 It has been claimed that " only since the George H. W. Bush administration have Hispanic candidates received serious consideration from presidents in the selection process " , and that Emilio M. Garza ( considered for the vacancy eventually given to Clarence Thomas ) was the first Hispanic judge for whom such an appointment was contemplated . Subsequently , Bill Clinton was reported by several sources to have considered José A. Cabranes for a Supreme Court nomination on both occasions when a Court vacancy opened during the Clinton presidency . The possibility of a Hispanic Justice returned during the George W. Bush Presidency , with various reports suggesting that Emilio Garza , Alberto Gonzales , and Consuelo M. Callahan were under consideration for the vacancy left by the retirement of Sandra Day O 'Connor . O 'Connor 's seat eventually went to Samuel Alito , however . Speculation about a Hispanic nomination arose again after the election of Barack Obama . In 2009 , Obama appointed Sonia Sotomayor , a woman of Puerto Rican descent , to be the first unequivocally Hispanic Justice . Both the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials and the Hispanic National Bar Association count Sotomayor as the first Hispanic justice . 
 Some historians contend that Cardozo — a Sephardic Jew believed to be of distant Portuguese descent — should also be counted as the first Hispanic Justice . <unk> wrote in 1979 that " [ a ] mong the large ethnic groupings of European origin which have never been represented upon the Supreme Court are the Italians , Southern Slavs , and Hispanic Americans . " The National Hispanic Center for Advanced Studies and Policy Analysis wrote in 1982 that the Supreme Court " has never had an Hispanic Justice " , and the Hispanic American Almanac similarly reported in 1996 that " no Hispanic has yet sat on the U.S. Supreme Court " . However , Segal and Spaeth state : " Though it is often claimed that no Hispanics have served on the Court , it is not clear why Benjamin Cardozo , a Sephardic Jew of Spanish heritage , should not count . " They identify a number of other sources that present conflicting views as to Cardozo 's ethnicity , with one simply labeling him " Iberian . " In 2007 , the Dictionary of Latino Civil Rights History also listed Cardozo as " the first Hispanic named to the Supreme Court of the United States . " 
 The nomination of Sonia Sotomayor , widely described in media accounts as the first Hispanic nominee , drew more attention to the question of Cardozo 's ethnicity . Cardozo biographer Andrew Kaufman questioned the usage of the term " hispanic " during Cardozo 's lifetime , commenting : " Well , I think he regarded himself as Sephardic Jew whose ancestors came from the Iberian Peninsula . " However , " no one has ever firmly established that the family 's roots were , in fact , in Portugal " . It has also been asserted that Cardozo himself " confessed in 1937 that his family preserved neither the Spanish language nor Iberian cultural traditions " . By contrast , Cardozo made his own translations of authoritative legal works written in French and German . 
 = = = Ethnic groups that have never been represented = = = 
 Many ethnic groups have never been represented on the Court . There has never been a Justice with any Asian , Native American , or Pacific Islander heritage , and no person having such a heritage was publicly considered for an appointment until the 21st century . Legal scholar Viet D. Dinh , of Vietnamese descent , was named as a potential George W. Bush nominee . During the presidency of Barack Obama , potential nominees have included Harold <unk> Koh , of Korean descent , and former Idaho attorney general Larry <unk> , a member of the Pawnee tribe . 
 = = = Public opinion on ethnic diversity = = = 
 Public opinion about ethnic diversity on the court " varies widely depending on the poll question 's wording " . For example , in two polls taken in 1991 , one resulted in half of respondents agreeing that it was " important that there always be at least one black person " on the Court while the other had only 20 % agreeing with that sentiment , and with 77 % agreeing that " race should never be a factor in choosing Supreme Court justices " . It is claimed that the Presidents who have appointed Justices to the Supreme Court in recent years have taken race and religion into account , causing it to be unrepresentative of the U.S. population in general . At the current time , no white Protestant serves on the Court , despite the fact that white Protestants are the largest single demographic group in the United States . 
 = = Gender = = 
 Of the 112 justices , 108 ( 96 @.@ 4 % ) have been men . All Supreme Court justices were males until 1981 , when Ronald Reagan fulfilled his 1980 campaign promise to place a woman on the Court , which he did with the appointment of Sandra Day O 'Connor . O 'Connor was later joined on the Court by Ruth Bader Ginsburg , appointed by Bill Clinton in 1993 . After O 'Connor retired in 2006 , Ginsburg would be joined by Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan , who were successfully appointed to the Court in 2009 and 2010 , respectively , by Barack Obama . The only other woman to be nominated to the Court was Harriet Miers , whose nomination to succeed O 'Connor by George W. Bush was withdrawn under fire . 
 Substantial public sentiment in support of appointment of a woman to the Supreme Court has been expressed since at least as early as 1930 , when an editorial in the Christian Science Monitor encouraged Herbert Hoover to consider Ohio justice Florence E. Allen or assistant attorney general Mabel Walker <unk> . Franklin Delano Roosevelt later appointed Allen to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit — making her " one of the highest ranking female jurists in the world at that time " . However , neither Roosevelt nor his successors over the following two decades gave strong consideration to female candidates for the Court . Harry Truman considered such an appointment , but was dissuaded by concerns raised by justices then serving that a woman on the Court " would inhibit their conference deliberations " , which were marked by informality . 
 President Richard Nixon named Mildred Lillie , then serving on the Second District Court of Appeal of California , as a potential nominee to fill one of two vacancies on the Court in 1971 . However , Lillie was quickly deemed unqualified by the American Bar Association , and no formal proceedings were ever set with respect to her potential nomination . Lewis Powell and William Rehnquist were then successfully nominated to fill those vacancies . 
 = = = Public opinion on gender diversity = = = 
 In 1991 , a poll found that 53 % of Americans felt it " important that there always be at least one woman " on the Court . However , when O 'Connor stepped down from the court , leaving Justice Ginsburg as the lone remaining woman , only one in seven persons polled found it " essential that a woman be nominated to replace " O 'Connor . 
 = = Marital status and sexual orientation = = 
 = = = Marital status = = = 
 All but a handful of Supreme Court justices have been married . Frank Murphy , Benjamin Cardozo , and James McReynolds were all lifelong bachelors . In addition , retired justice David Souter and current justice Elena Kagan have never been married . William O. Douglas was the first Justice to divorce while on the Court , and also had the most marriages of any Justice , with four . Justice John Paul Stevens divorced his first wife in 1979 , marrying his second wife later that year . Sonia Sotomayor was the first female justice to be appointed as an unmarried woman , having divorced in 1983 , long before her nomination in 2009 . 
 Several justices have become widowers while on the bench . The 1792 death of Elizabeth Rutledge , wife of Justice John Rutledge , contributed to the mental health problems that led to the rejection of his recess appointment . Roger B. Taney survived his wife , Anne , by twenty years . Oliver Wendell Holmes , Jr. resolutely continued working on the Court for several years after the death of his wife . William Rehnquist was a widower for the last fourteen years of his service on the Court , his wife Natalie having died on October 17 , 1991 after suffering from ovarian cancer . With the death of Martin D. Ginsburg in June 2010 , Ruth Bader Ginsburg became the first woman to be widowed while serving on the Court . 
 = = = Sexual orientation = = = 
 With regards to sexual orientation , no Supreme Court justice has identified himself or herself as anything other than heterosexual , and no incontrovertible evidence of a justice having any other sexual orientation has ever been uncovered . However , the personal lives of several justices and nominees have attracted speculation . 
 G. Harrold Carswell was unsuccessfully nominated by Richard Nixon in 1970 , and was convicted in 1976 of battery for making an " unnatural and lascivious " advance to a male police officer working undercover in a Florida men 's room . Some therefore claim him as the only gay or bisexual person nominated to the Court thus far . If so , it is unlikely that Nixon was aware of it ; White House Counsel John Dean later wrote of Carswell that " [ w ] hile Richard Nixon was always looking for historical firsts , nominating a homosexual to the high court would not have been on his list " . 
 Speculation has been recorded about the sexual orientation of a few justices who were lifelong bachelors , but no unambiguous evidence exists that they were gay . Perhaps the greatest body of circumstantial evidence surrounds Frank Murphy , who was dogged by " [ r ] <unk> of homosexuality [ ... ] all his adult life " . 
 For more than 40 years , Edward G. Kemp was Frank Murphy 's devoted , trusted companion . Like Murphy , Kemp was a lifelong bachelor . From college until Murphy 's death , the pair found creative ways to work and live together . [ ... ] When Murphy appeared to have the better future in politics , Kemp stepped into a supportive , secondary role . 
 As well as Murphy 's close relationship with Kemp , Murphy 's biographer , historian Sidney Fine , found in Murphy 's personal papers a letter that " if the words mean what they say , refers to a homosexual encounter some years earlier between Murphy and the writer . " However , the letter 's veracity cannot be confirmed and a review of all the evidence led Fine to conclude that he " could not stick his neck out and say [ Murphy ] was gay " . 
 Speculation has also surrounded Benjamin Cardozo , whose celibacy suggests repressed homosexuality or asexuality . The fact that he was unmarried and was personally tutored by the writer Horatio Alger ( alleged to have had sexual relations with boys ) led some of Cardozo 's biographers to insinuate that Cardozo was homosexual , but no real evidence exists to corroborate this possibility . Constitutional law scholar Jeffrey Rosen noted in a New York Times Book Review of Richard Polenberg 's book on Cardozo : 
 Polenberg describes Cardozo 's lifelong devotion to his older sister Nell , with whom he lived in New York until her death in 1929 . When asked why he had never married , Cardozo replied , quietly and sadly , I never could give Nellie the second place in my life . Polenberg suggests that friends may have stressed Cardozo 's devotion to his sister to discourage rumors that he was sexually dysfunctional , or had an unusually low sexual drive or was homosexual . But he produces no evidence to support any of these possibilities , except to note that friends , in describing Cardozo , used words like beautiful , exquisite , sensitive or delicate . 
 Andrew Kaufman , author of Cardozo , a biography published in 2000 , notes that " Although one cannot be absolutely certain , it seems highly likely that Cardozo lived a celibate life " . Judge Learned Hand is quoted in the book as saying about Cardozo : " He [ had ] no trace of homosexuality anyway " . 
 More recently , when David Souter was nominated to the Court , " conservative groups expressed concern to the White House ... that the president 's bachelor nominee might conceivably be a homosexual " . Similar questions were raised regarding the sexual orientation of unmarried nominee Elena Kagan . However , no evidence was ever produced regarding Souter 's sexual orientation , and Kagan 's apparent heterosexuality was attested by colleagues familiar with her dating history . 
 = = Religion = = 
 When the Supreme Court was established in 1789 , the first members came from among the ranks of the Founding Fathers and were almost uniformly Protestant . Of the 112 justices who have been appointed to the court , 91 have been from various Protestant denominations , 12 have been Catholics ( one other justice , Sherman Minton , converted to Catholicism after leaving the Court ) , eight have been Jewish and one , David Davis , had no known religious affiliation . Three of the 17 chief justices have been Catholics , and one Jewish justice , Abe Fortas , was unsuccessfully nominated to be chief justice . 
 The table below shows the religious affiliation of each of the justices sitting as of February 2016 : 
 = = = Protestant justices = = = 
 Most Supreme Court justices have been Protestant Christians . These have included 33 Episcopalians , 18 Presbyterians , nine Unitarians , five Methodists , three Baptists , and lone representatives of various other denominations . William Rehnquist was the Court 's only Lutheran . Noah Swayne was a Quaker . Some 15 Protestant justices did not adhere to a particular denomination . Baptist denominations and other evangelical churches have been underrepresented on the Court , relative to the population of the United States . Conversely , mainline Protestant churches historically were overrepresented . 
 Following the retirement of John Paul Stevens in June 2010 , the Court had an entirely non @-@ Protestant composition for the first time in its history . 
 = = = Catholic justices = = = 
 The first Catholic justice , Roger B. Taney , was appointed chief justice in 1836 by Andrew Jackson . The second , Edward Douglass White , was appointed as an associate justice in 1894 , but also went on to become chief justice . Joseph McKenna was appointed in 1898 , placing two Catholics on the Court until White 's death in 1921 . This period marked the beginning of an inconsistently observed " tradition " of having a " Catholic seat " on the court . 
 Other Catholic justices included Pierce Butler ( appointed 1923 ) and Frank Murphy ( appointed 1940 ) . Sherman Minton , appointed in 1949 , was a Protestant during his time on the Court . To some , however , his wife 's Catholic faith implied a " Catholic seat " . Minton joined his wife 's church in 1961 , five years after he retired from the Court . Minton was succeeded by a Catholic , however , when President Eisenhower appointed William J. Brennan to that seat . Eisenhower sought a Catholic to appoint to the Court — in part because there had been no Catholic justice since Murphy 's death in 1949 , and in part because Eisenhower was directly lobbied by Cardinal Francis Spellman of the Archdiocese of New York to make such an appointment . Brennan was then the lone Catholic justice until the appointment of Antonin Scalia in 1986 , and Anthony Kennedy in 1988 . 
 Like Sherman Minton , Clarence Thomas was not a Catholic at the time he was appointed to the Court . Thomas was raised Catholic and briefly attended Conception Seminary College , a Roman Catholic seminary , but had joined the Protestant denomination of his wife after their marriage . At some point in the late 1990s , Thomas returned to Catholicism . In 2005 , John Roberts became the third Catholic Chief Justice and the fourth Catholic on the Court . Shortly thereafter , Samuel Alito became the fifth on the Court , and the eleventh in the history of the Court . Alito 's appointment gave the Court a Catholic majority for the first time in its history . Besides Thomas , at least one other Justice , James F. Byrnes , was raised as a Roman Catholic , but converted to a different branch of Christianity prior to serving on the Court . 
 In contrast to historical patterns , the Court has gone from having a " Catholic seat " to being what some have characterized as a " Catholic court . " The reasons for that are subject to debate , and are a matter of intense public scrutiny . That the majority of the Court is now Catholic , and that the appointment of Catholics has become accepted , represents a historical ' sea change . ' It has fostered accusations that the court has become " a Catholic boys club " ( particularly as the Catholics chosen tend to be politically conservative ) and calls for non @-@ Catholics to be nominated . 
 In May 2009 , President Barack Obama nominated a Catholic woman , Sonia Sotomayor , to replace retiring Justice David Souter . Her confirmation raised the number of Catholics on the Court to six , compared to three non @-@ Catholics ( all Jewish ) . With Antonin Scalia 's death in February 2016 , the number of Catholic Justices went back to five . 
 All of the Catholic justices have been members of the " Roman " ( Latin ) rite within the Catholic Church . 
 = = = Jewish justices = = = 
 In 1853 , President Millard Fillmore offered to appoint Louisiana Senator Judah P. Benjamin to be the first Jewish justice , and the New York Times reported ( on February 15 , 1853 ) that " if the President nominates Benjamin , the Democrats are determined to confirm him " . However , Benjamin declined the offer , and ultimately became Secretary of State for the Confederacy during the Civil War . The first Jewish nominee , Louis Brandeis , was appointed in 1916 , after a tumultuous hearing process . The 1932 appointment of Benjamin Cardozo raised mild controversy for placing two Jewish justices on the Court at the same time , although the appointment was widely lauded based on Cardozo 's qualifications , and the Senate was unanimous in confirming Cardozo . 
 Brandeis was succeeded by Protestant William O. Douglas , but Cardozo was succeeded by another Jewish Justice , Felix Frankfurter . Negative reaction to the appointment of the early Jewish justices did not exclusively come from outside the Court . Justice James Clark McReynolds , a blatant anti @-@ semite , refused to speak to Brandeis for three years following the latter 's appointment and when Brandeis retired in 1939 , did not sign the customary dedicatory letter sent to Court members on their retirement . During Benjamin Cardozo 's swearing in ceremony McReynolds pointedly read a newspaper muttering " another one " and did not attend that of Felix Frankfurter , exclaiming " My God , another Jew on the Court ! " 
 Frankfurter was followed by Arthur Goldberg and Abe Fortas , each of whom filled what became known as the " Jewish Seat " . After Fortas resigned in 1969 , he was replaced by Protestant Harry Blackmun . No Jewish justices were nominated thereafter until Ronald Reagan nominated Douglas H. Ginsburg in 1987 , to fill the vacancy created by the retirement of Lewis F. Powell ; however , this nomination was withdrawn , and the Court remained without any Jewish justices until 1993 , when Ruth Bader Ginsburg ( unrelated to Douglas Ginsburg ) was appointed to replace Byron White . Ginsburg was followed in relatively quick succession by the appointment of Stephen Breyer , also Jewish , in 1994 to replace Harry Blackmun . In 2010 , the confirmation of President Barack Obama 's nomination of Elena Kagan to the Court ensured that three Jewish justices would serve simultaneously . Prior to this confirmation , conservative political commentator Pat Buchanan stated that , " If Kagan is confirmed , Jews , who represent less than 2 percent of the U.S. population , will have 33 percent of the Supreme Court seats " . At the time of his remarks , 6 @.@ 4 percent of justices had been Jewish in the history of the court . On March 16 , 2016 , President Obama nominated Merrick Garland to fill the Supreme Court vacancy created by the death of Antonin Scalia . 
 = = = The shift to a Catholic majority , and non @-@ Protestant Court = = = 
 At the time of Breyer 's appointment in 1994 , there were two Roman Catholic justices , Antonin Scalia and Anthony Kennedy , and two Jewish justices , Stephen Breyer and Ruth Bader Ginsburg . Clarence Thomas , who had been raised as a Roman Catholic but had attended an Episcopal church after his marriage , returned to Catholicism later in the 1990s . At this point , the four remaining Protestant justices — Rehnquist , Stevens , O 'Connor , and Souter — remained a plurality on the Court , but for the first time in the history of the Court , Protestants were no longer an absolute majority . 
 The first Catholic plurality on the Court occurred in 2005 , when Chief Justice Rehnquist was succeeded in office by Chief Justice John Roberts , who became the fourth sitting Catholic justice . On January 31 , 2006 , Samuel Alito became the fifth sitting Catholic justice , and on August 6 , 2009 , Sonia Sotomayor became the sixth . By contrast , there has been only one Catholic U.S. President , John F. Kennedy ( unrelated to Justice Kennedy ) , and one Catholic U.S. Vice President , Joe Biden , and there has never been a Jewish U.S. President or Vice President . 
 At the beginning of 2010 , Justice John Paul Stevens was the sole remaining Protestant on the Court . In April 2010 , Justice Stevens announced his retirement , effective as of the Court 's 2010 summer recess . Upon Justice Stevens ' retirement , which formally began on June 28 , 2010 , the Court lacked a Protestant member , marking the first time in its history that it was exclusively composed of Jewish and Catholic justices . 
 This development has led to some comment . Law school professor Jeffrey Rosen wrote that " it 's a fascinating truth that we 've allowed religion to drop out of consideration on the Supreme Court , and right now , we have a Supreme Court that religiously at least , by no means looks like America " . 
 = = = Religions that have never been represented = = = 
 A number of sizable religious groups , each less than 2 % of the U.S. population , have had no members appointed as justices . These include Orthodox Christians , Mormons , Pentecostals , Muslims , Hindus , Buddhists , and Sikhs . George Sutherland has been described as a " lapsed Mormon " because he was raised in the LDS Church , his parents having immigrated to the United States during Sutherland 's infancy to join that church . Sutherland 's parents soon left the LDS Church and moved to Montana . Sutherland himself also disaffiliated with the faith , but remained in Utah and graduated from Brigham Young Academy in 1881 , the only non @-@ Mormon in his class . In 1975 , Attorney General Edward H. Levi had listed Dallin H. Oaks , a Mormon who had clerked for Earl Warren and was then president of Brigham Young University , as a potential nominee for Gerald Ford . Ford " crossed Oaks 's name off the list early on , noting in the margin that a member of the LDS Church might bring a ' confirmation fight ' " . 
 No professing atheist has ever been appointed to the Court , although some justices have declined to engage in religious activity , or affiliate with a denomination . As an adult , Benjamin Cardozo no longer practiced his faith and identified himself as an agnostic , though he remained proud of his Jewish heritage . 
 = = Age = = 
 Unlike the offices of President , U.S. Representative , and U.S. Senator , there is no minimum age for Supreme Court justices set forth in the United States Constitution . However , justices tend to be appointed after having made significant achievements in law or politics , which excludes many young potential candidates from consideration . At the same time , justices appointed at too advanced an age will likely have short tenures on the Court . 
 The youngest justice ever appointed was Joseph Story , 32 at the time of his appointment in 1812 ; the oldest was Charles Evans Hughes , who was 67 at the time of his appointment as Chief Justice in 1930 . ( Hughes had previously been appointed to the Court as an associate justice in 1910 , at the age of 48 , but had resigned in 1916 to run for president ) . Story went on to serve for 33 years , while Hughes served 11 years after his second appointment . The oldest justice at the time of his initial appointment was Horace Lurton , 65 at the time of his appointment in 1909 . Lurton died after only four years on the Court . The oldest sitting justice to be elevated to Chief Justice was Hughes ' successor , Harlan Fiske Stone , who was 68 at the time of his elevation in 1941 . Stone died in 1946 , only five years after his elevation . The oldest nominee to the court was South Carolina senator William Smith , nominated in 1837 , then aged around 75 ( it is known that he was born in 1762 , but not the exact date ) . The Senate confirmed Smith 's nomination by a vote of 23 – 18 , but Smith declined to serve . 
 Of the justices currently sitting , the youngest at time of appointment was Clarence Thomas , who was 43 years old at the time of his confirmation in 1991 . As of the beginning of the 2014 – 15 term , Elena Kagan was the youngest justice sitting , at 54 years of age . The oldest person to have served on the Court was Oliver Wendell Holmes , Jr . , who stepped down two months shy of his 91st birthday . John Paul Stevens , second only to Holmes , left the court in June 2010 , two months after turning 90 . 
 The average age of the Court as a whole fluctuates over time with the departure of older justices and the appointment of younger people to fill their seats . The average age of the Court is 70 years , 7 months . Just prior to the death of Chief Justice Rehnquist in September 2005 , the average age was 71 . After Sonia Sotomayor was appointed in August 2009 , the average age at which current justices were appointed was about 53 years old . 
 The longest period of time in which one group of justices has served together occurred from August 3 , 1994 , when Stephen Breyer was appointed to replace the retired Harry Blackmun , to September 3 , 2005 , the death of Rehnquist , totaling 11 years and 31 days . From 1789 until 1970 , justices served an average of 14 @.@ 9 years . Those who have stepped down since 1970 have served an average of 25 @.@ 6 years . The retirement age had jumped from an average of 68 pre @-@ 1970 to 79 for justices retiring post @-@ 1970 . Between 1789 and 1970 there was a vacancy on the Court once every 1 @.@ 91 years . In the next 34 years since the two appointments in 1971 , there was a vacancy on average only once every 3 @.@ 75 years . The typical one @-@ term president has had one appointment opportunity instead of two . 
 Commentators have noted that advances in medical knowledge " have enormously increased the life expectancy of a mature person of an age likely to be considered for appointment to the Supreme Court " . Combined with the reduction in responsibilities carried out by modern justices as compared to the early justices , this results in much longer potential terms of service . This has led to proposals such as imposing a mandatory retirement age for Supreme Court justices and predetermined term limits . 
 = = Educational background = = 
 Although the Constitution imposes no educational background requirements for federal judges , the work of the Court involves complex questions of law — ranging from constitutional law to administrative law to admiralty law — and consequently , a legal education has become a de facto prerequisite to appointment on the Supreme Court . Every person who has been nominated to the Court has been an attorney . 
 Before the advent of modern law schools in the United States , justices , like most attorneys of the time , completed their legal studies by " reading law " ( studying under and acting as an apprentice to more experienced attorneys ) rather than attending a formal program . The first justice to be appointed who had attended an actual law school was Levi Woodbury , appointed to the Court in 1846 . Woodbury had attended Tapping Reeve Law School in Litchfield , Connecticut , the most prestigious law school in the United States in that day , prior to his admission to the bar in 1812 . However , Woodbury did not earn a law degree . Woodbury 's successor on the Court , Benjamin Robbins Curtis , who received his law degree from Harvard Law School in 1832 , and was appointed to the Court in 1851 , was the first Justice to bear such a credential . 
 Associate Justice James F. Byrnes , whose short tenure lasted from June 1941 to October 1942 , was the last justice without a law degree to be appointed ; Stanley Forman Reed , who served on the Court from 1938 to 1957 , was the last sitting justice from such a background . In total , of the 112 justices appointed to the Court , 47 have had law degrees , an additional 18 attended some law school but did not receive a degree , and 47 received their legal education without any law school attendance . 
 The table below shows the college and law school from which each of the justices sitting as of February 2015 graduated : 
 = = Professional background = = 
 Not only have all justices been attorneys , nearly two thirds had previously been judges . As of 2010 , eight of the nine sitting justices previously served as judges of the United States Courts of Appeals , while the most recent appointment , Justice Elena Kagan , served as Solicitor General , the attorney responsible for representing the federal government in cases before the Court . Few justices have a background as criminal defense lawyers , and Thurgood Marshall is reportedly the last justice to have had a client in a death penalty case . 
 Historically , justices have come from some tradition of public service ; only George Shiras , Jr. had no such experience . Relatively few justices have been appointed from among members of Congress . Six were members of the United States Senate at the time of their appointment , while one was a sitting member of the House of Representatives . Six more had previously served in the Senate . Three have been sitting governors . Only one , William Howard Taft , had been President of the United States . The last justice to have held elected office was Sandra Day O 'Connor , who was elected twice to the Arizona State Senate after being appointed there by the governor . 
 = = Financial means = = 
 The financial position of the typical Supreme Court Justice has been described as " upper @-@ middle to high social status : reared in <unk> but not necessarily urban environment , member of a civic @-@ minded , politically active , economically comfortable family " . Charles A. Beard , in his An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States , profiled those among the justices who were also drafters of the Constitution . 
 James Wilson , Beard notes , " developed a lucrative practice at Carlisle " before becoming " one of the directors of the Bank of North America on its incorporation in 1781 " . A member of the Georgia Land Company , Wilson " held shares to the amount of at least one million acres " . John Blair was " one of the most respectable men in Virginia , both on account of his Family as well as fortune " . Another source notes that Blair " was a member of a prominent Virginia family . His father served on the Virginia Council and was for a time acting Royal governor . His granduncle , James Blair , was founder and first president of the College of William and Mary . " John Rutledge was elected Governor of South Carolina at a time when the Constitution of that state set , as a qualification for the office , ownership of " a settled plantation or freehold ... of the value of at least ten thousand pounds currency , clear of debt " . Oliver Ellsworth " rose rapidly to wealth and power in the bar of his native state " with " earnings ... unrivalled in his own day and unexampled in the history of the colony " , developing " a fortune which for the times and the country was quite uncommonly large " . Bushrod Washington was the nephew of George Washington , who was at the time of the younger Washington 's appointment the immediate past President of the United States and one of the wealthiest men in the country . 
 " About three @-@ fifths of those named to the Supreme Court personally knew the President who nominated them " . There have been exceptions to the typical portrait of justices growing up middle class or wealthy . For example , the family of Sherman Minton went through a period of impoverishment during his childhood , resulting from the disability of his father due to a heat stroke . 
 In 2008 , seven of the nine sitting justices were millionaires , and the remaining two were close to that level of wealth . Historian Howard Zinn , in his 1980 book A People 's History of the United States , argues that the justices cannot be neutral in matters between rich and poor , as they are almost always from the upper class . Chief Justice Roberts is the son of an executive with Bethlehem Steel ; Justice Stevens was born into a wealthy Chicago family ; and Justices Kennedy and Breyer both had fathers who were successful attorneys . Justices Alito and Scalia both had educated ( and education @-@ minded ) parents : Scalia 's father was a highly educated college professor and Alito 's father was a high school teacher before becoming " a long @-@ time employee of the New Jersey state legislature " . Only Justices Thomas and Sotomayor have been regarded as coming from a lower @-@ class background . One authority states that " Thomas grew up in poverty . The Pin Point community he lived in lacked a sewage system and paved roads . Its inhabitants dwelled in destitution and earned but a few cents each day performing manual labor " . The depth of Thomas ' poverty has been disputed by suggestions of " ample evidence to suggest that Thomas enjoyed , by and large , a middle @-@ class upbringing " . 
 = = = Financial disclosures = = = 
 Beginning in 1979 , the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 required federal officials , including the justices , to file annual disclosures of their income and assets . These disclosures provide a snapshot into the wealth of the justices , reported within broad ranges , from year to year since 1979 . In the first such set of disclosures , only two justices were revealed to be millionaires : Potter Stewart and Lewis F. Powell , with Chief Justice Warren Burger coming in third with about $ 600 @,@ 000 in holdings . The least wealthy Justice was Thurgood Marshall . 
 The 1982 report disclosed that newly appointed Justice Sandra Day O 'Connor was a millionaire , and the second @-@ wealthiest Justice on the Court ( after Powell ) . The remaining justices listed assets in the range of tens of thousands to a few hundred @-@ thousand , with the exception of Thurgood Marshall , who " reported no assets or investment income of more than $ 100 " . The 1985 report had the justices in relatively the same positions , while the 1992 report had O 'Connor as the wealthiest member of the Court , with Stevens being the only other millionaire , most other justices reporting assets averaging around a half million dollars , and the two newest justices , Clarence Thomas and David Souter , reporting assets of at least $ 65 @,@ 000 . ( In 2011 , however , it was revealed that Thomas had misstated his income going back to at least 1989 . ) 
 The 2007 report was the first to reflect the holdings of John Roberts and Samuel Alito . Disclosures for that year indicated that Clarence Thomas and Anthony Kennedy were the only justices who were clearly not millionaires , although Thomas was reported to have signed a book deal worth over one million dollars . Other justices reported holdings within the following ranges : 
 The financial disclosures indicate that many of the justices have substantial stock holdings . This , in turn , has affected the business of the Court , as these holdings have led justices to recuse themselves from cases , occasionally with substantial impact . For example , in 2008 , the recusal of John Roberts in one case , and Samuel Alito in another , resulted in each ending in a 4 @-@ 4 split , which does not create a binding precedent . The Court was unable to decide another case in 2008 because four of the nine justices had conflicts , three arising from stock ownership in affected companies . 
 = Pieter Nuyts = 
 Pieter Nuyts or <unk> ( 1598 – 11 December 1655 ) was a Dutch explorer , diplomat , and politician . 
 He was part of a landmark expedition of the Dutch East India Company in 1626 – 27 which mapped the southern coast of Australia . He became the Dutch ambassador to Japan in 1627 , and he was appointed Governor of Formosa in the same year . Later he became a controversial figure because of his disastrous handling of official duties , coupled with rumours about private indiscretions . He was disgraced , fined and imprisoned , before being made a scapegoat to ease strained Dutch relations with the Japanese . He returned to the Dutch Republic in 1637 , where he became the mayor of <unk> <unk> and of Hulst . 
 He is chiefly remembered today in the place names of various points along the southern Australian coast , named for him after his voyage of 1626 – 27 . During the early 20th century , he was vilified in Japanese school textbooks in Taiwan as an example of a " typical arrogant western bully " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Pieter Nuyts was born in 1598 in the town of Middelburg in Zeeland , Dutch Republic to Laurens Nuyts , a merchant , and his wife Elisabeth <unk> , wealthy Protestant immigrants from Antwerp . After studying at the University of Leiden and gaining a doctorate in philosophy , he returned to Middelburg to work in his father 's trading company . 
 In 1613 , Pieter Nuyts , who was staying in Leiden with the famous Orientalist <unk> , is known to have met with the Moroccan envoy in the Low Countries Al @-@ <unk> . Al @-@ <unk> wrote for him an entry in Pieter 's Album <unk> stating : 
 The excellent young man Peter <unk> has asked me to write something for him , so I say to him : Be obedient to the commands of the almighty God and do not worship anyone but him , and be obedient to your parents and humble towards them ( ... ) 
 In 1620 , Pieter married Cornelia Jacot , also a child of Antwerp émigrés , who was to bear four of his children — Laurens ( born around 1622 ) , Pieter ( 1624 ) and the twins Anna Cornelia and Elisabeth ( 1626 ) . In 1626 he entered service with the Dutch East India Company ( VOC ) and was seen as one of their rising stars . 
 = = Australian expedition = = 
 On 11 May 1626 the VOC ship ' t Gulden <unk> ( The Golden Seahorse ) departed from Amsterdam with Nuyts and his eldest son Laurens aboard . Deviating from the standard route to the VOC 's East Asian Batavia headquarters , the ship continued east and mapped around 1 @,@ 500 km of the southern coast of Australia from Albany , Western Australia to Ceduna , South Australia . The captain of the ship , François Thijssen , named the region ′ t Landt van Pieter Nuyts ( Pieter Nuyts ' Land ) after Nuyts , who was the highest @-@ ranking official on the ship . Today several areas in the state of South Australia still bear his name , such as Nuyts 's Reef , Cape Nuyts and the Nuyts Archipelago ; names given by the British navigator and cartographer Matthew Flinders . Later Nuytsia floribunda , the Western Australian Christmas Tree , was also named for him . 
 = = Ambassador to Japan = = 
 On 10 May 1627 , a month after completing his Australian voyage , Nuyts was simultaneously appointed both Governor of Formosa ( Taiwan ) and ambassador to Japan for the Dutch East India Company , travelling in this capacity to the court of the shogun Tokugawa Iemitsu , ruler of Japan . At the same time Hamada <unk> , a Japanese trader based in Nagasaki with frequent business in Formosa , had taken a group of sixteen native Formosans to Japan and had them pose as rulers of Formosa . His plan was to have the Formosans grant sovereignty over Taiwan to the shogun , while Nuyts was in Japan to assert rival Dutch claims on the island . Both embassies were refused an audience with the shogun ( the Dutch failure being variously attributed to Nuyts 's " haughty demeanour and the antics of his travel companions " and " Hamada 's machinations at the court " ) . 
 = = Governor of Formosa = = 
 On returning from his unsuccessful mission to Japan , Nuyts took up his position as the third Governor of Formosa , with his residence in Fort Zeelandia in Tayouan ( modern @-@ day Anping ) . One of his early aims was to force an opening for the Dutch to trade in China — something which had eluded them since they arrived in East Asia in the early 17th century . To further this goal , he took the Chinese trade negotiator Zheng <unk> hostage and refused to release him until he agreed to give the Dutch trading privileges . More than thirty years later it was to be Zheng 's son Koxinga who ended the reign of the Dutch on Formosa . 
 Nuyts acquired some notoriety while Governor for apparently taking native women to his bed , and having a translator hide under the bed to interpret his pillow @-@ talk . He was also accused of profiting from private trade , something which was forbidden under company rules . Some sources claim that he officially married a native Formosan woman during this time , but as he was still legally married to his first wife Cornelia , this seems unlikely . 
 His handling of relations with the natives of Formosa too was a cause for concern , with the residents of Sinkan contrasting his harsh treatment with the " generous hospitality of the Japanese " . Nuyts had a low opinion of the natives , writing that they were " a simple , ignorant people , who know neither good nor evil " . In 1629 he narrowly escaped death when after being feted at the aboriginal village of Mattau , the locals took advantage of the relaxed and convivial atmosphere to slaughter sixty off @-@ guard Dutch soldiers — Nuyts was spared by having left early to return to Zeelandia . This incident was later used as a justification for the Pacification Campaign of 1635 – 36 . 
 It was during Nuyts ' tenure as Governor that the Spanish established their presence on Formosa in 1629 . He was greatly concerned by this development , and wrote to Batavia urgently requesting an expedition to dislodge the Spanish from their strongholds in <unk> and <unk> . In his letter he stressed the potential for the Spanish to interfere with Dutch activities and the trade benefits the Dutch could gain by taking the north of the island . The colonial authorities ignored his request , and took no action against the Spanish until 1641 . 
 = = = Hostage crisis = = = 
 The already troubled relations with Japanese merchants in Tayouan took a turn for the worse in 1628 when tensions boiled over . The merchants , who had been trading in Taiwan long before the Dutch colony was established , refused to pay Dutch tolls levied for conducting business in the area , which they saw as unfair . Nuyts exacted revenge on the same Hamada <unk> who he blamed for causing the failure of the Japanese embassy by impounding his ships and weapons until the tolls were paid . However , the Japanese were still not inclined to pay taxes , and the affair came to a head when Hamada took Nuyts hostage at knifepoint in his own office . Hamada 's demands were for the return of their ships and property , and for safe passage to return to Japan . These requests were granted by the Council of Formosa ( the ruling body of Dutch Formosa ) , and Nuyts ' son Laurens was taken back to Japan as one of six Dutch hostages . Laurens died in Omura prison on 29 December 1631 . During the Japanese era in Taiwan ( 1895 – 1945 ) , school history textbooks retold the hostage @-@ taking as the Nuyts Incident ( <unk> , <unk> jiken ) , portraying the Dutchman as a " typical arrogant western bully who slighted Japanese trading rights and trod on the rights of the native inhabitants " . 
 = = Extradition to Japan = = 
 The Dutch were very keen to resume the lucrative trade with Japan which had been choked off in the wake of the dispute between Nuyts and Hamada at the behest of the Japanese authorities in Edo . All their overtures to the Japanese court failed , until they decided to extradite Pieter Nuyts to Japan for the shogun to punish him as he saw fit . This was an unprecedented step , and was representative of both the extreme official displeasure with Nuyts in the Dutch hierarchy and the strong desire to recommence Japanese trade . 
 A measure of the upset he caused to the Dutch authorities can be gauged by the contents of a letter from VOC Governor @-@ General Anthony van Diemen to VOC headquarters in Amsterdam in 1636 , expressing his concern about plans to send a highly paid lawyer to Batavia to draw up a legal code : 
 I wonder whether these highly intelligent people do not perform more <unk> than services in these quarters , witness the cases of Martinus Sonck , Pieter Nuyts , Pieter <unk> , Antonio van den Heuvel , and others , who have been used to the great disadvantage of the Company [ ... ] The Company can draw better resources from experienced , vigilant merchants with alert minds . 
 Nuyts was held under house arrest by the Japanese from 1632 until 1636 , when he was released and sent back to Batavia . During this period he passed the time by mining his collection of classical Latin texts by writers such as Cicero , Seneca , and Tacitus to write treatises on subjects such as the elephant and the Nile Delta , exercises which were designed to display rhetorical flair and high style . He also further annoyed Dutch authorities by spending lavish sums on clothing and food , things for which the VOC had to foot the bill . 
 Nuyts was released from captivity in 1636 , most likely due to the efforts of François Caron , who knew Nuyts from serving as his interpreter during the unsuccessful Japanese embassy of 1627 . On returning from Japan , Nuyts was fined by the VOC , before being dishonorably dismissed from the company and sent back to the Netherlands . 
 = = Return to the Dutch Republic = = 
 On returning to his home country he first went back to his city of birth Middelburg , before starting a career as a local administrator in Zeelandic Flanders , and settling in Hulst shortly after the town had been wrested from the Spanish in 1645 . He eventually rose to be three times mayor of <unk> <unk> and twice mayor of Hulst . Thanks to powerful allies in the Middelburg chamber of the VOC he was able to successfully appeal for the cancellation of the fines placed on him , and the money was returned . In 1640 he married Anna van Driel , who died that same year while giving birth to Nuyts ' third son , also called Pieter . In 1649 he married his third ( or perhaps fourth ) and final wife , Agnes Granier , who was to outlive him . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Nuyts died on 11 December 1655 and was buried in a churchyard in Hulst . The tombstone remained until 1983 , when it was destroyed during renovations of the church . After his funeral it was discovered that he had collected more taxes from his estates than he had handed over to the authorities ; his son Pieter eventually repaid his father 's debts . It was the younger Pieter who also arranged the posthumous publication of his father 's treatise <unk> des Elephants , in 1670 — a single known copy of which still exists , in the Koninklijke <unk> in The Hague . 
 = Elementary School Musical ( The Simpsons ) = 
 " Elementary School Musical " is the season premiere of The Simpsons ' twenty @-@ second season . It aired on the Fox Network in the United States on September 26 , 2010 . In this episode , Krusty the Clown invites Homer to the Nobel Peace Prize Ceremony in Oslo , Norway . Later turning out to be a hoax , Krusty is sued by the International Court of Justice for his many instances of public indecency . Meanwhile , Marge takes Lisa to a performing arts camp for a week . 
 The episode was written by Tim Long and directed by Mark Kirkland . Upon airing , it was met with mixed reception from television . " Elementary School Musical " was viewed by 7 @.@ 8 million viewers and attained a 3 @.@ 7 / 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode features guest appearances from Lea Michele , Amber Riley , Cory Monteith , Jemaine Clement , Bret McKenzie , Ira Glass , and Stephen Hawking , as well as several recurring voice actors and actresses for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As Homer , Lisa , and her friends watch the announcement of the year 's Nobel Prize winners , they are astounded to hear that Krusty the Clown has won the Peace Prize . Krusty picks Homer to accompany him to Oslo for the awards ceremony , and Homer decides to take Bart with him . Their plane lands in The Hague , and it is revealed that the Peace Prize announcement was a ruse to bring Krusty there so he could be tried by the International Court of Justice for his deplorable public behavior over the years , such as dropping a monkey from the Eiffel Tower in Paris , and stealing the act from a local clown in The Hague . Homer and Bart search desperately for any evidence to show that Krusty has made a genuine contribution to humanity , and eventually argue that his refusal to perform at Sun City because he wanted potato chips led directly to the South African government 's decision to release Nelson Mandela from prison . Even though it is obvious that these two incidents are not connected in any way , the court accepts this argument and frees Krusty , who immediately seeks out the nearest place to buy marijuana — the courthouse cafeteria . 
 Meanwhile , Marge surprises Lisa by sending her to a performing arts camp for a week . She eagerly immerses herself there in music and theater , meeting several campers who love to break into song and two guitar @-@ playing hipster counselors , Ethan and Kurt . When Marge takes her home at the end of the week , Lisa has trouble readjusting to normal life and looks for a chance to express her newly awakened creative side . She runs away from home and seeks out Ethan and Kurt in " <unk> " , described by the counselors as the " artistic hotbed of Springfield " . However , she soon learns that they have grossly exaggerated the area , which is really a run @-@ down slum , and that they actually work at a sandwich shop . They sing a song about the difficulties of being an artist , during which Krusty gets beaten up for accidentally announcing he is the prison snitch . Ethan and Kurt encourage her to return to her family and think about trying to make an artistic name for herself when she is older . As Marge arrives to take Lisa home , Ethan and Kurt show off a mural that they have painted in her honor , which takes up an entire side of a building . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Elementary School Musical " was written by Tim Long and directed by Mark Kirkland . The episode features guest appearances from Lea Michele , Cory Monteith , and Amber Riley from the Fox series Glee . The three previously revealed their appearances on Twitter in February 2010 . Physicist Stephen Hawking also made an appearance . Flight of the Conchords members Jemaine Clement and Bret McKenzie first rehearsed their lines over the phone with Nancy Cartwright , the voice of Bart , before flying to the United States to record their parts for the show . Clement , a fan of the show since it first aired as shorts on The Tracey Ullman Show , said that he and McKenzie would play new characters , rather than themselves . He continued : 
 Yeah , we were over the moon . We don 't play ourselves , because most people won 't know who we are , but they 'll look like yellow versions of ourselves . We play counsellors at an arts camp that Lisa 's going to . It 's pretty fun . We just went to a studio and recorded it , but , yeah , we were really flattered . 
 The opening sequence features Otto Mann in a Partridge Family @-@ like bus , while the chalkboard gag makes a reference to the film Inception . The Glee cast members sing a version of " Good Vibrations " by the Beach Boys . Krusty the Clown had a Super Bowl " nip slip " , appeared on The Electric Company and was seen using a child as a human shield in a similar manner to the character Greg Stillson from The Dead Zone . Lisa listens to This American Life , a public radio program voiced by Ira Glass . Also , Ethan and Kurt have a map of Middle Earth on the wall of their apartment . Krusty 's comment that " I ain 't gonna play Sun City " is a reference to Steven van Zandt 's famous protest song . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Elementary School Musical " was initially broadcast on September 26 , 2010 in the United States as part of the animation television night on Fox . It was succeeded by episodes of The Cleveland Show and Family Guy . Upon airing , the episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 8 million households , despite airing simultaneously with 60 Minutes on CBS , Extreme Makeover : Home Edition on ABC , and a match between the New York Jets and the Miami Dolphins as part of the 2010 NFL season on NBC . " Elementary School Musical " garnered a 3 @.@ 7 / 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to the Nielsen ratings . Ratings and total viewership for the episode declined 14 % from the previous season premiere , " Homer the Whopper " , which attained 8 @.@ 31 million viewers and received a 4 @.@ 3 / 12 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . However , opposite results were shown when compared to the previous episode , " Judge Me Tender " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 72 million viewers and achieved a 2 @.@ 5 / 8 rating in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , according to the Nielsen ratings . " Elementary School Musical " ranked twenty @-@ third in the 18 – 49 demographic for the week . 
 Television critics were polarized with " Elementary School Musical " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a ' C + ' grade . Although he expressed satisfaction towards many aspects of the episode , such as the character development of Lisa Simpson , VanDerWerff criticized the songs performed in the episode . In response to the appearance of Jemaine Clement and Bret McKenzie of the Flight of the Conchords , he stated : " I have no idea if the writers wrote new songs for the two guys in Flight of the Conchords to sing [ ... ] but the songs they sang were pretty weak . " Similarly , VanDerWerff was critical of the guest appearances of Michele , Riley , and Monteith , and stated : " Bringing in the Glee kids to sing a take on " Good Vibrations " that was , frankly , awful mostly just felt like an attempt to have guest stars in nothing parts so they could be promoted . In contrast , Brad Trechak of TV Squad felt that the " Elementary School Musical " was an enjoyable start to the twenty @-@ second season of the series , and retorted that the appearances of Clement and McKenzie was the highlight of the episode . Similarly , Eric Hochberger of TV Fanatic wrote , " We actually loved Bret and Jemaine doing what they do best last night : playing characterized versions of themselves . Unlike the Glee kids , our favorite duo from New Zealand were given decent songs and some pretty great lines . " Hochberger gave the episode a 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . 
 = Change ( Taylor Swift song ) = 
 " Change " is a song performed by American singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift . Swift self @-@ penned the song and co @-@ produced it alongside Nathan Chapman . The song was released on August 8 , 2008 , with all proceeds being donated to the United States Olympic team . " Change " was written about Swift 's hopes and aspirations in regards to succeeding , although being signed to the smallest record label in Nashville , Tennessee . The track was later chosen as one of the themes for the 2008 Summer Olympics and was included on the AT & T Team USA Soundtrack , which was released August 7 , 2008 . The song was later included on Swift 's second studio album Fearless , which was released in November 2008 . " Change " is musically pop rock and uses divergent string instruments . Lyrically , it speaks of overcoming obstacles and achieving victory . 
 It received mixed reviews from music critics and was able to debut and peak at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Swift 's first song to reach the top ten on the chart . The music video for " Change " was directed by Shawn Robbins and features Swift performing with a band in a ballroom . An alternate version of the video features footage of the United States Olympic team at the 2008 Summer Olympics . The song was performed during Swift 's first headlining tour , the Fearless Tour in 2009 . 
 = = Background = = 
 When Swift was first signed to Big Machine Records , it was a new and extremely small record label , the smallest in Nashville , Tennessee , that consisted of approximately twelve employees and her as the only signed artist . At some point , Swift realized that it would be more difficult for her to achieve success through a small label , than in a larger label , constricting their contacts and making it nearly impossible to embark on concert tours and have presenter or performer slots on award shows . In addition , as the only signed artist , she could not ask for favors and only had herself to encourage the hope that scenarios would eventually change . Swift described the scenario as an " uphill climb " and said , " There was this moment where I sat there and was like , ‘ When are we going to get a fighting chance ? We ’ re the smallest record label in Nashville , but we want this really bad . ’ " After reassuring to herself that it would be different in the future , she wrote the beginning of " Change " . She let the track sit for a while , waiting for a remarkable event to trigger its completion . She then completed the track the day after she won the Horizon Award at the 2007 Country Music Association Awards and saw Scott Borchetta , the president of Big Machine Records , crying . " That ’ s when I finished [ it ] , because I knew I couldn ’ t finish it until something like that happened . It was absolutely the most amazing night of my life , getting to see the emotion of all the people who worked so hard for me . " 
 The song was recorded in December 2007 , when she recognized it applied to more scenarios and had a " bigger meaning " than originally . American television network National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) had asked Swift to perform at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . However , an appearance could not be scheduled because Swift was touring at the time . Instead , Swift 's father suggested using " Change " as a theme for the event . Therefore , " Change " was used during NBC 's daily video highlights in August 2008 , prior to the release of Fearless . " I wrote the song ‘ Change ’ as an underdog story . It ’ s kind of crazy to think that the Olympics chose this as one of the songs to play during the Olympic Games " , Swift commented . It was included on the AT & T Team USA Soundtrack ( 2008 ) . The song was released as a promotional single on the iTunes Store on August 8 , 2008 . All proceeds were donated to the United States Olympic team . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The duration of " Change " is four minutes and forty six seconds . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian described the song 's genre as a " kind of <unk> perfect pop rock " . He said the most country part of the song were lyrics that referenced Catholicism with the word " hallelujah " . It is set in common time and has a moderate tempo of 100 beats per minute . It is written in the key of F major and Swift 's vocals span one octave , from F3 to B ♭ 4 . They were described to have a nasal tone when using her voice above mezzo forte . It follows the chord progression F – F / E – Dm – B ♭ . " Change " relies on a string @-@ swathed instrumentation . 
 The lyrics of " Change " speak of overcoming obstacles and achieving triumph , while instilling hope in oneself . It centers around the concept of surpassing others ' expectations and the limitations they set out . The song turns the notion of fearlessness into a movement that is not specified . Dave Heaton of PopMatters noted the lyric " I believe in whatever you do " meant Swift was unconcerned with the specifics of the cause . He presumed it was a universal message or was about changing the traditions of country music sound and defying the expectations of what country artists can achieve with their careers . Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone believed the lyrics addressed political issues . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The song received generally mixed reviews from contemporary critics . Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine was unimpressed by Swift 's vocals , describing them as unpleasant and thin . Keefe added that her voice often cracked and , therefore , prevented the song from becoming an anthem . Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone magazine considered the track to be vague . Dave Heaton of PopMatters compared " Change " and Swift 's " Long Live " , both which ended Fearless and Speak Now ( 2010 ) , respectively . He stated , " There ’ s something really generic about the song [ s ] , but that quality becomes the cornerstone of an anthem . " Heaton also commented that the song was appealing to multiple audiences , as long as they felt restrained by any scenario . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week ending August 30 , 2008 , " Change " debuted at its peak position of number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 , selling over 131 @,@ 000 digital downloads , making it Swift 's best @-@ charting song at the time and first top ten appearance . In the following week , the song descended to number forty and then number one @-@ hundred on the Billboard Hot 100 , marking its third and last week on the chart . The song is one of thirteen songs from Fearless charted within the top forty of the Billboard Hot 100 , breaking the record for the most top forty entries from a single album . " Change " also peaked at number fifty @-@ seven on the Hot Country Songs chart on the week ending August 30 , 2008 . The track also peaked at number twenty @-@ one on the now @-@ defunct Pop 100 chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Change " was directed by Shawn Robbins . It was filmed at the ballroom in the Scottish Rite Cathedral in Indianapolis , Indiana . The video commences with a shot of a stained glass window . It then transitions to Swift , clothed by a white cocktail dress and black cowboy boots , performing alongside a backup band in an empty ballroom . The band members dressed semi @-@ casual and played the instruments bass , drums , and various guitars . As the video progresses , Swift is seeing singing and dancing . Cut @-@ scenes feature close @-@ ups of Swift in another setting , clothed by another white cocktail dress and surrounded by hot pink , white , and blue twinkling lights in a black background . The video concludes with Swift turning back and walking toward the backup band . An alternate version of the video features footage from United States Olympic team at the 2008 Summer Olympics . Both versions of the music video premiered on NBC.com in August 2008 . To date , the video has over 37 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Swift has performed the track on the AOL Sessions . Since , Swift has performed the track at the Studio 330 Sessions , the 2009 CMA Music Festival , the 2009 V Festival , and the Australian charity concert Sydney Sound Relief . Swift 's first televised performance of " Change " was at the 2010 Academy of Country Music Awards , where she , donning a sparkly evening gown , sang on an elevator suspended from the crowd . She then came down , where she was joined by a teenage choir , and finished the performance by surfing the crowd . Swift performed " Change " on the first North American leg of the Fearless Tour . During the performances , Swift wore a sparkly silver and black dress with black , leather boots . She noted , " It 's been a tough year " , and commenced singing throughout the stage as images of victims of economic and natural disasters were projected on the video screens . As the song approximated , its last refrain , she said , " Things turn back around . " Then , scenes of triumph appeared on the video screens . Craig Rosen of The Hollywood Reporter attended the May 22 , 2009 concert in Los Angeles , California at the Staples Center and commented , " It was overly simplistic and a bit naive , but still hard not to be moved . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times said Swift offered the audience with optimistic thinking with the performance in the August 27 , 2009 concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Digital Download 
 " Change " ( Album Version ) – 4 : 43 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Japanese battleship Hatsuse = 
 Hatsuse ( 初瀬 , Hatsuse ) was a Shikishima @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Imperial Japanese Navy by the British firm of Armstrong Whitworth in the late 1890s . The ship participated in the early stages of the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 1905 , including the Battle of Port Arthur on the second day of the war . She was involved in the subsequent operations until she struck two mines off Port Arthur in May 1904 . The second mine detonated one of her magazines and Hatsuse sank almost immediately afterwards with the loss of over half her crew . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hatsuse was 438 feet ( 133 @.@ 5 m ) long overall and had a beam of 76 feet 9 inches ( 23 @.@ 4 m ) . She had a full @-@ load draught of 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) and normally displaced 14 @,@ 850 long tons ( 15 @,@ 090 t ) and had a crew of 849 officers and enlisted men when serving as a flagship . The ship was powered by two Humphrys Tennant vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines using steam generated by 25 Belleville boilers . The engines were rated at 14 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 800 kW ) , using forced draught , and were designed to reach a top speed of around 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Hatsuse , however , reached a top speed of 19 @.@ 11 knots ( 35 @.@ 39 km / h ; 21 @.@ 99 mph ) from 16 @,@ 117 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 018 kW ) on her sea trials . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 643 long tons ( 1 @,@ 669 t ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship 's main battery consisted of four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns mounted in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The secondary battery consisted of fourteen 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) quick @-@ firing guns , mounted in casemates on the sides of the hull and in the superstructure . A number of smaller guns were carried for defence against torpedo boats . These included 20 QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt guns , eight 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) 3 @-@ pounder guns and ten 37 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . She was also armed with four submerged 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes . Hatsuse 's waterline armour belt consisted of Harvey armour and was 4 – 9 inches ( 102 – 229 mm ) thick . The armour of her gun turrets had a maximum thickness of 10 in ( 254 mm ) and her deck ranged from 2 @.@ 5 to 4 inches ( 64 to 102 mm ) in thickness . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Hatsuse , named after the Hase @-@ dera temple , which was famous for its maple trees , was ordered as part of the 10 Year Naval Expansion Programme and paid for from the £ 30 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 indemnity paid by China after losing the Sino @-@ Japanese War of 1894 – 1895 . The ship was laid down by Armstrong Whitworth at their Elswick shipyard on 10 January 1898 . She was launched on 27 June 1896 and completed on 18 January 1901 . Before sailing to Japan , she represented the Meiji Emperor at Queen Victoria 's funeral . 
 At the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War , Hatsuse , commanded by Captain Yu <unk> , was assigned to the 1st Division of the 1st Fleet . She participated in the Battle of Port Arthur on 9 February 1904 when Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō led the 1st Fleet in an attack on the Russian ships of the Pacific Squadron anchored just outside Port Arthur . Tōgō had expected his surprise night attack on the Russians by his destroyers to be much more successful than it actually was and anticipated that they would be badly disorganized and weakened , but the Russians had recovered from their surprise and were ready for his attack . The Japanese ships were spotted by the cruiser Boyarin which was patrolling offshore and alerted the Russian defences . Tōgō chose to attack the Russian coastal defences with his main armament and engage the Russian ships with his secondary guns . Splitting his fire proved to be a bad idea as the Japanese 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) and six @-@ inch guns inflicted little damage of significance on the Russian ships who concentrated all their fire on the Japanese ships with some effect . Although a large number of ships on both sides were hit , Russian casualties numbered only 17 while the Japanese suffered 60 killed and wounded before Tōgō disengaged . Hatsuse was hit twice during the battle , losing seven crewmen killed and 17 wounded . 
 Hatsuse participated in the action of 13 April when Tōgō successfully lured out a portion of the Pacific Squadron , including Vice Admiral Stepan Makarov 's flagship , the battleship Petropavlovsk . When Makarov spotted the five battleships of the 1st Division , he turned back for Port Arthur and Petropavlovsk struck a minefield laid by the Japanese the previous night . The Russian battleship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded , Makarov one of the 677 killed . Emboldened by his success , Tōgō resumed long @-@ range bombardment missions , which prompted the Russians to lay more minefields . 
 On 14 May 1904 , Admiral Nashiba put to sea with the battleships Hatsuse ( flag ) , Shikishima , and Yashima , the protected cruiser Kasagi , and the dispatch boat Tatsuta to relieve the Japanese blockading force off Port Arthur . On the following morning , the squadron encountered a minefield laid by the Russian minelayer Amur . Hatsuse struck one mine that disabled her steering at 10 : 50 a.m. and Yashima struck another when moving to assist Hatsuse . At 12 : 33 p.m. , the latter drifted onto another mine that detonated one of her magazines , killing 496 of her crew , and sinking the ship at 38 ° 37 ′ N 121 ° 20 ′ E. Tatsuta and Kasagi managed to save the Admiral and Captain <unk> with 334 other officers and enlisted men . Yashima 's flooding could not be controlled and she foundered about eight hours later , after her crew had abandoned ship . 
 = Geographia Neoteriki = 
 Geographia Neoteriki ( Greek : <unk> <unk> Modern Geography ) is a geography book written in Greek by Daniel Philippidis and Grigorios Konstantas and printed in Vienna in 1791 . It focused on both the physical and human geography features of the European continent and especially on Southeastern Europe , and is considered one of the most remarkable works of the modern Greek Enlightenment . The authors of the Geographia Neoteriki adopted new geographical methodologies for that time , which were primarily based on personal examination of the described areas and used as sources a number of contemporary European handbooks . 
 The work , written in a vernacular language , also described the contemporary social developments and expressed ideas that were considered revolutionary and anticlerical , and addressed the political and economic decay of the Ottoman Empire . Geographia Neoteriki was welcomed with enthusiasm by western intellectual circles , especially in France , but on the other hand , it was largely neglected by Greek scholars . 
 = = Background = = 
 A category of historical and geographical literature , focused on regional history and geography , emerged during the 18th century among Greek scholars . This kind of literature combined the collection of ethnographic data with a conviction in geography 's moral and religious purpose . Major representatives of this field were two scholars and clerics , Daniel Philippidis and Grigorios Konstantas . They came from the village of <unk> in Thessaly , modern Greece , and were nicknamed <unk> , from the ancient name of their birthplace ( <unk> ) . Both scholars were active members of the Greek diaspora in the Danubian Principalities , in modern Romania , where they studied and taught at the courts of the Greek Orthodox <unk> and the Princely Academies of Bucharest and Iaşi . This environment offered in general a special attraction for ambitious and educated Greek people from the Ottoman Empire , contributing to the enlightenment of their nation . Philippidis ' and Konstantas ' work Geographia Neoteriki , published in Vienna in 1791 , belongs to a body of contemporary texts which strove to map out the European parts of the Ottoman Empire and Greece in particular . 
 = = Content = = 
 This work was the first and only volume by Daniel Philippidis and Grigorios Konstantas , and their intention was not only to define and describe the lands that were populated by Greeks , but also to describe the current social developments in the wider region . With this work they gave a precise delimitation of European Hellas ( Greece ) of that time , a few decades before the outbreak of the Greek War of Independence ( 1821 ) . According to their description this area would not only include present @-@ day Greece , but also Albania , the Republic of Macedonia and the southern half of Bulgaria , an area that included all the areas ruled by the Macedonian Kings , in addition to those of classical Greece incorporating most of the Orthodox populations of the Balkan peninsula , which was during that time under Ottoman rule . 
 They concluded that the ' Greek lands ' are located in a privileged geographic location at the crossroads of three continents : Europe , Asia and Africa , however , as the Ottoman administration was incapable of reinforcing the rule of law , economic activity couldn 't flourish . Thus , they addressed the political and economic instability of the Ottoman Empire that struggled to maintain control over different ethnicities and huge territories . As a consequence of that lack of control , many Greeks were impelled to seek protection outside the Ottoman Empire , while the ones that had not abandoned their lands , suffered under a terrible Ottoman regime , and had no educational rights . 
 Reflecting a new revolutionary era in the European history after the outbreak of the French Revolution , the authors expressed sharp social criticism , castigating the corruption of the church authorities , the idleness of the monasticism , and popular superstition . They also appealed for reform of the language , education , and change to the social mores as a way to overcome backwardness and to renew people 's mentality with a more western view . They claimed that Greece is positioned within a Europe defined by the dynamics of political reforms from old and corrupt monarchical regimes to new republican communities . The modern innovative spirit of Geographia Neoteriki was also expressed in the use of a lively and malleable vernacular ( Demotic ) language with very few ties to the <unk> , a more <unk> form of Greek , which was commonly used by most Greek scholars of that time . 
 The book introduced a number of new ideas in the field of human geography and social organization models , that had been developed in the western world during the 18th century . Among the sources that the authors used to compose Geographia Neoteriki , were the Géographie Moderne by Nicolle de La Croix , the Géographie Ancienne , and the Géographie Moderne , which were part of the Encyclopédie <unk> by Charles @-@ Joseph <unk> . Additionally , the authors had personally examined the areas described in the work . This element served both as the work 's primary organizing mode as well as the basis for their historical approach . 
 = = Popularity = = 
 In general , Geographia Neoteriki , was welcomed with enthusiasm by western intellectual circles . Jean @-@ Baptiste d <unk> de <unk> , professor of modern Greek in the Ecole des <unk> Orientales <unk> , used it as a textbook for his students . French geographer Barbie du Bocage published a review after the book 's publication along with a translated passage . Moreover , travellers who published accounts during the early 19th century , frequently cited the text . François Pouqueville , William Martin Leake , Henry Holland , and Lord Byron mentioned this work , and used it as a source of information . The book also enjoyed some popularity in the non Greek regions of the Balkan peninsula , while 19th century Bulgarian authors of geographic textbooks used it as a model . 
 On the other hand , especially due to the vernacular language used , this work was largely neglected among the Greek scholars , especially by Adamantios Korais and Dimitrios <unk> , and was never used as an academic work , or even as a school textbook . It was also negatively received by the Church hierarchy , as well as conservative Greek scholars , due to the vernacular language it used and the liberal views it expressed . It is worth noting that the work ’ s linguistic form disappointed even Dimitrios <unk> , the intellectual mentor of the two authors , while Philippidis himself , never used such vernacular style language again in his future works . However , Geographia Neoteriki inspired a number of similar geographical works published in Greece during the 19th century . 
 = Tik Tok = 
 " Tik Tok " ( stylized as " TiK ToK " ) is the debut single by American recording artist Kesha . The song was produced by Dr. Luke and Benny Blanco and co @-@ written by Kesha , Dr. Luke and Blanco . It was released on August 7 , 2009 as the lead single from Kesha 's debut studio album , Animal . The opening line of the song came from an experience where Kesha woke up surrounded by beautiful women , to which she imagined Diddy being in a similar scenario . The experience triggered the writing of the song which she later brought to her producer , Dr. Luke , who was then contacted by Diddy in hopes of a collaboration ; he came to the studio the same day and recorded his lines and the song was completed . 
 According to Kesha , the song 's lyrics are representative of her and based on her life ; the song has a carefree message and talks about not letting anything bring you down . The song is an electropop song with dance @-@ pop elements that uses a minimalist video @-@ game beat interspersed with handclaps and synths . The song 's verses use a rap @-@ sing vocal style while the chorus is sung ; throughout the song the use of Auto @-@ Tune is prominent . Musically , the song has been compared to the works of Lady Gaga , Uffie , and Fergie . 
 The song achieved commercial success by topping the charts in eleven countries . In the United States , the song broke the record for the biggest single @-@ week sum of all time for a female artist selling 610 @,@ 000 digital downloads in one week . " Tik Tok " was certified 5 × platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and has sold over six million copies in the United States . The song was the best @-@ selling single worldwide in 2010 , selling 12 @.@ 8 million copies in that year alone , and by 2012 , 14 million copies were sold , making it the third best @-@ selling single in the digital history , after " Call Me Maybe " by Carly Rae Jepsen , and " I Gotta Feeling " by The Black Eyed Peas . The song was listed 56th on the Billboard Hot 100 Songs of All @-@ time . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In 2005 , Lukasz Gottwald ( Dr. Luke ) had just finished producing tracks for Kelly Clarkson 's album Breakaway ( 2004 ) and was looking to expand further on his writing and producing credits . Luke solicited around to different people in the music business asking for demos from unknown artists . Two of the demos he received were from Katy Perry and Kesha . He was particularly taken with Kesha 's demos which consisted of a self @-@ penned country ballad and trip @-@ hop track . The latter of the demos caught Luke off guard when she ran out of lyrics and started to rap , " I 'm a white girl / From the ' Ville / Nashville , bitch . Uhh . <unk> . " The improvisation made her stand out from other artists that Luke had listened to , which he recalled : " That 's when I was like , ' OK , I like this girl 's personality . When you 're listening to 100 CDs , that kind of bravado and chutzpah stand out . " Following this , at the age of eighteen , Kesha signed to Luke 's label , Kemosabe Records , and his publishing company , Prescription Songs . 
 After being signed to Luke 's label she also signed to David Sonenberg 's DAS management company . While at the label she worked with record producer Greg Wells , which she attributes to developing her sound on her first record , Animal ( 2010 ) . Although she was signed to Luke and his label , Kesha never took priority as he was busy with other projects at the time . It was not until 2008 when Luke was working with Flo Rida on " Right Round " that he pulled Kesha in to contribute , giving her the female hook . Within a few months the song became a worldwide number one . The event lead to different labels sparking interest in signing her , including RCA Records , to which she eventually signed . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 " Tik Tok " was written by Ke $ ha , alongside Dr. Luke and Benny Blanco and was co @-@ produced by Luke and Blanco . Ke $ ha said the inspiration behind the song came from coming home half @-@ drunk and stumbling after a night out of partying . She would then write down a few words to a song , then the following morning she would wake up with the story waiting to be told . The opening line came from an experience where she woke up surrounded by " beautiful women " , leading to her imagining P. Diddy being in a similar scenario . She then proceeded to bring the song to her producer Dr. Luke and Benny Blanco and the song was written . Four hours later , Diddy called Luke and said that they should do a song together . Diddy came to the studio later that day to contribute his lines and the collaboration was completed . 
 Engineering of the song was done by Emily Wright and Sam Holland at Conway Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California . While Ke $ ha was in the studio with Dr. Luke and Blanco , she took three takes to get the song correct as she jokingly " white @-@ girl rapped " over the beat . At one point in the song 's production , she had wanted to re @-@ write the verses of the song because she did not think that they were " funny or clever " , feeling that they " kind of sucked . " She elaborated , " I thought it was just another song , I thought it was just like all the other ones I 'd written . I didn 't even know if it was very good . I wanted to rewrite the verses , I didn 't think it was funny or clever . I thought it kind of sucked . But everyone else liked it . " Ke $ ha ultimately did not end up rewriting any of the song 's lyrics . She further described the theme of the song in an interview , emphasizing that it embodied her own lifestyle , 
 We 're [ Ke $ ha and her friends ] all young and broke and it doesn 't matter . We can find clothes on the side of the street and go out and look fantastic , and kill it . If we don 't have a car that doesn 't stop us , because we 'll take the bus . If we can 't afford drinks , we 'll bring a bottle in our purse . It 's just about not letting anything bring you down . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Tik Tok " is an upbeat electropop song that incorporates elements of dance @-@ pop and <unk> in its production and beats . It utilizes a minimalist " video @-@ game beat " interspersed with handclaps and synths . In the beginning , Kesha says , " Wake up in the morning feeling like P. Diddy " , Kesha uses a spoken word rap style on the verses while the chorus is sung . Throughout the song Kesha 's vocals are enhanced by Auto @-@ Tune in some places . The song also features two lines by Diddy ( " Hey , what up girl ? " and " Let 's go ! " ) Lyrically , the song speaks about " excess pleasures , from drinking ( ' Ain 't got a care in the world but I got plenty of beer ' ) to men ( ' We kick ' em to the curb unless they look like Mick Jagger ' ) . " According to Kesha the lyrics are representative of herself , stating , " It 's about my life . It 's 100 percent me . " 
 Kesha uses a rap vocal delivery which was influenced by the Beastie Boys . She claims that the track 's creation would not have happened if it was not for their influence on her music . While the song was being crafted she took a different vocal approach to the song than in her earlier records , explaining that : " I ’ ve done the country , done the pop @-@ rock , done the super @-@ hard electro , ... I was like , whatever , throw some rap in there , why not ? " According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Kobalt Music Publishing , the song is set in common time with a moderate beat rate of 120 beats per minute . The song is written in the key of D minor . It has the sequence of B ♭ – C – Dm as its chord progression and Kesha 's vocals in the song span from the note of D3 to the note of D5 . Musically , the song has been compared to Lady Gaga 's debut single , " Just Dance " , for their similar composition and lyrical context and to Fergie for their similar rap style . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 In July 2009 , the song was offered as a free download on Kesha 's MySpace page for over a month before its official sale release . The song was later released to iTunes on August 7 , 2009 , and on August 25 , 2009 , in the United States . Barry Weiss of RCA / Jive Label Group relied on a similar marketing scheme to that of Britney Spears ' in 1999 when choosing to give the song away for free . The song 's marketing relied heavily on radio once she had achieved a strong online interest , but its radio release was delayed until October in order to capitalize on social media 's interest in her . After spreading the song quickly topped iTunes charts . 
 To promote the single , Kesha made several television appearances and performances across the world . The first televised performance of the song was on a part of MTV Push , a program broadcast on MTV Networks worldwide , where she performed the song alongside her other tracks " Blah Blah Blah " and " Dinosaur " . She performed the song alongside " Blah Blah Blah " , " Take It Off " , " Your Love Is My Drug " and " Dirty Picture " in a set for BBC Radio 1 's Big Weekend . On May 29 , 2010 , Kesha performed " Tik Tok " alongside " Your Love Is My Drug " at the MTV Video Music Awards Japan . 
 Kesha has also made appearances on It 's On with Alexa Chung , The Wendy Williams Show , Lopez Tonight , Late Night with Jimmy Fallon , The Tonight Show with Conan O 'Brien and The Ellen DeGeneres Show to perform the song . This song was also performed on Saturday Night Live on April 17 , 2010 . On August 13 , 2010 Kesha performed " Tik Tok " on Today . On November 7 , 2010 Kesha performed the song at the MTV Europe Music Awards . Throughout the performance she was seen wearing a leotard with day @-@ glow makeup . The performance featured a backing consisting of flashing lights and background dancers . The song 's bridge was changed during the performance and featured a more " amping house music vibe " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Kelsey Paine of Billboard called the song " a love letter to DJs everywhere , with hand claps that build to a crescendo of pure , infectious dance @-@ pop . " Paine , referring to her appearance on " Right Round " , wrote that she " offers her own fun and frivolous ode to a wild night out " as she sings about drinking and men . The review was concluded with the consensus the Kesha 's debut " reveals a knack for getting the party started . " Jim Farber of the New York Daily News called the song " a vintage lick of dance candy too tooth @-@ <unk> sweet to resist " that featured a " stabbing synthesizer hook " . Fraser McAlpine of the BBC , giving the single four out of a possible five stars , called it a " dirty little ditty " that had " ' hit ' written all over it " . McAlpine noted its similarities to Lady Gaga 's " Just Dance " for their partying subject matter , but concedes that " she does make it sound kinda fun though . " Billy Johnson , Jr. of Yahoo ! compared " Tik Tok " to the 1980s L <unk> hit " Cars That Go Boom " and notes that Kesha has " take [ n ] on L <unk> 's vocal styling for her own hit . " 
 Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song four out of five stars , he spoke of the song giving Kesha a " <unk> image " but described the lyrics in a positive manner . Levine said the use of auto @-@ tune was " fun " and described Dr. Luke 's backing track as " bouncy " and " bubblegummy " . The review highlighted the song 's chorus with Levine calling it " stonking great " and " completely trashy in the best possible way . " David Jeffries of Allmusic called the track " fun " , listing it as one of the album 's best tracks . David Renshaw of Drowned in Sound felt that the song was effective in what it was trying to do , writing : " <unk> and rambunctious , it ’ s a brash summer anthem about getting drunk and partying hard . World rocking it might not be , but as a piece of disposable pop it captures a moment and boasts a huge hook which , really , is all you need to rule the radio , TV and ringtone airwaves . " Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly listed the song as the recommended download off of Animal , writing that " her Valley Girl sneer with electro @-@ glam arrangements that make brushing one 's teeth ' with a bottle of Jack ' sound like an awesome way to kill the morning @-@ after blues . " 
 Jonah Weiner of Slate Magazine gave the song a negative review saying that " the song sets up ship on the fault line between charmingly daft and deeply irritating . " He then compared the song to work by other artists , stating that " the rapped verses are sub @-@ Fergie @-@ grade , proudly stuffed with <unk> and to @-@ hell @-@ with @-@ the @-@ expiration @-@ date slang . " Weiner echoed the sentiment that the plotline seemed like " a sequel " to " Just Dance " , summing it up as " girl wakes up drunk , stays drunk , finds a dance floor and ( spoiler alert ) gets even drunker . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times described the song as " a zippy and salacious celebration of late nights and mornings @-@ after . " He noted that " some have compared Kesha , unfavorably , to Uffie , who is signed to the influential French electronic music label Ed Banger and whose sass @-@ rap predated Kesha ’ s by a couple of years . " However , he thought that " if anyone should feel fleeced by ' Tik Tok ' , though , it ’ s Lady Gaga , who probably hears significant chunks of her hit ' Just Dance ' in its melody and subject matter . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = United States = = = 
 In the United States , on the week ending October 24 , 2009 , " Tik Tok " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number seventy @-@ nine . The song steadily climbed the chart and became the first number one of the new decade . On the week ending December 27 , 2009 , " Tik Tok " broke the record in the United States for the highest single week sales , selling 610 @,@ 000 digital downloads , the highest ever by a female artist since tracking began in 2003 and second highest overall , behind " Right Round " which sold 636 @,@ 000 copies on the chart dated February 28 , 2009 . The record would later be surpassed by Taylor Swift 's single " We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together " when it sold 623 @,@ 000 digital copies in its debut week in the week ending September 1 , 2012 . On the week ending February 6 , 2010 , the song topped the Billboard Pop Songs radio airplay chart registering 11 @,@ 224 spins , becoming , at the time , the most played song in the charts seventeen @-@ year history , breaking the record set of 10 @,@ 859 spins just a week earlier by Lady Gaga 's " Bad Romance " . The song topped the chart for a total of nine consecutive weeks and at the end of 2010 , " Tik Tok " was named the Hot 100 song of the year . It was also the seventh most played song on radio in the country and the eighth most downloaded song that year . The song has received 5 × Platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America for sales of 5 million units . As of March 2016 , " Tik Tok " had sold over 6 @.@ 8 million downloads in the US . 
 The song made its first ever chart appearance in Canada , where the song debuted at number sixty @-@ seven on the Canadian Hot 100 . It ascended the chart for numerous weeks before attaining the number one position on the week ending November 21 , 2009 . The song remained atop the chart for two weeks before falling to the number two position , being dethroned by Lady Gaga 's , " Bad Romance " . " Tik Tok " regained the number one position weeks later on January 2 , 2010 , and held the top spot for seven weeks , giving the single nine weeks atop the chart in total . In 2009 the song was the year 's seventy @-@ sixth best charting song and it was 2010 's second best charting song on the Canadian Hot 100 Year End Charts . The single has been certified 7 × Platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for sales of 560 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = = Europe and Asia = = = 
 In Europe , the song debuted at number thirty @-@ eight in Sweden on the issue dated October 23 , 2009 , and managed to peak at number three . The song debuted at thirty @-@ nine in Denmark and peaked at number three . In Norway , the song debuted at number eleven and peaked at number three . In the United Kingdom , " Tik Tok " debuted on the official UK Singles Chart at number six on November 8 , 2009 , and over a period of just under three months climbed to a peak of number four on January 3 , 2010 . In 2010 , The UK Official Charts Company ranked " Tik Tok " at 100 on their list of the best @-@ selling singles of the 21st century . 
 By the end of 2010 , " Tik Tok " had become the best selling song by a foreign artist at 1 @,@ 412 @,@ 653 downloads in South Korea . 
 = = = Oceania = = = 
 " Tik Tok " made its chart debut on the official New Zealand Singles Chart at number seven on the issue dated October 5 , 2009 . The following week it moved up to number one where it held the top spot for a total of five consecutive weeks . The song has since been certified 2 × Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for sales of 30 @,@ 000 units . In Australia the song debuted on the ARIA Charts at number twenty @-@ eight , and reached number one on its third week on the chart . The song was listed atop the chart for a total of eight weeks and in 2009 it was listed at position nine on the Australian Singles Year End Chart . ; the following year the song was listed at position twelve on the 2010 year end chart . It has since been certified 5 × Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of 350 @,@ 000 units . The song sold 12 @.@ 8 million digital copies worldwide in 2010 , making it the best selling single of the year , trumping the previous year 's song by more than three million downloads . As of 2012 , it has sold around 14 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Tik Tok " was directed by Syndrome . It was shot in Kesha 's old neighborhood and the car featured in the video belongs to her . Kesha explained the experience saying , " the video I 'm excited about because I actually got to shoot it in my old neighborhood and the guy driving my gold car is a friend of mine " . The video 's party scene was shot in her friend 's house , which they refer to as the " drunk tank " . The singer said " the last party scene is in this house called the drunk tank , which is one of my friend 's houses that we all go party at . So I like it cause its super @-@ honest and genuine . " The video begins with Kesha waking in a bathtub in a home as she stumbles out and begins to look for a toothbrush in the restroom . She makes her way down a staircase looking at the pictures lining the wall . Kesha makes her way to the kitchen and walks in on a family who are having breakfast , startling them . She shrugs and then leaves the home as the family gets up and follows her . When she arrives at the sidewalk , she picks up a gold bicycle lying against a fallen fence and rides off . Kesha meets a group of children and trades the bicycle for their boombox . The video cuts to another scene where she rejects a guy and is picked up by a man portrayed by Simon Rex who drives her in a gold 1978 Trans Am . They are pulled over by the police , who handcuff Kesha . The scene then pans to her singing while standing in the T @-@ top as she dangles the handcuffs hanging from her left arm . The next scene shows Kesha in an empty room filled with glitter . She then attends a party with Rex for the final scene . The video comes to an end with Kesha lying in a different bathtub from the one she woke up in . The official music video has received over 250 million views on YouTube as of September 2015 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Cover versions and parodies = = = 
 " Weird Al " Yankovic included the chorus in his polka medley " Polka Face " from his 2011 album Alpocalypse . The song was parodied by British comedy group The Midnight Beast . The parody discusses youthful subjects such as attempting to view the nude bodies of women and dodging parents ' anger . After Kesha discovered the parody , she left a message on her Twitter account : " <unk> <unk> this is better than my version . " Released to iTunes on January 15 , 2010 , the song peaked at number four on the Australian Singles Chart , and at thirty @-@ nine on the Irish Singles Chart . Comedian Julie Brown parodied the song with the single " Another Drunk Chick " on her album Smell the Glamour ( 2011 ) . Jarett <unk> of The New York Post stated it was " one of the year 's best comedy albums . " Avril Lavigne performed an acoustic version of the song in her setlist for BBC 's Radio 1 . 
 In 2009 , American metalcore band , Woe , Is Me , covered the song , making it one of the earliest releases from the band . 
 Another parody of " Tik Tok " which is called " Go Cops ! " has reached over 11 million views on YouTube and became viral rapidly . This parody was made by a Comedy Music Artist and Comedian from Detroit called Rucka Rucka Ali . 
 Another parody came about when Israel Defense Forces soldiers created IDF Tik Tok in 2010 , a viral dance video that opens with six infantry soldiers on patrol in Hebron , walking cautiously down a deserted street , armed and wearing full combat gear , when " Tik Tok " begins to play , and the soldiers break into choreographed dance moves . " Tik Tok " was used in the opening sequence for The Simpsons episode " To <unk> with Love " , in which the entire cast lip @-@ synced to the song . 
 The cast of FOX musical series Glee performed this song on the episode " Blame It on the Alcohol " , with Heather Morris ' character , Brittany Pierce , taking the lead . The episode revolved around teen drinking and its dangers . The members of Glee Club are asked to perform at the school 's alcohol awareness assembly , in which " Tik Tok " is one of the songs performed . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club wrote that the song 's inclusion in the episode was superfluous , stating that it was just an excuse to get a Kesha song on Glee . VanDerWerff however , wrote that he " REALLY liked Heather Morris ' " rendition of the song . Sandra Gonzalez of Entertainment Weekly praised Brittany 's choreography and overall performance in " Tik Tok " , writing , " The huge star of this number was clearly Brittany , who more and more every week proves that she needs to be moved to the forefront of this show 's big performances and storylines . " Gonzalez gave the cover version of " Tik Tok " a B , calling it " pure , fun entertainment up until we got to the part straight out of the mind of Gordie <unk> . So even though the purple vomit was a bit too much for this weak viewer , the performance made me add a Ke $ ha song to my iTunes , which I never thought would happen . " Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone gave the cover version of " Tik Tok " a mostly positive review , writing , " Love Brittany as we do , we wish Rachel or Mercedes stepped up to the mic . The performance is less risqué than their Pep Rally " Push It " but winds up causing more controversy when Brittany pukes on Rachel and Santana also vomits up grey slush . It 's a fitting end to the song , and the episode . " 
 In 2012 , British girl band Little Mix covered this song with single Push It on X Factor . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 " Tik Tok " was used in several episodes of TV USA : The Hills , The Simpsons ( used the opening ) , Glee ( covered by Heather Morris ) , and TV Chilean : Otra <unk> papa , <unk> , Proyecto Miss Chile . The song was also used in a TV spot of the 2010 live @-@ action comedy film Marmaduke . The song was used in a Chilean commercial shopping La Polar in January 2011 and was featured in a promo of Chilean La Red international release America 's Next Top Model in April 2010 . This song is also used in the 2011 comedy film Diary of a Wimpy Kid : <unk> Rules . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Conway Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Animal , Dynamite Cop Music / Where Da Kasz at BMI . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Wife selling ( English custom ) = 
 Wife selling in England was a way of ending an unsatisfactory marriage by mutual agreement that probably began in the late 17th century , when divorce was a practical impossibility for all but the very wealthiest . After parading his wife with a halter around her neck , arm , or waist , a husband would publicly auction her to the highest bidder . Wife selling provides the backdrop for Thomas Hardy 's novel The Mayor of <unk> , in which the central character sells his wife at the beginning of the story , an act that haunts him for the rest of his life , and ultimately destroys him . 
 Although the custom had no basis in law and frequently resulted in prosecution , particularly from the mid @-@ 19th century onwards , the attitude of the authorities was equivocal . At least one early 19th @-@ century magistrate is on record as stating that he did not believe he had the right to prevent wife sales , and there were cases of local Poor Law Commissioners forcing husbands to sell their wives , rather than having to maintain the family in workhouses . 
 Wife selling persisted in England in some form until the early 20th century ; according to the jurist and historian James Bryce , writing in 1901 , wife sales were still occasionally taking place during his time . In one of the last reported instances of a wife sale in England , a woman giving evidence in a Leeds police court in 1913 claimed that she had been sold to one of her husband 's workmates for £ 1 . 
 = = Legal background = = 
 Wife selling in its " ritual form " appears to be an " invented custom " that originated at about the end of the 17th century , although there is an account from 1302 of someone who " granted his wife by deed to another man " . With the rise in popularity of newspapers , reports of the practice become more frequent in the second half of the 18th century . In the words of 20th @-@ century writer Courtney Kenny , the ritual was " a custom rooted sufficiently deeply to show that it was of no recent origin " . Writing in 1901 on the subject of wife selling , James Bryce stated that there was " no trace at all in our [ English ] law of any such right " , but he also observed that " everybody has heard of the odd habit of selling a wife , which still occasionally recurs among the humbler classes in England " . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Until the passing of the Marriage Act of 1753 , a formal ceremony of marriage before a clergyman was not a legal requirement in England , and marriages were unregistered . All that was required was for both parties to agree to the union , so long as each had reached the legal age of consent , which was 12 for girls and 14 for boys . Women were completely subordinated to their husbands after marriage , the husband and wife becoming one legal entity , a legal status known as coverture . As the eminent English judge Sir William Blackstone wrote in 1753 : " the very being , or legal existence of the woman , is suspended during the marriage , or at least is consolidated and incorporated into that of her husband : under whose wing , protection and cover , she performs everything " . Married women could not own property in their own right , and were indeed themselves the property of their husbands . But Blackstone went on to observe that " even the disabilities the wife lies under are , for the most part , intended for her protection and benefit . So great a favourite is the female sex of the laws of England " . 
 = = = Separation = = = 
 Five distinct methods of breaking up a marriage existed in the early modern period of English history . One was to sue in the ecclesiastical courts for separation from bed and board ( a <unk> et <unk> ) , on the grounds of adultery or life @-@ threatening cruelty , but it did not allow a remarriage . From the 1550s , until the Matrimonial Causes Act became law in 1857 , divorce in England was only possible , if at all , by the complex and costly procedure of a private Act of Parliament . Although the divorce courts set up in the wake of the 1857 Act made the procedure considerably cheaper , divorce remained prohibitively expensive for the poorer members of society . An alternative was to obtain a " private separation " , an agreement negotiated between both spouses , embodied in a deed of separation drawn up by a conveyancer . Desertion or elopement was also possible , whereby the wife was forced out of the family home , or the husband simply set up a new home with his mistress . Finally , the less popular notion of wife selling was an alternative but illegitimate method of ending a marriage . The Laws Respecting Women , As They Regard Their Natural Rights ( 1777 ) observed that , for the poor , wife selling was viewed as a " method of dissolving marriage " , when " a husband and wife find themselves heartily tired of each other , and agree to part , if the man has a mind to authenticate the intended separation by making it a matter of public notoriety " . 
 Although some 19th @-@ century wives objected , records of 18th @-@ century women resisting their sales are non @-@ existent . With no financial resources , and no skills on which to trade , for many women a sale was the only way out of an unhappy marriage . Indeed , the wife is sometimes reported as having insisted on the sale . A wife sold in Wenlock Market for 2s . 6d. in 1830 was quite determined that the transaction should go ahead , despite her husband 's last @-@ minute misgivings : " ' e [ the husband ] turned shy , and tried to get out of the business , but Mattie mad ' un stick to it . ' Er <unk> her <unk> in ' er <unk> man 's face , and said , ' Let be yer rogue . I <unk> be sold . I wants a change ' . " 
 For the husband , the sale released him from his marital duties , including any financial responsibility for his wife . For the purchaser , who was often the wife 's lover , the transaction freed him from the threat of a legal action for criminal conversation , a claim by the husband for restitution or damage to his property , in this case his wife . 
 = = Sale = = 
 It is unclear when the ritualised custom of selling a wife by public auction first began , but it seems likely to have been some time towards the end of the 17th century . In November 1692 " John , ye son of Nathan Whitehouse , of Tipton , sold his wife to Mr. Bracegirdle " , although the manner of the sale is unrecorded . In 1696 , Thomas Heath <unk> was fined for " <unk> in an unlawful manner with the wife of George <unk> of <unk> ... <unk> bought her of her husband at <unk> the pound " , and ordered by the peculiar court at Thame to perform public penance , but between 1690 and 1750 only eight other cases are recorded in England . In an Oxford case of 1789 wife selling is described as " the vulgar form of Divorce lately adopted " , suggesting that even if it was by then established in some parts of the country it was only slowly spreading to others . It persisted in some form until the early 20th century , although by then in " an advanced state of decomposition " . 
 In most reports the sale was announced in advance , perhaps by advertisement in a local newspaper . It usually took the form of an auction , often at a local market , to which the wife would be led by a halter ( usually of rope but sometimes of ribbon ) around her neck , or arm . Often the purchaser was arranged in advance , and the sale was a form of symbolic separation and remarriage , as in a case from Maidstone , where in January 1815 John Osborne planned to sell his wife at the local market . However , as no market was held that day , the sale took place instead at " the sign of ' The Coal @-@ barge , ' in Earl Street " , where " in a very regular manner " , his wife and child were sold for £ 1 to a man named William Serjeant . In July the same year a wife was brought to Smithfield market by coach , and sold for 50 guineas and a horse . Once the sale was complete , " the lady , with her new lord and master , mounted a handsome <unk> which was in waiting for them , and drove off , seemingly nothing loath to go . " At another sale in September 1815 , at Staines market , " only three shillings and four pence were offered for the lot , no one choosing to contend with the bidder , for the fair object , whose merits could only be appreciated by those who knew them . This the purchaser could boast , from a long and intimate acquaintance . " 
 Although the initiative was usually the husband 's , the wife had to agree to the sale . An 1824 report from Manchester says that " after several <unk> she [ the wife ] was knocked down for 5s ; but not liking the purchaser , she was put up again for 3s and a quart of ale " . Frequently the wife was already living with her new partner . In one case in 1804 a London shopkeeper found his wife in bed with a stranger to him , who , following an altercation , offered to purchase the wife . The shopkeeper agreed , and in this instance the sale may have been an acceptable method of resolving the situation . However , the sale was sometimes spontaneous , and the wife could find herself the subject of bids from total strangers . In March 1766 , a carpenter from Southwark sold his wife " in a fit of conjugal indifference at the alehouse " . Once sober , the man asked his wife to return , and after she refused he hanged himself . A domestic fight might sometimes precede the sale of a wife , but in most recorded cases the intent was to end a marriage in a way that gave it the legitimacy of a divorce . In some cases the wife arranged for her own sale , and even provided the money for her agent to buy her out of her marriage , such as an 1822 case in Plymouth . 
 Such " divorces " were not always permanent . In 1826 John Turton sold his wife Mary to William Kaye at Emley Cross for five shillings . But after Kaye 's death she returned to her husband , and the couple remained together for the next 30 years . 
 = = = Mid @-@ 19th century = = = 
 It was believed during the mid @-@ 19th century that wife selling was restricted to the lowest levels of labourers , especially to those living in remote rural areas , but an analysis of the occupations of husbands and purchasers reveals that the custom was strongest in " proto @-@ industrial " communities . Of the 158 cases in which occupation can be established , the largest group ( 19 ) was involved in the livestock or transport trades , 14 worked in the building trade , 5 were blacksmiths , 4 were chimney @-@ sweeps , and 2 were described as gentlemen , suggesting that wife selling was not simply a peasant custom . The most high @-@ profile case was that of Henry Brydges , 2nd Duke of Chandos , who is reported to have bought his second wife from an ostler in about 1740 . 
 Prices paid for wives varied considerably , from a high of £ 100 plus £ 25 each for her two children in a sale of 1865 ( equivalent to about £ 12 @,@ 900 in 2016 ) to a low of a glass of ale , or even free . The lowest amount of money exchanged was three farthings ( three @-@ quarters of one penny ) , but the usual price seems to have been between 2s . 6d. and 5 shillings . According to authors Wade Mansell and Belinda <unk> , money seems usually to have been a secondary consideration ; the more important factor was that the sale was seen by many as legally binding , despite it having no basis in law . Some of the new couples bigamously married , but the attitude of officialdom towards wife selling was equivocal . Rural clergy and magistrates knew of the custom , but seemed uncertain of its legitimacy , or chose to turn a blind eye . Entries have been found in baptismal registers , such as this example from <unk> in Essex , dated 1782 : " Amie Daughter of Moses Stebbing by a bought wife delivered to him in a Halter " . A jury in Lincolnshire ruled in 1784 that a man who had sold his wife had no right to reclaim her from her purchaser , thus endorsing the validity of the transaction . In 1819 a magistrate who attempted to prevent a sale at Ashbourne , Derby , but was pelted and driven away by the crowd , later commented : 
 Although the real object of my sending the constables was to prevent the scandalous sale , the apparent motive was that of keeping the peace ... As to the act of selling itself , I do not think I have a right to prevent it , or even oppose any obstacle to it , because it rests upon a custom preserved by the people of which perhaps it would be dangerous to deprive them by any law for that purpose . 
 In some cases , like that of Henry Cook in 1814 , the Poor Law authorities forced the husband to sell his wife , rather than have to maintain her and her child in the Effingham workhouse . She was taken to Croydon market and sold for one shilling , the parish paying for the cost of the journey and a " wedding dinner " . 
 = = = Venue = = = 
 By choosing a market as the location for the sale , the couple ensured a large audience , which made their separation a widely witnessed fact . The use of the halter was symbolic ; after the sale , it was handed to the purchaser as a signal that the transaction was concluded , and in some instances , those involved would often attempt further to legitimate the sale by forcing the winning bidder to sign a contract , recognising that the seller had no further liability for his wife . In 1735 , a successful wife sale in St Clements was announced by the common <unk> , who wandered the streets ensuring that local traders were aware of the former husband 's intention not to honour " any debts she should contract " . The same point was made in an advertisement placed in the Ipswich Journal in 1789 : " no person or persons to <unk> her with my name ... for she is no longer my right " . Those involved in such sales sometimes attempted to legalise the transaction , as demonstrated by a bill of sale for a wife , preserved in the British Museum . The bill is contained in a petition presented to a Somerset Justice of the Peace in 1758 , by a wife who about 18 months earlier had been sold by her husband for £ 6 6s " for the support of his <unk> " . The petition does not object to the sale , but complains that the husband returned three months later to demand more money from his wife and her new " husband " . 
 In Sussex , inns and public houses were a regular venue for wife @-@ selling , and alcohol often formed part of the payment . For example , when a man sold his wife at the Shoulder of Mutton and Cucumber in <unk> in 1898 , the purchaser paid 7s . 6d . ( £ 40 in 2016 ) and 1 imperial quart ( 1 @.@ 1 l ) of beer . A sale a century earlier in Brighton involved " eight pots of beer " and seven shillings ( £ 30 in 2016 ) ; and in <unk> in 1790 , a man who swapped his wife at the village inn for half a pint of gin changed his mind and bought her back later . 
 Public wife sales were sometimes attended by huge crowds . An 1806 sale in Hull was postponed " owing to the crowd which such an extraordinary occurrence had gathered together " , suggesting that wife sales were relatively rare events , and therefore popular . Estimates of the frequency of the ritual usually number about 300 between 1780 and 1850 , relatively insignificant compared to the instances of desertion , which in the Victorian era numbered in the tens of thousands . 
 = = = Distribution and symbolism = = = 
 Wife selling appears to have been widespread throughout England , but relatively rare in neighbouring Wales , where only a few cases were reported , and in Scotland where only one has been discovered . The English county with the highest number of cases between 1760 and 1880 was Yorkshire , with 44 , considerably more than the 19 reported for Middlesex and London during the same period , despite the French caricature of <unk> John Bull " booted and spurred , in [ London 's ] Smithfield Market , crying ' à <unk> livres ma femme ! ' [ £ 15 for my wife ] , while Milady stood <unk> in a pen " . 
 In his account , Wives for Sale , author Samuel Pyeatt Menefee collected 387 incidents of wife selling , the last of which occurred in the early 20th century . Historian E. P. Thompson considered many of Menefee 's cases to be " vague and dubious " , and that some double @-@ counting had taken place , but he nevertheless agreed that about 300 were authentic , which when combined with his own research resulted in about 400 reported cases . 
 Menefee argued that the ritual mirrored that of a livestock sale — the symbolic meaning of the halter ; wives were even occasionally valued by weight , just like livestock . Although the halter was considered central to the " legitimacy " of the sale , Thompson has suggested that Menefee may have misunderstood the social context of the transaction . Markets were favoured not because livestock was traded there , but because they offered a public venue where the separation of husband and wife could be witnessed . Sales often took place at fairs , in front of public houses , or local landmarks such as the obelisk at Preston ( 1817 ) , or Bolton 's " gas pillar " ( 1835 ) , where crowds could be expected to gather . 
 There were very few reported sales of husbands , and from a modern perspective , selling a wife like a chattel is degrading , even when considered as a form of divorce . Nevertheless , most contemporary reports hint at the women 's independence and sexual vitality : " The women are described as ' fine @-@ looking ' , ' buxom ' , ' of good appearance ' , ' a comely @-@ looking country girl ' , or as ' enjoying the fun and frolic heartily ' " . 
 Along with other English customs , settlers arriving in the American colonies during the late 17th and early 18th century took with them the practice of wife selling , and the belief in its legitimacy as a way of ending a marriage . In 1645 " The P <unk> Court " of Hartford , Connecticut , reported the case of Baggett <unk> , who was fined 20 shillings for " <unk> his wyfe to a young man " . The Boston Evening @-@ Post reported on 15 March 1736 an argument between two men " and a certain woman , each one claiming her as his Wife , but so it was that one of them had actually disposed of his Right in her to the other for Fifteen Shillings " . The purchaser had , apparently , refused to pay in full , and had attempted to return " his " wife . He was given the outstanding sum by two generous bystanders , and paid the husband — who promptly " gave the Woman a modest Salute wishing her well , and his Brother Sterling much Joy of his Bargain . " An account in 1781 of a William Collings of South Carolina records that he sold his wife for " two dollars and half [ a ] dozen bowls of <unk> " . 
 = = Changing attitudes = = 
 Towards the end of the 18th century , some hostility towards wife selling began to manifest itself amongst the general population . One sale in 1756 in Dublin was interrupted by a group of women who " rescued " the wife , following which the husband was given a mock trial and placed in the stocks until early the next morning . In about 1777 , a wife sale at Carmarthenshire produced in the crowd " a great silence " , and " a feeling of uneasiness in the gathering " . When a labourer offered his wife for sale on Smithfield market in 1806 , " the public became incensed at the husband , and would have severely punished him for his brutality , but for the interference of some officers of the police . " 
 Reports of wife selling rose from two per decade in the 1750s , to a peak of 50 in the 1820s and 1830s . As the number of cases increased so did opposition to the practice . It became seen as one of a number of popular customs that the social elite believed it their duty to abolish , and women protested that it represented " a threat and insult to their sex " . JPs in Quarter Sessions became more active in punishing those involved in wife selling , and some test cases in the central law courts confirmed the illegality of the practice . Newspaper accounts were often disparaging : " a most disgusting and disgraceful scene " was the description in a report of 1832 , but it was not until the 1840s that the number of cases of wife selling began to decline significantly . Thompson discovered 121 published reports of wife sales between 1800 and 1840 , as compared to 55 between 1840 and 1880 . 
 Lord Chief Justice William Murray , 1st Earl of Mansfield , considered wife sales to be a conspiracy to commit adultery , but few of those reported in the newspapers led to prosecutions in court . The Times reported one such case in 1818 , in which a man was indicted for selling his wife at Leominster market , for 2s . 6d . In 1825 a man named Johnson was charged with " having sung a song in the streets describing the merits of his wife , for the purpose of selling her to the highest bidder at Smithfield . " Such songs were not unique ; in about 1842 John Ashton wrote " Sale of a Wife " . The arresting officer claimed that the man had gathered a " crowd of all sorts of vagabonds together , who appeared to listen to his ditty , but were in fact , collected to pick pockets . " The defendant , however , replied that he had " not the most distant idea of selling his wife , who was , poor creature , at home with her hungry children , while he was endeavouring to earn a bit of bread for them by the strength of his lungs . " He had also printed copies of the song , and the story of a wife sale , to earn money . Before releasing him , the Lord Mayor , judging the case , cautioned Johnson that the practice could not be allowed , and must not be repeated . In 1833 the sale of a woman was reported at Epping . She was sold for 2s . 6d . , with a duty of 6d . Once sober , and placed before the Justices of the Peace , the husband claimed that he had been forced into marriage by the parish authorities , and had " never since lived with her , and that she had lived in open adultery with the man Bradley , by whom she had been purchased " . He was imprisoned for " having deserted his wife " . 
 The return of a wife after 18 years results in Michael <unk> 's downfall in Thomas Hardy 's novel Mayor of <unk> . A bad @-@ tempered , impulsive and cruel husband , feeling burdened by his wife , <unk> sells her to a stranger for five guineas . He becomes a successful businessman and rises to the position of mayor , but the return of his wife many years later prompts his fall back into penury . The custom was also referred to in the 19th @-@ century French play , Le Marché de Londres . Commenting on the drama and contemporary French attitudes on the custom , in 1846 the writer Angus B. Reach complained : " They reckon up a long and visionary list of our failings [ ... They ] would as readily give up their belief in the geographical and physical existence of London , as in the astounding fact that in England a husband sells his wife exactly as he sells his horse or his dog . " Such complaints were still commonplace nearly 20 years later ; in The Book of Days ( 1864 ) , author Robert Chambers wrote about a case of wife selling in 1832 , and noted that " the occasional instances of wife @-@ sale , while remarked by ourselves with little beyond a passing smile , have made a deep impression on our continental neighbours , [ who ] constantly cite it as an evidence of our low civilisation . " Embarrassed by the practice , a legal handbook of 1853 enabled English judges to dismiss wife selling as a myth : " It is a vulgar error that a husband can get rid of his wife by selling her in the open market with a halter round her neck . Such an act on his part would be severely punished by the local magistrate . " Originally published in 1869 , Burn 's Justice of the Peace and Parish Officer states that " publicly selling or buying a wife is clearly an indictable offence ... And many prosecutions against husbands for selling , and others for buying , have recently been sustained , and imprisonment for six months inflicted " . 
 Another form of wife selling was by deed of conveyance . Although initially much less common than sale by auction , the practice became more widespread after the 1850s , as popular opinion turned against the market sale of a wife . The issue of the commonly perceived legitimacy of wife selling was also brought to the government . In 1881 , Home Secretary William Harcourt was asked to comment on an incident in Sheffield , in which a man sold his wife for a quart of beer . Harcourt replied : " no impression exists anywhere in England that the selling of wives is legitimate " , and " that no such practice as wife selling exists " , but as late as 1889 , a member of the Salvation Army sold his wife for a shilling in Hucknall <unk> , Nottinghamshire , and subsequently led her by the halter to her buyer 's house , the last case in which the use of a halter is mentioned . The most recent case of an English wife sale was reported in 1913 , when a woman giving evidence in a Leeds police court during a maintenance case claimed that her husband had sold her to one of his workmates for £ 1 ( equivalent to about £ 90 in 2016 ) . The manner of her sale is unrecorded . 
 = SpongeBob SquarePants ( season 8 ) = 
 The eighth season of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants , created by former marine biologist and animator Stephen Hillenburg , originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States from March 26 , 2011 to December 6 , 2012 , and contained 26 episodes , beginning with the episodes " A Friendly Game " and " Oral Report " . The series chronicles the exploits and adventures of the title character and his various friends in the fictional underwater city of Bikini Bottom . The season was executive produced by series creator Hillenburg and writer Paul Tibbitt , who also acted as the showrunner . 
 The show itself received several recognition , including the 2011 and 2012 Kids ' Choice Awards for Favorite Cartoon . The series was also nominated in various international Kids ' Choice Awards ceremonies for the same category . At the 39th Daytime Emmy Awards the show received four nominations — including Outstanding Children 's Animated Program , Outstanding Directing in an Animated Program , Outstanding Performer in an Animated Program for Rodger Bumpass as Squidward Tentacles , and Outstanding Sound Editing <unk> . At the 40th Daytime Emmy Awards , the series was nominated for Outstanding Achievement in Sound Editing - Animation . The show won the BAFTA Children 's Awards for the International category . The episode " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " was well received at the 40th Annie Awards , being nominated for three categories , including a successful win for Dan Driscoll for the Character Animation in an Animated Television or other Broadcast Venue Production category . In 2012 , it was reported that the show was receiving a decline in ratings . The Wall Street Journal pointed to a few possible problems : It could be too old , or it may be shown on TV too often . Another issue could be its licensing to Netflix , an on @-@ demand Internet streaming media , the previous year . As a result , Netflix CEO Reed Hastings announced not to renew their existing deal with Viacom , owner of the SpongeBob trademark . Since then , Viacom 's deal with Netflix expired , removed its shows such as SpongeBob , and Dora the Explorer , and moved its programmings to Amazon.com , Netflix 's top competitor . 
 Several compilation DVDs that contained episodes from the season were released . The SpongeBob SquarePants : The Complete Eighth Season DVD was released in Region 1 on March 12 , 2013 , Region 2 on October 28 , 2013 , and Region 4 on October 30 , 2013 . 
 = = Production = = 
 The season aired on Nickelodeon , which is owned by Viacom , and was produced by United Plankton Pictures and Nickelodeon . The season 's executive producers were series creator Stephen Hillenburg and Paul Tibbitt , who also acted as the series ' showrunner . Due to the success of the show , the New York Daily News reported that Nickelodeon picked up SpongeBob SquarePants for an eighth season on December 14 , 2009 , during the year which the show was celebrating its tenth anniversary on television . Brown Johnson , president of animation for Nickelodeon and MTVN Kids & Family Group , announced the renewal of the series . The season was ordered with 26 episodes , that would bring the total number of episodes for the series to 178 . With its episode count of 178 , SpongeBob SquarePants surpassed Rugrats in episodes to claim the spot as the Nickelodeon series with most episodes . Johnson said " After a decade on our air , SpongeBob has emerged as one of the most beloved and popular characters in television history . Audiences of all ages have fallen in love with this show and we 're delighted to be serving up additional original episodes to our viewers for many years . " 
 Nickelodeon President Cyma Zarghami said " There are a bunch of different theories about SpongeBob . You can 't dismiss the fact that it is a creatively excellent property . It 's a character of good , positive energy . It came at a time when people wanted something more positive . " On March 26 , 2011 , the season premiered with the episode " A Friendly Game " and " Oral Report " . The episode " A Friendly Game " was written by Casey Alexander , Zeus Cervas and Steven Banks , with Tom Yasumi serving as animation director . The episode " Oral Report " was written by Alexander , Cervas and Dani Michaeli , and was directed by Alan Smart . 
 Animation was handled overseas in South Korea at Rough Draft Studios . In 2012 , Nickelodeon produced and debuted " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " , the first full @-@ length episode of the series that was produced in stop motion animation . Mark Caballero , Seamus Walsh , and Christopher Finnegan of Screen Novelties animated it , and Caballero and Walsh also served as its directors . Production on the episode began in October 2011 at Los Angeles , California . According to Finnegan , it took about five months to shoot , with a couple of months on either end for research and development and post . Animation directors credited with episodes in the eighth season included Caballero , Andrew Overtoom , Alan Smart , Walsh , and Tom Yasumi . Episodes were written by a team of writers , which consisted of Alexander , Banks , Luke Brookshier , Nate Cash , Marc Ceccarelli , Cervas , Sean Charmatz , Andrew Goodman , Derek Iversen , Mr. Lawrence , Michaeli , Richard Pursel , Aaron Springer , Paul Tibbitt , and Vincent Waller . The season was storyboarded by Alexander , Brookshier , Cash , Ceccarelli , Cervas , Charmatz , Springer , and Waller . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The eighth season had a cast of six main actors . Tom Kenny provided the voice of the title character SpongeBob SquarePants and his pet snail Gary . SpongeBob 's best friend , a starfish named Patrick Star , was voiced by Bill Fagerbakke , while Rodger Bumpass played the voice of Squidward Tentacles , an arrogant and ill @-@ tempered octopus . Other members of the cast were Carolyn Lawrence as Sandy Cheeks , a squirrel from Texas ; Clancy Brown as Mr. Krabs , a miserly crab obsessed with money and SpongeBob 's boss at the Krusty Krab ; and Mr. Lawrence as Plankton , a small green copepod and Mr. Krabs ' business rival . The season had a number of secondary characters including Jill Talley as Plankton 's computer wife , Karen ; Mary Jo Catlett as Mrs. Puff , SpongeBob 's driving instructor ; Lori Alan as Pearl , Mr. Krabs ' daughter ; and Brian Doyle @-@ Murray as the Flying Dutchman . 
 In addition to the regular cast members , episodes feature guest voices from many ranges of professions , including actors , musicians , and artists . For instance , in the episode " Ghoul Fools " , American actor and comedian Chris Elliott guest starred in the episode as Lord Poltergeist , ghost pirate who runs a " haunted house boat . " Ernest Borgnine and Tim Conway returned in the episode " Mermaid Man Begins " , reprising their roles as SpongeBob and Patrick 's favorite superheroes , Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy , respectively . They reappeared in " Super Evil Aquatic Villain Team Up is Go ! " , voicing their respective roles . In " Pet Sitter Pat " , Marion Ross voiced her recurring role as Grandma SquarePants , SpongeBob 's grandmother . In " The Way of the Sponge " , comedian Rich Fulcher guest starred as Fuzzy Acorns , Sandy 's karate instructor . John Goodman guest starred in the special episode " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " as Santa Claus . In " Hello Bikini Bottom " , Andy Samberg voiced the character of Colonel Carper , a concert manager who wants to become SpongeBob and Squidward 's band manager . Samberg said " I 've been a SpongeBob fan for years , so I was honored to be asked . It 's one of the few shows ever that 's just as funny for kids as it is for adults . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 During its peak years in early 2000 , SpongeBob SquarePants received enormous ratings and number of viewers . By 2012 , it was reported that the series ' ratings were declining . The average number of viewers aged 2 to 11 watching SpongeBob at any given time dropped 29 % in the first quarter from a year earlier , according to Nielsen . Wall Street Journal business writer John <unk> suggested that the age of the series and oversaturation of the show might be contributing to the decline of the series ' ratings , and might also be directly responsible for the decline in Nickelodeon 's overall ratings . Media analyst Todd Juenger , directly attributes the decline in Nickelodeon 's ratings to the availability of streaming video content on services like Netflix , a provider of on @-@ demand Internet streaming media . Philippe Dauman , the president and CEO of Viacom , contradicted the notion saying he did not think " the limited amount of Nick library content on Netflix [ ... ] has had a significant impact " . A Nickelodeon spokesman says SpongeBob is performing consistently well and remains as the number one rated animated series in all of children 's television . He added " there is nothing that we have seen that points to SpongeBob as a problem . " Dauman blamed the drop on " some ratings systemic issues " at Nielsen , citing extensive set @-@ top @-@ box data that " does in no way reflect " the Nielsen data . 
 Juenger also notes that SpongeBob could affect the ratings of other Nickelodeon programming because children often change channels to find their favorites program , then stay tuned into that network . Nickelodeon recently reduced its exposure in television . In the first quarter of 2012 , the network cut back on the number of episodes it aired by 16 % compared with a year earlier . 
 On April 22 , 2013 , Netflix CEO Reed Hastings announced not to renew their existing deal with Viacom . Since then , Viacom 's deal with Netflix expired and removed its shows such as SpongeBob , and Dora the Explorer . However , SpongeBob is still available to stream on Netflix in Canada . On June 4 , 2013 , Viacom announced a multi @-@ year licensing agreement moving its programmings , such as SpongeBob and Dora the Explorer , to Amazon.com , Netflix 's top competitor . Amazon agreed to pay more than $ 200 million to Viacom for the license , its largest subscription streaming transaction ever . 
 = = = Reviews and accolades = = = 
 At the 39th Annie Awards , Dani Michaeli , Sean Charmatz , Nate Cash , Luke Brookshier and Paul Tibbitt were nominated for Best Writing in an Animated Television Production for the episode " Patrick 's <unk> " . Moreover , directors Mark Caballero and Seamus Walsh also received a nomination at the 40th Annie Awards for Directing in an Animated Television or other Broadcast Venue Production for the episode " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " . Nominated for the same episode , Dan Driscoll won the Character Animation in an Animated Television or other Broadcast Venue Production category . <unk> Forrest received the same nomination for his work on the episode , but lost . The episode was also nominated at the 2013 Golden Reel Awards for Best Sound Editing - Sound Effects , Foley , Dialogue and ADR Animation in Television . " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " was nominated at the Annecy International Animated Film Festival for Special Award for a TV Series . 
 The show itself received several recognition . At the 39th Daytime Emmy Awards the show received four nominations — including Outstanding Children 's Animated Program , Outstanding Directing in an Animated Program , Outstanding Performer in an Animated Program for Rodger Bumpass as Squidward Tentacles , and Outstanding Sound Editing - Animation . At the 40th Daytime Emmy Awards , the series was nominated for Outstanding Achievement in Sound Editing - Animation . The show was nominated at the Producers Guild of America for the Children 's Program category . At the BAFTA Children 's Awards , the show won the International category . At the 2011 and 2012 ASCAP Film and Television Awards , SpongeBob SquarePants won the Top Television Series category . Furthermore , at the 2011 Kids ' Choice Awards , the show won the Favorite Cartoon category . The series also won the succeeding year 's Kids ' Choice Awards and the 2011 Indonesia Kids ' Choice Awards for the same category . SpongeBob SquarePants also received Favorite Cartoon nominations at the Kids ' Choice Awards Argentina 2011 and 2012 , and at the 2012 Kids ' Choice Awards Mexico . At the TP de Oro , the show won the Best Children and Youth Program category . 
 The season received positive reviews from media critics . In his review for The Boston Globe , Tom Russo was positive on the season DVD set . Russo praised the episode that " topped the shortlist " , " Plankton 's Good Eye " , writing " the micro @-@ antagonist clones one of SpongeBob 's eyeballs for himself , and suddenly develops a more bubbly worldview . " Author Richard <unk> cited a scene in " Squidward 's School for Grown @-@ Ups " , in which SpongeBob tries to win back Patrick 's friendship by dressing as the operatic Brünnhilde ( just as Bugs Bunny did in the classic 1957 cartoon What 's Opera , Doc ? ) , as an example of the supposed gay subtext in the series , claimed to exist by some critics of the show and denied by its creator . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Key 
 The following episodes listed in the chart are arranged according to their production order , rather than by their original air dates . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The DVD boxset for season eight was released by Paramount Home Entertainment and Nickelodeon in the United States and Canada in March 2013 , three months after it had completed broadcast on television . The DVD release features bonus materials . 
 = City at the End of Time = 
 City at the End of Time is a 2008 science fiction novel by American writer Greg Bear . It was published in August 2008 by Del Rey in the United States , and Gollancz in the United Kingdom . The story follows three drifters in present @-@ day Seattle who are tormented by strange dreams of the Kalpa , a city one hundred trillion years in the future . The Kalpa is attempting to ward off the Typhon , an inexplicable entity that has consumed the rest of the ancient universe and broken down the laws of physics . 
 The novel belongs to the Dying Earth subgenre . It is rooted in hard science fiction , but also incorporates several other genres , including fantasy and horror . Bear called it science fiction " stretched to the nth degree " . He said that in the novel he honors those writers who changed the face of science fiction and fantasy , including William Hope Hodgson and Arthur C. Clarke , and pays homage to Hodgson 's 1912 novel , The Night Land , with which City at the End of Time shares a number of plot elements . 
 The novel received a mixed reception from critics . Some reviewers were impressed by the novel 's scope and grandiosity , while others felt that the characters were underdeveloped and the story was difficult to follow . New Scientist described the first half of the book as " a gripping , original tale " , but complained that in the second half Bear over @-@ complicates the story with " too many ideas , images , mythologies and distractions " . City at the End of Time was nominated for the Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel and the John W. Campbell Memorial Award in 2009 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 City at the End of Time is about the Kalpa , the last city on Earth , one hundred trillion years in the future . The novel 's backstory describes how the aging universe continued expanding and its spacetime fabric weakened . With the galaxies burnt out , humanity dispersed across the cosmos , where they encountered the Typhon , an inexplicable entity that was destroying the decaying universe . It consumed matter and replaced space @-@ time with emptiness and inconsistencies beyond the laws of physics . The resulting Chaos spread rapidly , driving some humans back to ancient Earth with its rekindled sun . In an attempt to fend off the approaching Typhon , leaders of the dying Earth sent for Polybiblios , a human living with the Shen , an ancient alien race . Polybiblios returned to Earth with his adopted daughter , Ishanaxade , a being he had constructed from " fate @-@ logs " of intelligent species collected by the Shen . After the Shen system fell , and the Chaos surrounded Earth , its leaders instructed everybody to convert themselves from primordial ( real ) matter to noötic ( virtual ) mass . As each city fell , its inhabitants retreated to the last remaining cities , the Kalpa and Nataraja . Using knowledge he had gleaned from the Shen , Polybiblios built reality generators to protect the Kalpa . Nataraja , which had rebelled against the instruction to convert to noötic matter , was left to fend for itself . 
 The novel alternates between the Kalpa and present @-@ day Seattle , where three drifters , Ginny , Jack and Daniel are in possession of sum @-@ runners , small stone @-@ like talismans that give them " fate @-@ shifting " abilities , whereby they can jump between fate @-@ lines ( world lines in a multiverse ) . Ginny and Jack also have disturbing dreams of the Kalpa , and are inexplicably connected to Jebrassy and Taidba , two " breeds " living in the future city . Fate @-@ shifters and their sum @-@ runners are hunted by " collectors " working for the Chalk Princess , an entity controlled by the Typhon from the future . These hunters place adverts in local newspapers inviting " dreamers " to contact them for " help " . 
 In the future , the Typhon is destroying history and world @-@ lines are being broken , merging the past and the present . With the Chaos closing in on the Kalpa , the inhabitants ( all noötic ) are unable to venture outside the city walls . Under Ishanaxade 's instructions , they create " breeds " , copies of ancient humans , using primordial matter . They send them in groups into the Chaos to find out if Nataraja still stands , but none return . Ishanaxade herself ventures out , but is not heard from again . As the Typhon starts breaching the Kalpa , the last batch of breeds , including Jebrassy and Taidba , leave the city in search of help . Armed with portable reality generators , they slowly progress through the unreal landscape in search of the rebel city . 
 Meanwhile , the Chaos has reached all the way back to the present @-@ day , and an event called the Terminus hits Seattle : the past , present and future collide and world @-@ lines are severed . Ginny , Jack and Daniel , having evaded the hunters , trek across a degenerating Seattle . Protected by their sum @-@ runners , they are drawn to Nataraja , where Ishanaxade is waiting . While still in the Kalpa , Ishanaxade had instructed Polybiblios to create the sum @-@ runners containing " fragmented Babels " , and in the Chaos she had sent them back to the " beginning of time " . The sum @-@ runners were programmed to lead the bearers to Ishanaxade when the expected Terminus occurred . The breeds , programmed to see Ishanaxade as their " mother " , are also drawn to Nataraja , and Jebrassy and Taidba find their counterparts Jack and Ginny in the ruined city . The Kalpa falls to the Chaos , but in Nataraja , the sum @-@ runners and their Babel fragments are united and history is recreated , causing the Typhon , now a failed god , to implode . 
 = = Background = = 
 Greg Bear is an award @-@ winning science fiction writer from Seattle . He has won three Nebula Awards , including the 1995 Award for Best Novel for Moving Mars , and two Hugo Awards , including the 1983 Award for Best Novelette for Blood Music . City at the End of Time was his first novel since Quantico , which was first published in 2005 . Bear 's early influences included science fiction authors Robert A. Heinlein , Isaac Asimov and Poul Anderson . 
 Bear called City at the End of Time his " longest and most ambitious science fiction novel " he has written for a while . He said it is a " significant departure " from any of his previous works , and that it has a future history unlike anything he had tackled before . In an interview with Andromeda Spaceways Inflight Magazine in September 2008 , Bear said that what inspired him to write City at the End of Time was the question , " What if we 're still primitive in our thinking [ about physics and cosmology ] ? " , and this led to the idea for a story of " a Universe that goes on and on and on , and how reality might have to be changed by that circumstance . " 
 Bear told Locus magazine in August 2008 that he had found what appears to be a " continuity " in British science fiction : H. G. Wells 's The Time Machine ( 1895 ) , Arthur C. Clarke 's The City and the Stars ( 1956 ) , and Hodgson 's The House on the Borderland ( 1908 ) and The Night Land ( 1912 ) , all speculate on the evolution of humankind in the deep future . Bear said that these works , and their author 's imagination , were a big influence on City at the End of Time . 
 = = Analysis and genre = = 
 Science fiction critic John Clute said " City at the End of Time is an example of a novel in dialogue with past works of SF . " He said that Bear pays homage to William Hope Hodgson 's 1912 novel , The Night Land , with which City at the End of Time shares a number of plot elements . Both books include characters who dream of cities in the far future ( the Kalpa , and the Last Redoubt in The Night Land ) which are surrounded by encroaching chaos . The Kalpa also draws on Arthur C. Clarke 's future city , <unk> in his 1956 novel , The City and the Stars . Influences of other past works on City at the End of Time include H. P. Lovecraft 's novella The Shadow Out of Time ( 1936 ) , in which people exchange personalities in dreams across time , and Olaf Stapledon 's Last and First Men ( 1930 ) , in which the last of humanity in the deep future mentally contact people from the past . Lovecraft 's The Shadow Out of Time was in turn also influenced by The Night Land , which Lovecraft is said to have thought highly of . 
 Bear admired Hodgson 's imagination which , in The Night Land , had created the Last Redoubt as a " technological preserve " in the far future to keep out monsters that humanity had previously created , and which had evolved over long periods of time . But Bear 's interpretation of The Night Land is that this future landscape is a " metaphysical place " , and the monsters are " not creatures of this Earth " . For Bear , this explanation broadens the novel 's scope , and opens the door to other interpretations . 
 Another influence on City at the End of Time are the short stories , " The Universal Library " ( 1901 ) by Kurd <unk> and " The Library of Babel " ( 1941 ) by Jorge Luis Borges , which science fiction and mystery author Peter Heck believes is intentional . Books feature prominently in the novel in both present @-@ day Seattle and the Kalpa in the future , and Heck sees it as " a metaphor that anyone whose life is built around books — whether as a writer , reader , or bookseller — can readily empathize with . " 
 Clute notes that the Kalpa is not , as the title suggests , the last city ; they believe they are , but the last city is Nataraja , " the city beyond the city at the end of time " . Clute says that the Typhon is " a kind of god and a kind of quasi @-@ animate principle of destruction " that is attempting to destroy the universe because it " cannot tolerate being told " or " observed " . The creation and evolution of the universe is observed and recorded , and the Typhon will not tolerate this telling . In the Kalpa , Polybiblios creates Babel fragments ( " <unk> libraries that do not end " ) that , when brought together , will form a " backstory " that retells the history of the universe and overwhelms the Typhon . 
 City at the End of Time is rooted in hard science fiction , but includes several other genres . SFF World said the novel is similar to Stephen King 's Dark Tower , where " an ultimate destination that defies both space and time are at the heart " of both stories . But whereas King focuses on " fantastical elements " , Bear adopts a " scientific approach " . SFF World described City at the End of Time as " an Epic Science Fiction novel [ with ] elements of thriller and horror with some downright creepy characters . " Kirkus Reviews called the book an " eschatological fantasy " , and science fiction critic Paul Kincaid says the novel has " plotting and language [ that ] seem to have been borrowed wholesale from fantasy " . Bear himself said the novel could be fantasy or horror , but called it science fiction " stretched to the nth degree " . City at the End of Time is generally referred to as a " Dying Earth " story , and is categorized under the Dying Earth subgenre . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A review in Publishers Weekly described City at the End of Time as a " complex , difficult and beautifully written tale [ that ] will appeal to sophisticated readers who prefer thorny conundrums to fast @-@ paced action " . A reviewer for the Library Journal said the novel " <unk> [ es ] readers into a visceral experience of cosmological theory and the big creation stories of mythology " . A review in New Scientist described the first half of the book as " a gripping , original tale " with the portrayal of the fate @-@ shifters 's talents as " nothing short of brilliant " , but complained that in the second half Bear over @-@ complicates the story with " too many ideas , images , mythologies and distractions " . The reviewer said that a promising story " whips itself up into a virtually incomprehensible final act " . Science fiction critic John Clute described the book as " cosmological [ science fiction ] without a net " , and complained that Bear rushes through the story too quickly and does not dwell long enough on locations like the Kalpa to make it memorable . He said that the flight to the future of Ginny , Jack and Daniel " gets a touch Frodo @-@ in @-@ Mordor at places " . 
 Writing in a review in Asimov 's Science Fiction , science fiction and mystery author Peter Heck called City at the End of Time a " big , sweeping , heavily symbolic tale " , and " one of Bear 's most ambitious " . He said that while the story could have focused more on the future city , " in the end , the plotlines come together , and the complexities merge into a satisfying unity " . Speculative fiction writer Simon Petrie writing in Andromeda Spaceways Inflight Magazine was impressed by the book 's " grandiosity to the total synthesis of cosmology and myth " , and Bear 's " ability to encapsulate a universal future history in just the one book " , but found the mix of science , fantasy , horror , mythology and religion a little " incongruous " at times . Petrie also felt that the use of so many " viewpoint characters " results in these characters being underdeveloped , and tends to " [ blunt ] the pathos as the plot edges towards climax " . 
 In a review in the online speculative fiction magazine Strange Horizons , Tony Keen was critical of Bear 's novel , saying that the present and future passages " do not mesh terribly well " , and that it is " too long " with " too many ideas " . He complained that the book was difficult to follow and that Bear keeps " moving the goalposts as it suits his narrative " . Keen said that for a science fiction novel , he was surprised at its " lack of consistency " , and called it more a work of fantasy than science fiction . He said the " revelations " at the end still did not help explain what had happened , but that " by this point , it was for me hard to care " . A review in the Oakland Tribune complained that Bear , who it felt is not strong on " crafting memorable characters " , " struggles " with the novel 's multiple viewpoints . The review added that while he " takes a long time to get there , and arrives with a palpable scent of anticlimax , [ Bear ] does deliver at the end " , although with not enough to satisfy the reviewer . 
 Science fiction critic Paul Kincaid had mixed feelings about the novel . In a review at the SF Site webzine he criticized the characterisation saying that he could not always separate the main characters . Kincaid questioned the need for the supernatural entity , the Typhon , which is never developed . He described the " end of time " sequence as " the most powerful science fictional moment in this entire book " , saying that he found it " far more scary , far more gripping , than any supernatural intervention " . Kincaid said that while he found the book " ambitious " and " intellectually satisfying " , " somehow the whole feels less than the sum of its parts " . 
 In another review at the SF Site , Greg L. Johnson wrote that while City at the End of Time provides plenty of " wonder , awe , and a sense of humanity in the face of an implacable universe " , he feels that Bear does not quite succeed with this ambitious story of the fate of reality and the universe at large . Johnson described it as " an immensely complicated story " that unfolds by means of " hints and allusions " . He said that even the book 's ending only hints at what the gathered role players had achieved . Johnson wrote that while Bear 's depictions of events on a grand scale , like the decay of Seattle , are good , his portrayal of the key players against this backdrop is not as strong . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = = = Work cited = = = 
 Bear , Greg ( August 5 , 2008 ) . City at the End of Time ( e @-@ book ) . Random House Digital , Inc . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 345 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 = Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! = 
 Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! is the eleventh studio album by American hip hop group Insane Clown Posse . Released on September 1 , 2009 by Psychopathic Records , it was the group 's second album with producer Mike E. Clark since his return to Psychopathic Records , and the first album to focus on the Dark Carnival since the conclusion of the group 's original " Joker 's Cards " series . The character is the first of a set of six new Joker 's Cards . 
 The album 's title refers to a character within the Dark Carnival described as a large , continuing explosion which clears evil souls from the carnival grounds . Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! peaked at number four in the Billboard Top 200 . Critics praised Clark 's production and the return to the Dark Carnival concept . In 2010 , Psychopathic Records released a " Nuclear Edition " of the album , which featured previously unreleased material . The music video for the song " Miracles " , produced for the reissue , became viral , and was the subject of a Saturday Night Live parody which was praised by the group . It is the group 's 26th overall release . 
 = = Production = = 
 Mike E. Clark produced much of Insane Clown Posse 's discography until the group 's sixth and seventh albums , Bizzar and Bizaar . After Clark nearly died from a collapsed lung , he became less active in the music industry , his studio not being used for much of the early decade , and the group worked with Mike <unk> on their eighth and ninth albums , The Wraith : Shangri @-@ La and Hell 's Pit . In 2006 , Clark returned to Psychopathic Records and produced the group 's tenth studio album , The Tempest in 2007 , but did not work with the group directly . Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! was the first album which Clark worked on directly with Joseph Bruce and Joseph Utsler since Bizaar . Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! was recorded between September 2008 and July 2009 at Clark 's Fun House Studio . Bruce listened to music by the progressive rock band Gong for inspiration . In order to ensure the quality of their vocal recordings , Bruce and Utsler drank tea before every take and didn 't smoke cannabis while recording . Much material was recorded for the album ; some songs left off the initial release appeared on the " Nuclear Edition " reissue , while another song intended for Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! , " If I Ate Your Brains " , was released as part of a single for the 2009 Hallowicked concert . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to Bruce , the goal was to produce an album that was " very much a part of the Dark Carnival , without it being the seventh Joker 's Card " . Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! was the first album to focus on this concept since Hell 's Pit . The album was later revealed to be the first Joker 's Card of a " second deck . " Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! is a character within the Dark Carnival which Bruce describes as a " continuous explosion that stomps his way through the crowd blowing [ ... ] evil souls [ ... ] to Hell " . The album features a series of skits in which rednecks , pedophiles , and husbands who abuse their wives receive phone calls inviting them to the Dark Carnival , where they are promised US $ 100 @,@ 000 for arriving . 
 According to Bruce , " In Yo Face " was originally titled " Pie in Yo Face " , but it was decided that the final title sounded better . " The Bone " features surf rock @-@ influenced guitars . According to Bruce , " Mike 's beat for this was so fuckin ' crazy sounding I had no idea what the fuck to do with it . " " To Catch a Predator " was written during the mixing process , when the group realized that the album needed a song " that attacks an evil " . Inspired by the television series To Catch a Predator , the song 's lyrics describe Violent J luring pedophiles into his house to violently murder them . According to Bruce , " I could easily see myself killing pedophiles in real life and having no guilt . The only reason I don ’ t do it is because I 'd probably get caught . So its nice to live it out through my music . " " Boing Boing " , a comedic sex @-@ oriented rap , samples audio from a pornographic film which had previously been sampled by the group on their Tunnel of Love EP . Bruce says that the song was intended as a joke . Some fans interpreted the song as Bruce and Utsler calling themselves ugly , while others believed that they were bragging about how many women they have sex with . Bruce commented " We 're not sex symbols , especially not me . If there are girls , they ’ re there to see Shaggy . " 
 " I Found a Body " features lyrics similar to the plot of Weekend at Bernie 's , and incorporates Bruce 's singing , concluding with a " Pearl Jam style yell " . " Fonz Pond " was inspired by a series of bicycle trails and paths leading to what had once been a pond , but had dried out , and was filled with garbage and rusted junk . Rumors spread about kids that died trying to pass the curve surrounding the area . Clark created a beat which sounded unlike what Bruce had initially expected , leading him to write a song about a haunted pond hidden in the woods . Bruce describes the production of " Imma Kill U " as similar to that of early albums by Ice Cube and Public Enemy . Bruce states that Utsler initially hated " Juggalo Island " when they began recording it , and said that it was " too soft " for Insane Clown Posse . Bruce maintained his confidence in the song , but promised Utsler that if he still felt the same way after the song was completed , it would be left off the album . As the recording continued , Utsler began to like the track more , and later praised the song in a phone conversation . 
 The lyrics of " Miracles " focus on the extraordinary events humans experience in life which often go unacknowledged , and encourages listeners to take time to look at the world and reevaluate their life . The song 's music is built around an ascending synthesizer melody , and climaxes with an electric guitar solo performed by Mike E. Clark , and beatboxing by Joseph Utsler . " Chop Chop Slide " was inspired by the " Cha Cha Slide " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The album 's title was first announced in the liner notes of Bruce 's solo album The Shining . Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! was initially announced as having an April release . Bruce and Utsler participated in a three @-@ day photo shoot for the album 's promotional images . The album 's release was preceded with a nationwide in @-@ store tour beginning in August , and followed by a 64 @-@ day tour , including the group 's annual Halloween performance in Detroit . The album was released in three different color variations of the cover : red , blue , and green . Each version features its own unique introduction and hidden track . A sampler for the album was released , featuring a decoder piece for finding hidden messages in the album 's artwork . 
 A special edition of the album , dubbed the " Nuclear Edition " , was released on April 6 , 2010 . It features a gold cover and bonus material from each version of the album , three previously unreleased tracks , the sampler , two music videos and the documentary A Family Underground . The first music video from the album , " In Yo Face " , was released on December 18 , 2009 . The second music video from the album , " Miracles " , premiered as part of the " Nuclear Edition " reissue . A third music video from the album , " Juggalo Island " , was filmed at the 2008 Gathering of the Juggalos . A fourth music video from the album , " Fonz Pond " , has also been released . A fifth music video , " It 's All Over " was released in December 2011 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! received positive reviews . Allmusic reviewer David Jeffries gave the album three out of five stars , calling it " a formulaic album from the kings of slaughterhouse rap @-@ rock , but fans will appreciate the extra enthusiasm from the duo , the bounty of filth , and maybe most of all , the reviving of the Dark Carnival mythos . " The Detroit News music critic Adam Graham gave the album a B rating , describing it as " the best material the Clowns have touched since 1999 's The Amazing Jeckel Brothers . " 
 <unk> Axe Music reviewer Matt <unk> gave the album a four out of five rating , writing that " even if you ’ re not a huge fan of the ' commercial ' sound [ ... ] there 's plenty of grim tracks to appease the appetite of new and old fans alike . " Another writer for the website , James Zahn , gave the " Nuclear Edition " reissue 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 . 
 Washington City Paper writer Andrew Noz gave the album " three and a half 20 oz . Faygo bottles out of five " . Consequence of Sound reviewer David Buchanan notes the change to a more positive sound as universally appealing while also noting the comeback of Dark Carnival references as a selling point for long @-@ time fans , giving the album 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 . Mike E. Clark received praise for the album 's production , which David Jeffries described as " inventive " , and Adam Graham described as being " packed with enough hooks , chants and stellar riffs to tide the Juggalo Nation over through a year 's supply of Faygo . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! debuted at number 1 on the Billboard Top Independent Albums chart and number 4 on the Billboard 200 selling 50 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . In 2010 , the " Nuclear Edition " charted at No. 55 on the Billboard 200 , following the release of the " Miracles " music video . By February 2010 , the album had sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies . By October 8 , 2010 , the album had surpassed the group 's previous release , The Tempest , in sales by almost 50 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The music video for " Miracles " has become viral . On April 17 , 2010 Saturday Night Live aired a sketch which parodied the video . In the sketch , fictional personalities DJ <unk> and Lil ' Blaster debuted a fictional music video by the <unk> Killa <unk> called " Magical Mysteries " as part of Under Underground Records ' " Underground Rock Minute " . The fictional video featured Ryan Phillippe and Bobby Moynihan rapping about things such as " where the sun hides at night " and blankets . Saturday Night Live had previously parodied Psychopathic Records in 2009 . Insane Clown Posse called the " Miracles " parody " a huge honor . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Original version = = = 
 = = = Nuclear edition = = = 
 = = Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! Tour = = 
 Insane Clown Posse promoted the tour for Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! in the pamphlet of the album . The first part of the tour kicked off on September 15 , 2009 and concluded on October 31 , 2009 at ICP 's annual Hallowicked Show . The second part of the tour kicked off on November 7 , 2009 and concluded on December 18 , 2009 . Hed pe , The Dayton Family and <unk> were the supporting artists on the tour . 
 = Obsessed ( Mariah Carey song ) = 
 " Obsessed " is a song by American singer Mariah Carey from her twelfth studio album , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel ( 2009 ) . The song was written and produced by Carey , Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash and Christopher " Tricky " Stewart , and was released as the album 's lead single on June 16 , 2009 by Island Records . The song draws musical influences from R & B and hip hop music , and is built around a thumping bass line . Additionally , the song is accentuated by hand claps , while Carey 's voice is processed with Auto @-@ Tune . Lyrically , the song describes Mariah 's dilemma regarding constant claims of a prior relationship from rapper Eminem , although he is not specifically mentioned . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics who highlighted it as a stand @-@ out track from Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel . Many reviewers complimented its clever lyrics and strong beat , while others criticized the song 's usage of auto @-@ tune on Carey 's vocals . At the time of the song 's release , " Obsessed " was the center of controversy , as critics and the media suggested Carey was aiming it at American rapper Eminem , who had negatively referenced her several times in songs . Eminem released a song called " The Warning " in response . 
 " Obsessed " peaked at number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Carey 's 27th top @-@ ten hit on the chart . In terms of total top @-@ ten chart entries among all artists in the chart 's history , Carey tied for fifth place after the song 's peak , with Janet Jackson and Elton John . Internationally , the song was not released throughout parts of Europe , as Island Records decided to give priority to the album 's second single , Carey 's cover of Foreigner 's classic " I Want to Know What Love Is " . " Obsessed " peaked within the top 10 in France and Italy , and in the top 20 in Australia , Belgium , Canada and Japan . 
 The song 's music video was directed by film @-@ maker Brett Ratner , who Carey has previously worked with on other music videos . Throughout the video , Carey plays both herself and the character of the male stalker , dressed in a bellhop uniform , as well as a gray hoodie and sweatpants . Two videos were shot for " Obsessed " , one for the original version , and one for the remixed version , which features rapper Gucci Mane . The video was shot predominantly at the Plaza Hotel , and on the streets of New York City . After several photographs of Carey dressed as the stalker were leaked , tabloids immediately compared Carey 's costume to Eminem 's usual attire . Carey performed the song live on the fourth season of America 's Got Talent , The Today Show , and throughout her Angels Advocate Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2008 , Carey had suddenly cancelled a concert tour supporting her eleventh studio album , E = MC ² . There was heavy speculation in the media that Carey had become pregnant , and had abandoned the plans for a tour as a result . The singer had later admitted that she was pregnant during that time period , and had suffered a miscarriage , leading to the cancellation of the tour . 
 Carey then opted to record a new album , that would be released during the summer of 2009 . During the later stages of the project , Carey released the title , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel , that would serve as the singer 's twelfth studio album . She explained how plans for a ballad to be released were put on hold , because a new song she had written " needed to be heard " . On June 9 , 2009 , she wrote on her official Twitter account : " Seriously , this is one of my favorite songs ever . I love the whole album . I 'm completely immersed in it . I can 't wait for you to hear it " , and announced its title as " Obsessed " . Later that week , The @-@ Dream , who co @-@ wrote the song with Carey , claimed that the song was definitely aimed at someone in particular , and that it would upset them greatly . The song was transmitted digitally to radio stations on June 16 , 2009 for immediate airplay and made its debut on Chicago radio station B96 at 2 : 00 pm . An official remix of the song , featuring rapper Gucci Mane , premiered on the same day . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 The single cover artwork for " Obsessed " features Carey leaning against a dirty concrete wall . She is shown wearing black underwear and a matching sheer top , with a black bra visible through the shirt . Carey 's hair is featured in a long and wet style , cascading over her shoulders and right breast . The word " Obsessed " is written in large white letters over Carey 's body . An anonymous writer for MTV described it as " wet and raunchy " , while writing , " As you can see here the star has chosen a sexy shot to launch material from her next album . Mariah is shown busting out of a revealing black top and wearing black underwear . " 
 = = Controversy = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 2001 , Carey decided to venture into the film industry with her debut acting role , Glitter . It was a critical and commercial flop , which led to Carey 's $ 100 million recording contract being bought out by Virgin Records , who paid her $ 49 million to part ways . Carey also had personal life conflicts and erratic behavior in public appearances , leading to the singer being hospitalized . During this period in Carey 's personal life , American rapper Eminem claimed to date Carey for six months . After this Eminem referred to Carey in several of his songs in a negative light , feeling angered by her disowning their relationship . The back @-@ and @-@ forth through songs continued with " Clown " on Carey 's album Charmbracelet , her voice recordings being played at Eminem 's Anger Management Tour . After playing the excerpt , Eminem would pretend to be sick before launching into his song " Puke " . 
 On May 12 , 2009 , Eminem released his sixth studio effort , Relapse , which included a song titled " Bagpipes from Baghdad " . The song 's lyrics suggested Eminem was still in love with Carey , and that he " wanted her back " : " I want another crack at ya " and " Nick Cannon better back the fuck up . I 'm not playing , I want her back , you punk . " After the song 's release , Cannon went on his website , defending Carey and expressing his disgust at his comments . Following Cannon 's comments , Eminem responded sarcastically . He clarified that the song was actually " wishing the couple the best " , and that it was a misunderstanding . In an interview with BBC Radio , Eminem clarified that although contained a " harsh " line , he meant well . He later commented that he respected Cannon for his response , and that he expected him to stand up for his wife . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 After Carey premiered " Obsessed " on June 16 , 2009 , the media frenzied and began speculating the song was targeting at Eminem , due to its lyrics and overall message . Following the song 's accompanying music video , which featured Carey playing a role that resembled the rapper , critics considered it Carey 's response to Eminem 's " Bagpipes from Baghdad " . Soon after both the song and video 's release , the rapper released another song , titled " The Warning " on July 30 , 2009 , which he claimed to be a retaliation . The song 's lyrics allude to his supposed relationship with the singer , the music video for " Obsessed " , and pictures and proof he claims to have of the couple . The song begins " Only reason I dissed you in the first place is because you denied seeing me . Now I 'm pissed off " , before describing Carey 's impersonation of him in her video , " Oh gee , is that supposed to be me in the video with the goatee ? / Wow Mariah , didn 't expect ya to go balls out . " Eminem continues describing a near @-@ sexual encounter with the singer , threatening to release voice @-@ mails and pictures he still has in his possession . Additionally , the song features a female 's voice , unknown whether or not Carey 's , where she calls herself Mary Poppins , as well as several intervals of her laughter . In the aftermath of the releases , Cannon was questioned regarding the inspiration of " Obsessed " , and whether it was ever directed at Eminem : 
 She 's Mariah Carey . She 's not <unk> ' , she 's a vegetarian . People keep saying [ ' Obsessed ' ] was directed at certain people . To be completely honest , she did the record ' cause she 's a huge fan of this movie Mean Girls , and there 's a line in the movie where one of the girls is like , ' Why are you so obsessed with me ? ' She says that at the beginning of the song , and that 's where the concept came from . But , you know , art imitates life . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Obsessed " draws influences from the R & B and hip hop music genres . The song is built around a " thumping bass line " , and features a " distorted wordless vocal hook " as its instrumentation . Additionally , the song is accentuated by hand claps , while Carey 's voice is set with auto @-@ tune . Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle described the song 's production as " an auto @-@ tune orgy of come @-@ hither vocals and cutesy Mariah @-@ isms . " According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Obsessed " is set in common time with a tempo of 84 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C minor , with Carey 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of C3 to the high @-@ note of C7 . Written and produced by Carey , The @-@ Dream and Tricky Stewart , the song follows in the chord progression of Bm7 – Am7 – Gmaj7 . Lyrically , the song describes the protagonists dilemma regarding a stalker , and finds her asking him regarding his obsession . 
 After the song 's release , critics heavily compared its lyrics to Eminem , and suggested Carey alluded to him and his ' obsession ' with her . " Obsessed " never mentions the rapper 's name , although reviewers felt it to be very obvious . The song begins with " I was like , ' Why are you so obsessed with me ? ' " , before the music begins . As the first verse begins , Carey describes the tracks ' subjects constant lies : " All up in the blogs sayin ' we met at a bar / When I don 't even , know who you are / <unk> ' you up in my house sayin ' you up in my car / When you in L.A. and I 'm at Jermaine 's " . Additionally , the song suggests the stalker is under the influence of drugs : It must be the weed , it must be the E / ' Cause you be poppin ' , you get it poppin ' . " During the chorus , Carey confronts her stalker , asking : Why are you so obsessed with me / Boy I wanna know / Lying that you 're sexing me / When everybody knows / It 's clear that you 're upset with me / Oh , Oh , Oh , finally found a girl that you couldn 't impress / If you you were the last man on earth still couldn 't hit this . " During the song 's second verse , critics complimented Carey 's lyrics , highlighting phrases such as : You 're a mom & pop , I 'm a corporation / I 'm a press conference , you 're a conversation " , " suggesting the rapper isn 't a worthy suitor " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Obsessed " received generally positive reviews from music critics . While most reviewers complimented the song 's lyrics and production , some criticized Carey for her usage of auto @-@ tune . Daniel Kreps from Rolling Stone stated that " the biting mid @-@ tempo track is already more musically and lyrically engrossing than E = MC ² ' s singles . " The A.V. Club 's Michaelangelo Matos complimented the song 's clever lyrics , and called it a " wicked dis of an unnamed Eminem for spreading rumors about their involvement . " Though criticizing Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel for being full of mid @-@ tempo numbers , James Reed from The Boston Globe felt " Obsessed " " stood out of the goo " , due to its witty lyrics and strong beat production . Monica Herrera of Billboard gave the song a positive review , describing it as a " gem of a dis record that coasts , even over its sputtering moans and synth jabs . " Additionally , Herrera complimented Carey 's lyrics , calling them " <unk> and funny " . Entertainment Weekly 's Leah Greenblatt described the track as a " brash synth kiss @-@ off " , while Alex Macpherson from The Guardian called it " jaunty " and " wisecracking " . On " Obsessed " , Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine felt the " attitude is sexy " , while Jon Caramanica from The New York Times felt the song was a stand @-@ out track from the album , which he felt was " dated " . He described that although the entire album was produced by Carey , The @-@ Dream and Tricky Stewart , which he described as " masters of compensation , helping elevate mediocre singers — like The @-@ Dream himself or Rihanna , on ' Umbrella ' — to something sublime " , " Obsessed " sounded " Dr. Dre @-@ esque , and felt it was a notable exception from the rest of Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel . 
 Los Angeles Times 's Ann Powers described it as an " aggressive track " , while Lauren Carter of the Boston Herald wrote " Carey 's musical stiff @-@ arm ends with some vocal acrobatics to let us know she 's still got it . Expect to get ' Obsessed ' this summer . " MTV News rated the song as one of the contenders for the " best of the summer " , writing " Mimi returns , this time with an Auto @-@ Tuned kiss @-@ off to wannabe <unk> ( and Eminem ? ) that will probably be the soundtrack to a million summer hookups and just as many public @-@ intoxication collars . Glossy , <unk> and decidedly " urban " , Mariah strikes back . Your radio has been warned . AllMusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine chose the song as a " top pick " from Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel , while Amos Barshad of The New York Times listed it as the fifth top song of the summer . In contrast , " Obsessed " received a mixed review from the Los Angeles Times writer , Todd Martens , who wrote that although " its <unk> Mimi than [ they ] ' re used to " , she ultimately " has been molded to fit current trends " and that the single " again sells out the songbird to her producers . " At the ASCAP 27th Annual Pop Music Awards , " Obsessed " won " Most Performed Song " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Obsessed " debuted at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 , with sales of 119 @,@ 266 digital downloads , making it Carey 's highest debut in over a decade , since " My All " ( 1998 ) . This marked her 40th entry on the Hot 100 , making her just the eighth woman in the chart 's history to make 40 or more appearances . The song peaked at number seven on the Hot 100 , making it her 27th top 10 hit , the second greatest amount among female artists , and tying her achievements to those of Janet Jackson . The song stayed in the top 40 for 20 weeks , longer than her number @-@ one hit " Touch My Body " ( 2008 ) . In terms of total top 10 chart entries amongst all artists in the chart 's history , Carey is now tied for fifth place with Jackson and Elton John . The song made an early debut at number 52 on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and has since peaked at number 12 , marking Carey 's 40th chart entry and placing her in second place for most charted songs among women in the 1990s and 2000s ( decade ) ( the first being Mary J. Blige ) . Carey made her 29th appearance on the Pop Songs / Mainstream Top 40 radio chart , with " Obsessed " debuting at number 39 , and peaking at eight . The arrival extends her lead for the most overall chart entries in the tally 's nearly 17 @-@ year history . She is now three titles ahead of the second @-@ place Madonna ( 26 ) . 
 On August 11 , 2009 , it was announced that the single would be released as a CD single at Wal @-@ Mart store locations in the United States , her first commercial single release physically since 2002 in the country . The CD single was released early at various Wal @-@ Mart store locations , however selling enough copies an entire week before its release date to debut at number one on the Billboard Hot Singles Sales chart , where it remained for four consecutive weeks on the chart . On October 15 , 2009 , " Obsessed " was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of over one million units . This marked Carey 's 12th platinum single , more than any other female artist in history . According to Nielsen SoundScan , " Obsessed " has sold over 1 @,@ 742 @,@ 000 copies in the United States as of July 2013 . On the Canadian Hot 100 , the song peaked at number 20 , and spent only four weeks within the singles chart . 
 Internationally , the song achieved moderate charting due to its limited release . It was not released commercially throughout Europe , in order to give way for the album 's second single , Carey 's cover of Foreigner 's classic " I Want to Know What Love Is " . On July 26 , 2009 , the song debuted at number 26 on the Australian Singles Chart . " Obsessed " peaked at number 13 in the following weeks , placing higher than " Touch My Body " ( # 17 in 2008 ) , and spent a total of 13 weeks on the chart . " Obsessed " was certified Gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of over 35 @,@ 000 units . In France , " Obsessed " debuted at its peak position of number eight , during the week dated September 26 , 2009 . The song charted for a total of 23 weeks , before dropping out on February 27 , 2010 . Similarly , the song peaked at number six on the Italian Singles Chart on July 16 , as well as number 61 on the Dutch Top 40 on September 5 , 2009 . On both the Japan Hot 100 and New Zealand Singles Chart , " Obsessed " peaked at numbers 16 and 21 , while spending four weeks on both charts , respectively . In the United Kingdom , " Obsessed " was lined up to be released in August before the release of Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel , but was pushed back several times and was ultimately cancelled in October , despite receiving heavy radio and video airplay . After the album was released , the song peaked at number 52 from downloads alone . 
 = = Remix = = 
 On June 16 , 2009 , an accompanying remix featuring rapper Gucci Mane was released alongside the original . The song kept to its original arrangement and vocals , only adding ad libs throughout the song , as well as replacing the bridge with a new verse by Mane . Two days before the remix 's release , Jasmine <unk> , Carey 's longtime friend tweeted regarding it , saying " Listening to ' Obsessed ' remix on repeat , <unk> rapper @-@ cant tell u who it is but he put the G in Ghetto ! Sick combo @-@ hotness . " In an interview with MTV News , Mane described the remix as his " biggest collaboration yet " : 
 Shout @-@ out to Mariah Carey and her whole squad and my boy Chris <unk> . He got me and Mariah together . I appreciate it . He put me on there as well as her . Both of them are smart for doing that . The song came out hard . Mariah knew I wanted to do a song with her . It finally happened , and it turned out hard . I just flew up there to New York , went in the studio with her . I flew right out and went back on the road . When I do a song with people , I like to really get in the studio with them so I could feel they swag and they could feel mine . The music comes out better . 
 Aside from the primary remix , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel included four additional remixes that were released on a separate CD along with the original . It was packaged in a separate sleeve , and included the remix featuring Mane , and versions done by Jump Smokers , Tim Cahill , Seamus Haji and <unk> & Lamboy . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 The song 's music video was directed by Brett Ratner , who had previously worked with Carey on six other music videos , and was shot from June 28 to 29 , 2009 . Throughout the video , Carey plays herself and a male stalker , dressed as both a bellhop and a man wearing a gray hoodie and sweatpants . Two videos were shot for " Obsessed " , one for the original version , and one for the remixed version , which features Gucci Mane . The video was shot predominantly at the Plaza Hotel , and on the streets of New York City . After several photographs of Carey dressed as the stalker were leaked , critics and bloggers immediately compared Carey 's costume to Eminem 's usual attire , and many wrote that aside from the goatee , the pair looked alike . Carey tweeted " I am not at any point in the video playing a specific person . I 'm dressed as a ' stalker ' in 3 different ensembles . " Carey also revealed that the music video would reference several of her favorite films , such as Mean Girls ( 2004 ) , with the line " Why are you so obsessed with me ? " , as well as The Devil Wears Prada ( 2006 ) . 
 In an interview with MTV News , Carey described going under @-@ cover as the stalker role : " Well , we had a lot of people outside . I 'm walking up to the Plaza [ Hotel ] , and when I was dressed as Mariah Carey , there were a lot of people just standing there taking pictures , and the street was closed down , and it was a whole rigmarole . It is what it is . So , basically , I went into costume as the stalker , and I told my bodyguard , ' I don 't want you to walk with me . ' So , a friend of mine was there , and I was like , ' Let 's walk together . ' " After reports continued to speculate regarding the video 's subject , Ratner explained that the main inspiration behind the video was the 1983 film , The King of Comedy . On July 10 , 2009 , Carey announced through her Twitter account that the video would premiere on the talent competition program , America 's Got Talent , which was hosted by Cannon . The full version premiered two days later on 106 & Park . Carey was present at the show and discussed the making of the video . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with Carey at a photoshoot in a private room at the Plaza Hotel , speaking the line , " And I was like , why are you so obsessed with me ? " Next , a Rolls @-@ Royce Phantom is shown pulling up to the hotel , with Carey stepping out of the vehicle . As she gets out of the car , Carey dressed as a bellhop , assists her to the ramp where she is walking and greeting fans . The next scene finds Carey walking into the hotel , and waving to everyone , with the camera zooming to the bellhops face to reveal him intently staring at her . As the first verse begins , Carey is shown at the photo @-@ shoot in the hotel , with a cameo by Patrick Demarchelier as the photographer . The bellhop , now dressed in a gray hoodie and sweatpants , is shown holding a hair @-@ blower at Carey , apparently assisting with the shoot . As the shoot continues , scenes of the bellhop are shown in his room , where he has dolls of Carey on the wall , as well as quilts with the cover of her 2005 album , The Emancipation of Mimi . 
 The video progresses as Carey , now on the streets of New York , is walking towards the hotel . As she begins to notice the bellhop , dressed in the sweats , pursuing her , she turns around in haste and begins jolting back to the hotel while holding several shopping bags . Additionally , scenes of the stalker 's home are shown again , this time more elaborately , with his walls covered with portraits of the singer , as well as album covers and lights around a large photo of her . As the video comes to an end , she waits for her limousine to arrive at the hotel . However , before she gets inside , she notices the stalker attempting to take a picture of her . She then looks directly into his camera and gives a smile . The video then shows him again , still attempting to take a picture , right before a bus hits him . Carey gasps in shock after witnessing the incident . The remix video for the song features the same story @-@ line and footage , only showing inter @-@ cut scenes of Carey dressed in a white ensemble , while laying on a vintage wooden table . As Gucci Mane stands next to her in a white suit , he pours her champagne and hands her the glass . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 At the time of the video 's release , several critics took notice of the similarities in Eminem 's attire and Carey 's stalker . Nick Levine from Digital Spy wrote : " It isn 't quite as ridiculous as we were hoping , and Mariah 's insisting the male stalker she plays isn 't meant to be a ' specific person ' , but there 's still plenty to enjoy in the ' Obsessed ' video . There is a lot of MC cleavage , a not entirely convincing fake beard and a neat Mean Girls reference towards the end . " Newsday 's Corris Little described it as " genius ! " and continued , " Move over Eminem , I 'm officially obsessed with Mariah Carey . Who isn 't ? She can sing , she 's pretty and she has really fun music videos . " A writer from the Evening Standard called the video " shocking " , and felt that Carey 's disguise was so convincing , she should assume the role more often if she wants to travel incognito . The New York Post 's Jarett Wieselman described it as " human butterfly <unk> [ ing ] her macho side " , and concluded his review with " I 'm guessing the video involves Mariah 's butch bellhop becoming a little infatuated with the singer , or something . Basically it 's another way to give her double the screentime – much like that Mariah @-@ on @-@ Mariah fight in ' Heartbreaker ' ! " New York Daily News writer Chris Baud joked about Eminem going one step further , writing : " It 's great that Mariah seems to be having fun with this whole ' <unk> ' thing , but we 're afraid of the conflict going any further , because no one wants to see the next step : Eminem in drag . " Jennifer Armstrong from Entertainment Weekly complimented Carey for " going after " Eminem , and concluded " I like Mariah with a sense of humor , and I love the idea of her turning the tables on the king of celebrity @-@ mocking videos . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Carey performed " Obsessed " on several televised appearances since its release . On August 5 , 2009 , Carey performed the song live for the first time on the fourth season of the talent competition , America 's Got Talent . Carey , appearing in jeans and a black top , was accompanied by several male dancers and three back @-@ up singers . As she performed the song , the dancers hoisted her into the air several times , and carried her to several areas on the stage . During the performance , several white lights flashed , while monitors behind the dancers showed images of Carey and the video . Breanne <unk> from E ! Entertainment Television criticized several aspects of the performance . She described the lighting as " anxiety inducing " , and wrote , " That said , no one is doubting the singer 's impressive set of pipes , but — frighteningly jarring lighting and quick edits aside — did she actually utilize them on ' America 's Got Talent ' last night ? " Aside from questioning the singers live vocals , she also felt Carey seemed " robotic " , and didn 't show effort or interest in the performance . A reviewer from Idolator also was critical on the performance , asking if there was " anything good about [ it ] " . He claimed Carey was lip @-@ syncing , and described it as " lackadaisical " , and wrote , " the backup dancers ’ moves would have probably received a big red ' X ' from at least one of the judges . " 
 In the United States , on October 2 , 2009 , Carey began promotion of the album on Today , in the form of a four piece outdoor concert . Wearing a " black leather trench coat and accessorized with a glittery microphone " , Carey performed " Obsessed " , " I Want to Know What Love Is " , " H.A.T.E.U. " and her 1991 single , " Make It Happen " . The performance of " Obsessed " featured similar choreography as on America 's Got Talent , in which Carey was carried around by her dancers several times . Carey performed " Obsessed " live on Lopez Tonight on December 16 , 2009 , alongside another song from the album , " It 's A Wrap " . At the Fashion Rocks ceremony in 2009 , Carey performed " Touch My Body " and " Obsessed " , as well as the remix to her 1995 song " Fantasy " . During the short set list , Carey was accompanied by six men in black tie and suits , who hoisted her into the air in front of over 6 @,@ 000 people during " Obsessed " , and rigorous dance routines throughout " Touch My Body " . Following the release of Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel , she held four concerts at the Pearl Concert Theater , where she included the song on the set @-@ list . Similar to the performance at the Fashion Rocks ceremony , Carey was hoisted into the air several times by four to six male dancers , each of whom circled her with intricate dancing throughout the song . Carey featured similar choreography for the song during her Angels Advocate Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) , where it was included throughout the entire span of the tour . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Adapted from the Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel liner notes . 
 Mariah Carey – songwriting , producer , vocals 
 Terius Nash – songwriting , producer 
 Christopher Stewart – songwriting , producer 
 Victor Alexander – producer 
 Brian Garter – recording 
 Brian Thomas – recording 
 Jaysen @-@ Joshua Fowler – audio mixing 
 Dave Pensado – audio mixing 
 Bernie Grundman – mastering 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Geology Hall = 
 Geology Hall , formerly Geological Hall , is a building located in the historic Queens Campus section of Rutgers , The State University of New Jersey 's College Avenue Campus in New Brunswick , New Jersey , United States . As part of the Queen 's Campus , Geology Hall was included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places and the National Register of Historic Places in 1973 . When Rutgers was selected as New Jersey 's only land grant college in 1864 , the college began to expand its curriculum to include instruction in science and agriculture . Rutgers president William Henry Campbell raised funds to construct a building to accommodate this expansion , and Geology Hall , designed by architect Henry Janeway Hardenbergh , was built in 1872 . 
 At present , the building houses administrative offices and the university 's geological museum . The museum , one of the oldest collegiate geology collections in the United States , was founded by state geologist and Rutgers professor George Hammell Cook in 1872 . Its exhibits showcase the natural history of New Jersey ; focusing geology , paleontology , and anthropology . Exhibits include fluorescent zinc minerals from Franklin and Ogdensburg , a mastodon from Salem County , a dinosaur trackway discovered in Towaco , and a Ptolemaic era Egyptian mummy . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1864 the State of New Jersey named Rutgers College as their sole land grant college . Pursuant to the Morrill Act of 1862 , this designation gave federal lands to the state that the state could then sell to raise money to develop practical education in agriculture , science , military science and engineering . 
 George Hammell Cook ( 1818 @-@ 1889 ) , a professor of chemistry and natural sciences , influenced the state to select Rutgers over the College of New Jersey ( now Princeton University ) . Cook was appointed state geologist in 1864 and later became the college 's vice president . With the college 's land grant status and new funding for scientific studies , Cook expanded his research and teaching into geology and agriculture . 
 Six years later , the college 's board of trustees decided to erect a building to house the college 's new scientific programs . At this time , Rutgers was celebrating the centennial anniversary of its second charter ( 1770 ) and college president William Henry Campbell ( 1808 – 1890 ) solicited donations from alumni and other supporters in an extensive fundraising effort aimed at supporting these new programs . With these funds , the trustees commissioned a design for a Geological Hall from Henry Janeway Hardenbergh ( 1847 – 1918 ) , a young architect from New Brunswick . Hardenbergh received these contracts through family connections , as several members of his family were graduates , trustees , or associated with the school . His great @-@ great @-@ grandfather , the Rev. Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh ( 1736 – 1790 ) , was Rutgers ' first president and one of its founders , and his grandfather , Rev. Jacob Janeway served as vice president of the college and had turned down the post of president in 1840 . 
 Hardenbergh 's design was described as employing both Gothic elements and classical forms that preceded the extreme eclecticism that was to mark a later Victorian Gothic Revival period . The original plans called for the building to be constructed out of red brick , but the final execution was mostly in sandstone quarried in Connecticut , with some examples of stone from Newark . Geology Hall , built on the south side of Old Queens , was the second of three projects that Hardenberg designed for the college , following an addition to a building ( now Alexander Johnston Hall ) that housed the college 's grammar school ( now Rutgers Preparatory School ) the year before . The third project , Kirkpatrick Chapel ( 1873 ) , was designed to complement the simple Gothic Revival style of Geology Hall and was erected on the north side of Old Queens . 
 The building was completed in 1872 at a cost of US $ 63 @,@ 201 @.@ 54 ( 2013 : US $ 1 @,@ 215 @,@ 365 ) . Geology Hall 's first floor provided the college with rooms for laboratory and lecture instruction and housed the college 's armory . The first @-@ floor classrooms would accommodate the college 's physics , military science , and geology departments . Geology Hall also provided instruction space for courses in agriculture , chemistry and engineering for several years , until Rutgers built New Jersey Hall ( 1889 ) to house the Agricultural Experiment Station , and buildings for the Chemistry and Engineering departments ( 1909 and 1910 respectively ) across Hamilton Street on land that became the college 's Voorhees Mall . Geology Hall 's second floor was designed to provide sufficient space to house the college 's natural history artefacts and geological specimens as a museum . 
 Today , Geology Hall houses some of the offices of the university 's administration and the Rutgers Geology Museum . Previously , it housed the offices of the Rutgers geology department , now called the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences , from 1872 until 1979 , when it moved to the university 's Busch Campus in Piscataway . This was the last of the university 's science department to move across the Raritan River to the Busch campus . In 1973 , Geology Hall was included with six other buildings on Rutgers ' Queen 's Campus on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places and the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = Rutgers Geology Museum = = 
 Cook established the university 's geology museum in 1872 with specimens collected during the New Jersey Geological Survey which he directed as New Jersey 's state geologist . Since then , the museum has operated on the building 's second floor , offering free tours to small groups , schools , and to the general public . The museum 's collections , of which only a small portion is on display , feature exhibits on geology , natural history , paleontology , and anthropology , with an emphasis on the natural history of New Jersey . 
 The museum 's earliest collections began to coalesce in 1836 through the work of Lewis C. Beck ( 1798 – 1853 ) , a physician , botanist , entomologist , chemist and geologist , who taught at Rutgers in the mid @-@ nineteenth century from 1830 until his death in 1853 . Many of the exhibits feature items that are unique to New Jersey , including Native American artifacts , minerals , and fossils . These exhibits include a set of fossilized dinosaur tracks believed to belong to the carnivorous <unk> , from the Jurassic @-@ period discovered near Towaco in Morris County , and the skeleton of a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ year old mastodon ( Mammut americanum ) discovered in Salem County in 1869 . The mastodon , found in a marl pit near Mannington , was sold by a local farmer to a travelling circus before it was acquired by Rutgers for display . 
 A collection of around 2 @,@ 400 specimens ( including some fluorescent minerals ) was donated to the museum in October 1940 by George Rowe , a mine captain with the New Jersey Zinc Company . The collection is rich in rare minerals , many of which found during twentieth @-@ century zinc mining operations in Franklin , New Jersey . This museum 's holdings were augmented with the donation of 6 @,@ 000 fluorescent mineral specimens collected by Anne and Milton <unk> . This exhibit opened to the public in October 2002 . 
 The museum displays a 2 @,@ 400 @-@ year @-@ old female Egyptian mummy on loan from the New Brunswick Theological Seminary . The mummy , which dates to 320 or 330 B.C. in the Ptolemaic era , was discovered in Northern Egypt and brought back to the United States by a Dutch Reformed missionary who served there in the early 1700s . Little else is known about the mummy 's origins , but it was stored in a closet at the seminary until 1968 when it was first put on display . 
 In 2013 , rumors suggested that the university administration was planning to place the museum 's exhibits in permanent storage , close the museum and renovate Geology Hall for use as an auditorium . A letter @-@ writing campaign from alumni and the general public persuaded the administration to commit towards continuing the museum and expanding its mission . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Last Exit to Springfield = 
 " Last Exit to Springfield " is the seventeenth episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 11 , 1993 . It was directed by Mark Kirkland and was the last episode written by Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky . The episode 's plot revolves around Homer Simpson becoming president of the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant 's trade union and leading the workers of the plant in a strike in order to get their dental plan back . Dr. Joyce Brothers guest stars as herself . 
 The episode considers several visual sequences , and references a variety of films including The Godfather Part II , Yellow Submarine , Citizen Kane and How the Grinch Stole Christmas . " Last Exit to Springfield " received widespread acclaim from both fans and critics and has frequently been cited as one of the best episodes of the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mr. Burns sits in his office awaiting the union leader , who mysteriously disappeared after promising to clean up the union , so that they can discuss the proposed union contract . While perusing the contract , Burns becomes disgusted with the union demands and reminisces about simpler times in which disgruntled workers were simply walled up in coke ovens . Burns then decides to take on the union , and revokes their dental plan . 
 Meanwhile , at Painless Dentistry , the Simpson children are getting their teeth checked . It is discovered Lisa needs braces . When Marge informs Homer , he tells her not to worry about the cost , as the union had won a dental plan during a previous strike . Later , at a meeting of the local chapter of International Brotherhood of Jazz Dancers , Pastry Chefs and Nuclear Technicians , Carl announces that the newest contract requires the union to give up their dental plan in exchange for a free keg of beer for their meeting . Homer slowly comprehends that giving up their dental plan would require him to pay for Lisa 's braces and jumps into action , reminding everyone how their dental plan has helped them all . 
 Carl proposes Homer be the new union president and he is promptly elected by a nearly unanimous vote . Mr. Burns watches Homer on his hidden camera , and is intimidated by his energy . Burns invites Homer to his office with the intent of bribing him , but Homer <unk> Burns 's sly innuendos as sexual advances . Homer quickly gets to his feet , saying he does not go for those " back door shenanigans " and promptly leaves , a series of events which establishes the idea in Burns 's mind that Homer is honest and incorruptible . 
 Mr. Burns sends hired goons to the Simpson house in order to take Homer back to Burns ' Manor to negotiate . While Burns is setting the agenda for the discussion , Homer is struck by the urgent need to use the rest room . Homer asks Burns where the rest room is and immediately leaves , leading Burns to conclude that Homer is a tough negotiator who is unwilling to even hear him out . At a later union meeting , Homer tries to resign , tired of meeting with Mr. Burns . The union misunderstands his frustration , and the members nearly unanimously decide to strike . Mr. Burns is undeterred by the strike and tries several methods of breaking it up , but fails . On an edition of Kent Brockman 's talk show Smartline , Burns is allowed an opening tirade and he threatens dire events if the strike is not concluded . 
 Later , Burns and Smithers march to a secret room in the Power Plant and turn off the power for the entire town . The strikers do not lose hope and begin to sing . Burns , confident he has broken the union 's spirit , steps out on his balcony to hear their reaction but is disarmed by their unity and optimism . Burns finally calls a meeting with Homer to concede to their demands on one condition : that Homer resign as union president . Homer celebrates madly , leading Burns to finally realize that Homer is not the " brilliant tactician " he thought he was . With the Simpson family insured again , Lisa gets her perfect new braces and she , the Simpson family , and the dentist gather and laugh as the episode comes to a close . 
 = = Production = = 
 The idea for this episode came from Mike Reiss , who thought it would be funny if the plant went on strike . The writers of the episode , Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky , would later add the dental plan aspect of the plot . In several scenes , Mr. Burns is portrayed as the Devil who is tempting Homer and showing him what he could have . During the production of this episode , an ABC camera crew was allowed into the rewrite room , which Al Jean says he regrets because they were working on stage direction , and they came off as not being very funny . 
 The producers originally asked Anthony Hopkins and Clint Eastwood to provide the voice of the dentist , Dr. Wolfe , but they both turned the role down . Anthony Perkins was later asked to fulfill the role and he agreed , but died before the role could be recorded . In the end , the role went to Simpsons regular Hank Azaria . As well , the original panelist on Smartline was supposed to be O. J. Simpson , but he turned it down , much to the relief of the writers when Simpson was later tried for murder . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title of the episode is a homage to Hubert Selby Jr . ' s novel Last Exit to Brooklyn , one subplot of which involves the corruption and downfall of a union leader during a strike . The body of the union president is seen buried under a football field , a homage to the mystery surrounding the whereabouts of Jimmy Hoffa and his alleged burial at New Jersey 's Giants Stadium . Mr. Burns ' outfit in the flashback to his childhood is based on Buster Brown . Homer 's imagination of a life of organized crime is based on Don <unk> 's first appearance in The Godfather Part II , accepting donuts rather than a necklace and an orange . 
 Lisa has a nitrous oxide @-@ induced hallucination that echoes The Beatles film Yellow Submarine , which Al Jean says had to be changed slightly for legal reasons . This included changing the name of the short sequence to " purple submersible " ; George Harrison calls her " Lisa in the Sky " , while Paul McCartney notes " no diamonds though " . The scene where Lisa acquires her monstrous braces and breaks her mirror is based on a scene from the 1989 Tim Burton film Batman where Jack Napier discovers his transformation into the Joker . 
 When Homer is escorted by the hired goons into what appears to be Burns ' conservatory , a Burns @-@ headed bird is sitting in front of the screen , which then flies away . This is a reference to the cockatoo in Citizen Kane . The episode features an incidental music , a sample of " Classical Gas " by Mason Williams on a request from Lenny . Before Mr. Burns shuts off the power to the town in response to the strike , he says , " From Hell 's heart I stab at thee " which is a reference to Captain Ahab 's curse , from the novel Moby @-@ Dick . The workers ' resistance to the power outage , and Mr. Burns 's response , is a parody of How the Grinch Stole Christmas . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Last Exit to Springfield " finished 19th in ratings for the week of March 8 – 14 , 1993 , with a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 7 , equivalent to approximately 12 @.@ 8 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating COPS . 
 This episode is generally ranked as being one of the best of all time and is on a number of Top 10 lists ; the BBC stated it is " frequently cited as the show 's best @-@ ever episode " . An Entertainment Weekly article from January 2003 looking back at the top 25 episodes of the series chose this episode as the show 's greatest episode , saying " this episode is virtually flawless , the product of a series at the height of its creative powers -- when the satire was savage and relevant " and " the stuff of syndication legend : Burns facing down brilliant labor kingpin Homer Simpson ; Homer Simpson facing down his own brain ( <unk> PLAN ! / Lisa needs braces ! ) ; Grampa rattling on about wearing onions on his belt . Last Exit is a glorious symphony of the high and the low , of satirical shots at unions . " In his book , Planet Simpson , Chris Turner calls it the best episode of the series , saying " Episode <unk> of The Simpsons should be taught in schools , in history , economics , social studies , literature and art class . It 's flawless " . He also called it " the funniest half @-@ hour in TV history " , and provided a full analysis of the episode , only criticizing the chalkboard and couch gags . He maintains that he chose the episode as best ever before Entertainment Weekly 's list was published . 
 In 2003 , to celebrate the show 's 300th episode , USA Today published a top 10 chosen by the webmaster of The Simpsons Archive , which had this episode in first place . The BBC website says , " This fine episode contains several of our favourite sequences ... A classic , and the series ' most marked expedition into the surreal - up to this point . " MSNBC , who listed the episode as their favorite , stated , " This is the episode that every self @-@ respecting Simpsons geek must be able to recite verbatim . " Michael Moran of The Times ranked the episode as the sixth best in the show 's history . 
 Director Mark Kirkland considers this episode to be one of the most surreal episodes that he has worked on because it has a lot of story crammed into it , lots of parodies and contains several visual sequences . Al Jean has also called this one of the " craziest " episodes . Homer 's line " uh ... Yeah " after being asked if he found the bathroom is one of Jay Kogen 's favorite Simpsons jokes . The episode 's parody of Batman was named the 30th greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 
 The scene in the episode in which Mr. Burns shows his room with a thousand monkeys working at a thousand typewriters , a reference to the infinite monkey theorem , has inspired a real @-@ life experiment about the theorem . The episode has become study material for sociology courses at University of California Berkeley , where it is used to " examine issues of the production and reception of cultural objects , in this case , a satirical cartoon show " , and to figure out what it is " trying to tell audiences about aspects primarily of American society , and , to a lesser extent , about other societies . " 
 After negotiating with Burns , Homer celebrates by lying on his side and spinning in a circle . West Ham United soccer player Michail Antonio imitated this routine after scoring a goal in 2016 . 
 = Washington State Route 22 = 
 State Route 22 ( SR 22 ) is a 35 @.@ 84 @-@ mile ( 57 @.@ 68 km ) long state highway spanning Yakima and Benton counties in the US state of Washington . Existing since at least 1937 , the highway serves to connect several small communities that have been bypassed by Interstate 82 ( I @-@ 82 ) / U.S. Route 12 ( US 12 ) . Except for the section through Toppenish and the southeastern bypass of Prosser , the highway is lightly traveled passing mainly through rural farmland . The highway parallels a BNSF Railway line for a majority of its route , with the rail line predating the highway by at least 27 years . 
 Three digit highway numbers in Washington indicate auxiliary routes of their parent route , giving SR 22 five auxiliary routes : SR 220 , SR 221 , SR 223 , SR 224 , and SR 225 . SR 220 was decommissioned during the 1991 legislative session , and is no longer maintained by the Washington State Department of Transportation . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 22 begins at exit 50 on the concurrent I @-@ 82 / US 12 as a hybrid diamond – partial cloverleaf interchange The route heads south through farmland towards the town of Toppenish in Yakima County , which is also part of the Yakama Indian Reservation . While in Toppenish , the highway passes over double track belonging to BNSF Railway . On the south end of town , SR 22 intersects US 97 , turning southeast as US 97 heads south . Traveling southeast , SR 22 passes through more farmland , passing the small census @-@ designated place of Satus and an interchange with SR 223 . The city of Mabton is located just north of the highway , and is accessible by turning onto SR 241 . The highway leaves the reservation and turns southwest after passing the Sunnyside Wildlife Recreation Area , and crosses the Yakima – Benton county line , continuing through farmland until approaching the outskirts of Prosser , the county seat of Benton County . SR 22 serves as a bypass of Prosser , turning north until intersecting Wine Country Road and the Desert Wind Winery on the east side of Prosser before turning back southwest on Wine Country Road and terminating at a folded diamond interchange , exit 82 , on I – 82 . 
 Every year the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2009 , WSDOT calculated that as few as 1 @,@ 100 cars traveled through the intersection with Bus Road just west of the Sunnyside Wildlife Recreation Area , and as many as 10 @,@ 000 cars passed through the town of Toppenish before the interchange with US 97 . 
 The segment of highway between its western terminus at I @-@ 82 and US 97 is listed on both the WSDOT List of Highways of Statewide Significance , which marks this portion of the highway as a critical to connecting major communities in the state , and the National Highway System , a system of roads that are important to the nation 's economy , defense and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 A roadway has existed since before 1926 , connecting Toppenish and Prosser near the current alignment of SR 22 , however the roadway was incomplete , with a gap existing between Satus and Mabton . The gap in the roadway was completed by 1933 , and the segment between Toppenish and Prosser was numbered Secondary State Highway 3A ( SSH 3A ) by 1939 , while the segment between the current I @-@ 82 and US 97 was originally numbered as part of Primary State Highway 8 ( PSH 8 ) . These designations remained until the 1964 state highway renumbering , when SSH 3A and the small segment of PSH 8 were renumbered SR 22 . Before the completion of I @-@ 82 through the area , SR 22 continued into the town of Buena , however now that the interstate has been completed , SR 22 has been truncated to the interstate . 
 The rail line that the highway parallels between Toppenish and just west of Prosser has existed since at least 1910 . It originally belonged to the Spokane , Portland and Seattle Railway , and it is now part of BNSF Railway as part of their Yakima Valley Subdivision . 
 In Spring 2011 , WSDOT began a $ 4 @.@ 63 million construction project to build wider lanes and shoulders on SR 22 between I @-@ 82 and the city of Toppenish , because of a number of collisions along the roadway . Other improvements included installing new sidewalks with ADA @-@ compliant curbs and access ramps , as well as adding turn lanes to side roads . The project was completed in June 2012 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Related routes = = 
 Three digit state highway numbers are considered auxiliary routes of their one or two digit parent route , thus SR 22 has four current , and one decommissioned , auxiliary routes . 
 = = = SR 220 = = = 
 State Route 220 was a 27 @.@ 42 @-@ mile ( 44 @.@ 13 km ) long state highway located entirely in the Yakama Indian Reservation , Yakima County . The highway linked Fort Simcoe State Park in the west to White Swan and Toppenish in the east . 
 = = = SR 221 = = = 
 State Route 221 is a 25 @.@ 95 @-@ mile ( 41 @.@ 76 km ) long state highway located entirely within Benton County . The highway serves to connect the unincorporated community of Paterson to the county seat Prosser . 
 = = = SR 223 = = = 
 State Route 223 is a 3 @.@ 81 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 13 km ) long state highway located entirely in Yakima County . It serves the role of connecting the city of Granger to the county seat , Yakima via I @-@ 82 and to SR 22 . 
 = = = SR 224 = = = 
 State Route 224 is a 10 @.@ 15 @-@ mile ( 16 @.@ 33 km ) long state highway located entirely in Benton County . The highway serves to connect SR 225 to I @-@ 82 , and to link Benton City to West Richland and Richland . 
 = = = SR 225 = = = 
 State Route 225 is an 11 @.@ 32 @-@ mile ( 18 @.@ 22 km ) long two @-@ lane state highway located entirely in Benton County . The highway travels over the Benton City – Kiona Bridge over the Yakima River and connects Benton City to I @-@ 82 via SR 224 . The bridge is listed on the Washington Heritage Register and National Register of Historic Places . 
 = Beat of My Heart = 
 " Beat of My Heart " is a song recorded by American singer Hilary Duff for her first compilation album , Most Wanted ( 2005 ) . It was written by Duff and the Dead Executives , a record production team consisting of Jason Epperson , Joel and Benji Madden . Along with the three other new songs on Most Wanted , " Beat of My Heart " was crafted with the intention of having a " totally different sound " from Duff 's previous material . It is an up @-@ tempo new wave @-@ inspired electropop song that incorporates elements of bubblegum pop and dance music in its production . Lyrically , " Beat of My Heart " can be interpreted in many different ways . For Duff , it tells the story of a woman " com [ ing ] out of her shell again " after a bad break @-@ up . 
 Following the success of " Wake Up " , " Beat of My Heart " was issued as the second international single from Most Wanted . It was released in Australia by Festival Mushroom Records on December 11 , 2005 and in several European countries on March 6 , 2006 , by Angel Records . The single was a moderate commercial success . It managed to chart in four different countries , reaching its highest position in Italy , where it peaked at number eight . In addition , it reached the top twenty in Australia and Spain and the low @-@ end of the chart in Switzerland . Critical reaction to " Beat of My Heart " was generally mixed , with many criticizing the song for being repetitive and childish , while others gave it credit for presenting an easy @-@ to @-@ listen @-@ to sound . 
 The music video for " Beat of My Heart " was directed by Phil Harder . The video , which paid homage to bond girls , debuted a " more mature " image of Duff . It emulates the title sequences of James Bond films from the 1960s to present @-@ day , high @-@ tech 3D designs . Duff has performed " Beat of My Heart " live on all of her concert tours since its inception . A pre @-@ recorded performance of the song was played during the 2006 edition of Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve , which would later become a regular feature during future editions of the program . The song and video were parodied on the American sketchy comedy series Mad TV . The parody satirizes Duff 's thinness and Hollywood 's obsession with body image . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 On May 20 , 2005 , MTV News reported that Hilary Duff would be releasing a new album in August , comprising previously released tracks and four new recordings . The following month , in an interview with MTV News , Duff said that she had been working with brothers Joel and Benji Madden , of the American rock band Good Charlotte , and Jason Epperson ( together known under the production name the Dead Executives ) to write and produce new songs for the compilation . She said that " ... they 're three of my favorite songs I 've ever done . ... It was really fun being in the studio with them . " Described by Duff as the first time when " all the responsibility was on [ her ] " , she went into the recording studio without the guidance of her record label or management . 
 According to Duff , she did not tell anyone at her record label that she was working with the Dead Executives . Joel , whom Duff had been dating at the time , was aware that she needed new material for a compilation album , and knew that she wanted a " totally different sound " . Together , the Dead Executives went into the recording studio and worked on new music for Duff , before bringing her into the studio to collectively work on them . Duff described working with them as pleasant , and the music as a new milestone in her career , stating that working with " people you 're close with makes a world of difference when you 're recording and being creative . " At the same time , Duff was also nervous about how her fans would react to the new music . Duff recorded four tracks for the album , three of which were co @-@ written and produced with the Dead Executives . 
 For Duff , who stated that the song can be interpreted in many different ways , " Beat of My Heart " tells the story of a heterosexual relationship , in which the woman was in love with the man , but he was not " as into her as she was him " . After the couple break @-@ up , she found herself in a place where she " wasn 't herself " . She then " comes out of her shell again " , which Duff described as : " Coming out again , dancing again , smiling again , having fun and seeing everything in a brighter light . " The Dead Executives were instrumental in the instrumentation of " Beat of My Heart " , performing on the bass and guitars . They also mixed and engineered the song ; the latter was also conducted by Todd Parker and Grant Conway and assisted by Allan Hessler . It was mixed and recorded at the Foxy Studio in Los Angeles , California . The drums featured on the track was performed by Dean Butterworth while Monique Powell and The Fruit performed backing vocals . The song was then mastered by Joe <unk> . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Beat of My Heart " is an up @-@ tempo new wave @-@ inspired electropop song that incorporates elements of bubblegum pop and dance music in its production . It contains a " soft electronic pop " sound and has the heart beat sound as its base , as well as guitar strums at a " feverish pace " throughout the song . Spence D. of IGN described " Beat of My Heart " as a " glorious uninhibited slab of Euro pop as filtered through the vocal chords of a warm @-@ blooded American girl . " 
 " Beat of My Heart " opens with the sound of a beating heart . In the pre @-@ chorus , Duff 's vocals are made distant by the song 's use of guitars and synth keyboards . She sings that she is going to follow her own interests : " To the beat of my / To the beat of my / To the beat of my heart " . In the first verse , a disinterested Duff sings that she is eager to speak her mind and " yield to her every desire " . In the chorus , she sings that her confidence has strained her relationships with her friends . In the second verse , she sings of being over her depression . An " angry guitar " and a " goth piano " interrupts the song in its bridge . Duff sings that she is only listening to herself from now on . According to Chuck Taylor of Billboard magazine , the line " beat of my heart " is repeated forty @-@ four times in the song . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Beat of My Heart " received generally mixed reviews from contemporary music critics . Pam Avoledo of Blogcritics wrote that Duff sounds like she is bored and " going through the motions " on the song . She further stated that Duff has " lost her <unk> and ironically , her spunk " in the song . Avoledo concluded her review by calling " the bland electro pop " song an " insult to the genre . It 's like spilling ramen on a <unk> Westwood evening gown . " A reviewer from CBBC Newsround commented that the song is so repetitive that you will feel like " you 've listened to it 20 times after just one play " . The reviewer praised the heartbeat present on the track , writing that it " make it a bit of a foot @-@ tapper " , but deemed the lyrics to be " meaningless " . The reviewer concluded that : " You 'll find yourself humming it but will be hard pushed to remember what on earth she was singing about ! " Spence D. of IGN wrote that " Beat of My Heart " does not try for subtlety as it utilizes the " much overused heartbeat " for the " foundation rhythm " of the song . 
 A reviewer for Billboard noted that the song " seems to toss her back to her Disney days " . They concluded that : " Pop music is always appreciated , but this is a kiddie anthem , plain and simple [ ... ] it is hardly a contender for contemporary radio " . Bill Lamb of About.com found the song , along with " Break My Heart " , to be " disappointing cookie cutter copies " of Avril Lavigne 's " Sk8er Boi " . He stated that although the songs are " easy to listen " , they " break no new ground " . Gabriel Leong of MTV Asia stated that " Beat of My Heart " sounds " very much like " songs that Debbie Gibson , Tiffany and Bananarama would have recorded in 1980s , a direction that suits Duff " much better than the whole budding rock chick image she 's been trying out . We don 't want a squabble with Ashlee [ Simpson ] now , do we <unk> ? " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Beat of My Heart " was a moderate commercial success . The single managed to chart in four different countries , reaching its highest position in Italy , where it peaked at number eight on the week ending on April 6 , 2006 , after debuting at number ten . In Australia , " Beat of My Heart " outperformed " Wake Up " by reaching number 13 ; it stayed on the chart for a total 14 weeks . The song gained lower positions in Spain , where it managed to peak inside the top twenty by reaching number 17 ; and in Switzerland , where it reached number 89 . In 2006 , " Beat of My Heart " was placed at number 90 on the Australian year @-@ end singles chart , and at number 74 on the year @-@ end Australian Physical Singles chart . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Beat of My Heart " was shot in Los Angeles , California on the week of September 26 , 2005 . It was directed by Phil Harder for Harder / Fuller Films , who is best known for his mid @-@ to @-@ late 1990s videos for seminal indie rock acts Low , the Red House Painters and The Afghan Whigs , as well as his videos for The Barenaked Ladies . The video , which pays homage to bond girls , contains " that hip sensibility " of James Bond films and presents a " more mature " image of Duff . A representative for Duff 's record label said that : " She 's always been a huge James Bond fan . She watched those movies with her sister growing up , and she loved the Bond girls , because they were always so stylish , and she 's stylish . " The music video was made available to purchase on the iTunes Store from November 2 , 2005 . It later made its on @-@ air premiere on MTV 's Total Request Live a week later , on November 9 . 
 The music video emulates the title sequences of Bond films from the 1960s to present @-@ day , high @-@ tech 3D designs . In the opening sequence , one of the graphics turns into a wire frame of a beating electronic heart , which " pulls out " with each beat . As the camera zooms , the heart grows in size and " weaves " to become Duff . According to MTV News , while she doesn 't " take on " Pussy Galore , Plenty O 'Toole , Holly Goodhead , or any other Bond girl , she becomes a " Bond girl in spirit " , switching from era to era with different looks , with her hair blowing and flying around in graphic silhouettes . Instead of cutting from image to image , the shots evolve in a Bond @-@ like style " as shapes take on different forms to reveal something else " . Duff performs in silhouette , with a microphone , " where a gun would otherwise be " . In another shot , her band is a silhouette . The edition of the video is matched to the beat of the song , " zapping the view in and out , until a lull in the song , when the view travels back into her eyes , through her skin and back to her beating heart . " 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Duff premiered " Beat of My Heart " as part of the set list of the Still Most Wanted Tour , which commenced on July 12 , 2005 in Los Angeles . She co @-@ hosted the 2006 edition of Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve . A pre @-@ recorded performance of " Beat of My Heart " was played during the program . The event also featured a live performance from Times Square by Mariah Carey — the first in the show 's history . These live performances would become a regular feature during future editions of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve . Duff performed the song as part of the set list of the Dignity World Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of " Beat of My Heart " CD single . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Interferometry = 
 Interferometry is a family of techniques in which waves , usually electromagnetic , are superimposed in order to extract information about the waves . Interferometry is an important investigative technique in the fields of astronomy , fiber optics , engineering metrology , optical metrology , oceanography , seismology , spectroscopy ( and its applications to chemistry ) , quantum mechanics , nuclear and particle physics , plasma physics , remote sensing , biomolecular interactions , surface profiling , <unk> , mechanical stress / strain measurement , <unk> , and optometry . 
 Interferometers are widely used in science and industry for the measurement of small displacements , refractive index changes and surface irregularities . In analytical science , interferometers are used in continuous wave Fourier transform spectroscopy to analyze light containing features of absorption or emission associated with a substance or mixture . An astronomical interferometer consists of two or more separate telescopes that combine their signals , offering a resolution equivalent to that of a telescope of diameter equal to the largest separation between its individual elements . 
 = = Basic principles = = 
 Interferometry makes use of the principle of superposition to combine waves in a way that will cause the result of their combination to have some meaningful property that is diagnostic of the original state of the waves . This works because when two waves with the same frequency combine , the resulting intensity pattern is determined by the phase difference between the two waves — waves that are in phase will undergo constructive interference while waves that are out of phase will undergo destructive interference . Waves which are not completely in phase nor completely out of phase will have an intermediate intensity pattern , which can be used to determine their relative phase difference . Most interferometers use light or some other form of electromagnetic wave . 
 Typically ( see Fig . 1 , the well @-@ known Michelson configuration ) a single incoming beam of coherent light will be split into two identical beams by a beam splitter ( a partially reflecting mirror ) . Each of these beams travels a different route , called a path , and they are recombined before arriving at a detector . The path difference , the difference in the distance traveled by each beam , creates a phase difference between them . It is this introduced phase difference that creates the interference pattern between the initially identical waves . If a single beam has been split along two paths , then the phase difference is diagnostic of anything that changes the phase along the paths . This could be a physical change in the path length itself or a change in the refractive index along the path . 
 As seen in Fig . 2a and 2b , the observer has a direct view of mirror M1 seen through the beam splitter , and sees a reflected image M ' 2 of mirror M2 . The fringes can be interpreted as the result of interference between light coming from the two virtual images S ' 1 and S ' 2 of the original source S. The characteristics of the interference pattern depend on the nature of the light source and the precise orientation of the mirrors and beam splitter . In Fig . 2a , the optical elements are oriented so that S ' 1 and S ' 2 are in line with the observer , and the resulting interference pattern consists of circles centered on the normal to M1 and M ' 2 . If , as in Fig . 2b , M1 and M ' 2 are tilted with respect to each other , the interference fringes will generally take the shape of conic sections ( hyperbolas ) , but if M1 and M ' 2 overlap , the fringes near the axis will be straight , parallel , and equally spaced . If S is an extended source rather than a point source as illustrated , the fringes of Fig . 2a must be observed with a telescope set at infinity , while the fringes of Fig . 2b will be localized on the mirrors . 
 Use of white light will result in a pattern of colored fringes ( see Fig . 3 ) . The central fringe representing equal path length may be light or dark depending on the number of phase inversions experienced by the two beams as they traverse the optical system . ( See Michelson interferometer for a discussion of this . ) 
 = = Categories = = 
 Interferometers and interferometric techniques may be categorized by a variety of criteria : 
 = = = <unk> versus heterodyne detection = = = 
 In <unk> detection , the interference occurs between two beams at the same wavelength ( or carrier frequency ) . The phase difference between the two beams results in a change in the intensity of the light on the detector . The resulting intensity of the light after mixing of these two beams is measured , or the pattern of interference fringes is viewed or recorded . Most of the interferometers discussed in this article fall into this category . 
 The heterodyne technique is used for ( 1 ) shifting an input signal into a new frequency range as well as ( 2 ) amplifying a weak input signal ( assuming use of an active mixer ) . A weak input signal of frequency f1 is mixed with a strong reference frequency f2 from a local oscillator ( LO ) . The nonlinear combination of the input signals creates two new signals , one at the sum f1 + f2 of the two frequencies , and the other at the difference f1 − f2 . These new frequencies are called <unk> . Typically only one of the new frequencies is desired , and the other signal is filtered out of the output of the mixer . The output signal will have an intensity proportional to the product of the amplitudes of the input signals . 
 The most important and widely used application of the heterodyne technique is in the superheterodyne receiver ( <unk> ) , invented by U.S. engineer Edwin Howard Armstrong in 1918 . In this circuit , the incoming radio frequency signal from the antenna is mixed with a signal from a local oscillator ( LO ) and converted by the heterodyne technique to a lower fixed frequency signal called the intermediate frequency ( IF ) . This IF is amplified and filtered , before being applied to a detector which extracts the audio signal , which is sent to the loudspeaker . 
 Optical heterodyne detection is an extension of the heterodyne technique to higher ( visible ) frequencies . 
 = = = Double path versus common path = = = 
 A double path interferometer is one in which the reference beam and sample beam travel along divergent paths . Examples include the Michelson interferometer , the Twyman @-@ Green interferometer , and the Mach @-@ Zehnder interferometer . After being perturbed by interaction with the sample under test , the sample beam is recombined with the reference beam to create an interference pattern which can then be interpreted . 
 A common path interferometer is a class of interferometer in which the reference beam and sample beam travel along the same path . Fig . 4 illustrates the Sagnac interferometer , the fibre optic gyroscope , the point diffraction interferometer , and the lateral shearing interferometer . Other examples of common path interferometer include the Zernike phase contrast microscope , Fresnel 's biprism , the zero @-@ area Sagnac , and the <unk> interferometer . 
 = = = Wavefront splitting versus amplitude splitting = = = 
 A wavefront splitting interferometer divides a light wavefront emerging from a point or a narrow slit ( i.e. spatially coherent light ) and , after allowing the two parts of the wavefront to travel through different paths , allows them to recombine . Fig . 5 illustrates Young 's interference experiment and Lloyd 's mirror . Other examples of wavefront splitting interferometer include the Fresnel biprism , the Billet Bi @-@ Lens , and the Rayleigh interferometer . 
 In 1803 , Young 's interference experiment played a major role in the general acceptance of the wave theory of light . If white light is used in Young 's experiment , the result is a white central band of constructive interference corresponding to equal path length from the two slits , surrounded by a symmetrical pattern of colored fringes of diminishing intensity . In addition to continuous electromagnetic radiation , Young 's experiment has been performed with individual photons , with electrons , and with buckyball molecules large enough to be seen under an electron microscope . 
 Lloyd 's mirror generates interference fringes by combining direct light from a source ( blue lines ) and light from the source 's reflected image ( red lines ) from a mirror held at grazing incidence . The result is an asymmetrical pattern of fringes . Interestingly , the band of equal path length , nearest the mirror , is dark rather than bright . In 1834 , Humphrey Lloyd interpreted this effect as proof that the phase of a front @-@ surface reflected beam is inverted . 
 An amplitude splitting interferometer uses a partial reflector to divide the amplitude of the incident wave into separate beams which are separated and recombined . Fig . 6 illustrates the Fizeau , Mach – Zehnder and Fabry – Pérot interferometers . Other examples of amplitude splitting interferometer include the Michelson , Twyman – Green , Laser Unequal Path , and <unk> interferometer . 
 The Fizeau interferometer is shown as it might be set up to test an optical flat . A precisely figured reference flat is placed on top of the flat being tested , separated by narrow spacers . The reference flat is slightly beveled ( only a fraction of a degree of <unk> is necessary ) to prevent the rear surface of the flat from producing interference fringes . Separating the test and reference flats allows the two flats to be tilted with respect to each other . By adjusting the tilt , which adds a controlled phase gradient to the fringe pattern , one can control the spacing and direction of the fringes , so that one may obtain an easily interpreted series of nearly parallel fringes rather than a complex swirl of contour lines . Separating the plates , however , necessitates that the illuminating light be collimated . Fig 6 shows a collimated beam of monochromatic light illuminating the two flats and a beam splitter allowing the fringes to be viewed on @-@ axis . 
 The Mach – Zehnder interferometer is a more versatile instrument than the Michelson interferometer . Each of the well separated light paths is traversed only once , and the fringes can be adjusted so that they are localized in any desired plane . Typically , the fringes would be adjusted to lie in the same plane as the test object , so that fringes and test object can be photographed together . If it is decided to produce fringes in white light , then , since white light has a limited coherence length , on the order of micrometers , great care must be taken to equalize the optical paths or no fringes will be visible . As illustrated in Fig . 6 , a compensating cell would be placed in the path of the reference beam to match the test cell . Note also the precise orientation of the beam splitters . The reflecting surfaces of the beam splitters would be oriented so that the test and reference beams pass through an equal amount of glass . In this orientation , the test and reference beams each experience two front @-@ surface reflections , resulting in the same number of phase inversions . The result is that light traveling an equal optical path length in the test and reference beams produces a white light fringe of constructive interference . 
 The heart of the Fabry – Pérot interferometer is a pair of partially silvered glass optical flats spaced several millimeters to centimeters apart with the silvered surfaces facing each other . ( Alternatively , a Fabry – Pérot etalon uses a transparent plate with two parallel reflecting surfaces . ) As with the Fizeau interferometer , the flats are slightly beveled . In a typical system , illumination is provided by a diffuse source set at the focal plane of a collimating lens . A focusing lens produces what would be an inverted image of the source if the paired flats were not present ; i.e. in the absence of the paired flats , all light emitted from point A passing through the optical system would be focused at point A ' . In Fig . 6 , only one ray emitted from point A on the source is traced . As the ray passes through the paired flats , it is multiply reflected to produce multiple transmitted rays which are collected by the focusing lens and brought to point A ' on the screen . The complete interference pattern takes the appearance of a set of concentric rings . The sharpness of the rings depends on the reflectivity of the flats . If the reflectivity is high , resulting in a high Q factor ( i.e. high finesse ) , monochromatic light produces a set of narrow bright rings against a dark background . In Fig . 6 , the low @-@ finesse image corresponds to a reflectivity of 0 @.@ 04 ( i.e. <unk> surfaces ) versus a reflectivity of 0 @.@ 95 for the high @-@ finesse image . 
 Michelson and Morley ( 1887 ) and other early experimentalists using interferometric techniques in an attempt to measure the properties of the luminiferous aether , used monochromatic light only for initially setting up their equipment , always switching to white light for the actual measurements . The reason is that measurements were recorded visually . <unk> light would result in a uniform fringe pattern . Lacking modern means of environmental temperature control , experimentalists struggled with continual fringe drift even though the interferometer might be set up in a basement . Since the fringes would occasionally disappear due to vibrations by passing horse traffic , distant thunderstorms and the like , it would be easy for an observer to " get lost " when the fringes returned to visibility . The advantages of white light , which produced a distinctive colored fringe pattern , far outweighed the difficulties of aligning the apparatus due to its low coherence length . This was an early example of the use of white light to resolve the " 2 pi ambiguity " . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Physics and astronomy = = = 
 In physics , one of the most important experiments of the late 19th century was the famous " failed experiment " of Michelson and Morley which provided evidence for special relativity . Recent repetitions of the Michelson – Morley experiment perform heterodyne measurements of beat frequencies of crossed cryogenic optical resonators . Fig 7 illustrates a resonator experiment performed by Müller et al. in 2003 . Two optical resonators constructed from crystalline sapphire , controlling the frequencies of two lasers , were set at right angles within a helium <unk> . A frequency comparator measured the beat frequency of the combined outputs of the two resonators . As of 2009 , the precision by which anisotropy of the speed of light can be excluded in resonator experiments is at the 10 − 17 level . 
 Michelson interferometers are used in tunable narrow band optical filters and as the core hardware component of Fourier transform spectrometers . 
 When used as a tunable narrow band filter , Michelson interferometers exhibit a number of advantages and disadvantages when compared with competing technologies such as Fabry – Pérot interferometers or Lyot filters . Michelson interferometers have the largest field of view for a specified wavelength , and are relatively simple in operation , since tuning is via mechanical rotation of <unk> rather than via high voltage control of piezoelectric crystals or lithium niobate optical modulators as used in a Fabry – Pérot system . Compared with Lyot filters , which use birefringent elements , Michelson interferometers have a relatively low temperature sensitivity . On the negative side , Michelson interferometers have a relatively restricted wavelength range and require use of <unk> which restrict transmittance . 
 Fig . 8 illustrates the operation of a Fourier transform spectrometer , which is essentially a Michelson interferometer with one mirror movable . ( A practical Fourier transform spectrometer would substitute corner cube reflectors for the flat mirrors of the conventional Michelson interferometer , but for simplicity , the illustration does not show this . ) An interferogram is generated by making measurements of the signal at many discrete positions of the moving mirror . A Fourier transform converts the interferogram into an actual spectrum . 
 Fig . 9 shows a doppler image of the solar corona made using a tunable Fabry @-@ Pérot interferometer to recover scans of the solar corona at a number of wavelengths near the <unk> green line . The picture is a color @-@ coded image of the doppler shift of the line , which may be associated with the coronal plasma velocity towards or away from the satellite camera . 
 Fabry @-@ Pérot thin @-@ film etalons are used in narrow bandpass filters capable of selecting a single spectral line for imaging ; for example , the H @-@ alpha line or the Ca @-@ K line of the Sun or stars . Fig . 10 shows an Extreme ultraviolet Imaging Telescope ( EIT ) image of the Sun at 195 <unk> , corresponding to a spectral line of multiply @-@ ionized iron atoms . EIT used multilayer coated reflective mirrors that were coated with alternate layers of a light " spacer " element ( such as silicon ) , and a heavy " <unk> " element ( such as molybdenum ) . Approximately 100 layers of each type were placed on each mirror , with a thickness of around 10 nm each . The layer thicknesses were tightly controlled so that at the desired wavelength , reflected photons from each layer interfered constructively . 
 The Laser Interferometer Gravitational @-@ Wave Observatory ( LIGO ) uses two 4 @-@ km Michelson @-@ Fabry @-@ Pérot interferometers for the detection of gravitational waves . In this application , the Fabry – Pérot cavity is used to store photons for almost a millisecond while they bounce up and down between the mirrors . This increases the time a gravitational wave can interact with the light , which results in a better sensitivity at low frequencies . Smaller cavities , usually called mode cleaners , are used for spatial filtering and frequency stabilization of the main laser . The first observation of gravitational waves occurred on September 14 , 2015 . 
 The Mach @-@ Zehnder interferometer 's relatively large and freely accessible working space , and its flexibility in locating the fringes has made it the interferometer of choice for visualizing flow in wind tunnels , and for flow visualization studies in general . It is frequently used in the fields of aerodynamics , plasma physics and heat transfer to measure pressure , density , and temperature changes in gases . 
 Mach @-@ Zehnder interferometers are also used to study one of the most counterintuitive predictions of quantum mechanics , the phenomenon known as quantum entanglement . 
 An astronomical interferometer achieves high @-@ resolution observations using the technique of aperture synthesis , mixing signals from a cluster of comparatively small telescopes rather than a single very expensive monolithic telescope . 
 Early radio telescope interferometers used a single baseline for measurement . Later astronomical interferometers , such as the Very Large Array illustrated in Fig 11 , used arrays of telescopes arranged in a pattern on the ground . A limited number of baselines will result in insufficient coverage . This was alleviated by using the rotation of the Earth to rotate the array relative to the sky . Thus , a single baseline could measure information in multiple orientations by taking repeated measurements , a technique called Earth @-@ rotation synthesis . <unk> thousands of kilometers long were achieved using very long baseline interferometry . 
 Astronomical optical interferometry has had to overcome a number of technical issues not shared by radio telescope interferometry . The short wavelengths of light necessitate extreme precision and stability of construction . For example , spatial resolution of 1 milliarcsecond requires 0 @.@ 5 µm stability in a 100 m baseline . Optical interferometric measurements require high sensitivity , low noise detectors that did not become available until the late 1990s . Astronomical " seeing " , the turbulence that causes stars to twinkle , introduces rapid , random phase changes in the incoming light , requiring kilohertz data collection rates to be faster than the rate of turbulence . Despite these technical difficulties , roughly a dozen astronomical optical interferometers are now in operation offering resolutions down to the fractional milliarcsecond range . Fig . 12 shows a movie assembled from aperture synthesis images of the Beta Lyrae system , a binary star system approximately 960 light @-@ years ( 290 parsecs ) away in the constellation Lyra , as observed by the CHARA array with the <unk> instrument . The brighter component is the primary star , or the mass donor . The fainter component is the thick disk surrounding the secondary star , or the mass gainer . The two components are separated by 1 milli @-@ arcsecond . Tidal distortions of the mass donor and the mass gainer are both clearly visible . 
 The wave character of matter can be exploited to build interferometers . The first examples of matter interferometers were electron interferometers , later followed by neutron interferometers . Around 1990 the first atom interferometers were demonstrated , later followed by interferometers employing molecules . 
 Electron holography is an imaging technique that photographically records the electron interference pattern of an object , which is then reconstructed to yield a greatly magnified image of the original object . This technique was developed to enable greater resolution in electron microscopy than is possible using conventional imaging techniques . The resolution of conventional electron microscopy is not limited by electron wavelength , but by the large aberrations of electron lenses . 
 Neutron interferometry has been used to investigate the <unk> – Bohm effect , to examine the effects of gravity acting on an elementary particle , and to demonstrate a strange behavior of fermions that is at the basis of the Pauli exclusion principle : Unlike macroscopic objects , when fermions are rotated by 360 ° about any axis , they do not return to their original state , but develop a minus sign in their wave function . In other words , a fermion needs to be rotated 720 ° before returning to its original state . 
 Atom interferometry techniques are reaching sufficient precision to allow laboratory @-@ scale tests of general relativity . 
 Interferometers are used in atmospheric physics for high @-@ precision measurements of trace gases via remote sounding of the atmosphere . There are several examples of interferometers that utilize either absorption or emission features of trace gases . A typical use would be in continual monitoring of the column concentration of trace gases such as ozone and carbon monoxide above the instrument . 
 = = = Engineering and applied science = = = 
 Newton ( test plate ) interferometry is frequently used in the optical industry for testing the quality of surfaces as they are being shaped and figured . Fig . 13 shows photos of reference flats being used to check two test flats at different stages of completion , showing the different patterns of interference fringes . The reference flats are resting with their bottom surfaces in contact with the test flats , and they are illuminated by a monochromatic light source . The light waves reflected from both surfaces interfere , resulting in a pattern of bright and dark bands . The surface in the left photo is nearly flat , indicated by a pattern of straight parallel interference fringes at equal intervals . The surface in the right photo is uneven , resulting in a pattern of curved fringes . Each pair of adjacent fringes represents a difference in surface elevation of half a wavelength of the light used , so differences in elevation can be measured by counting the fringes . The flatness of the surfaces can be measured to millionths of an inch by this method . To determine whether the surface being tested is concave or convex with respect to the reference optical flat , any of several procedures may be adopted . One can observe how the fringes are displaced when one presses gently on the top flat . If one observes the fringes in white light , the sequence of colors becomes familiar with experience and aids in interpretation . Finally one may compare the appearance of the fringes as one moves ones head from a normal to an oblique viewing position . These sorts of maneuvers , while common in the optical shop , are not suitable in a formal testing environment . When the flats are ready for sale , they will typically be mounted in a Fizeau interferometer for formal testing and certification . 
 Fabry @-@ Pérot etalons are widely used in telecommunications , lasers and spectroscopy to control and measure the wavelengths of light . <unk> filters are multiple layer thin @-@ film etalons . In telecommunications , wavelength @-@ division multiplexing , the technology that enables the use of multiple wavelengths of light through a single optical fiber , depends on filtering devices that are thin @-@ film etalons . Single @-@ mode lasers employ etalons to suppress all optical cavity modes except the single one of interest . 
 The Twyman – Green interferometer , invented by Twyman and Green in 1916 , is a variant of the Michelson interferometer widely used to test optical components . The basic characteristics distinguishing it from the Michelson configuration are the use of a monochromatic point light source and a collimator . It is interesting to note that Michelson ( 1918 ) criticized the Twyman @-@ Green configuration as being unsuitable for the testing of large optical components , since the light sources available at the time had limited coherence length . Michelson pointed out that constraints on geometry forced by limited coherence length required the use of a reference mirror of equal size to the test mirror , making the Twyman @-@ Green impractical for many purposes . Decades later , the advent of laser light sources answered Michelson 's objections . ( A Twyman @-@ Green interferometer using a laser light source and unequal path length is known as a Laser Unequal Path Interferometer , or <unk> . ) Fig . 14 illustrates a Twyman @-@ Green interferometer set up to test a lens . Light from a monochromatic point source is expanded by a diverging lens ( not shown ) , then is collimated into a parallel beam . A convex spherical mirror is positioned so that its center of curvature coincides with the focus of the lens being tested . The emergent beam is recorded by an imaging system for analysis . 
 Mach @-@ Zehnder interferometers are being used in integrated optical circuits , in which light interferes between two branches of a waveguide that are externally modulated to vary their relative phase . A slight tilt of one of the beam splitters will result in a path difference and a change in the interference pattern . Mach @-@ Zehnder interferometers are the basis of a wide variety of devices , from RF modulators to sensors to optical switches . 
 The latest proposed extremely large astronomical telescopes , such as the Thirty Meter Telescope and the European Extremely Large Telescope , will be of segmented design . Their primary mirrors will be built from hundreds of hexagonal mirror segments . <unk> and figuring these highly <unk> and non @-@ rotationally symmetric mirror segments presents a major challenge . Traditional means of optical testing compares a surface against a spherical reference with the aid of a null corrector . In recent years , computer @-@ generated holograms ( <unk> ) have begun to supplement null correctors in test setups for complex <unk> surfaces . Fig . 15 illustrates how this is done . Unlike the figure , actual <unk> have line spacing on the order of 1 to 10 µm . When laser light is passed through the <unk> , the zero @-@ order diffracted beam experiences no wavefront modification . The wavefront of the first @-@ order diffracted beam , however , is modified to match the desired shape of the test surface . In the illustrated Fizeau interferometer test setup , the zero @-@ order diffracted beam is directed towards the spherical reference surface , and the first @-@ order diffracted beam is directed towards the test surface in such a way that the two reflected beams combine to form interference fringes . The same test setup can be used for the innermost mirrors as for the outermost , with only the <unk> needing to be exchanged . 
 Ring laser gyroscopes ( <unk> ) and fibre optic gyroscopes ( <unk> ) are interferometers used in navigation systems . They operate on the principle of the Sagnac effect . The distinction between <unk> and <unk> is that in a <unk> , the entire ring is part of the laser while in a <unk> , an external laser injects counter @-@ propagating beams into an optical fiber ring , and rotation of the system then causes a relative phase shift between those beams . In a <unk> , the observed phase shift is proportional to the accumulated rotation , while in a <unk> , the observed phase shift is proportional to the angular velocity . 
 In telecommunication networks , <unk> is used to move frequencies of individual signals to different channels which may share a single physical transmission line . This is called frequency division multiplexing ( FDM ) . For example , a coaxial cable used by a cable television system can carry 500 television channels at the same time because each one is given a different frequency , so they don 't interfere with one another . Continuous wave ( CW ) doppler radar detectors are basically heterodyne detection devices that compare transmitted and reflected beams . 
 Optical heterodyne detection is used for coherent Doppler lidar measurements capable of detecting very weak light scattered in the atmosphere and monitoring wind speeds with high accuracy . It has application in optical fiber communications , in various high resolution spectroscopic techniques , and the self @-@ heterodyne method can be used to measure the <unk> of a laser . 
 Optical heterodyne detection is an essential technique used in high @-@ accuracy measurements of the frequencies of optical sources , as well as in the stabilization of their frequencies . Until a relatively few years ago , lengthy frequency chains were needed to connect the microwave frequency of a cesium or other atomic time source to optical frequencies . At each step of the chain , a frequency multiplier would be used to produce a harmonic of the frequency of that step , which would be compared by heterodyne detection with the next step ( the output of a microwave source , far infrared laser , infrared laser , or visible laser ) . Each measurement of a single spectral line required several years of effort in the construction of a custom frequency chain . Currently , optical frequency combs have provided a much simpler method of measuring optical frequencies . If a mode @-@ locked laser is modulated to form a train of pulses , its spectrum is seen to consist of the carrier frequency surrounded by a closely spaced comb of optical sideband frequencies with a spacing equal to the pulse repetition frequency ( Fig . 16 ) . The pulse repetition frequency is locked to that of the frequency standard , and the frequencies of the comb elements at the red end of the spectrum are doubled and <unk> with the frequencies of the comb elements at the blue end of the spectrum , thus allowing the comb to serve as its own reference . In this manner , locking of the frequency comb output to an atomic standard can be performed in a single step . To measure an unknown frequency , the frequency comb output is dispersed into a spectrum . The unknown frequency is overlapped with the appropriate spectral segment of the comb and the frequency of the resultant heterodyne beats is measured . 
 One of the most common industrial applications of optical interferometry is as a versatile measurement tool for the high precision examination of surface topography . Popular interferometric measurement techniques include Phase Shifting Interferometry ( PSI ) , and Vertical Scanning Interferometry ( VSI ) , also known as scanning white light interferometry ( <unk> ) or by the ISO term Coherence Scanning Interferometry ( CSI ) , CSI exploits coherence to extend the range of capabilities for interference microscopy . These techniques are widely used in micro @-@ electronic and micro @-@ optic fabrication . PSI uses monochromatic light and provides very precise measurements ; however it is only usable for surfaces that are very smooth . CSI often uses white light and high numerical apertures , and rather than looking at the phase of the fringes , as does PSI , looks for best position of maximum fringe contrast or some other feature of the overall fringe pattern . In its simplest form , CSI provides less precise measurements than PSI but can be used on rough surfaces . Some configurations of CSI , variously known as and Enhanced VSI ( <unk> ) , high @-@ resolution <unk> or Frequency Domain Analysis ( FDA ) , use coherence effects in combination with interference phase to enhance precision . 
 Phase Shifting Interferometry addresses several issues associated with the classical analysis of static interferograms . Classically , one measures the positions of the fringe centers . As seen in Fig . 13 , fringe deviations from straightness and equal spacing provide a measure of the aberration . Errors in determining the location of the fringe centers provide the inherent limit to precision of the classical analysis , and any intensity variations across the interferogram will also introduce error . There is a trade @-@ off between precision and number of data points : closely spaced fringes provide many data points of low precision , while widely spaced fringes provide a low number of high precision data points . Since fringe center data is all that one uses in the classical analysis , all of the other information that might theoretically be obtained by detailed analysis of the intensity variations in an interferogram is thrown away . Finally , with static interferograms , additional information is needed to determine the polarity of the wavefront : In Fig . 13 , one can see that the tested surface on the right deviates from flatness , but one cannot tell from this single image whether this deviation from flatness is concave or convex . Traditionally , this information would be obtained using non @-@ automated means , such as by observing the direction that the fringes move when the reference surface is pushed . 
 Phase shifting interferometry overcomes these limitations by not relying on finding fringe centers , but rather by collecting intensity data from every point of the CCD image sensor . As seen in Fig . 17 , multiple interferograms ( at least three ) are analyzed with the reference optical surface shifted by a precise fraction of a wavelength between each exposure using a piezoelectric transducer ( PZT ) . Alternatively , precise phase shifts can be introduced by modulating the laser frequency . The captured images are processed by a computer to calculate the optical wavefront errors . The precision and reproducibility of PSI is far greater than possible in static interferogram analysis , with measurement <unk> of a hundredth of a wavelength being routine . Phase shifting technology has been adapted to a variety of interferometer types such as Twyman @-@ Green , Mach – Zehnder , laser Fizeau , and even common path configurations such as point diffraction and lateral shearing interferometers . More generally , phase shifting techniques can be adapted to almost any system that uses fringes for measurement , such as holographic and speckle interferometry . 
 In coherence scanning interferometry , interference is only achieved when the path length delays of the interferometer are matched within the coherence time of the light source . CSI monitors the fringe contrast rather than the phase of the fringes . Fig . 17 illustrates a CSI microscope using a <unk> interferometer in the objective ; other forms of interferometer used with white light include the Michelson interferometer ( for low magnification objectives , where the reference mirror in a <unk> objective would interrupt too much of the aperture ) and the <unk> interferometer ( for high magnification objectives with limited working distance ) . The sample ( or alternatively , the objective ) is moved vertically over the full height range of the sample , and the position of maximum fringe contrast is found for each pixel . The chief benefit of coherence scanning interferometry is that systems can be designed that do not suffer from the 2 pi ambiguity of coherent interferometry , and as seen in Fig . 18 , which scans a <unk> x <unk> x <unk> volume , it is well suited to profiling steps and rough surfaces . The axial resolution of the system is determined in part by the coherence length of the light source . Industrial applications include in @-@ process surface metrology , roughness measurement , 3D surface metrology in hard @-@ to @-@ reach spaces and in hostile environments , <unk> of surfaces with high aspect ratio features ( grooves , channels , holes ) , and film thickness measurement ( semi @-@ conductor and optical industries , etc . ) . 
 Fig . 19 illustrates a Twyman – Green interferometer set up for white light scanning of a macroscopic object . 
 Holographic interferometry is a technique which uses holography to monitor small deformations in single wavelength implementations . In multi @-@ wavelength implementations , it is used to perform dimensional metrology of large parts and assemblies and to detect larger surface defects . 
 Holographic interferometry was discovered by accident as a result of mistakes committed during the making of holograms . Early lasers were relatively weak and photographic plates were insensitive , necessitating long exposures during which vibrations or minute shifts might occur in the optical system . The resultant holograms , which showed the holographic subject covered with fringes , were considered ruined . 
 Eventually , several independent groups of experimenters in the mid @-@ 60s realized that the fringes encoded important information about dimensional changes occurring in the subject , and began intentionally producing holographic double exposures . The main Holographic interferometry article covers the disputes over priority of discovery that occurred during the issuance of the patent for this method . 
 <unk> and multi- exposure holography is one of three methods used to create holographic interferograms . A first exposure records the object in an unstressed state . Subsequent exposures on the same photographic plate are made while the object is subjected to some stress . The composite image depicts the difference between the stressed and unstressed states . 
 Real @-@ time holography is a second method of creating holographic interferograms . A holograph of the unstressed object is created . This holograph is illuminated with a reference beam to generate a hologram image of the object directly superimposed over the original object itself while the object is being subjected to some stress . The object waves from this hologram image will interfere with new waves coming from the object . This technique allows real time monitoring of shape changes . 
 The third method , time @-@ average holography , involves creating a holograph while the object is subjected to a periodic stress or vibration . This yields a visual image of the vibration pattern . 
 Interferometric synthetic aperture radar ( <unk> ) is a radar technique used in geodesy and remote sensing . Satellite synthetic aperture radar images of a geographic feature are taken on separate days , and changes that have taken place between radar images taken on the separate days are recorded as fringes similar to those obtained in holographic interferometry . The technique can monitor <unk> to millimeter @-@ scale deformation resulting from earthquakes , volcanoes and landslides , and also has uses in structural engineering , in particular for the monitoring of subsidence and structural stability . Fig 20 shows Kilauea , an active volcano in Hawaii . Data acquired using the space shuttle Endeavour 's X @-@ band Synthetic Aperture Radar on April 13 , 1994 and October 4 , 1994 were used to generate interferometric fringes , which were overlaid on the X @-@ SAR image of Kilauea . 
 Electronic speckle pattern interferometry ( <unk> ) , also known as TV holography , uses video detection and recording to produce an image of the object upon which is superimposed a fringe pattern which represents the displacement of the object between recordings . ( see Fig . 21 ) The fringes are similar to those obtained in holographic interferometry . 
 When lasers were first invented , laser speckle was considered to be a severe drawback in using lasers to illuminate objects , particularly in holographic imaging because of the grainy image produced . It was later realized that speckle patterns could carry information about the object 's surface deformations . Butters and <unk> developed the technique of speckle pattern interferometry in 1970 , and since then , speckle has been exploited in a variety of other applications . A photograph is made of the speckle pattern before deformation , and a second photograph is made of the speckle pattern after deformation . Digital subtraction of the two images results in a correlation fringe pattern , where the fringes represent lines of equal deformation . Short laser pulses in the nanosecond range can be used to capture very fast transient events . A phase problem exists : In the absence of other information , one cannot tell the difference between contour lines indicating a peak versus contour lines indicating a trough . To resolve the issue of phase ambiguity , <unk> may be combined with phase shifting methods . 
 A method of establishing precise geodetic baselines , invented by Yrjö Väisälä , exploited the low coherence length of white light . Initially , white light was split in two , with the reference beam " folded " , bouncing back @-@ and @-@ forth six times between a mirror pair spaced precisely 1 m apart . Only if the test path was precisely 6 times the reference path would fringes be seen . Repeated applications of this procedure allowed precise measurement of distances up to 864 meters . <unk> thus established were used to calibrate geodetic distance measurement equipment , leading to a <unk> traceable scale for geodetic networks measured by these instruments . ( This method has been superseded by GPS . ) 
 Other uses of interferometers have been to study dispersion of materials , measurement of complex indices of refraction , and thermal properties . They are also used for three @-@ dimensional motion mapping including mapping vibrational patterns of structures . 
 = = = Biology and medicine = = = 
 Optical coherence tomography ( OCT ) is a medical imaging technique using low @-@ coherence interferometry to provide tomographic visualization of internal tissue microstructures . As seen in Fig . 22 , the core of a typical OCT system is a Michelson interferometer . One interferometer arm is focused onto the tissue sample and scans the sample in an X @-@ Y longitudinal raster pattern . The other interferometer arm is bounced off a reference mirror . Reflected light from the tissue sample is combined with reflected light from the reference . Because of the low coherence of the light source , interferometric signal is observed only over a limited depth of sample . X @-@ Y scanning therefore records one thin optical slice of the sample at a time . By performing multiple scans , moving the reference mirror between each scan , an entire three @-@ dimensional image of the tissue can be reconstructed . Recent advances have striven to combine the nanometer phase retrieval of coherent interferometry with the ranging capability of low @-@ coherence interferometry . 
 Phase contrast and differential interference contrast ( DIC ) microscopy are important tools in biology and medicine . Most animal cells and single @-@ celled organisms have very little color , and their intracellular organelles are almost totally invisible under simple bright field illumination . These structures can be made visible by staining the specimens , but staining procedures are time @-@ consuming and kill the cells . As seen in Figs . 24 and 25 , phase contrast and DIC microscopes allow unstained , living cells to be studied . DIC also has non @-@ biological applications , for example in the analysis of planar silicon semiconductor processing . 
 Angle @-@ resolved low @-@ coherence interferometry ( a / LCI ) uses scattered light to measure the sizes of subcellular objects , including cell nuclei . This allows interferometry depth measurements to be combined with density measurements . Various correlations have been found between the state of tissue health and the measurements of subcellular objects . For example , it has been found that as tissue changes from normal to cancerous , the average cell nuclei size increases . 
 Phase @-@ contrast X @-@ ray imaging ( Fig . 26 ) refers to a variety of techniques that use phase information of a coherent x @-@ ray beam to image soft tissues . ( For an elementary discussion , see Phase @-@ contrast x @-@ ray imaging ( introduction ) . For a more in @-@ depth review , see Phase @-@ contrast X @-@ ray imaging . ) It has become an important method for visualizing cellular and histological structures in a wide range of biological and medical studies . There are several technologies being used for x @-@ ray phase @-@ contrast imaging , all utilizing different principles to convert phase variations in the x @-@ rays emerging from an object into intensity variations . These include propagation @-@ based phase contrast , talbot interferometry , moiré @-@ based far @-@ field interferometry , refraction @-@ enhanced imaging , and x @-@ ray interferometry . These methods provide higher contrast compared to normal absorption @-@ contrast x @-@ ray imaging , making it possible to see smaller details . A disadvantage is that these methods require more sophisticated equipment , such as synchrotron or <unk> x @-@ ray sources , x @-@ ray optics , or high resolution x @-@ ray detectors . 
 = Beorhtwulf of Mercia = 
 Beorhtwulf ( pronounced [ <unk> ] , meaning " bright wolf " ; also spelled Berhtwulf ; died 852 ) was King of Mercia , a kingdom of Anglo @-@ Saxon England , from 839 or 840 to 852 . His ancestry is unknown , though he may have been connected to Beornwulf , who ruled Mercia in the 820s . Almost no coins were issued by Beorhtwulf 's predecessor , Wiglaf , but a Mercian coinage was restarted by Beorhtwulf early in his reign , initially with strong similarities to the coins of Æthelwulf of Wessex , and later with independent designs . The Vikings attacked within a year or two of Beorhtwulf 's accession : the province of Lindsey was raided in 841 , and London , a key centre of Mercian commerce , was attacked the following year . Another Viking assault on London in 851 " put Beorhtwulf to flight " , according to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle ; the Vikings were subsequently defeated by Æthelwulf . This raid may have had a significant economic impact on Mercia , as London coinage is much reduced after 851 . 
 Berkshire appears to have passed from Mercian to West Saxon control during Beorhtwulf 's reign . The Welsh are recorded to have rebelled against Beorhtwulf 's successor , Burgred , shortly after Beorhtwulf 's death , suggesting that Beorhtwulf had been their overlord . Charters from <unk> 's reign show a strained relationship with the church , as Beorhtwulf seized land and subsequently returned it . 
 Beorhtwulf and his wife , Sæthryth , may have had two sons , Beorhtfrith and Beorhtric . Beorhtric is known from witnessing his father 's charters , but he ceased to do so before the end of Beorhtwulf 's reign . Beorhtfrith appears in later sources which describe his murder of Wigstan , the grandson of Wiglaf , in a dispute over Beorhtfrith 's plan to marry Wigstan 's widowed mother Ælfflæd . Beorhtwulf 's death is not recorded in any surviving sources , but it is thought that he died in 852 . 
 = = Background and sources = = 
 For most of the 8th century , Mercia was the dominant Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom . Mercian influence in the south @-@ eastern kingdoms of Kent , East Anglia , and Essex continued into the early 820s under Coenwulf of Mercia . However , Coenwulf 's death in 821 marked the beginning of a period in which Mercia suffered from dynastic conflicts and military defeats that redrew the political map of England . Four ( possibly five ) kings , from what appear to be four different kin @-@ groups , ruled Mercia throughout the next six years . Little genealogical information about these kings has survived , but since Anglo @-@ Saxon names often included initial elements common to most or all members of a family , historians have suggested that kin @-@ groups in this period can be reconstructed on the basis of the similarity of their names . Three competing kin @-@ groups are recognizable in the charters and regnal lists of the time : the C , Wig and B groups . The C group , which included the brothers Coenwulf , Cuthred of Kent , and Ceolwulf I , was dominant in the period following the deaths of Offa of Mercia and his son Ecgfrith in 796 . Ceolwulf was deposed in 823 by Beornwulf , perhaps the first of the B group , who was killed fighting against the East Anglians in 826 . He was followed by Ludeca , not obviously linked to any of the three groups , who was killed in battle the following year . After Ludeca 's death , the first of the Wig family came to power : Wiglaf , who died in 839 or 840 . Beorhtwulf , who succeeded to the throne that year , is likely to have come from the B group , which may also have included the ill @-@ fated Beornred who " held [ power ] a little while and unhappily " after the murder of King Æthelbald in 757 . 
 An alternative model of Mercian succession is that a number of kin @-@ groups may have competed for the succession . The sub @-@ kingdoms of the Hwicce , the Tomsæte , and the unidentified Gaini are examples of such power @-@ bases . Marriage alliances could also have played a part . Competing magnates — those called in charters " dux " or " princeps " ( that is , leaders ) — may have brought the kings to power . In this model , the Mercian kings are little more than leading noblemen . 
 An important source for the period is the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , a collection of annals in Old English narrating the history of the Anglo @-@ Saxons . The Chronicle was a West Saxon production , however , and is sometimes thought to be biased in favour of Wessex . Charters dating from Beorhtwulf 's reign have survived ; these were documents which granted land to followers or to churchmen and were witnessed by the kings who had the authority to grant the land . A charter might record the names of both a subject king and his overlord on the witness list appended to the grant . Such a witness list can be seen on the Ismere Diploma , for example , where Æthelric , son of king Oshere of the Hwicce , is described as a " subregulus " , or subking , of Æthelbald of Mercia . 
 = = Accession and coinage = = 
 It is possible that Beorhtwulf is the same person as the Beorhtwulf who witnessed a charter of Wiglaf 's in 836 . If so , this is Beorhtwulf 's first appearance in the historical record . His accession to the throne of Mercia is usually thought to have occurred in about 840 . The date is not given directly in any of the primary sources , but it is known from regnal lists that he succeeded Wiglaf as king . Historian D. P. Kirby suggests that Wiglaf 's death occurred in 839 , basing this date on the known chronology of the reigns of Beorhtwulf and Burgred , the next two Mercian kings . It is possible that Wigmund , the son of Wiglaf , was king briefly between Wiglaf and Beorhtwulf . The evidence for this possibility comes only from a later tradition concerning Wigmund 's son , Wigstan , so it is uncertain whether he actually did so . 
 Almost no Mercian coins are known from the 830s , after Wiglaf regained Mercia from Egbert of Wessex . Beorhtwulf restarted a Mercian coinage early in his reign , and the extended gap in the 830s has led to the suggestion that Wiglaf 's second reign was as a client king of Egbert 's , without permission to mint his own coinage . Beorhtwulf 's coinage would then indicate his independence of Mercia . However , it is more usually thought that Wiglaf took Mercia back by force . An alternative explanation for Beorhtwulf 's revival of the coinage is that it was part of a plan for economic regeneration in the face of the Viking attacks . The Viking threat may also account for the evident cooperation in matters of currency between Mercia and Wessex which began in Beorhtwulf 's reign and lasted until the end of the independent Mercian kingdom on the death of King Ceolwulf II in the years around 880 . 
 The earliest of Beorhtwulf 's coins were issued in 841 – 842 , and can be identified as the work of a Rochester die @-@ cutter who also produced coins early in the reign of Æthelwulf of Wessex . After ten years without any coinage , Beorhtwulf would have had to go outside Mercia to find skilled die @-@ cutters , and Rochester was the closest mint . Hence the link to Rochester probably does not indicate that the coins were minted there ; it is more likely that they were produced in London , which was under Mercian control . Subsequent coins of Beorhtwulf 's are very similar to Æthelwulf 's . One coin combines a portrait of Beorhtwulf on the reverse side with a design used by Æthelwulf on the obverse ; this has been interpreted as indicating an alliance between the two kingdoms , but it is more likely to have been the work of a forger or an illiterate moneyer reusing the design of a coin of Æthelwulf 's . A different coinage appears later in the 840s , and was probably ended by the Viking attacks of 850 – 851 . There are also coins without portraits that are likely to have been produced at the very end of Beorhtwulf 's reign . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Beorhtwulf 's kingship began auspiciously . In the battle of <unk> or Cyfeiliog , he killed King <unk> <unk> of Gwynedd and later sources imply ( see below ) that he was able to subjugate the northern Welsh after this . 
 However , the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records Viking raids in 841 against the south and east coasts of Britain , including the Mercian province of Lindsey , centred on modern Lincoln . The city of London , chief centre of Mercia 's trade , was attacked the following year . The Chronicle states that there was " great slaughter " in London , and large coin hoards were buried in the city at this time . 
 Berkshire appears to have passed out of Mercian hands and become a part of the kingdom of Wessex at some point during the late 840s . In 844 Ceolred , the bishop of Leicester , granted Beorhtwulf an estate at Pangbourne , in Berkshire , so the area was still in Mercian hands at that date . Asser , writing in about 893 , believed that King Alfred the Great was born between 847 and 849 at Wantage in Berkshire . The implication is that Berkshire had previously come under the control of Wessex , though it is also possible the territory was divided between the two kingdoms , possibly even before Beorhtwulf 's accession . Whatever the nature of the change , there is no record of how it occurred . It appears that the Mercian ealdorman Æthelwulf remained in office afterwards , implying a peaceful transition . 
 In 853 , not long after Beorhtwulf 's death , the Welsh rebelled against Burgred and were subdued by an alliance between Burgred and Æthelwulf . 
 = = Charters = = 
 The synod at Croft held by Wiglaf in 836 , which Beorhtwulf may have attended , was the last such conclave called together by a Mercian king . During Beorhtwulf 's reign and thereafter , the kingdom of Wessex had more influence than Mercia with the Archbishop of Canterbury . A charter of 840 provides evidence of a different kind concerning Beorhtwulf 's relations with the church . The charter concerns lands that had originally been granted by Offa to the monastery of <unk> in Worcestershire . The lands had come under the control of the church in Worcester , but Beorhtwulf had seized the land again . In the charter Beorhtwulf acknowledges the church 's right to the land , but forces a handsome gift from the bishop in return : " four very choice horses and a ring of 30 mancuses and a skilfully wrought dish of three pounds , and two silver horns of four pounds ... [ and ] ... two good horses and two goblets of two pounds and one gilded cup of two pounds . " This is not an isolated case ; there are other charters that show Mercian kings of the time disputing property with the church , such as a charter of 849 in which Beorhtwulf received a lease on land from the bishop of Worcester , and promised in return that he would be " more firmly the friend of the bishop and his community " and , in the words of historian Patrick Wormald , " would not rob them in future " . Wormald suggests that this ruthless behaviour may be explained by the fact that landed estates were becoming harder to find , as so much land had been granted to monasteries . The problem had been mentioned over a century before by Bede , who in a letter to Egbert , the Archbishop of York , had complained of " a complete lack of places where the sons of nobles and of veteran thegns can receive an estate " . Beorhtwulf 's concession of wrongdoing suggests that he could not rely on his nobles to support him in such a disagreement , and may indicate that his hold on the throne was insecure . 
 Holders of land were under an obligation to the king to support the king 's household , though exemptions could be obtained . A charter of the late 840s released the monastery of Breedon on the Hill from the requirement to supply food and lodging to Beorhtwulf 's servants and messengers , including " the royal hawks , huntsmen , horses , and their attendants " . The exemption cost a substantial sum , and did not release the monastery from every burden ; the obligation to feed messengers from neighbouring kingdoms or from overseas was excluded from the exemption . 
 = = End of reign = = 
 In 851 , a Viking army landed at Thanet , then still an island , and over @-@ wintered there . A second Viking force of 350 ships is reported by the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle to have stormed Canterbury and London , and to have " put to flight Beorhtwulf , king of Mercia , with his army " . The Vikings were defeated by Æthelwulf and his sons , Æthelstan and Æthelbald , but the economic impact appears to have been significant , as Mercian coinage in London was very limited after 851 . 
 No surviving contemporary source records Beorhtwulf 's death , but according to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle his successor , Burgred , reigned for twenty @-@ two years and was driven from his throne by the Vikings in 874 , implying that Beorhtwulf died in 852 . From Burgred 's charters it is known that his reign began before 25 July 852 . It has been suggested that an otherwise unknown king named Eanred may have reigned briefly between Beorhtwulf and Burgred ; the evidence for this consists of a single silver penny inscribed " <unk> REX " , which has similarities to some of Beorhtwulf 's and Æthelwulf 's pennies and hence is thought to have been produced after 850 . The only recorded King Eanred ruled in Northumbria and is thought to have died in 840 , though an alternative chronology of the Northumbrian kings has been proposed that would eliminate this discrepancy . Generally the penny is considered to belong to " an unknown ruler of a southern kingdom " , and it cannot be assumed that an Eanred succeeded Beorhtwulf . 
 = = Family = = 
 Beorhtwulf was married to Sæthryth , apparently a figure of some importance in her own right as she witnessed all of his charters between 840 and 849 , after which she disappears from the record . Beorhtwulf is said to have had two sons , Beorhtfrith and Beorhtric . Beorhtric is known from witnessing his father 's charters , but he ceased to do so before the end of Beorhtwulf 's reign . 
 The story of Beorhtwulf 's other known son , Beorhtfrith , is told in the Passio sancti <unk> , which may include material from a late 9th @-@ century source , with some corroboration in the chronicle of John of Worcester . Beorhtfrith wished to marry the royal heiress Ælfflæd , King Ceolwulf 's daughter , widow of Wiglaf 's son Wigmund and mother of Wigstan . Wigstan refused to allow the marriage , since Beorhtfrith was a kinsman of Wigmund 's and was also Wigstan 's godfather . In revenge , Beorhtfrith murdered Wigstan , who was subsequently venerated as a saint . The story , though of late origin , is regarded as plausible by modern historians . 
 = A Rush of Blood to the Head = 
 A Rush of Blood to the Head is the second studio album by the British alternative rock band Coldplay . Released on 26 August 2002 in the UK through the label Parlophone , the album was produced by the band and British record producer Ken Nelson . Recording started after the band became popular worldwide with the release of their debut album , Parachutes , and one of its singles in particular , " Yellow " . The album makes greater use of electric guitar and piano than its predecessor . 
 The album was made available in August 2002 , two months after its original planned release date . It was released on 27 August in the United States through Capitol Records . Capitol released a remastered version of the album in 2008 on a 180 @-@ gram vinyl record as part of the " From the Capitol Vaults " series . The album debuted and continued their huge commercial legacy , an ongoing pattern that began with Parachutes which made Coldplay one of the best @-@ selling bands worldwide . It topped the UK Albums Chart upon its first week of release in the United Kingdom , and became the eighth biggest @-@ selling album of the 21st century in the UK . The British Phonographic Industry has since certified the album 9 × Platinum for its accumulated sales of over 2 @.@ 8 million units in the UK and this album sold 20 million worldwide . The album spawned the hit singles " In My Place " , " The Scientist " , and " Clocks " . " God Put a Smile upon Your Face " was also released , but was significantly less successful . 
 A Rush of Blood to the Head has been critically acclaimed , and the band won the 2003 Grammy for Best Alternative Album for the second year in a row , and the 2004 Grammy for Record of the Year for the song " Clocks " . In 2012 it was ranked number 466 on Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . It was also voted the best album of all time by the listeners of BBC Radio 2 in a poll conducted in 2013 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The band started recording the album in London a week after the September 11 attacks in the United States , during which their " poignant songs ... garnered larger audiences " . Coldplay had never stayed in London for an extended period before and were bombarded by problems focusing on the production process . They decided to relocate to Liverpool , where they had recorded some of the songs on Parachutes . Vocalist Chris Martin said that once there they " became obsessed with recording " . " In My Place " was the first song recorded for the album and the one that the band released as the album 's lead single " because it was the song that made us want to do a second album . It kept us going and made us think we could still write songs " , following " a strange period of not really knowing what we were doing " three months after the success of Parachutes . 
 The band wrote more than 20 songs for the album and some of those new tracks , including " In My Place " and " Animals " , were performed live during the tours promoting Parachutes . The album 's title was revealed through a post on the band 's official website . 
 During initial recording sessions in Liverpool , vocalist Chris Martin and guitarist Jonny Buckland worked alone , and only on weekends . Each Monday , they would present the song ideas that they had developed to their bandmates . With A Rush of Blood to the Head nearly completed , Martin went into the studio late one night and wrote a piano riff that he has stated " just came out " . The band recognised that this early version of the song , that would become " Clocks " , was special the first time Martin played it to them . Reasoning that it was too late to include the song on the album , they recorded a demo version and included it on a CD marked " Songs for # 3 " , featuring unfinished tracks they intended to work on for their third studio album . 
 By June 2002 , the band had completed A Rush of Blood to the Head , but thought their output sounded " rubbish " and reached an agreement with the label to postpone the release of the album until they were completely satisfied . Subsequently , many songs were discarded because they sounded like they could have been on Parachutes . Martin has claimed that it would have been uninteresting : " It would have shown that we 're happy to sit back on what we 'd done , and we 're not . For us , it was important to progress and try to improve upon our abilities as musicians . " Such ambitions put the band under strain : " sometimes practice sessions ended abruptly with one or more members of Coldplay threatening to quit " . 
 After headlining the 2002 Glastonbury Festival , Coldplay returned to the studio and worked on some tracks from the " Songs for # 3 " they had produced earlier . Phil Harvey , the band 's manager , heard " Clocks " and urged them to rework it immediately : " No , you must do that song now ' cause you 're going on [ in the lyrics ] about urgency , and you 're talking about keeping this song back . That doesn 't make sense . " 
 = = = Cover art = = = 
 The album cover for A Rush of Blood to the Head was designed by photographer Sølve Sundsbø . Sundsbø had been hired by fashion magazine Dazed & Confused in the late 1990s to produce something with a " technological feel , something all white " . As an artist , he tried to do " stuff that hasn 't been done before , which is virtually impossible " ; he suggested taking shots using a three @-@ dimensional scanning machine . 
 The model for the shot wore an all @-@ white makeup because it produces the " best results " ; for the image , the model wore a twill @-@ coloured cape . The computer could not read the colours so it was replaced with spikes , and the head in the image was chopped because the machine only scanned 30 centimetres . The editor of the magazine liked the image and eventually featured it in one of their publications . Martin saw the image in the magazine and approached Sundsbø for permission to use the image as the cover of A Rush of Blood to the Head . For the album 's singles , Martin asked Sundsbø what he could do ; the latter suggested scanning the head of each member of the band ( Sundsbø also did artwork duties for the Live 2003 home video ) . 
 The booklet contains only two photos ; One with Coldplay in a location that was rumoured to be a forest , and one with the same band in the studio . The album cover was among the ten chosen by the Royal Mail for a set of " Classic Album Cover " postage stamps issued in January 2010 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Recording the album after 11 September attacks gave the band a fresh perspective : " The new songs are reflective of new attitudes . [ They tell listeners ] not to be frightened . Anybody can achieve whatever they want to . " Most of the song lyrics are about urgency . Martin has commented that previous songs were more relaxed since they were in a comfortable state of mind : " Perhaps there 's a bit more urgency on some of these songs . And that 's born from all the places we 've been and the things we 've experienced . " Martin has explained , in relation to the theme of urgency , that the album 's title means " doing something on impulse " . Several songs on the album are about relationships . These tracks are based on reality , but according to Martin , they were written with a fictional twist : " Songs are like fairy tales : they have a beginning and an end and you can make it all work perfectly . Real life doesn 't work like that " . 
 The album includes ballads and acoustic songs featuring extensive use of guitar and piano . The U2 @-@ esque " epic rock " of the album 's opening track " Politik " , the piano @-@ driven " Clocks " , the loud guitars of " A Whisper " and the Crowded House @-@ inspired guitar in " Warning Sign " were seen as an extension of the band 's musical range . Chris Martin has stated that the album 's title track is an homage to American singer @-@ songwriter Johnny Cash , whom he considered one of " the greatest ... men with just guitars " . 
 The song " Green Eyes " was written by Chris Martin for two people : an " American friend " and bandmate , Jonny Buckland . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Upon release , A Rush of Blood to the Head received universal acclaim from contemporary critics . Review aggregating website Metacritic reports a normalised score of 80 % based on 25 reviews . Many felt that it built upon their previous album , Parachutes . Alexis Petridis of the newspaper The Guardian wrote that the band 's " new assurance is everywhere ... the timidity of Parachutes is nowhere to be found " . He concludes , " It sounds like an album ready to take on the world , and win . " 
 Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times praised the album , commenting that it is " one of the year 's best albums " and describing it as " sparser , stranger and even catchier than its predecessor " . Rolling Stone magazine 's Rob Sheffield , said that " A Rush of Blood to the Head is a <unk> , edgier , thoroughly surprising album " , adding , " where Parachutes was the clumsy diary of a high @-@ strung kid , A Rush of Blood sounds more like a band with the confidence to test its own limits . " Ted Kessler of NME lauded the album , calling it " an album of outstanding natural beauty , an organic , wholesome work . " MacKenzie Wilson of AllMusic echoed the above comments , saying that it is a " strong album " . Wilson , who compliments Martin for his " sharpened " falsetto and refined " haunting delivery " and Buckland for his " riveting guitar work " , notes that " regardless of the band still being in their mid @-@ twenties , they 've made an amazing record " . Emma Pearse of the American newspaper The Village Voice has the same sentiments , stating that it is " a little edgier , <unk> , and more conversational " compared to Parachutes . Robert Christgau gave the album a one @-@ star honourable mention ( ) and quipped , " Let Green Eyes dump him for real and we 'll see how long he hums in the void . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 A Rush of Blood to the Head made an entrance into the UK Albums Chart upon its debut week , entering at number 1 and moving 273 @,@ 924 copies . The British Phonographic Industry has since certified the album eight times platinum for its accumulated sales of over 2 @.@ 4 million copies . With the subsequent release of " Clocks " and " The Scientist " , the album spent over one year on the chart . A Rush of Blood to the Head has been placed at number seven on the list of United Kingdom 's 20 biggest @-@ selling albums of the 21st century , published by the British trade paper Music Week . In July 2011 , A Rush of Blood to the Head climbed from No. 176 back to No. 44 in the album 's 250th charting week there . As of May 2014 , the album had sold 2 @,@ 875 @,@ 980 copies in the UK , making it Coldplay 's best @-@ selling album . As of March 2015 , it is the tenth best @-@ selling album of the 21st century . 
 In the United States , A Rush of Blood was Coldplay 's first venture into the top 5 with 144 @,@ 000 copies sold initially , stronger than its predecessor , Parachutes , which debuted at number 189 in December 2000 . It has since been certified four times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America , and it has sold sales 4 @,@ 925 @,@ 000 copies as of July 2014 . It has been certified seven times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association , having accumulated shipments of over 490 @,@ 000 units , and four times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for shipments of over 400 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
