 A Rush of Blood to the Head has earned the band several awards from both the domestic and international music press . In 2002 it was awarded Best Album at the Q Awards . In the same year , the band won two Grammy Awards : Best Alternative Music Album and Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal for the song " In My Place " . In 2003 A Rush of Blood to the Head won Best British Album at the BRIT Awards , and the following year the band earned their first Grammy Award for Record of the Year for the song " Clocks " for a total of 3 Grammys for this album . The band won 3 <unk> at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Group Video , Breakthrough Video and Best Direction in a Video for " The Scientist " and its music video on YouTube has over 90 million views . The same year , they won the awards best NME album of the year , and best album of the year at the NME awards . 
 The album was chosen in 2002 as Billboard magazine 's Critics ' Choice . Kludge included it on their list of best albums of 2002 . In 2012 , it was ranked number 466 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . It was also ranked 21st on Rolling Stone 's list of top 100 albums of the 2000s . In 2007 The National Association of Recording Merchandisers and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame released a list of what they term " The Definitive 200 Albums of All Time " ; A Rush of Blood to the Head ranks at number 65 on the list . The album was nominated for the BRITs Album of 30 Years at the 2010 BRIT Awards . 
 In a BBC Radio poll in 2013 , the album topped the list ahead of Hopes and Fears by Keane , Rio by Duran Duran and The Dark Side of the Moon by Pink Floyd . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Chris Martin , Jonny Buckland , Guy Berryman , and Will Champion . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = John Whittle = 
 John Woods Whittle , VC , DCM ( 3 August 1882 – 2 March 1946 ) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and British Commonwealth armed forces . Whittle was serving as a sergeant in the First World War when he was decorated with the Victoria Cross following two separate actions against German forces during their retreat to the Hindenburg Line in 1917 . In the latter action , he attacked a machine gun crew , killing the group and seizing the gun . 
 Born in Tasmania , Whittle completed twelve months active service during the Second Boer War , before returning to Australia and enlisting in the Royal Navy where he served for five years as a stoker . Re @-@ enlisting in the army , he was posted to the Army Service Corps , artillery , and Tasmanian Rifle Regiment prior to the outbreak of the First World War . Transferring to the Australian Imperial Force in 1915 , Whittle joined the 12th Battalion in Egypt and embarked for the Western Front the following year . During an attack on the village of La Barque , Whittle rushed a German trench and forced the men from the position ; he was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal as a result . 
 Wounded three times during the war , Whittle was the subject of two courts @-@ martial due to his unruly behaviour . In October 1918 , he returned to Australia at the invitation of the Prime Minister of Australia to assist in recruitment . Discharged from the military in December 1918 , he later moved to Sydney . In 1934 , Whittle was presented with a Certificate of Merit after saving a drowning boy . He died in 1946 at the age of 63 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Whittle was born on 2 August 1882 at Huon Island , Tasmania , to Henry Whittle , a labourer , and his wife Catherine ( née Sullivan ) . He grew up in Hobart , and was living there when he enlisted as a private in the 4th Tasmanian ( 2nd Imperial Bushman ) Contingent during 1899 , for service in the Second Boer War . The unit embarked for South Africa on 27 March 1901 , and arrived four weeks later . The contingent spent the following twelve months on active duty , which included action in the Cape Colony , before returning to Australia on 25 June 1902 . 
 Soon after his return to Australia , Whittle enlisted in the Royal Navy as a stoker . He spent five years as a sailor , during which time he was attached to various ships on the Australia Station , including HMS Challenger and HMAS Pioneer . Discharged from the navy in 1907 , Whittle joined the Australian Army and was posted to the Army Service Corps ; he was to serve in this position for three and a half years . During this time , Whittle married Emily Margaret Roland in a Catholic ceremony at the archbishop 's house , Hobart , on 23 July 1909 . 
 Following his marriage , Whittle transferred briefly to the artillery , serving with the 31st Battery , Australian Field Artillery . He was then posted to the Tasmanian Rifle Regiment , and remained with this unit until the outbreak of the First World War . 
 = = First World War = = 
 = = = Early war service = = = 
 On 6 August 1915 , Whittle transferred to the Australian Imperial Force in order to see active service overseas during the war . Allotted as a reinforcement to the 26th Battalion as a private , he embarked from Melbourne on 27 October aboard HMAT Ulysses bound for Egypt . Appointed acting corporal soon after arrival , he was reallocated to the 12th Battalion with the rank of private on 1 March 1916 , following a period of divisional reorganisation and expansion to the Australian forces which were now stationed in Egypt . Whittle was promoted to the substantive rank of corporal two weeks later . 
 Embarking for the Western Front , the 12th Battalion joined the British Expeditionary Force upon arrival in France on 7 April 1916 . Eight days later , Whittle was promoted to lance sergeant . Posted to the Fleurbaix sector of France , the 12th Battalion was engaged in minor operations until July . During this time , Whittle was wounded on 18 June , suffering a gunshot wound to his right arm . Initially admitted to the 3rd Field Ambulance , the injury necessitated treatment in England and Whittle was transferred to the 1st Auxiliary Hospital , Harefield . He rejoined the 12th Battalion on 16 September following recuperation . 
 Following its involvement at Pozières from July to September 1916 , the 12th Battalion moved to the Ypres sector in Belgium , where Whittle was promoted to sergeant on 14 October . In late November , Whittle was admitted to hospital suffering from an illness ; on 18 December , he rejoined his unit , which had returned to action on the Somme . 
 During the German retreat to the Hindenburg Line , Whittle took part in the 12th Battalion 's attack on the villages of La Barque and Ligny @-@ <unk> as a member of Captain James Newland 's A Company on 26 – 27 February 1917 . At Bark Trench , a position on the north side of the centre of La Barque , the company encountered a German strongpoint and Newland was wounded . Rallying his men , Whittle rushed the post and started bombing the occupants with grenades . He then chased the Germans as they began to retreat down the trench line , before they were forced from the position . For his efforts during the assault , Whittle was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal , the recommendation of which cited his " ... conspicuous gallantry in the presence of the enemy " . The announcement of the award was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 26 April 1917 . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 By early April 1917 , three German @-@ held outpost villages remained between the area to the south of the I Anzac Corps position and the Hindenburg Line . An attack to capture the villages of Boursies , Demicourt and Hermies by the 1st Australian Division was formulated to commence on 9 April , the day the British offensive opened at Arras . For his gallantry in two separate actions during this engagement , Whittle was awarded the Victoria Cross . 
 On 8 April , the 12th Battalion was tasked with the capture of the village of Boursies . The attack was to act as a feint in order to mislead the German forces on the direction from which Hermies was to be assaulted . Whittle had been placed in command of the left platoon in Newland 's A Company for the attack , which commenced at 03 : 00 . Advancing , the company was subjected to heavy machine gun fire from a derelict mill approximately 400 metres ( 440 yd ) short of the village and began to suffer heavy casualties . Gathering a party of men , Newland led a bombing attack which was able to dislodge the Germans from the position and secure the area . Continuing their advance , the company was able to reach its objectives , where Whittle was placed in command of a post just beyond the mill . 
 Throughout the day , the Australians came under heavy shellfire from the Germans . At 22 : 00 , the German forces launched a severe counter @-@ attack against the mill under the cover of an intense barrage of artillery and bombs . Advancing down the main road , they managed to enter the trench Whittle was holding . Gathering all available men , Whittle charged the Germans and was able to <unk> the position . Newland arrived soon after , and the two men worked together until the position was re @-@ established . The 12th Battalion was relieved on 10 April by the 11th Battalion , having succeeded in capturing Boursies at the cost of 240 casualties , of which 70 were killed or missing . 
 Following a four @-@ day reprieve away from the frontline , the 12th Battalion relieved the 9th Battalion at Lagnicourt on 14 April . Around dawn the following day , the Germans launched a fierce counter @-@ attack against the 1st Australian Division 's line . Breaking through the Australian line , the Germans forced back the 12th Battalion 's D Company , which was to the left of Newland 's A Company . Soon surrounded and under attack on three sides , Newland withdrew the company to a sunken road which had been held by Captain Percy Cherry during the capture of the village three weeks earlier , and lined the depleted company out in a defensive position on both banks . Establishing his platoon in position , Whittle noticed a group of Germans moving a machine gun into position to enfilade the road . As the gunners began to set up the weapon , Whittle , under heavy rifle fire , jumped from the road and single @-@ handedly rushed the crew . Using his bombs , he succeeded in killing the entire group before collecting the gun and taking it back to A Company 's position . 
 As reinforcements from the 9th Battalion began to arrive , Newland was able to repulse a third attack by the Germans . <unk> the 9th and 12th Battalions , a combined counter @-@ attack was able to be launched and the line recaptured by approximately 11 : 00 . The 12th Battalion had suffered 125 casualties during the engagement , with 66 killed or missing . Whittle and Newland were both subsequently awarded a Victoria Cross for their actions that day ; the pair were the only two permanent members of the Australian military to receive the decoration during the war . 
 The full citation for Whittle 's Victoria Cross appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette on 8 June 1917 , reading : 
 War Office , 8th June , 1917 . 
 His Majesty the KING has been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officers , Non @-@ commissioned Officers and Men : — 
 No. <unk> Sjt . John Woods Whittle , Inf . Bn . , Aus . Imp . Force . 
 For conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty on two occasions . 
 When in command of a platoon the enemy , under cover of an intense artillery barrage , attacked the small trench he was holding . Owing to weight of numbers the enemy succeeded in entering the trench , and it was owing to Sjt . Whittle personally collecting all available men and charging the enemy that the position was regained . 
 On a second occasion when the enemy broke through the left of our line Sjt . Whittle 's own splendid example was the means of keeping the men well in hand . His platoon were suffering heavy casualties and the enemy endeavoured to bring up a machine gun to enfilade the position . <unk> the situation he rushed alone across the fire @-@ swept ground and attacked the hostile gun crew with bombs before the gun could be got into action . 
 He succeeded in killing the whole crew and in bringing back the machine gun to our position . 
 = = = Later war service = = = 
 In late April 1917 , Whittle spent three days in a field hospital receiving treatment for psoriasis , before embarking for England on attachment to a training battalion . Joining the unit on 6 May , he once again underwent an eight @-@ day furlough in a military hospital later in the month . During this time , Whittle attended an investiture ceremony in the forecourt of Buckingham Palace on 21 July , where he was decorated by King George V with his Victoria Cross and Distinguished Conduct Medal . 
 Re @-@ embarking for France on 25 August , Whittle rejoined the 12th Battalion which had subsequently moved to Belgium in preparation for another offensive at Ypres . On 1 October , he was the subject of a General Court Martial in the field , charged with two offences committed on 27 September : 1 . Drunkenness while on active service ; 2 . Conduct to the prejudice of good order and Military Discipline while on active service , in that when the commanding officer was addressing a parade he called out words to the effect of : " But we are good soldiers though " . He was found guilty of both offences , and sentenced to be reduced to the rank of corporal . Following four days detention during the trial , Whittle re @-@ joined the 12th Battalion on 8 October . 
 The 12th Battalion spent the next two months engaged in minor operations in Belgium , before once again transferring to the trenches in France during December . During this time , Whittle was re @-@ promoted to the rank of sergeant . With the commencement of the German Spring Offensive of 1918 , the 12th Battalion assisted in repulsing the assault in the months of March and April . While engaged in this operation , Whittle was wounded on 19 March and admitted to a field hospital suffering shrapnel wounds to his right hand . Recovering from the wound , he returned to the 12th Battalion in April . Later that month , Whittle was charged with conduct to the prejudice of good order and Military Discipline a second time for mutilating his pay book ; he was reprimanded by the battalion 's commanding officer as a result . 
 In June 1918 , Whittle was posted to the 2nd Army Central School for a five @-@ week stint . Returning to the 12th Battalion in mid @-@ July , Whittle was wounded in action for the third time ; suffering shrapnel wounds to his right elbow , he was admitted to the 3rd Australian Field Ambulance on 25 July . Evacuated to England , he was admitted to the Central Military Hospital , Eastbourne , before transferring to the 3rd Australian Auxiliary Hospital , Dartford , two weeks later . During this time , Billy Hughes , as Prime Minister of Australia , invited several of Australia 's Victoria Cross recipients of the war to return to Australia and assist in a recruiting drive ; Whittle was among a group of ten who accepted the offer . The party embarked aboard HMAT Medic on 24 August , bound for Melbourne . Arriving seven weeks later , Whittle returned to Tasmania and assisted with recruiting on the island during the last few weeks of the war . Following the Armistice , he was discharged from the Australian Imperial Force on 15 December 1918 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his discharge from the Australian Imperial Force , Whittle re @-@ settled in Hobart with his family . He briefly re @-@ enlisted in the 40th Battalion during 1921 , before moving to Sydney , New South Wales , where he gained employment as an inspector on the staff of an insurance company . Whittle later worked in several other jobs , including a period of service with Tooth 's Brewery in Sydney . On 11 November 1929 , he attended the New South Wales Dinner for recipients of the Victoria Cross in Sydney , before briefly re @-@ enlisting in the Australian Army once again the following year . 
 On 7 February 1934 , Whittle was walking through University Park when he was accosted by a small boy who said that his younger brother had fallen into the lake . Rushing to the area , Whittle dived into the weed @-@ choked lake and began searching for the boy . Finding him unconscious , Whittle brought the boy to the bank and applied artificial respiration for approximately half an hour ; the child later came around and was taken to hospital . Whittle left the scene and proceeded home in a taxi without leaving his name , but his identity was subsequently discovered and he was presented with a Certificate of Merit by the Royal Life Saving Society . Whittle himself was ill for a fortnight due to swallowing some of the foul water in the ornamental lake . 
 During the Second World War , Whittle 's son , Ivan Ernest , served as a private in the 2 / 33rd Australian Infantry Battalion . He was killed when the B @-@ 24 Liberator aircraft he was travelling in crashed into a marshalling yard at Port Moresby , New Guinea , on 7 September 1943 . At his home in Glebe on 2 March 1946 , John Whittle died of a cerebral haemorrhage at the age of 63 . Survived by his wife , a son and three daughters , he was buried in Rookwood Cemetery . 
 = Salamander = 
 Salamanders are a group of amphibians typically characterized by a lizard @-@ like appearance , with slender bodies , blunt snouts , short limbs projecting at right angles to the body , and the presence of a tail in both larvae and adults . All present @-@ day salamander families are grouped together under the scientific name Urodela . Salamander diversity is most abundant in the Northern Hemisphere and most species are found in the Holarctic ecozone , with some species present in the Neotropical zone . 
 Salamanders never have more than four toes on their front legs and five on their rear legs , but some species have fewer digits and others lack hind limbs . Their permeable skin usually makes them reliant on habitats in or near water or other cool , damp places . Some salamander species are fully aquatic throughout their lives , some take to the water intermittently , and others are entirely terrestrial as adults . Unique among vertebrates , they are capable of regenerating lost limbs , as well as other damaged parts of their bodies . Members of the family Salamandridae are mostly known as newts and lack the costal grooves along the sides of their bodies typical of other groups . The skin of some species contains the powerful poison tetrodotoxin and these salamanders tend to be slow @-@ moving and have bright warning coloration to advertise their toxicity . Salamanders typically lay eggs in water and have aquatic larvae , but great variation occurs in their lifecycles . In some species and some harsh environments , salamanders reproduce while still in the larval state . 
 In literature and legend , the salamander is associated with fire , being supposedly unharmed by the flames , while clothes made from its skins or ' wool ' were believed to be incombustible . More plausibly , salamanders were said to be intensely poisonous . Despite this , salamander brandy , a drink prepared by dunking live salamanders in fermenting fruit juices , is reputed to have hallucinogenic and aphrodisiac properties . The salamander 's ability to regenerate lost body parts is being investigated and research is ongoing into any applications this may have for human medicine . 
 = = Description = = 
 The skin lacks scales and is moist and smooth to the touch , except in newts of the Salamandridae , which may have velvety or warty skin , wet to the touch . The skin may be drab or brightly colored , exhibiting various patterns of stripes , bars , spots , blotches , or dots . Male newts become dramatically colored during the breeding season . Cave species dwelling in darkness lack pigmentation and have a translucent pink or pearlescent appearance . 
 Salamanders range in size from the minute salamanders , with a total length of 2 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) , including the tail , to the Chinese giant salamander which reaches 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) and weighs up to 65 kg ( 143 lb ) . Most , however , are between 10 and 20 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 and 7 @.@ 9 in ) in length . 
 = = = Trunk , limbs and tail = = = 
 An adult salamander generally resembles a small lizard , having a basal tetrapod body form with a cylindrical trunk , four limbs , and a long tail . Except in the family Salamandridae , the head , body , and tail have a number of vertical depressions in the surface which run from the mid @-@ dorsal region to the ventral area and are known as costal grooves . Their function seems to be to help keep the skin moist by channeling water over the surface of the body . 
 Some aquatic species , such as sirens and <unk> , have reduced or absent hind limbs , giving them an eel @-@ like appearance , but in most species , the front and rear limbs are about the same length and project sidewards , barely raising the trunk off the ground . The feet are broad with short digits , usually four on the front feet and five on the rear . Salamanders do not have claws , and the shape of the foot varies according to the animal 's habitat . Climbing species have elongated , square @-@ tipped toes , while rock @-@ dwellers have larger feet with short , blunt toes . The tree @-@ climbing salamander ( Bolitoglossa sp . ) has plate @-@ like webbed feet which adhere to smooth surfaces by suction , while the rock @-@ climbing <unk> species from California have feet with fleshy webs and short digits and use their tails as an extra limb . When ascending , the tail props up the rear of the body , while one hind foot moves forward and then swings to the other side to provide support as the other hind foot advances . 
 In larvae and aquatic salamanders , the tail is laterally flattened , has dorsal and ventral fins , and undulates from side to side to propel the animal through the water . In the families Ambystomatidae and Salamandridae , the male 's tail , which is larger than that of the female , is used during the amplexus embrace to propel the mating couple to a secluded location . In terrestrial species , the tail moves to counterbalance the animal as it runs , while in the arboreal salamander and other tree @-@ climbing species , it is prehensile . The tail is also used by certain plethodontid salamanders that can jump , to help launch themselves into the air . The tail is used in courtship and as a storage organ for proteins and lipids . It also functions as a defense against predation , when it may be lashed at the attacker or <unk> when grabbed . Unlike frogs , an adult salamander is able to regenerate limbs and its tail when these are lost . 
 = = = Skin = = = 
 The skin of salamanders , in common with other amphibians , is thin , permeable to water , serves as a respiratory membrane , and is well @-@ supplied with glands . It has highly cornified outer layers , renewed periodically through a skin shedding process controlled by hormones from the pituitary and thyroid glands . During moulting , the skin initially breaks around the mouth , and the animal moves forwards through the gap to shed the skin . When the front limbs have been worked clear , a series of body ripples pushes the skin towards the rear . The hind limbs are extracted and push the skin farther back , before it is eventually freed by friction as the salamander moves forward with the tail pressed against the ground . The animal often then eats the resulting sloughed skin . 
 <unk> in the skin discharge mucus which keeps the skin moist , an important factor in skin respiration and thermoregulation . The sticky layer helps protect against bacterial infections and molds , reduces friction when swimming , and makes the animal slippery and more difficult for predators to catch . <unk> glands scattered on the upper surface , particularly the head , back , and tail , produce repellent or toxic secretions . Some salamander toxins are particularly potent . The rough @-@ skinned newt ( Taricha granulosa ) produces the neurotoxin tetrodotoxin , the most toxic <unk> substance known . Handling the newts does no harm , but ingestion of even a minute fragment of skin is deadly . In feeding trials , fish , frogs , reptiles , birds , and mammals were all found to be susceptible . 
 Mature adults of some salamander species have " nuptial " glandular tissue in their cloacae , at the base of their tails , on their heads or under their chins . Some females release chemical substances , possibly from the ventral cloacal gland , to attract males , but males do not seem to use pheromones for this purpose . In some <unk> , males have conspicuous mental glands on the chin which are pressed against the females ' nostrils during the courtship ritual . They may function to speed up the mating process , reducing the risk of its being disrupted by a predator or rival male . The gland at the base of the tail in Plethodon cinereus is used to mark fecal pellets to proclaim territorial ownership . 
 = = = Senses = = = 
 Olfaction in salamanders plays a role in territory maintenance , the recognition of predators , and courtship rituals , but is probably secondary to sight during prey selection and feeding . Salamanders have two types of sensory areas that respond to the chemistry of the environment . Olfactory epithelium in the nasal cavity picks up airborne and aquatic odors , while adjoining vomeronasal organs detect nonvolatile chemical cues , such as tastes in the mouth . In <unk> , the sensory epithelium of the vomeronasal organs extends to the <unk> grooves , which stretch from the nostrils to the corners of the mouth . These extended areas seem to be associated with the identification of prey items , the recognition of conspecifics , and the identification of individuals . 
 The eyes of most salamanders are adapted primarily for vision at night . In some permanently aquatic species , they are reduced in size and have a simplified retinal structure , and in cave dwellers such as the Georgia blind salamander , they are absent or covered with a layer of skin . In amphibious species , the eyes are a compromise and are nearsighted in air and farsighted in water . Fully terrestrial species such as the fire salamander have a flatter lens which can focus over a much wider range of distances . To find their prey , salamanders use trichromatic color vision extending into the ultraviolet range , based on three photoreceptor types that are maximally sensitive around 450 , 500 , and 570 nm . The larvae , and the adults of some highly aquatic species , also have a lateral line organ , similar to that of fish , which can detect changes in water pressure . 
 All salamanders lack middle ear cavity , eardrum and <unk> tube , but have an opercularis system like frogs , and are still able to detect airborne sound . The opercularis system consists of two ossicles : the columella ( equivalent to the stapes of higher vertebrates ) which is fused to the skull , and the operculum . An opercularis muscle connects the latter to the pectoral girdle , and is kept under tension when the animal is alert . The system seems able to detect low @-@ frequency vibrations ( 500 – 600 Hz ) which may be picked up from the ground by the fore limbs and transmitted to the inner ear . These may serve to warn the animal of an approaching predator . 
 Salamanders are usually considered to have no voice and do not use sound for communication in the way frogs do ; however , some species can make quiet ticking or popping noises , perhaps by the opening and closing of valves in the nose . The California giant salamander can produce a bark or rattle , and a few species can squeak by contracting muscles in the throat . The arboreal salamander can squeak using a different mechanism ; it retracts its eyes into its head , forcing air out of its mouth . The <unk> salamander occasionally makes a hissing sound , while the sirens sometimes produce quiet clicks , and can resort to faint shrieks if attacked . Vocalization in salamanders has been little studied and the purpose of these sounds is presumed to be the startling of predators . 
 = = = Respiration = = = 
 Respiration differs among the different species of salamanders , and can involve gills , lungs , skin , and the membranes of mouth and throat . Larval salamanders breathe primarily by means of gills , which are usually external and feathery in appearance . Water is drawn in through the mouth and flows out through the gill slits . Some neotenic species such as the <unk> ( Necturus maculosus ) retain their gills throughout their lives , but most species lose them at metamorphosis . The embryos of some terrestrial lungless salamanders , such as Ensatina , that undergo direct development , have large gills that lie close to the egg 's surface . 
 When present in adult salamanders , lungs vary greatly among different species in size and structure . In aquatic , cold @-@ water species like the southern torrent salamander ( <unk> variegatus ) , the lungs are very small with smooth walls , while species living in warm water with little dissolved oxygen , such as the lesser siren ( Siren intermedia ) , have large lungs with convoluted surfaces . In the terrestrial lungless salamanders ( family Plethodontidae ) , no lungs or gills are present , and gas exchange mostly takes place through the skin , supplemented by the tissues lining the mouth . To facilitate this , these salamanders have a dense network of blood vessels just under the skin and in the mouth . 
 In the <unk> , metamorphosis is incomplete , and they retain one pair of gill slits as adults , with fully functioning internal gills . Some species that lack lungs respire through gills . In most cases , these are external gills , visible as tufts on either side of the head . Some terrestrial salamanders have lungs used in respiration , although these are simple and sac @-@ like , unlike the more complex organs found in mammals . Many species , such as the olm , have both lungs and gills as adults . 
 = = Feeding and diet = = 
 Salamanders are opportunistic predators . They are generally not restricted to specific foods , but feed on almost any organism of a reasonable size . Large species such as the Japanese giant salamander ( Andrias japonicus ) eat crabs , fish , small mammals , amphibians , and aquatic insects . In a study of smaller dusky salamanders ( Desmognathus ) in the Appalachian Mountains , their diet included earthworms , flies , beetles , beetle larvae , leafhoppers , springtails , moths , spiders , grasshoppers , and mites . Cannibalism sometimes takes place , especially when resources are short or time is limited . Tiger salamander tadpoles in ephemeral pools sometimes resort to eating each other , and are seemingly able to target unrelated individuals . Adult blackbelly salamanders ( Desmognathus <unk> ) prey on adults and young of other species of salamanders , while their larvae sometimes cannibalise smaller larvae . 
 Most species of salamander have small teeth in both their upper and lower jaws . Unlike frogs , even the larvae of salamanders possess these teeth . Although larval teeth are shaped like pointed cones , the teeth of adults are adapted to enable them to readily grasp prey . The crown , which has two cusps ( bicuspid ) , is attached to a pedicel by collagenous fibers . The joint formed between the bicuspid and the pedicel is partially flexible , as it can bend inward , but not outward . When struggling prey is advanced into the salamander 's mouth , the teeth tips relax and bend in the same direction , encouraging movement toward the throat , and resisting the prey 's escape . Many salamanders have patches of teeth attached to the vomer and the palatine bones in the roof of the mouth , and these help to retain prey . All types of teeth are resorbed and replaced at intervals throughout the animal 's life . 
 A terrestrial salamander catches its prey by flicking out its sticky tongue in an action that takes less than half a second . In some species , the tongue is attached anteriorly to the floor of the mouth , while in others , it is mounted on a pedicel . It is rendered sticky by secretions of mucus from glands in its tip and on the roof of the mouth . High @-@ speed cinematography shows how the tiger salamander ( Ambystoma tigrinum ) positions itself with its snout close to its prey . Its mouth then gapes widely , the lower jaw remains stationary , and the tongue bulges and changes shape as it shoots forward . The protruded tongue has a central depression , and the rim of this collapses inward as the target is struck , trapping the prey in a mucus @-@ laden trough . Here it is held while the animal 's neck is flexed , the tongue retracted and jaws closed . Large or resistant prey is retained by the teeth while repeated protrusions and retractions of the tongue draw it in . Swallowing involves alternate contraction and relaxation of muscles in the throat , assisted by depression of the eyeballs into the roof of the mouth . Many lungless salamanders of the family Plethodontidae have more elaborate feeding methods . Muscles surrounding the hyoid bone contract to store elastic energy in springy connective tissue , and actually " shoot " the hyoid bone out of the mouth , thus elongating the tongue . Muscles that originate in the pelvic region and insert in the tongue are used to reel the tongue and the hyoid back to their original positions . 
 An aquatic salamander lacks muscles in the tongue , and captures its prey in an entirely different manner . It grabs the food item , grasps it with its teeth , and adopts a kind of inertial feeding . This involves tossing its head about , drawing water sharply in and out of its mouth , and snapping its jaws , all of which tend to tear and macerate the prey , which is then swallowed . 
 Though frequently feeding on slow @-@ moving animals like snails , shrimps and worms , <unk> are unique among salamanders for having developed <unk> towards herbivory , such as beak @-@ like jaw ends and extensive intestines . They feed on algae and other soft @-@ plants in the wild , and easily eat offered lettuce . 
 = = Defense = = 
 Salamanders have thin skins and soft bodies , and move rather slowly , and at first sight might appear to be vulnerable to opportunistic predation . However , they have several effective lines of defense . <unk> coating on damp skin makes them difficult to grasp , and the slimy coating may have an offensive taste or be toxic . When attacked by a predator , a salamander may position itself to make the main poison glands face the aggressor . Often , these are on the tail , which may be waggled or turned up and arched over the animal 's back . The sacrifice of the tail may be a worthwhile strategy , if the salamander escapes with its life and the predator learns to avoid that species of salamander in future . 
 = = = Aposematism = = = 
 Skin secretions of the tiger salamander ( Ambystoma tigrinum ) fed to rats have been shown to produce aversion to the flavor , and the rats avoided the presentational medium when it was offered to them again . The fire salamander ( Salamandra <unk> ) has a ridge of large granular glands down its spine which are able to squirt a fine jet of toxic fluid at its attacker . By angling its body appropriately , it can accurately direct the spray for a distance of up to 80 cm ( 31 in ) . 
 The Iberian ribbed newt ( <unk> <unk> ) has another method of deterring aggressors . Its skin exudes a poisonous , viscous fluid and at the same time , the newt rotates its sharply pointed ribs through an angle between 27 and 92 ° , and adopts an inflated posture . This action causes the ribs to puncture the body wall , each rib protruding through an orange wart arranged in a lateral row . This may provide an aposematic signal that makes the spines more visible . When the danger has passed , the ribs retract and the skin heals . 
 = = = Camouflage and mimicry = = = 
 Although many salamanders have cryptic colors so as to be unnoticeable , others signal their toxicity by their vivid coloring . Yellow , orange , and red are the colors generally used , often with black for greater contrast . Sometimes , the animal postures if attacked , revealing a flash of warning hue on its underside . The red <unk> , the brightly colored terrestrial juvenile form of the eastern newt ( Notophthalmus viridescens ) , is highly poisonous . It is avoided by birds and snakes , and can survive for up to 30 minutes after being swallowed ( later being regurgitated ) . The red salamander ( <unk> ruber ) is a palatable species with a similar coloring to the red <unk> . Predators that previously fed on it have been shown to avoid it after encountering red <unk> , an example of Batesian mimicry . Other species exhibit similar mimicry . In California , the palatable yellow @-@ eyed salamander ( Ensatina <unk> ) closely resembles the toxic California newt ( Taricha <unk> ) and the rough @-@ skinned newt ( Taricha granulosa ) , whereas in other parts of its range , it is cryptically colored . A correlation exists between the toxicity of Californian salamander species and diurnal habits : relatively harmless species like the California slender salamander ( Batrachoseps attenuatus ) are nocturnal and are eaten by snakes , while the California newt has many large poison glands in its skin , is diurnal , and is avoided by snakes . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Some salamander species use tail autotomy to escape predators . The tail drops off and wriggles around for a while after an attack , and the salamander either runs away or stays still enough not to be noticed while the predator is distracted . The tail regrows with time , and salamanders routinely regenerate other complex tissues , including the lens or retina of the eye . Within only a few weeks of losing a piece of a limb , a salamander perfectly reforms the missing structure . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Salamanders split off from the other amphibians during the mid- to late Permian , and initially were similar to modern members of the Cryptobranchoidea . Their resemblance to lizards is the result of <unk> , their common retention of the primitive tetrapod body plan , and they are no more closely related to lizards than they are to mammals . Their nearest relatives are the frogs and toads , within Batrachia . The earliest known salamander fossils have been found in geological deposits in China and Kazakhstan , dated to the middle Jurassic period around 164 million years ago . 
 Salamanders are found only in the Holarctic and Neotropical regions , not reaching south of the Mediterranean Basin , the Himalayas , or in South America the Amazon Basin . They do not extend north of the Arctic tree line , with the northernmost Asian species , <unk> <unk> occurring in the Siberian larch forests of Sakha and the most northerly species in North America , Ambystoma laterale , reaching no farther north than Labrador and Taricha granulosa not beyond the Alaska Panhandle . They had an exclusively Laurasian distribution until Bolitoglossa invaded South America from Central America , probably by the start of the Early Miocene , about 23 million years ago . They also lived on the Caribbean Islands during the early Miocene epoch , confirmed by the discovery of <unk> <unk> , found trapped in amber in the Dominican Republic . However , possible salamander fossils have been found on the Australian sites of Riversleigh and <unk> . 
 There are about 655 living species of salamander . One @-@ third of the known salamander species are found in North America . The highest concentration of these is found in the Appalachian Mountains region , where the Plethodontidae are thought to have originated in mountain streams . Here , vegetation zones and proximity to water are of greater importance than altitude . Only species that adopted a more terrestrial mode of life have been able to disperse to other localities . The northern slimy salamander ( Plethodon glutinosus ) has a wide range and occupies a habitat similar to that of the southern gray @-@ cheeked salamander ( Plethodon <unk> ) . The latter is restricted to the slightly cooler and wetter conditions in north @-@ facing cove forests in the southern Appalachians , and to higher elevations above 900 m ( 3 @,@ 000 ft ) while the former is more adaptable , and would be perfectly able to inhabit these locations , but some unknown factor seems to prevent the two species from co @-@ existing . 
 = = Reproduction and development = = 
 Salamanders are not vocal and in most species the sexes look alike , so they use olfactory and tactile cues to identify potential mates , and sexual selection does occur . Pheromones play an important part in the process and may be produced by the abdominal gland in males and by the cloacal glands and skin in both sexes . Males are sometimes to be seen investigating potential mates with their snouts . In Old World newts , Triturus spp . , the males are sexually dimorphic and display in front of the females . Visual cues are also thought to be important in some <unk> species . 
 In about 90 % of all species , fertilisation is internal . The male typically deposits a spermatophore on the ground or in the water according to species , and the female picks this up with her vent . The spermatophore has a packet of sperm supported on a conical gelatinous base , and often an elaborate courtship behavior is involved in its deposition and collection . Once inside the cloaca , the spermatozoa move to the spermatheca , one or more chambers in the roof of the cloaca , where they are stored for sometimes lengthy periods until the eggs are laid . In the most primitive salamanders such as the Asiatic salamanders and the giant salamanders , external fertilization occurs , instead . In these species , the male releases sperm onto the egg mass in a reproductive process similar to that of typical frogs . 
 Three different types of egg deposition occur . Ambystoma and Taricha spp. spawn large numbers of small eggs in quiet ponds where many large predators are unlikely . Most dusky salamanders ( Desmognathus ) and Pacific giant salamanders ( Dicamptodon ) lay smaller batches of medium @-@ sized eggs in a concealed site in flowing water , and these are usually guarded by an adult , normally the female . Many of the tropical climbing salamanders ( Bolitoglossa ) and lungless salamanders ( <unk> ) lay a small number of large eggs on land in a well @-@ hidden spot , where they are also guarded by the mother . Some species such as the fire salamanders ( Salamandra ) are ovoviviparous , with the female retaining the eggs inside her body until they hatch , either into larvae to be deposited in a water body , or into fully formed juveniles . 
 In temperate regions , reproduction is usually seasonal and salamanders may migrate to breeding grounds . Males usually arrive first and in some instances set up territories . Typically , a larval stage follows in which the organism is fully aquatic . The tadpole has three pairs of external gills , no eyelids , a long body , a laterally flattened tail with dorsal and ventral fins and in some species limb @-@ buds or limbs . Pond @-@ type larvae may have a pair of rod @-@ like balancers on either side of the head , long gill filaments and broad fins . Stream @-@ type larvae are more slender with short gill filaments , narrower fins and no balancers , but instead have hind limbs already developed when they hatch . The tadpoles are carnivorous and the larval stage may last from days to years , depending on species . Sometimes this stage is completely bypassed , and the eggs of most lungless salamanders ( Plethodontidae ) develop directly into miniature versions of the adult without an intervening larval stage . 
 By the end of the larval stage , the tadpoles already have limbs and metamorphosis takes place normally . In salamanders , this occurs over a short period of time and involves the closing of the gill slits and the loss of structures such as gills and tail fins that are not required as adults . At the same time , eyelids develop , the mouth becomes wider , a tongue appears , and teeth are formed . The aqueous larva emerges onto land as a terrestrial adult . 
 Not all species of salamanders follow this path . Neoteny , also known as paedomorphosis , has been observed in all salamander families , and may be universally possible in all salamander species . In this state , an individual may retain gills or other juvenile features while attaining reproductive maturity . The changes that take place at metamorphosis are under the control of thyroid hormones and in obligate <unk> such as the axolotl ( Ambystoma mexicanum ) , the tissues are seemingly unresponsive to the hormones . In other species , the changes may not be triggered because of <unk> of the hypothalamus @-@ pituitary @-@ thyroid mechanism which may occur when conditions in the terrestrial environment are too inhospitable . This may be due to cold or wildly fluctuating temperatures , aridity , lack of food , lack of cover , or insufficient iodine for the formation of thyroid hormones . Genetics may also play a part . The larvae of tiger salamanders ( Ambystoma tigrinum ) , for example , develop limbs soon after hatching and in seasonal pools promptly undergo metamorphosis . Other larvae , especially in permanent pools and warmer climates , may not undergo metamorphosis until fully adult in size . Other populations in colder climates may not metamorphose at all , and become sexually mature while in their larval forms . Neoteny allows the species to survive even when the terrestrial environment is too harsh for the adults to thrive on land . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 A general decline in living amphibian species has been linked with the fungal disease chytridiomycosis . A higher proportion of salamander species than of frogs or caecilians are in one of the at @-@ risk categories established by the IUCN . Salamanders showed a significant diminution in numbers in the last few decades of the 20th century , although no direct link between the fungus and the population decline has yet been found . The IUCN made further efforts in 2005 as they established the Amphibian Conservation Action Plan ( <unk> ) , which was subsequently followed by Amphibian Ark ( <unk> ) , Amphibian Specialist Group ( ASG ) , and finally the umbrella organization known as the Amphibian Survival Alliance ( ASA ) . Researchers also cite deforestation , resulting in fragmentation of suitable habitats , and climate change as possible contributory factors . Species such as <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> that had been abundant in the cloud forests of Guatemala and Mexico during the 1970s were found by 2009 to be rare . However , few data have been gathered on population sizes over the years , and by intensive surveying of historic and suitable new locations , it has been possible to locate individuals of other species such as <unk> townsendi , which had been thought to be extinct . Currently , the major lines of defense for the conservation of Salamanders includes both in situ and ex situ conservation <unk> are efforts in place for certain members of the Salamander family to be conserved under a conservation breeding program ( CBP ) but it is important to note that there should be research done ahead of time to determine if the Salamander species is actually going to value from the CBP , as researchers have noted that some species of amphibians completely fail in this environment . 
 Various conservation initiatives are being attempted around the world . The Chinese giant salamander , at 1 @.@ 8 m ( 6 ft ) the largest amphibian in the world , is critically endangered , as it is collected for food and for use in traditional Chinese medicine . An environmental education programme is being undertaken to encourage sustainable management of wild populations in the Qinling Mountains and captive breeding programmes have been set up . The hellbender is another large , long @-@ lived species with dwindling numbers and fewer juveniles reaching maturity than previously . Another alarming finding is the increase in abnormalities in up to 90 % of the hellbender population in the Spring River ( Arkansas ) watershed . Habitat loss , silting of streams , pollution and disease have all been implicated in the decline and a captive breeding programme at Saint Louis Zoo has been successfully established . Of the 20 species of minute salamanders ( <unk> spp . ) in Mexico , half are believed to have become extinct and most of the others are critically endangered . Specific reasons for the decline may include climate change , chytridiomycosis , or volcanic activity , but the main threat is habitat destruction as logging , agricultural activities , and human settlement reduce their often tiny , fragmented ranges . Survey work is being undertaken to assess the status of these salamanders , and to better understand the factors involved in their population declines , with a view to taking action . 
 Ambystoma mexicanum , an aquatic salamander , is a species protected under the Mexican UMA ( Unit for Management and conservation of wildlife ) as of April 1994 . However , there are a number of factors that work against their preservation and conservation methods . The most profound factors are that the waters in which they are endemic are severely polluted and that even if they were found in the wild again they would be fished up for either research or exotic animal sells on the black market . Another detrimental factor is that the axolotl lost their role as a top predator since the introduction of locally exotic species such as Nile tilapia and carp . Tilapia and carp directly compete with <unk> by consuming their eggs , larvae , and juveniles . Climate change has also immensely affected <unk> and their populations throughout the southern Mexico area . Due to its proximity to Mexico City , officials are currently working on programs at Lake Xochimilco to bring in tourism and educate the local population on the restoration of the natural habitat of these creatures . This proximity is a large factor that has impacted the survival of the axolotl , as the city has expanded to take over the Xochimilco region in order to make use of its resources for water and provision and sewage . However , the axolotl has the benefit of being raised in farms for the purpose of research facilities . So there is still a chance that they may be able to return to their natural habitat . The recent decline in population has substantially impacted genetic diversity among populations of axolotl , making it difficult to further progress scientifically . It is important to note that although there is a level of limited genetic diversity due to Ambystoma populations , such as the axolotl , being <unk> species , it does not account for the overall lack of diversity . There is evidence that points towards a historical bottlenecking of Ambystoma that contributes to the variation issues . Unfortunately , there is no large genetic pool for the species to pull from unlike in historical <unk> there is severe concern for inbreeding due to lack of gene flow . One way researchers are looking into maintaining genetic diversity within the population is via cryopreservation of the spermatophores from the male axolotl . It is a safe and non @-@ invasive method that requires the collection of the spermatophores and places them into a deep freeze for preservation . Most importantly , they have found that there in only limited damage done to the spermatophores upon thawing and thus it is a viable option . As of 2013 , it is a method that is being used to save not only the axolotl but also numerous other members of the salamander family . 
 Research is being done on the environmental cues that have to be replicated before captive animals can be persuaded to breed . Common species such as the tiger salamander and the <unk> are being given hormones to stimulate the production of sperm and eggs , and the role of arginine <unk> in courtship behaviour is being investigated . Another line of research is artificial insemination , either in vitro or by inserting spermatophores into the cloacae of females . The results of this research may be used in captive @-@ breeding programmes for endangered species . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Disagreement exists between different authorities as to the definition of the terms Caudata and Urodela . Some maintain that the Urodela should be restricted to the crown group , with the Caudata being used for the total group . Others restrict the name Caudata to the crown group and use Urodela for the total group . The former approach seems to be most widely adopted and is used in this article . 
 The 10 families belonging to the Urodela are divided into three suborders . The clade <unk> is often used to separate the Cryptobranchoidea and Salamandroidea from the <unk> . 
 = = Phylogeny and evolution = = 
 The origins and evolutionary relationships between the three main groups of amphibians ( <unk> , <unk> and anurans ) is a matter of debate . A 2005 molecular phylogeny , based on rDNA analysis , suggested that the first divergence between these three groups took place soon after they had branched from the lobe @-@ finned fish in the Devonian ( around 360 million years ago ) , and before the breakup of the supercontinent Pangaea . The briefness of this period , and the speed at which radiation took place , may help to account for the relative scarcity of amphibian fossils that appear to be closely related to lissamphibians . However , more recent studies have generally found more recent ( Late Carboniferous to Permian ) age for the basalmost divergence among lissamphibians . 
 The first known fossil salamanders are <unk> <unk> from the Middle Jurassic of Kyrgyzstan and two species of the apparently neotenic , aquatic <unk> from England of a similar date . They looked superficially like robust modern salamanders but lacked a number of anatomical features that developed later . <unk> <unk> from the Upper Jurassic of Kazakhstan resembled modern mole salamanders in morphology and probably had a similar burrowing lifestyle . 
 The Cryptobranchoidea ( primitive salamanders ) and the Salamandroidea , also known as <unk> , ( advanced salamanders ) are believed to be sister groups . Both seem to have appeared before the end of the Jurassic , the former being exemplified by <unk> <unk> , <unk> sinensis , <unk> paradoxus , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , and the latter by <unk> <unk> . By the Upper Cretaceous , most or all of the living salamander families had probably appeared . 
 Cladogram from Darren Naish . The position of the Sirenidae is disputed ; the position shown is considered by Naish to explain the data best . 
 = = In human society = = 
 = = = Myth and legend = = = 
 Legends have developed around the salamander over the centuries , many related to fire . This connection likely originates from the tendency of many salamanders to dwell inside rotting logs . When placed into a fire , the salamander would attempt to escape from the log , lending to the belief that salamanders were created from flames . The mythical ruler Prester John , supposedly had a robe made from salamander hair , the " Emperor of India " possessed a suit made from a thousand skins , Pope Alexander III had a tunic which he valued highly and William Caxton ( 1481 ) wrote : " This <unk> <unk> <unk> , of which is made cloth and <unk> that may not <unk> in the fyre . " The salamander was said to be so toxic that by twining around a tree , it could poison the fruit and so kill any who ate them and by falling into a well , could kill all who drank from it . 
 The association of the salamander with fire appeared first in Ancient Greece , where Pliny the Elder writes in his Natural History that " A salamander is so cold that it puts out fire on contact . It vomits from its mouth a milky liquid ; if this liquid touches any part of the human body it causes all the hair to fall off , and the skin to change color and break out in a rash . " The ability to put out fire is repeated by Saint Augustine in the fifth century and Isidore of Seville in the seventh century . 
 In Hermetic teachings , there are four orders of elements and each has a ruling elemental over it : 
 Spirits of Earth - Gnomes 
 Spirits of Air - <unk> 
 Spirits of Water - <unk> 
 Spirits of Fire - Salamanders 
 The Japanese giant salamander has been the subject of legend and artwork in Japan , in the ukiyo @-@ e work by Utagawa Kuniyoshi . The well @-@ known Japanese mythological creature known as the kappa may be inspired by this salamander . A newt plays a key role in Roald Dahl 's children 's book Matilda when , in the chapter ' The First Miracle ' , the eponymous heroine Matilda Wormwood slips a newt into the headmistress Miss <unk> 's water , and tips it over by telekinesis . 
 = = = Limb regeneration as applied to humans = = = 
 Salamanders ' limb regeneration has long been the focus of interest among scientists . Researchers have been trying to find out the conditions required for the growth of new limbs and hope that such regeneration could be replicated in humans using stem cells . <unk> have been used in research and have been genetically engineered so that a fluorescent protein is present in cells in the leg , enabling the cell division process to be tracked under the microscope . It seems that after the loss of a limb , cells draw together to form a clump known as a <unk> . This superficially appears undifferentiated , but cells that originated in the skin later develop into new skin , muscle cells into new muscle and cartilage cells into new cartilage . It is only the cells from just beneath the surface of the skin that are pluripotent and able to develop into any type of cell . Researchers from the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute have found that when macrophages were removed , salamanders lost their ability to regenerate and instead formed scar tissue . If the processes involved in forming new tissue can be reverse engineered into humans , it may be possible to heal injuries of the spinal cord or brain , repair damaged organs and reduce scarring and fibrosis after surgery . 
 = = = Salamander brandy = = = 
 A 1995 article in the Slovenian weekly magazine <unk> publicized Salamander brandy , a liquor supposedly indigenous to Slovenia . It was said to combine hallucinogenic with aphrodisiac effects and is made by putting several live salamanders in a barrel of fermenting fruit . Stimulated by the alcohol , they secrete toxic mucus in defense and eventually die . Besides causing hallucinations , the neurotoxins present in the brew were said to cause extreme sexual arousal . 
 Later research by Slovenian anthropologist <unk> <unk> ( University of Ljubljana ) paints a very different picture — Salamander in brandy appears to have been traditionally seen as an adulterant , one which caused ill health . It was also used as a term of slander . 
 = = = Regional lists = = = 
 California Salamanders 
 Salamanders of North Carolina 
 Salamanders of Texas 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Salamander Video 
 Salamander feeding movies in slow motion 
 Living Underworld salamander images 
 Caudata @-@ database : Images of newts and salamanders 
 = U.S. Route 11 in Maryland = 
 U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) is a part of the U.S. Highway System that runs from New Orleans , Louisiana to Rouses Point , New York . In Maryland , the federal highway runs 12 @.@ 83 miles ( 20 @.@ 65 km ) from the West Virginia state line at the Potomac River in Williamsport north to the Pennsylvania state line near Maugansville . US 11 is the primary north – south surface highway in central Washington County , connecting Hagerstown with Williamsport to the south and Hagerstown Regional Airport to the north . The federal highway was once a major long @-@ distance highway , but that role has been assumed by Interstate 81 ( I @-@ 81 ) , which parallels US 11 not only in Maryland but for most of its course from Tennessee to Upstate New York . US 11 is maintained by the Maryland State Highway Administration except for the municipally @-@ maintained portions within the corporate limits of Williamsport and Hagerstown . 
 US 11 is the descendant of a trail blazed through the Great Appalachian Valley in the 18th century . In the 19th century , this trail was upgraded to a pair of turnpikes , one from Williamsport to Hagerstown and the second from Hagerstown to the Pennsylvania state line . The highway was constructed in its modern form in the early 20th century , with the bridge across the Potomac River constructed in 1909 and the old turnpikes paved as all @-@ weather roads by the nascent Maryland State Roads Commission in the 1910s . These highways and the streets of Hagerstown and Williamsport were designated Maryland 's portion of US 11 in 1926 . The federal highway was improved outside of the towns in the years surrounding 1930 and again around 1950 . Since the completion of I @-@ 81 in two sections in the late 1950s and mid @-@ 1960s removed long @-@ distance traffic from the highway , US 11 has seen its two major relocations : one that removed the highway from downtown Hagerstown and another required by expansion at Hagerstown Regional Airport . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 11 begins at the West Virginia state line on the south bank of the Potomac River . The highway crosses the Potomac River on a two @-@ lane bridge just south of its confluence with Conococheague Creek . The bridge passes over Potomac Park and the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal National Historical Park . At the east end of the bridge , US 11 enters the town of Williamsport , where the highway is municipally @-@ maintained . The federal highway makes a turn to the north , then makes a sharp turn to the east onto Potomac Street adjacent to the Williamsport Visitor Center of the historical park . Within the Williamsport Historic District , US 11 intersects MD 68 ( Conococheague Street ) and MD 63 . MD 63 joins MD 68 in a concurrency on Conococheague Street to the south and US 11 on Potomac Street east to Artizan Street , where MD 63 heads north out of town . US 11 veers northeast and heads through a more suburban area of Williamsport . The federal highway leaves the town of Williamsport and becomes state @-@ maintained immediately before expanding to a four @-@ lane divided highway for its partial cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 81 ( Maryland Veterans Memorial Highway ) . 
 US 11 continues northeast as Virginia Avenue , a two @-@ lane highway through residential subdivisions . The federal highway passes close to the historic home Tammany and intersects Governor Lane Boulevard , which heads south through an industrial park . US 11 passes under I @-@ 70 with no access and enters the suburb of Halfway , where the highway crosses the Winchester and Western Railroad at @-@ grade and at an angle . The federal highway intersects both Massey Boulevard and Halfway Boulevard , which head northwest toward the Valley Mall . US 11 continues into the city of Hagerstown , where the highway becomes municipally @-@ maintained and enters an industrial area . The federal highway crosses Norfolk Southern Railway 's Hagerstown District rail line immediately before its intersection with Wilson Boulevard , which heads east . Virginia Avenue , the old alignment of US 11 , continues north toward downtown Hagerstown , passing through the South Prospect Street Historic District and passing by Hagerstown City Park , which contains the Hager House and the Washington County Museum of Fine Arts . 
 US 11 turns west onto Burhans Boulevard and immediately crosses over the Norfolk Southern rail line again . The federal highway curves to the north , paralleling the rail line , then crosses over the Winchester and Western rail line as its junction with the <unk> Southern line . US 11 continues north through a residential neighborhood before passing by the Hagerstown Roundhouse Museum and passing under CSX 's Lurgan Subdivision just east of its wye with the Norfolk Southern line . At the intersection with Elgin Boulevard and Lanvale Street , US 11 turns east to remain on Burhans Boulevard and starts to parallel the CSX rail line . The federal highway and railroad curve to the north , where the highway intersects US 40 on the opposite side of the tracks from downtown Hagerstown . US 40 consists of a one @-@ way pair , Washington Street eastbound and Franklin Street westbound . Between the two directions of US 40 , US 11 passes the historic Western Maryland Railway Station , which is now the headquarters of the Hagerstown Police Department . North of US 40 , US 11 intersects Salem Avenue , crosses Norfolk Southern Railway 's Lurgan Branch , and curves north away from CSX 's Hanover Subdivision , which turns to the east . Burhans Boulevard reaches its northern end at an oblique three @-@ way intersection with Pennsylvania Avenue . 
 US 11 continues north on Pennsylvania Avenue , passing North Hagerstown High School . State maintenance of the federal highway resumes and the highway 's name changes to Middleburg Pike at Haven Road just before the highway leaves the city of Hagerstown . US 11 continues north past residential subdivisions in the suburbs of Fountain Head and Orchard Hills . The federal highway passes a Volvo manufacturing plant and intersects Maugans Avenue , which heads west to Maugansville . North of the intersection with Showalter Road , US 11 adjoins the property of Hagerstown Regional Airport . The federal highway curves to the northeast and passes through a tunnel under the airport 's east – west runway . The federal highway curves back to the northwest through an industrial area before resuming its northward course to the Pennsylvania state line . US 11 enters Pennsylvania just south of the federal highway 's intersection with PA 163 ( Mason Dixon Road ) . 
 = = History = = 
 US 11 is the descendent of a trail blazed from Pennsylvania following the establishment of Evan Watkins 's ferry across the Potomac River at the mouth of Conococheague Creek in 1744 . This trail became part of the Great Wagon Road from Philadelphia south through the Great Appalachian Valley to Virginia and North Carolina . In the center of the Hagerstown Valley along the trail , German immigrant Jonathan Hager laid out his namesake town in 1762 . In the 19th century , the Hagerstown and Middleburg Turnpike was constructed between Hagerstown and Middleburg , a settlement on the Pennsylvania side of the state line . In <unk> the Williamsport and Hagerstown Turnpike was constructed between the town that sprung up at the Potomac River crossing and the county seat of Washington County . Starting in 1896 , the Hagerstown Railway Company of Washington County operated an interurban between Williamsport and Hagerstown adjacent to the turnpike . The streetcar suburb of Halfway developed along the turnpike and trolley line at the midpoint between the two municipalities . 
 The first portion of modern US 11 to be constructed was the bridge over the Potomac River at Williamsport , which was financed and constructed by Washington County and completed in 1909 . The new bridge , which became the only crossing between Cumberland and Washington , D.C. to survive the flood of March 1936 , charged tolls from a tollgate at the West Virginia end of the bridge . The Maryland State Roads Commission later purchased the bridge in 1954 and removed the tolls in 1958 . Both the Williamsport Pike and Middleburg Pike , their right @-@ of @-@ way now owned by the Maryland State Roads Commission , were paved by 1921 . Those highways as well as Potomac Street in the town of Williamsport and the streets connecting the two former turnpikes within the city of Hagerstown — Virginia Avenue , Jonathan Street , and Pennsylvania Avenue — were designated Maryland 's portion of US 11 in 1926 . 
 The first upgrades to US 11 occurred when Williamsport Pike and Middleburg Pike were rebuilt and widened in the late 1920s and early 1930s , respectively . Williamsport Pike was rebuilt again in 1948 , with the highway widened using the right @-@ of @-@ way of the Williamsport – Hagerstown interurban that had ceased service in 1947 . By 1950 , US 11 in Hagerstown followed a one @-@ way pair : the northbound direction followed Summit Avenue and Jonathan Street between Virginia Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue and the southbound direction used Prospect Street through the downtown area . The first relief from long @-@ distance traffic came to US 11 when the first section of I @-@ 81 was completed from US 40 to the Pennsylvania state line in 1958 . Following the completion of I @-@ 81 from US 40 south to the Potomac River in 1966 , US 11 became a highway mainly for local traffic . US 11 's bridge across the Potomac River was rebuilt in 1979 . In addition , the highway 's name south of Hagerstown was changed from Williamsport Pike to Virginia Avenue around 1995 . 
 Despite the construction of I @-@ 81 , another bypass of downtown Hagerstown , Burhans Boulevard , was constructed in the 1960s . Burhans Boulevard was named for Winslow F. Burhans , the mayor of Hagerstown from 1953 to 1965 who was instrumental in elevating the tracks of the Western Maryland Railway on the west side of downtown Hagerstown to eliminate a series of grade crossings . The boulevard was started in 1960 between Salem Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue . Construction was underway on the section between Virginia Avenue and Elgin Boulevard by 1962 . Both sections were completed by 1965 . Burhans Boulevard was completed around 1968 from Elgin Boulevard to Washington Street , from which the boulevard continued north paralleling the Western Maryland tracks along what had formerly been Foundry Street . At the southern end of Hagerstown , Burhans Boulevard , Virginia Avenue , and Wilson Boulevard were relocated to eliminate two grade crossings with the Norfolk Southern Railway tracks in 1983 . Burhans Boulevard remained a regular municipal street until US 11 was rerouted away from downtown Hagerstown around 1987 . 
 The other major relocation of US 11 occurred around Hagerstown Regional Airport . Due to the airport 's east – west runway being extended eastward , US 11 was relocated by Washington County in 1964 , resulting in a wide curve in what had been a straight highway . The portion of highway between Showalter Road and the Pennsylvania state line was subsequently county @-@ maintained until 1972 . Another extension of the east – west runway occurred between 2004 and 2007 . For this extension , US 11 was relocated to a tunnel underneath the extended runway along the curved alignment in 2006 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Washington County . 
 = Frances McConnell @-@ Mills = 
 Frances Mary McConnell @-@ Mills ( July 9 , 1900 – December 28 , 1975 ) was an American toxicologist . She was the first woman to be appointed Denver 's city toxicologist , the first female toxicologist in the Rocky Mountains , and probably the first female forensic pathologist in the United States . 
 McConnell was raised in Colorado and after studying chemistry she became a high school teacher . She later attended medical school at the University of Colorado Denver , graduating in 1925 . She specialized in the fields of toxicology and forensic pathology , which led her to testify in many high @-@ profile criminal cases throughout her career . In addition to working as Denver 's city toxicologist , she held positions in multiple hospitals and administrative boards . After battling lifelong health problems , including rheumatic heart disease and a leg amputation , McConnell died in 1975 . She was posthumously inducted into the Colorado Women 's Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McConnell @-@ Mills was born Frances Mary McConnell in 1900 in Monument , Colorado . Her father was a physician and a pharmacist , and often took Frances with him when he made house calls to patients . She was sent to live with her aunt and grandfather so that she could attend Colorado Springs High School ; she graduated at the age of 15 and was awarded a full scholarship to the University of Denver . She received a bachelor 's degree from the university in 1918 , aged 17 , and graduated again with a master 's degree in chemistry when she was 19 , making her the university 's youngest graduate with a master 's degree at the time . In 1919 , she began work as a teacher of chemistry , biology , geometry and trigonometry at Englewood High School . 
 McConnell applied to the University of Colorado School of Medicine in 1920 and was accepted . Although her father had previously paid for 17 men to attend medical school , he refused to pay for Frances ' tuition because he deemed medicine to be " too hard a life for a woman " . She therefore supported herself through medical school by working as a musician in local bars and theaters , as a tutor , and as a laboratory assistant . In November 1925 , she married David L. Mills , a lawyer , and gave birth to a daughter the year after . Although McConnell hyphenated her name to McConnell @-@ Mills , she continued to use her maiden name for her professional career to avoid drawing attention to her children . 
 = = Career = = 
 McConnell graduated from the University of Colorado as a Doctor of Medicine in 1925 and completed an internship at Denver General Hospital . She subsequently took on a position as a toxicologist in the coroner 's offices at the same hospital , making her the first female toxicologist in the Rocky Mountains area . She was appointed Denver 's city toxicologist in 1926 and became an assistant pathologist in 1927 , working alongside deputy coroner George Bostwick and city pathologist W. S. Dennis . Her appointment to city toxicologist made her the first woman to hold the position . 
 McConnell 's work mainly focused on poison and blood analysis , and she testified in many criminal cases as an expert witness . Her work often involved determining the cause of death when poisoning was suspected . In 1930 , she investigated the death of a ten @-@ year @-@ old Denver girl ; the case was referred to at the time as the city 's " most famous and controversial murder case " . Although she initially suspected the girl had been poisoned , McConnell discovered crushed glass in the girl 's stomach and blood stains in the family car ; her testimony led to the sentencing of the girl 's stepmother for murder . In 1936 , McConnell testified against suspected rapist and murderer Joe <unk> after finding fibers from the <unk> at the murder scene under the suspect 's fingernails . ( Although <unk> was convicted of murder and executed in 1939 , he was granted a posthumous pardon in 2011 . ) McConnell also discovered that murder victim Georg <unk> had been killed with a lethal dose of arsenic , which led to further investigations confirming that Anna Marie Hahn had killed <unk> , as well as other men in the same way . McConnell testified at Hahn 's trial in Cincinnati and Hahn was subsequently convicted and executed . After she was called to Raton , New Mexico as a key witness in a murder trial in 1935 , a court reporter for the Raton Range wrote that McConnell " has gained a national reputation ... in her blood analysis work " . Additionally , she is thought to be the United States ' first female forensic pathologist . Despite working on numerous high @-@ profile , widely publicized cases , McConnell kept her life as private as possible and only ever gave one interview during her career . 
 Outside of toxicology , McConnell did extensive laboratory work . In the 1930s and 1940s she undertook personal research into passive immunity and developed serums for scarlet fever , polio , the common cold and acne for use on family members . While working for otolaryngologist Harry Baum , she invented a hair rinse which Baum called " Noreen " that was produced until the 1990s . In 1941 , she was appointed director of the laboratory department of the Colorado State Board of Health , and she later founded Denver General Hospital 's School for Medical Technologists in order to train new workers , especially women . She enrolled in an advanced serology training program at the University of Michigan in 1941 and went on to study surgical pathology at the Cook County Hospital in Chicago in 1943 . Following her term at Cook County , she resigned from the Board of Health and accepted a role at St. Luke 's Hospital in Denver as a laboratory director and pathologist . She was forced to leave St. Luke 's in 1944 due to illness , and after recovering she returned to Denver General Hospital as its laboratory director . She continued to work on criminal cases between other jobs until 1948 . 
 In the 1950s , McConnell joined physician and public health activist Florence R. Sabin to create an examination on behalf of the Colorado State Board of Basic Sciences for granting licenses to applicants who wished to practice health science . McConnell was appointed to the Board in 1956 , making her the only female member at the time , and served until 1975 . 
 = = Health problems and death = = 
 McConnell battled with health problems throughout her life , after contracting rheumatic fever at the age of 20 which subsequently progressed to rheumatic heart disease . In 1944 she contracted appendicitis which required an emergency appendectomy ; she developed deep vein thrombosis in her right leg after the surgery and her leg was subsequently amputated above the knee . She was given a prosthetic leg which she named " Matilda " but later became wheelchair @-@ bound . 
 Following the death of her husband in 1967 , McConnell lived alone . She kept working until the last two weeks of her life , filling various roles on the Board of Basic Sciences , in an allergy practice , and as a consultant for the Denver Poison Center . She died in December 1975 in St. Luke 's Hospital , Denver , at the age of 75 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A year before her death , in December 1974 , McConnell received an award from the University of Colorado Medical School which recognized her as a 50 @-@ year graduate of the school and as one of only two Coloradoan women at the time who had practiced medicine for 50 years . 
 She was inducted into the Colorado Women 's Hall of Fame in 1996 . In 1999 , her daughter Jeanne <unk> published a book titled Women of Consequence : The Colorado Women 's Hall of Fame , which contains the biographies of McConnell and 58 other inductees of the Hall of Fame . The project began when <unk> set out to write a biography of her mother , but was urged by her editor to do the same for all 59 of the women in the Hall of Fame at the time , and compile them into a book . 
 = Highlanders ( rugby union ) = 
 The Highlanders ( known as the Pulse Energy Highlanders for sponsorship reasons and formerly known as the Otago Highlanders ) are a New Zealand professional rugby union team based in Dunedin that compete in Super Rugby . The team represents the North Otago , Otago and Southland unions . The Highlanders take their name from the Scottish immigrants that helped found the Otago , North Otago , and Southland regions in the 1840s and 1850s . Their main ground through the 2011 Super Rugby season was Carisbrook in Dunedin , with home games occasionally being played in Invercargill and Queenstown . The Highlanders moved into Carisbrook 's replacement , Forsyth Barr Stadium at University Plaza , for the 2012 season ; the stadium opened in time for the 2011 Rugby World Cup , but after the Super Rugby season . 
 The team was formed in 1996 to represent the lower South Island in the newly formed Super 12 competition . They finished the inaugural season eighth , and the following season finished last after winning only three of eleven matches . However , in the 1998 , 1999 and 2000 seasons they qualified for semi @-@ finals ; hosting the 1999 competition final against fellow South Island team the Crusaders . They lost the match 24 – 19 , and the following year were again knocked out by the Crusaders — this time in their semi @-@ final . In the following fifteen seasons they would only finish in the top four once more , in 2002 . But in 2015 , they were crowned Super Rugby champions . 
 Former Highlander , Anton Oliver has played a record 127 games for the Highlanders , and thirteen other players have played over 50 games for the team . The Highlanders ' highest career points scorer is Tony Brown with 857 points , and highest career try scorer is Jeff Wilson with 35 . They are currently coached by Jamie Joseph and are co @-@ captained by Shane Christie and Ben Smith . 
 = = History = = 
 The Highlanders ' franchise was created as one of five New Zealand teams in the Super 12 . Originally named the Otago Highlanders , the Highlanders ' franchise area encompassed the lower South Island of New Zealand , and was formed from the North Otago , Otago , and Southland provincial rugby unions . 
 The 1996 team was captained by John Leslie and coached by Gordon Hunter . Their first Super 12 match was against the Queensland Reds at Carisbrook on 3 March 1996 , whom they defeated 57 – 17 . After three matches the Highlanders were undefeated and leading the competition . However the following week at Loftus Versfeld Stadium in South Africa they were defeated 59 – 29 by Northern Transvaal . They only won two more games that season , against Natal at Carisbrook and against the Canterbury Crusaders at Lancaster Park , and they finished the season eighth on the table . 
 1997 was the least successful season ever for the Highlanders . They finished last in the competition , and managed only three wins . They were now coached by Glenn Ross and captained by Taine Randell . Their eight defeats that season included a 75 – 43 loss to Natal in Durban . The points scored by Natal included 50 points by Gavin Lawless – a competition record . Following their last place in the 1997 season , Tony Gilbert was appointed as coach . Their first game under his guidance was an upset 26 – 19 win over the Queensland Reds . The Highlanders eventually became the first New Zealand side to defeat all four South African teams in one season . After defeating the Bulls at Loftus Versfeld they needed the Queensland Reds not to defeat the Brumbies by a large margin . Queensland were defeated by the Brumbies 23 – 16 and the Highlanders finished fourth , thus qualifying for the semi @-@ finals . In the semi @-@ final , they faced defending champions the Auckland Blues at Eden Park . The Blues were leading 20 – 16 at halftime , and were leading 30 – 26 before a controversial try to Adrian Cashmore pushed the Blues to a 37 – 26 lead . <unk> <unk> had illegally taken out Highlander Stanley off the ball . 
 The following season in 1999 the Highlanders improved on their 1997 season record by reaching and hosting the tournament final . They opened their season with a 19 – 13 victory over the Auckland Blues at Carisbrook . This was followed by a victory over the Northern Bulls , the Stormers at Carisbrook , and the Cats , before their first loss of the season to the Sharks . They returned to New Zealand to defeat the Waikato Chiefs and then the Crusaders . After defeating the Reds , the Highlanders lost to the New South Wales Waratahs at Carisbrook . The next week they defeated the Brumbies at the same venue . In their next match , despite leading the Wellington Hurricanes 14 – 3 at half time , the Highlanders lost when Hurricanes half back Jason Spice scored in the corner to give the Hurricanes a 21 – 19 victory . Had the Highlanders won they would have finished top of the table and hosted a semi @-@ final at Carisbrook . Instead they then had to travel to South Africa where they defeated the Stormers 33 – 18 . The Highlanders travelled back to Dunedin for the 1999 Super 12 Final , which was against South Island rivals the Canterbury Crusaders , and was billed as " the party at Tony Brown 's house " after Highlanders first five @-@ eighth Tony Brown . The Highlanders scored first , and led 14 – 9 at half time . However the decisive try was to Crusaders wing Afato So 'oalo , who chipped the ball then out @-@ sprinted All Blacks winger Jeff Wilson to collect the ball and score . Although the Highlanders scored a try to <unk> Maka with three minutes remaining , the Crusaders won 24 – 19 . 
 The Highlanders opened their 2000 season with a 50 – 13 victory over the Queensland Reds at Carisbrook . They won their next three matches , against the Sharks , Hurricanes and Cats . However they then lost their following three ; against the Crusaders , Brumbies , and Blues . They played the Crusaders at Jade Stadium in their semi @-@ final , and were defeated 37 – 15 after Marika Vunibaka scored two tries for the Crusaders in the last 20 minutes . The next season opened with a 23 – 8 victory over the Blues . Their 39 – 20 defeat of the Waratahs at Carisbrook on 7 April was the first defeat of New South Wales by an Otago @-@ based side since the Otago provincial team defeated New South Wales 5 – 0 in 1901 . The Highlanders narrowly lost to the Hurricanes in Napier 35 – 33 before defeating the Brumbies at Carisbrook on 20 April . Although the Highlanders went undefeated at home for a second consecutive season , they finished fifth with six wins that season . 
 Laurie Mains had returned from South Africa to coach Otago in the 2001 National Provincial Championship ( NPC ) , and was appointed the Highlanders coach for 2002 . Their season started with a narrow 30 – 28 loss to the Crusaders at Jade Stadium . That year the Highlanders also achieved a win over all four South African teams . The Gordon Hunter Memorial Trophy was also introduced that season to be contested between the Highlanders and Blues . Gordon Hunter had coached both teams before dying from cancer in 2001 . The match was played at Eden Park , and the Highlanders were ahead 15 – 3 at half time , and eventually won 20 – 13 . Their last home match of the season was against the Reds at Carisbrook . The Highlanders ' 40 – 26 win meant that they had gone three seasons undefeated at Carisbrook . The Highlanders finished fourth and played the Crusaders in Christchurch where they lost 34 – 23 , although Jeff Wilson did score a try in his last match for the franchise . 
 The 2003 season started with a 29 – 16 win over the Chiefs in Hamilton . They then defeated the Stormers and Bulls before losing to the Cats in Johannesburg . Their second loss occurred when the Crusaders defeated them 17 – 16 at Carisbrook . The Highlanders had gone three seasons , 2000 , 2001 and 2002 , and 16 games unbeaten at Carisbrook before that loss . The Highlanders then defeated the Blues 22 – 11 to retain the Gordon Hunter Memorial Trophy . In April that year it was revealed a rift had developed between coach Laurie Mains and some of the senior players in the squad . Anton Oliver was branded the ringleader by Mains , and after their final game of the season Mains resigned and was replaced by his assistant Greg Cooper . 
 In contrast to their previous season , in 2004 the Highlanders conceded 44 tries , twelve more than in 2003 , but scored nine more tries then in 2003 . Not only did they have a new head coach , but also thirteen new players in their squad . This all contributed to them finishing the season ninth that season . The Highlanders ' 2005 season started with a loss to the Blues at Carisbrook . Following this the side won six games consecutively , the first time the franchise had ever done so . After a draw with the Stormers and a bye , the Highlanders had gone unbeaten for eight weeks . Three weeks from the end of the round robin they were third , but after losing their remaining three matches fell to eighth for the season . 
 After ten years the Super 12 was expanded to include two extra teams ; the Western Force from Australia , and the Central Cheetahs from South Africa . The expanded competition was renamed the Super 14 . The Highlanders continued under Cooper in 2006 . After losing their first match of 2006 to the Crusaders , they then won their next three . After only won two of their last six games , they finished the season ranked ninth . The 2007 ended with a similar result to 2006 . The Highlanders again finished ninth on the table , and worst of the New Zealand teams . They finished the season with five wins and eight losses from their thirteen matches . 
 While the fortunes of the franchise had been declining for a few years , they would bottom out with a player exodus following the 2007 Rugby World Cup . The squad 's entire All Black front row of Carl Hayman , Anton Oliver , and Clarke <unk> left for lucrative contracts in Europe , while star first @-@ five Nick Evans moved north to Auckland to play for the Blues , and hugely talented young lock James Ryan was forced to retire at age 24 due to injury problems . Joining the exodus were several other veteran starters , along with coach Greg Cooper who left the franchise to take up an assistant coaching position with the Blues . The coach for the 2008 season , Glenn Moore , was appointed 28 August 2007 . 
 Moore was left with a weak side of young and inexperienced players which would stumble to a franchise @-@ worst record of only 3 wins against 10 losses during the 2008 Super 14 season , and finished as the lowest @-@ placed New Zealand team on the table . Jimmy Cowan , one of the team 's few bright spots through this period , was appointed team captain for 2009 , but things would improve little over the following two seasons as the team again limped to the worst record of the New Zealand clubs . When Moore was released as coach following the 2010 season , the franchise had compiled a record of only 10 wins against 29 losses in three seasons under his leadership . 
 Former All Black Jamie Joseph was hired as coach for the 2011 Super Rugby season , while Jamie Mackintosh replaced Cowan as team captain . The campaign would prove to be the franchise 's most successful in several years , as they raced out to a 3 – 0 start including a monumental away win over the Bulls in Pretoria . They remained in playoff contention for almost the entire season , sitting 8 – 4 at one juncture , before slumping under an injury cloud at the end of the year to finish 8th on the table . 
 Highlanders won the 2015 Super Rugby season defeating the Hurricanes 21 – 14 in Wellington . Phil Gifford called the win the " greatest Super Rugby comeback this century " . 
 = = Name and colours = = 
 The name Highlanders was chosen after the early Scottish settlers in the lower South Island . These Scottish settlers were the founders of Dunedin — known as the " Edinburgh of the South " , and the city where the Highlanders are based . According to the Highlanders official website : " The name and image of the Highlander conjures up visions of fierce independence , pride in one 's roots , loyalty , strength , kinship , honesty , and hard work . " 
 The colours of the Highlanders formerly encompassed the provincial colours of North Otago , Otago , and Southland ; yellow , blue and maroon . Blue is also the predominant colour of the Flag of Scotland , and is used by many sports teams in that country . 
 On 3 June 2011 , the Highlanders introduced — controversially — a new predominantly lime green home kit . It was debuted in the Highlanders ' final home match of the 2011 Super Rugby season . 
 Despite the resounding negative feedback from fans , this kit was initially confirmed for the 2012 season . On 6 September 2011 , however , the club announced a change of heart — they would be returning to their traditional blue strip for home matches , and using the lime green kit for away matches during the 2012 Super Rugby season . 
 = = Franchise area = = 
 The Highlanders ' franchise area consists of the region controlled by the North Otago , Otago and Southland Rugby Unions . Both Otago and Southland compete in the semi @-@ professional ITM Cup ( formerly the Air New Zealand Cup ) , and North Otago in the amateur Heartland Championship . However , given Otago and Southland 's lack of success in the ITM Cup , the Highlanders have often looked further afield to sign players from . This is a reflection of Otago 's historically large influx of people from distant lands during the early settlement period , particularly from the Celtic countries of Scotland and Ireland . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 Starting with the 2012 season , the Highlanders moved into the Forsyth Barr Stadium , opened in August 2011 . It was built to replace their original home of Carisbrook , which was no longer suitable for international rugby , or as a venue for the 2011 Rugby World Cup . The Carisbrook Stadium Trust was established in 2006 to manage the planning and construction of a new stadium . The new stadium is not on the current Carisbrook site , but instead near the University of Otago and Otago Harbour . It is a roofed , all weather stadium with a rectangular configuration , and permanent seating capacity of 25 @,@ 000 that could be expanded to 30 @,@ 748 if necessary . 
 The Highlanders ' original home ground was the 29 @,@ 000 capacity Carisbrook in Dunedin . Carisbrook is also known as " The Brook " , or as " The House of Pain " due to its reputation as a difficult venue to visit . The stadium was also well known for Dunedin 's large student population ( known as " <unk> " ) that occupied the terraces — an uncovered concrete embankment at the eastern end of the ground . 
 The Highlanders usually play at least one regular season match outside of Dunedin , at either Rugby Park in Invercargill or the Queenstown Events Centre in Queenstown . Prior to 2007 the regular season match was usually played at Rugby Park , however in 2007 they played a match at the Queenstown Events Centre . The Highlanders have also played pre @-@ season matches at Centennial Park in Oamaru and at the Showgrounds in Balclutha . 
 On 28 March 2009 , the Highlanders played a home game at FMG Stadium in Palmerston North against the Bulls . This game attracted a crowd of 10 @,@ 000 ; one of the Highlanders ' biggest of the 2009 season . 
 = = Development team = = 
 The Highlanders have fielded a development team in competitions such as the Pacific Rugby Cup and in matches against other representative teams for several seasons . Known as the Highlanders Development XV , the squad is selected from the best emerging rugby talent in the Highlanders catchment area and is composed of Highlanders contracted players , wider training group members , under 20s , and selected club players . 
 = = Records and achievements = = 
 = = = Season standings = = = 
 = = = Team records = = = 
 The 2014 season set several new records for the team , that had stood since the 1998 and 1999 seasons . They scored their most ever points ( 425 ) , and most ever tries ( 42 ) in a season . Lima <unk> set a franchise record for most points in a season with 178 , becoming just the third Highlander to score 25 points in a game . The 2000 year saw perhaps their greatest victory ever with their 65 – 23 win against the Bulls , setting several records ; most points in a match , most tries in a match with nine , and largest winning margin of 42 . 
 Former first five @-@ eighth Tony Brown holds the record for most career points with 857 . His 857 career points included 144 conversions , 183 penalties , and six drop @-@ goals . The most points in a single match is held by former fullback Ben Blair who scored 28 against the Sharks in 2005 . Most career tries is held by former player Jeff Wilson with 35 . Wilson and Blair also share the record for most tries in a single match with three along with Israel <unk> , Doug Howlett , Ryan Nicholas , Jeremy Stanley , and To 'o <unk> . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Champions ( 1 ) 
 2015 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) 
 1999 
 Playoff Appearances ( 6 ) 
 1998 , 1999 , 2000 , 2002 , 2014 , 2015 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 The squad for the 2016 Super Rugby season : 
 = = = Current internationally capped players = = = 
 Ben Smith is also the vice captain of the 2016 All Blacks 
 = = Notable players = = 
 Players who have played over 50 games for the Highlanders : 
 Josh Blackie 
 John Blaikie 
 Tony Brown 
 Jimmy Cowan 
 Tom Donnelly 
 Carl Hayman 
 Carl Hoeft 
 Byron Kelleher 
 Chris King 
 Josh Kronfeld 
 Filipo Levi 
 Simon Maling 
 <unk> <unk> 
 Kelvin Middleton 
 Craig Newby 
 Anton Oliver 
 Taine Randell 
 Romi <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> 
 Ben Smith 
 Lima <unk> 
 Adam Thomson 
 Jeff Wilson 
 = = Coaches and management = = 
 In their first season the Highlanders were coached by Gordon Hunter before he joined the All Blacks selection panel . Glen Ross took over in 1997 , and was not reappointed for the 1998 season . Tony Gilbert was appointed for the 1998 season , and again coached the team in 1999 before being appointed co @-@ coach for the All Blacks . Peter Sloane was appointed Gilbert 's successor for the 2000 season , and also coached them in 2001 before moving to coach the Blues . Laurie Mains returned to New Zealand from South Africa to replace Sloane for the 2002 season . Mains resigned following the 2003 season after a rift between him and senior players . Greg Cooper replaced Mains and coached the team from 2003 until 2007 , when he left the franchise to take up the assistant coaches position with the Blues . Glenn Moore coached the club from 2008 through until 2010 , when he was relieved of his duties after the club posted only 10 wins against 29 losses in his three years in charge . His replacement was former All Black flanker Jamie Joseph , who has been coach since the start of the 2011 season . In 2013 Tony Brown was appointed the job as attack coach after two seasons being the head coach of Otago and leading them to finals fixtures . 
 Head coach 
 Jamie Joseph 
 Assistant coaches 
 Jon Preston 
 Scott McLeod 
 Kees <unk> 
 Tony Brown 
 = Mellotron = 
 The Mellotron is an electro @-@ mechanical , polyphonic tape replay keyboard originally developed and built in Birmingham , England , in 1963 . It evolved from a similar instrument , the Chamberlin , but could be mass @-@ produced more effectively . The instrument works by pulling a section of magnetic tape across a head . Different portions of the tape can be played to access different sounds . 
 The original models were designed to be used in the home , and contained a variety of sounds , including automatic accompaniments . Bandleader Eric Robinson and television personality David Nixon were heavily involved in the instrument 's original publicity . A number of other celebrities such as Princess Margaret were early adopters . 
 The Mellotron became more popular after the Beatles used it on several tracks . It was subsequently adopted by the Moody Blues , Genesis and King Crimson , and became a notable instrument in progressive rock . Later models such as the M400 , the best selling model , dispensed with the accompaniments and some sound selection controls in order to be used by touring musicians . The instrument became less popular in the 1980s due to the introduction of polyphonic synthesizers and samplers , despite a number of high profile uses from Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark and XTC . 
 Production of the Mellotron ceased in 1986 , but it regained popularity in the 1990s , and was used by several notable bands . This led to the resurrection of the original manufacturer , Streetly Electronics . In 2007 , Streetly produced the M4000 , which combined the layout of the M400 with the bank selection of earlier models . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The Mellotron has a similar behaviour to a sampler , but generates its sound via audio tape . When a key is pressed , a tape connected to it is pushed against a playback head , like a tape recorder . While the key remains depressed , the tape is drawn over the head , and a sound is played . When the key is released , a spring pulls the tape back to its original position . A variety of sounds are available on the instrument . On earlier models , the instrument is split into " lead " and " rhythm " sections . There is a choice of six " stations " of rhythm sounds , each containing three rhythm tracks and three fill tracks . The fill tracks can also be mixed together . Similarly , there is a choice of six lead stations , each containing three lead instruments which can be mixed . In the centre of the Mellotron , there is a tuning button that allows a variation in both pitch and tempo . Later models do not have the concept of stations and have a single knob to select a sound , along with the tuning control . However , the frame containing the tapes is designed to be removed , and replaced with one with different sounds . 
 Although the Mellotron was designed to reproduce the sound of the original instrument , replaying a tape creates minor fluctuations in pitch ( wow and flutter ) , and amplitude , so a note sounds slightly different each time it is played . Pressing a key harder allows the head to come into contact under greater pressure , to the extent that the Mellotron responds to <unk> . 
 Another factor in the Mellotron 's sound is that the individual notes were recorded in isolation . For a musician accustomed to playing in an orchestral setting , this was unusual , and meant that they had nothing against which to <unk> . Noted cellist Reginald Kirby refused to <unk> his cello to cover the lower range of the Mellotron , and so the bottom notes are actually performed on a double bass . According to Mellotron author Nick <unk> , one note of the string sounds contains the sound of a chair being scraped in the background . 
 The original Mellotrons were intended to be used in the home or in clubs , and were not designed for touring bands . Even the later M400 , which was designed to be as portable as possible , weighed over 122 pounds ( 55 kg ) . Smoke , and variations in temperature , and humidity were also detrimental to the instrument 's reliability . Moving the instrument between cold storage rooms and brightly lit stages could cause the tapes to stretch and stick on the capstan . Leslie Bradley recalls receiving some Mellotrons in for a repair " looking like a blacksmith had shaped horseshoes on top . " Pressing too many keys at once caused the motor to drag , resulting in the notes sounding flat . Robert Fripp stated that " Tuning a Mellotron doesn 't " . Dave Kean , an expert Mellotron <unk> , recommends that older Mellotrons should not be immediately used after a period of inactivity , as the tape heads can become magnetized in storage and destroy the recordings on them if played . 
 = = History = = 
 Although tape samplers had been explored in research studios , the first commercially available keyboard @-@ driven tape instruments were built and sold by California @-@ based Harry Chamberlin . The concept of the Mellotron originated when Chamberlin 's sales agent , Bill Fransen , brought two of Chamberlin 's <unk> 600 instruments to England in 1962 to search for someone who could manufacture 70 matching tape heads for future Chamberlins . He met Frank , Norman and Les Bradley of tape engineering company <unk> Ltd , who said they could improve on the original design . The Bradleys subsequently met bandleader Eric Robinson , who agreed to help finance the recording of the necessary instruments and sounds . Together with the Bradleys and television celebrity David Nixon , they formed a company , Mellotronics , in order to market the instrument . Robinson was particularly enthusiastic about the Mellotron , because he felt it would revitalise his career , which was then on the wane . He arranged the recording sessions at IBC Studios in London , which he co @-@ owned with George Clouston . 
 The first model to be commercially manufactured was the Mk I in 1963 . An updated version , the Mk II , was released the following year which featured the full set of sounds selectable by banks and stations . The instrument was expensive , costing £ 1 @,@ 000 , at a time when a typical house cost £ 2 @,@ 000 – £ 3 @,@ 000 . 
 Fransen failed to explain to the Bradleys that he was not the owner of the concept , and Chamberlin was unhappy with the fact that someone overseas was copying his idea . After some acrimony between the two parties , a deal was stuck between them in 1966 , whereby they would both continue to manufacture instruments independently . <unk> renamed themselves Streetly Electronics in 1970 . 
 In 1970 , the model M400 was released , which contained 35 notes ( G – F ) and a removable tape frame . It sold over 1 @,@ 800 units . By the early 1970s , hundreds of the instruments were assembled and sold by EMI under exclusive licence . Following a financial and trademark dispute through a U.S. distribution agreement , the Mellotron name was acquired by American @-@ based Sound Sales . Streetly @-@ manufactured instruments after 1976 were sold under the name Novatron . The American Mellotron distributor , Sound Sales , produced their own Mellotron model , the 4 @-@ Track , in the early 1980s . At the same time Streetly Electronics produced a road @-@ cased version of the 400 – the <unk> Novatron . By the mid @-@ 1980s , both Sound Sales and Streetly Electronics suffered severe financial setbacks , losing their market to synthesizers and solid @-@ state electronic samplers , which rendered the Mellotron essentially extinct . The company folded in 1986 , and Les Bradley threw most of the manufacturing equipment into a skip . 
 Streetly Electronics was subsequently reactivated by Les Bradley 's son John and Martin Smith . After Les Bradley 's death in 1997 , they decided to resume full @-@ time operation as a support and refurbishment business . By 2007 , the stock of available instruments to repair and restore was diminishing , so they decided to build a new model , which became the M4000 . The instrument combined the features of several previous models , and featured the layout and chassis of an M400 but with a digital bank selector that emulated the mechanical original in the Mk II . 
 = = Notable users = = 
 The first notable musician to use the Mellotron was variety pianist Geoff Unwin , who was specifically hired by Robinson in 1962 to promote the use of the instrument . He toured with a Mk II Mellotron and made numerous appearances on television and radio . Unwin claimed that the automatic backing tracks on the Mk II 's left hand keyboard allowed him to provide more accomplished performances than his own basic skills on the piano could provide . 
 The earlier 1960s Mk II units were made for the home and the characteristics of the instrument attracted a number of celebrities . Among the early Mellotron owners were Princess Margaret , Peter Sellers , King Hussein of Jordan and Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard ( whose Mellotron is now installed in the Church of Scientology 's head UK office at Saint Hill Manor ) . According to Robin Douglas @-@ Home , Princess Margaret " adored it ; he ( Lord Snowdon ) positively loathed it . " 
 After Mellotronics had targeted them as a potential customer , the BBC Radiophonic Workshop became interested in the possibilities of the instrument , hoping it would allow them to increase throughput . The corporation used two custom @-@ made models that employed recorded sound effects throughout 1963 and 1964 , but had problems with fluctuating tape speed and found the sound wasn 't up to professional broadcast quality . The Mellotron was eventually dropped in favour of electronic oscillators and synthesizers . 
 British multi @-@ instrumentalist Graham Bond is considered the first rock musician to record with a Mellotron , beginning in 1965 . The first hit song to feature a Mellotron Mk II was " Baby Can It Be True " , which Bond performed live with the machine in televised performances , using <unk> to trigger the tapes from his Hammond organ . 
 Mike Pinder worked at Streetly Electronics for 18 months in the early 1960s as a tester , and was immediately excited by the possibilities of the instrument . After trying piano and Hammond organ , he settled on the Mellotron as the instrument of choice for his band , The Moody Blues , purchasing a second @-@ hand model from Fort Dunlop Working Men 's Club in Birmingham and using it extensively on every album from Days of Future Passed ( 1967 ) to Octave ( 1978 ) . Pinder claims to have introduced John Lennon and Paul McCartney to the Mellotron , and convinced each of them to buy one . The Beatles hired a machine and used it on their single " Strawberry Fields Forever " , recorded in various takes between November and December 1966 . Though producer George Martin was unconvinced by the instrument , describing it " as if a Neanderthal piano had impregnated a primitive electronic keyboard " , they continued to compose and record with various Mellotrons for the albums Magical Mystery Tour ( 1967 ) and The Beatles ( 1968 , The White Album ) . McCartney used the Mellotron sporadically in his solo career , and his wife Linda played one while touring with Wings . The Rolling Stones ' Brian Jones played a Mellotron on some studio tracks , including " She 's a Rainbow " and " Jigsaw Puzzle " . 
 The Mellotron became a key instrument in progressive rock . King Crimson bought two Mellotrons when forming in 1969 . They were aware of Pinder 's contributions to the Moody Blues and didn 't want to sound similar , but concluded there was no other way of generating the orchestral sound . The instrument was originally played by Ian McDonald , and subsequently by Robert Fripp on McDonald 's departure . Later member David Cross recalled he didn 't particularly want to play the Mellotron , but felt that it was simply what he needed to do as a member of the band . Tony Banks bought a Mellotron from Fripp in 1971 , which he claimed was previously used by King Crimson , to use with Genesis . He decided to approach the instrument in a different way to a typical orchestra , using block chords , and later stated that he used it in the same manner as a synth pad on later albums . His unaccompanied introduction to " Watcher of the Skies " on the album Foxtrot ( 1972 ) , played on a Mk II with combined strings and brass , became significant enough that Streetly Electronics provided a " Watcher Mix " sound with the M4000 . Banks claims to still have a Mellotron in storage , but doesn 't feel inclined to use it as he generally prefers to use up @-@ to @-@ date technology . Barclay James Harvest 's Woolly Wolstenholme bought an M300 primarily to use for string sounds , and continued to play the instrument live into the 2000s as part of a reformed band . 
 The Mellotron was used by German electronic band Tangerine Dream through the 1970s , on albums such as : <unk> ( 1973 ) , Phaedra ( 1974 ) , <unk> ( 1975 ) , <unk> ( 1976 ) , and Encore ( 1977 ) . In 1983 , the band 's Christopher Franke asked Mellotronics if they could produce a digital model , as the group migrated towards using samplers . 
 Though the Mellotron was not extensively used in the 1980s , a number of bands featured it as a prominent instrument . One of the few UK post @-@ punk bands to do so was Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark , who featured it heavily on their platinum @-@ selling 1981 album Architecture & Morality . Andy McCluskey has stated they used the Mellotron because they were starting to run into limitations of the cheap monophonic synthesizers they had used up to that point . He bought a second @-@ hand M400 and was immediately impressed with the strings and choir sounds . XTC 's Dave Gregory recalls seeing bands using Mellotrons when growing up in the 1970s , and thought it would be an interesting addition to the group 's sound . He bought a second @-@ hand model in 1982 for £ 165 , and first used it on the album Mummer ( 1983 ) . IQ 's Martin Orford bought a second hand M400 and used it primarily for visual appeal rather than musical quality or convenience . 
 The Mellotron received notable publicity in 1995 for its use on Oasis ' album ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? The instrument was played by both Noel Gallagher and Paul Arthurs on several tracks , but a particularly prominent use was the cello sound on the hit single " Wonderwall " , played by Arthurs . Radiohead asked Streetly Electronics to restore and repair a model for them in 1997 , and recorded with it on several tracks for their album OK Computer ( 1997 ) . 
 Spock 's Beard 's Ryo <unk> is a noted fan of the Mellotron , saying it characterises the sound of the band . Porcupine Tree 's Steven Wilson has acquired one of King Crimson 's old Mellotrons and in 2013 gave a demonstration of the instrument in celebration of its 50th anniversary . 
 More recently , the Mellotron has been regularly used by Brian Jonestown Massacre 's Anton Newcombe , in recordings he produced with his band and also his solo project with Tess Parks . 
 = = Competitors = = 
 Alternative versions of the Mellotron were manufactured by competitors in the early to mid @-@ 1970s . The Mattel <unk> was a toy keyboard designed to be used in the home , which played back sounds using optical discs . This was followed by the <unk> <unk> in 1975 , which used a more professional @-@ sounding version of the same technology . Its most notable user was Patrick Moraz . 
 = = List of models = = 
 Mk I ( 1963 ) – double manual ( 35 notes on each ) . Very similar to the Chamberlin Music Master 600 . About 10 were made . 
 Mk II ( 1964 ) – double manual . 18 sounds on each manual . Organ @-@ style cabinet , two 12 @-@ inch internal speakers and amp . Weight 160 kg . About 160 were made . 
 FX console ( 1965 ) – double manual with sound effects . Designed to be quieter than the Mk II , with a different DC motor and a solid @-@ state power amplifier . 
 M300 ( 1968 ) – 52 @-@ note single manual , some with pitch wheel @-@ control , and some without . About 60 were made . 
 M400 ( 1970 ) – 35 @-@ note single manual . The most common and portable model . About 1 @,@ 800 units were made . It has three different sounds per frame . 
 EMI M400 ( 1970 ) – a special version of the M400 manufactured by EMI music company in Britain under licence from Mellotronics . 100 of this model were made . 
 Mark V ( 1975 ) – double @-@ manual mellotron , with the internals of two <unk> plus additional tone and control features . Around nine were made . 
 Novatron Mark V ( 1977 ) – the same as the Mellotron Mark V , but under a different name . 
 Novatron 400 ( 1978 ) – as above ; a Mellotron M400 with a different name @-@ plate . 
 <unk> ( 1981 ) – a flight @-@ cased version of Novatron 400 . 
 4 Track ( 1980 ) – very rare model ; only about five were ever made . 
 Mark VI ( 1999 ) – an improved version of the M400 . The first Mellotron to be produced since Streetly Electronics went out of business in 1986 . 
 Mark VII – basically an upgraded Mark V. Like the Mark VI , produced on the new factory in Stockholm . 
 <unk> ( 2005 ) – an M400 in a transparent glass case . Only one was made . 
 M4000 ( 2007 ) – one manual , 24 sounds . An improved version of the Mk II with cycling mechanism . Made by Streetly Electronics . 
 = = = Related products = = = 
 <unk> ( 2010 ) – a single @-@ manual digital product that does not feature tapes . Made at the Mellotron factory in Stockholm . 
 Electro @-@ Harmonix M9 Tape Replay Machine ( 2016 ) 
 = Calostoma cinnabarinum = 
 Calostoma cinnabarinum is a species of gasteroid fungus in the family Sclerodermataceae , and is the type species of the genus Calostoma . It is known by several common names , including stalked puffball @-@ in @-@ aspic and gelatinous stalked @-@ puffball . The fruit body has a distinctive color and overall appearance , featuring a layer of yellowish jelly surrounding a bright red , spherical head approximately 2 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter atop a red or yellowish brown spongy stipe 1 @.@ 5 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 to 2 in ) tall . The innermost layer of the head is the gleba , containing clear or slightly yellowish elliptical spores , measuring 14 – 20 micrometers ( µm ) long by 6 – 9 µm across . The spore surface features a pattern of small pits , producing a net @-@ like appearance . A widely distributed species , it grows naturally in eastern North America , Central America , northeastern South America , and East Asia . C. cinnabarinum grows on the ground in deciduous forests , where it forms mycorrhizal associations with oaks . 
 Despite its appearance and common name , C. cinnabarinum is not related to the true puffballs or to species in the genus Podaxis ( also commonly called " stalked puffballs " ) . It is also unrelated to earthstars and stinkhorns . However , C. cinnabarinum has had a complex taxonomic history that at various times confused it with each of those groups , until the advent of molecular phylogenetics . Although eaten or used in folk medicine in some areas , it is typically considered inedible . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Calostoma cinnabarinum has a long taxonomic history . Leonard <unk> illustrated a " dusty fungus from Virginia , an elegant twisted work with a coral @-@ red stipe " in his 1692 <unk> that was later recognized as this species . In 1809 , Christiaan Persoon provided the first modern scientific description , as Scleroderma <unk> , and suggested that the species might be distinctive enough to warrant the creation of a new genus . Later that year , Nicaise Desvaux did just that , creating the genus Calostoma . To avoid a <unk> name , he renamed the type species C. cinnabarinum . 
 In 1811 , Louis Bosc did not mention the earlier works when describing it as Lycoperdon heterogeneum , although he also suggested it should be placed in its own genus . Jean <unk> transferred Persoon 's S. <unk> to Lycoperdon in 1817 , while including Bosc 's L. heterogeneum separately . In the same year , Nees von Esenbeck noted Bosc 's belief that the species deserved its own genus and created Mitremyces , without referencing Desvaux 's prior assignment to Calostoma . An 1825 paper by Edward Hitchcock referred to the species with the entirely novel binomial name <unk> coccineum ; although Hitchcock claimed this name was established by Lewis Schweinitz , he admitted that no such description had been previously published , and the name and its claimed origin are considered doubtful . 
 Schweinitz assigned Bosc 's Lycoperdon heterogeneum to Mitremyces under the name M. lutescens in 1822 . He revisited the genus a decade later , describing M. cinnabarinum as a novel species , but incomplete descriptions and mislabelled specimens caused confusion . August Corda separated them more clearly , providing new descriptions , and assigning cinnabarinum to Calostoma based on the descriptions of Desvaux and Persoon , while maintaining lutescens in Mitremyces . George Massee 's 1888 monograph of Calostoma discounted the distinction entirely , arguing that Schweinitz 's two species were actually the same species at different stages of development . In 1897 , Charles Edward <unk> published a new description of C. lutescens , making a clear division between the two similar species that has not been substantially revised since . References to this species as " C. cinnabarina " are common but incorrect . 
 The specific epithet cinnabarinum is derived from the Ancient Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) , and refers to its " cinnabar @-@ red " color , like that of dragon 's blood . Its names in the English vernacular include " stalked puffball @-@ in @-@ aspic " , " red slimy @-@ stalked puffball " , " aspic puffball " , " gelatinous @-@ stalked puffball " , and " hot lips " . In central Mexico , it is known as " orchid fungus " in both Spanish ( hongo <unk> ) and Nahuatl ( huang <unk> ) . 
 = = = Phylogenetics = = = 
 The relationships and evolutionary origins of Calostoma were a matter of considerable historical debate . Based on various morphological features , 19th @-@ century mycologists viewed it as a relative of , variously , Scleroderma , Clathrus , Geastrum , or Tulostoma . The advent of molecular phylogenetics in the late 20th century confirmed that the <unk> order was polyphyletic because gasteroid fungi do not form a single clade . Efforts to use nuclear and mitochondrial DNA sequencing to resolve the proper taxonomic placement of these fungi revealed that Calostoma cinnabarinum was not closely related to true puffballs , stinkhorns , most earthstars , or gasteroid agarics such as Tulostoma or Podaxis , but instead belonged within the Boletales . Further research organized a group of mostly gasteroid fungi , including Calostoma , into the newly named suborder Sclerodermatineae . This analysis confirmed that C. cinnabarinum and C. ravenelii are distinct species , and identified their closest relatives outside the genus as Gyroporus , Astraeus , and Scleroderma . A subsequent multigene ( <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> , 5.8S , <unk> , and mt @-@ <unk> ) study redrew the Sclerodermatineae cladogram slightly , making Pisolithus the closest relatives of Calostoma . 
 Calostoma cinnabarinum 's physical dissimilarity to many other species in Boletales corresponds to a higher rate of genetic drift than average for the order . This trait is shared with other members of the Sclerodermatineae , which as a group have undergone more rapid evolutionary change than the order as a whole . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The assignment of Calostoma to the Boletales placed it in an order whose biochemistry has been the topic of research . Most members of the Boletales are characterized by compounds produced by the <unk> @-@ <unk> pathway , including several distinctive pigments . <unk> Gruber and Wolfgang <unk> were not able to detect these compounds in C. cinnabarinum , but isolated a novel <unk> pigment . This compound , named calostomal , is responsible for the orange @-@ red color of the fruit bodies . The methyl ester of calostomal was subjected to NMR spectroscopy and was identified as all @-@ trans @-@ 16 @-@ oxohexadeca @-@ 2 @,@ 4 @,@ 6 @,@ 8 @,@ 10 @,@ 12 @,@ 14 @-@ <unk> acid . Chemically related pigments , the <unk> , had been isolated from the brightly colored Boletus <unk> and B. <unk> . It is not yet clear if the results of this <unk> investigation will mandate changes to Boletales cladistics . 
 = = Description = = 
 The appearance of the fruit bodies has been compared to amphibian eggs or " small red tomato [ es ] surrounded by jelly " . They consist of a bright red , globose head atop a net @-@ like stipe , covered in a thick gelatinous layer . These fruit bodies are initially hypogeous , but emerge from the ground as the stipe continues to expand . 
 The head is up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter and typically nearly round , although in some populations , it is visibly oval and may be slightly smaller or larger . The internal structure of the head is complex , sometimes described as an exoperidium and endoperidium that each possess <unk> , and sometimes as distinct layers . The outermost is a yellowish , translucent coating of jelly @-@ like material 4 to 9 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) thick , somewhat similar to a gelatinous universal veil . Below this coating is a thin , cinnabar @-@ red membrane . As the mushroom ages , these outer layers break down and fall away from the head . Pieces of the red membrane become embedded in the remaining gelatinous material , giving them the appearance of small red seeds . This process reveals the endoperidium , a tough , non @-@ gelatinous layer that does not break apart . When first revealed , it has a powdery , bright red surface that weathers to orange or pale yellow as the powder wears away . Bright red apical ridges or rays form a peristome . North American specimens typically have four to five such ridges , but Asian populations have been described with as many as seven . Contained inside the endoperidium is the gleba , or spore mass , which is white when young but buff or yellow in older specimens . 
 Like the head , the stipe is covered in a gelatinous outer layer . The stipe itself consists of a number of anastomosing gelatinous strands , giving the structure a reticulate or spongy appearance . These strands vary in color from red to yellow @-@ brown , and fade with age . The stipe is 1 to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick and 1 @.@ 5 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 to 2 in ) long , although some or all of this length may remain buried . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 When viewed in mass , as in a spore print , the spores generally appear yellow , although a Korean population with a light pink spore mass has been observed . Viewed with a light microscope , the spores are hyaline or pale yellow , elliptical , and visibly pitted . Electron microscopy or atomic force microscopy reveals the pits , or pores , to be an elaborate net @-@ like structure called a reticulum . There are two to three such pores per micrometer , each approximately 400 nanometers deep . Most spores are 14 – 20 by 6 – 9 µm , but some may be as long as 24 or 28 µm ; specimens from a Korean population were reported with slightly smaller spores . Unlike others in the genus , C. cinnabarinum does not use nurse cells to supply food material to spores . The basidia are 40 – 50 by 15 – 20 µm , broadly obovate , club @-@ shaped or sometimes cylindrical , with five to twelve spores distributed evenly or irregularly over the surface . The gleba also contains branching hyphae , 3 – 4 µm thick with frequent clamp connections . The capillitium formed by these connections is present only when the mushroom is young and disintegrates thereafter . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 At least in North America , Calostoma cinnabarinum is distinctive and easily recognizable . Two other species of Calostoma also occur in the eastern United States . C. lutescens has a thinner gelatinous layer and a predominately yellow middle layer , or <unk> , with the red color confined to the peristome . It also possesses a well @-@ defined collar at the base of the spore case , a longer stipe , and globose , pitted spores . C. ravenelii is not gelatinous , but instead has warts adorning the spore case , and is smaller than C. cinnabarinum . It also has a reddish peristome but is otherwise clay @-@ colored . Unlike C. lutescens , the spores of C. ravenelii cannot be distinguished from those of C. cinnabarinum except through the use of atomic force microscopy . 
 More representatives of the genus are present in Asia . At least nine species have been recorded from mainland India , some of which also overlap C. cinnabarinum 's range in Indonesia , Taiwan , or Japan . Many of these species can be readily distinguished by macroscopic features . C. japonicum is pinkish orange and lacks a gelatinous outer layer , while both C. <unk> and C. <unk> are brown . However , others require microscopic features of spore shape and ornamentation for identification . Unlike the uniformly elongated spores of C. cinnabarinum , C. <unk> possesses both elliptical and globose spores . C. <unk> differs primarily in the pattern of ornamentation on its spore surface . 
 = = Distribution , habitat , and ecology = = 
 Widely distributed , Calostoma cinnabarinum can be found from Massachusetts south to Florida in the United States . Its range extends at least as far west as Texas , with possible populations in the Southwest , but is most common in the Appalachian Mountains where it becomes more frequent with increasing elevation . It is also present in Eastern Mexico , where it grows in the subtropical cloud forests of Veracruz and Hidalgo . In Central America , it is known from Belize 's <unk> National Park , the cloud forests of Baja Verapaz and El Quiché in Guatemala , and Panama . The species is also recorded in South America , from Colombia as far southeast as Brazil , where it is described as rare . It has also been collected from a disjunct population in Asia , where it has been recorded from seven provinces in mainland China , mostly in the southeast , as well as from Indonesia , Taiwan , Japan , and <unk> in South Korea . 
 Calostoma cinnabarinum was thought to be saprotrophic , and has been described in this manner in both scholarly and popular discussions of the species . However , this classification was the result of its taxonomic history and comparisons with saprotrophic fungi that are not closely related . After its assignment to the Sclerodermatineae , a suborder whose members are ectomycorrhizal , its ecological role came into question . In 2007 , Andrew Wilson and David Hibbett of Clark University and Eric Hobbie of the University of New Hampshire employed isotopic labeling , DNA sequencing , and morphological analysis to determine that this species is also ectomycorrhizal . Like all mycorrhizal fungi , C. cinnabarinum establishes a mutualistic relationship with the roots of trees , allowing the fungus to exchange minerals and amino acids extracted from the soil for fixed carbon from the host . The subterranean hyphae of the fungus grow a sheath of tissue around the rootlets of the tree . This association is especially beneficial to the host , as the fungus produces enzymes that mineralize organic compounds and facilitate the transfer of nutrients to the tree . The only host trees identified for C. cinnabarinus are Quercus oaks , although related members of Calostoma have been observed to associate with other trees in the Fagaceae family , such as beech . 
 In addition to its required association with oaks , C. cinnabarinum appears to be restricted to wetter forests . Early descriptions of its habitat found it in " rather moist situations " and in " damp woods " , and David Arora has more recently described its preference for the humid forests of the southern Appalachians . In contrast , it has not been detected in the dry oak forests of California and is likely also absent from the dry tropical forests of western Costa Rica . In Brazil it has been observed in the sandy soil and drier conditions of the Caatinga and cerrado , although only after periods of heavy rainfall . Its outer layer may provide protection from desiccation . Fruit bodies are most common in the late summer and fall , although spring occurrences are known . 
 Squirrels have been known to feed on C. cinnabarinum , although its gelatinous coating deters insect predation . 
 = = Uses = = 
 As with all members of its genus , C. cinnabarinum is generally considered inedible by field guides . Because the fruit bodies begin development underground , they are too tough for consumption by the time they are visible , and their appearance may be considered unappetizing . A study of the cultural practices of mestizo descendants of the Otomi people in <unk> de Doria , Mexico , reported that immature specimens of C. cinnabarinum , known locally as <unk> , were frequently eaten raw in the past , especially by children . Consumption of the species was no longer commonplace , with only five of the 450 locals interviewed familiar with the practice . The gleba of C. cinnabarinum has been described as having a mild taste and , despite a local recollection to the contrary , is not sweet . C. cinnabarinum has also been used in traditional medicine . A 1986 <unk> study of native traditions in Veracruz identified this use of huang <unk> , which locals roasted , then consumed as a powder with mineral water to treat gastrointestinal distress . Unlike these Mexican traditions , Hunan folk beliefs hold that the mushroom is poisonous on account of its bright color . 
 = Nagato @-@ class battleship = 
 The Nagato @-@ class battleships ( <unk> , Nagato @-@ gata senkan ) were a pair of dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) during World War I , although they were not completed until after the end of the war . Nagato , the lead ship of the class , frequently served as a flagship . Both ships carried supplies for the survivors of the Great Kantō earthquake in 1923 . They were modernized in 1933 – 36 with improvements to their armor and machinery and a rebuilt superstructure in the pagoda mast style . Nagato and her sister ship Mutsu briefly participated in the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War in 1937 and Nagato was the flagship of Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto during the attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 that began the Pacific War . 
 The sisters participated in the Battle of Midway in June 1942 , although they did not see any combat . Mutsu saw more active service than her sister because she was not a flagship and participated in the Battle of the Eastern Solomons in August before returning to Japan in early 1943 . One of Mutsu 's aft magazines detonated in June , killing 1 @,@ 121 crew and visitors and destroying the ship . The IJN conducted a perfunctory investigation into the cause of her loss and concluded that it was the work of a disgruntled crewmember . They dispersed the survivors in an attempt to conceal the sinking to keep up morale in Japan . Much of the wreck was salvaged after the war and many artifacts and relics are on display in Japan . 
 Nagato spent most of the first two years of the war training in home waters . She was transferred to Truk in mid @-@ 1943 , but did not see any combat until the Battle of the Philippine Sea in mid @-@ 1944 when she was attacked by American aircraft . Nagato did not fire her main armament against enemy vessels until the Battle of Leyte Gulf in October 1944 . She was lightly damaged during the battle and returned to Japan the following month for repairs . The IJN was running out of fuel by this time and decided not to fully repair her . Nagato was converted into a floating anti @-@ aircraft platform and assigned to coastal defense duties . After the war , the ship was a target for U.S. nuclear weapon tests during Operation Crossroads in mid @-@ 1946 . She survived the first test with little damage , but was sunk by the second test . 
 = = Background = = 
 The IJN considered a battle fleet of eight modern battleships and eight modern armored cruisers necessary for the defense of Japan , and the government adopted that policy in 1907 . This was the genesis of the Eight @-@ Eight Fleet Program , the development of a cohesive battle line of 16 capital ships less than eight years old . Advances in naval technology like the British battleship HMS Dreadnought and the battlecruiser HMS Invincible forced the IJN to several times re @-@ evaluate the ships that it counted as modern . By 1910 , the IJN considered none of its current ships to be modern and restarted the program in 1911 with orders for the Fusō @-@ class dreadnoughts and the Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers . By 1915 , the IJN was halfway to its goal and wanted to order four more dreadnoughts , but the Diet rejected its plan , and the 1916 budget authorized only one dreadnought , later named Nagato , and two battlecruisers . Later that year , American President Woodrow Wilson announced plans for 10 additional battleships and six battlecruisers , and the following year the Diet authorized three more dreadnoughts in response , one of which would later be named Mutsu . 
 = = Design = = 
 Allocated project number A @-@ 102 , the Nagato class was designed before Commander Yuzuru Hiraga was reassigned to the Navy Technical Department ( NTD ) responsible for ship design , although Hiraga is often credited with the design of these ships . In contrast to earlier designs , the Nagato class used the American " all or nothing " armor scheme that maximized the armor thickness protecting the core of the ship by eliminating armor elsewhere . The design had two armored decks of medium thickness rather than the single thicker deck used formerly . The ships also used a new type of underwater protection system that successfully resisted penetration by 200 @-@ kilogram ( 440 lb ) torpedo warheads in full @-@ scale trials . It consisted of a deep water @-@ tight compartment adjacent to the hull , backed by a thick torpedo bulkhead that connected to the side and deck armor plates , with a deep fuel oil tank behind it . 
 Although the United States Navy planned to arm its Colorado class with 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) guns before the Nagato class was designed , Nagato 's 410 @-@ millimeter ( 16 @.@ 1 in ) guns made her the first dreadnought that was launched armed with guns larger than 15 inches ( 381 mm ) . 
 On 12 June 1917 , well before Mutsu was laid down , Hiraga proposed a revised design for the ship that reflected the lessons from the Battle of Jutland that had occurred the previous year , and incorporated advances in boiler technology . Given project number A @-@ 125 , his design added an extra twin main @-@ gun turret , using space and weight made available by the reduction of the number of boilers from 21 to 12 , while the power remained the same . He reduced the secondary armament from 20 guns to 16 , although they were raised in height to improve their ability to fire during heavy weather and to improve their arcs of fire . To increase the ship 's protection he proposed angling the belt armor outwards to improve its resistance to horizontal fire , and increasing the thickness of the lower deck armor and the torpedo bulkhead . Hiraga also planned to add anti @-@ torpedo bulges to improve underwater protection . He estimated that his ship would displace as much as Nagato , although it would cost about a million yen more . Hiraga 's changes would have considerably delayed Mutsu 's completion and were rejected by the Navy Ministry . 
 = = Description = = 
 The ships had a length of 201 @.@ 17 meters ( 660 ft 0 in ) between perpendiculars and 215 @.@ 8 meters ( 708 ft 0 in ) overall . They had a beam of 29 @.@ 02 meters ( 95 ft 3 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 08 meters ( 29 ft 9 in ) . The Nagato @-@ class ships displaced 32 @,@ 720 metric tons ( 32 @,@ 200 long tons ) at standard load and 39 @,@ 116 metric tons ( 38 @,@ 498 long tons ) at full load . Their crew consisted of 1 @,@ 333 officers and enlisted men as built and 1 @,@ 368 in 1935 . In 1944 , the crew totaled around 1 @,@ 734 men . 
 The Nagato class was equipped with a unique <unk> ( seven @-@ legged ) mast designed to maximize rigidity for range @-@ finding purposes and survivability under shellfire . It consisted of a thick vertical leg in the center surrounded by six outer legs . The central leg was large enough to accommodate an electric elevator running between the foretop and main deck . In November 1944 , the tops of Nagato 's mainmast and funnel were removed to improve the arcs of fire for her anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 In 1927 , Mutsu 's bow was remodeled to reduce the amount of spray produced when steaming into a head sea . This increased her overall length by 1 @.@ 59 meters ( 5 ft 3 in ) to 217 @.@ 39 meters ( 713 ft 3 in ) . This proved successful and her sister 's bow was rebuilt in 1930 . During their 1934 – 36 reconstruction , the ships ' sterns were lengthened by 7 @.@ 55 meters ( 24 @.@ 8 ft ) to improve their speed and their forward superstructures were rebuilt into a pagoda mast . They were given torpedo bulges to improve their underwater protection and to compensate for the weight of the additional armor and equipment . These changes increased their overall length to 224 @.@ 94 m ( 738 @.@ 0 ft ) , their beam to 34 @.@ 6 m ( 113 ft 6 in ) and their draft to 9 @.@ 49 meters ( 31 ft 2 in ) . Their displacement increased over 7 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 6 @,@ 900 long tons ) to 46 @,@ 690 metric tons ( 45 @,@ 950 long tons ) at deep load . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ships were equipped with four Gihon geared steam turbines , each of which drove one 4 @.@ 191 @-@ meter ( 13 ft 9 in ) propeller . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 80 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 60 @,@ 000 kW ) , using steam provided by 21 Kampon water @-@ tube boilers ; 15 of these were oil @-@ fired while the remaining half @-@ dozen used fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . The boilers had a working pressure of 286 psi ( 1 @,@ 972 kPa ; 20 kgf / cm2 ) . 
 The ships had a stowage capacity of 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 626 t ) of coal and 3 @,@ 400 long tons ( 3 @,@ 455 t ) of oil , giving them a range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . Nagato exceeded her designed speed of 26 @.@ 5 knots ( 49 @.@ 1 km / h ; 30 @.@ 5 mph ) during her sea trials , reaching 26 @.@ 7 knots ( 49 @.@ 4 km / h ; 30 @.@ 7 mph ) at 85 @,@ 500 shp ( 63 @,@ 800 kW ) and Mutsu reached the same speed with 87 @,@ 500 shp ( 65 @,@ 200 kW ) . The US Navy did not learn their actual speed capability until about 1937 ; previously it had believed that the ships were capable of only 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . 
 During refits in 1923 – 25 , the fore funnel was rebuilt in a serpentine shape in an unsuccessful effort to prevent smoke interference with the bridge and fire @-@ control systems . The rebuilt fore funnel was eliminated during the ships ' 1930s reconstructions when their boilers were replaced by 10 oil @-@ fired Kampon boilers , which had a working pressure of 313 psi ( 2 @,@ 158 kPa ; 22 kgf / cm2 ) and temperature of 300 ° C ( 572 ° F ) . The turbines were also replaced by lighter , more modern , units and their propellers were replaced by larger 4 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 14 ft 1 in ) ones . When the ships conducted their post @-@ reconstruction trials , they reached a speed of 24 @.@ 98 knots ( 46 @.@ 26 km / h ; 28 @.@ 75 mph ) with 82 @,@ 300 shp ( 61 @,@ 400 kW ) . Additional fuel oil was stored in the bottoms of the newly added torpedo bulges , which increased their capacity to 5 @,@ 560 long tons ( 5 @,@ 650 t ) and thus their range to 8 @,@ 560 nmi ( 15 @,@ 850 km ; 9 @,@ 850 mi ) at 16 knots . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament of the Nagato @-@ class ships consisted of eight 45 @-@ caliber 41 @-@ centimeter guns , mounted in two pairs of twin @-@ gun , superfiring turrets fore and aft . Numbered one through four from front to rear , the hydraulically powered turrets gave the guns an elevation range of − 2 to + 35 degrees . The rate of fire for the guns was around two rounds per minute . Their turrets were replaced in the mid @-@ 1930s using the turrets stored from the unfinished Tosa @-@ class battleships . While in storage they were modified to increase their range of elevation to − 3 to + 43 degrees , which increased the gun 's maximum range from 30 @,@ 200 to 37 @,@ 900 meters ( 33 @,@ 000 to 41 @,@ 400 yd ) . 
 By World War II , the guns used Type 91 armor @-@ piercing , capped shells . Each of these shells weighed 1 @,@ 020 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 250 lb ) and had a muzzle velocity of 780 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ) . Also available was a 936 @-@ kilogram ( 2 @,@ 064 lb ) high @-@ explosive shell that had a muzzle velocity of 805 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 640 ft / s ) . A special Type 3 Sankaidan incendiary shrapnel shell was developed in the 1930s for anti @-@ aircraft use . 
 The ships ' secondary armament of twenty 50 @-@ caliber 14 @-@ centimeter guns was mounted in casemates on the upper sides of the hull and in the superstructure . The latter guns had a maximum elevation of + 20 degrees and the former could elevate to + 25 degrees which gave them ranges of 15 @,@ 800 meters ( 17 @,@ 300 yd ) and 17 @,@ 000 meters ( 19 @,@ 000 yd ) respectively . Each gun could fire a 38 @-@ kilogram ( 84 lb ) high @-@ explosive projectile at a rate up to 10 rounds per minute . Anti @-@ aircraft defense was provided by four 40 @-@ caliber 3rd Year Type 3 @-@ inch AA guns in single mounts . The 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) high @-@ angle guns had a maximum elevation of + 75 degrees , and had a rate of fire of 13 to 20 rounds per minute . They fired a 6 kg ( 13 lb ) projectile with a muzzle velocity of 680 m / s ( 2 @,@ 200 ft / s ) to a maximum height of 7 @,@ 500 meters ( 24 @,@ 600 ft ) . The ship was also fitted with eight 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes , four on each broadside , two above water and two submerged . They used the 6th Year Type torpedo which had a 203 @-@ kilogram ( 448 lb ) warhead of Shimose powder . It had three settings for range and speed : 15 @,@ 500 meters ( 17 @,@ 000 yd ) at 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) , 10 @,@ 000 meters ( 11 @,@ 000 yd ) at 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) , or 7 @,@ 000 meters ( 7 @,@ 700 yd ) at 37 knots ( 69 km / h ; 43 mph ) . 
 Around 1926 , the four above @-@ water torpedo tubes were removed and the ships received three additional 76 @-@ millimeter AA guns that were situated around the base of the foremast . They were replaced by eight 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter Type 89 dual @-@ purpose guns in 1932 , fitted on both sides of the fore and aft superstructures in four twin @-@ gun mounts . When firing at surface targets , the guns had a range of 14 @,@ 700 meters ( 16 @,@ 100 yd ) . Their maximum rate of fire was 14 rounds a minute , but their sustained rate of fire was around eight rounds per minute . Two twin @-@ gun mounts for license @-@ built Vickers 2 @-@ pounder light AA guns were also added to the ship that same year . They had a rate of fire of 200 rounds per minute . 
 When the ships were reconstructed in 1934 – 36 , the remaining torpedo tubes and the two forward 14 @-@ centimeter guns were removed from the hull . All of the remaining 14 @-@ centimeter guns had their elevation increased to + 35 degrees which increased their range to 20 @,@ 000 meters ( 22 @,@ 000 yd ) . An unknown number of license @-@ built 13 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter Hotchkiss machine guns in twin mounts were also added . The maximum range of these guns was 6 @,@ 500 meters ( 7 @,@ 100 yd ) , but the effective range against aircraft was 700 – 1 @,@ 500 meters ( 770 – 1 @,@ 640 yd ) . The cyclic rate was adjustable between 425 and 475 rounds per minute , but the need to change 30 @-@ round magazines reduced the effective rate to 250 rounds per minute . 
 The 2 @-@ pounders were replaced in 1939 by 20 license @-@ built Hotchkiss 25 @-@ millimeter Type 96 light AA guns in a mixture of twin @-@ gun and single mounts . This was the standard Japanese light AA gun during World War II , but it suffered from severe design shortcomings that rendered it a largely ineffective weapon . According to historian Mark Stille , the twin and triple mounts " lacked sufficient speed in train or elevation ; the gun sights were unable to handle fast targets ; the gun exhibited excessive vibration ; the magazine was too small , and , finally , the gun produced excessive muzzle blast " . These 25 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) guns had an effective range of 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 300 yd ) . The maximum effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute because of the frequent need to change the 15 @-@ round magazines . As far as is known , no additional AA guns were installed aboard Mutsu before her loss . Additional 25 @-@ millimeter guns were installed aboard Nagato during the war ; on 10 July 1944 , she was reported to have 98 guns on board . An additional 30 guns were added during a refit in Yokosuka in November . Two more twin 127 @-@ millimeter gun mounts were added at the same time abreast the funnel and all of her 14 @-@ centimeter guns were removed as she was now a floating anti @-@ aircraft battery . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The Nagato @-@ class ships ' waterline armor belt was made from Vickers cemented armor and protected 137 @.@ 14 meters ( 449 @.@ 9 ft ) of the hull between the barbettes of the end turrets . The lower strake was 305 mm ( 12 in ) thick , 2 @.@ 7 meters ( 8 ft 10 in ) high , and tapered to a thickness of 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) at its bottom edge ; above it was a strake of 229 mm ( 9 in ) armor that was 1 @.@ 7 meters ( 5 ft 7 in ) high . Approximately 1 @.@ 77 meters ( 5 ft 10 in ) of the armor belt was below the waterline . The turrets were protected with an armor thickness of 305 mm on the face , 230 – 190 mm ( 9 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 5 in ) on the sides , and 152 – 127 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 0 in ) on the roof . The barbettes were protected by armor 305 mm thick , while the casemates of the 140 mm guns were protected by 25 mm armor plates . The sides of the conning tower were 369 mm ( 14 @.@ 5 in ) thick . 
 The main deck armor consisted of three layers of high @-@ tensile steel ( HTS ) 69 mm ( 2 @.@ 7 in ) thick that connected to the top of the upper strake of side armor . The flat portion of the lower deck had one layer of Ducol steel 25 mm thick with two layers of HTS of equal thickness above it . About 3 meters ( 9 ft 10 in ) from the side of the hull , this deck , now composed of three layers of HTS , totaling 75 mm ( 3 in ) in thickness , sloped downwards where it met a short horizontal armored ( three layers of HTS with a total thickness of 66 mm ( 3 in ) ) deck that connected to the main armored belt and the torpedo bulkhead . This was also made up of three 25 mm layers of HTS and curved up and outwards to meet the short horizontal armored deck . It enclosed a water @-@ tight compartment that was 3 @.@ 05 meters ( 10 ft 0 in ) from the side of the ship . It was backed by fuel oil tanks 3 @.@ 13 meters ( 10 ft 3 in ) deep . The outermost void was designed to allow the explosive force of a torpedo 's warhead to dissipate as much as possible while the oil tank was supposed to stop any fragments from penetrating the innermost bulkhead protecting the ship 's vital areas . 
 The new 41 cm turrets installed during their reconstruction were more heavily armored than the original ones . Face armor was increased to 460 mm ( 18 in ) , the sides to 280 mm ( 11 in ) , and the roof to 230 – 250 mm ( 9 – 10 in ) . The armor over the machinery and magazines was increased by 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) on the upper deck and 25 mm on the upper armored deck . The torpedo bulges added at the same time were 13 @.@ 5 meters ( 44 ft 3 in ) high and 2 @.@ 84 meters ( 9 ft 4 in ) deep . They were divided into four compartments , the lower two of which were filled with oil and the others remained empty . These additions increased the weight of each ship 's armor to 13 @,@ 032 metric tons ( 12 @,@ 826 long tons ) , 32 @.@ 6 percent of their displacement . In early 1941 , as a preparation for war , the uppermost compartment of the bulges was filled with sealed steel crushing tubes and the barbette armor of both ships was reinforced with 100 mm armor plates above the main deck and 215 mm ( 8 @.@ 5 in ) plates below it . 
 = = = Fire control and sensors = = = 
 The Nagato @-@ class ships were fitted with a 10 @-@ meter ( 32 ft 10 in ) rangefinder in the forward superstructure ; six @-@ meter ( 19 ft 8 in ) and three @-@ meter ( 9 ft 10 in ) anti @-@ aircraft rangefinders were added in the early 1920s . The rangefinders in the two superfiring turrets were replaced by 10 @-@ meter units in 1932 – 33 . 
 They were initially fitted with a Type 13 fire @-@ control system derived from Vickers equipment received during World War I , but this was replaced by an improved Type 14 system around 1925 . It controlled the main and secondary guns ; no provision was made for anti @-@ aircraft fire until the Type 31 fire @-@ control director was introduced in 1932 . A modified Type 14 fire @-@ control system was tested aboard Nagato in 1935 , and later approved for service as the Type 34 . A new anti @-@ aircraft director , designated the Type 94 , used to control the 127 mm AA guns , was introduced in 1937 , although it is unknown when they were installed on the ships . The 25 mm AA guns were controlled by a Type 95 director that was also introduced in 1937 . 
 As far as is known , no radars were installed aboard Mutsu before her loss . While in drydock in May 1943 , a Type 21 air @-@ search radar was installed aboard Nagato on the roof of the 10 @-@ meter rangefinder at the top of the pagoda mast . On 27 June 1944 , two Type 22 surface @-@ search radars were installed on the pagoda mast and two Type 13 early warning radars were fitted on her mainmast . 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 Nagato was briefly fitted with an 18 @-@ meter ( 59 ft 1 in ) aircraft flying @-@ off platform on No. 2 turret in August 1925 . Yokosuka Ro @-@ go Ko @-@ gata and Heinkel HD 25 floatplanes were tested from it before it was removed early the following year . An additional boom was added to the mainmasts of both ships in 1926 to handle the Yokosuka E1Y then assigned to them . A Hansa @-@ Brandenburg W.33 floatplane was tested aboard Nagato that same year . A catapult was fitted between the mainmast and No. 3 turret in mid @-@ 1933 , a collapsible crane was installed in a portside sponson , and the ships were equipped to operate two or three floatplanes , although no hangar was provided . The sisters began to operate Nakajima E4N2 biplanes until they were replaced by Nakajima E8N2 biplanes in 1938 . A more powerful catapult was installed in November 1938 to handle heavier aircraft like the one Kawanishi E7K that was added in 1939 – 40 . Mitsubishi F1M biplanes replaced the E8Ns on 11 February 1943 . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 While Mutsu was still fitting out , the American government decided to call a conference in Washington , D.C. to forestall the massively expensive naval arms race between the United States , the United Kingdom and the Empire of Japan that was developing . The Washington Naval Conference convened on 12 November , and the Americans proposed to scrap virtually every capital ship under construction or fitting out among the participating nations . Mutsu was specifically listed among those to be scrapped even though she had been commissioned a few weeks earlier . This was unacceptable to the Japanese delegation and they agreed to a compromise that allowed them to keep Mutsu in exchange for scrapping the obsolete dreadnought Settsu and a similar arrangement for several American Colorado @-@ class dreadnoughts that were fitting out . 
 Upon commissioning , the sister ships were assigned to the 1st Battleship Division , although Nagato became the flagship of Rear Admiral Sōjirō Tochinai , a role she often fulfilled during her career . The ships hosted Edward , Prince of Wales , and his aide @-@ de @-@ camp Lieutenant Louis Mountbatten in 1922 during the prince 's visit to Japan . After the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake , both ships loaded supplies from Kyushu for the victims on 4 September . They sank the hulk of the obsolete battleship Satsuma on 7 September 1924 during gunnery practice in Tokyo Bay in accordance with the Washington Naval Treaty . Nagato became flagship of the Combined Fleet on 1 December 1925 , flying the flag of Admiral Keisuke Okada . The sisters were placed in reserve several times during the 1920s while they were being modernized . Mutsu served as flagship of Emperor Hirohito during the 1927 naval maneuvers and fleet review and again in 1933 . 
 The ships were reconstructed from late 1933 to mid @-@ 1936 . In August 1937 , the sisters transported 3 @,@ 749 men of the 11th Infantry Division to Shanghai during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . Their floatplanes bombed targets in Shanghai on 24 August before they returned to Sasebo the following day . Nagato became a training ship on 1 December 1937 until she again became the flagship of the Combined Fleet on 15 December 1938 . The ship participated in an Imperial Fleet Review on 11 October 1940 . The sisters were refitted in 1941 in preparation for war , which included the fitting of external degaussing coils and additional armor for their barbettes . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto issued the code phrase " Niitaka yama nobore " ( Climb Mount Niitaka ) on 2 December 1941 from Nagato at anchor at Hashirajima to signal the 1st Air Fleet ( Kido Butai ) to proceed with its attack on Pearl Harbor . When Japan began the Pacific War on 8 December , the sisters sortied for the Bonin Islands , along with the four ships of Battleship Division 2 and the light carrier Hōshō as distant cover for the fleet attacking Pearl Harbor , and returned six days later . Yamamoto transferred his flag to the new battleship Yamato on 12 February 1942 . 
 In June 1942 , Mutsu and Nagato were assigned to the Main Body of the 1st Fleet during the Battle of Midway , together with Yamato , Hōshō , the light cruiser Sendai and nine destroyers . Following the loss of all four fleet carriers of the " Kido Butai " on 4 June , Yamamoto attempted to lure the American forces west to within range of the Japanese air groups at Wake Island , and into a night engagement with his surface forces , but the American forces withdrew and Mutsu saw no action . After rendezvousing with the remnants of the Striking Force on 6 June , over half of the survivors from the sunken aircraft carriers of the 1st Air Fleet were transferred to Mutsu and Nagato . They arrived at Hashirajima on 14 June . 
 On 14 July , both ships were reassigned to Battleship Division 2 and Nagato became the flagship of the 1st Fleet . She remained in Japanese waters training until August 1942 . Mutsu was transferred to the Advance Force of the 2nd Fleet on 9 August , and departed Yokosuka two days later to support operations during the Guadalcanal Campaign . She arrived at Truk on 17 August . On 20 August , while sailing from Truk to rendezvous with the main body of Vice Admiral Chūichi Nagumo 's 3rd Fleet , Mutsu , the heavy cruiser Atago , and escorting destroyers unsuccessfully attempted to locate the escort carrier USS Long Island in response to a flying boat detection of the American ship . 
 During the Battle of the Eastern Solomons on 27 August , Mutsu , assigned to the Support Force , fired four shells at enemy reconnaissance aircraft during what was her first , and only , action of the war . On 7 January 1943 , Mutsu returned to Japan together with the carrier Zuikaku , the heavy cruiser Suzuya and four destroyers . The ship prepared to sortie on 13 April to reinforce the Japanese garrisons in the Aleutian Islands in response to the Battle of the Komandorski Islands , but the operation was cancelled the next day and Mutsu resumed training . 
 = = = = Mutsu 's loss = = = = 
 On 8 June 1943 , Mutsu was moored at Hashirajima when the magazine of her No. 3 turret exploded at 12 : 13 , cutting the ship in half . The forward section capsized almost immediately , but the rear section remained afloat until the early morning of the next day . Nearby ships were able to rescue 353 survivors from the 1 @,@ 474 crew members and visitors aboard Mutsu , meaning that 1 @,@ 121 men were killed in the explosion . To avert the potential damage to morale from the loss of a battleship , Mutsu 's loss was declared a state secret . To further prevent rumors from spreading , many survivors were reassigned to various garrisons in the Pacific Ocean . 
 The IJN convened a commission three days after the sinking to investigate the loss . It issued its preliminary conclusions on 25 June , well before the investigation of the wreck was completed , and decided that the explosion was the result of a disgruntled seaman . The commission failed to consider the possibility of fire , which historian Mike Williams considers to be a possible cause , as a number of observers noted smoke coming from the vicinity of No. 3 turret . The truth , however , will never be known . 
 = = = = Nagato = = = = 
 Nagato transferred to Truk in the Caroline Islands in August 1943 . Together with the bulk of the 1st Fleet , she sortied in September and October in unsuccessful searches for American carriers . On 1 February 1944 , Nagato departed Truk to avoid an American air raid , and arrived at Palau three days later . The ship arrived on 21 February at Lingga Island , near Singapore , and she became the flagship of Vice Admiral Matome Ugaki , commander of Battleship Division 1 , on 25 February until he transferred his flag to Yamato on 5 May . Nagato remained at Lingga until 11 May when she was transferred to Tawitawi on 12 May , and assigned to the 1st Mobile Fleet , under the command of Vice Admiral Jisaburō Ozawa . 
 Battleship Division 1 rendezvoused with Ozawa 's main force on 16 June near the Mariana Islands , and Nagato escorted three aircraft carriers during the Battle of the Philippine Sea . She was only lightly engaged during the battle , was not damaged , and suffered no casualties . After the battle , the ship returned to Japan where she was refitted with additional radars and light AA guns . Nagato loaded a regiment of the 28th Infantry Division and delivered them at Okinawa on 11 July before continuing on to Lingga . 
 In October 1944 , the ship took part in " Operation Sho @-@ 1 " , an attack on the Allied landings on Leyte . Assigned to Vice Admiral Takeo Kurita 's 1st Diversion Force ( also known as the Center Force ) , Nagato was attacked by multiple waves of American dive bombers and fighters during the Battle of the Sibuyan Sea on 24 October en route to Leyte Gulf . She was struck twice by bombs that killed 52 crewmen , but was not seriously damaged . 
 The next morning , the 1st Diversion Force attacked the American forces supporting the invasion in the Battle off Samar . Nagato engaged the escort carriers and destroyers of Task Group 77 @.@ 4 @.@ 3 , codenamed " Taffy 3 " . She opened fire on three escort carriers , the first time she had fired her guns at an enemy ship , but missed . One of the defending destroyers fired a spread of torpedoes that missed their intended target and headed for Yamato and Nagato which were on a parallel course . The two battleships were forced to turn away north to avoid the torpedoes , and were 10 miles ( 16 km ) away from the engagement before the torpedoes ran out of fuel . Turning back , Nagato engaged the American ships , claiming damage to one cruiser . Later in the day , Nagato was hit in the bow by two bombs , but the damage was not severe . 
 The ship returned to Japan for repairs in mid @-@ November . Lack of fuel and materials meant that she could not be brought back into service and she was turned into a floating anti @-@ aircraft battery . Her funnel and mainmast were removed to improve the arcs of fire of her AA guns , which were increased by two Type 89 mounts and nine triple 25 mm gun mounts . Her forward secondary guns were removed in compensation . A coal @-@ burning donkey boiler was installed on the pier for heating and cooking purposes and a converted submarine chaser was moored alongside to provide steam and electricity ; her anti @-@ aircraft guns lacked full power and were only partially operational . On 20 April Nagato was reduced to reserve . In June 1945 , all of her secondary guns and about half of her anti @-@ aircraft armament was moved ashore , together with her rangefinders and searchlights . Her crew was therefore reduced to less than 1 @,@ 000 officers and enlisted men . On 18 July 1945 , the heavily camouflaged ship was attacked by carrier @-@ based fighter bombers and torpedo bombers . Nagato was hit by two bombs and a rocket that killed 35 men and damaged four 25 mm guns . On 30 August , a few days before the formal surrender , American sailors took control of the ship . 
 = = After the war = = 
 Nagato was selected to participate as a target ship in Operation Crossroads , a series of U.S. nuclear weapon tests held at Bikini Atoll in mid @-@ 1946 . In mid @-@ March , Nagato departed Yokosuka for Eniwetok , but her hull had not been repaired from the underwater damage sustained during the attack on 18 July and she leaked enough that her pumps could not keep up . The ship had a list of seven degrees to port by the time tugboats from Eniwetok arrived . She reached the atoll on 4 April and Bikini in May . 
 Operation Crossroads began with the first blast ( Test Able ) , an air burst on 1 July 1946 ; Nagato was not close to ground zero and was only lightly damaged . For Test Baker , an underwater explosion , the ship was positioned closer to ground zero . Nagato rode out the tsunami of water from the explosion with little apparent damage ; she had a slight starboard list of two degrees after the tsunami dissipated . A more thorough assessment could not be made because she was dangerously radioactive . Her list gradually increased over the next five days and she capsized during the night of 29 / 30 July . Opened to divers in 1996 , The Times has named Nagato as one of the top 10 wreck diving sites in the world . 
 In 1970 , salvage operations began on Mutsu 's wreck that lasted until 1978 and recovered about 75 % of the ship . The salvagers recovered bodies of 849 crewmen killed during the explosion . In 1995 , the Mutsu Memorial Museum declared that no further salvage operations were planned . The only significant portion of the ship that remains is a 35 @-@ meter ( 114 ft 10 in ) long section running from the bridge structure forward to the vicinity of No. 1 turret . The highest portion of the ship is 12 meters ( 39 ft 4 in ) below the surface . Many , but not all , artifacts are displayed at the Mutsu Memorial Museum in Tōwa @-@ Cho . Since 1963 , a memorial service has been held there every year on 8 June in honor of the crew . 
 = Kenny McCormick = 
 Kenneth " Kenny " McCormick ( sometimes spelled as <unk> ) is a main character in the animated adult television series South Park , along with his friends Stan Marsh , Kyle Broflovski , and Eric Cartman . His oft @-@ muffled and indiscernible speech — the result of his parka hood covering his mouth — is provided by co @-@ creator Matt Stone . He debuted on television when South Park first aired on August 13 , 1997 , after having first appeared in The Spirit of Christmas shorts created by Stone and long @-@ time collaborator Trey Parker in 1992 ( Jesus vs. Frosty ) and 1995 ( Jesus vs. Santa ) . 
 Kenny is a third , later fourth @-@ grade student who commonly has extraordinary experiences not typical of conventional small @-@ town life in his hometown of South Park , Colorado , where he lives with his impoverished family . Kenny is animated by computer to look as he did in the show 's original method of cutout animation . He also appears in the 1999 full @-@ length feature film South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut , in which his true appearance and voice was first revealed , and various South Park merchandise . 
 In a running gag most prevalent during the first five seasons of the series , Kenny would suffer an excruciating death before returning alive and well in the next episode with little or no definitive explanation given . Stan would frequently use the catchphrase " Oh my God ! They killed Kenny ! " Followed by Kyle exclaiming " ... You bastards ! " . Media commentators have published their interpretations of the many aspects of the running gag from philosophical and societal viewpoints . Since the show began its sixth season in 2002 , the practice of killing Kenny has been seldom used by the show 's creators . Various episodes have set up the gag , sometimes presenting a number of explanations for Kenny 's unacknowledged reappearances . 
 = = Role in South Park = = 
 Kenny attends South Park Elementary as part of Mr. Garrison 's fourth grade class . During the first 58 episodes , Kenny and the other main child characters were in the third grade . Kenny comes from a poor household , presided over by his violent , alcoholic and unemployed Irish / Scottish father , Stuart McCormick . His mother Carol McCormick has a job washing dishes at the Olive Garden . Kenny has an older brother named Kevin . He also has a younger sister , shown with his family in the season nine episode " Best Friends Forever " , but does not make another appearance until the 15th season episode " The Poor Kid " , in which her name is revealed to be Karen , whom he loves unconditionally . Kenny is friends with Stan and Kyle , and has indicated that he maintains a friendship with Eric Cartman solely out of pity . Kenny is regularly teased for living in poverty , particularly by Cartman . 
 Kenny 's superhero alter ego , Mysterion , first appeared in the Season 13 episode " The Coon " , as a rival to Eric Cartman 's eponymous superhero alter ego . He unmasks himself at the end of the episode , but his identity is left intentionally ambiguous . He is not revealed to be Kenny until the Season 14 episode " Mysterion Rises " , the character 's third appearance as part of a story arc . 
 = = Deaths = = 
 Prior to season six , Kenny died in almost every episode . The nature of the deaths were often gruesome and portrayed in a comically absurd fashion , and usually followed by Stan and Kyle respectively yelling " Oh my God ! They killed Kenny ! " and " You bastard ( s ) ! " . Shortly afterward , rats would commonly appear and begin picking at his corpse . In a following episode , Kenny would reappear alive and well , usually without any explanation . Most characters appear oblivious or indifferent to the phenomenon , although occasionally one will acknowledge an awareness of it . In " Cherokee Hair Tampons " , Kenny gets irritated and offended when Stan laments Kyle 's critical condition while utterly ignoring Kenny 's past demises . Eric Cartman commented on Kenny 's deaths in the episode " Cartmanland " , when he is being sued for unsafe rides insisting to attorneys representing his family that " Kenny dies all the time ! " 
 Near the end of the production run of the show 's fifth season , Parker and Stone contemplated having an episode in which Kenny was killed off permanently . The reasoning behind the idea was to genuinely surprise fans , and to allow an opportunity to provide a major role for Butters Stotch , a breakout character whose popularity was growing with the viewers and creators of the show . In the episode " Kenny Dies " , Kenny dies after developing terminal muscular dystrophy , while Parker and Stone claimed that Kenny would not be returning in subsequent episodes . The duo insisted they grew tired of upholding the tradition of having Kenny die in each episode . Stone stated that thinking of humorous ways to kill the character was initially fun , but became more mundane as the series progressed . When they determined that it would be too difficult to develop the character because he was too much of a " prop " , Parker and Stone finally decided to kill off Kenny permanently . 
 [ " Kenny Dies " ] was the one episode where [ all the characters ] cared [ he was dying ] for once . After that , we said , ' Why doesn 't he just stay dead ? ' And it was like , ' Okay , let 's just do that . ' It was that easy of a decision . I think a lot of people probably haven 't noticed . I couldn 't care less . I am so sick of that character . 
 — Matt Stone , from a 2002 article in the Knoxville News @-@ Sentinel 
 For much of season six , Kenny remained dead , though both Stone and Parker entertained the idea of eventually bringing the character back . According to Stone , only a small minority of fans were significantly angered by Kenny 's absence to threaten a boycott of the cable channel Comedy Central , on which South Park is aired . For most of the season , Stan , Kyle , and Cartman fill the void left by Kenny by allowing the characters Butters Stotch and Tweek <unk> into their group , paving the way for those characters to receive more focus on the show . Nevertheless , Kenny returned from the year @-@ long absence in the season six finale " Red Sleigh Down " , and has remained a main character since , and has been given larger roles in episodes . His character no longer dies each week , and has only been killed occasionally in episodes following his return . 
 The first explanation given for Kenny 's deaths and reappearances was given in " Cartman Joins NAMBLA " , wherein the <unk> have a baby exactly like Kenny , including the characteristic orange parka , shortly after the former Kenny dies . Mr. McCormick exclaims , " God , this must be the fiftieth time this has happened " , to which Mrs. McCormick quickly replies , " Fifty @-@ second " . This explanation is expanded upon in the Season 14 episodes " Coon 2 : Hindsight " , " Mysterion Rises " and " Coon vs. Coon and Friends " , in which Kenny , while playing superheroes with his friends , claims his " super power " is immortality . He actually dies several times during these episodes — even committing suicide more than once — reawakening in his bed each time . He is annoyed and angry that no one can remember him dying every time he regenerates , and longs to know the source of his power . Unbeknownst to him , his parents were previously connected to a Cthulhu @-@ worshipping death cult . After Kenny shoots himself the second time , Mrs. McCormick awakes with a scream , shrieks " It 's happening again ! " , and minutes later , is shown gently placing a newborn Kenny in his bed . " We should never have gone to that stupid cult meeting , " she <unk> as she and her husband return to bed . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation and design = = = 
 When developing the character , the show 's creators had observed that most groups of childhood friends in small middle @-@ class towns always included " the one poor kid " and decided to portray Kenny in this light . 
 An unnamed precursor to Kenny first appeared in the first The Spirit of Christmas short , dubbed Jesus vs. Frosty , created by Parker and Stone in 1992 while they were students at the University of Colorado . The character was composed of construction paper cutouts and animated through the use of stop motion . When tasked three years later by friend Brian Graden to create another short as a video Christmas card that he could send to friends , Parker and Stone created another similarly @-@ animated The Spirit of Christmas short , dubbed Jesus vs. Santa . In this short , Kenny is given his first name , and first appears as he does in the series . Kenny next appeared on August 13 , 1997 , when South Park debuted on Comedy Central with the episode " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " . 
 In tradition with the show 's animation style , Kenny is composed of simple geometrical shapes and primary colors . He is not offered the same free range of motion associated with hand @-@ drawn characters ; his character is mostly shown from only one angle , and his movements are animated in an intentionally jerky fashion . Ever since the show 's second episode , " Weight Gain 4000 " ( season one , 1997 ) , Kenny , like all other characters on the show , has been animated with computer software , though he is portrayed to give the impression that the show still utilizes its original technique . 
 The effect of Kenny 's speech is achieved by Stone mumbling into his own hand as he provides Kenny 's lines , while the recorded audio is then edited with Pro Tools , and the pitch is altered to make the voice sound more like that of a fourth grader . As the technique of Kenny 's muzzled enunciation frequently implies , many of his lines are indeed profane and sexually explicit , the lengthier of which are mostly improvised by Stone . 
 He first appeared unobscured by his hood in South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut , where it was revealed that he had messy golden hair . In a cameo appearance during this moment in the film , Mike Judge provided the voice for Kenny 's one line of uninsulated dialogue : " Goodbye , you guys . " On a few occasions during episodes that have originally aired since the film 's release , he has been seen without the parka ; however , unlike in Bigger , Longer & Uncut his entire face has been only seen once in the television series without being partially obscured or otherwise altered , this being in The Losing Edge . He also speaks <unk> during some of these instances , in which case co @-@ producer Eric Stough provides Kenny 's voice . During " The Coon " episodes of seasons 13 and 14 , Kenny has his first major speaking role as the character Mysterion . 
 = = = Personality and traits = = = 
 While most child characters on the show are foul @-@ mouthed , Kenny is often even more risqué with his dialogue . Parker and Stone state that they depict Kenny and his friends in this manner in order to display how young boys really talk when they are alone . While Kenny is often cynical and profane , Parker notes that there nonetheless is an " underlying sweetness " aspect to the character , and Time magazine described Kenny and his friends as " sometimes cruel but with a core of innocence " . He is amused by toilet humor and bodily functions , and his favorite television personalities are Terrance and Phillip , a Canadian duo whose comedy routines on their show @-@ within @-@ the @-@ show revolve substantially around fart jokes . Kenny is shown to desire intercourse in the episode " The Ring " , when Kenny gets a girlfriend and is overjoyed to find out that she has a reputation as a slut . Kenny is also lecherous , and often portrayed as being eager to do and say disgusting things in an attempt to impress others or earn money . Conversely , his alter @-@ ego Mysterion is seemingly mature , principled , and serious @-@ minded , the only exception being one instance in " Mysterion Rises " in which he takes delight in irritating Cartman . As Mysterion he convinces his parents to take better care of themselves and their children , as seen by their reaction when he questions them about the cult of Cthulhu . He also uses his disguise to protect his sister Karen ( who refers to Mysterion as her " guardian angel " ) , as revealed in " The Poor Kid . " Despite his character flaws in all of his guises Kenny is usually depicted as being uncommonly selfless , even dying for the sake of others . 
 When role @-@ playing , Kenny has been shown to prefer playing as the female hero . This was first discovered in the episode " Black Friday " and continued through the next two sequel episodes called " A Song of Ass and Fire " and its follow @-@ up , " Titties and Dragons " . Throughout the three episodes , Kenny cross @-@ dresses as a fantasy @-@ style princess with a wig and dress similar to the video game character Princess Zelda , and becomes a Japanese @-@ speaking moe anime character at one point . When Cartman complains , " You 're never going to be a real princess " , Princess Kenny responds ( via her translator , Stan ) angrily to Cartman , calling him a " ball @-@ licking lesbian " . This portrayal continues in the video game South Park : The Stick of Truth where Cartman notes that playing a " chick " is " just how [ Kenny ] seems to be rolling right now " . Kenny 's sister also refers to Kenny by female pronouns if you talk to her in the McCormick house . Throughout the game , Kenny posts ' status updates ' referring to him / herself as " the cutest of them all " and refers to him / herself with female pronouns . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Kenny 's deaths are well known in popular culture , and was one of the things viewers most commonly associated with South Park during its earlier seasons . The exclamation of " Oh my God ! They killed Kenny ! " quickly became a popular catchphrase , while both Kenny and the phrase have appeared on some of the more popular pieces of South Park merchandise , including shirts , bumper stickers , calendars and baseball caps , and inspired the rap song " Kenny 's Dead " by Master P , which was featured on Chef Aid : The South Park Album . 
 The running gag of Kenny 's deaths in earlier seasons was incorporated into the season 9 ( 2005 ) episode " Best Friends Forever " when Kenny , in a vegetative state , is kept alive by a feeding tube while a media circus erupted over whether the tube should be removed and allow Kenny to die . The episode received much attention as it served to provide commentary on the Terri Schiavo case , originally airing just one day before Schiavo died . The episode earned South Park its first Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program . 
 Kenny 's deaths have been subject to much critical analysis in the media and literary world . In the book South Park and Philosophy : Bigger , Longer , and More Penetrating , an essay by Southern Illinois University philosophy professor Dr. Randall Auxier , entitled " Killing Kenny : Our Daily Dose of Death " , suggests that the fashion of the recurring gag serves to help the viewer become more comfortable with the inevitability of their own death . In the book South Park and Philosophy : You Know , I Learned Something Today , University of Wisconsin – Stevens Point professor Karin Fry wrote an essay concerning the parallels between Kenny 's role in the show and the different concepts of existentialism . 
 When Sophie <unk> of the University of Strasbourg discovered a mutated gene that causes an adult fruit fly to die within two days after it is infected with certain bacteria , she named the gene " Kenny " in honor of the character . 
 = = In other media = = 
 Kenny had a major role in South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut , the full @-@ length film based on the series , and appeared on the film 's soundtrack singing ( albeit muffled ) several lines of the song " Mountain Town " from the film . As a tribute to the Dead Parrot sketch , a short that features Kenny as a " dead friend " being returned by Cartman to a shop run by Kyle aired during a 1999 BBC television special commemorating the 30th anniversary of Monty Python 's Flying Circus . Kenny was also featured in the documentary film The Aristocrats , listening to Cartman tell his version of the film 's titular joke , and in the " The Gauntlet " , a short spoofing both Gladiator and Battlefield Earth that aired during the 2000 MTV Movie Awards . 
 Kenny also appears in five South Park @-@ related video games : In South Park , Kenny is controlled by the player through the first person shooter mode who attempts to ward off enemies from terrorizing the town of South Park . In South Park : Chef 's Luv Shack , a user has the option of playing as Kenny when participating in the game 's several " minigames " based on other popular arcade games . In the racing game South Park Rally , a user can race as Kenny against other users playing as other characters , while choosing to place him in any of a variety of vehicles . In South Park Let 's Go Tower Defense Play ! , Kenny can be selected as a playable character used to establish a tower defense against the game 's antagonists . In South Park : The Stick of Truth , Kenny can be selected as a companion over the course of much of the game . 
 = French battleship Carnot = 
 Carnot was an ironclad battleship of the French Navy . She was laid down in July 1891 , launched in July 1894 , and completed in July 1897 . She was a member of a group of five broadly similar battleships , along with Charles Martel , Jauréguiberry , Bouvet , and Masséna , which were ordered in response to the British Royal Sovereign class . Like her half @-@ sisters , she was armed with a main battery of two 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns and two 274 mm ( 10 @.@ 8 in ) guns in individual turrets . She had a top speed of 17 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 0 km / h ; 20 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 Carnot had a fairly uneventful career . She spent the majority of her service life in the Northern and Mediterranean Squadrons of the French fleet , where she participated in extensive , annual maneuvers . She was withdrawn from service by the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , and so did not see action during the conflict . She remained in the French Navy 's inventory until 1922 , when she was stricken from the naval register and sold for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Carnot was the second member of a group of five battleships built to a broadly similar design , but different enough to be considered unique vessels . The first ship was Charles Martel , which formed the basis for Carnot and three other ships . Design specifications were identical for each of the ships , but different engineers designed each vessel . The ships were based on the previous battleship Brennus , but instead of mounting the main battery all on the centerline , the ships used the lozenge arrangement of the earlier vessel Magenta , which moved two of the main battery guns to single turrets on the wings . The five ships were built in response to the British Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Carnot was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long between perpendiculars , and had a beam of 21 @.@ 4 m ( 70 ft 3 in ) and a draught of 8 @.@ 36 m ( 27 ft 5 in ) . She had a displacement of 11 @,@ 954 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 765 long tons ) . Her bridge was cut down compared to Charles Martel to save weight , and she was equipped with lighter pole masts instead of the heavy fighting masts used on her half @-@ sister . She had a crew of 647 officers and enlisted men . 
 Carnot had two vertical triple expansion engines each driving a single screw , with steam supplied by twenty @-@ four Lagrafel d 'Allest water @-@ tube boilers . Her propulsion system was rated at 16 @,@ 300 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 200 kW ) , which allowed the ship to steam at a speed of 17 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 0 km / h ; 20 @.@ 5 mph ) . As built , she could carry 680 t ( 670 long tons ; 750 short tons ) of coal , though additional space allowed for up to 980 t ( 960 long tons ; 1 @,@ 080 short tons ) in total . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Carnot 's main armament consisted of two Canon de 305 mm Modèle 1887 guns in two single @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft . She also mounted two Canon de 274 mm Modèle 1887 guns in two single @-@ gun turrets , one amidships on each side , sponsoned out over the tumblehome of the ship 's sides . Her secondary armament consisted of eight Canon de 138 @.@ 6 mm Modèle 1888 guns , which were mounted in single turrets at the corners of the superstructure . She also carried four 9 @-@ pounder quick @-@ firing guns , twelve 3 @-@ pounders , and eight 1 @-@ pounder revolving cannons . Her armament suite was rounded out by two 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , which were submerged in the ship 's hull . 
 The ship 's armor was constructed with nickel steel . The main belt was 460 mm ( 18 in ) thick amidships , and tapered down to 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) at the lower edge . On either end of the central citadel , the belt was reduced to 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) at the waterline and 250 mm on the lower edge ; the belt extended for the entire length of the hull . Above the belt was 101 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 in ) thick side armor . The main battery guns were protected with 380 mm ( 15 in ) of armor , and the secondary turrets had 101 mm thick sides . The main armored deck was 69 mm ( 2 @.@ 7 in ) thick . The conning tower had 230 mm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides . 
 = = History = = 
 Carnot was laid down in Toulon in July 1891 and launched three years later in July 1894 . Fitting @-@ out work was completed another three years after that , in July 1897 , and the ship was commissioned into the French Navy . 
 Carnot spent the majority of her active career alternating between the Northern and Mediterranean Squadrons . The newer battleships typically served in the Mediterranean , while older vessels were assigned to the Northern Squadron . In January 1900 , she was assigned to the Northern Squadron , under the command of Vice Admiral Ménard , replacing the Charlemagne . The Northern Squadron conducted annual training exercises in June 1901 ; the following month , they joined the Mediterranean Squadron for combined fleet maneuvers . 
 By 1902 , Carnot had been transferred to the Reserve Squadron of the Mediterranean Squadron , alongside the old battleships Charles Martel , Brennus , and Hoche . The Reserve Squadron was commanded by Rear Admiral Besson , who flew his flag in Brennus . The entire French fleet , including Carnot , conducted extensive maneuvers in the Mediterranean in July and August of that year . 
 Carnot had been transferred to the Northern Squadron by 1906 , and participated in the annual summer maneuvers in June – July 1906 . The following year , Carnot was back in the Mediterranean , in the Second Squadron . She remained in the Second Squadron through 1909 . 
 By the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Carnot had been laid up in the port of Brest , along with Charles Martel . Both ships were retained on the effective list , however , pending the completion of the new Normandie @-@ class battleships . Carnot was ultimately stricken from the naval register in 1922 and sold for scrapping that year . 
 = Sydney Leroux = 
 Sydney Rae Leroux Dwyer ( born May 7 , 1990 ) is a Canadian American professional soccer player and Olympic gold medalist . As a forward , she is currently signed by FC Kansas City in the National Women 's Soccer League ( NWSL ) . After representing Canada at various youth levels , she chose to play for the United States women 's national under @-@ 20 soccer team starting in 2008 and later began playing for the U.S. senior national team in 2012 . Leroux has earned over 50 caps with the senior national team and was part of the Americans ' winning squads at the 2012 London Olympics and 2015 Women 's World Cup . 
 Leroux played collegiate soccer for the UCLA Bruins and at the semi @-@ professional level for the Vancouver Whitecaps . She made her debut for the Whitecaps at the age of fifteen , becoming the youngest player ever to play for the team . Leroux was the number one pick by the Atlanta Beat during the 2012 WPS Draft on January 13 , 2012 . Following the suspension of the league in early 2012 , she played for the Seattle Sounders Women during the summer of the same year . In 2013 , she made her professional debut for the Boston Breakers in the NWSL during the league 's inaugural season . She was later traded to Seattle Reign FC in 2014 , Western New York Flash for the 2015 season and FC Kansas City prior to the 2016 season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Leroux was born in Surrey , British Columbia to a Canadian mother , Sandi Leroux , and an American father , Ray Chadwick . Her mother played third base for the Canadian national softball team . Her father was a professional baseball player who pitched briefly for the California Angels in 1986 . Coming from a family of baseball players , Sydney played baseball for Whalley Little League from 1994 – 2004 . Leroux was raised primarily by her mother after her parents split when her mother was three months pregnant with Sydney . 
 During her freshman and sophomore year of high school , Leroux attended Johnston Heights Secondary School in Surrey where she was the leading scorer on the soccer team . Also a track and field athlete , she won <unk> in the 4 × 100 metres relay with her team . Leroux played three seasons of club soccer with Coquitlam City Wild , helping the team to Provincial Cup Championships in 2003 , 2004 and 2005 . Leroux 's prolific goalscoring helped the team win the under @-@ 14 national championship in 2003 . She secured a bronze medal in helping the team finish third at the under @-@ 16 national tournament in 2005 . Leroux became the youngest player to play for the Vancouver Whitecaps of the W @-@ League at the age of 15 . She also won a championship as part of a British Columbia select team at the Canada Games in 2005 . 
 Leroux stated that at a very early age , she knew she wanted to play for the United States women 's national soccer team . To pursue her goal , she moved to Scottsdale , Arizona at the age of 15 and attended Horizon High School during her junior and senior years while living with multiple host families . Despite having a challenging time adjusting to life without her family and friends , she helped lead Sereno Soccer Club to state titles in 2007 and 2008 . Of her move to the United States , she said , " It was not easy . It was probably one of the most difficult things I ever had to do , move away from everything that I knew and was comfortable with to something that I had no idea about . Not having any family around . Doing it on my own . As a 15 @-@ year @-@ old , that 's kind of hard . I had to grow up really fast [ ... ] But I guess it 's all worth it . Now I have a chance to prove myself , and that 's what I enjoy , and that 's why I did what I did . " 
 = = College career = = 
 Leroux played collegiate soccer for UCLA from 2008 to 2011 , under head coaches Jill Ellis ( 2008 – 10 ) and B. J. Snow ( 2011 ) . During her freshman season , she started 18 of the 19 games in which she played . She was the sixth @-@ highest scorer on the team with five goals and six assists for a total of 16 points on the season , and was named to the All @-@ Freshman Team in the Pacific @-@ 10 Conference ( Pac @-@ 10 ) . During her second year , she led UCLA in scoring with 48 points ( 23 goals , two assists ) and was a semi @-@ finalist for the Hermann Trophy . Her 23 goals ranked second in the Pac @-@ 10 and tied with teammate Lauren Cheney for a new single @-@ season record at UCLA . Leroux earned Soccer America MVP second team , Second @-@ team All @-@ Pac @-@ 10 , and 2009 NCAA All @-@ Tournament Team honors the same year . During the first round of the NCAA Division I Women 's Soccer Tournament , she tied the school 's record for most goals scored in a single match after scoring four during the team 's 7 – 1 defeat of Boise State . 
 As a junior , Leroux ranked fifth in UCLA history for career points ( 91 ) as well as fourth in goals ( 41 ) and game @-@ winning goals ( 15 ) . She ranked third in the Pac @-@ 10 for goals ( 13 ) and second in game @-@ winning goals ( 6 ) earning her First @-@ team Soccer America MVP , Third @-@ team NSCAA All @-@ American , First @-@ team NSCAA All @-@ Pacific Region , and First @-@ team All @-@ Pac @-@ 10 honors the same year . During the Bruins ' first game of her junior season in 2010 , she scored four goals against Cal Poly Pomona helping her team win 7 – 0 . She was subsequently named Pac @-@ 10 Player of the Week . Leroux scored the game @-@ winning goal during the second round of the 2010 NCAA Tournament helping the Bruins defeat the UCF Knights 2 – 1 and advance to the third round where they lost to Stanford . 
 During her final year with the Bruins in 2011 , she led the team in scoring for the third straight season with 16 goals and three assists for a total of 35 points . She was named First @-@ team NSCAA All @-@ American , Soccer America 's MVP First Team , and was a semi @-@ finalist for the Hermann Trophy . She scored eight game @-@ winning goals , more than any other player in the newly renamed Pac @-@ 12 Conference . She scored her first hat trick of the season ( the third of her collegiate career ) in 21 minutes during a 6 – 1 win over Arizona State in October 2011 . At the Bruins ' next game against Colorado , Leroux scored another hat trick helping her team win 8 – 0 . She finished her collegiate career ranked fourth in UCLA 's record books for points ( 126 ) , goals ( 57 ) , and game @-@ winning goals ( 23 ) . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 = = = = Vancouver Whitecaps , 2005 and 2011 = = = = 
 Leroux played for the Vancouver Whitecaps during the 2005 W @-@ League season , becoming the youngest player to ever play for the team aged 15 years and seven days . She returned to the Whitecaps for the 2011 season . She ranked second in the league for goals scored with 11 finishing the regular season with 24 points in 11 appearances . After helping the Whitecaps advance to the W @-@ League Championship Final Four with a goal during the team 's 4 – 3 defeat of Santa Clarita Blue Heat in the Western Conference Final , Leroux was named to the All @-@ Western Conference team . Post @-@ season , she was named 2011 W @-@ League Rookie of the Year . 
 = = = = WPS Draft and Seattle Sounders Women , 2012 = = = = 
 Leroux was the number one pick by the Atlanta Beat in the 2012 WPS Draft , though the league folded before she could play for the team . During the summer of 2012 , Leroux joined fellow U.S. national team players , Hope Solo , Alex Morgan , Stephanie Cox , and Megan Rapinoe on the Seattle Sounders Women in the W @-@ League . Sounders Women head coach , Michelle French , said of the signing , " Sydney is the consummate goal scorer with an incredible attacking attitude . She not only shows tireless effort on the offensive side of the ball , but she is very unique in that she prides herself on her defensive recovery and ability to win the ball back . She makes an impact no matter where she plays on the field . " Due to her national team commitments and preparation for the 2012 Summer Olympics , Leroux made only two regular season appearances for the club . She scored two goals and served one assist in her 168 minutes on the pitch . With the national teammates ' presence on the team , the Sounders sold out nine of their ten home matches at the 4 @,@ 500 capacity Starfire Stadium . Average attendance during the 2012 season for the Sounders Women was four times higher than the next closest team . 
 = = = = Boston Breakers , 2013 = = = = 
 In January 2013 , Heather O 'Reilly , Heather Mitts and Leroux were the three United States national team players allocated to the Boston Breakers for the inaugural season of the National Women 's Soccer League ( NWSL ) . She scored her first goal of the season in the 91st minute of the Breakers ' season opener against the Washington Spirit , tying the game 1 – 1 in stoppage time . Leroux scored the league 's first ever hat trick during the Breakers ' 4 – 1 win against the Chicago Red Stars on May 4 and was subsequently named NWSL Player of the Week . On July 3 , she scored another equalizer against the Seattle Reign FC , resulting in a 1 – 1 draw . A few days later on July 6 , she scored two goals against the Portland Thorns FC resulting in a 2 – 0 win for the Breakers in front of 12 @,@ 436 fans at <unk> @-@ Wen Field . 
 Leroux 's 11 goals scored during the season tied for second with national teammate Abby Wambach of the Western New York Flash . Lauren Holiday of FC Kansas City was in first place with 12 . The Breakers finished the 2013 season fifth in the league with an 8 – 6 – 8 record . 
 = = = = Seattle Reign FC , 2014 = = = = 
 On November 18 , 2013 , it was announced that Leroux had been traded to the Seattle Reign FC for the 2014 NWSL season in exchange for Kristie <unk> , Michelle <unk> and the Reign 's first two picks in the 2015 draft . Ebullient Reign FC head coach Laura Harvey hailed the signing of Leroux : " One of the world 's best forwards . She is a young , extraordinary talent with unlimited upside . Sydney will be the consistent goal @-@ scoring threat that we struggled to find last season . " 
 During the 2014 season , the Reign set a league record unbeaten streak of 16 games during the first part of the season . During the 16 game stretch , the Reign compiled a 13 – 0 – 3 record . The Reign finished first in the regular season clinching the NWSL Shield for the first time . After defeating the Washington Spirit 2 – 1 in the playoff semi @-@ finals , the Reign were defeated 2 – 1 by FC Kansas City during the championship final . Leroux finished the 2014 season with five goals in 22 games played . In March 2015 , it was announced that she was traded to Western New York Flash . 
 = = = = FC Kansas City = = = = 
 On January 13 , 2016 , Leroux was traded to FC Kansas City . Leroux announced later that month that she is pregnant , and she is expected to miss the 2016 NWSL season . 
 = = = = Club summary = = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = = Youth national teams = = = = 
 By virtue of her parents ' nationalities , Leroux was eligible to represent either Canada or the United States . Playing for Canada at the age of 14 , she was the youngest individual to participate in the 2004 FIFA U @-@ 19 Women 's World Cup , held in Thailand . She served as captain of Canada 's under @-@ 15 team that traveled to Germany in 2005 . 
 Leroux received clearance from FIFA to change her allegiance to the United States in 2008 and went on to help the under @-@ 20 national team win the 2008 FIFA U @-@ 20 Women 's World Cup in Santiago , Chile . She scored in the first half of the final against North Korea . She represented the United States at the 2010 FIFA U @-@ 20 Women 's World Cup and ended her under @-@ 20 career as the country 's all @-@ time leading scorer in Under @-@ 20 Women 's World Cup play with 10 goals . At the under @-@ 20 level , she is among the country 's most capped players with 36 games and is the all @-@ time leading scorer for the U.S. with 30 goals . In 2012 , she was named the 2011 U.S. Soccer Young Female Athlete of the Year , playing for both the senior and under @-@ 23 national teams . 
 = = = = U.S. senior national team = = = = 
 Leroux played at the 2012 CONCACAF Women 's Olympic Qualifying Tournament as a member of the United States senior national team . In her second cap for the senior side , Leroux scored five goals in a CONCACAF Olympic qualifying match between the U.S. and Guatemala ; the final score of the match was 13 – 0 . Leroux 's performance tied the record for goals scored in a single match by one player in a CONCACAF Olympic Qualifying Tournament . She also tied the single @-@ game record for the national team , equaling previous performances by her teammates Amy Rodriguez and Abby Wambach in 2012 and 2004 respectively . 
 In 2012 , Leroux set a new team scoring record as a reserve on the team with 12 goals scored off the bench in one year . The previous record of nine goals was set by Debbie Keller in 1998 . 
 = = = = = From Algarve to the London Olympics , 2012 = = = = = 
 During the 2012 Algarve Cup in Portugal , Leroux scored the team 's fifth goal in the 93rd minute of the U.S. ' first group stage match against Denmark , in which the U.S. won 5 – 0 . During the team 's second group stage match , she scored the game @-@ winning goal against Norway in the 81st minute . After losing to Japan in the third group stage match , the team defeated Sweden 4 – 0 to clinch third place at the tournament . 
 Leroux was the youngest player and a goal @-@ scoring member of the Olympic gold medal @-@ winning team at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . She scored the second goal against New Zealand during the quarter final match of the tournament helping the U.S. win 2 – 0 . 
 = = = = = Algarve Cup , Controversy in Toronto , 2013 = = = = = 
 During the team 's second group stage match at the 2013 Algarve Cup , Leroux opened the scoring for the U.S. when she netted a goal in the 13th minute . Her goal was followed by four others from her teammates resulting in a 5 – 0 win over China . The U.S. went on to win the tournament after defeating Germany 2 – 0 in the final . 
 While playing in a sold @-@ out friendly match against Canada at BMO Field in Toronto , Ontario in June 2013 , Leroux was booed by Canadian fans throughout the match . After scoring during stoppage time to bring the score to 3 – 0 in favor of the U.S. , Leroux celebrated her goal by hushing the crowd and pointing to the U.S. emblem on her jersey which further inflamed many fans in the crowd . After the game , she stated via Twitter , " When you chant racial slurs , taunt me and talk about my family don 't be mad when I shush you and show pride in what I represent . # <unk> . " The U.S. Soccer Federation announced that Leroux had " endured abuse both verbally and in social media " since switching to the U.S. national soccer team in 2008 ; however , Leroux later clarified that no such incidents took place at BMO Field . " My tweet from this morning wasn 't in response to anything from yesterday 's match at BMO Field . In fact , the atmosphere at the stadium was a positive step forward for women 's soccer . Unfortunately , the type of abuse I have received in the past and via social media for my decision to play for the United States is a step backwards . That is what prompted my response in the heat of the moment . " 
 During a friendly against Mexico in September 2013 , Leroux scored a hat trick in nine minutes , helping the U.S. win 7 – 0 . 
 = = = = = 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup = = = = = 
 Leroux was on the roster of the United States team for the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup . She saw action in four of the seven games , recording an assist to a Christen Press goal in the opening game against Australia . She did not play in the Final against Japan 
 = = = = = International goals = = = = = 
 = = Honors = = 
 NWSL Player of the Week : 2013 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Leroux holds dual citizenship in Canada and the United States . Her nickname is " Syd the Kid " . Her chihuahua , " Boss Leroux " , has thousands of Twitter followers and is often featured in the media along with Sydney . Leroux has been in a relationship with English @-@ born MLS player Dom Dwyer since 2014 . On February 14 , 2015 ( Valentine 's Day , or 2 / 14 ; her USWNT jersey number is 2 and Dwyer 's is 14 ) , it was announced that she and Dwyer had wed in January 2015 in a private ceremony . On January 25 , 2016 , Sydney announced on social media that she 's expecting the couple 's first child in September 2016 . On March 13 , 2016 , Sydney and Dom announce on social media that they are having a son . 
 = = Endorsements = = 
 Leroux has appeared in several advertisements and promotional pieces for Nike . In December 2013 , she and national teammate Alex Morgan were featured in Nike 's " Winning in a Winter Wonderland " commercial along with other professional athletes including Robinson Cano , Justin Tuck , and Julia Mancuso . In June 2014 , she signed an endorsement deal with Nestle <unk> . The same month , she made a cameo appearance in a commercial for Beats by Dre in preparation for the 2014 FIFA World Cup . In June 2014 , she became the first female endorser for the sports drink company <unk> , joining fellow professional athletes Richard Sherman , Kevin Love , and James Harden . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Television and video = = = 
 Leroux was the focus of an ESPN feature entitled Living Her Dream , which profiled her evolution as an international soccer player . She was a guest on Canada 's Breakfast Television in August 2012 following the 2012 Olympics . In October 2013 , she was interviewed by Grete <unk> for an <unk> short feature , Q & A With Sydney Leroux . The same month , she was profiled in Fox Soccer Exclusive : Sydney Leroux for Fox Soccer Channel . In December 2013 , Leroux was featured in episode 9 of AOL 's online series , My Ink . 
 = = = Magazines = = = 
 Leroux was one of 21 professional athletes featured in ESPN 's The Body Issue in 2013 . She appeared semi @-@ nude on one of eight covers for the magazine . Of the experience she said , 
 I think a lot of females struggle with the way they look , and I wanted to show that everyone 's body is different . I think it 's a big deal to be an athlete and feel confident in your body and show it off . I 'm not going to say I 've never struggled with how I look , but I 've reached a point in my life where I 'm happy with who I am . 
 In May 2015 , Leroux was featured on the cover of ESPN Magazine with teammates Abby Wambach and Alex Morgan . 
 = = = Video Games = = = 
 Leroux was featured along with her national teammates in the EA Sports ' FIFA video game series in FIFA 16 , the first time women players were included in the game . 
 = = = Ticker Tape Parade and White House Honor = = = 
 Following the United States ' win at the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup , Leroux and her teammates became the first women 's sports team to be honored with a Ticker tape parade in New York City . Each player received a key to the city from Mayor Bill de Blasio . In October of the same year , the team was honored by President Barack Obama at the White House . 
 = Secrets ( The Walking Dead ) = 
 " Secrets " is the sixth episode of the second season of the post @-@ apocalyptic horror television series The Walking Dead . It originally aired on AMC in the United States on November 20 , 2011 . In this episode , Glenn ( Steven Yeun ) tells Dale Horvath ( Jeffrey DeMunn ) that Lori Grimes ( Sarah Wayne Callies ) is pregnant and there are numerous walkers in the Greene barn . Dale confronts Hershel Greene ( Scott Wilson ) about hoarding walkers in his barn . Meanwhile , Shane Walsh ( Jon Bernthal ) attempts to teach Andrea ( Laurie Holden ) how to use weapons and Lori agonizes over the decision to terminate her pregnancy or keep the baby . 
 The episode was written by Angela Kang and directed by David Boyd . " Secrets " touches on various themes , including abortion , romance , and confession . In preparation for filming , producers initially converted a vacant building in downtown Sharpsburg , Georgia into a temporary pharmacy in July 2011 . Principal photography for the episode occurred a month later in August . 
 " Secrets " attained mostly positive reception from critics , who praised the character development and the storyline progression . The episode attracted criticism from political commentators , who denounced the show for its misleading perception of emergency contraception . Upon airing , " Secrets " garnered 6 @.@ 08 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 1 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . It became the second highest @-@ rated cable program of the day , as well as the fourth most @-@ viewed cable program of the week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with Carl ( Chandler Riggs ) , who has fully recovered from his injuries , helping his mother Lori ( Sarah Wayne Callies ) feed chickens on the Greene farm . Meanwhile Patricia ( Jane McNeill ) breaks the legs of several chickens , puts them into a potato sack , and carries them to the barn to feed the walkers who are being kept there . 
 Maggie ( Lauren Cohan ) begs Glenn ( Steven Yeun ) , already struggling with being the only one to know about Lori 's pregnancy , to keep secret the presence of walkers in the barn . Dale ( Jeffrey DeMunn ) quickly notices Glenn 's nervousness who , after being questioned , blurts out both secrets . He checks on Lori and promises her that he will not tell anyone about her pregnancy . Afterwards , Dale confronts Hershel about the walkers in the barn . Hershel asserts that all walkers are still people , and that they are just ill . He explains that among the walkers in the barn are his wife and stepson . Dale argues that they are not human beings , and explains that they are too dangerous to be kept alive based on what he has seen . Hershel however considers killing the walkers to be atrocious . Rick ( Andrew Lincoln ) and Lori argue about how to tell the group of Hershel 's ( Scott Wilson ) refusal to let them stay on the farm once they get back on their feet . Meanwhile Rick , Shane and T @-@ Dog ( IronE Singleton ) give gun training to Jimmy , Carl and the women on the farm . Shane decides to take Andrea for advanced training lessons after she impresses him with her shooting skills . Despite her previous prowess she proves unable to shoot a moving target . Shane attempts to motivate Andrea by mentioning Amy , Andrea 's late sister , but instead upsets her and she storms off . 
 Glenn and Maggie go off to the pharmacy to pick up additional medical supplies for Lori . Glenn , like Dale , expresses his opinion that the walkers need to be killed . Maggie is annoyed at his use of the word " walker " , saying that she knows those in the barn by their real names , as they were her friends and family . In the pharmacy , Maggie is attacked and nearly bitten while retrieving the supplies — she narrowly escapes after Glenn kills the walker . After returning to the farm , angry Maggie confronts Lori , who she blames for the near @-@ death of Glenn and her . After he intervenes , Maggie tells him that she does care about him and that the rest of the group do not respect him , only using him as " walker bait " . Glenn , however , tells Lori that he is her friend , and again urges her to tell Rick about the pregnancy . Unwilling to bring a child into a world that she sees as without joy , Lori takes the morning after pills Glenn gave her , but immediately goes away from the camp and throws them up . At the same time Rick enters the tent and finds the pills , then goes to find her . She ultimately confesses her previous affair with Shane ( Jon Bernthal ) to her husband , who reveals that he already knew . 
 Andrea and Shane then go off to town after Shane finds a lead on the missing Sophia , but find it overrun by walkers . They escape after Andrea rediscovers her shooting abilities , and the two subsequently begin an affair . Upon returning however , Dale quickly guesses that something has happened between them . Feeling protective , he warns Shane to stay away from her , and tells him that he witnessed Shane aim his shotgun at Rick in the woods near their old camp outside Atlanta , as well as raising suspicions as to what happened to Otis while he and Shane went searching for medical supplies . Shane denies ever intending to kill his best friend , but threatens Dale , hinting he would kill him should he make any more " wild accusations " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Secrets " was directed by David Boyd and written by Angela Kang . It features recurring appearances from Lauren Cohan , Scott Wilson , IronE Singleton , Emily Kinney , Jane McNeill , and James Allen McCune . Principal photography for the episode commenced in downtown Sharpsburg , Georgia in August 2011 . Preparation for filming began in July 2011 , when producers renovated an empty building into a temporary drug store . Herb Bridges , who owned the building at the time , was initially contacted by producers of the series ' in January 2011 , and again four months later in May . Bridges informed them that the space would be rented by a woman who would open a children 's store there ; however , she had not moved into the space yet . 
 The topic of abortion is a prominent theme in " Secrets " . After discovering that she is pregnant , Lori asks Glenn to retrieve with emergency contraception pills from the pharmacy . Upon returning , an infuriated Maggie hands Lori her pills . Dale gently confronts her about her pregnancy when he sees that she becomes nauseated at the smell of cooking meat , and Lori explains that Rick is the biological father of the child . Writer Robert Kirkman opined that such assertions were " wishful thinking " . " She was with those two men very close to each other . There was not a large span of time between her time with Shane and then Rick 's return and her time with Rick . It 's definitely up in the air and it ’ s not like there 's a lot of paternity tests floating around out there . " Kirkman felt that he had to responsibly approach controversial issues from a neutral standpoint and insisted that abortion should warrant discussion , considering the circumstances . He stated : " As far as the abortion stuff goes , it ’ s really just a matter of being realistic . These are the kinds of issues that people deal with in real life and in this situation I think that that is the kind of thought process that Lori Grimes would be going through . " 
 In the concluding sequence of the episode , Lori admits to Rick that she had an affair with Shane in the belief that her husband was dead . Kirkman stated that the writers wanted to " wrap up to a certain extent " , and opined that such revelations would add more tension between the characters . 
 It was something we wanted to wrap up to a certain extent . It 's a disservice to Rick 's character to make him look like he 's completely clueless . But this isn 't really a resolution per se . It makes things a little bit more tense , moving into this next episode . Seeing Rick interact with Shane will have an extra level of tension because now the audience has one up on Shane as opposed to one up on Rick . It ’ s going to be fun waiting for the other shoe to drop , when Rick may or may not confront Shane with this information . 
 In an interview with MTV News , Bernthal stated that Walsh was suffering from the " loneliness you feel when you 're right there with them and you can 't be with them in the way you want . " Bernthal applauded the writers for such changes , and felt that the storyline never <unk> . " The people that Shane loved more than anyone else in the world before the apocalypse are still very much alive and still very much with him , but he 'll never be with them in the way he wants to and the way he once was . Every relationship — Shane / Carl , Shane / Lori and Shane / Rick — it 's tainted and fractured . When you suffer from that kind of loneliness , it brings out the worst in you . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Secrets " initially aired in the United States on November 20 , 2011 on AMC . Upon airing , the episode acquired 6 @.@ 08 million viewers and attained a 3 @.@ 1 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . It was the second highest @-@ rated cable program of the day , having been beaten by a stock car racing event as part of the 2011 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series . " Secrets " became the fourth most @-@ watched program of the week , as well as the highest @-@ rated non @-@ sports cable program of the week . Total viewership and ratings slightly declined from the previous episode , " Chupacabra " , which was viewed by 6 @.@ 12 million viewers and garnered a 3 @.@ 2 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . In the United Kingdom , the episode received 561 @,@ 000 viewers and became the highest @-@ rated television program on FX for the week dated November 27 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Secrets " was well received by television critics . Gina McIntyre of the Los Angeles Times concluded that the episode " dispensed with almost every hidden truth the survivors have been keeping from one another . " Scott Meslow of The Atlantic described the episode as one focused on love and relationships . IGN 's Eric Goldman evaluated the episode as " satisfying " , and added that its character development was executed strongly . Ultimately , he issued " Secrets " an eight out of ten , signifying a " great " rating . Aaron Rutkoff of The Wall Street Journal echoed synonymous sentiments ; " Viewers tuning in each week in the hope of watching pulse @-@ quickening battles between overmatched humans and armies of the undead are sure to be frustrated . Things are static in an action sense , but the show ’ s admirably nuanced characters are changing and reacting to the world in surprising and complicated ways . " Writing for Cinema Blend , Nick Venable stated that the characters became more distinguishable . 
 Not all reviewers were as enthusiastic about " Secrets " as the general consensus . Starlee Kine of New York stated that despite having high hopes in the beginning of " Secrets " , the episode overall failed to meet her expectations . The A.V. Club 's Zach Halden opined that despite containing solid scenes , the episode harbored several issues . Halden cited the pace of the storyline progression and the execution of the character development as weaknesses . Concluding his review , he gave the episode a B grade . Although Andrew Conrad of The Baltimore Sun touted the character development , he pointed out that there was very little action . The Portland Mercury 's Steven Humphrey panned the episode , describing it as " boring " . 
 The opening segment of " Secrets " was widely lauded by critics . Halden thought that it was a great start to the episode , and Kine felt that the show returned to form following the sequence . She wrote : " This week 's opening functioned like an adrenaline shot to my weary heart . At the sight of all those undead relatives in the barn , I , too , briefly , came to life . " 
 Critics were polarized with the characters ' reaction to Lori opting for an abortion . Halden criticized the character 's opposing views on the matter , and stated that their reasonings were invalid . Halden wrote . " I 'm not even sure it would be possible for her to abort the pregnancy at this point , but the show 's working on the assumption that having a child in a world where death literally lurks around every corner is an unequivocal good . The only person who ’ s been anti @-@ pregnancy is Lori , and the show hasn 't managed to cast her in a very good light , so it ’ s not like her arguments hold much water — which is also ridiculous , because ultimately , her opinion is the only one that matters . " HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall reflected similar thoughts , and stated that Rick 's arguments against Lori 's attempts were obsolete . 
 The love triangle involving Lori , Rick , and Shane was cited as an episode highlight . Meslow felt that the interactions between Lori and Rick possessed " as much rawness and honesty as could be hoped for . " Kine criticized the emotion during the interactions between Shane and Rick , and summated that it was a " standard Walking Dead attempt at trying to convince us that Grimes and Shane are friends by way of showing us their casual , good @-@ old @-@ boy @-@ tinged banter . " <unk> expressed that the episode 's conclusion was a rational and level @-@ headed resolution to the storyline ; " Whatever jealousy he might feel , it would have been absurd for Rick to punish the woman he loves most in the world for post @-@ apocalyptic infidelity under these circumstances . " Sepinwall commended Rick 's reaction to Lori 's confessions , and Goldman felt that their interaction was well acted and perfectly scripted . Venable appraised the segment as " very engaging " , and applauded Lincoln 's performance . He wrote , " Andrew Lincoln delivered these lines of pitiable understanding as well as anyone could . " CNN 's Henry Hanks opined : " If you thought Rick and Shane had blow @-@ ups before , you ain 't seen nothing yet . " 
 Critics applauded the growing relationship between Andrea and Shane , as well as Dale 's confrontation with Shane . Despite describing them as an " unlikely pairing " , Meslow asserted that it was superior to the storyline between Andrea and Dale . " There 's something to be said for the occasional post @-@ apocalyptic tryst , which allows two characters who 've experienced almost nothing but misery to have , even for a moment , something that resembles joy , " he articulated . Meslow retorted that it was wise to underplay the tryst between Shane and Andrea , which he predicted would not lead to anything serious . Venable wrote : " Dale ’ s lack of personality traits , beyond being the wise sage who gets in everyone ’ s business , makes him an unpredictable foe in my book , and could be as interesting as Shane ’ s violent selfishness . " Morgan Jeffrey of Digital Spy avouched that Shane continued to be an interesting character ; " Just as we were beginning to like him again , he murdered Otis in cold blood . And it seems like his downward spiral is set to continue — he 's threatening poor Dale and embarking on an ill @-@ advised affair with Andrea . " 
 The progressing relationship between Maggie Greene and Glenn was well received by critics . Nate Rawlings of Time asserted that their interactions carried the most emotional poignance . Rawlings opined : " She 's forced to confront , perhaps for the first time , that these creatures are <unk> monsters . Before her attack , she yelled at Dale [ sic ] for calling them Walkers ; to her they 're mom , her brother , the neighbors . After her attack , her mind might be changed . " 
 = = = = Abortion controversy = = = = 
 " Secrets " attracted criticism from political commentators for its " potentially misleading perception " of emergency contraception . Shawn Rhea of Planned Parenthood cited that the morning @-@ after pills do not induce abortion , as the episode implies . Erin Gloria Ryan of Jezebel wrote : " Lori would have been better off sending the men off to loot a shop that sells herbal remedies and brewing herself some pennyroyal tea or climbing a tree and jumping out in hopes that the impact would end the pregnancy . Both of those things are dangerous and might not work , but they 're about as effective as OD 'ing on levonorgestrel . " Ryan prescribed that actual abortion pills are administered by medical professionals and are not available at pharmacies . Danielle Aronson of ACLU summated that the effectiveness of terminating a pregnancy with emergency contraception would be equivalent to " cutting a zombie 's finger off to kill it . " Similarly , Slate 's Amanda Marcotte opined : " The problem with this storyline , outside the tedious fear of getting letters from irate anti @-@ <unk> that dictates TV 's near @-@ absolute approach to unintended pregnancy , is simple : Morning @-@ after pills are not abortion . " Marcotte asserted that abortion pills , commonly RU @-@ 486 , were only provided by medical personnel . " Morning @-@ after pills are contraception , and they work by stifling ovulation before any sperm can make their way toward the Fallopian tubes . " 
 This prompted showrunner Glen Mazzara to respond to such criticism . In his interview with The Daily Beast , he stated : " The producers and writers of The Walking Dead are fully aware that the morning @-@ after pill would not induce an abortion or miscarriage , we exercised our artistic creative license to explore a storyline with one of our characters , not to make any pro @-@ life or pro @-@ choice political statement . We sincerely hope that people are not turning to the fictional world of The Walking Dead for accurate medical information . " The episode itself does not , in fact , claim the morning after pills will work , as Glenn questions Lori over that fact , to which she replies that she does not know . 
 = Cheddar , Somerset = 
 Cheddar is a large village and civil parish in the Sedgemoor district of the English county of Somerset . It is situated on the southern edge of the Mendip Hills , 9 miles ( 14 km ) north @-@ west of Wells . The civil parish includes the hamlets of Nyland and Bradley Cross . The village , which has its own parish council , has a population of 5 @,@ 755 and the parish has an acreage of 8 @,@ 592 acres ( 3 @,@ 477 ha ) as of 1961 . 
 Cheddar Gorge , on the northern edge of the village , is the largest gorge in the United Kingdom and includes several show caves including Gough 's Cave . The gorge has been a centre of human settlement since Neolithic times including a Saxon palace . It has a temperate climate and provides a unique geological and biological environment that has been recognised by the designation of several Sites of Special Scientific Interest . It is also the site of several limestone quarries . The village gave its name to Cheddar cheese and has been a centre for strawberry growing . The crop was formerly transported on the Cheddar Valley rail line , which closed in the late 1960s but is now a cycle path . The village is now a major tourist destination with several cultural and community facilities , including the Cheddar Show Caves Museum . 
 The village supports a variety of community groups including religious , sporting and cultural organisations . Several of these are based on the site of The Kings of Wessex Academy , which is the largest educational establishment . 
 = = History = = 
 The name Cheddar comes from the Old English word <unk> , meaning deep dark cavity or pouch . 
 There is evidence of occupation from the Neolithic period in Cheddar . Britain 's oldest complete human skeleton , Cheddar Man , estimated to be 9 @,@ 000 years old , was found in Cheddar Gorge in 1903 . Older remains from the Upper Late Palaeolithic era ( 12 @,@ 000 – 13 @,@ 000 years ago ) have been found . There is some evidence of a Bronze Age field system at the Batts Combe quarry site . There is also evidence of Bronze Age barrows at the mound in the Longwood valley , which if man @-@ made it is likely to be a field system . The remains of a Roman villa have been excavated in the grounds of the current vicarage . 
 The village of Cheddar had been important during the Roman and Saxon eras . There was a royal palace at Cheddar during the Saxon period , which was used on three occasions in the 10th century to host the Witenagemot . The ruins of the palace were excavated in the 1960s . They are located on the grounds of The Kings of Wessex Academy , together with a 14th century chapel dedicated to St. Columbanus . Roman remains have also been uncovered at the site . Cheddar was listed in the Domesday Book of 1086 as <unk> , meaning " Shear Water " , from the Old English <unk> and Celtic <unk> . An alternate spelling in earlier documents , common through the 1850s is <unk> . As early as 1130 AD , the Cheddar Gorge was recognised as one of the " Four wonders of England " . Historically , Cheddar 's source of wealth was farming and cheese making for which it was famous as early as 1170 AD . The parish was part of the Winterstoke Hundred . 
 The manor of Cheddar was deforested in 1337 and Bishop Ralph was granted a licence by the King to create a hunting forest . 
 As early as 1527 there are records of watermills on the river . In the 17th and 18th centuries , there were several watermills which ground corn and made paper , with 13 mills on the Yeo at the peak , declining to seven by 1791 and just three by 1915 . In the Victorian era it also became a centre for the production of clothing . The last mill , used as a shirt factory , closed in the early 1950s . William Wilberforce saw the poor conditions of the locals when he visited Cheddar in 1789 . He inspired Hannah More in her work to improve the conditions of the Mendip miners and agricultural workers . In 1801 , 4 @,@ 400 acres ( 18 km2 ) of common land were enclosed under the Inclosure Acts . 
 Tourism of the Cheddar gorge and caves began with the opening of the Cheddar Valley Railway in 1869 . 
 Cheddar , its surrounding villages and specifically the gorge has been subject to flooding . In the Great Flood of 1968 the flow of water washed large boulders down the gorge , washed away cars , and damaged the cafe and the entrance to Gough 's Cave . 
 = = Government = = 
 Cheddar is recognised as a village . The adjacent settlement of Axbridge , although only about a third the population of Cheddar , is a town . This apparently illogical situation is explained by the relative importance of the two places in historic times . While Axbridge grew in importance as a centre for cloth manufacturing in the Tudor period and gained a charter from King John , Cheddar remained a more dispersed mining and dairy @-@ farming village . Its population grew with the arrival of the railways in the Victorian era and the advent of tourism . 
 The parish council , which has 15 members who are elected for four years , is responsible for local issues , including setting an annual precept ( local rate ) to cover the council 's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny . The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the police , district council officers , and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime , security , and traffic . The parish council 's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities , as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance , repair , and improvement of highways , drainage , footpaths , public transport , and street cleaning . Conservation matters ( including trees and listed buildings ) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council . 
 The village is in the ' Cheddar and Shipham <unk> ward . After including Shipham the total population of the ward taken at the 2011 census is 6 @,@ 842 . 
 The village falls within the non @-@ metropolitan district of Sedgemoor , which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972 . It was previously part of Axbridge Rural District . Sedgemoor is responsible for local planning and building control , local roads , council housing , environmental health , markets and fairs , refuse collection and recycling , cemeteries and crematoria , leisure services , parks , and tourism . Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education , social services , the library , roads , public transport , trading standards , waste disposal and strategic planning , although fire , police and ambulance services are provided jointly with other authorities through the Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service , Avon and Somerset Constabulary and the South Western Ambulance Service . 
 It is also part of the Wells county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom . It elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election , and is part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = International relations = = 
 Cheddar is twinned with Felsberg , Germany and <unk> , France , and it has an active programme of exchange visits . Initially , Cheddar twinned with Felsberg in 1984 . In 2000 , Cheddar twinned with <unk> , which had also been twinned with Felsberg . Cheddar also has a friendship link with Ocho Rios in Saint Ann Parish , Jamaica . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The area is underlain by Black Rock slate , Burrington Oolite and Clifton Down Limestone of the Carboniferous Limestone Series , which contain <unk> and fossil debris on top of Old Red Sandstone , and by Dolomitic Conglomerate of the Keuper . Evidence for Variscan orogeny is seen in the sheared rock and cleaved shales . In many places weathering of these strata has resulted in the formation of immature calcareous soils . 
 = = = Gorge and caves = = = 
 Cheddar Gorge , which is located on the edge of the village , is the largest gorge in the United Kingdom . The gorge is the site of the Cheddar Caves , where Cheddar Man was found in 1903 . Older remains from the Upper Late Palaeolithic era ( 12 @,@ 000 – 13 @,@ 000 years ago ) have been found . The caves , produced by the activity of an underground river , contain stalactites and stalagmites . Gough 's Cave , which was discovered in 1903 , leads around 400 m ( 437 yd ) into the rock @-@ face , and contains a variety of large rock chambers and formations . Cox 's Cave , discovered in 1837 , is smaller but contains many intricate formations . A further cave houses a children 's entertainment walk known as the " Crystal Quest " . 
 Cheddar Gorge , including Cox 's Cave , Gough 's Cave and other attractions , has become a tourist destination , attracting about 500 @,@ 000 visitors per year . In a 2005 poll of Radio Times readers , following its appearance on the 2005 television programme Seven Natural Wonders , Cheddar Gorge was named as the second greatest natural wonder in Britain , surpassed only by the Dan yr Ogof caves . 
 = = = Sites of Special Scientific Interest = = = 
 There are several large and unique Sites of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) around the village . 
 Cheddar Reservoir is a near @-@ circular artificial reservoir operated by Bristol Water . Dating from the 1930s , it has a capacity of 135 million gallons ( 614 @,@ 000 cubic metres ) . The reservoir is supplied with water taken from the Cheddar Yeo , which rises in Gough 's Cave in Cheddar Gorge and is a tributary of the River Axe . The inlet grate for the 54 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) water pipe that is used to transport the water can be seen next to the sensory garden in Cheddar Gorge . It has been designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) due to its wintering waterfowl populations . 
 Cheddar Wood and the smaller <unk> 's Wood form a biological Site of Special Scientific Interest from what remains of the wood of the Bishops of Bath and Wells in the 13th century and of King Edmund the Magnificent 's wood in the 10th . During the 19th century , its lower fringes were grubbed out to make strawberry fields . Most of these have been allowed to revert to woodland . The wood was coppiced until 1917 . This site compromises a wide range of habitats which include ancient and secondary semi @-@ natural broadleaved woodland , unimproved neutral grassland , and a complex mosaic of calcareous grassland and acidic dry dwarf @-@ shrub heath . Cheddar Wood is one of only a few English stations for Starved Wood @-@ sedge ( Carex depauperata ) . Purple <unk> ( Lithospermum purpurocaeruleum ) , a nationally rare plant , also grows in the wood . Butterflies include Silver @-@ washed Fritillary ( Argynnis <unk> ) , Dark Green Fritillary ( Argynnis <unk> ) , Pearl @-@ bordered Fritillary ( Boloria euphrosyne ) , Holby Blue ( <unk> <unk> ) and Brown Argus ( Aricia <unk> ) . The slug ( Arion fasciatus ) , which has a restricted distribution in the south of England , and the Soldier beetle ( <unk> fusca ) also occur . 
 By far the largest of the SSSIs is called Cheddar Complex and covers 441 @.@ 3 hectares ( 1 @,@ 090 @.@ 5 acres ) of the gorge , caves and the surrounding area . It is important because of both biological and geological features . It includes four SSSIs , formerly known as Cheddar Gorge SSSI , August Hole / Longwood Swallet SSSI , GB Cavern Charterhouse SSSI and Charterhouse on @-@ Mendip SSSI . It is partly owned by the National Trust who acquired it in 1910 and partly managed by the Somerset Wildlife Trust . 
 = = = Quarries = = = 
 Close to the village and gorge are Batts Combe quarry and Callow Rock quarry , two of the active Quarries of the Mendip Hills where limestone is still extracted . Operating since the early 20th century , Batts Combe is owned and operated by Hanson Aggregates . The output in 2005 was around 4 @,@ 000 tonnes of limestone per day , one third of which was supplied to an on @-@ site lime kiln , which closed in 2009 ; the remainder was sold as coated or dusted aggregates . The limestone at this site is close to 99 percent carbonate of calcium and magnesium ( dolomite ) . 
 The <unk> Quarry finished its work as a limestone quarry in the 1950s and was then used by the Central Electricity Generating Board as a tower testing station . During the 1970s and 1980s it was also used to test the ability of containers of radioactive material to withstand impacts and other accidents . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Cheddar has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 @.@ 0 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea , which moderates temperature . The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 69 @.@ 8 ° F ) . In winter mean minimum temperatures of 1 ° C ( 33 @.@ 8 ° F ) or 2 ° C ( 35 @.@ 6 ° F ) are common . In the summer the Azores high @-@ pressure system affects the south @-@ west of England . Convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine ; annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most the rainfall in the south @-@ west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which are most active during those seasons . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall per year is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The parish has a population of 5 @,@ 093 , with a mean age of 43 years . Residents live in 2 @,@ 209 households . The vast majority of households ( 2 @,@ 183 ) give their ethnic status as white . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The village gave its name to Cheddar cheese , which is the most popular type of cheese in the United Kingdom . The cheese is now made and consumed worldwide , and only one producer remains in the village . 
 Since the 1880s , Cheddar 's other main produce has been the strawberry , which is grown on the south @-@ facing lower slopes of the Mendip hills . As a consequence of its use for transporting strawberries to market , the since @-@ closed Cheddar Valley line became known as The Strawberry Line after it opened in 1869 . The line ran from Yatton to Wells . When the rest of the line was closed and all passenger services ceased , the section of the line between Cheddar and Yatton remained open for goods traffic . It provided a fast link with the main markets for the strawberries in Birmingham and London , but finally closed in 1964 , becoming part of the Cheddar Valley Railway Nature Reserve . 
 Cheddar Ales is a small brewery based in the village , producing beer for local public houses . Tourism is a significant source of employment . Around 15 percent of employment in Sedgemoor is provided by tourism , but within Cheddar it is estimated to employ as many as 1 @,@ 000 people . The village also has a youth hostel , and a number of camping and caravan sites . 
 = = Culture and community = = 
 Cheddar has a number of active service clubs including Cheddar Vale Lions Club , Mendip Rotary and Mendip Inner Wheel Club . The clubs raise money for projects in the local community and hold annual events such as a fireworks display , duck races in the Gorge , a dragon boat race on the reservoir and concerts on the grounds of the nearby St Michael 's Cheshire Home . 
 Several notable people have been born or lived in Cheddar . Musician Jack Bessant , the bass guitarist with the band Reef grew up on his parents ' strawberry farm , and Matt Goss and Luke Goss , former members of Bros , lived in Cheddar for nine months as children . Trina Gulliver , eight @-@ time World Professional Darts Champion , currently lives in Cheddar . The comedian Richard Herring grew up in Cheddar . His 2008 Edinburgh Festival Fringe show , The Headmaster 's Son is based on his time at The Kings of Wessex School , where his father Keith was the headmaster . The final performance of this show was held at the school in November 2009 . He also visited the school in March 2010 to perform his show Hitler Moustache . In May 2013 , a community radio station called Pulse was launched . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The market cross in Bath Street dates from the 15th century , with the shelter having been rebuilt in 1834 . It has a central octagonal pier , a socket raised on four steps , a hexagonal shelter with six arched four @-@ centred openings , shallow two @-@ stage buttresses at each angle , and an embattled parapet . The shaft is crowned by an abacus with figures in niches , probably from the late 19th century , although the cross is now missing . It was rebuilt by Thomas , Marquis of Bath . It is a Scheduled Ancient Monument ( Somerset County No 21 ) and Grade II * listed building . In January 2000 , the cross was seriously damaged in a traffic accident . By 2002 , the cross had been rebuilt and the area around it was redesigned to protect and enhance its appearance . The cross was badly damaged again in March 2012 , when a taxi crashed into it late at night demolishing two sides . Repair work , which included the addition of wooden @-@ clad steel posts to protect against future crashes , was completed in November 2012 at a cost of £ 60 @,@ 000 . 
 Hannah More , a philanthropist and educator , founded a school in the village in the late 18th century for the children of miners . Her first school was located in a 17th @-@ century house . Now named " Hannah More 's Cottage " , the Grade II @-@ listed building is used by the local community as a meeting place . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The village is situated on the A371 road which runs from Wincanton , to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . It is approximately 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from the route of the M5 motorway with around a 10 miles ( 16 km ) drive to junction 21 or 22 . 
 It was on the Cheddar Valley line , a railway line that was opened in 1869 and closed in 1963 . It became known as The Strawberry Line because of the large volume of locally @-@ grown strawberries that it carried . It ran from Yatton railway station through Cheddar to Wells ( Tucker Street ) railway station and joined the East Somerset Railway to make a through route via Shepton Mallet ( High Street ) railway station to Witham . Sections of the now @-@ disused railway have been opened as the Strawberry Line Trail , which currently runs from Yatton to Cheddar . The Cheddar Valley line survived until the " Beeching Axe " . Towards the end of its life there were so few passengers that diesel railcars were sometimes used . The Cheddar branch closed to passengers on 9 September 1963 and to goods in 1964 . The line closed in the 1960s , when it became part of the Cheddar Valley Railway Nature Reserve , and part of the National Cycle Network route 26 . The cycle route also intersects with the West Mendip Way and various other footpaths . 
 = = Education = = 
 Cheddar has three schools belonging to the Cheddar Valley Group of Schools , twelve schools that provide Cheddar Valley 's three @-@ tier education system . Cheddar First School has ten classes for children between 4 and 9 years . <unk> Middle School , a middle school categorised as a middle @-@ deemed @-@ secondary school , has 510 pupils between 9 and 13 . <unk> takes children moving up from Cheddar First School as well as other first schools in the Cheddar Valley . The Kings of Wessex Academy , a coeducational comprehensive school , has been rated as " outstanding " by Ofsted . It has 1 @,@ 182 students aged 13 to 18 , including 302 in the sixth form . Kings is a faith school linked to the Church of England . It was awarded the specialist status of Technology College in 2001 , enabling it to develop its Information Technology ( IT ) facilities and improve courses in science , mathematics and design technology . In 2007 it became a foundation school , giving it more control over its own finances . The academy owns and runs a sports centre and swimming pool , Kings Fitness & Leisure , with facilities that are used by students as well as residents . Community education project I.T. for the Terrified , which was originally set up in Wedmore in 1999 , is based in an old cow shed on the school 's grounds . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 The Church of St Andrew dates from the 14th century . It was restored in 1873 by William Butterfield . It is a Grade I listed building and contains some 15th century stained glass and an altar table of 1631 . The chest tomb in the chancel is believed to contain the remains of Sir Thomas Cheddar and is dated 1442 . The tower , which rises to 100 feet ( 30 m ) , contains a bell dating from 1759 made by Thomas Bilbie of the Bilbie family . 
 There are also churches for Roman Catholic , Methodist and other denominations , including Cheddar Valley Community Church , who not only meet at The Kings of Wessex School on Sunday , but also have their own site on <unk> for meeting during the week . The Baptist chapel was built in 1831 . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Kings Fitness & Leisure , situated on the grounds of The Kings of Wessex School , provides a venue for various sports and includes a 20 @-@ metre swimming pool , racket sport courts , a sports hall , dance studios and a gym . A youth sports festival was held on Sharpham Road Playing Fields in 2009 . In 2010 a skatepark was built in the village , funded by the Cheddar Local Action Team . 
 Cheddar Football Club , founded in 1892 and nicknamed " The <unk> " , play in the Somerset County Football League Premier Division . In 2009 plans were revealed to move the club from its present home at <unk> Park on Draycott Road to a new larger site . 
 Cheddar Cricket Club was formed in the late 19th century and moved to Sharpham Road Playing Fields in 1964 . They now play in the West of England Premier League Somerset Division . Cheddar Rugby Club , who own part of the Sharpham playing fields , was formed in 1836 . The club organises an annual Cheddar Rugby Tournament . Cheddar Lawn Tennis Club , was formed in 1924 , and play in the North Somerset League and also has social tennis and coaching . Cheddar Running Club organised an annual half marathon until 2009 . 
 The village is both on the route of the West Mendip Way and Samaritans Way South West . 
 = Ave Maria ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Ave Maria " is a song by American R & B recording artist Beyoncé Knowles from her third studio album I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . Amanda Ghost , Ian Dench and Makeba Riddick wrote the song in collaboration with its producers Knowles and production duo Stargate . As stated by Ghost , " Ave Maria " was inspired by Knowles ' and her own respective marriages . The song is a re @-@ write of Franz Schubert 's " Ave Maria " . It is instrumentally complete with a piano and strings . Throughout the ballad , Knowles sings in a lower register with an operatic soprano . Lyrically , it speaks about being surrounded by friends but still feeling alone . 
 Critical reception towards the song was mixed . Many contemporary critics praised its balladry and Knowles ' vocals while others dubbed it as merely a normal take on the original . Following the release of I Am ... Sasha Fierce , " Ave Maria " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 150 on November 29 , 2008 , based on downloads alone . The song was a part Knowles ' set list during her I Am ... Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) where she sang it dressed in a wedding dress and veil . " Ave Maria " was subsequently included on her live album , I Am ... World Tour ( 2010 ) . Knowles also performed the song as a tribute to Michael Jackson during the 2009 BET Awards . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 Mikkel Storleer Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen , together under the stage name Stargate , wrote and produced the song with additional writing by Amanda Ghost , Ian Dench and Makeba Riddick . The song was written in Bangladesh , Patchwerk and Silent Sound Studios in Atlanta , Georgia in 2008 . Knowles worked with Amanda Ghost to re @-@ write Franz Schubert 's " Ave Maria " after having co @-@ written " Disappear " in London . She stated that the song was one of the most personal on the album . Ghost told The Daily Telegraph that Knowles ' references to rapper Jay @-@ Z are usually unclear and open to interpretation , yet her music , including " Ave Maria " , " is the one place she can be incredibly expressive " . Knowles and Ghost both liked Schubert 's song and walked down the aisle to the song during their respective weddings . The marriages of the artists inspired them to write their own version of the recording . She further discussed the lyrics and inspiration : 
 [ T ] he lyric is very much about her . She talks about being surrounded by friends but she 's alone : ' How can the silence seem so loud ? ' and then ' There 's only us when the lights go down ' . I think that 's probably the most personal line on the whole album about her and Jay , because they are very real , and they 're very much in love , and it must be pretty tough to have that love when you 're incredibly famous . 
 " Ave Maria " is present on the I Am ... disc of the double album I Am ... Sasha Fierce , as it is a ballad that shows Knowles ' insecurities about love , and the person she is " underneath all the makeup , underneath the lights and underneath all the exciting star drama " . Knowles has said that she loves singing ballads because , " the music and the emotion in the story is told [ sic ] so much better . It 's a better connection because you can hear it and it 's not all these other distractions . I really wanted people to hear my voice and hear what I had to say . " During an interview , Knowles revealed that " Ave Maria " was the most personal song to her on the whole album . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Ave Maria " is a ballad that runs for 3 minutes and 42 seconds . The Village Voice 's Nana Ekua Brew @-@ Hammond described the song as being " opera @-@ tinted " . According to the sheet music published by EMI Music Publishing , it is written in the key of C Major with a slow tempo of 75 beats per minute and it is set in common time . The song samples Franz Schubert 's " Ave Maria " , however as noted by Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly , even though it " does riff on the classic aria , it 's not an actual cover " . The main instruments in " Ave Maria " include a piano and strings . Throughout the song , Knowles ' voice shows restraint as she sings in a lower register with an operatic soprano that gives her more vocal power , as commented by Jennifer Vineyard of MTV News . Her vocal range spans from the music note of B3 to E5 . Lyrically , " Ave Maria " is about being surrounded by friends but still feeling alone , as conveyed by the lines , " How can the silence seem so loud ? " and " There 's only us when the lights go down " . This view was echoed by Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle , who wrote that the song weaves " a vivid tale of a desperate woman " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Contemporary music critics received the " Ave Maria " with mixed reception . While some praised Knowles ' emotion @-@ filled vocals , others stated that her version as merely a normal take on the original . Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle commended the open @-@ hearted emotion and the soft vocals that Knowles adopts on " Ave Maria " , before adding that it is " a clever riff on the classic aria " and " a unique risk that pays off " . Likewise , the Hartford Courant 's Eric R. Danton , praised the rework of the classic aria , adding that Knowles ' lyrics were an " elegant take on the timeless melody " . Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media commented that Knowles ' twist on the song is " vocally impeccable , but it reads more like recital fodder rather than a true confessional . " Leah Greenblatt from Entertainment Weekly wrote that on the I Am disc there were some " lovely ballads " including " Disappear " , the " soaring ' Halo ' and ' Ave Maria ' " . Matos Michaelangelo of The A.V. Club wrote that " Beyoncé has a real flair for grandeur " and the " big , wide melodies of ' Halo ' and ' Ave Maria ' give her enough to work with that . " Greg Kot of Chicago Tribune commented that " Ave Maria " offers a " rare moment of comfort " and added that it " come [ s ] off as delicate as [ Knowles ' ] emotions . " Jim Farber of Daily News praised the song with its " operatic flourishes ... [ and ] heavenly élan " . In another review , he noted that the song was " by far her most melodically sure , and musically diverse , work " . USA Today 's Elysa Gardner chose " Ave Maria " as one of the songs to download from the album . While reviewing I Am ... Sasha Fierce , a critic from People magazine noted that " the classically tinged ' Ave Maria , ' ... shows even more range [ than ' If I Were a Boy ' ] . " 
 Spence D. of IGN Music praised " Ave Maria " , writing that it shows Knowles in " crystal clear form " due to the mellow accompaniment that highlighted her " often captivating " voice . Darryl Sterdan , writing for the Canadian website Jam ! , noted that Knowles " draws on the classic composition for this sweeping number " and echoes a similar line to John Lennon 's quote : " Life is what happens to you while you 're busy making other plans . " Talia Kraines of BBC Online called the song " very strange , but wonderful " . In his consumer guide , Robert Christgau wrote , " But me , I 'm a hater , and thus I 'm something like outraged , by not just those two pimp @-@ outs but an ' Ave Maria ' lacking even the dumbstruck literalism of Pink 's rendition or the grotesque conversion of ' Umbrella ' into ' Halo . ' " Bernard Zuel of The Sydney Morning Herald wrote that the song was " pompous and frankly embarrassing " . Colin McGuire of PopMatters commented that " Ave Maria " is a " pretty normal take , a piece that has simply been done too many times before to think [ Knowles ] would even have a shot at putting her stamp on it . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian described the song as " dreary " . According to James Reed of The Boston Globe , the song is " an intriguing proposition torpedoed by a soggy arrangement " . Adam Mazmanian of The Washington Times gave a negative review for the song , writing that the high notes included on " Ave Maria " , " should have remained a secret between Beyonce and her producers " . In 2013 , John Boone and Jennifer Cady of E ! Online placed the song at number ten on their list of ten best Knowles ' songs . They further added , " The new classic kicks off with the plucking off some light strings and you know by the end you 'll be singing through tears . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Ave Maria " was a part of the set list during Knowles ' I Am ... Tour ( 2009 @-@ 2010 ) , where she performed the song dressed in a wedding dress and blended it into Sarah McLachlan 's " Angel " ( 1998 ) . The wedding dress Knowles wore during the tour , was originally designed as a black dress and was designed by Thierry Mugler . Her mother and designer , Tina Knowles , made the dress stage @-@ appropriate so Knowles could dance in it . When Knowles performed the song in Sunrise , Florida on June 29 , 2009 , animated graphics of turntables , faders , and other club gear throbbed behind her and her musicians . Knowles was accompanied by her two drummers , two keyboardists , a percussionist , a horn section , three backup vocalists called the Mamas and a lead guitarist , Bibi McGill . According to Parke Puterbaugh from News & Record , the strangest moment of the concert was Knowles ' " unironic delivery " of " Ave Maria " , for which she was attired in a wedding dress and veil . 
 Following Knowles ' performance of the ballad at The O2 Arena in London , a writer for the newspaper Irish Independent commented that " an Irish audience surely cannot sit through the old convent staple ' Ave Maria ' ... without feeling something cold squeeze the heart . " Alice Jones of The Independent felt that the performance was an " exceedingly odd segment " during the tour . While reviewing Knowles ' performance at the Madison Square Garden , a writer of People magazine compared her look with Madonna 's . While reviewing another concert by Knowles , Ann Powers of Los Angeles Times also compared the performance with " pop 's ultimate alpha female " Madonna at the 1984 MTV Video Music Awards . She also compared " Ave Maria " with the singer 's 1989 song " Like a Prayer " because they both used religious imagery to elevate a romantic connection . A writer of Evening Chronicle praised the performance of the song during the tour , saying that it showed off Knowles ' " incredible " vocals . A critic of Daily Mail , noted that Knowles performed " near operatic heights " during " Ave Maria " . MTV News ' Jayson Rodriguez commented that Knowles uses her softer side while performing the ballad . Jim Farber of the Daily News praised the performance of the song , saying that " Beyoncé hit notes with a new delicacy , then moved seamlessly into the final operatic crescendo " . Barbara Ellen of The Observer was negative about the performance of " Ave Maria " during the I Am ... Tour , comparing it with Challenge <unk> and <unk> . She described it as " nonsense ... [ it ] has no place in a Beyoncé show " . 
 Knowles performed " Ave Maria " in Burswood Entertainment Complex , Perth , Western Australia , on September 25 , 2009 . Jay Hanna , writing for The Sunday Times , described the performance as " stunning " . Jay Lustig of New Jersey On @-@ Line described the same performance as " operatic " . Holly Byrnes of The Daily Telegraph while reviewing another stop during the concert tour of Knowles in Australia wrote that her performance of the ballad " guaranteed to have raised the sails of the Sydney Opera House " , while Patrick Emery of The Australian described her performance during another stop in the same country as " soaring " . A live performance of " Ave Maria " is featured on Knowles ' 2010 live album , I Am ... World Tour . Andy Gill of The Independent , while reviewing the DVD , gave a negative review for the performance of the song , writing that " if her grotesque over @-@ emoting on ' Ave Maria ' is anything to go by , legibility could make things a lot worse . " On December 3 , 2008 , Knowles ' performance of " Ave Maria " at the Rockefeller Center , in New York , was broadcast on NBC . A writer from People magazine described her performance as " rousing " . Knowles sang the song as a tribute to Michael Jackson at the 2008 Essence Music Festival . She later performed the song during the 2009 BET Awards , where she blended it with Sarah McLachlan 's song " Angel " in honor to Michael Jackson , following his death . Knowles appeared in an angelic Balmain mini white dress , and according to a writer from The Daily Telegraph and Daily Mail , she performed a " moving version " of " Ave Maria " . A writer for the newspaper The Hindu commented that the performance of the song was " simultaneously sexy and angelic " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 On May 12 , 2012 , Molly Rainford , a contestant of the sixth season of Britain 's Got Talent , sang " Ave Maria " during the show 's final . Digital Spy 's Daniel Sperling noted that Rainford sang a " pimped @-@ up version " of the song which he called " incredible " . A writer of BBC Online described her rendition as " moving " . On May 28 , 2012 , <unk> <unk> sang " Ave Maria " on The Voice ( Australia ) . Simon Holt of The Sydney Morning Herald noted that " she has a voice which brought tears to many eyes " , including coach and mentor Seal 's . Coach Joel Madden said : " I have to be respectful . That was a very spiritual performance . I 'm not sure what it was like for people at home , but that felt electric in here " . A reviewer for Take 40 Australia called it a " rousing version " . <unk> 's version peaked at number 25 on the Australian Singles Chart for the week of June 10 , 2012 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from I Am ... Sasha Fierce liner notes . 
 Beyoncé Knowles – songwriter , vocals 
 Amanda Ghost – songwriter 
 Ian Dench – songwriter , guitar 
 Makeba Riddick – songwriter 
 Mikkel <unk> – songwriter , producer , recorder , other instrumentation 
 Tor Erik Hermansen – songwriter , production , other instrumentation 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – audio mixing 
 Matt Green – audio mixing assistant 
 Recorded at Roc the Mic Studios , New York City , New York 
 Mixed at Record Plant , Los Angeles , California 
 = = Charts = = 
 Following the album 's digital release , " Ave Maria " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 150 on November 29 , 2008 . It also charted on the Portuguese Ringtone Chart in 2010 at number 16 . 
 = Commit This to Memory = 
 Commit This to Memory is the second studio album by American rock band Motion City Soundtrack . Produced by Mark Hoppus , the album was released on June 7 , 2005 , in the United States by Epitaph Records . Motion City Soundtrack , formed in 1997 , had first found success with their debut album , I Am the Movie ( 2002 ) . The band toured in the interim years , creating positive word @-@ of @-@ mouth . In 2004 , the band joined Blink @-@ 182 on the road for a string of shows , which led to their bassist , Mark Hoppus , joining the band in the studio for his first producing effort . 
 Recorded over six weeks in late 2004 , Commit This to Memory was created largely at Seedy Underbelly Studios , a suburban home converted into a studio in Los Angeles ' Valley Village region . The album was written partially in their hometown of Minneapolis and partially in Los Angeles , during a period in which frontman Justin Pierre was seeking treatment for alcohol abuse . He hoped for his lyricism to better emphasize storytelling , inspired by the lyrics of Tom Waits , Ben Folds and John K. Samson . Hoppus mainly worked with the band on completing song arrangements . 
 The album became the band 's breakthrough , with lead single " Everything Is Alright " becoming the band 's signature song . The album peaked at number two on Billboard 's Independent Albums chart . The singles ' music videos achieved rotation on cable channel MTV2 while the band toured alongside Fall Out Boy and Panic ! at the Disco on the Nintendo Fusion Tour , later also joining the Warped Tour for a stint . In 2014 , The A.V. Club referred to the album as a classic of pop punk , " full of hook @-@ laden , keyboard @-@ assisted songs whose bright melodies don ’ t mask the despair and self @-@ loathing lurking beneath them . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Motion City Soundtrack formed in 1997 in Minneapolis , Minnesota . The band signed to Epitaph Records in 2003 after recording I Am the Movie , their debut , independently and selling copies of it out of the back of their tour van for a year . Motion City became part of a slew of Epitaph signings , including <unk> Romance , Scatter the Ashes and From First To Last , amid concerns the Southern California label had strayed too far from its roots , and seemed " a little too emo . " By the time the band began production on their sophomore record , I Am the Movie had sold nearly 62 @,@ 000 copies . The group had accumulated significant buzz , and were regarded as a " must @-@ see " act on the Warped Tour 2004 . 
 Mark Hoppus ' involvement stems from when an Atticus Clothing employee played him I Am the Movie . He was so taken with it that he raved about the band in Rolling Stone , inviting them to open for his group , Blink @-@ 182 on their 2004 European tour . On the trek , he became good friends with the musicians . He told them that he had purchased an abundance of recording gear and amplifiers for the previous Blink @-@ 182 album and told the band of his interest in recording music from a production standpoint . At the final show of the tour , guitarist Joshua Cain went to Hoppus ' dressing room and asked him to produce their next record . Although Hoppus had never produced anything before , he was excited to be a part of the album and accepted the offer . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The band first began writing songs at their rehearsal space in their hometown of Minneapolis , which they nicknamed the " Dungeon " , due to its ability to " suck the life and energy out of the band . " For Pierre , the album came at the brink of a transitional period for him , in which he began to seek treatment for alcohol abuse . He left the band during the writing stages for Los Angeles where he moved in with Epitaph founder Brett Gurewitz and began attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings . Afterwards , the band rejoined Pierre in Los Angeles to begin recording demos for a month ; the change of scenery brought about new energy for the group , according to Pierre . Commit This to Memory would be the first album by the band to feature material crafted by each musician in the group , as previous releases had featured songs written in the years prior to each member joining . In addition , the band had more time and funds to spend time working on the album . " It was also the first time we had a lot more time and money to go in and feel like we were making a real record this time , whereas I Am the Movie was recorded in little segments here and there and eventually pieced together , " said drummer Tony Thaxton . 
 Recording sessions for Commit This to Memory , which were booked by Hoppus , were scheduled over six weeks at Seedy Underbelly Studios in Valley Village , a district of Los Angeles , California , which was actually a rented house that had once belonged to Jeff Porcaro , the drummer for Toto . The band had , according to Hoppus , " a million ideas and a lot of energy and enthusiasm to make a great record " . Pierre strove for the record to have a sound that resembled the bands Braid , Superchunk , <unk> and the Pixies . Living in a suburb , the neighbors had called police to the band and Hoppus several times for being too loud at night time , especially when Hoppus brought a Roland TR @-@ 808 drum machine outside to work on a song late at night . According to Pierre , Hoppus was not interested in putting his own stamp on the music , but rather bringing out the best in what he saw in the group . Hoppus generally modeled his production after Jerry Finn ( a longtime producer of Blink @-@ 182 ) , and therefore it involved much watching and listening . " Mark kept telling us , ' Your name is going to be a lot bigger on the front than mine is on the back ' , " recalled Justin Pierre , " So he would throw suggestions out there but always say , ' Feel free to turn these down . ' And we would ! " 
 Pierre characterized Hoppus as both " very involved and not involved , " with his job as producer mainly giving notes on the sound of the instruments and offering suggestions to improve songs . Hoppus mostly worked with the band on arrangements , believing the songs were too packed and " needed to breathe " . Hoppus mentioned that label politics had hindered the creativity of Blink 's Take Off Your Pants and Jacket ( 2001 ) , and did not want to see the same fate befall the band . He was " meticulous " in his approach , partially due to the fact that it was his first production job . Hoppus was the one who advised the band to merge two previously unrelated songs — a slower , softer song and a pulsating drum track — into one , which became " Time Turned Fragile " . The frontman of Fall Out Boy , Patrick Stump , contributed guest vocals to " Everything Is Alright " , and Hoppus to " Hangman " . With production completed , Hoppus was very excited for the band that he felt was on the cusp of " great things " , recalling , " After six weeks of these guys living all together in two rooms of this house with a studio attached they created this amazingly beautiful and honest album . Justin 's lyrics are so brutally truthful . " The group completed recording in November 2004 , and judged final mixes over the interim months . Pierre later called Commit This to Memory his personal favorite album by the band . 
 = = Music = = 
 In a 2015 interview , Pierre notes that fans have told him that they find Commit This to Memory a " winter album , " to which he agrees , noting the unintentional mention of the new year in several songs . His lyricism on Commit This to Memory centralizes around change and , in his words , " being a complete <unk> , yet , at the same time , being somewhat successful " . On the record , he " addresses the themes of substance abuse , psychological disorders and failing relationships . " Pierre penned " Everything Is Alright " as a summary of his OCD ( Obsessive – compulsive disorder ) tendencies . He intended to utilize his social anxiety and fears in the song 's form , which he has since employed in numerous other compositions . " I don ’ t think the [ phrase ] " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " is correct , but it ’ s something where the verses are one thing and then the chorus is another , but it 's sort of like giving yourself a pep talk , " said Pierre . The song 's lyrics include hating such mundane things as " theme parks , flying , strangers , [ and ] waiting in line , " things that Pierre genuinely disliked at the time of the song 's writing . For the record , he intended to simplify his lyrics to enhance storytelling and he drew inspiration from Tom Waits , Ben Folds and John K. Samson 's writing styles . Keeping in the Waits / Folds inspiration , Pierre strove to write from another person 's point of view ; in the case of " Time Turned Fragile " , it is sung from the perspective of his father . 
 Pierre has in retrospect labeled half of the album 's writing as being completed while inebriated and the other half while getting sober . For example , he penned the lyrics to " Attractive Today " and " Time Turned Fragile " while drunk in his apartment , in a " sad and lonely place . " In this approach , words mostly " just came out , " and were not substantially revised . In addition , he was listening to the 2003 album Reconstruction Site by the Weakerthans , and found himself inspired by the songwriting of frontman John K. Samson . Pierre would often take lyrics from other bands songs for song titles ; " Time Turned Fragile " is lifted from a lyric in <unk> 's " Julia " , while " Together We 'll Ring in the New Year " was pulled from the Tom Waits song " Please Wake Me Up " . " L.G. <unk> " grew out of a night on Motion City Soundtrack 's 2003 UK tour with The All @-@ American Rejects , in which the latter band 's merchandise manager was severely inebriated . He stood on the merchandise stand and shouted the song 's central thesis — " Let 's Get Fucked Up and Die " . All involved found great humor in the " mantra " , which went on to be printed on business cards as a joke . " Hold Me Down " was inspired by a former roommate of Pierre 's . After she had moved out , Pierre found a portion of her math homework in a couch cushion , leading to him imagining a scenario of finding a letter from a departed lover . 
 The album has been called definitive of pop punk . Joshua Cain dismissed this label , remarking , " I definitely wouldn 't consider us a pop @-@ punk band . Our influences are more based on ' 90s bands like Superchunk and early Weezer . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , Commit This to Memory received general acclaim from music critics . Scott Heisel of Alternative Press wrote that " Memory is an inspired , mature sophomore disc chock full of catchy , intelligent pop @-@ rock . " Allmusic 's Johnny Loftus considered the band more intelligent and sophisticated than their Warped Tour peers : " Motion City Soundtrack [ ' s ] wistful memories , tales of breaking up , and frantic searches for answers [ are ] <unk> than the next pop @-@ punk combo on the quadruple summertime bill . " Jennifer Maerz of Entertainment Weekly ended her review with the note that " MCS ' slick , soaring anthems ultimately unite the spirits of those who see themselves , like Pierre , as ' lifeless corners of this empty frame . ' " Mark Griffiths of Kerrang ! wrote , " It 's a bright and invigorating affair [ ... ] and is , in short , fantastic . " The Washington Post 's Marianne Meyer opined that the record " nimbly moves from skittish rhythms to genuinely tender sentiment . " Jessica Grose of Spin favorably compared it to Blink @-@ 182 's Enema of the State ( 1999 ) . Tony McMenamin of Blender deemed it the publication 's album of the month , calling it " a charged mix of instantly catchy pop @-@ punk lashings and somber acoustic wailings . " 
 The album was leaked to file sharing websites within a day of the final mastering and months before its official release . It debuted on the Billboard 200 in the issue dated June 25 , 2005 at position 72 , selling 16 @,@ 000 copies in its opening week . It charted better on the magazine 's Independent Albums chart , where it peaked at number two . The last official estimate placed it at 285 @,@ 000 albums sold in the U.S. , but Pierre said in 2015 interview that the number is closer to 500 @,@ 000 . The band 's music videos found regular rotation on networks such as MTV2 , and the band also performed on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . Rolling Stone 's Lauren <unk> considered the album a sleeper hit . Nevertheless , the band ’ s breakthrough brought naysayers , and the group became targets for critics of pop punk : " [ the band was ] frequently characterized as the sort of ultra @-@ commercial punk poseurs who water down the genre to the point of drowning it . " 
 Subsequent reviews of the album have continued to be positive . In 2014 , The A.V. Club referred to the album as a classic of pop punk , " full of hook @-@ laden , keyboard @-@ assisted songs whose bright melodies don ’ t mask the despair and self @-@ loathing lurking beneath them . " <unk> Ali of Cincinnati CityBeat wrote that Commit This to Memory " absolutely bleeds charm , " commenting , " Even with all the dire thematic matter Pierre ’ s lyrics covered , [ ... ] the band framed the words with music that sparkled , owing to spunky , inspired hooks , full @-@ sounding record production and ample doses of Moog . " Alternative Press 's Tyler Sharp deemed the record a " classic , " while Taylor Morgan of OC Weekly called it " the soundtrack of millennial youth , reminiscent of breakups , making out , goofing off , and growing up . " BuzzFeed included the album at number 21 on their " 36 Pop Punk Albums You Need To Hear Before You F — — ing Die " list . NME listed the album as one of " 20 Pop Punk Albums Which Will Make You Nostalgic " . 
 = = Touring = = 
 During the recording of the album , the band embarked on their first headlining tour , The Sub @-@ Par Punk Who Cares Tour 2004 . After recording , the band set out on the inaugural Epitaph Tour , alongside <unk> Romance and From First to Last , with appearances by the Matches and Scatter the Ashes on select dates . The tour visited every major US city , and ran from February 2 to March 19 , 2005 . The band played to larger crowds on the tours supporting the album , including over 9000 fans on a Chicago date in 2005 . The group " toured incessantly , " including dates on the Warped Tour 2005 . Afterwards , the band joined the Nintendo Fusion Tour with Fall Out Boy , Panic ! at the Disco , and The Starting Line , which was their largest nationwide tour to that point . The group had been friends with Fall Out Boy for many years prior , having both played side @-@ by @-@ side before either group found their respective success . 
 The band embarked on a tour celebrating the tenth anniversary of the album between January and February 2015 , playing the album in its entirety . " It doesn 't feel like ten years ago , but then it also feels like a lifetime ago , " said Pierre . The group later extended this anniversary tour , and further toured the album between June and August 2015 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Motion City Soundtrack . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Bessie Braddock = 
 Elizabeth Margaret " Bessie " Braddock ( née Bamber ; 24 September 1899 – 13 November 1970 ) was a British Labour Party politician who served as Member of Parliament ( MP ) for the Liverpool Exchange division from 1945 to 1970 . She was a member of Liverpool County Borough Council from 1930 to 1961 . Although she never held office in government , she won a national reputation for her forthright campaigns in connection with housing , public health and other social issues . 
 Braddock inherited much of her campaigning spirit from her mother , Mary Bamber , an early socialist and trade union activist . After some years in the Independent Labour Party ( ILP ) , Braddock joined the Communist Party of Great Britain ( CPGB ) on its foundation in 1920 , but quickly became disillusioned with the party 's dictatorial tendencies . She left the CPGB in 1924 and later joined the Labour Party . Before the Second World War , alongside her husband Jack Braddock , she established a reputation as a crusading left @-@ wing councillor , frequently at odds with her party while pursuing an agenda of social reform . During the war she worked in Liverpool 's ambulance service , before winning the Exchange division for Labour in the 1945 general election . 
 With her formidable physique and outspoken manner , Braddock was a pugnacious presence in parliament , and a keen supporter of the 1945 – 51 Attlee ministry 's reform agenda , particularly the establishment of the National Health Service in 1948 . She served on Labour 's National Executive Committee between 1947 and 1969 . Her combative style led to a brief suspension from parliament in 1952 . For most of her parliamentary career she remained a member of Liverpool 's council , and was a central figure in the controversy that arose in the 1950s over the city 's decision to acquire and flood the Tryweryn Valley in Wales for the construction of a reservoir . 
 Between 1953 and 1957 Braddock served on the Royal Commission for Mental Health which led to the Mental Health Act 1959 . From the early 1950s she moved steadily to the right wing of her party , and was increasingly acerbic in her judgements of her former colleagues on the left . When Labour won the 1964 general election she refused office on the grounds of age and health ; thereafter her parliamentary contributions dwindled as her health worsened . Towards the end of her life she became Liverpool 's first woman freeman . After her death in 1970 her Guardian obituarist hailed her as " one of the most distinctive political personalities of the century " . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
