 = = = = Childhood = = = = 
 Elizabeth Bamber was born on 24 September 1899 at 23 Zante Street , Liverpool , the eldest daughter of Hugh Bamber , a bookbinder , and his wife Mary , née Little . Mary had come to Liverpool as a child when her father , a well @-@ to @-@ do Edinburgh lawyer , abandoned his family after his descent into alcoholism and poverty . Liverpool in the late 19th century suffered extremes of poverty , and had the highest infant mortality rate in the country . Mary became a trade union organiser and campaigner against poverty , and established a reputation as an outstanding platform speaker . She was the dominant early influence on her daughter Elizabeth , who formed a lifelong determination to represent and fight for the disadvantaged . 
 In 1902 the Bamber family relocated to Smollett Street in nearby Bootle , one of several moves that caused Elizabeth 's formal education to be divided among several schools . Alongside her normal schooling her political education began at the Marmaduke Street Socialist Sunday School , and through the medium of her mother 's campaigning activities . One of Elizabeth 's early memories was of the soup kitchen for the destitute which Mary helped to run on St George 's Plateau : " I remember the faces of the unemployed when the soup ran out ... I remember blank , hopeless stares , day after day , week after week , all through the hard winter of 1906 – 07 " . 
 At the age of 11 Elizabeth left the Sunday School and joined the youth section of the Independent Labour Party ( ILP ) , where she studied socialism alongside a busy programme of social activities . She later described herself at this time as " strong , agile , fond of walking and eating " . By this time Mary Bamber was working as an organiser for the Warehouse Workers ' Union ; Elizabeth assisted her mother , sometimes acting as a steward at meetings . Mother and daughter were both present at St George 's Plateau on 13 August 1911 , when a baton charge by police and troops broke up a rally in support of Liverpool 's striking transport workers . Hundreds were injured , and in the disturbances that followed , two demonstrators were shot dead . The day became enshrined in Liverpool 's working @-@ class history as " Bloody Sunday " . 
 = = = = ILP years = = = = 
 Elizabeth left school in 1913 , and began work filling seed packets for five shillings a week . The job was too monotonous to engage her for long , and after a few months she found a post in the drapery department of the Walton Road Co @-@ operative store . At her mother 's insistence she became a member of the <unk> ' Union . Meanwhile , she attended classes run by the Workers ' Educational Association and the Plebs ' League : " They told me how the capitalists controlled money , business and the land , and ... hung on to them " . 
 Within the group of young socialists who gathered regularly at the ILP 's local headquarters there were three Elizabeths . To avoid confusion , lots were drawn to decide who should be known respectively as Elizabeth , Betty , or Bessie . By this means Elizabeth Bamber took the name Bessie , which she retained for the rest of her life . Among the other ILP activists at Kensington was Sydney Silverman , four years older than Bessie , the son of a poor draper . Silverman was a considerable influence on the youthful Bessie ; he would be her future colleague , both in the Liverpool council chamber and the House of Commons . When the First World War began in August 1914 , the ILP opposed it as " an appalling crime upon the nations " who had been " stampeded by fear and panic " . On the introduction of conscription in 1916 , Silverman and others adopted positions of uncompromising pacifism , and were imprisoned . The ILP welcomed news of the Russian Revolution of 1917 , and vigorously opposed allied intervention in the civil war that followed it . Bessie played a leading role in a TUC " Hands Off Russia " rally in Liverpool 's Sheil Park , where she and others resisted the efforts of the British Empire Union to capture the ILP 's red flag . 
 At the end of the war in 1918 , Bessie left the Co @-@ op and took a clerical post with the Warehouse Workers ' Union . In the course of her ILP activities she met and befriended John " Jack " Braddock , a wagon builder and union activist with a reputation as a firebrand . He had arrived in Liverpool from Dewsbury in 1915 , hoping to emigrate to Canada , but had stayed in the port and immersed himself in left @-@ wing politics and the fight to improve working conditions . He and Bessie became very close ; in 1919 they helped Mary Bamber to fight for a Liverpool council seat , as the ILP 's candidate in the Everton district . The election campaign was bitter and at times violent , but resulted in Bamber 's victory by the slim margin of 13 votes . 
 = = = Communist activist = = = 
 By 1920 Mary Bamber , Bessie and Jack Braddock had become disillusioned with the ILP , which seemed to them to lack the necessary radicalism to march with the times . At the time , Sylvia Pankhurst 's Workers ' Socialist Federation , the British Socialist Party and other socialist organisations were increasingly coordinating their activities , and in 1920 merged to form the Communist Party of Great Britain ( CPGB ) . Under Mary Bamber 's influence , both Bessie and Jack Braddock left the ILP to become members of the new party . Within the CPGB the young couple became acquainted with Wal Hannington , leader of the National Unemployed Workers Committee Movement . They joined his " work or maintenance " campaign which aimed to raise the levels of Poor Law relief to what they considered a proper subsistence level . The couple did not endear themselves to the CPGB hierarchy when , on egalitarian grounds , they opposed the levels of salary which the party wanted to pay to its full @-@ time officials . 
 In the joint autobiography written with Jack , The Braddocks ( 1963 ) , Bessie cites the formative experience of police violence on " Bloody Sunday " in 1911 as a motivating factor for her CPGB activities . On 12 September 1921 , again at St George 's Plateau , she attended a rally for the city 's jobless , organised by the Liverpool Unemployed Workers ' Committee . Again there was police intervention ; Jack and Mary Bamber were charged with unlawful assembly and received a token one day 's imprisonment . In 1922 Bessie and other party members provided comfort and shelter to Hannington 's hunger marchers , as the columns of unemployed passed through Lancashire on their way to London . Bessie combined her party roles — she was treasurer of the Liverpool branch — with her full @-@ time union post ; Jack , meanwhile , was only intermittently in work , as his incendiary reputation meant that employers were reluctant to give him a job . He had been living for some time at the Bambers ' home when , in February 1922 , the couple were married at Brougham Terrace registry office , during the course of a working day . After a brief reception they returned to their respective duties — Bessie to her union job and Jack to his volunteer work for the CPGB . 
 The Braddocks were not comfortable as CPGB members . They objected to the lack of autonomy afforded to local branches by the party 's central " Political Bureau " , and to what they perceived as the leadership 's unquestioning subservience to the Soviet Union . Mary Bamber , after a visit to Russia , opined that there were as many true communists in Liverpool as in Moscow . In 1924 , increasingly convinced that communist rule would lead to the enslavement rather than the liberation of workers , the entire leadership of the Liverpool CPGB branch , including both Braddocks , resigned from the party . 
 = = = Liverpool council = = = 
 After leaving the CPGB , the Braddocks continued their socialist activism in Liverpool . Jack 's role in the Merseyside Council of Action ( an impromptu militant action group ) during the 1926 General Strike made employers even less willing to engage him . He was rescued by the action of Sir Benjamin Johnson , a liberal @-@ minded industrialist , who lent him the money to purchase a Co @-@ operative Insurance Society agency . Jack and Bessie were now determined to pursue their political aims by democratic methods , and in 1926 they joined the <unk> ward of the Liverpool Labour Party . In the 1929 Liverpool council elections , Jack was returned unopposed as the Labour councillor for the Everton ward . A year later Bessie joined him , elected in the St Anne 's ward . 
 St Anne 's , one of the most deprived areas of the city , contained a closed workhouse at Brownlow Hill , which the Conservative @-@ controlled council had decided to sell to the Roman Catholic Church , as the potential site for a cathedral . The Labour group 's official policy was to delay the sale for several years , so that the empty workhouse buildings could be used as temporary housing during slum clearance and rebuilding . The issue split Labour on religious lines ; nearly all the Catholic members of the Labour group defied party policy and voted for an immediate sale . Among the rebels was the sitting St Anne 's councillor , Olive Hughes . She was thereupon deselected by the St Anne 's ward , which chose Bessie as their candidate for the 1930 election . Bessie faced a difficult task , since Hughes chose to stand against her as an Independent Socialist , with the support of leading local Catholics in a ward where the electorate was 85 per cent Catholic . An intense campaign , during which Bessie claimed to have visited every street in the ward , brought her success . 
 This victory did not delay the workhouse 's fate ; the site was duly sold to the Catholic Church for £ 110 @,@ 000 , and demolition began in January 1931 . Nevertheless , Bessie , who had been appalled by the housing conditions in the ward , helped to instigate a slum clearance campaign which slowly brought improvements . As a member of the council 's Port Sanitary and Hospitals Committee , which controlled all the city 's hospitals and residential homes for the elderly , Bessie discovered that the hospitals were generally verminous , drably decorated and poorly ventilated , with inadequate cooking facilities . Patients ' record @-@ keeping systems were rudimentary , with little or no communication between hospitals . She became involved in the reform , reorganisation and modernisation of many of the city 's health facilities , in particularly those related to mothers and children . From 1934 she was chairman of the Maternity and Child Welfare subcommittee , and in June 1936 worked with other women 's groups to organise a national conference on maternity and child welfare issues . 
 The Labour group on the council remained divided . The group 's leader was Luke Hogan ( 1885 – 1954 ) , of Irish stock and closely identified with the Catholic caucus . He enjoyed the strong support of around two @-@ thirds of the Labour councillors ; the Braddocks , and from 1932 Sydney Silverman , were part of the smaller leftist wing of the group . Clashes between the two sides were frequent , the main contention being the supposed attempts by Hogan and his followers to " <unk> " the local party . When in 1936 Hogan tried to block the renewal of a grant to a local birth control clinic , Bessie led a cross @-@ party rebellion of councillors which ensured that the grant was maintained . She argued that most of the 87 women who had died in childbirth the previous year might have survived with access to contraception . 
 Mostly , Bessie was uncompromising in her attitude towards the council 's ruling Conservatives ; on one occasion she was ejected from the council chamber by the police , after she had called the Housing Committee chairman a liar and refused the mayor 's order to withdraw the remark . She justified this behaviour on the grounds that " if you didn 't do something outrageous , nobody would take any notice of you " . She had earlier resorted to using a two @-@ foot megaphone in a council meeting , to demand action over housing conditions and slums . 
 Inspired by her colleague Silverman , who in the 1935 general election became MP for Nelson and Colne , Bessie determined to seek a parliamentary career of her own . This ambition contrasted with that of Jack , who turned down the chance to be Labour 's candidate in the Everton constituency to concentrate on his local government role . In 1936 Bessie was selected as Labour candidate for Liverpool Exchange . This inner @-@ city division had long been held by the Conservatives , mainly because of a substantial " business vote " which , before the abolition of plural voting in 1948 , gave owners of businesses an extra vote in the constituency where their business operated . In the recent election the seat had been held by the Conservative , Sir John Shute , with a majority of 4 @,@ 412 . Bessie was then 36 years old ; she would have to wait for nearly 10 years before she could fight her seat , as the general election that would normally have been held in 1939 or 1940 was postponed by the Second World War . 
 In the years immediately before the war Bessie was concerned at the extent of recruitment in the city by the British Union of Fascists . She was outspoken in her attacks on fascist groups , and in her defence of those who attacked their parades . The death of her mother Mary Bamber in June 1938 , at the age of 63 , was a considerable personal blow to Bessie , and was widely mourned within Liverpool 's socialist community . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 On the outbreak of war in September 1939 , Bessie left her union post and joined G Division of the Liverpool Ambulance Service , as a driver . Initially her main job was to train other drivers , mostly young women . She became a section leader and then a deputy leader of G Division , an administrative post that should have kept her at headquarters . However , she records that she drove her ambulance through all the 68 major air raids that struck Liverpool during the war years . It was dangerous work ; on a single day , 3 May 1941 , 14 drivers lost their lives . Bessie remained with the ambulance service almost until the end of the war in 1945 . 
 In 1942 Bessie and Jack moved to what would be their home for the remainder of their lives , a suburban semi @-@ detached house in ZigZag Road , in Liverpool 's West Derby district . They remained active members of Liverpool council , and in 1943 Jack became deputy leader of the Labour group . Two years later the Braddocks healed the rift with Hogan by proposing and seconding his appointment as the city 's Lord Mayor for the year 1945 – 46 ; Jack succeeded him as leader of the Labour group on the council , a post he held until his death in 1963 . Bessie became honorary president of the Liverpool Trades Council and Labour Party ( <unk> ) , the body that had been formed in 1921 when the Liverpool Trades Council merged with the newly formed local Labour Party to form a united labour front . 
 = = = Labour MP = = = 
 = = = = Labour government 1945 – 51 = = = = 
 Despite some opinion polls indicating a Labour lead , most commentators expected that Winston Churchill 's prestige would ensure a comfortable Conservative victory in the July 1945 general election . Before polling day , The Manchester Guardian surmised that " the chances of Labour sweeping the country and obtaining a clear majority ... are pretty remote " . The News of the World predicted a working Conservative majority , while in Glasgow a pundit forecast the result as Conservatives 360 , Labour 220 , Others 60 . The expectations of a Labour victory in Liverpool Exchange were not high , but Bessie 's chances were boosted by the poor local record of the sitting member , Colonel Shute , and she herself was confident . Defying most forecasts , across the country Labour won 393 seats , and with an overall majority of 146 , Clement Attlee formed the first majority Labour government . Bessie won Liverpool Exchange with a majority of 665 from 16 @,@ 000 votes cast . 
 In an assessment of the new MPs , the Daily Express described Bessie as " a character among the Labour women . Very forthright in her speech , strong in her Labour faith ... never hesitates to call a spade a spade " . Physically imposing — she admitted to weighing 15 stone ( 210 pounds , 95 kg ) — she made an impact with her maiden speech , on 17 October 1945 , during a debate on the national housing shortage . After taunting the Conservative opposition for having " <unk> " the Exchange seat — " the prize Division of the [ Liverpool ] Tory Party " — she made an impassioned plea to the new Minister of Health , Aneurin Bevan , for immediate measures to improve the slum housing conditions in Liverpool , and throughout the country : " Particularly in industrial areas , people are living in flea @-@ ridden , bug @-@ ridden , rat @-@ ridden , lousy hell @-@ holes " . She ended her speech with a promise that she and other Labour back @-@ <unk> would continue to agitate until the conditions in which many were forced to live , " as a result of having been represented for so long by the Conservative Party " , were removed . 
 Bessie 's aggressive anti @-@ Toryism was frequently in evidence during her first years in parliament , especially when she could attribute to them the economic miseries of her Liverpool constituents . In a Commons debate on 28 March 1946 she welcomed the government 's decision to close the Liverpool Cotton Association , which she denounced as " the bulwark of the Tory administration in Liverpool " , nothing more than a group of financiers who gambled with the industry in order to make profits for themselves . On 1 May 1947 The Manchester Guardian , reporting the chaotic Commons scenes during the divisions following a debate on the nationalisation of the railways , recorded that " Mrs E.M. Braddock ... danced a jig as she moved over to the Opposition benches where she occupied the seat usually used by Mr Churchill . " When the Bolton Evening News called her performance " nauseating , a sorry degradation of democratic discussion " she sued the newspaper for defamation . She lost the case , and a subsequent appeal was unsuccessful . 
 In 1947 Bessie was elected to the Labour Party 's National Executive Committee ( NEC ) . She was generally identified with the left wing of the party , and was for a time associated with a grouping known as the " Socialist Fellowship " , which espoused a programme of colonial freedom , workers ' control and reduced arms expenditure . She resigned from the Fellowship in 1950 , along with fellow @-@ MPs Fenner Brockway and Ellis Smith , when it condemned the United Nations intervention in the Korean War . She continued her wholehearted campaigning on behalf of the poorest in the country , pleading with parliament to " remember the queues outside the Poor Relief offices " , and castigating the " New Look " fashion of 1948 as wasteful , " the ridiculous whim of idle people " . Bessie 's fiery reputation did not harm her electorally ; in the February 1950 general election , with the Exchange constituency greatly increased by boundary changes , her majority rose to 5 @,@ 344 . Nationally Labour lost 76 seats , and its parliamentary majority was reduced to five . Attlee 's second government was short @-@ lived ; in the October 1951 general election Bessie increased her personal majority again , to 6 @,@ 834 , but nationally Labour was defeated by the Conservatives and went into opposition . 
 Outside her political duties Bessie , a keen fan of boxing , accepted the honorary presidency of the Professional Boxers ' Association , and was a passionate defender of the sport . Her enthusiasm arose in part from her experiences as a juvenile court magistrate ; she believed that the sport fostered character and mutual respect . She was frequently at odds with her parliamentary colleague Edith <unk> , a medical doctor who wrote the anti @-@ boxing tract The <unk> Art , and campaigned for the sport 's abolition . 
 = = = = 1950s : <unk> shift = = = = 
 After leaving Socialist Fellowship , Bessie moved steadily towards the centre and right of her party , distancing herself from colleagues with whom she had earlier found common cause . She did not support Aneurin Bevan when he resigned from the government in April 1951 over the introduction of National Health Service charges , and later asserted that , by making dissidence fashionable , Bevan had " weakened the [ Labour ] National Executive to the point where it could no longer deal effectively with infiltrating Trotskyists and Communists " . In 1955 her opposition to the Bevanite faction was such that she supported efforts by Hugh Gaitskell and Herbert Morrison to have Bevan expelled from the party . She regularly attacked the Labour left at party conferences , and in 1952 was involved in scuffles with other delegates after the unexpected success of Bevanite candidates in the NEC elections . 
 Also in 1952 , Bessie 's volatile temperament caused her to become the first woman member to be suspended from the House of Commons , after she repeatedly protested to the Deputy Speaker for failing to call her during a debate on the textile industry , a matter of great concern to her constituents . In general , her forthright attitude won her cross @-@ party respect , and in 1953 she was appointed by Churchill ( who had returned as prime minister in 1951 ) to the Royal Commission on Mental Health , otherwise known as the Percy Commission , whose work led to the Mental Health Act 1959 . 
 Bessie 's increasingly centrist stance troubled party members in Liverpool Exchange , where the Bevanite faction was generally popular . In 1954 the local party passed a motion requesting that she step down before the next general election . This was rejected by the NEC , who believed that Bessie was a national electoral asset . Shortly before the May 1955 general election the Exchange party tried again , and voted by 40 to 39 to <unk> her . Bessie , convinced that this vote had been rigged , appealed to the NEC , who set the decision aside and imposed her on the constituency . These party machinations had no effect on Bessie 's popularity with the voters ; in the election on 26 May , despite the intervention of a left @-@ wing Independent Socialist candidate , she increased her majority to 7 @,@ 186 . Nevertheless , the Conservatives retained power with an increased parliamentary majority . In the municipal elections held that same month , Labour won control of Liverpool 's council for the first time ; Jack Braddock became council leader . Bessie gave up her St Anne 's ward seat , after 25 years , but remained on the council as a co @-@ opted alderman . 
 = = = = Campaigns and controversies , 1956 – 59 = = = = 
 In May 1956 Bessie 's concerns about the treatment of prisoners in Walton Prison led to an investigation by Sir Godfrey Russell Vick , which revealed numerous instances of violence by members of the prison staff , and brought about reforms . In July that year , during a home affairs debate , Bessie demanded tougher regulations on the supply and licensing of air pistols , which under the existing law were readily available to juveniles . She alarmed the house by brandishing two such pistols which , she explained , she had confiscated in the course of her duties as a juvenile court magistrate . When rebuked by the Deputy Speaker , she replied that she had deliberately used shock tactics , reprising her earlier council chamber argument that " no one takes any notice unless someone does something which is out of order , or is unusual " . She also campaigned for the rights of larger women to obtain fashionable clothes ; using her substantial 50 " – 40 " – 50 " measurements to advantage , she took part in a fashion show aimed at the larger @-@ than @-@ average woman . 
 In 1956 , as part of a Liverpool council delegation , the Braddocks visited the Soviet Union at the invitation of the mayor of Odessa , a city with which Liverpool had informal fraternal links . Her overall impression of the country was of drabness and oppression , with welfare provision generally well below British levels , although she conceded that medical facilities were excellent . Before returning home she informed the mayor of Odessa that " after forty years of socialism ... you haven 't achieved half of what we have in Britain " . 
 In the later 1950s an issue arose which tarnished the reputations of both Braddocks in the eyes of much of Liverpool 's Welsh community and the people of Wales . In 1955 Liverpool council applied for the compulsory purchase of land in the Tryweryn Valley , Merionethshire , North Wales , for the construction of a reservoir to serve Liverpool 's increasing needs for water — some 65 million gallons a day . The proposal would mean the flooding of the small village of Llyn Celyn , and several farms . On 7 November a deputation led by the Plaid Cymru president Gwynfor Evans sought to address the council in a plea for a change in policy . According to Bessie 's biographer Ben Rees , while Evans was speaking , Bessie banged on the table and joined other councillors in insulting Evans and demanding that he " go back to Wales " . In July 1957 , when the enabling legislation reached its second House of Commons reading , Bessie described the scheme as regional rather than local , and claimed that some parts of Wales would benefit from it . The land to be flooded in the Tryweryn Valley was not , she said , of high agricultural value , and " nothing was done that was not agreed to by the tenants in the area " . The bill became law , and construction began in 1959 , but protests and demonstrations continued until the reservoir 's opening in 1965 . The slogan <unk> <unk> ( " Remember Tryweryn " ) was coined by nationalists , says Rees , as " a reminder of Liverpool 's greed and lack of sensitivity " . In October 2015 , on the 50th anniversary of the reservoir 's completion , protestors demonstrated around the statue of Bessie at <unk> 's Lime Street Station . 
 In the October 1959 general election the Conservatives , now led by Harold Macmillan , increased their majority in parliament to 100 seats . In Liverpool Exchange Bessie defied the national swing , and increased her proportion of the vote . On a reduced turnout her personal majority fell slightly , to 6 @,@ 971 . 
 = = = = Later career , 1960 – 68 = = = = 
 In 1961 Bessie 's aldermanic term on Liverpool 's council expired . That year , the Conservatives briefly took control of the council , and used their majority to block her reappointment . This ended 31 years ' service on the council . In 1963 , when Labour regained control , she did not seek re @-@ instatement . The year 1963 saw the publication of The Braddocks , in which Bessie made a sustained attack on communism and Trotskyism : " The purpose of this book is to bring home to the rank and file how wide that influence is ... unless positive steps are taken by the workers themselves ... democracy will be dead " . Reviewing the book for the Socialist Standard , Lawrence <unk> thought it gave a useful picture of early 20th century working @-@ class life in Liverpool , but concluded that " from the evidence of this book the Braddocks qualified fully for the role of blind leaders of the blind " . 
 On 12 November 1963 Jack Braddock died of a heart attack , at the age of 71 , while attending an official function in Liverpool . The October 1964 general election brought Labour a narrow victory under Harold Wilson , while in Liverpool Exchange , Bessie achieved her best personal majority to date , 9 @,@ 746 . She did not take a post in the new government ; according to The Guardian she was offered a job , but declined on the grounds of health and age . Although she fought the next election , in March 1966 , and held Liverpool Exchange easily , for the final six years of her parliamentary life she was relatively inactive and often absent through illness . Her last contribution in the House was on 27 January 1969 , a question regarding facilities for disabled drivers . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 In 1968 Bessie became vice chairman ( and therefore chairman @-@ elect ) of the Labour Party . However , in February 1969 she collapsed with exhaustion and was hospitalised . In August she resigned from the NEC on health grounds , thus forgoing her succession to the party chairmanship . In September she announced that she did not intend to contest the next general election , and would retire from politics , a decision which shocked and disappointed her constituents . In April 1970 she was awarded the freedom of the City of Liverpool , the first woman thus honoured . Bessie formally left parliament at the dissolution before the June 1970 general election ; on 13 November 1970 she died in Liverpool 's Rathbone Hospital , at the age of 71 . At her funeral service held a few days later at Anfield Crematorium , in the course of his tribute , Harold Wilson summed her up thus : " She was born to fight for the people of the docks , of the slums , of the factories and in every part of the city where people needed help " . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 At the time of her death , commentators described Bessie as one of the most notable political personalities of her time , and perhaps the best @-@ known woman in Britain after the Queen . She was especially appreciated in Liverpool , where much of her campaigning zeal for better housing and healthcare was concentrated . Widely known and remembered as " Battling Bessie " , thirty years after her death she was placed eighth in a BBC poll of " great Merseysiders " . 
 Bessie was renowned for the sharpness of her tongue , either in pursuit of her campaigns or in denouncing her enemies . She frequently used inflammatory , colourful language , once describing an opposing councillor as a " blasted rat " , and another time telling the Tory majority that she was willing " to take a machine gun to the lot of you " . In contrast to this aggressive public , Bessie 's private life was unostentatious . She did not smoke or drink , dressed conventionally and holidayed modestly in Scarborough . Nevertheless , she enjoyed the company of many glamorous friends from the worlds of show business and boxing . 
 Towards perceived adversaries , Bessie showed neither patience nor respect , especially those with whom she had once shared common ground on the far left . Apart from her attacks on Bevan , she displayed particular scorn for the future Labour Party leader Michael Foot , whose practice in the 1950s of writing articles attacking the Labour leadership for right @-@ wing newspapers was , she thought , disloyal . A much reported exchange between her and Churchill has her accusing him of being drunk , and him concurring but adding : " My dear you are ugly , but tomorrow I shall be sober and you will still be ugly " — or similar words . There is no reliable evidence that any such exchange took place ; despite its popularity , commentators are generally sceptical . According to the columnist Simon Hoggart , similar stories involving other figures had been circulating for years ; he concluded : " If it sounds true , if it echoes something we feel about the politician , then it will cling to him or her as if bonded with <unk> " . 
 In 1984 , Radio City , an independent Liverpool radio station , broadcast a 4 @-@ part dramatisation of Jack and Bessie Braddock 's lives . Bessie Braddock is commemorated in Liverpool by the statue in Lime Street Station , and by a blue plaque erected at her modest home in ZigZag Road . In a 2014 Fabian Society essay the Labour MP Lisa Nandy wrote that Bessie " brought her experiences of life in the slums of Liverpool right into the heart of Westminster . Now , more than ever , we need the voices of working women to be heard in parliament " . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Newspapers and journals = = = = 
 = = = = Online = = = = 
 = Rochus Misch = 
 Rochus Misch ( 29 July 1917 – 5 September 2013 ) was a German Oberscharführer ( sergeant ) in the 1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler ( LSSAH ) . He was badly wounded during the Polish campaign during the first month of World War II in Europe . After recovering , from 1940 to April 1945 , he served in the Führerbegleitkommando ( Führer Escort Command ; FBK ) as a bodyguard , courier , and telephone operator for German dictator Adolf Hitler . He was widely reported in the media as being the last surviving occupant of the Führerbunker when he died in September 2013 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rochus Misch was born on 29 July 1917 in Alt @-@ <unk> near Oppeln ( Opole ) in the Province of Silesia ( now Stare <unk> , Poland ) . His father , a construction worker , died of wounds sustained in World War I. His widowed mother died of pneumonia when he was two and a half , and he grew up with his grandparents . His older brother Bruno died after a swimming accident in May 1922 . 
 Over the objections of the school director , his grandfather took him out of school after eight years as he thought Rochus needed to learn a trade . After several years , Misch moved to Hoyerswerda and became an apprentice with the firm of <unk> & Model . There he trained as a painter . In 1935 , after working as a journeyman painter , Misch attended the Masters ' School for Fine Arts in Cologne . After six months , he returned to Hoyerswerda to continue his training . Misch met Gerda , his wife @-@ to @-@ be , in July 1938 . They later married on New Year 's Eve , 1942 . They had a daughter , Brigitta Jacob @-@ Engelken who after the war supported Jewish causes . 
 = = Military service = = 
 In 1937 , Misch received a call up notice for military service . In <unk> , he joined the SS @-@ Verfügungstruppe ( SS @-@ VT ) , the predecessor to the Waffen @-@ SS , instead of the German Army as the SS @-@ VT did not require Reichsarbeitsdienst ( National Labour Service ) time . Along with eleven others , he was selected for Hitler 's personal bodyguard unit , the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler ( LSSAH ) . In August 1939 , he was promoted to the rank of SS @-@ Rottenführer . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 For the invasion of Poland in September 1939 , his regiment was attached to the XIII Army Corps , a part of the 8th Army . Near Warsaw on 24 September , he was one of four men selected by his company commander , then SS @-@ Hauptsturmführer Wilhelm Mohnke to negotiate the surrender of Polish troops during the Battle of Modlin . He was picked because of his ability , although very limited , to speak Polish . After the negotiations failed , the Germans headed back to their lines . When they were about 80 metres from the fort , firing began . Several rounds hit Misch , who then fell down and lost consciousness . Some German soldiers carried him to an aid station . Later , he was transferred to two different hospitals . Thereafter , he spent six weeks at a convalescent home . For his actions , Misch was awarded the Iron Cross , Second Class . As Misch was the last living member of his Lower Silesian family , Mohnke recommended him for the Führerbegleitkommando ( Führer Escort Command ; FBK ) . This was made up of SS members , including men from the LSSAH , who no longer had to serve on the front lines . 
 Misch was transferred to the FBK in early May 1940 . As a junior member of Hitler 's permanent bodyguard , Misch travelled with Hitler throughout the war . When not serving as bodyguards , Misch and the others in the unit served as telephone operators , couriers , orderlies , valets , and waiters . When on duty , the FBK members were the only armed men Hitler allowed to be near him . They never had to surrender their weapon and were never searched when they were with Hitler . It did cause Misch some concern that they were armed only with Walther PPK 7 @.@ 65 pistols . 
 On 16 January 1945 , following the Wehrmacht 's defeat in the Battle of the Bulge , Misch and the rest of Hitler 's personal staff moved into the Führerbunker and Vorbunker under the Reich Chancellery garden in Berlin . His FBK commanding officer , Franz Schädle , appointed Misch to be the bunker telephone operator . Misch handled all of the direct communication from the bunker . He did not leave it for any significant period of time until the war ended in May 1945 . On 22 April 1945 , Schädle called him on the phone and told him there was a place reserved for his wife and young daughter on one of the last planes out of Berlin . Misch was temporarily released from duty and drove to pick up his family to take them to the aircraft . However , his wife refused to take their daughter and leave him and her parents in Berlin . Upon returning to the Reich Chancellery , Misch learned that Hitler was releasing most of the remaining staff to leave Berlin . By that date , as the Red Army was entering Berlin , propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels and his wife Magda brought their six young children to stay in the Vorbunker . Joseph Goebbels moved into the room next to Misch 's telephone exchange in the lower level of the Führerbunker . The Goebbels children would play in the corridor around Misch 's post . 
 On 30 April , the Soviets were less than 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) from the bunker . That afternoon , Hitler and Eva Braun committed suicide fewer than 40 hours after they were married . Misch witnessed the discovery of the bodies of Hitler and Braun . He followed Otto Günsche and Hitler 's chief valet Heinz Linge to the door of Hitler 's private room . After the door was opened , Misch only took a quick " glance " . He saw Eva , with her legs drawn up , to Hitler 's left on the sofa . Her eyes were open and she was dead . Hitler was also dead . He was either sitting on the sofa or in the armchair by it ; his head " had fallen forward slightly " . Misch started to leave to report the events to Schädle , but then stopped and returned to the door of Hitler 's study . By then Misch observed that Hitler 's corpse had been removed from inside the study and wrapped in a blanket . Several men then picked it up and carried it past him . Misch left and reported the events to Schädle , who instructed him to return to his duty station . After returning to the telephone exchange , Misch later recalled Unterscharführer <unk> proclaiming " So they 're burning the boss now ! " <unk> asked Misch if he was going upstairs to watch the events , but Misch declined to go . Thereafter , Günsche came down and told Misch that the corpses of Hitler and Braun had been burned in the garden of the Reich Chancellery . 
 Misch was present in the bunker complex when Magda Goebbels poisoned her six children and then committed suicide with her husband Joseph on 1 May 1945 . According to Misch , this act by the Goebbels ' of murdering their children was most unsettling . Years later he stated that event was the " most dreadful thing " he experienced in the bunker . 
 Prior to his suicide , Joseph Goebbels finally released Misch from further service ; he was free to leave . Misch and mechanic Johannes Hentschel were two of the last people remaining in the bunker . They exchanged letters to their wives in case anything happened to either of them . Misch then went upstairs through the cellars of the Reich Chancellery to where Schädle had his office to report one last time . According to Hentschel , by that time Schädle 's shrapnel leg wound had turned gangrenous . Misch told Schädle that Goebbels had released him . Schädle told Misch of the route he should take to try to get through the Soviet encirclement of the area . After helping Misch , Schädle shot himself . Misch fled the bunker in the early morning of 2 May , only hours before the Red Army seized it . He met up with some other soldiers and they travelled north through the U @-@ Bahn tunnels . However , they were captured shortly thereafter and taken prisoner . Misch was brought to Lubyanka Prison in Moscow , where he was tortured by Soviet NKVD officers in an attempt to extract information regarding Hitler 's last days . Soviet leader Joseph Stalin was extremely interested in learning of Hitler 's fate and theories about possible escape . Misch spent eight years in Soviet forced labour camps . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his release from captivity in 1953 , Misch returned to what was then West Berlin . He arrived home on New Year 's Eve 1953 to the house which was 3 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) from the Führerbunker . At the time , Misch 's wife worked as a teacher in <unk> . Misch struggled for several years with what to do with his life after captivity . He was offered various odd jobs , among others as a porter in a hospital and as a driver . Most of these job offers were through his wartime contacts , and required moving away from Berlin , which his wife refused to do . He finally obtained a loan backed by wealthy German philanthropists to buy out a painting and interior decorating shop from a retiree in Berlin . He ran this modest business successfully , and during the early Allied occupation of Berlin also became involved in the making of peanut butter for American troops . The business had been started by Misch 's old friend , Adolf <unk> . This sideline business became so successful that Misch considered leaving his shop . His wife convinced him to remain in the painting and interior decorating business . In 1975 , Gerda was elected to the parliament of West Berlin in which she served for several years . Years later Gerda developed Alzheimer 's and died in 1998 . Misch continued to manage his shop until his retirement at age 68 in 1985 . His memoir in German , Der letzte Zeuge ( The Last Witness ) , was published in 2008 . The English edition was published in 2014 with an introduction by historian Roger Moorhouse . 
 With the deaths of Bernd von Freytag @-@ Loringhoven on 27 February 2007 , Armin Lehmann on 10 October 2008 , and Siegfried <unk> on 1 December 2008 , Misch was said to be the last survivor of the Führerbunker . Misch was loyal to Hitler to the end , stating in Nazi apologia , " He was no brute . He was no monster . He was no superman " , " ... very normal . Not like what is written " , and " [ h ] e was a wonderful boss " . Misch 's daughter , Brigitta , learned through her maternal grandmother that Gerda was of Jewish descent . However , Gerda never mentioned it and her father refused to acknowledge it . Brigitta became an architect and has supported Jewish causes . 
 After the release of the 2004 German film Downfall ( Der <unk> ) in France , French journalist Nicolas Bourcier interviewed Misch on multiple occasions during 2005 . The resulting biography was published in French as J 'étais garde du corps d <unk> 1940 – 1945 ( I was Hitler 's bodyguard 1940 – 1945 ) in March 2006 , ISBN <unk> . Translations were released in South America , Japan , Spain , Poland , Turkey , and Germany in 2006 and 2007 . Misch served as consultant to writer Christopher McQuarrie on the 2008 film Valkyrie , a Hollywood depiction of the 20 July plot . 
 Misch lived in Berlin in the same house he moved into when he was released by the Soviets . The house is in the district of <unk> in South Berlin . Misch regularly received visitors who wished to speak to or interview him . Misch died in Berlin on 5 September 2013 at the age of 96 . 
 = = Books = = 
 J 'étais garde du corps d <unk> 1940 – 1945 ( I was Hitler 's bodyguard 1940 – 1945 ) , with Nicolas Bourcier . Le <unk> Midi 2006 , ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Rochus Misch : Der letzte Zeuge . Ich war Hitlers <unk> , Kurier und <unk> . Mit einem <unk> von Ralph Giordano . 11 . <unk> , Piper @-@ Verlag 2013 , ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 492 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Hitler 's Last Witness : The Memoirs of Hitler 's Bodyguard . Frontline Books 2014 , ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 = Rosetta @ home = 
 Rosetta @ home is a distributed computing project for protein structure prediction on the Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing ( BOINC ) platform , run by the Baker laboratory at the University of Washington . Rosetta @ home aims to predict protein – protein docking and design new proteins with the help of about sixty thousand active volunteered computers processing at over 110 teraFLOPS on average as of November 20 , 2015 . Foldit , a Rosetta @ Home videogame , aims to reach these goals with a crowdsourcing approach . Though much of the project is oriented towards basic research on improving the accuracy and robustness of the proteomics methods , Rosetta @ home also does applied research on malaria , Alzheimer 's disease and other pathologies . 
 Like all BOINC projects , Rosetta @ home uses idle computer processing resources from volunteers ' computers to perform calculations on individual <unk> . Completed results are sent to a central project server where they are validated and assimilated into project databases . The project is cross @-@ platform , and runs on a wide variety of hardware configurations . Users can view the progress of their individual protein structure prediction on the Rosetta @ home screensaver . 
 In addition to disease @-@ related research , the Rosetta @ home network serves as a testing framework for new methods in structural bioinformatics . These new methods are then used in other Rosetta @-@ based applications , like RosettaDock and the Human Proteome Folding Project , after being sufficiently developed and proven stable on Rosetta @ home 's large and diverse collection of volunteer computers . Two particularly important tests for the new methods developed in Rosetta @ home are the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction ( CASP ) and Critical Assessment of Prediction of Interactions ( CAPRI ) experiments , biannual experiments which evaluate the state of the art in protein structure prediction and protein – protein docking prediction , respectively . Rosetta @ home consistently ranks among the foremost docking predictors , and is one of the best tertiary structure predictors available . 
 = = Computing platform = = 
 Both the Rosetta @ home application and the BOINC distributed computing platform are available for the Microsoft Windows , Linux and Macintosh platforms ( BOINC also runs on several other platforms , e.g. FreeBSD ) . Participation in Rosetta @ home requires a central processing unit ( CPU ) with a clock speed of at least 500 MHz , 200 megabytes of free disk space , 512 megabytes of physical memory , and Internet connectivity . As of July 20 , 2016 , the current version of the Rosetta Mini application is 3 @.@ 73 . The current recommended BOINC program version is 7 @.@ 6 @.@ 22 . Standard HTTP ( port 80 ) is used for communication between the user 's BOINC client and the Rosetta @ home servers at the University of Washington ; <unk> ( port 443 ) is used during password exchange . Remote and local control of the BOINC client use port <unk> and port 1043 , which might need to be specifically unblocked if they are behind a firewall . <unk> containing data on individual proteins are distributed from servers located in the Baker lab at the University of Washington to volunteers ' computers , which then calculate a structure prediction for the assigned protein . To avoid duplicate structure predictions on a given protein , each workunit is initialized with a random number seed . This gives each prediction a unique trajectory of descent along the protein 's energy landscape . Protein structure predictions from Rosetta @ home are approximations of a global minimum in a given protein 's energy landscape . That global minimum represents the most energetically favorable conformation of the protein , i.e. its native state . 
 A primary feature of the Rosetta @ home graphical user interface ( GUI ) is a screensaver which shows a current workunit 's progress during the simulated protein folding process . In the upper @-@ left of the current screensaver , the target protein is shown adopting different shapes ( conformations ) in its search for the lowest energy structure . Depicted immediately to the right is the structure of the most recently accepted . On the upper right the lowest energy conformation of the current decoy is shown ; below that is the true , or native , structure of the protein if it has already been determined . Three graphs are included in the screensaver . Near the middle , a graph for the accepted model 's free energy is displayed , which fluctuates as the accepted model changes . A graph of the accepted model 's root mean square deviation ( RMSD ) , which measures how structurally similar the accepted model is to the native model , is shown far right . On the right of the accepted energy graph and below the RMSD graph , the results from these two functions are used to produce an energy vs. RMSD plot as the model is progressively refined . 
 Like all BOINC projects , Rosetta @ home runs in the background of the user 's computer using idle computer power , either at or before logging into an account on the host operating system . Rosetta @ home frees resources from the CPU as they are required by other applications so that normal computer usage is unaffected . To minimize power consumption or heat production from a computer running at sustained capacity , the maximum percentage of CPU resources that Rosetta @ home is allowed to use can be specified through a user 's account preferences . The times of day during which Rosetta @ home is allowed to do work can also be adjusted , along with many other preferences , through a user 's account settings . 
 Rosetta , the software that runs on the Rosetta @ home network , was rewritten in C + + to allow easier development than that offered by its original version , which was written in Fortran . This new version is object @-@ oriented , and was released on February 8 , 2008 . Development of the Rosetta code is done by Rosetta Commons . The software is freely licensed to the academic community and available to pharmaceutical companies for a fee . 
 = = Project significance = = 
 With the proliferation of genome sequencing projects , scientists can infer the amino acid sequence , or primary structure , of many proteins that carry out functions within the cell . To better understand a protein 's function and aid in rational drug design , scientists need to know the protein 's three @-@ dimensional tertiary structure . 
 Protein 3D structures are currently determined experimentally through X @-@ ray crystallography or nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) spectroscopy . The process is slow ( it can take weeks or even months to figure out how to crystallize a protein for the first time ) and comes at high cost ( around $ 100 @,@ 000 USD per protein ) . Unfortunately , the rate at which new sequences are discovered far exceeds the rate of structure determination – out of more than 7 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 protein sequences available in the NCBI non @-@ redundant ( nr ) protein database , fewer than 52 @,@ 000 proteins ' 3D structures have been solved and deposited in the Protein Data Bank , the main repository for structural information on proteins . One of the main goals of Rosetta @ home is to predict protein structures with the same accuracy as existing methods , but in a way that requires significantly less time and money . Rosetta @ home also develops methods to determine the structure and docking of membrane proteins ( e.g. , GPCRs ) , which are exceptionally difficult to analyze with traditional techniques like X @-@ ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy , yet represent the majority of targets for modern drugs . 
 Progress in protein structure prediction is evaluated in the biannual Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction ( CASP ) experiment , in which researchers from around the world attempt to derive a protein 's structure from the protein 's amino acid sequence . High scoring groups in this sometimes competitive experiment are considered the de facto standard @-@ bearers for what is the state of the art in protein structure prediction . Rosetta , the program on which Rosetta @ home is based , has been used since <unk> in 2002 . In the 2004 CASP6 experiment , Rosetta made history by being the first to produce a close to atomic @-@ level resolution , ab initio protein structure prediction in its submitted model for CASP target <unk> . Ab initio modeling is considered an especially difficult category of protein structure prediction , as it does not use information from structural homology and must rely on information from sequence homology and modeling physical interactions within the protein . Rosetta @ home has been used in CASP since 2006 , where it was among the top predictors in every category of structure prediction in CASP7 . These high quality predictions were enabled by the computing power made available by Rosetta @ home volunteers . Increasing computational power allows Rosetta @ home to sample more regions of conformation space ( the possible shapes a protein can assume ) , which , according to <unk> 's paradox , is predicted to increase exponentially with protein length . 
 Rosetta @ home is also used in protein docking prediction , which determines the structure of multiple complexed proteins , or quaternary structure . This type of protein interaction affects many cellular functions , including antigen – antibody and enzyme – inhibitor binding and cellular import and export . Determining these interactions is critical for drug design . Rosetta is used in the Critical Assessment of Prediction of Interactions ( CAPRI ) experiment , which evaluates the state of the protein docking field similar to how CASP gauges progress in protein structure prediction . The computing power made available by Rosetta @ home 's project volunteers has been cited as a major factor in Rosetta 's performance in CAPRI , where its docking predictions have been among the most accurate and complete . 
 In early 2008 , Rosetta was used to computationally design a protein with a function never before observed in nature . This was inspired in part by the retraction of a high @-@ profile paper from 2004 which originally described the computational design of a protein with improved enzymatic activity compared to its natural form . The 2008 research paper from David Baker 's group describing how the protein was made , which cited Rosetta @ home for the computational resources it made available , represented an important proof of concept for this protein design method . This type of protein design could have future applications in drug discovery , green chemistry , and bioremediation . 
 = = Disease @-@ related research = = 
 In addition to basic research in predicting protein structure , docking and design , Rosetta @ home is also used in immediate disease @-@ related research . Numerous minor research projects are described in David Baker 's Rosetta @ home journal . As of February 2014 , information on recent publications and a short description of the work are being updated on the forum . 
 = = = Alzheimer 's disease = = = 
 A component of the Rosetta software suite , RosettaDesign , was used to accurately predict which regions of <unk> proteins were most likely to make amyloid @-@ like fibrils . By taking <unk> ( six amino acid @-@ long fragments ) of a protein of interest and selecting the lowest energy match to a structure similar to that of a known fibril forming <unk> , RosettaDesign was able to identify peptides twice as likely to form fibrils as are random proteins . Rosetta @ home was used in the same study to predict structures for amyloid beta , a fibril @-@ forming protein that has been postulated to cause Alzheimer 's disease . Preliminary but as yet unpublished results have been produced on Rosetta @-@ designed proteins that may prevent fibrils from forming , although it is unknown whether it can prevent the disease . 
 = = = Anthrax = = = 
 Another component of Rosetta , RosettaDock , was used in conjunction with experimental methods to model interactions between three proteins — lethal factor ( LF ) , edema factor ( EF ) and protective antigen ( PA ) — that make up anthrax toxin . The computational model accurately predicted docking between LF and PA , helping to establish which domains of the respective proteins are involved in the LF – PA complex . This insight was eventually used in research resulting in improved anthrax vaccines . 
 = = = Herpes simplex virus 1 = = = 
 RosettaDock was used to model docking between an antibody ( immunoglobulin G ) and a surface protein expressed by the cold sore virus , herpes simplex virus 1 ( HSV @-@ 1 ) which serves to degrade the antiviral antibody . The protein complex predicted by RosettaDock closely agreed with the particularly difficult @-@ to @-@ obtain experimental models , leading researchers to conclude that the docking method has potential in addressing some of the problems that X @-@ ray crystallography has with modeling protein – protein interfaces . 
 = = = HIV = = = 
 As part of research funded by a $ 19 @.@ 4 million grant by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation , Rosetta @ home has been used in designing multiple possible vaccines for human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) . 
 = = = Malaria = = = 
 In research involved with the Grand Challenges in Global Health initiative , Rosetta has been used to computationally design novel homing endonuclease proteins , which could eradicate Anopheles gambiae or otherwise render the mosquito unable to transmit malaria . Being able to model and alter protein – DNA interactions specifically , like those of homing endonucleases , gives computational protein design methods like Rosetta an important role in gene therapy ( which includes possible cancer treatments ) . 
 = = Development history and branches = = 
 Originally introduced by the Baker laboratory in 1998 as an ab initio approach to structure prediction , Rosetta has since branched into several development streams and distinct services . The Rosetta platform derives its name from the Rosetta Stone , as it attempts to decipher the structural " meaning " of proteins ' amino acid sequences . More than seven years after Rosetta 's first appearance , the Rosetta @ home project was released ( i.e. announced as no longer beta ) on October 6 , 2005 . Many of the graduate students and other researchers involved in Rosetta 's initial development have since moved to other universities and research institutions , and subsequently enhanced different parts of the Rosetta project . 
 = = = RosettaDesign = = = 
 RosettaDesign , a computational approach to protein design based on Rosetta , began in 2000 with a study in redesigning the folding pathway of Protein G. In 2002 RosettaDesign was used to design <unk> , a 93 @-@ amino acid long α / β protein that had an overall fold never before recorded in nature . This new conformation was predicted by Rosetta to within 1 @.@ 2 Å RMSD of the structure determined by X @-@ ray crystallography , representing an unusually accurate structure prediction . Rosetta and RosettaDesign earned widespread recognition by being the first to design and accurately predict the structure of a novel protein of such length , as reflected by the 2002 paper describing the dual approach prompting two positive letters in the journal Science , and being cited by more than 240 other scientific articles . The visible product of that research , <unk> , was featured as the RCSB PDB 's ' Molecule of the Month ' in October 2006 ; a superposition of the respective cores ( residues 60 – 79 ) of its predicted and X @-@ ray crystal structures are featured in the Rosetta @ home logo . 
 Brian <unk> , a former postdoctoral associate in David Baker 's lab and now an associate professor at the University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , offers RosettaDesign as an online service . 
 = = = RosettaDock = = = 
 RosettaDock was added to the Rosetta software suite during the first CAPRI experiment in 2002 as the Baker laboratory 's algorithm for protein – protein docking prediction . In that experiment , RosettaDock made a high @-@ accuracy prediction for the docking between streptococcal pyogenic <unk> A and a T cell @-@ receptor β @-@ chain , and a medium accuracy prediction for a complex between porcine α @-@ amylase and a <unk> antibody . While the RosettaDock method only made two acceptably accurate predictions out of seven possible , this was enough to rank it seventh out of nineteen prediction methods in the first CAPRI assessment . 
 Development of RosettaDock diverged into two branches for subsequent CAPRI rounds as Jeffrey Gray , who laid the groundwork for RosettaDock while at the University of Washington , continued working on the method in his new position at Johns Hopkins University . Members of the Baker laboratory further developed RosettaDock in Gray 's absence . The two versions differed slightly in side @-@ chain modeling , decoy selection and other areas . Despite these differences , both the Baker and Gray methods performed well in the second CAPRI assessment , placing fifth and seventh respectively out of 30 predictor groups . Jeffrey Gray 's RosettaDock server is available as a free docking prediction service for non @-@ commercial use . 
 In October 2006 , RosettaDock was integrated into Rosetta @ home . The method used a fast , crude docking model phase using only the protein backbone . This was followed by a slow full @-@ atom refinement phase in which the orientation of the two interacting proteins relative to each other , and side @-@ chain interactions at the protein – protein interface , were simultaneously optimized to find the lowest energy conformation . The vastly increased computational power afforded by the Rosetta @ home network , in combination with revised " fold @-@ tree " representations for backbone flexibility and loop modeling , made RosettaDock sixth out of 63 prediction groups in the third CAPRI assessment . 
 = = = Robetta = = = 
 The Robetta server is an automated protein structure prediction service offered by the Baker laboratory for non @-@ commercial ab initio and comparative modeling . It has participated as an automated prediction server in the biannual CASP experiments since <unk> in 2002 , performing among the best in the automated server prediction category . Robetta has since competed in CASP6 and 7 , where it did better than average among both automated server and human predictor groups . 
 In modeling protein structure as of CASP6 , Robetta first searches for structural homologs using BLAST , PSI @-@ BLAST , and 3D @-@ Jury , then parses the target sequence into its individual domains , or independently folding units of proteins , by matching the sequence to structural families in the <unk> database . Domains with structural homologs then follow a " template @-@ based model " ( i.e. , homology modeling ) protocol . Here , the Baker laboratory 's in @-@ house alignment program , K * sync , produces a group of sequence homologs , and each of these is modeled by the Rosetta de novo method to produce a decoy ( possible structure ) . The final structure prediction is selected by taking the lowest energy model as determined by a low @-@ resolution Rosetta energy function . For domains that have no detected structural homologs , a de novo protocol is followed in which the lowest energy model from a set of generated decoys is selected as the final prediction . These domain predictions are then connected together to investigate inter @-@ domain , tertiary @-@ level interactions within the protein . Finally , side @-@ chain contributions are modeled using a protocol for Monte Carlo conformational search . 
 In <unk> , Robetta was augmented to use Rosetta 's high resolution all @-@ atom refinement method , the absence of which was cited as the main cause for Robetta being less accurate than the Rosetta @ home network in CASP7 . 
 = = = Foldit = = = 
 On May 9 , 2008 , after Rosetta @ home users suggested an interactive version of the distributed computing program , the Baker lab publicly released Foldit , an online protein structure prediction game based on the Rosetta platform . As of September 25 , 2008 , Foldit has over 59 @,@ 000 registered users . The game gives users a set of controls ( e.g. " shake " , " wiggle " , " rebuild " ) to manipulate the backbone and amino acid side chains of the target protein into more energetically favorable conformations . Users can work on solutions individually as " soloists " or collectively as " <unk> " , accruing points under either category as they improve their structure predictions . Users can also individually compete with other users through a " duel " feature , in which the player with the lowest energy structure after 20 moves wins . 
 = = Comparison to similar distributed computing projects = = 
 There are several distributed computed projects which have study areas similar to those of Rosetta @ home , but differ in their research approach : 
 = = = Folding @ home = = = 
 Of all the major distributed computing projects involved in protein research , Folding @ home is the only one not to use the BOINC platform . Both Rosetta @ home and Folding @ home study protein misfolding diseases such as Alzheimer 's disease , but Folding @ home does so much more exclusively . Folding @ home almost exclusively uses all @-@ atom molecular dynamics models to understand how and why proteins fold ( or potentially misfold , and subsequently aggregate to cause diseases ) . In other words , Folding @ home 's strength is modeling the process of protein folding , while Rosetta @ home 's strength is computational protein design and prediction of protein structure and docking . 
 Some of Rosetta @ home 's results are used as the basis for some Folding @ home projects . Rosetta provides the most likely structure , but it is not definite if that is the form the molecule takes or whether or not it is viable . Folding @ home can then be used to verify Rosetta @ home 's results , but can also provide additional atomic @-@ level information , as well as details into how the molecule changes shape . 
 The two projects also differ significantly in their computing power and host diversity . Averaging about 6 @,@ 650 teraFLOPS from a host base of CPUs , GPUs and PS3s , Folding @ home has nearly 108 times more computing power than Rosetta @ home . 
 = = = World Community Grid = = = 
 Both Phase I and Phase II of the Human Proteome Folding Project ( <unk> ) , a subproject of World Community Grid , have used the Rosetta program to make structural and functional annotations of various genomes . Although he now uses it to create databases for biologists , Richard Bonneau , head scientist of the Human Proteome Folding Project , was active in the original development of Rosetta at David Baker 's laboratory while obtaining his PhD . More information on the relationship between the <unk> , <unk> and Rosetta @ home can be found on Richard Bonneau 's website . 
 = = = Predictor @ home = = = 
 Like Rosetta @ home , Predictor @ home specialized in protein structure prediction . While Rosetta @ home uses the Rosetta program for its structure prediction , Predictor @ home used the <unk> methodology . In 2009 , Predictor @ home shut down . 
 Other protein related distributed computing projects on BOINC include <unk> @ home , Docking @ home , <unk> @ home , <unk> , and <unk> . <unk> @ home , the Rosetta @ home alpha project which tests new application versions , work units , and updates before they move on to Rosetta @ home , runs on BOINC as well . 
 = = Volunteer contributions = = 
 Rosetta @ home depends on computing power donated by individual project members for its research . As of April 18 , 2014 , about 26 @,@ 900 users from 150 countries were active members of Rosetta @ home , together contributing idle processor time from about 66 @,@ 000 computers for a combined average performance of over 83 teraFLOPS . 
 Users are granted BOINC credits as a measure of their contribution . The credit granted for each workunit is the number of decoys produced for that workunit multiplied by the average claimed credit for the decoys submitted by all computer hosts for that workunit . This custom system was designed to address significant differences between credit granted to users with the standard BOINC client and an optimized BOINC client , and credit differences between users running Rosetta @ home on Windows and Linux operating systems . The amount of credit granted per second of CPU work is lower for Rosetta @ home than most other BOINC projects . Rosetta @ home is thirteenth out of over 40 BOINC projects in terms of total credit . 
 Rosetta @ home users who predict protein structures submitted for the CASP experiment are acknowledged in scientific publications regarding their results . Users who predict the lowest energy structure for a given workunit are featured on the Rosetta @ home homepage as ' Predictor of the Day ' , along with any team of which they are a member . A ' User of the Day ' is chosen at random each day to be on the homepage as well from users who have made a Rosetta @ home profile . 
 = Sanguinarium = 
 " Sanguinarium " is the sixth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . " Sanguinarium " was written by newcomers Vivian and Valerie Mayhew and directed by Kim Manners , and is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . It first aired in the United States on November 10 , 1996 on the Fox network , earning a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 1 and being seen by 19 @.@ 85 million viewers upon its initial broadcast . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In " Sanguinarium " , bizarre murders in a hospital 's plastic surgery unit lead Mulder and Scully to suspect a supernatural force may be responsible . As the uncontrolled killings continue , Mulder discovers a link between the victims ' dates of birth and key dates on the witchcraft calendar . 
 The episode started as a spec script written by two fans of the series . It features several references to real life witchcraft sources . " Sanguinarium " received mixed reviews from critics ; negative criticism was given to the number of inconsistencies in the plot . The episode 's use of gore also drew a mixed reaction ; some critics felt that the gore helped , while others felt that " Sanguinarium " relied too heavily on it to cover up weaknesses in its storyline . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a routine liposuction operation in Chicago , Dr. Harrison Lloyd ( John Juliani ) suddenly begins to violently remove such large amounts of fat from a patient that the patient dies . Following the unusual experience , Lloyd tells Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) that he killed the patient due to being spiritually possessed . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) is skeptical about Lloyd 's claims , believing he 's only making it up to escape legal consequences . Mulder inspects the operation room and discovers pentagrams burned into the floor , suspecting witchcraft as the cause . 
 Upon reviewing the tapes of the operation , Mulder decides to check what type of medication Lloyd was taking . Meanwhile , the staff at Lloyd 's clinic are shocked when another plastic surgeon , Dr. Ilaqua ( Paul Raskin ) , murders a patient under unusual circumstances . Scully interviews Ilaqua , who claims to not be able to remember anything from what happened . Scully deduces that both Ilaqua and Lloyd were taking the same medicine . Mulder 's belief in the cause for the unexplained phenomena strengthens when he reviews the tape of the second murder , observing a pentagram @-@ like pattern on the stomach of the victim . 
 Worried by the events , the staff tells Mulder and Scully about a similar series of deaths that occurred at the same hospital ten years prior . They suspect Rebecca Waite ( O @-@ Lan Jones ) , a nurse who is the only person present at all the death scenes . The agents visit Waite 's house , discovering evidence that she practiced witchcraft ; however , the evidence has been planted there by a staff member of the hospital . Elsewhere , Dr. Jack Franklin ( Richard Beymer ) is non @-@ fatally assaulted at his house by Waite . Attempts to question Waite are prevented when she starts to vomit pins , and then dies shortly after . 
 Mulder deduces that the birthdays of all the victims match up with the dates of the Witches ' Sabbath , meaning that continued murders will occur . Back at the clinic , another patient is murdered when her face is melted by acid . With no suspects left to turn to , Mulder uses the hospital 's computer program to determine what Franklin would look like under heavy plastic surgery . He is shocked to find that Franklin is actually Dr. <unk> Cox , a cosmetic doctor who presumably died during the first spree of murders . Cox attempts to murder his fifth and final victim in a quest to gain eternal youth . He removes the skin on his own face , using a ritual to make him appear younger . Cox is never caught , with the episode ending with him successfully applying at another medical hospital . 
 = = Production = = 
 In the 1990s , spec scripts were widely used in television , wherein unexperienced writers could write a teleplay for their favorite shows . The X @-@ Files had a large staff of writers , however occasionally to fill the large amount of ordered episodes per season , the staff would have to take a risk on a teleplay written by a freelance writer . " Sanguinarium " was such a case , being written by sisters Vivian Mayhew and Valerie Mayhew , their first experience with writing a one @-@ hour network program . They would later be responsible for several episodes in the television series Charmed . The sisters asked staff writers Glen Morgan and James Wong for suggestions . Morgan and Wong stated that " the scariest things are those which repeat every day " . After Vivian was paged by a number she did not know , she concluded that a pager qualified as a scary thing because an unknown person could connect with its owner . Then the <unk> went from the pagers to a class that normally uses them , doctors , and concluded that doctors losing control and being bewitched could be a good plot . After writing the spec script , they presented them to Morgan and Wong , who suggested they change the villain from a woman to a man as " plastic surgery is related to vanity , and everyone expects that from a woman , but not a man . " The spec script written by the Mayhew sisters was chosen to become a full episode . " Sanguinarium " stands as the siblings ' only work in The X @-@ Files . 
 After the spec script was picked , series creator Chris Carter and the show 's staff reworked the ideas into a teleplay . Carter focused the plot on the themes of greed and vanity , and executive producer Howard Gordon created some of the most graphic moments , such as a phrase written in blood on Franklin 's bathroom . Vince Gilligan named Theresa Shannon after actress Shannon Tweed . After Carter had the idea of placing a subtle pentagram on the reunion table , production designer Graeme Murray decided to take this further by creating rooms with five sides , and having the plastic surgery unit with five operating rooms represent an imaginary pentagram . Like previous episode " Home " , Fox Standards and Practices objected to the graphical content , and Carter had to intervene to help retain some scenes . 
 The episode features references to witchcraft and occultism . The nurse from the episode , Rebecca Waite , was named after a friend of the writers called Rebecca White , with a slight change as a real nurse also called White existed in Chicago . Viewers ended up finding Waite 's name as an unintended reference to Rebecca Nurse , an innocent woman prosecuted during the Salem witch trials , and the Rider @-@ Waite tarot deck , the most popular tarot deck utilized in the world . The episode itself references Gerald Gardner , a <unk> known for publishing several books on witchcraft and founder of the Gardnerian Tradition . While the Mayhew sisters tried to depict occultism without offending anybody , not connecting Franklin and Waite to any known cult , many Wiccans sent angry letters and e @-@ mails to Fox regarding the portrayal of their beliefs . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Sanguinarium " premiered on the Fox network on November 10 , 1996 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 1 , with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . " Sanguinarium " was seen by 18 @.@ 85 million viewers on first broadcast . 
 Gillian Anderson described " Sanguinarium " as " one of the most repulsive scripts I ever shot " , explaining that she could not watch scenes such as the doctor stabbing a patient . David Duchovny stated that " I didn 't understand the plot , but I liked the script " , noting that Carter and his team improved a weak teleplay and director Kim Manners " did an excellent job " . Entertainment Weekly gave " Sanguinarium " a " B – " , feeling that it was " redeemed " by the gore . However , they were " worried " by the " fourth consecutive phoned @-@ in performance by Duchovny and Anderson " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club was more negative , grading it a " D " . He felt that the episode was " too much " , with gore shown directly instead of suggested . He also criticized the characterization , especially Scully 's , the " predictable " scares , " ludicrously bad " dialogue , and a story that did not make much sense . Despite this , he did praise the " strong " guest acting . Sarah Stegall awarded " Sanguinarium " two stars out of five , commenting that " several things went wrong " , and also noting the reliance on gore . She mused that she thought it was odd that the " bad " magic seemed to succeed , noting that the " good " magic seemed useless , summarizing , " Where 's the logic in that ? " In addition , Stegall thought the episode 's biggest flaw was its lack of logical writing , and that it required too much suspension of belief from the viewer . 
 Tom Kessenich in Examinations : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 @-@ 9 of the X @-@ Files commented that the ending of " Sanguinarium " was similar to the ending of episode " Signs and Wonders " , wherein the antagonist manages to get away . Frederick S. Clarke from Cinefantastique gave " Sanguinarium " a mixed review , writing that the episode " combines plastic surgery and black magic into an unsatisfying mix that fails to lampoon our obsession with beauty . " Not all reviews were as negative . Writer Preston Nichols took a liking to the episode , having viewed it " eighteen times and counting " . Michael Avalos and George Liedtke , writing for Knight Ridder , speculated that " Sanguinarium " provided viewers with " haunting memories " . Mark Davis of The Daytona Beach News @-@ Journal , in 1998 , named the episode one of the " Best of The X @-@ Files " . 
 = Goat Simulator = 
 Goat Simulator is a third @-@ person perspective action video game developed and published by Coffee Stain Studios . It was released for Microsoft Windows via Steam on 1 April 2014 , and ports for Mac OS X and Linux were released on 27 June 2014 . Mobile versions for iOS and Android were released on 17 September 2014 . Versions for the Xbox 360 and Xbox One were released on 17 April 2015 , and for PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 on 11 August 2015 ; these ports were developed by Double Eleven . 
 The game has been compared by the developer as akin to skateboarding games , but where the player controls a goat aimed at doing as much damage as possible around an open world map , without any other larger goals . The game , initially developed as a joke prototype from an internal game jam and shown in an early alpha state in YouTube videos , was met with excitement and attention , prompting the studio to build out the game into a releasable state while still retaining various non @-@ breaking bugs and glitches to maintain the game 's entertainment value . 
 The game received mixed reviews ; some reviewers praised the title for providing a humorous sandbox interface to experiment with , while others criticized the game 's reliance on social media to popularize what was otherwise a simple and buggy product . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Goat Simulator is an open @-@ ended third @-@ person perspective game in which the player controls a goat . The player is free to explore the game 's world , a suburban setting , as a goat , and jump , run , bash things , and lick objects . Licking objects attaches the goat 's tongue to the object and lets the player drag the object around until they let go . At any time , the player can let the goat drop into a ragdoll model , allowing the game 's physics to take over , and another control makes the game run in slow @-@ motion . A number of environmental features allow the player to manipulate the goat into stunts such as bouncing off trampolines or launching the goat into the air through large fans . The game features a scoring system similar to skateboarding games like Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater , whereby doing tricks or other actions earns points , while chaining such tricks together in sequence helps build a multiplier that applies to the total score of the tricks done in the sequence . Various in @-@ game goals , such as achieving a certain height , completing flips , or destroying certain objects , are given to the player , but the player is not required to follow these instructions . 
 Small gold goat statues are hidden in the game 's world . Collecting this allows the goat to restart the game with various modifiers in play , such as changing the goat model to a demon goat , a giraffe , or an ostrich , or adding a jetpack to the goat that can be activated at any time . Various easter eggs are scattered about the sandbox , such as a castle where one can become the Queen of all Goats , or where the goat character gains a move similar to Sonic the Hedgehog 's spin attack . The game 's lead developer Armin Ibrisagic noted after release that the game 's setting is a parody of the concept of Purgatory , having left references to Heaven and Hell that were later found by fans . Ibrisagic also noted the inclusion of some elements based on the 2014 Ukrainian revolution . 
 = = Development = = 
 Goat Simulator started as a joke prototype from an internal one @-@ month game jam held by Coffee Stain Studios in January 2014 , after completing work for their game Sanctum 2 . The game was described by the lead developer Armin Ibrisagic as " an old school skating game , except instead of being a skater , you 're a goat , and instead of doing tricks , you wreck stuff " . The idea followed after originally pitching the game as a variation of QWOP , where the player would control the individual limbs of the goat separately with various keyboard keys ; this concept was rejected in favor of the more Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater @-@ type of gameplay the final game presents . Ibrisagic had focused on goats after jokingly trying to convince his coworkers that goats would achieve viral attention on the Internet in much the same way that cats presently do . 
 The prototype used Nvidia PhysX and an Apex physics engine with ragdoll physics for the goat and human models within the Unreal Engine 3 , a game engine they were familiar with from the Sanctum series . In @-@ game assets were purchased from third @-@ party vendors instead of developed in @-@ house , such as the original goat model which the studio acquired for use for less than $ 20 . The prototype was meant to be a parody of various other " weirdly successful " Simulation games presently available , such as Euro Truck Simulator . Ibrisagic had no intention of this becoming a full title , instead only offering the prototype for him and other developers to learn the Unreal Engine alongside other developers that were developing prototypes in more earnest . 
 Footage of the game in its alpha state was posted to YouTube by Coffee Stain , where it received more than a million views in two days and a large response from fans requesting a full release of the game in part due to various glitches in the prototype 's engine . The appeal of the video was also picked up by the agricultural magazine Modern Farmer . Some journalists suggested that the title be developed into a full game even knowing it was meant as a joking title ; GameSpot editor Danny O 'Dwyer supported the full release of the game arguing that " games should be dumb once in a while " . 
 The large positive response to the alpha footage convinced the studio to develop Goat Simulator as a full title to Steam , putting more people on the title . The team , having no plans for a full release , debated on whether to approach a large publisher to receive funding to help make the title into something like Grand Theft Auto , but decided to stay with a small , inexpensive title that would be truer to the teaser video . Recognizing that the glitching was part of the game 's appeal , Ibrisagic only sought to fix software bugs that might cause the game to crash , leaving in the other glitches and bugs associated with the physics engine as the results from these were " really hilarious " . They limited themselves to a short development time of four weeks without significant management oversight as to set an urgent but realistic goal to bring the game to a playable state . Ibrisagic felt it was important for the game to be supported on Steam , but initially feared that Valve Corporation would not accept the quirky title . He instead found Valve to be welcoming of the title , including a joking response from the company that stated " [ Valve 's marketing manager DJ Powers ] has started wearing a goat costume to work he ’ s so excited about this game " . As part of its release , Coffee Stain added support for Steam Workshop which would let players modify the game , aware that players would likely create levels and scenarios that will glitch and crash the game for humorous results . While the physics engine allows for spectacular rendering of destruction of the game environment , which is a main feature of the game , Coffee Stain acknowledged the downside of this as " it would synchronise terribly in multiplayer " . They estimated that adding multiplayer would remove " 90 percent of the physics " and many other features , and left the game as a single player title at launch . The studio considered that it only spent a couple months to complete the Windows version , and opted to outsource versions for OS X and Linux , with Ryan Gordon handling the porting . 
 = = = Release and promotion = = = 
 Coffee Stain Studios released Goat Simulator worldwide on 1 April 2014 , aware that tying the date with April Fools ' Day may raise doubts on the validity of the game . Those that pre @-@ ordered the game through Coffee Stain 's website received early access to the title three days ahead of release . The official release trailer for Goat Simulator is a loose parody of the highly praised teaser trailer released for Dead Island , showing , among shots of the game , reversed slow @-@ motion footage of the goat crashing through a building after being launched from an exploding gas station . 
 The studio released a free expansion and patch to the game on 3 June 2014 , which in addition to fixing game @-@ breaking issues , added new goat models , a new map to explore based on a seaside town with a carnival , more game @-@ breaking issues , and local multiplayer for up to 4 players via split @-@ screen . Ibrisagic believes that adding multiplayer support atop Steam Workshop support will allow creative users to develop new gameplay modes that will extend the title 's playability . The patch also adds in additional controls that the player can use to make the goat perform various freestyle tricks comparable to those in Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater . The studio released a second free patch to the game on 20 November 2014 including elements that parody massive multiplayer online games like World of Warcraft , though remains a single player or local multiplayer experience . 
 A paid @-@ content expansion titled " <unk> " was released on 7 May 2015 as downloadable content for the game on personal computers and a stand @-@ alone application for mobile devices . It was developed by Coffee Stain 's partner studio Gone North Games . The expansion 's content spoofs zombie @-@ based survival games , such as DayZ , and includes a new map and gameplay aspects such as fighting off zombies and crafting . The title itself plays off DayZ as well as a play on the Internet meme <unk> In a cross @-@ promotional " <unk> " update with Bossa Studios ' I am Bread to be offered in late 2015 , a free update to Goat Simulator will allow the players to select a piece of bread as their avatar , while I am Bread will add in a " <unk> " mode based on Goat Simulator . Another add @-@ on , the " Super Secret DLC " package part of a cross @-@ promotion with Overkill Software 's Payday 2 ; the Payday @-@ inspired content for Goat Simulator included additional playable characters including a camel , flamingo , and a dolphin in a wheelchair , while Goat Simulator content will be added to Payday 2 . These were released in January 2016 . Goat Simulator decorative content will be added to Rocket League in a mid @-@ 2016 update . Another expansion , " Waste of Space " , was again developed by Gone North Games and released on 26 May 2016 . The expansion features a new map based on a space colony , and spoofs much of the recent science fiction media genre . 
 The aforementioned OS X and Linux ports were released on 27 June 2014 . Following the game 's digital release , Koch Media agreed to distribute the game in UK and EU retail stores starting in May 2014 . Similarly , Deep Silver approached Coffee Stain Studios to work out a deal to publish the title in North American retail markets starting in July 2014 . At Microsoft 's presentation at the 2014 Gamescom convention in August , Goat Simulator was announced as one of several titles to be coming to the Xbox One platform with the help of Double Eleven studios , and later confirmed to be also arriving for the Xbox 360 , with both versions released on 17 April 2015 . Koch Media also distributed a retail version of the Xbox One version , including all additional downloadable content , across Europe for release on 4 March 2016 . Coffee Stain Studios also released ports for iOS and Android in September 2014 . PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 versions , also ported by Double Eleven , were released on 11 August 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Goat Simulator received " mixed " reviews upon release , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . Goat Simulator was named as an honorable mention for Excellence in Audio for the 2015 Independent Games Festival . 
 Eurogamer 's Dan Whitehead complimented Coffee Stain Studios on building in enough content Goat Simulator and potential expansion through Steam to prove it more than a simple joke title , and instead a brief diversion " in which the player is a willing participant " . Dan Stapleton of IGN considered the title a " clever interactive spoof of all the broken game physics we ’ ve seen in open worlds " and despite being short , was a " hell of a good time " . Tim Turi of Game Informer stated that the first hour with the game would be amusing , but due to the lack of more expansive features , he " [ does not ] recommend it to anyone looking for more than disposable entertainment " . Steve Tilley of the Toronto Sun described the game as one where " most players will have a few hours of fun and then file [ it ] away as an occasional novelty to pull out when they ’ re especially bored " . 
 Rich Stanton of The Guardian was very critical of Goat Simulator , noting how the title is self @-@ aware of its poor quality , and stated that the game 's creation and promotion " demonstrates how social media and the internet amplify our supine tendencies " . Andy Kelly of PC Gamer was also critical of the title , calling it a " bad , amateurish and boring game " , and considered its popularity was only due to word @-@ of @-@ mouth and YouTube videos that enticed players to buy the game themselves . 
 Ibrisagic stated that Coffee Stain Studios made their money back on the development costs within a few minutes of the game being offered on Steam . As of August 2014 , the studio has reported that nearly a million copies of Goat Simulator have been sold , outperforming their other games over the previous four years . The mobile release for iOS and Android systems reached 100 @,@ 000 downloads within 6 days of launch . By mid @-@ January 2015 , over 2 @.@ 5 million copies of the game were sold across all platforms . During a presentation at the 2016 Game Developers Conference , Ibrisagic revealed that Goat Simulator has made more than $ 12 million in revenue , compared to both Sanctum and Sanctum 2 which made under $ 2 million each . With the success of the game , Coffee Stain Studios has worked to license out Goat Simulator @-@ themed properties with third @-@ party vendors . 
 In an industry roundtable the CEO of Paradox name checked Goat Simulator specifically stating " You have to have an edge in there , and that 's why I say ' more Goat Simulator and less Call of Duty ' for Paradox , because we need the edge . It 's easier to get out and market , it 's easier to show what you 're doing " adding that " People are tired of explosions and dubstep music . We 've seen it a million times now " 
 = History of the domestic sheep = 
 The history of the domesticated sheep goes back to between 11000 and 9000 BC , and the domestication of the wild mouflon in ancient Mesopotamia . Sheep are among the first animals to have been domesticated by humans , and there is evidence of sheep farming in Iranian statuary dating to that time period . These sheep were primarily raised for meat , milk , and skins . Woolly sheep began to be developed around 6000 BC in Iran , and cultures such as the Persians relied on sheep 's wool for trading . They were then imported to Africa and Europe via trade . The first sheep was found in Asia . 
 = = Wild ancestors = = 
 The exact line of descent between domestic sheep and their wild ancestors is unclear . The most common hypothesis states that Ovis aries is descended from the Asiatic ( O. orientalis ) species of mouflon . It has been proposed that the European mouflon ( O. <unk> ) is an ancient breed of domestic sheep turned feral rather than an ancestor , despite its commonly being cited as ancestor in past literature . A few breeds of sheep , such as the <unk> <unk> from Scotland , were formed through crossbreeding with wild European mouflon . 
 The urial ( O. <unk> ) was once thought to have been a forebear of domestic sheep , as they occasionally interbreed with mouflon in the Iranian part of their range . However , the urial , <unk> ( O. ammon ) , and snow sheep ( O. <unk> ) have a different number of chromosomes than other Ovis species , making a direct relationship implausible , and phylogenetic studies show no evidence of urial ancestry . Further studies comparing European and Asian breeds of sheep showed significant genetic differences between the two . Two explanations for this phenomenon have been posited . The first explanation is that a currently unknown species or subspecies of wild sheep that contributed to the formation of domestic sheep . The second explanation is that this variation is the result of multiple waves of capture from wild mouflon , similar to the known development of other livestock . 
 One chief difference between ancient sheep and modern breeds is the technique by which wool could be collected . Primitive sheep can be shorn , but many can have their wool plucked out by hand in a process called " rooing " . <unk> helps to leave behind the coarse fibers called <unk> which are still longer than the soft fleece . The fleece may also be collected from the field after it falls out naturally . This rooing trait survives today in unrefined breeds such as the Soay and many Shetlands . Indeed , the Soay , along with other Northern European breeds with short tails , naturally rooing fleece , diminutive size , and horns in both sexes , are closely related to ancient sheep . Originally , weaving and spinning wool was a handicraft practiced at home , rather than an industry . Babylonians , Sumerians , and Persians all depended on sheep ; and although linen was the first fabric to be fashioned in to clothing , wool was a prized product . The raising of flocks for their fleece was one of the earliest industries , and flocks were a medium of exchange in barter economies . Numerous biblical figures kept large flocks , and subjects of the king of Israel were taxed according to the number of rams they owned . 
 = = In Asia = = 
 = = = Domestication = = = 
 Sheep were among the first animals to be domesticated by mankind ( although the domestication of dogs may be over 20 @,@ 000 years earlier ) ; the domestication date is estimated to fall between 11 @,@ 000 and 9 @,@ 000 B.C in Mesopotamia . Their wild relatives have several characteristics , such as a relative lack of aggression , a manageable size , early sexual maturity , a social nature , and high reproduction rates , which made them particularly suitable for domestication . Today , Ovis aries is an entirely domesticated animal that is largely dependent on man for its health and survival . Feral sheep do exist , but exclusively in areas devoid of large predators ( usually islands ) and not on the scale of feral horses , goats , pigs , or dogs , although some feral populations have remained isolated long enough to be recognized as distinct breeds . 
 The rearing of sheep for secondary products , and the resulting breed development , began in either southwest Asia or western Europe . Initially , sheep were kept solely for meat , milk and skins . Archaeological evidence from statuary found at sites in Iran suggests that selection for woolly sheep may have begun around 6000 BC , and the earliest woven wool garments have been dated to two to three thousand years later . Before this , when a sheep was slaughtered for its meat , the hide would be tanned and worn as a kind of tunic . Researchers believe that the development of such clothing encouraged humans to live in areas far colder than the Fertile Crescent , where temperatures averaged 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) . Sheep molars and bones found at Çatalhöyük suggest that populations of domestic sheep may have been established in the area . By that span of the Bronze Age , sheep with all the major features of modern breeds were widespread throughout Western Asia . 
 The residents of the ancient city of <unk> , which dates to 6000 BC , kept sheep and goats as their primary livestock . There have also been numerous identifications of Nomadic pastoralism in archaeological sites , identified by a prevalence of sheep and goat bones , a lack of grain or grain @-@ processing equipment , very limited architecture showing a set of characteristic traits , a location outside the region 's zone of agriculture , and ethnographic analogy to modern nomadic pastoral peoples . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 = = = = Middle East = = = = 
 There is a large but constantly declining minority of nomadic and seminomadic pastoralists in countries such as Saudi Arabia ( probably less than 3 % ) , Iran ( 4 % ) , and Afghanistan ( at most 10 % ) . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 In India , there are efforts to ' grade up ' , or improve the quality of , the native desi sheep breed , by crossing it with Merino and other high @-@ quality wool sheep . This is being done in an effort to produce a desi sheep that produces high @-@ quality wool and mutton . 
 = = = = China = = = = 
 Sheep are not an important part of China 's agricultural economy , since the majority of China does not have the large open pastures required for sheep @-@ rearing . Sheep farming is more common in the northwestern provinces of the country , where such tracts of land exist . China does have a native sheep breed , the <unk> . The population of the breed has been in decline since 1985 , despite government promotion of the breed . 
 = = = = Japan = = = = 
 The Japanese government encouraged farmers to raise sheep throughout the 19th @-@ century . Sheep @-@ rearing programs began to import Yorkshire , Berkshire , Spanish merino , and numerous Chinese and Mongolian sheep breeds , encouraged by government promotion of sheep farming . However , a lack of knowledge on the farmer 's part of how to successfully keep sheep , and the government 's failure to provide information to those importing the sheep they promoted , led to the project 's failure , and in 1888 it was discontinued . 
 = = = = Mongolia = = = = 
 Sheep herding has been one of the main economic activities and lifestyles of Mongolians for millennia . Mongolian sheep herding traditions and modern science are well developed . Mongolian selection and veterinary science classifies the sheep herd of the country by ( i ) wool fiber ’ s length , thinness and softness , ( ii ) capability of surviving at various altitudes , ( iii ) physical appearance , tail form , size , and other criteria . The most common sheep breeds are Mongol <unk> , Gov @-@ altai , <unk> , Bayad , <unk> , <unk> and number of other breeds , all being of the fat @-@ tailed breed . 
 A census of the entire domestic animals stock of the country is carried out annually . At the end of 2014 , the census counted more than 23 million of sheep that makes up 44 @.@ 6 percent of the entire herding stock . 
 Annually before the Lunar New year the Government awards the prestigious “ Best Herder ” ( in Mongolian “ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ” ) nomination to select herders . 
 = = In Africa = = 
 Sheep entered the African continent not long after their domestication in western Asia . A minority of historians once posited a contentious African theory of origin for Ovis aries . This theory is based primarily on rock art interpretations , and osteological evidence from Barbary sheep . The first sheep entered North Africa via Sinai , and were present in ancient Egyptian society between eight and seven thousand years ago . Sheep have always been part of subsistence farming in Africa , but today the only country that keeps significant numbers of commercial sheep is South Africa , with 28 @.@ 8 million head . 
 In Ethiopia , there are several varieties of sheep landrace . Attempts have been made to classify the sheep based on factors such as tail shape and wool type , and H. Epstein made an attempt at classifying them this way by dividing the breeds into 14 types based on those two factors . However , in 2002 , further genetic analysis revealed that there are only four distinct varieties of Ethiopian sheep : short @-@ fat @-@ tailed , long @-@ fat @-@ tailed , fat @-@ rumped , and thin @-@ tailed . 
 = = In Europe = = 
 Sheep husbandry spread quickly in Europe . Excavations show that in about 6000 BC , during the Neolithic period of prehistory , the <unk> people , living around <unk> @-@ les @-@ <unk> near present @-@ day Marseille in the south of France , were among the first in Europe to keep domestic sheep . Practically from its inception , ancient Greek civilization relied on sheep as primary livestock , and were even said to name individual animals . Scandinavian sheep of a type seen today — with short tails and multi @-@ colored fleece — were also present early on . Later , the Roman Empire kept sheep on a wide scale , and the Romans were an important agent in the spread of sheep raising through much of Europe . Pliny the Elder , in his Natural History ( Naturalis Historia ) , speaks at length about sheep and wool . Declaring " Many thanks , too , do we owe to the sheep , both for appeasing the gods , and for giving us the use of its fleece . " , he goes on to detail the breeds of ancient sheep and the many colors , lengths and qualities of wool . Romans also pioneered the practice of blanketing sheep , in which a fitted coat ( today usually of nylon ) is placed over the sheep to improve the cleanliness and luster of its wool . 
 During the Roman occupation of the British Isles , a large wool processing factory was established in Winchester , England in about 50 AD . By 1000 AD , England and Spain were recognized as the twin centers of sheep production in the Western world . As the original breeders of the fine @-@ wooled merino sheep that have historically dominated the wool trade , the Spanish gained great wealth . Wool money largely financed Spanish rulers and thus the voyages to the New World by conquistadors . The powerful Mesta ( its full title was <unk> <unk> de la Mesta , the Honorable Council of the Mesta ) was a corporation of sheep owners mostly drawn from Spain 's wealthy merchants , Catholic clergy and nobility that controlled the merino flocks . By the 17th century , the Mesta held upwards of two million head of merino sheep . 
 Mesta flocks followed a seasonal pattern of transhumance across Spain . In the spring , they left the winter pastures ( <unk> ) in Extremadura and Andalusia to graze on their summer pastures ( <unk> ) in Castile , returning again in the autumn . Spanish rulers eager to increase wool profits gave extensive legal rights to the Mesta , often to the detriment of local peasantry . The huge merino flocks had a lawful right of way for their migratory routes ( <unk> ) . Towns and villages were obliged by law to let the flocks graze on their common land , and the Mesta had its own sheriffs that could summon offending individuals to its own tribunals . 
 <unk> of <unk> without royal permission was also a punishable offense , thus ensuring a near @-@ absolute monopoly on the breed until the mid @-@ 18th century . After the breaking of the export ban , fine wool sheep began to be distributed worldwide . The export to Rambouillet by Louis XVI in 1786 formed the basis for the modern Rambouillet ( or French Merino ) breed . After the Napoleonic Wars and the global distribution of the once @-@ exclusive Spanish stocks of Merinos , sheep raising in Spain reverted to hardy coarse @-@ wooled breeds such as the Churra , and was no longer of international economic significance . 
 The sheep industry in Spain was an instance of migratory flock management , with large homogenous flocks ranging over the entire country . The management model used in England was quite different but had a similar importance to economy of the country . Up until the early 20th century , <unk> ( the smuggling of sheep or wool out of the country ) was a punishable offense , and to this day the Lord Speaker of the House of Lords sits on a cushion known as the Woolsack . 
 The high concentration and more sedentary nature of shepherding in the UK allowed sheep especially adapted to their particular purpose and region to be raised , thereby giving rise to an exceptional variety of breeds in relation to the land mass of the country . This greater variety of breeds also produced a valuable variety of products to compete with the <unk> wool of Spanish sheep . By the time of Elizabeth I 's rule , sheep and wool trade was the primary source of tax revenue to the Crown of England and the country was a major influence in the development and spread of sheep husbandry . 
 An important event not only in the history of domestic sheep , but of all livestock , was the work of Robert Bakewell in the 18th century . Before his time , breeding for desirable traits was often based on chance , with no scientific process for selection of breeding stock . Bakewell established the principles of selective breeding — especially line breeding — in his work with sheep , horses and cattle ; his work later influenced Gregor Mendel and Charles Darwin . His most important contribution to sheep was the development of the Leicester <unk> , a quick @-@ maturing breed of blocky conformation that formed the basis for many vital modern breeds . Today , the sheep industry in the UK has diminished significantly , though pedigreed rams can still fetch around 100 @,@ 000 Pounds sterling at auction . 
 = = In the Americas = = 
 No ovine species native to the Americas has ever been domesticated , despite being closer genetically to domestic sheep than many Asian and European species . The first domestic sheep in North America — most likely of the Churra breed — arrived with Christopher Columbus ' second voyage in 1493 . The next transatlantic shipment to arrive was with Hernán Cortés in 1519 , landing in Mexico . No export of wool or animals is known to have occurred from these populations , but flocks did disseminate throughout what is now Mexico and the Southwest United States with Spanish colonists . <unk> were also introduced to the Navajo tribe of Native Americans , and became a key part of their livelihood and culture . The modern presence of the Navajo @-@ Churro breed is a result of this heritage . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 The next transport of sheep to North America was not until 1607 , with the voyage of the Susan Constant to Virginia . However , the sheep that arrived in that year were all slaughtered because of a famine , and a permanent flock was not to reach the colony until two years later in 1609 . In two decades ' time , the colonists had expanded their flock to a total of 400 head . By the 1640s there were about 100 @,@ 000 head of sheep in the 13 colonies , and in 1662 , a woolen mill was built in Watertown , Massachusetts . Especially during the periods of political unrest and civil war in Britain spanning the 1640s and 1650s which disrupted maritime trade , the colonists found it pressing to produce wool for clothing . Many islands off the coast were cleared of predators and set aside for sheep : Nantucket , Long Island , Martha 's Vineyard and small islands in Boston Harbor were notable examples . There remain some rare breeds of American sheep — such as the Hog Island sheep — that were the result of island flocks . Placing semi @-@ feral sheep and goats on islands was common practice in colonization during this period . Early on , the British government banned further export of sheep to the Americas , or wool from it , in an attempt to stifle any threat to the wool trade in the British Isles . One of many restrictive trade measures that precipitated the American Revolution , the sheep industry in the Northeast grew despite the bans . 
 Gradually , beginning in the 19th century , sheep production in the U.S. moved westward . Today , the vast majority of flocks reside on Western range lands . During this westward migration of the industry , competition between sheep ( sometime called " range maggots " ) and cattle operations grew more heated , eventually erupting into range wars . Other than simple competition for grazing and water rights , cattlemen believed that the secretions of the foot glands of sheep made cattle unwilling to graze on places where sheep had stepped . As sheep production centered on the U.S. western ranges , it became associated with other parts of Western culture , such as the rodeo . In modern America , a minor event in rodeos is mutton busting , in which children compete to see who can stay atop a sheep the longest before falling off . Another effect of the westward movement of sheep flocks in North America was the decline of wild species such as Bighorn sheep ( O. <unk> ) . Most diseases of domestic sheep are <unk> to wild <unk> , and such diseases , along with overgrazing and habitat loss , are named as primary factors in the plummeting numbers of wild sheep . Sheep production peaked in North America during the 1940s and 1950s at more than 55 million head . By 2013 the number of sheep in the United States was 10 percent what it had been in the early 1940s . 
 In the 1970s , Roy McBride , a farmer from Alpine , Texas , invented a collar filled with the poison compound 1080 to protect his livestock from coyotes , which tended to attack the throat . This device is known as the livestock protection collar and is in widespread use in Texas , as well as in South Africa . 
 = = = South America = = = 
 In South America , especially in Patagonia , there is an active modern sheep industry . Sheep keeping was largely introduced through immigration to the continent by Spanish and British peoples , for whom sheep were a major industry during the period . South America has a large number of sheep , but the highest @-@ producing nation ( Brazil ) kept only just over 15 million head in 2004 , far fewer than most centers of sheep husbandry . The primary challenges to the sheep industry in South America are the phenomenal drop in wool prices in the late 20th century and the loss of habitat through logging and overgrazing . The most influential region internationally is that of Patagonia , which has been the first to rebound from the fall in wool prices . With few predators and almost no grazing competition ( the only large native grazing mammal is the guanaco ) , the region is prime land for sheep raising . The most exceptional area of production is surrounding the La Plata river in the Pampas region . Sheep production in Patagonia peaked in 1952 at more than 21 million head , but has steadily fallen to fewer than ten today . Most operations focus on wool production for export from Merino and Corriedale sheep ; the economic sustainability of wool flocks has fallen with the drop in prices , while the cattle industry continues to grow . 
 = = In Australia and New Zealand = = 
 Australia and New Zealand are crucial players in the contemporary sheep industry , and sheep are an iconic part of both countries ' culture and economy . New Zealand has the highest density of sheep per capita ( sheep outnumber the human population 12 to 1 ) , and Australia is the world 's indisputably largest exporter of sheep and cattle . In 2007 , New Zealand even declared 15 February their official National Lamb Day to celebrate the country 's history of sheep production . 
 The First Fleet brought the initial population of 70 sheep from the Cape of Good Hope to Australia in 1788 . The next shipment was of 30 sheep from Calcutta and Ireland in 1793 . All of the early sheep brought to Australia were exclusively used for the dietary needs of the penal colonies . The beginnings of the Australian wool industry were due to the efforts of Captain John Macarthur . At Macarthur 's urging 16 Spanish <unk> were imported in 1797 , effectively beginning the Australian sheep industry . By 1801 Macarthur had 1 @,@ 000 head of sheep , and in 1803 he exported 111 kilograms ( 245 lb ) of wool to England . Today , Macarthur is generally thought of as the father of the Australian sheep industry . 
 The growth of the sheep industry in Australia was explosive . In 1820 , the continent held 100 @,@ 000 sheep , a decade later it had one million . By 1840 , New South Wales alone kept 4 million sheep ; flock numbers grew to 13 million in a decade . While much of the growth in both nations was due to the active support of Britain in its desire for wool , both worked independently to develop new high @-@ production breeds : the Corriedale , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Polwarth , <unk> Merino , Peppin Merino , and Poll Merino were all created in New Zealand or Australia . Wool production was a fitting industry for colonies far from their home nations . Before the advent of fast air and maritime shipping , wool was one of the few viable products that was not subject to spoiling on the long passage back to British ports . The abundant new land and milder winter weather of the region also aided the growth of the Australian and New Zealand sheep industries . 
 Flocks in Australia have always been largely range bands on fenced land , and are aimed at production of medium to <unk> wool for clothing and other products as well as meat . New Zealand flocks are kept in a fashion similar to English ones , in fenced holdings without shepherds . Although wool was once the primary income source for New Zealand sheep owners ( especially during the New Zealand wool boom ) , today it has shifted to meat production for export . 
 = = = Animal welfare concerns = = = 
 The Australian sheep industry is the only sector of the industry to receive international criticism for its practices . Sheep stations in Australia are cited in Animal Liberation , the seminal book of the animal rights movement , as the author 's primary evidence in his argument against retaining sheep as a part of animal agriculture . The practice of mulesing , in which skin is cut away from an animal 's perineal area to prevent cases of the fatal condition flystrike , has been condemned by animal rights groups such as PETA as being a " painful and unnecessary " process . In response , a program of phasing out mulesing is currently being implemented , and some mulesing operations are being carried out with the use of anaesthetic . The Animal Welfare Advisory Committee to the New Zealand Ministry of Agriculture Code of recommendations and minimum standards for the welfare of Sheep , considers mulesing a " special technique " which is performed on some Merino sheep at a small number of farms in New Zealand . 
 Most of the sheep meat exported from Australia is either frozen carcases to the UK or is live export to the Middle East for halal slaughter . PETA has stated that sheep exported to countries outside the jurisdiction of Australia 's animal cruelty laws are treated inhumanely and that halal meat processing facilities exist in Australia , making the export of live animals redundant . Entertainer Pink has pledged to boycott all Australian sheep products in protest . 
 = Common stingray = 
 The common stingray ( Dasyatis pastinaca ) is a species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae , found in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean and Black Seas . It typically inhabits sandy or muddy habitats in coastal waters shallower than 60 m ( 200 ft ) , often burying itself in sediment . Usually measuring 45 cm ( 18 in ) across , the common stingray has a diamond @-@ shaped pectoral fin disc slightly wider than long , and a whip @-@ like tail with upper and lower fin folds . It can be identified by its plain coloration and mostly smooth skin , except for a row of tubercles along the midline of the back in the largest individuals . 
 The predominant prey of the common stingray are bottom @-@ dwelling crustaceans , though it also takes molluscs , polychaete worms , and small bony fishes . It is aplacental viviparous : the embryos are nourished by yolk and later histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother . Females bear 4 – 9 young twice per year in shallow water , after a gestation period of four months . The common stingray can inflict a painful , though rarely life @-@ threatening , wound with its venomous tail spine . During classical antiquity , its sting was ascribed many mythical properties . This species is not sought after by commercial fisheries , but is taken in large numbers as bycatch and utilized for food , fishmeal , and liver oil . Its population is apparently dwindling across its range , though there is not yet sufficient data for the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) to assess it beyond Data Deficient . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Well @-@ documented since classical antiquity , the common stingray was known as trygon ( <unk> ) to the ancient Greeks and as pastinaca to the ancient Romans . An old common name for this species , used in Great Britain since at least the 18th century , is " fire @-@ flare " or " fiery @-@ flare " , which may refer to the reddish color of its meat . 
 The first formal scientific description of the common stingray , as Raja pastinaca , was authored by the father of taxonomy Carl Linnaeus in the 1758 tenth edition of Systema Naturae . It has since been placed in the genus Dasyatis . There are at least 25 earlier references to this ray in literature , under various non @-@ binomial names such as Raja corpore <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> in cauda <unk> , Pastinaca marina prima , and Pastinaca marina <unk> . Many of these early accounts , including Linnaeus ' , also incorporated information from other species . Consequently , the designation of a lectotype is warranted in the interests of taxonomic stability , but this has yet to be enacted . 
 The blue stingray ( Dasyatis <unk> ) of southern Africa has long been regarded as a variant of the common stingray . However , the common stingray lacks the blue markings of the other species and differs in morphological and <unk> characters , which led the latter to be definitively recognized as a separate species by Paul Cowley and Leonard Compagno in 1993 . The distinction between this species and the similar Tortonese 's stingray ( D. <unk> ) of the Mediterranean is poorly understood and may not be valid , requiring further investigation . 
 In 2001 , Lisa Rosenberger published a phylogenetic analysis of 14 Dasyatis species , based on morphology . The common stingray was reported to be the most basal member of the genus , other than the bluespotted stingray ( D. kuhlii ) and pelagic stingray ( D. violacea ) . However , D. violacea has generally been recognized as belonging to its own genus Pteroplatytrygon , and recently D. kuhlii has also been placed in a different genus , Neotrygon . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The common stingray is found throughout the Mediterranean and Black Seas . It also occurs , though in significantly lower numbers , in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean from southern Norway and the western Baltic Sea to Madeira and the Canary Islands . This bottom @-@ dwelling species can be found from the shore to a depth of 200 m ( 660 ft ) , though it is not usually found deeper than 60 m ( 200 ft ) . It favors sandy or muddy bottoms in calm water , and is also sometimes encountered near rocky reefs or in estuaries , as it is tolerant of low salinity . Off the Azores , common stingrays are most abundant in summer and least abundant in winter , suggestive of a seasonal shift in range and / or depth as has been documented in other ray species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The common stingray has been reported to reach a width of 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) and a length of 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) , though a width of 45 cm ( 18 in ) is more typical . The flattened pectoral fin disc is diamond @-@ shaped and slightly wider than it is long , with narrowly rounded outer corners . The leading margins of the disc are almost straight and converge on a pointed , slightly protruding snout ; the trailing margins of the disc are convex . The eyes are smaller than the spiracles ( paired respiratory openings ) , which are placed closely behind . There are 28 – 38 upper tooth rows and 28 – 43 lower tooth rows ; the teeth are small and blunt , and arranged into flattened surfaces . There are five papillae ( nipple @-@ like structures ) across the floor of the mouth . 
 The tail is slender and whip @-@ like , measuring approximately half as long as the disc . A stinging spine with strong serrations , measuring up to 35 cm ( 14 in ) long and equipped with a venom gland at its base , is positioned about a third of the distance along the tail . A second or even third spine may also be present , as the spines are regularly replaced and new spines grow in before existing ones have been shed . The tail behind the spine bears a low cutaneous fold on top and a short , deep fold underneath . The body and tail are smooth , save for a few dermal denticles on the leading edge of the disk ; older individuals may also develop a row of bony knobs along the midline of the back . This species is a solid gray , brown , reddish , or olive @-@ green above , and whitish below with dark fin margins . Young rays may have white spots . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Encountered singly or in " social " groups , the common stingray appears to segregate by sex to some degree and may be more active at night , tending to bury itself in sediment during daytime . It feeds on a wide variety of bottom @-@ dwelling organisms , including crustaceans , cephalopods , bivalves , polychaete worms , and small bony fishes . It is reportedly does great damage to cultured shellfish beds . One study in the Gulf of İskenderun off Turkey found that crustaceans comprised some 99 % of its diet , with fish prey becoming increasingly important with age . Another study off the coast of Cilicia , Turkey , found the most important dietary component to be the penaeid shrimp <unk> <unk> , followed by the pistol shrimp Alpheus glaber and the swimming crab Charybdis longicollis ; cephalopods were relatively important for males , while fishes were important for females . Common stingrays have been observed closely following each other in the presence of food , possibly to take advantage of other individuals ' foraging success . 
 Like other stingrays , the common stingray is aplacental viviparous : the embryos are initially sustained by yolk , which is later supplemented by histotroph ( " uterine milk " , enriched with proteins , fat , and mucus ) delivered by the mother through numerous extensions of the uterine epithelium called trophonemata . Females bear two litters of 4 – 9 pups per year in shallow inshore waters , following a gestation period of four months . Various authors have generally reported birthing in summer , between May and September or over a narrower timeframe such as July to August . Mature rays are known to aggregate off the Balearic Islands from mid @-@ June to July , possibly for reproductive purposes . Newborns measure about 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) across and 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) long . Males reach sexual maturity at 22 – 32 cm ( 8 @.@ 7 – 12 @.@ 6 in ) across , and females at 24 – 38 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 – 15 @.@ 0 in ) across . The oldest known individual from the wild was ten years of age , but the species has lived up to 21 years in captivity . Known parasites of the common stingray include the flukes Heterocotyle <unk> and Entobdella diadema , and the tapeworm <unk> minimum . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Though not aggressive , the common stingray can inflict an excruciating wound with its serrated , venomous tail spine . The ancient Greeks and Romans greatly feared its venom , with authors such as Aelian ( 175 – 235 AD ) stating that stingray wounds were incurable . The Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder ( 23 – 79 AD ) , in his Natural History , asserted that its spine was capable of killing trees , piercing armor like an arrow , and corroding iron . Greek poet Oppian ( 172 – 210 AD ) claimed that the touch of stingray venom could even dissolve stone . In Greek mythology , Hercules was said to have lost a finger to the bite of a stingray , and Circe was said to have armed her son <unk> with a spear tipped with a stingray spine , with which he accidentally slew his father Odysseus . 
 British zoologist Francis Day , in his 1884 The Fishes of Great Britain and Ireland , noted that the common stingray was not eaten because of its " rank and disagreeable " flesh , and that Welsh fishermen used its liver oil as a treatment for burns and other injuries . In the present day , the pectoral fins or " wings " of this species are sold smoked or dried and salted , and it is also utilized as a source of fishmeal and liver oil . The liver is regarded as a delicacy in French cuisine , and used to prepare dishes such as <unk> de foie de <unk> and foie de <unk> en <unk> . 
 Common stingrays are caught incidentally by commercial fisheries across many parts of its range , using bottom trawls , gillnets , bottom longlines , beach seines , and trammel nets . Because of its inshore habitat preferences , this ray is more susceptible to small @-@ scale coastal fisheries than to industrial operations , such as in the Balearic Islands , where it makes up 40 % of the shark and ray trammel net catch . Surveys indicate that common stingrays have declined in the Mediterranean and the northeastern Atlantic , and may have been extirpated from the Bay of Biscay . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Near Threatened in those two regions , while the species as a whole is listed under Data Deficient . The common stingray is protected within five marine protected areas ( MPAs ) in the Balearic Islands , and also benefits from a European Union ban on the use of trawls within 5 @.@ 6 km ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) of the coast . 
 = Yosemite National Park = 
 Yosemite National Park ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ SEM @-@ it @-@ ee ) is a United States National Park spanning eastern portions of Tuolumne , Mariposa and Madera counties in the central eastern portion of the U.S. state of California . The park , which is managed by the National Park Service , covers an area of 747 @,@ 956 acres ( 1 @,@ 168 @.@ 681 sq mi ; 302 @,@ 687 ha ; 3 @,@ 026 @.@ 87 km2 ) and reaches across the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada mountain range . About 3 @.@ 8 million people visit Yosemite each year : most spend the majority of their time in the seven square miles ( 18 km2 ) of Yosemite Valley . Designated a World Heritage Site in 1984 , Yosemite is internationally recognized for its granite cliffs , waterfalls , clear streams , giant sequoia groves , lakes , mountains , glaciers , and biological diversity . Almost 95 % of the park is designated wilderness . Yosemite was central to the development of the national park idea . First , Galen Clark and others lobbied to protect Yosemite Valley from development , ultimately leading to President Abraham Lincoln 's signing the Yosemite Grant in 1864 . Later , John Muir led a successful movement to establish a larger national park encompassing not just the valley , but surrounding mountains and forests as well — paving the way for the United States national park system . 
 Yosemite is one of the largest and least fragmented habitat blocks in the Sierra Nevada , and the park supports a diversity of plants and animals . The park has an elevation range from 2 @,@ 127 to 13 @,@ 114 feet ( 648 to 3 @,@ 997 m ) and contains five major vegetation zones : chaparral / oak woodland , lower montane forest , upper montane forest , subalpine zone , and alpine . Of California 's 7 @,@ 000 plant species , about 50 % occur in the Sierra Nevada and more than 20 % within Yosemite . There is suitable habitat for more than 160 rare plants in the park , with rare local geologic formations and unique soils characterizing the restricted ranges many of these plants occupy . 
 The geology of the Yosemite area is characterized by granitic rocks and remnants of older rock . About 10 million years ago , the Sierra Nevada was uplifted and then tilted to form its relatively gentle western slopes and the more dramatic eastern slopes . The uplift increased the steepness of stream and river beds , resulting in formation of deep , narrow canyons . About 1 million years ago , snow and ice accumulated , forming glaciers at the higher alpine meadows that moved down the river valleys . Ice thickness in Yosemite Valley may have reached 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) during the early glacial episode . The downslope movement of the ice masses cut and sculpted the U @-@ shaped valley that attracts so many visitors to its scenic vistas today . 
 The name " Yosemite " ( meaning " killer " in Miwok ) originally referred to the name of a renegade tribe which was driven out of the area ( and possibly annihilated ) by the Mariposa Battalion . Before then the area was called " Ahwahnee " ( " big mouth " ) by indigenous people . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ahwahneechee and the Mariposa Wars = = = 
 As revealed by archeological finds , the Yosemite Valley has been inhabited for nearly 3 @,@ 000 years , though humans may have first visited the area as long as 8 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 years ago . The indigenous natives called themselves the Ahwahneechee , meaning " dwellers in Ahwahnee . " They are related to the Northern Paiute and Mono tribes . Many tribes visited the area to trade , including nearby Central Sierra Miwoks , who lived along the drainage area of the Tuolumne and Stanislaus Rivers . A major trading route went over Mono Pass and through Bloody Canyon to Mono Lake , just to the east of the Yosemite area . Vegetation and game in the region was similar to that present today ; acorns were a staple to their diet , as well as other seeds and plants , salmon and deer . 
 The California Gold Rush in the mid @-@ 19th century dramatically increased travel by European @-@ Americans in the area , causing competition for resources between the regional Paiute and Miwok and the miners and hangers on . In 1851 as part of the Mariposa Wars intended to suppress Native American resistance , United States Army Major Jim Savage led the Mariposa Battalion into the west end of Yosemite Valley . He was pursuing forces of around 200 Ahwahneechee led by Chief Tenaya . 
 Accounts from this battalion were the first well @-@ documented reports of ethnic Europeans entering Yosemite Valley . Attached to Savage 's unit was Dr. Lafayette Bunnell , the company physician , who later wrote about his awestruck impressions of the valley in The Discovery of the Yosemite . Bunnell is credited with naming Yosemite Valley , based on his interviews with Chief Tenaya . Bunnell wrote that Chief Tenaya was the founder of the Pai @-@ Ute Colony of Ah @-@ wah @-@ nee . The Miwok , a neighboring tribe , and most white settlers considered the Ahwahneechee to be especially violent because of their frequent territorial disputes . The Miwok term for the Pai @-@ Ute band was <unk> <unk> , meaning " they are killers " . Correspondence and articles written by members of the battalion helped to popularize the natural wonders of the Yosemite Valley and the surrounding area . 
 Chief Tenaya and his Ahwahneechee were eventually captured and their village burned ; they were removed to a reservation near Fresno , California . The chief and some others were later allowed to return to Yosemite Valley . In the spring of 1852 they attacked a group of eight gold miners , and then moved east to flee law enforcement . Near Mono Lake , they took refuge with the nearby Mono tribe of Paiute . They stole horses from their hosts and moved away , but the Mono Paiutes tracked down and killed many of the Ahwahneechee , including Chief Tenaya . The Mono Paiute took the survivors as captives back to Mono Lake and absorbed them into the Mono Lake Paiute tribe . 
 A reconstructed " Indian Village of Ahwahnee " has been erected behind the Yosemite Museum , located next to the Yosemite Valley Visitor Center . 
 = = = Early tourists = = = 
 In 1855 , entrepreneur James Mason Hutchings , artist Thomas Ayres and two others were the first to tour the area . Hutchings and Ayres were responsible for much of the earliest publicity about Yosemite , writing articles and special magazine issues about the Valley . Ayres ' style in art was highly detailed with exaggerated angularity . His works and written accounts were distributed nationally , and an art exhibition of his drawings was held in New York City . Hutchings ' publicity efforts between 1855 and 1860 led to an increase in tourism to Yosemite . 
 Wawona was an Indian encampment in what is now the southwestern part of the park . Settler Galen Clark discovered the Mariposa Grove of giant sequoia in Wawona in 1857 . He had simple lodgings built , and roads to the area . In 1879 , the Wawona Hotel was built to serve tourists visiting Mariposa Grove . As tourism increased , so did the number of trails and hotels developed by people intending to build on the trade . 
 The Wawona Tree , also known as the Tunnel Tree , was a famous giant sequoia that stood in the Mariposa Grove . It was 227 feet ( 69 m ) tall , and was 90 ft ( 27 m ) in circumference . When a carriage @-@ wide tunnel was cut through the tree in 1881 , it became even more popular as a tourist photo attraction . Everything from horse @-@ drawn carriages in the late 19th century , to automobiles in the first part of the 20th century , traveled the road which passed through that tree . The Wawona Tree fell in 1969 under a heavy load of snow . It was estimated to have been 2 @,@ 300 years old . 
 Yosemite 's first concession was established in 1884 when John Degnan and his wife established a bakery and store . In 1916 , the National Park Service granted a 20 @-@ year concession to the Desmond Park Service Company . It bought out or built hotels , stores , camps , a dairy , a garage , and other park services . Desmond changed its name to the Yosemite National Park Company in December 1917 and was reorganized in 1920 . 
 The Curry Company had been started in 1899 by David and Jennie Curry to provide concessions in the park . They also founded Camp Curry , formerly known as Curry Village , now known as Half Dome Village . The Currys lobbied reluctant park supervisors to allow expansion of concession operations and development in the area . 
 Administrators in the National Park Service felt that limiting the number of concessionaires in each national park would be more financially sound . The Curry Company and its rival , the Yosemite National Park Company , were forced to merge in 1925 to form the Yosemite Park & Curry Company ( YP & CC ) . The company built the Ahwahnee Hotel in 1927 . 
 = = = Yosemite Grant = = = 
 Concerned by the effects of commercial interests , prominent citizens including Galen Clark and Senator John Conness advocated for protection of the area . A park bill was prepared with the assistance of the General Land Office in the Interior Department . The bill passed both houses of the 38th United States Congress , and was signed by President Abraham Lincoln on June 30 , 1864 , creating the Yosemite Grant . This is the first instance of park land being set aside specifically for preservation and public use by action of the U.S. federal government , and set a precedent for the 1872 creation of Yellowstone as the first national park . Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Grove were ceded to California as a state park , and a board of commissioners was proclaimed two years later . 
 Galen Clark was appointed by the commission as the Grant 's first guardian , but neither Clark nor the commissioners had the authority to evict homesteaders ( which included Hutchings ) . The issue was not settled until 1872 when the homesteader land holdings were invalidated by the U.S. Supreme Court . Clark and the reigning commissioners were ousted in 1880 , this dispute also reaching the Supreme Court in 1880 . The two Supreme Court decisions affecting management of the Yosemite Grant are considered important precedents in land management law . Hutchings became the new park guardian . 
 Access to the park by tourists improved in the early years of the park , and conditions in the Valley were made more hospitable . Tourism significantly increased after the First Transcontinental Railroad was completed in 1869 , but the long horseback ride to reach the area was a deterrent . Three stagecoach roads were built in the mid @-@ 1870s to provide better access for the growing number of visitors to Yosemite Valley . 
 John Muir was a Scottish @-@ born American naturalist and explorer . It was because of Muir that many National Parks were left untouched , such as Yosemite Valley National Park . One of the most significant camping trips Muir took was in 1903 with then president Theodore Roosevelt . This trip persuaded Roosevelt to return " Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove to federal protection as part of Yosemite National Park " . 
 John Muir wrote articles popularizing the area and increasing scientific interest in it . Muir was one of the first to theorize that the major landforms in Yosemite Valley were created by large alpine glaciers , bucking established scientists such as Josiah Whitney , who regarded Muir as an amateur . Muir wrote scientific papers on the area 's biology . Landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted emphasized the importance of conservation of Yosemite Valley . 
 = = = Increased protection efforts = = = 
 Overgrazing of meadows ( especially by sheep ) , logging of giant sequoia , and other damage caused Muir to become an advocate for further protection . Muir convinced prominent guests of the importance of putting the area under federal protection ; one such guest was Robert Underwood Johnson , editor of Century Magazine . Muir and Johnson lobbied Congress for the Act that created Yosemite National Park on October 1 , 1890 . The State of California , however , retained control of Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove . Muir also helped persuade local officials to virtually eliminate grazing from the Yosemite high country . 
 The newly created national park came under the jurisdiction of the United States Army 's Troop I of the 4th Cavalry on May 19 , 1891 , which set up camp in Wawona with Captain Abram Epperson Wood as acting superintendent . By the late 1890s , sheep grazing was no longer a problem , and the Army made many other improvements . The cavalry could not intervene to ease the worsening condition of Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove . The cavalry left another legacy in the park , the ranger hat . From 1899 to 1913 , cavalry regiments of the Western Department , including the all Black 9th Cavalry ( known as the " Buffalo Soldiers " ) and the 1st Cavalry , stationed two troops at Yosemite and brought with them the trooper 's campaign hat with its distinctive Montana Peak we recognize today as the " ranger hat . " This peak had been formed into the trooper 's stetson by veterans of the 1898 Spanish – American War to better shed tropical rain . 
 Muir and his Sierra Club continued to lobby the government and influential people for the creation of a unified Yosemite National Park . In May 1903 , President Theodore Roosevelt camped with Muir near Glacier Point for three days . On that trip , Muir convinced Roosevelt to take control of Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove away from California and return it to the federal government . In 1906 , Roosevelt signed a bill that did precisely that . 
 = = = National Park Service = = = 
 The National Park Service was formed in 1916 , and Yosemite was transferred to that agency 's jurisdiction . Tuolumne Meadows Lodge , Tioga Pass Road , and campgrounds at Tenaya and Merced lakes were also completed in 1916 . Automobiles started to enter the park in ever @-@ increasing numbers following the construction of all @-@ weather highways to the park . The Yosemite Museum was founded in 1926 through the efforts of Ansel Franklin Hall . 
 In 1903 , a dam in the northern portion of the park was proposed . Located in the Hetch Hetchy Valley , its purpose was to provide water and hydroelectric power to San Francisco . Muir and the Sierra Club opposed the project , while others , including Gifford Pinchot , supported it . In 1913 , the U.S. Congress authorized the O 'Shaughnessy Dam through passage of the Raker Act . 
 In the late 1920s , in an attempt that would be impossible to make today , a bid for Yosemite for the 1932 Winter Olympics was put forward . ( Ultimately , Lake Placid , New York , hosted . ) 
 More recently , preservationists persuaded Congress to designate 677 @,@ 600 acres ( 274 @,@ 200 ha ) , or about 89 % of the park , as the Yosemite Wilderness — a highly protected wilderness area . The Park Service has reduced artificial inducements to visit the park , such as the Firefall , in which red @-@ hot embers were pushed off a cliff near Glacier Point at night . Traffic congestion in Yosemite Valley during the summer months has become a concern . Two electric buses commenced service in September 1995 . The buses are quiet and do not emit pollutants . Eventually , all the buses in Yosemite will be electric . The 1996 Yosemite Valley Landslide killed a hiker and the January 1997 Merced River flood damaged many roads and several campgrounds . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Yosemite National Park is located in the central Sierra Nevada of California . Three wilderness areas are adjacent to Yosemite : the Ansel Adams Wilderness to the southeast , the Hoover Wilderness to the northeast , and the Emigrant Wilderness to the north . 
 The 1 @,@ 189 sq mi ( 3 @,@ 080 km2 ) park is roughly the size of the U.S. state of Rhode Island and contains thousands of lakes and ponds , 1 @,@ 600 miles ( 2 @,@ 600 km ) of streams , 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) of hiking trails , and 350 miles ( 560 km ) of roads . Two federally designated Wild and Scenic Rivers , the Merced and the Tuolumne , begin within Yosemite 's borders and flow westward through the Sierra foothills , into the Central Valley of California . Annual park visitation exceeds 3 @.@ 5 million , with most visitor use concentrated in the seven @-@ square @-@ mile ( 18 km2 ) area of Yosemite Valley . 
 = = = Rocks and erosion = = = 
 Almost all of the landforms in the Yosemite area are cut from the granitic rock of the Sierra Nevada Batholith ( a batholith is a large mass of intrusive igneous rock that formed deep below the surface ) . About 5 % of the park 's landforms ( mostly in its eastern margin near Mount Dana ) are metamorphosed volcanic and sedimentary rocks . These rocks are called roof pendants because they were once the roof of the underlying granitic rock . 
 Erosion acting upon different types of uplift @-@ created joint and fracture systems is responsible for creating the valleys , canyons , domes , and other features we see today . These joints and fracture systems do not move , and are therefore not faults . Spacing between joints is controlled by the amount of silica in the granite and granodiorite rocks ; more silica tends to create a more resistant rock , resulting in larger spaces between joints and fractures . 
 Pillars and columns , such as Washington Column and Lost Arrow , are created by cross joints . Erosion acting on master joints is responsible for creating valleys and later canyons . The single most erosive force over the last few million years has been large alpine glaciers , which have turned the previously V @-@ shaped river @-@ cut valleys into U @-@ shaped glacial @-@ cut canyons ( such as Yosemite Valley and Hetch Hetchy Valley ) . <unk> ( caused by the tendency of crystals in plutonic rocks to expand at the surface ) acting on granitic rock with widely spaced joints is responsible for creating domes such as Half Dome and North Dome and inset arches like Royal Arches . 
 = = = Popular features = = = 
 Yosemite Valley represents only one percent of the park area , but this is where most visitors arrive and stay . The Tunnel View is the first view of the Valley for many visitors and is extensively photographed . El Capitan , a prominent granite cliff that looms over Yosemite Valley , is one of the most popular rock climbing destinations in the world because of its diverse range of climbing routes in addition to its year @-@ round accessibility . Granite domes such as Sentinel Dome and Half Dome rise 3 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 800 feet ( 910 and 1 @,@ 460 m ) , respectively , above the valley floor . 
 The high country of Yosemite contains beautiful areas such as Tuolumne Meadows , Dana Meadows , the Clark Range , the Cathedral Range , and the Kuna Crest . The Sierra crest and the Pacific Crest Trail run through Yosemite , with peaks of red metamorphic rock , such as Mount Dana and Mount Gibbs , and granite peaks , such as Mount Conness . Mount Lyell is the highest point in the park , standing at 13 @,@ 120 feet ( 4 @,@ 000 m ) . The Lyell Glacier is the largest glacier in Yosemite National Park and is one of the few remaining in the Sierra Nevada today . 
 The park has three groves of ancient giant sequoia ( Sequoiadendron giganteum ) trees ; the Mariposa Grove ( 200 trees ) , the Tuolumne Grove ( 25 trees ) , and the Merced Grove ( 20 trees ) . This species grows larger in volume than any other and is one of the tallest and longest @-@ lived . 
 = = = Water and ice = = = 
 Tuolumne and Merced River systems originate along the crest of the Sierra Nevada in the park and have carved river canyons 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 to 1 @,@ 220 m ) deep . The Tuolumne River drains the entire northern portion of the park , an area of approximately 680 square miles ( 1 @,@ 800 km2 ) . The Merced River begins in the park 's southern peaks , primarily the Cathedral and Clark Ranges , and drains an area of approximately 511 square miles ( 1 @,@ 320 km2 ) . 
 <unk> processes , including glaciation , flooding , and fluvial geomorphic response , have been fundamental in creating landforms in the park . The park also contains approximately 3 @,@ 200 lakes ( greater than 100 m2 ) , two reservoirs , and 1 @,@ 700 miles ( 2 @,@ 700 km ) of streams , all of which help form these two large watersheds . Wetlands in Yosemite occur in valley bottoms throughout the park , and are often <unk> linked to nearby lakes and rivers through seasonal flooding and groundwater movement . Meadow habitats , distributed at elevations from 3 @,@ 000 to 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 to 3 @,@ 350 m ) in the park , are generally wetlands , as are the riparian habitats found on the banks of Yosemite 's numerous streams and rivers . 
 Yosemite is famous for its high concentration of waterfalls in a small area . Numerous sheer drops , glacial steps and hanging valleys in the park provide many places for waterfalls to exist , especially during April , May , and June ( the snowmelt season ) . Located in Yosemite Valley , the Yosemite Falls is the highest in North America at 2 @,@ 425 @-@ foot ( 739 m ) . Also in Yosemite Valley is the much lower volume Ribbon Falls , which has the highest single vertical drop , 1 @,@ 612 feet ( 491 m ) . Perhaps the most prominent of the Yosemite Valley waterfalls is Bridalveil Fall , which is the waterfall seen from the Tunnel View viewpoint at the east end of the Wawona Tunnel . <unk> Falls in Hetch Hetchy Valley is another notable waterfall . Hundreds of ephemeral waterfalls also exist in the park . 
 All glaciers in the park are relatively small glaciers that occupy areas that are in almost permanent shade , such as north- and northeast @-@ facing cirques . Lyell Glacier is the largest glacier in Yosemite ( the Palisades Glaciers are the largest in the Sierra Nevada ) and covers 160 acres ( 65 ha ) . None of the Yosemite glaciers are a remnant of the much , much larger Ice Age alpine glaciers responsible for sculpting the Yosemite landscape . Instead , they were formed during one of the <unk> episodes that have occurred since the thawing of the Ice Age ( such as the Little Ice Age ) . Climate change has reduced the number and size of glaciers around the world . Many Yosemite glaciers , including Merced Glacier , which was discovered by John Muir in 1871 and bolstered his glacial origins theory of the Yosemite area , have disappeared and most of the others have lost up to 75 % of their surface area . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Yosemite has a Mediterranean climate ( Köppen climate classification Csa ) , meaning most precipitation falls during the mild winter , and the other seasons are nearly dry ( less than 3 % of precipitation falls during the long , hot summers ) . Because of orographic lift , precipitation increases with elevation up to 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 400 m ) where it slowly decreases to the crest . Precipitation amounts vary from 36 inches ( 910 mm ) at 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) elevation to 50 inches ( 1 @,@ 300 mm ) at 8 @,@ 600 feet ( 2 @,@ 600 m ) . Snow does not typically persist on the ground until November in the high country . It accumulates all winter and into March or early April . 
 Mean daily temperatures range from 25 ° F ( − 4 ° C ) to 53 ° F ( 12 ° C ) at Tuolumne Meadows at 8 @,@ 600 feet ( 2 @,@ 600 m ) . At the Wawona Entrance ( elevation 5 @,@ 130 feet or 1 @,@ 560 metres ) , mean daily temperature ranges from 36 to 67 ° F ( 2 to 19 ° C ) . At the lower elevations below 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) , temperatures are hotter ; the mean daily high temperature at Yosemite Valley ( elevation 3 @,@ 966 feet or 1 @,@ 209 metres ) varies from 46 to 90 ° F ( 8 to 32 ° C ) . At elevations above 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 400 m ) , the hot , dry summer temperatures are moderated by frequent summer thunderstorms , along with snow that can persist into July . The combination of dry vegetation , low relative humidity , and thunderstorms results in frequent lightning @-@ caused fires as well . 
 At the park headquarters , with an elevation of 3 @,@ 966 feet ( 1 @,@ 209 m ) , January averages 38 @.@ 2 ° F ( 3 @.@ 4 ° C ) , while July averages 73 @.@ 0 ° F ( 22 @.@ 8 ° C ) , though in summer the nights are much cooler than the hot days . There are an average of 39 @.@ 5 days with highs of 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) or higher and an average of 97 @.@ 9 nights with freezing temperatures . Freezing temperatures have been recorded in every month of the year . The record high temperature was 115 ° F ( 46 ° C ) on July 20 , 1915 , while the record low temperature was − 6 ° F ( − 21 ° C ) on January 2 , 1924 and on January 21 , 1937 . Average annual precipitation is nearly 37 inches ( 940 mm ) , falling on 65 days . The wettest year was 1983 with 68 @.@ 94 inches ( 1 @,@ 751 mm ) and the driest year was 1976 with 14 @.@ 84 inches ( 377 mm ) . The most precipitation in one month was 29 @.@ 61 inches ( 752 mm ) in December 1955 and the most in one day was 6 @.@ 92 inches ( 176 mm ) on December 23 , 1955 . Average annual snowfall is 65 @.@ 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 67 m ) . The snowiest year was 1967 with 154 @.@ 9 inches ( 3 @.@ 93 m ) . The most snow in one month was 140 @.@ 8 inches ( 3 @.@ 58 m ) in January 1993 . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = Tectonic and volcanic activity = = = 
 The area of the park was astride a passive continental margin during the Precambrian and early Paleozoic . Sediment was derived from continental sources and was deposited in shallow water . These rocks have since been metamorphosed . 
 Heat generated from the Farallon Plate subducting below the North American Plate led to the creation of an island arc of volcanoes on the west coast of proto @-@ North America between the late Devonian and Permian periods . Later volcanism in the Jurassic intruded and covered these rocks in what may have been magmatic activity associated with the early stages of the creation of the Sierra Nevada Batholith . 95 % of these rocks were eventually removed by uplifted @-@ accelerated erosion . 
 The first phase of regional <unk> started 210 million years ago in the late Triassic and continued throughout the Jurassic to about 150 million years before present ( BP ) . Around the same time , the Nevadan orogeny built the Nevadan mountain range ( also called the Ancestral Sierra Nevada ) to a height of 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) . This was directly part of the creation of the Sierra Nevada Batholith , and the resulting rocks were mostly granitic in composition and emplaced about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) below the surface . The second major pluton emplacement phase lasted from about 120 million to 80 million years ago during the Cretaceous . This was part of the Sevier orogeny . 
 Starting 20 million years ago ( in the Cenozoic ) and lasting until 5 million years ago , a now @-@ extinct extension of Cascade Range volcanoes erupted , bringing large amounts of igneous material in the area . These igneous deposits blanketed the region north of the Yosemite region . Volcanic activity persisted past 5 million years BP east of the current park borders in the Mono Lake and Long Valley areas . 
 = = = Uplift and erosion = = = 
 Starting 10 million years ago , vertical movement along the Sierra fault started to uplift the Sierra Nevada . Subsequent tilting of the Sierra block and the resulting accelerated uplift of the Sierra Nevada increased the gradient of western @-@ flowing streams . The streams consequently ran faster and thus cut their valleys more quickly . Additional uplift occurred when major faults developed to the east , especially the creation of Owens Valley from Basin and Range @-@ associated extensional forces . Uplift of the Sierra accelerated again about two million years ago during the Pleistocene . 
 The uplifting and increased erosion exposed granitic rocks in the area to surface pressures , resulting in exfoliation ( responsible for the rounded shape of the many domes in the park ) and mass wasting following the numerous fracture joint planes ( cracks ; especially vertical ones ) in the now solidified plutons . Pleistocene glaciers further accelerated this process and the larger ones transported the resulting talus and till from valley floors . 
 Numerous vertical joint planes controlled where and how fast erosion took place . Most of these long , linear and very deep cracks trend northeast or northwest and form parallel , often regularly spaced sets . They were created by uplift @-@ associated pressure release and by the unloading of overlying rock via erosion . 
 = = = <unk> by glaciers = = = 
 A series of glaciations further modified the region starting about 2 to 3 million years ago and ending sometime around 10 @,@ 000 BP . At least four major glaciations have occurred in the Sierra Nevada , locally called the Sherwin ( also called the pre @-@ Tahoe ) , Tahoe , Tenaya , and Tioga . The Sherwin glaciers were the largest , filling Yosemite and other valleys , while later stages produced much smaller glaciers . A Sherwin @-@ age glacier was almost surely responsible for the major excavation and shaping of Yosemite Valley and other canyons in the area . 
 Glacial systems reached depths of up to 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) and left their marks in the Yosemite area . The longest glacier in the Yosemite area ran down the Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne River for 60 miles ( 97 km ) , passing well beyond Hetch Hetchy Valley . Merced Glacier flowed out of Yosemite Valley and into the Merced River Gorge . Lee Vining Glacier carved Lee Vining Canyon and emptied into Lake Russel ( the much @-@ enlarged ice age version of Mono Lake ) . Only the highest peaks , such as Mount Dana and Mount Conness , were not covered by glaciers . Retreating glaciers often left recessional moraines that impounded lakes such as the 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 9 km ) long Lake Yosemite ( a shallow lake that periodically covered much of the floor of Yosemite Valley ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Habitats = = = 
 With its scrubby sun @-@ baked chaparral , stately groves of pine , fir , and sequoia , and expanses of alpine woodlands and meadows , Yosemite National Park preserves a Sierra Nevada landscape as it prevailed before Euro @-@ American settlement . In contrast to surrounding lands , which have been significantly altered by logging , the park still contains some 225 @,@ 510 acres ( 91 @,@ 260 ha ) of old @-@ growth forest . Taken together , the park 's varied habitats support over 250 species of vertebrates , which include fish , amphibians , reptiles , birds , and mammals . 
 Along much of Yosemite 's western boundary , habitats are dominated by mixed coniferous forests of ponderosa pine , sugar pine , incense cedar , white fir , Douglas fir , and a few stands of giant sequoia , interspersed by areas of black oak and canyon live oak . A relatively high diversity of wildlife species is supported by these habitats , because of relatively mild , lower @-@ elevation climate and the mixture of habitat types and plant species . Wildlife species typically found in these habitats include black bear , coyote , raccoon , mountain kingsnake , Gilbert 's skink , white @-@ headed woodpecker , bobcat , river otter , gray fox , red fox , brown creeper , two species of skunk , cougar , spotted owl , and a wide variety of bat species . 
 Going higher in elevation , the coniferous forests become purer stands of red fir , western white pine , Jeffrey pine , lodgepole pine , and the occasional foxtail pine . Fewer wildlife species tend to be found in these habitats , because of their higher elevation and lower complexity . Species likely to be found include golden @-@ mantled ground squirrel , <unk> , fisher , Steller 's jay , hermit thrush , and northern goshawk . Reptiles are not common , but include rubber boa , western fence lizard , and northern alligator lizard . 
 As the landscape rises , trees become smaller and more sparse , with stands broken by areas of exposed granite . These include lodgepole pine , whitebark pine , and mountain hemlock that , at highest elevations , give way to vast expanses of granite as treeline is reached . The climate in these habitats is harsh and the growing season is short , but species such as pika , yellow @-@ bellied marmot , white @-@ tailed jackrabbit , Clark 's nutcracker , and black rosy finch are adapted to these conditions . Also , the treeless alpine habitats are the areas favored by Sierra Nevada bighorn sheep . This species , however , is now found in the Yosemite area only around Tioga Pass , where a small , reintroduced population exists . 
 At a variety of elevations , meadows provide important , productive habitat for wildlife . Animals come to feed on the green grasses and use the flowing and standing water found in many meadows . Predators , in turn , are attracted to these areas . The interface between meadow and forest is also favored by many animal species because of the proximity of open areas for foraging and cover for protection . Species that are highly dependent upon meadow habitat include great grey owl , willow flycatcher , Yosemite toad , and mountain beaver . 
 = = = Management issues = = = 
 Despite the richness of high @-@ quality habitats in Yosemite , the brown bear , California condor , and least Bell 's vireo have become extinct in the park within historical time , and another 37 species currently have special status under either California or federal endangered species legislation . The most serious current threats to Yosemite 's wildlife and the ecosystems they occupy include loss of a natural fire regime , exotic species , air pollution , habitat fragmentation , and climate change . On a more local basis , factors such as road kills and the availability of human food have affected some wildlife species . 
 The black bears of Yosemite were once famous for breaking into parked cars to steal food . They were also an encouraged tourist sight for many years at the park 's garbage dumps , where bears congregated to eat park visitors ' garbage and tourists gathered to photograph the bears . Increasing encounters between bears and humans and increasing damage to property led to an aggressive campaign to discourage bears from relying on human food or interacting with people and their property . The open @-@ air dumps were closed ; all trash receptacles were replaced with bear @-@ proof receptacles ; all campgrounds were equipped with bear @-@ proof food lockers so that people would not leave food in their vehicles , which were easy targets for the powerful and resourceful bears . Because bears who show aggression towards people usually are eventually destroyed , park personnel have continued to come up with innovative ways to have bears associate humans and their property with unpleasant experiences , such as being hit with rubber bullets . Today , about 30 bears a year are captured and ear @-@ tagged and their DNA is sampled so that , when bear damage occurs , rangers can ascertain which bear is causing the problem . 
 Increasing ozone pollution is causing tissue damage to the massive giant sequoia trees in the park . This makes them more vulnerable to insect infestation and disease . Since the cones of these trees require fire @-@ touched soil to germinate , historic fire suppression has reduced these trees ' ability to reproduce . The current policy of setting prescribed fires is expected to help the germination issue . 
 Yosemite National Park has documented more than 130 non @-@ native plant species within park boundaries . These non @-@ native plants were introduced into Yosemite following the migration of early Euro @-@ American settlers in the late 1850s . Natural and human @-@ caused disturbances , such as wildland fires and construction activities , have contributed to a rapid increase in the spread of non @-@ native plants . A number of these species aggressively invade and displace the native plant communities , resulting in impacts on the park 's resources . Non @-@ native plants can bring about significant changes in park ecosystems by altering the native plant communities and the processes that support them . Some non @-@ native species may cause an increase in the fire frequency of an area or increase the available nitrogen in the soil that may allow more non @-@ native plants to become established . Many non @-@ native species , such as yellow star thistle ( Centaurea solstitialis ) , are able to produce a long tap root that allows them to out @-@ compete the native plants for available water . 
 Bull thistle ( Cirsium vulgare ) , common mullein ( Verbascum thapsus ) , and Klamath weed ( Hypericum <unk> ) have been identified as noxious pests in Yosemite since the 1940s . Additional species that have been recognized more recently as aggressive and requiring control are yellow star thistle ( Centaurea solstitialis ) , sweet clover ( <unk> spp . ) , Himalayan blackberry ( Rubus armeniacus ) , cut @-@ leaved blackberry ( Rubus <unk> ) and large periwinkle ( <unk> major ) . 
 = = = Wildfires = = = 
 Forest fires seasonally clear the park of dead vegetation , making way for new growth . These fires are detrimental to the ecology of the park , and also damage the income generated by tourism . The Summer of Fire saw more resources dedicated to the subject of wildfire than ever before or since in the United States . The most recent fire , the Rim Fire , which destroyed nearly $ 2 billion in assets and revenue , closed off much of the park to tourists . This rim fire was the third largest on record , and burned nearly 500 acres of wild habitat . 
 = = Activities = = 
 Yosemite Valley is open year @-@ round and numerous activities are available through the National Park Service , Yosemite Conservancy , and Delaware North at Yosemite , including nature walks , photography and art classes , stargazing programs , tours , bike rentals , rafting , mule and horseback rides , and rock climbing classes . Many people enjoy short walks and longer hikes to waterfalls in Yosemite Valley , or walks among giant sequoias in the Mariposa , Tuolumne , or Merced Groves . Others like to drive or take a tour bus to Glacier Point ( summer – fall ) to see a spectacular view of Yosemite Valley and the high country , or drive along the scenic Tioga Road to Tuolumne Meadows ( May – October ) and go for a walk or hike . 
 Most park visitors stay just for the day , and only visit locations within Yosemite Valley that are easily accessible by automobile . There is a US $ 25 @-@ 30 per automobile user fee to enter the park , depending on the season . Traffic congestion in the valley is a serious problem during peak season , in summer . A free shuttle bus system operates year @-@ round in the valley , and park rangers encourage people to use this system since parking within the valley during the summer is often nearly impossible to find . 
 In addition to exploring the natural features of the park , visitors can also learn about the natural and cultural history of Yosemite Valley at a number of facilities in the valley : the Yosemite Valley Visitor Center , the adjoining Yosemite Museum , and the Nature Center at Happy Isles . There are also two National Historic Landmarks : the Sierra Club 's LeConte Memorial Lodge ( Yosemite 's first public visitor center ) , and the world @-@ famous Ahwahnee Hotel . Camp 4 was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2003 . 
 = = = Hiking = = = 
 Over 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) of trails are available to hikers — anything from the easy stroll , to the grueling hikes up several park mountains , to multiple @-@ day backpack trips . 
 The park can be divided into 5 sections for the day @-@ user — Yosemite Valley , Wawona / Mariposa Grove / Glacier Point , Tuolumne Meadows , Hetch Hetchy , and Crane Flat / White Wolf . Numerous books describe park trails , and free information is available from the Park Service in Yosemite . Park rangers encourage visitors to experience portions of the park in addition to Yosemite Valley . 
 Between late spring and early fall , much of the park can be accessed for multiple @-@ day backpacking trips . All overnight trips into the back country require a wilderness permit and most require approved bear @-@ resistant food storage . 
 = = = Driving destinations = = = 
 While some locations in Yosemite require hiking , other locations can be reached via automobile transportation . Driving locations also allow guests to observe the night sky in locations other than their campsite or lodge . All of the roads in Yosemite are scenic , but the most famous is the Tioga Road , typically open from late May or early June through November . 
 As an alternative to driving , bicycles are allowed on the roads . However , bicycles are only allowed off @-@ road on 12 miles ( 19 km ) of paved trails in Yosemite Valley itself ; mountain biking is not allowed . 
 = = = Climbing = = = 
 Rock climbing is an important part of Yosemite . Camp 4 , a walk @-@ in campground in Yosemite Valley , was instrumental in the development of rock climbing as a sport , and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Climbers can generally be spotted in the snow @-@ free months on anything from ten @-@ foot @-@ high ( 3 m ) boulders to the 3 @,@ 300 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 0 km ) face of El Capitan . Classes are offered by numerous groups on rock climbing . 
 = = = Winter activities = = = 
 Yosemite Valley is open all year , although some roads within the park close in winter . Downhill skiing is available at the Badger Pass Ski Area — the oldest downhill skiing area in California , offering downhill skiing from mid @-@ December through early April . Much of the park is open to cross @-@ country skiing and snowshoeing , with several backcountry ski huts open for use . Wilderness permits are required for backcountry overnight ski trips . 
 The Bracebridge dinner is an annual holiday event , held since 1927 at the Ahwahnee Hotel , inspired by Washington Irving 's descriptions of Squire Bracebridge and English Christmas traditions of the 18th century in his Sketch Book . Between 1929 and 1973 , the show was organized by Ansel Adams . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Bicycle rentals are available in Yosemite Valley spring through fall . Over 12 miles ( 19 km ) of paved bike paths are available in Yosemite Valley . In addition , bicyclists can ride on regular roads . Helmets are required by law for children under 18 years of age . Off @-@ trail riding and mountain biking are not permitted in Yosemite National Park . 
 Water activities are plentiful during warmer months . Rafting can be done through the Yosemite Valley on the Merced River . There are also swimming pools available at Yosemite Lodge and Curry Village . 
 In 2010 , Yosemite National Park was honored with its own quarter under the America the Beautiful Quarters program . 
 = Percy Cherry = 
 Percy Herbert Cherry , VC , MC ( 4 June 1895 – 27 March 1917 ) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . The award was granted posthumously for Cherry 's actions during an attack on the French village of Lagnicourt which was strongly defended by German forces . 
 Born in the Australian state of Victoria , Cherry moved to Tasmania at the age of seven when his family took up an apple orchard . Becoming an expert apple packer , he was also a skilled rifle shot and member of the Franklin rowing club . In 1913 , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the 93rd Infantry Regiment , Citizens Military Force , and served as a drill instructor at the outbreak of war . Enlisting in the Australian Imperial Force in March 1915 , he served at Gallipoli before transferring to the Western Front . In early March 1917 , Cherry was decorated with the Military Cross following an attack on Malt Trench , in which he led a party in capturing two German machine gun posts . He was killed by a German shell the day following his Victoria Cross action . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Cherry was born on 4 June 1895 at Drysdale , Victoria , to John <unk> Cherry and his wife Elizabeth , née Russel . When he was seven years old , the family moved to Tasmania and took up an apple orchard near <unk> . Cherry attended the local state school until he was thirteen , after which he received private tuition . He worked with his father and became an expert apple packer ; at fourteen he won a local case @-@ making competition at the Launceston Fruit Show by packing thirty @-@ five cases of apples in an hour . Joining the Australian Army Cadets in 1908 , Cherry soon became a sergeant and later a second lieutenant , where he used to drill cadets in four different districts . At the age of sixteen , he won the President 's Trophy and Gold Medal for being the best shot at the rifle range in Franklin . He also rowed with the Franklin rowing club , played the cornet in the Franklin brass band and sang in the Anglican church choir . In 1913 , Cherry joined the Citizens Military Force and was commissioned into the 93rd Infantry Regiment as a second lieutenant . 
 = = First World War = = 
 = = = Enlistment , March 1915 to Western Front , March 1917 = = = 
 At the outbreak of war , Cherry was sent to Claremont Camp and assumed duties as a drill instructor . On 5 March 1915 , he enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force and was allotted to the 26th Battalion , where he qualified as an infantry officer , but was considered too young for a commission in the Australian Imperial Force and was instead made a Quartermaster Sergeant . On 29 June , the battalion embarked from Brisbane for Egypt with Cherry aboard HMAT Aeneas . On arrival , the battalion spent several months training in the desert , where Cherry was promoted to company sergeant major in August . On 12 September , the battalion landed at Gallipoli and played a defensive role at Courtney ’ s and Steele ’ s Posts , and Russell ’ s Top . 
 On 1 December , injured by bomb wounds to his face and head , Cherry was evacuated to Egypt , where he was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 9 December . Three days later , the 26th Battalion was withdrawn from Gallipoli and evacuated to Egypt where Cherry rejoined them in preparation for service on the Western Front . Remaining in Egypt during this time , Cherry was selected to attend a machine gun course in March 1916 . After completion of this , he was transferred to the 7th Machine Gun Company in France . 
 He commanded the company 's 1st Battery at Fleurbaix , Messines and on the Somme until 5 August , when he was wounded in a duel with a German officer at Pozières . He and a German officer — who was leading an attack against Cherry 's position — were exchanging shots from neighbouring shell @-@ holes . Eventually , they both rose , firing simultaneously . The German officer hit Cherry in the neck but was mortally wounded by Cherry in return . Cherry approached the dying man , who pulled a package of letters from his pocket , and asked Cherry to have them censored and posted . Cherry promised to do so and the German handed over the letters , with the words ; " And so it ends " . He died shortly afterwards . As a result of his wounds , Cherry was evacuated to England for treatment . 
 Promoted to lieutenant on 25 August 1916 , Cherry returned to his unit on the Somme in November . The following month he was made a temporary captain and transferred back to the 26th Battalion as the commanding officer of C Company . His rank was confirmed on 14 February 1917 , and on 1 – 2 March he was involved in the battalion 's actions around the village of Warlencourt . At 03 : 00 on 2 March , Cherry led his company in an attack on the German held position of Malt Trench , situated between the villages of Warlencourt and Bapaume . Artillery fire had failed to adequately cut the barbwire lines for the advancing troops , and Cherry led a section of men along the wire until he found a break in it . Once through the gap , he rushed two machine gun posts , capturing one single @-@ handed , and turned one on the fleeing Germans before being wounded himself . For his actions during the engagement , Cherry was awarded the Military Cross , the notification of which was published in a supplement of the London Gazette on 26 April 1917 . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 On 26 March 1917 , the 7th Brigade — of which the 26th Battalion was part — was tasked with the capture of Lagnicourt . It was during this engagement where Cherry was to earn the Victoria Cross . An artillery barrage opened up on the village at 05 : 15 and continued for twenty minutes , allowing the infantry to close in . The plan was that Cherry 's company would storm the village itself while the battalion 's other companies encircled it . For the assault , Cherry split his company into two sections ; he commanded one section himself and placed the other under Lieutenant William Frederick Joseph Hamilton . 
 The company was soon in action . Cherry 's section captured a large fortified farm on the edge of the village . As they entered the muddy main street , the Australians came under heavy fire from the houses lining the road and from an adjacent stable yard . Cherry " rushed the stable yard " and a fierce firefight developed , before the Germans surrendered . As Cherry and his men moved through Lagnicourt , they found the main resistance coming from a large chalky crater , " spotted with white chalk " , at the crossroads in the village centre . The Germans ' stout defence was holding up the advance and Cherry sent a messenger back for more Stokes mortars . Becoming impatient at the delay , Cherry decided to rush the position under the cover of Lewis Gun and rifle grenade fire . Capturing the crater , he found Lieutenant Harold Hereward <unk> at the bottom wounded . <unk> had taken over command of the second section when Lieutenant Hamilton was wounded , and it had now been reduced to six men . 
 After capturing the crater , Cherry pushed on through the village , where his party emerged from among the buildings on the far side . Another stiff fight ensured with a group of Germans in dug @-@ outs by the side of the road , before the company was able to meet up with its fellow units which had bypassed the village and were already established to the north and east of the area . Cherry 's orders were to fall back into reserve , but he disregarded them as he sensed a counter @-@ attack was forthcoming . At 09 : 00 on 27 March , the Germans launched a very strong counter @-@ attack under heavy artillery fire . At one point , Cherry noticed that the Germans were firing yellow flares to pinpoint Australian positions to their gunners . He found some of these flares , and fired them away from his position . The German attempts to retake Lagnicourt — at a cost to the 7th Brigade of 377 casualties — raged all day before they abandoned the counterattack . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 In the afternoon of 27 March 1917 , a shell burst in a sunken road to the east of Lagnicourt , killing Cherry and several other men . He was buried in Quéant Road Cemetery , <unk> , Plot VIII , Row C , Grave 10 . The full citation for Cherry 's posthumous award of the Victoria Cross appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette on 11 May 1917 , reading : 
 War Office , 11th May , 1917 
 His Majesty the KING has been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officers and Man : — 
 2nd Lt. ( temp . Capt. ) Percy Herbert Cherry , M.C. , late Aus . Imp . Force . 
 For most conspicuous bravery , determination and leadership when in command of a company detailed to storm and clear a village . 
 After all the officers of his company had become casualties he carried on with care and determination , in the face of fierce opposition , and cleared the village of the enemy . 
 He sent frequent reports of progress made , and when held up for some time by an enemy strong point he organised machine gun and bomb parties and captured the position . His leadership , coolness and bravery set a wonderful example to his men . 
 Having cleared the village , he took charge of the situation and beat off the most resolute and heavy counter @-@ attacks made by the enemy . 
 Wounded about 6 @.@ 30 a.m. , he refused to leave his post , and there remained , encouraging all to hold out at all costs , until , about 4 @.@ 30 p.m. , this very gallant officer was killed by an enemy shell . 
 Cherry 's Victoria Cross was presented to his father by the Governor of Tasmania , Sir Francis Newdegate , in Hobart during October 1917 . In 1932 , a photograph of Cherry was unveiled at the headquarters of the 26th Battalion , Australian Imperial Force , at <unk> , Brisbane . His Victoria Cross is currently on display at the Australian War Memorial along with his other medals . 
 = North Staffordshire Railway = 
 The North Staffordshire Railway ( NSR ) was a British railway company formed in 1845 to promote a number of lines in the Staffordshire Potteries and surrounding areas in Staffordshire , Cheshire , Derbyshire and Shropshire . 
 The company was based in Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent and was nicknamed The Knotty ; its lines were built to the standard gauge of 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) . The main routes were constructed between 1846 and 1852 and ran from Macclesfield to Norton Bridge , just north of Stafford , and from Crewe to <unk> Junction , west of Derby . Within these main connections with other railway companies , most notably the London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) , the company operated a network of smaller lines although the total route mileage of the company never exceeded 221 miles ( 355 @.@ 7 km ) . The majority of the passenger traffic was local although a number of LNWR services from Manchester to London were operated via Stoke . Freight traffic was mostly coal and other minerals but the line also carried the vast majority of china and other pottery goods manufactured in England . 
 As the NSR was surrounded by other larger railway companies , there were in the 19th century several attempts emanating from other companies or proposals from NSR shareholders to amalgamate with one or more of the other companies that adjoined it . None of these came to fruition and the NSR remained an independent company up to 1923 when it became part of the London , Midland and Scottish Railway Company . 
 = = Before the railway = = 
 The area of north Staffordshire known today as the City of Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent was already a thriving industrial area before the arrival of the railways . The establishment of the pottery industry and the development of coal and ironstone mines in the 18th century had provided a need for materials , most noticeably clay , to be brought into the area . A corresponding need also arose for the resulting fragile goods i.e. pottery to be taken away from the area . This need had given rise in the mid to late 18th century of the construction of the Trent & Mersey Canal ( T & M ) and its various branches . Opened in 1777 it was a spectacular success and paid dividends reaching 75 % in 1822 . By 1845 this had fallen to a still impressive 30 % despite the onset of railway development in the North West of England . In 1836 the canal carried 184 @,@ 500 long tons ( 187 @,@ 461 t ; 206 @,@ 640 short tons ) of goods away and brought in 143 @,@ 610 long tons ( 145 @,@ 914 t ; 160 @,@ 843 short tons ) . 
 It was the Trent & Mersey Canal company that built the first railway in north Staffordshire when in 1776 it was granted powers to build a railway , or plateway , from Caldon Low limestone quarries to the canal basin at <unk> in the Churnet Valley . 
 = = Formation of the company = = 
 The Railway Mania of 1845 found the Potteries still without a railway , although the surrounding towns of Stafford , Crewe , Derby and Macclesfield were all connected to the fledgling railway system . The Staffordshire Potteries Railway promoted a route from Macclesfield to the Grand Junction Railway mainline at Norton Bridge plus a spur to Crewe . At the same time the Churnet Valley Railway promoted a line from Macclesfield to Derby with a branch to Stoke . After these two companies applied for the necessary powers to build the lines , Parliament suggested a pause of a year " to afford time for consideration and for maturing some more complete scheme for the accommodation of that important district " . 
 The two companies decided to join forces to make a new approach to Parliament . They also incorporated in the scheme a proposal to join the Trent Valley Railway into the Potteries . To do this they promoted the North Staffordshire or Churnet Valley and Trent Junction Railway . This prospective company issued its prospectus on 30 April 1845 from offices at 1 Old Palace Yard , Westminster , London . There was to be a share capital of £ 2 @,@ 350 @,@ 000 ( £ 210 million in 2015 ) . in £ 20 shares ( 117 @,@ 500 shares ) . 
 The prospectus outlined the NSR 's plans for two main lines . The Pottery Line running from a junction with the Manchester & Birmingham railway at Congleton to the Grand Junction Railway at Colwich was promoted , as ' giving the most ample accommodation to the towns of Tunstall , Burslem , Newcastle @-@ under @-@ Lyme , Hanley , Stoke , Fenton , Longton and Stone ' . The Churnet Line was to run from Macclesfield though Leek , Cheadle and Uttoxeter to join the Midland Railway line between Burton @-@ upon @-@ Trent and Derby forming a direct link between Manchester and Derby . 
 The company was formally incorporated in April 1845 under the shorter name of the North Staffordshire Railway . As a way of eliminating opposition to the Company 's Bills in Parliament , and to allow it to promote a line to Liverpool , the company made an agreement to take over the Trent & Mersey Canal Company . This was achieved by T & M shares being swapped for preference shares in the NSR . These preference shares paid a guaranteed annual dividend of 5 % once the entire railway was open . The total purchase cost of the T & M to the NSR £ 1 @,@ 170 @,@ 000 . 
 On 25 November 1845 the Derby and Crewe Railway was absorbed into the NSR Scheme . This was a line that was being supported by the Grand Junction Railway ( <unk> ) running between Derby and Crewe via Uttoxeter and Stoke . It was to eliminate the opposition of the Grand Junction company to the other NSR proposals that the NSR agreed to absorb the Derby and Crewe . However part of the deal was that the proposed line from Harecastle to Liverpool was abandoned . Despite having arranged to purchase the T & M canal for a considerable sum , to obtain support for the Liverpool extension the NSR agreed to the <unk> demand . All that survived of the NSR Liverpool plan was the short branch to Sandbach from Harecastle . 
 = = Parliamentary approval and construction = = 
 On 26 June 1846 , the three NSR acts were passed with the total of £ 2 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 in share capital being shared amongst the three lines , with seven years allowed for the completion of each line . The North Staffordshire Railway ( Pottery Line ) Act provided for the construction of the line from Macclesfield to Colwich with branches to Norton Bridge , Newcastle , Silverdale and Crewe . This act also vested the Trent & Mersey Canal in the NSR . Allocated capital for this work was £ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . The second act , the North Staffordshire Railway ( Harecastle and Sandbach ) Act provided for the construction of the line from Harecastle to Sandbach , allocated capital for these works was £ 200 @,@ 000 . Finally the North Staffordshire Railway ( Churnet Valley Line ) Act authorised the construction of the line from North Rode to Burton , a branch from Tutbury to Willington Junction near Derby , and the line between Uttoxeter and Stoke ; £ 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 of capital was allocated to this . 
 To start the construction work , there was an official ' cutting of the first sod ' ceremony . This took place in September 1846 The site chosen for the ceremony was a field in Etruria . A roped off enclosure for directors was created and the remainder of the field was reserved for invited guests . A mile long procession headed by John Lewis Ricardo , Member of Parliament for Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent and chairman of the NSR Company , formed . On Ricardo 's arrival , the crowds broke through the roped off area and Ricardo was pushed and shoved . During the actual cutting he buckled the silver spade and had difficulty removing the sod . Finally , his hat blew away . 
 Construction work went ahead under the supervision of the Consulting Engineer , George Parker Bidder . By February 1847 there were 1 @,@ 318 men and 60 horses working between Macclesfield and Colwich and they had removed 80 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 61 @,@ 000 m3 ) of earth , driven 843 yards ( 771 m ) of tunnel heading and erected 12 @,@ 000 yards ( 10 @,@ 973 m ) yards of fencing . 
 On 2 July 1847 the North Staffordshire Railway Act was passed . The act was necessary was because of problems encountered with the construction of the Crewe branch . The opportunity was taken to authorise several other deviations and small branches . It also consolidated the previous acts and importantly , forced the NSR to ensure that all lines were completed by specifying that ordinary dividends were not to exceed 5 % until the Churnet Valley and Willington lines had been opened . 
 Work continued apace and by 3 April 1848 the first freight trains were run . Passenger services started on 17 April 1848 and the first passenger train left the temporary station at <unk> Road , Stoke , hauled by locomotive No. 1 Dragon , heading for a temporary station at Norton Bridge on the London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) . The opening of the line gave the Potteries a railway link with Birmingham and London which made it an instant success with the public . Profits for the first two months were £ 1 @,@ 668 ' exceeding expectations ' . 
 The remaining lines under the original Acts were opened in stages but all were completed and open by the end of 1852 when the Stoke to Newcastle and Newcastle to <unk> sections opened . A few months after the opening of the first line , the imposing permanent station in Winton Square , Stoke was opened on 9 October 1848 . Stoke station then became the headquarters of the NSR . 
 = = Later lines = = 
 Later branches constructed in the nineteenth century included lines from Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent to Congleton via Smallthorne and Biddulph ; Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent to Leek ; Newcastle to Silverdale , Keele and Market Drayton ( junction with the Great Western Railway ) ; Alsager to Audley , <unk> and Keele , and Rocester to Ashbourne . 
 Also opened in the nineteenth century was the only NSR line to achieve any degree of fame , the Potteries Loop Line from Etruria via Hanley , <unk> , Burslem , Tunstall , Pitts Hill , <unk> and Goldenhill to Kidsgrove Liverpool Rd . Authorised in stages in 1864 – 5 , it opened to traffic in 1873 . Its fame came from several mentions and a description of a journey on a Burslem to Hanley train in Arnold Bennett 's The Old Wives ' Tale . 
 Twentieth century construction included a branch from Leek to <unk> Lowe via <unk> from where the 2 ft 6 in ( 762 mm ) narrow gauge Leek and Manifold Valley Light Railway ( L & MV ) was constructed through the <unk> and Manifold river valleys to Hulme End near Hartington . Although the L & MV was nominally independent the NSR both worked and operated the line . 
 Finally in 1910 , a very short line was built from Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent to Trentham Park . It was authorised as part of an alternative line to Newcastle @-@ under @-@ Lyme but construction work beyond Trentham was quickly abandoned owing to rising costs . The same act of parliament also transferred the Cheadle Railway to the NSR . The Cheadle Railway was a small local company constructed with NSR 's backing , built at great cost over a period of twelve years . It was a short line from Cresswell to Cheadle , this line , only four miles long , included a very difficult tunnel . The line was opened from Cresswell to <unk> 7 November 1892 and to Cheadle , 1 January 1901 . 
 A full list of authorisation and opening dates for sections of the NSR is given below . 
 = = Macclesfield , Bollington and Marple Railway = = 
 The Macclesfield , Bollington and Marple Railway ( MB & M ) was a joint line which the NSR participated in . A short line of just under 11 miles ( 18 km ) it was opened with the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway ( MS & L ) in 1869 to give the NSR to Manchester independently of the LNWR . As relationships between the NSR and the LNWR grew better the reason for the line lessened as the MB & M route to Manchester was 5 miles longer than the LNWR route . > Both passenger and freight traffic was handled by the MS & L ( or as it later became the Great Central Railway ) with the buildings maintained by the NSR . 
 = = Running powers with other companies = = 
 As a company with only a small route mileage the NSR made extensive use of running powers and in exchange granted running powers to other companies . 
 The earliest agreements were reached with the LNWR . In 1849 an agreement was reached where LNWR traffic could work over the NSR system but in exchange a certain amount of the LNWR London trains had to be routed via Stoke . These Manchester to London Euston restaurant car expresses were unique in often being hauled by NSR tank engines from Manchester to Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent where the LNWR express engines took over for the run via Stone , Sandon , Colwich , and the main line to London Euston . The NSR received a payment for every through passenger on these trains and employed a small army of ticket inspectors to examine and clip ( with its distinctive ' P ' clip ) every ticket during the Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent station stop . The agreement did give the NSR access to destinations such as Llandudno , Manchester , Stafford , Wolverhampton and Buxton . NSR goods trains were able to run to places such as Liverpool and Rugby . The LNWR also used running rights over the Uttoxeter – Ashbourne line to run through coaches from Buxton to London via Nuneaton . As well as the running power agreements with the LNWR there was a very short joint line of 32 chains ( 644 m ) at Middlewood and three jointly owned stations ; Ashbourne , Colwich and Macclesfield Goods . 
 Equally important in terms of traffic but not as extensive in terms of route were the running power agreements with the Midland Railway ( MR ) . For the NSR passenger traffic into Derby and Burton was authorised and good traffic as far afield as Wellingborough . The arrangements with these two companies allowed the NSR to run its longest passenger service , between Derby and Llandudno . These trains only ran 44 @.@ 5 miles ( 71 @.@ 6 km ) on NSR rails , with 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) over MR but with the majority , 67 @.@ 5 miles ( 108 @.@ 6 km ) over the LNWR . 
 In 1867 , an independent local company built the Stafford and Uttoxeter Railway , later incorporated into the Great Northern Railway ( GNR ) . The GNR built its GNR Derbyshire and Staffordshire Extension from Nottingham and Derby <unk> via Mickleover to <unk> Junction with running powers over the NSR from <unk> , through Uttoxeter , to <unk> Junction . The GNR granted the NSR running rights to Nottingham , Colwick , Leicester and Peterborough . Apart from excursion trains to Nottingham and goods trains to Colwick , the NSR did not take advantage of these powers . 
 Although the NSR had joint ownership of the MB & M with the MS & L the NSR did not have running powers over the rest of the MS & L and was content to let the MS & L handle all traffic north of Middlewood . Finally with both the NSR and the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) expanding into Shropshire running rights were agreed for NSR trains to run to Hodnet and Wellington and in return GWR goods trains could run to Stoke . 
 = = Amalgamation proposals and financial strength = = 
 There were several proposals made either to the NSR or by it , to merge or lease or sell the company to other railway companies . The first was in 1849 when the LNWR , using its financial strength , made suggestions about a merger . To avoid this the NSR had to agree to the running powers outlined above . A further attempt in 1851 got as far as a parliamentary bill being submitted for amalgamation until the select committee appointed to look at the bill reported against the idea . The LNWR made a further attempt in 1855 which failed because of concerted opposition by the MR , MS & L and GWR . Less than twenty years later , in 1870 , these four companies all combined to look at taking over the NSR following a decision by the NSR board to sell or lease the company . The four rival companies were unable to agree on who would take what share of the NSR and the proposal floundered . 
 In 1875 the MS & L proposed an amalgamation which initially found favour with the NSR board and shareholders but eventually fell through when the MS & L finances were investigated and it was found that the MS & L was no stronger financially than the NSR . Only two years later some NSR shareholders proposed a merger with the MR , the board dismissed the proposal with the chairman reminding shareholders that 
 The NSR had a small mileage and had to collect traffic for the large companies which surrounded it . They made profits from good mileages while the NSR had to do a great deal for comparatively little return . 
 The quote about little return was accurate . In 1877 the NSR dividend was only 2 % compared with the dividend of 6 % paid by the LNWR to its shareholders . A year later the dividend fell to its lowest ever point of only 1 ⅝ % . However it recovered and after 1881 never fell below 3 % . In 1891 the NSR paid a 5 % dividend for the first time , a level not to be reached again until 1913 . 
 In 1913 the NSR ranked as the eighteenth largest company by route mileage with 216 miles ( 348 km ) . Passenger numbers stood at 7 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 and goods traffic handled by the NSR consisted of 1 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 778 @,@ 082 t ) of goods , nearly 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 long tons ( 4 @,@ 064 @,@ 188 t ) of coal and coke and over 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 032 @,@ 094 t ) of other minerals . Among the 1 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 778 @,@ 082 t ) of goods was 150 @,@ 000 long tons ( 152 @,@ 407 t ) of pottery , over five @-@ sixths of the entire production in Britain . 
 = = Grouping = = 
 Under the Railways Act 1921 , the NSR was one of the eight major companies designated to form the North Western , Midland and West Scottish Group . This group became the London , Midland and Scottish Railway ( LMS ) . The act came into force on 1 January 1923 but along with the Caledonian Railway , the NSR amalgamation into the LMS was delayed until 1 July 1923 due to certain legal requirements not being completed by the due date . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 In January 1885 , a London and North Western Railway express passenger train collided with a freight train near Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent . One person was killed . 
 = = Other interests = = 
 In common with most other British railway companies , the NSR decided early on that it was advantageous to carry out its own maintenance work in all departments and also to undertake much of its own new construction work . Stoke railway works were opened in 1849 , capable of producing carriages , wagons and other equipment . Construction of locomotives followed later , commencing in 1864 . 
 Ownership of the Trent & Mersey canal made the NSR the biggest canal owning railway with 130 miles ( 209 km ) of waterways owned . The T & M owned Rudyard Lake which the NSR made use of as a leisure complex , building a golf course , in 1905 , on land adjoining the lake . A further area of interest , again via ownership of the T & M , was the lease on Caldon Low quarries . Associated with the quarry was the 3 ft 6 in ( 1 @,@ 067 mm ) tramway that ran from the quarries to <unk> making the NSR the operator of lines of three different gauges . 
 Although the NSR principally served the urban areas of the Potteries , it did promote the area for tourism , especially the Churnet Valley which local hoteliers had labelled as " Staffordshire 's little Switzerland " . The company issued a 150 @-@ page guide called Picturesque Staffordshire to support this promotion and dispel the widespread held idea that the county was dull and bleak In addition to the tourist traffic generated the NSR owned three hotels ; the North Stafford in Stoke ( opposite Stoke station ) , the Churnet Valley in Leek and the Hotel Rudyard at Rudyard . 
 = = Officers of the company = = 
 = = Motive power and rolling stock = = 
 = = = Locomotives = = = 
 NSR motive power came from a mixture of sources . Before the establishment of Stoke works there was a complete reliance on outside contractors . The first locomotives were either purchased from contractors building the line or firms such as Sharp Brothers and Company , B. Hick and Son , Kitson , Thompson and Hewitson , the Vulcan Foundry or Jones and Potts . 
 Originally the resident engineers were responsible for the locomotive stock and the first four holders of this post were all primarily civil engineers . In 1863 the new general manager , Morris , commissioned an outside report on the NSR locomotive fleet which recommended the rebuilding of 50 engines . By the time this report was produced a new engineer , Johnson , had been appointed . He undertook the improvements but the results were unsatisfactory and Johnson left in 1870 after only five years in post . The only significant event of Johnson 's tenure was the building of the first engines at Stoke works when three 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0T engines were built in 1868 . Johnson 's successor , Dodds , fared no better as his patented wedge motion , a type of valve gear , was unsuccessful . Dodds was dismissed in 1875 and a new post of locomotive superintendent created with a locomotive engineer , Angus , in charge . Although only in post for two years Angus replaced all the wedge motions with Stephenson valve gear . 
 There followed a long period of locomotive construction internally with all locomotives between 1875 and 1900 coming from the company works . The vast majority of these being tank engines although a small number of tender engines were constructed . Most engines , whether tank or tender locomotives were built with either 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 or 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 wheel arrangements . An urgent need for heavier goods engines prompted the company to go to contractors and a small number of 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 designs were purchased from Nasmyth , Wilson and Company . In 1903 five 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 2T engines were purchased from Vulcan Foundry and with the exception of two locomotives for shunting purchased from Kerr Stuart in 1919 these were the last engines not to be built by the company at Stoke . 
 Apart from engine No 1 of 1848 being named Dragon only two other NSR engines were ever named , in 1882 Class C 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 No. 55 was named Colin Minton Campbell and Class C No. 54 John Bramley Moore after the chairman and deputy chairman of the company , respectively . 
 The NSR also used a small number of railmotors with three being purchased in 1905 from Beyer , Peacock and Company . They were used on routes such as the Stoke – Newcastle service but were not a success . The vehicles did survive until grouping but had been taken out of service for some time some years earlier . In addition to the NSR locomotives were the two engines of the Leek & Manifold and the three engines that worked the Caldon Low quarries . The former were purchased from Kitson and Company and the latter from Henry Hughes and W. G. Bagnall . 
 At grouping 196 steam locomotives including the L & MV and Caldon Low engines were absorbed into the LMS along with the three railmotors and one battery electric locomotive . This last engine was built at Stoke in 1917 for shunting the copper works at <unk> . Four engines under construction at Stoke in 1923 were completed and also added to the LMS stock . Although many of the locomotives were not old , due to the LMS policy of standardisation all NSR engines had been withdrawn from service by 1939 . The one exception was the battery electric shunting locomotive which remained in service until 1963 . 
 Two NSR locomotives are preserved . NSR No. 2 , an 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 2T New L class ( one of the four constructed in 1923 ) and the battery electric locomotive . Both formed part of the national collection at the National Railway Museum but in 2016 ownership of the New L class locomotive was transferred to the <unk> Railway where the locomotive is now on display . 
 = = = = Locomotive depots = = = = 
 The largest locomotive depot was at Stoke , with 125 engines at grouping . The next largest was Alsager with an allocation of 15 engines . Other NSR depots existed at Macclesfield , Derby , Uttoxeter , Burton and Crewe . Stoke also had sub @-@ sheds at Market Drayton , <unk> and Ashbourne . NSR engines were also sub @-@ <unk> at other companies depots , with arrangements existing at the LNWR sheds at Stafford , Liverpool Edge Hill and Manchester Longsight and the GNR shed at Nottingham Colwick . 
 = = = = Locomotive liveries = = = = 
 Up to 1882 locomotives were a bright green with black and white lining with a Staffordshire knot emblem on the tank or tender sides . Longbottom introduced a new livery of a red brown with black , yellow and vermilion lining . Longbottom was succeeded by Adams who changed the livery once more to a crimson shade called Madder <unk> yellow and vermilion lining . The knot emblem was replaced by the company coat of arms and the words North Stafford . 
 = = = Coaching stock = = = 
 The NSR coaching stock was , even until grouping , predominantly four and six wheeled vehicles . Four @-@ wheeled carriages were the norm from the start and the last were constructed in the 1880s , although by then they had progressed from the <unk> coaches of the 1840s with the introduction of the communication cord in 1869 and the simple vacuum brake in 1883 . The first bogie coaches were introduced in 1906 for use on the Derby – Llandudno service and these were followed by further examples until 1923 . By 1919 all carriages , except 13 four @-@ wheelers used on miners trains , had been fitted with steam heating and a number of vehicles had been fitted with through pipes to allow use in trains equipped with Westinghouse brakes . Most carriages were constructed at Stoke but some were purchased from companies such as the Metropolitan Carriage , Wagon and Finance Company . 
 One area were the NSR was a pioneer was in the use of electrical lighting being the largest of only three British railway companies to switch from oil to electric lighting and not use any form of gas lighting . The first coach was fitted in 1897 and new stock constructed from 1899 had electric lighting as standard . Conversion of the remaining stock was slow and in 1910 there were still some oil lit carriages in service . 
 = = = = Coaching liveries = = = = 
 Coaching stock was originally claret but in 1875 was changed to Victoria Brown and white ( except for branch line trains which carried an all over Victoria Brown livery ) with gold and blue lining . Victoria Brown was the same red brown colour as Longbottom had introduced for NSR locomotives . In 1882 waist panels were additionally painted white . This colour scheme lasted until 1896 when it was changed to an overall Victoria Lake ( brown ) colour with gold and blue lining . Adams changed the livery to Madder Lake in 1903 to match the locomotives , the lining became yellow and red . A final minor change was to paint the waist panels of first class compartments cream to distinguish them . A constant presence was the company coat of arms being displayed on the coach sides . 
 = = = Goods stock = = = 
 Over its life the NSR built or bought many thousands of goods wagons . Early wagons had dumb buffers with spring buffers being introduced from 1870 . Early wagons were not of high capacity e.g. typical open wagons were only of 4 long tons ( 4 @.@ 1 t ) <unk> but capacities grew to 10 long tons ( 10 t ) on average by 1923 . 
 The NSR handed over to the LMS 6 @,@ 612 goods wagons of which over 5 @,@ 000 were open wagons for the transport of coal and other minerals . This number was dwarfed by the number of wagons owned by the pits , ironworks , other industrial operations and traders in the Stoke area . An unusual set of wagons to be seen were the bright yellow with red lettering vans owned by the Barnum and Bailey circus who had their main English depot in Stoke . 
 = = = = Goods liveries = = = = 
 Goods vehicles were painted red oxide with white lettering and a white Staffordshire knot . The letters <unk> with only two full stops were carried in small letters . From 1912 the letters were increased in size but changed to just N S with a central knot and no full stops . 
 = = The Knotty = = 
 The NSR is one of the few railways to become the subject of a play . In 1966 , Peter Cheeseman , artistic director of The Victoria Theatre , Stoke wrote a musical documentary about the NSR called The Knotty . Featured in the play were the voices of several NSR staff who had been interviewed especially for the play . The script with introductory notes by Cheeseman was published in 1970 . Sound recordings of the production , The Knotty - a musical documentary , was released on LP by Argo <unk> ( <unk> 125 ) in 1970 and as a digital version in 2014 it was digitised by <unk> Digital . 
 = = NSR main lines and branch lines — opening dates = = 
 Ricardo , North Staffordshire Railway chairman described the network as being like " a small octopus " ; but not one NSR station was more than 30 miles ( 48 km ) from Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent . Dates of authorisation and opening are given in the following table . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Fembot ( song ) = 
 " Fembot " is a song by Swedish recording artist Robyn , taken from her fifth studio album , Body Talk Pt . 1 ( 2010 ) . The song was written by Robyn and Klas Åhlund , and produced by the latter . It was inspired by Robyn 's personal experience of entering her thirties and contemplating children . With the song , she also argues against the notion that humans and robots are separate , explaining that technology has become more organic . " Fembot " is a song with an R & B vibe , and features Robyn rapping several double entendres in the verses , while proclaiming that " <unk> have feelings too " in the chorus . The song was released on 13 April 2010 as one of three promotional singles before the album 's release . 
 " Fembot " was met with positive reviews from critics , with some of them highlighting its humor and lyrical content . Critics also noted the continued " android theme " present on a few of Robyn 's previous songs , including the Röyksopp collaboration " The Girl and the Robot " ( 2009 ) . Commercially , " Fembot " performed well on the charts , managing to reach number three on the Sverigetopplistan chart and number ten in Norway . Robyn performed the song for the first time on talk show Skavlan in April 2010 , and later included it on the set lists for the All Hearts Tour ( 2010 ) and the Body Talk Tour ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with music webzine Pitchfork , Robyn was asked if " Fembot " represented a dislike for the notion that humans and robots are separate , and she responded by saying , " The classic , dystopian theory about the future is not really as interesting to me . Like the book I , Robot is all about these robots that basically went nuts , and it 's always because they were wrongly programmed by humans . It 's like a mirror of our own psyche . It 's almost like the wrong program could be a mental disease . " She elaborated that " Fembot " is not " really about the future or about space or anything " , saying that it is about the present time . " Technology is becoming more organic , and using the word ' fembot ' or ' robot ' in a song makes things more human to me " , she said . In an interview with music website Stereogum , she explained that the song also chronicles her personal experience of " turning 30 and contemplating children " . She elaborated , saying , 
 The song was uploaded the song onto Robyn 's official website on 17 March 2010 . It was later released to digital retailers in the United States on 13 April 2010 , and in Sweden three days later . It was one of three promotional singles released before the release of Body Talk Pt . 1 and the official first single , " Dancing on My Own " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Fembot " was written by Robyn and Klas Åhlund , and produced by the latter . It is in the key of D major and a tempo of 123 beats per minute with a " heavy R & B vibe " . According to Daniel Kreps of Rolling Stone , the song continues the " android theme " previously present on Robyn 's track , " <unk> " , the interlude " Bionic Woman " and the Röyksopp collaboration , " The Girl and the Robot " ( 2009 ) . DJ Ron Slomowicz of About.com compared its musical and lyrical style to that of previous single " <unk> Bitches " ( 2007 ) . According to Jer Fairall of PopMatters , the song utilizes " a spare , <unk> two @-@ note synth hook and a squelching electronic rhythm . " Robyn 's vocals in the song are layered with Auto @-@ Tune and vocoders . During the verses , she adapts her distinctive rapping style , and exclaims lyrical lines such as " I gotta lotta automatic booty applications " and " I 'm a very scientifically advanced hot mama . " Nate Chinen of The New York Times wrote that Robyn " rap [ s ] a series of double entendres in a digitally processed purr " , and then proclaims her " <unk> fixation on androids " in the chorus ; " I ’ ve got some news for you / <unk> have feelings too " . According to Lindsey Fortier of Billboard , " Fembot " sees Robyn " get [ ting ] in touch with her urban side " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Michael Gragg of MusicOMH wrote that " Though the lyrics are daft [ ... ] it 's exuberance and general sense of fun is so infectious that when the chorus kicks in you barely notice what she 's saying . " Jer Fairall of PopMatters wrote , " Look no further than the wry chorus hook of “ Fembot ” for proof of Robyn ’ s deftly subversive sense of humor . " Fairall also pointed out that " [ The chorus ] might hint , at first , in the direction of some Blade Runner @-@ esque sci @-@ fi pathos , but Robyn turns it towards a canny meta @-@ commentary on the fluid sense of authenticity that pervades 21st century pop stardom . " Fairall , however , thought that " the verses are nothing more than an inventory of the titular ‘ bot ’ s synthetic virtues . " Ben Norman of About.com selected the song as his favorite track on Body Talk Pt . 1 , and wrote that " ' Fembot ' is the incredibly quirky and well @-@ written Robyn @-@ rap track that needs to be heard to be believed . " Christopher Muther of The Boston Globe praised the song for having " one of the most entertaining lyrics to emerge this year " . 
 " Fembot " debuted at number seven on the Sverigetopplistan chart on the issue dated 23 April 2010 , becoming the week 's highest debut . The following week , it rose four positions to number three , which became its peak . The song spent seven weeks on the chart , before dropping out in June 2010 . In Norway , " Fembot " debuted at number nineteen on the VG @-@ lista chart and peaked at number ten . The song debuted and peaked at number ninety @-@ nine on the European Hot 100 Singles chart on the issue dated 15 May 2010 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Robyn performed the song on 16 April 2010 on the Norwegian @-@ Swedish talk show Skavlan . A writer from music website Stereogum wrote that Robyn did the song very well live , and commented ; " With just a keyboardist doubling as robot hypeman and two drummers , the performance is extremely faithful to the recorded version . It fact , it doesn ’ t really pop until the end and we get two seconds of Robyn doing the robot . " Robyn also performed the song on the All Hearts joint tour with American singer Kelis during the summer of 2010 . Robyn opened the show with " Fembot " , which was preceded by a computerized voice counting down . Joanna <unk> of MTV Iggy wrote that the song " set the tone for the futuristic electro light show to follow " . The song was also included on the set list for the Body Talk Tour . Similar to the All Hearts Tour , the show commenced with robotic voices over the speakers and backed by a heavy beat , before Robyn began singing " Fembot " as multicolored strobes lit the stage . However , for the second North American leg and onwards , " Time Machine " took over as the opening number . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Fembot " – 3 : 35 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Robyn – lyrics 
 Klas Åhlund – music , lyrics , instruments , programming and production 
 Niklas <unk> – mixing 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Johnnie Johnson ( RAF officer ) = 
 Air vice @-@ marshal James Edgar Johnson CB , CBE , DSO & two bars , DFC & Bar ( 9 March 1915 – 30 January 2001 ) , nicknamed " Johnnie " , was a Royal Air Force ( RAF ) pilot and flying ace — defined as a pilot that has shot down five or more enemy aircraft in aerial combat — who flew and fought during the Second World War . 
 Born in 1915 , Johnson grew up and was educated in the East Midlands , where he qualified as an engineer . A sportsman , Johnson broke his collarbone while playing rugby , an injury that later complicated his ambitions of becoming a fighter pilot . Johnson had been interested in aviation since his youth and applied to join the RAF . He was initially rejected , first on social , and then on medical grounds . In August 1939 he was eventually accepted . The injury problems , however , returned during his early training and flying career , resulting in him missing the Battle of France and the Battle of Britain between May and October 1940 . 
 In 1940 Johnson had an operation to reset his collarbone , and began flying regularly . He took part in the offensive sweeps over German @-@ occupied Europe from 1941 to 1944 , almost without rest . Johnson was involved in heavy aerial fighting during this period . His combat tour included participation in the Dieppe Raid , Combined Bomber Offensive , Battle of Normandy , Operation Market Garden , the Battle of the Bulge and the Western Allied invasion of Germany . Johnson progressed to the rank of group captain by the end of the war . 
 Johnson was credited with 34 individual victories over enemy aircraft , as well as seven shared victories , three shared probable , 10 damaged , three shared damaged and one destroyed on the ground . Johnson flew 700 operational sorties and engaged enemy aircraft on 57 occasions . Included in his list of individual victories were 14 Messerschmitt Bf 109s and 20 Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190s destroyed making him the most successful RAF ace against the Fw 190 . This score made him the highest scoring Western Allied fighter ace against the German Luftwaffe . 
 Johnson continued his career in the RAF after the war , and served in the Korean War , retiring in 1966 , with the rank of air vice marshal . He maintained an interest in aviation and did public speaking on the subject as well as entering into the business of aviation art . Johnnie Johnson remained active until his death from cancer in 2001 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Johnson was born 9 March 1915 in Barrow upon Soar , Leicestershire , to Alfred Johnson and Beatrice May Johnson . He lived and was brought up in Melton Mowbray , where his father was a policeman . Alfred Johnson was Inspector by the mid @-@ 1930s . One evening Oswald Mosley , the leader of the British Union of Fascists , held a meeting in the town . The license for the meeting expired at 22 : 00 at which time Alfred Johnson went alone and ejected the Fascists from the building . 
 Johnson was educated at Camden Street Junior School and Loughborough Grammar School . Johnson 's uncle , Edgar Charles Rossell , who had won the Military Cross with the Royal Fusiliers in 1916 , paid for Johnson 's education at Loughborough . According to his brother Ross , during his time there , Johnson was nearly expelled after refusing punishment for a misdemeanour , believing it to be unjustified : " he was very principled and simply dug his heels in " . Among Johnson 's hobbies and interests were shooting and sports ; he shot rabbits and birds in the local countryside . 
 Johnson attended the University of Nottingham , where he qualified as a civil engineer , aged 22 . Johnson became a surveyor at Melton Mowbray Urban District Council before progressing to assistant engineer with Chigwell Urban District Council at Loughton . In 1938 , Johnson broke his collarbone playing rugby for Chingford Rugby Club ; the injury was wrongly set and did not heal properly , which later caused him difficulty at the start of his flying career . 
 = = Joining the RAF = = 
 Keen to follow up his interest in aviation , Johnson started taking flying lessons at his own expense . He applied to join the Auxiliary Air Force ( AAF ) but encountered some of the social problems that were rife in British society at the time . Johnson strongly felt he was rejected on the grounds of his class status . Johnson 's fortunes were to improve . As the chances of war increased in the aftermath of the Munich Crisis , the standards of the RAF were relaxed , however , as the service expanded and brought in men from ordinary social backgrounds . Johnson re @-@ applied to the AAF . He was informed that sufficient pilots were already available but there were some vacancies in the balloon squadrons . Johnson rejected the offer . 
 Inspired by some Chingford friends who had joined , Johnson applied again to join the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve ( RAFVR ) . The RAFVR was a means to enter the RAF for young men with ordinary backgrounds . All volunteer aircrew were made Sergeants on with the possibility of a commission . He was rejected on the grounds that there were too many applicants for vacancies and his injury made him unsuitable for flight operations . He then joined the Leicestershire Yeomanry , where the injury was not a bar to recruitment . He joined the Territorial Army unit because , though he was in a reserved occupation , if war came , he had " no intention of seeing out the duration building air raid shelters or supervising decontamination squads " . Johnson was content in the Yeomanry . One day while riding through Burleigh , Berkshire on annual camp Johnson took a detour to RAF Wittering in Cambridgeshire . Upon seeing a line of Hawker Hurricane fighters Johnson remarked " If I 've got to fight Hitler I 'd sooner fight him in one of those than on a bloody great horse ! " . 
 = = = Flight training = = = 
 In August 1939 , Johnson was accepted by the RAFVR and began training at weekends at the airfield Stapleford Tawney , a satellite airfield of RAF North Weald . There he received ground instruction on airmanship . Taught by retired service pilots of 21 Elementary & Reserve Flying Training School , Johnson trained on the de Havilland Tiger Moth biplane . Upon the outbreak of war in September 1939 , with the rank of sergeant , Johnson entrained for Cambridge . He arrived at the 2nd Initial Training Wing to begin flight instruction . He was interviewed by senior officers in which he said his profession and knowledge of topography , surveying and mapping would make him more useful in a reconnaissance role . The wing commander agreed , but nonetheless , Johnson was selected for fighter pilot training and given the service number <unk> with the rank of Sergeant . Johnson and several hundred others were entrained for Cambridge and the 2 initial Training Wing . While assigned here Johnson learned basic military drill , sometimes given the slang name " square bashing " . 
 By December 1939 , Johnson began his initial training at 22 EFTS ( Elementary Flying Training School ) , Cambridge . He flew only three times in December 1939 and eight in January 1940 , all as second pilot . On 29 February 1940 , Johnson flew solo for the first time in Tiger Moth <unk> . On 15 March and 24 April , his passed a 50 @-@ minute flight test followed by two night flights the following day . The chief flying instructor passed him on 6 May . He then moved to 5 FTS at Sealand before completing training at 7 OTU ( Operational Training Unit ) – RAF Hawarden in Wales flying the Miles Master <unk> where he earned his instrument , navigation , night @-@ flying ratings and practised forced landings . After training was complete on 7 August 1940 , Johnson received his " wings " and was immediately inducted into the General Duties Branch of the RAF as a pilot officer with 55 hours and 5 minutes solo flying . 
 0n 19 August 1940 , Johnson flew a Spitfire for the first time . Over the next weeks he practised handling , formation flying , attacks , battle climbs , aerobatics and dogfighting . During his training flights , he stalled and crashed a Spitfire . Johnson had his harness straps on too loose , and wrenched his shoulders – revealing that his earlier rugby injury had not healed properly . The Spitfire did a ground loop , ripping off one of the undercarriage legs and forcing the other up through the port main plane . The commanding officer excused Johnson , for the " short airfield " was difficult to land on for an inexperienced pilot . Johnson got the impression , however , that he would be watched closely , and felt that if he made another mistake , he would be " certainly washed out " . Johnson tried to pack the injured shoulder with wool , held in place by adhesive tape . He also tightened the straps to reduce vibrations . Johnson found he had lost his " feel " in his right hand , and it became numb . When he practised dives , the pressure also aggravated his shoulder . He often tried to fly using his left hand only , but the Spitfire would have to be handled with both hands during anything other than simple manoeuvres . Despite the difficulties with his injuries , on 28 August 1940 , the course was complete . Johnson had 205 @.@ 25 hours on operational types including 23 @.@ 50 on the Spitfire . 
 = = = = Injury resurfaces = = = = 
 After training , in August 1940 , he was briefly posted to No. 19 Squadron as a probationary pilot officer . Due to equipment difficulties , 19 Squadron were unable to complete Johnson 's training and he left the unit . On 6 September 1940 Johnson was posted to No. 616 Squadron at RAF Coltishall . Squadron Leader <unk> " Billy " Burton took Johnson on a 50 @-@ minute training flight in <unk> . After the flight Burton impressed upon Johnson the difficulties of deflection shooting and the technique of a killing shot from line @-@ astern or near line @-@ astern positions ; the duty of the number two whose job was not to shoot down enemy aircraft but to ensure the leader 's tail was safe . Burton also directed Johnson to some critical tactical essentials ; the importance of keeping good battle formation and the tactical use of sun , cloud and height . Five days later , Johnson flew an X @-@ Raid patrol in Spitfire <unk> , qualifying for the Battle of Britain clasp . 
 Johnson 's old injury continued to trouble him and he found flying high performance aircraft like the Spitfire extremely painful . RAF medics gave him two options ; he could have an operation that would correct the problem , but this meant he would miss the Battle of Britain , or becoming a training instructor flying the light Tiger Moth . Johnson opted for the operation . He had hoped for discreet treatment , but word soon reached the CO , and Johnson was taken off flying duties and sent to the RAF Hospital at Rauceby . He did not return to the squadron until 28 December 1940 . CO Burton took Johnson up for a test flight on 31 December 1940 in Miles Magister <unk> . After the 45 @-@ minute flight , Johnson 's fitness to fly was approved . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Johnson returned to operational flying in early 1941 in 616 Squadron , which was forming part of the Tangmere Wing . Johnson often found himself flying alongside Wing Commander Douglas Bader and Australian ace Tony Gaze . On 15 January 1941 , Johnson , the recently appointed Squadron Leader Burton and Pilot Officer Hugh Dundas , who arrived back at the squadron on 13 September 1940 , took off to offer cover for a convoy off North Coates . The controller vectored the pair onto an enemy aircraft , a Dornier Do 17 . Both attacked the bomber and lost sight of it and each other . Although the controllers intercepted distress signals from the bomber Johnson did not see it crash . They were credited with one enemy aircraft damaged . It was the only time Johnson was to engage a German bomber . By the end of January , Johnson had added another 16 @.@ 35 flying hours on Spitfires . 
 In the opening months , Johnson flew as a night fighter pilot . Using day fighters to act as night fighters without radar was largely unsuccessful in intercepting German bombers during The Blitz ; Johnson 's only action occurred on 22 February 1941 when he damaged a Messerschmitt Bf 110 in Spitfire <unk> , <unk> @-@ F. A week later , Johnson 's squadron was moved to RAF Tangmere on the Channel coast . Johnson was eager to see combat after just 10 @.@ 40 operational hours and welcomed the prospect of meeting the enemy from Tangmere . If the Germans did not resume their assault the Wing was to take the fight to them . 
 In November 1940 Air Marshal Sholto Douglas became AOC ( Air Officer Commanding ) RAF Fighter Command . On 8 December 1940 a directive from the Air Staff called for Sector Offensive Sweeps . It ordered hit @-@ and @-@ run operations over Belgium and France . The operations were to be conducted by three squadrons to harass German air defences . On 10 January 1941 Circus attacks were initiated by sending small bomber formations protected by large numbers of fighters . The escalation of offensive operations throughout 1941 was designed to draw up the Luftwaffe as Douglas ' Command took an increasingly offensive stance . These operations became known as the Circus offensive . Trafford Leigh @-@ Mallory , AOC 11 Group , penned Operations Instruction No. 7 , which he had written on 16 February . Leigh @-@ Mallory outlined six distinct operations for day fighters : Ramrod ( bomber escort with primary goal the destruction of the target ) ; Fighter Ramrod ( The same goal where fighters escorted ground @-@ attack fighters ) ; Roadstead ( Bomber escort and anti @-@ sipping operations ) ; Fighter Roadstead ( the same operation as Roadstead but without bombers ) along with Rhubarb ( poor weather ground attack operation ) and Circus operations ( see glossary ) . 
 = = = Circus Offensives = = = 
 Johnson 's first contact with enemy single @-@ engine fighters did not go as planned . Bader undertook a patrol with Dundas as his number two . Johnson followed in his section as number three with " Nip " <unk> guarding his tail as Red Four . Johnson spotted three Bf 109s a few hundred feet higher and travelling in the same direction . Johnson , forgetting to calmly report the number , type and position of the enemy , shouted , " Look out <unk> ! " ( Bader 's call sign ) . Such a call was only to be used if the pilot in question was in imminent danger of being " bounced " . The Section broke in all directions and headed to Tangmere singly . The mistake brought an embarrassing rebuke from Bader at the debriefing . 
 Johnson flew various operations over France including the Rhubarb ground attack missions which Johnson hated — he considered it a waste of pilots . Several successful fighter pilots had been lost this way . Flight Lieutenant Eric Lock and Wing Commander Paddy Finucane were killed on Rhubarb operations in August 1941 and July 1942 respectively . Squadron leader Robert Stanford Tuck would be captured carrying out a similar operation in January 1942 . During this time , Dundas and other pilots also expressed dissatisfaction with the formation tactics being used in the wing . After a long conversation into the early hours , Bader accepted the suggestions by his senior pilots and agreed to the use of more flexible tactics to lessen the chances of being taken by surprise , or " bounced " . The tactical changes involved operating overlapping line abreast formations similar to the German Finger @-@ four formation . The tactics were used thereafter by RAF pilots in the Wing . 
 The first use of these tactics by the Tangmere Wing was used on 6 May 1941 . The Wing engaged Bf 109Fs from Jagdgeschwader 51 ( Fighter Wing 51 ) , led by Werner Mölders . Noticing the approaching Germans below and behind them , the Spitfires feigned ignorance . Waiting for the optimum moment to turn the tables , Bader called for them to break , and whip around behind the Bf 109s . Unfortunately , while the tactic had been successful in avoiding a surprise attack , the break was mistimed . It left some Bf 109s still behind the Spitfires . In the battle that followed the Wing shot down one Bf 109 and damaged another , although Dundas was shot down for the second time in his career — and once again by Mölders , who had remained behind the British . Dundas was able to nurse his crippled fighter back to base and crash @-@ land . 
 One month later , Johnson gained his first air victory . On 26 June Johnson participated in Circus 24 . Crossing the coast near Gravelines , Bader warned of 24 Bf 109s nearby , southeast , in front of the Wing . The Bf 109s saw the British and turned to attack the lower No. 610 Squadron from the rear . While watching three Bf 109s above him dive to port , Johnson lost sight of his wing commander at 15 @,@ 000 feet . Immediately a Bf 109E flew in front of him and turned slightly to port at a range of 150 yards . After receiving hits , the Bf 109 's hood was jettisoned and the pilot baled out . Several No. 145 Squadron pilots witnessed the victory . He had expended 278 rounds from <unk> 's guns . The Bf 109 was one of five lost by Jagdgeschwader 2 ( Fighter Wing 2 ) that day . 
 A flurry of action followed . On 1 July 1941 he expended 89 rounds and damaged a Bf 109E . Bader 's section was attacked and Johnson out @-@ turned his assailant . Firing , he saw glycol streaming behind it . On 14 July , the Tangmere Wing flew on Circus 48 to St Omer . Losing sight of the squadron , Johnson and his wingman proceeded inland at 3 @,@ 000 feet after spotting three aircraft . Turning in behind them , he identified them as Bf 109Fs . Johnson dived so as to come up and underneath into the enemy 's blind spot . Closing to 15 yards , he gave the trailing Bf 109 a two @-@ second burst . The tail was blown off and his windshield was covered in oil from the Messerschmitt . Johnson saw the other Bf 109s spinning down out of control . Having also lost his wingman , Johnson disengaged . Climbing and crossing the coast at Etaples , Johnson bounced a Bf 109E . Giving chase in a dive to 2 @,@ 000 feet and firing at 150 yards , he observed something flying off the Bf 109 's starboard wing . Johnson could not see any more owing to the oil @-@ covered windscreen and did not make a claim . His second victory was probably Unteroffizier ( Corporal ) R. <unk> , III . / Jagdgeschwader 26 ( Third Group , Fighter Wing 26 ) who was posted missing . 
 On 21 July , Johnson shared in the destruction of another Bf 109 with Pilot Officer <unk> . Johnson 's wingman disappeared during the battle . Sergeant <unk> was mortally wounded but made a wheels @-@ up landing near St Omer . Impressed with his skilful flying while badly wounded , the Germans buried him with full honours . On 23 July , Johnson damaged another Bf 109 . During this battle Adolf Galland , Geschwaderkommodore ( Wing Commander ) of JG 26 was wounded ; his life was saved by a recently installed armour plate behind his head . 
 Johnson took part in the 9 August 1941 mission in which Bader was lost over France . During the sortie , he destroyed a solitary Messerschmitt Bf 109 . Johnson flew as wingman to Dundas in Bader 's section . As the Wing crossed the coast , around 70 Bf 109s were reported in the area , the Luftwaffe aircraft outnumbering Bader 's Wing by 3 : 1 . Spotting a group of Bf 109s 1 @,@ 000 feet below them , Bader led a bounce on a lower group . The formations fell apart and the air battle became a mass of twisting aircraft ; 
 It seemed to me the biggest danger was a collision rather than being shot down , that 's how close we all were . We got the 109s we were bouncing then ( Squadron Leader ) Holden came down with his section , so there were a lot of aeroplanes ... just 50 yards apart . It was awful ... all you could think about was surviving , getting out of that mass of aircraft . 
 Johnson exited the mass of aircraft and was immediately attacked by three Bf 109s . The closest was 100 yards away . Maintaining a steep , tight , spiralling turn , he dived into cloud and immediately headed for Dover . Coming out of the cloud , Johnson saw a lone Bf 109 . Suspecting it to be one of the three that had chased him , he searched for the other two . Seeing nothing , Johnson attacked and shot it down . It was his fourth victory . Johnson ended his month 's tally by adding a probable victory on 21 August . But it had been a bad day and month for the Wing . The much loathed Circus and Rhubarb raids had cost Fighter Command 108 fighters . The Germans lost just 18 . On 4 September 1941 Johnson was promoted to flight lieutenant and awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) . 
 Johnson 's last certain victories of the year were achieved on 21 September 1941 . Escorting Bristol Blenheims to <unk> , the top cover wings failed to rendezvous with the bombers . Near Le Touquet at 15 : 15 and around 20 @,@ 000 feet , Johnson 's section was bounced by 30 Bf 109s . Johnson broke and turned in and behind a Bf 109F . Approaching from a quarter astern and slightly below , Johnson fired closing from 200 to 70 yards . Pilot Officer Smith of Johnson 's section observed the pilot bail out . Pursued by several enemy aircraft , Johnson dived to ground level . About 10 miles off Le Touquet , other Bf 109s attacked . Allowing the Germans to close within range , Johnson turned into a steep left @-@ hand turn . It took him onto the tail of a Bf 109 . Johnson fired and broke away at 50 yards . The Bf 109 was hit , stalled and crashed into the sea . Johnson was pursued until 10 miles south of Dover . The two victories made Johnson 's total to six destroyed , which now meant he was an official flying ace . In winter 1941 , Johnson and 616 Squadron moved to training duties . The odd convoy patrol was flown but it was an idle period for the Squadron which had now concluded its " Tangmere tour " . 
 = = = Squadron Leader to Wing Commander = = = 
 On 31 January 1942 , the Squadron moved to RAF Kings Cliffe . After an uneventful few months , RAF Fighter Command resumed its offensive policy in April 1942 when the weather cleared for large @-@ scale operations . Johnnie flew seven sweeps that month . But the situation had now changed . The Spitfire V , which was flown by the RAF had been a match for the Bf 109F , however , the Germans had introduced an new fighter : the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 . It was faster at all altitudes below 25 @,@ 000 feet , possessed a faster roll rate , was more heavily armed and could out @-@ dive and out @-@ climb the Spitfire . Only in the turn could the Spitfire outperform the Fw 190 . The introduction of this new enemy fighter resulted in heavier casualty rates among the Spitfire squadrons until a new mark of Spitfire could be produced . Johnson claimed a damaged Fw 190 on 15 April 1942 but he witnessed the Fw 190s get the better of the British pilots consistently throughout most of 1942 : 
 Yes , the 190 was causing us real problems at this time . We could out @-@ turn it , but you couldn 't turn all day . As the number of 190s increased , so the depth of our penetrations deceased . They drove us back to the coast really . 
 On 25 May , Johnson experienced an unusual mission . His section engaged a Dornier Do 217 carrying British markings , four miles west of his base . Johnson allowed the three inexperienced pilots to attack it , but they only managed to damage the bomber . Days later , on 26 June 1942 , Johnson was awarded the Bar to his DFC . More welcome news was received late in the month as the first Spitfire Mk . IXs began reaching RAF units . On 10 July 1942 , Johnson was promoted to the rank of squadron leader , effective as of the 13 July , and given command of 610 Squadron . 
 In " rhubarb " operations over France , Johnson 's wing commander , Patrick Jameson , insisted that the line @-@ astern formation be used which caused Johnson to question why tactics such as the finger @-@ four had not been universally adopted . Johnson criticised the lack of tactical consistency and when his squadron flew top cover , he often changed to the finger @-@ four as soon as they reached the French coast , hoping his wing leader wouldn 't notice . 
 By August 1942 , preparations were begun for a major operation , Jubilee , at Dieppe . The Dieppe raid took place on 19 August 1942 . Johnson took off at 07 : 40 in Spitfire VB . <unk> , DW @-@ B. Running into around 50 Bf 109s and Fw 190s in fours , pairs and singly . In a climbing attack Johnson shot down one Fw 190 which crashed into the sea and shared in the destruction of a Bf 109F . While heading back to base , Johnson attacked an alert Fw 190 which met his attack head on . The dogfight descended from 8 @,@ 000 to zero feet . Flying over Dieppe , Johnson dived towards a destroyer in the hope its fire would drive off the Fw 190 , now on his tail . The move worked and Johnson landed back at RAF West Malling at 09 : 20 . For the remainder of the year , the squadron was moved to RAF Castletown in September 1942 to protect the Royal Navy fleet at Scapa Flow . 
 Johnson took command of No. 144 Wing ( Canadians ) based at RAF Kenley after Christmas and they received the new Spitfire IX : the answer to the Fw 190 . After gaining a probable against a Fw 190 in February 1943 , Johnnie selected Spitfire <unk> after a 50 @-@ minute test flight on 22 March 1943 . It became his regular mount . Being a wing commander now meant his initials could be painted on the machine . His Spitfires now carried JE @-@ J. He was also allotted the call sign " <unk> " . 
 Johnson set about changing the wing 's tactical approach . He quickly forced the wing to abandon the line @-@ astern tactics for the finger @-@ four formation which offered much more safety in combat ; enabling multiple pilots to participate in scanning the skies for enemy aircraft so as to avoid an attack , and also being better able to spot and position their unit for a surprise attack upon the enemy . Johnson made another alteration to his units operations . He loathed ground @-@ attack missions which highly trained fighter pilots were forced to participate in . He abandoned ground attack missions whenever he could . During these weeks , Johnson 's wing escorted United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) bombers to targets in France . On a fighter sweep , Ramrod 49 , Johnson destroyed an Fw 190 for his eighth victory . Unteroffizier Hans <unk> from 6 Staffel baled out , but his parachute failed to open . 
 The spring proved to be a busy one ; Johnson claimed three Fw 190s damaged two days later . On the 11 and 13 May he destroyed an Fw 190 to reach 10 individual air victories while sharing in the destruction of another on the later date and a Bf 109 on 1 June . A further five victories against Fw 190s were achieved in June . Two were claimed on the 15 June . On the 17 June while leading the wing over Calais Johnson bounced one of JG 26 's Gruppen led by Wilhelm @-@ Ferdinand Galland . He shot down Unteroffizier Gunther Freitag , 8 . / JG 26 who was killed . On 24 June he claimed one destroyed and one damaged on and another victory on the 27th to brought his total to 15 . 
 Johnson scored more success in July . The USAAF began Blitz Week ; a concentrated effort against German targets . Escorting American bombers , Johnson destroyed three Bf 109s and damaged another , the last being shot down on 30 July ; his tally stood at 18 . There was still no standard formation procedure in Fighter Command , and Johnson 's use of the finger @-@ four made the wing distinct in the air . It earned 144 Wing the nickname " Wolfpack " . The name remained until 144 Wing was moved to an Advanced Landing Ground ( ALG ) at <unk> and was renamed No. 127 Wing RCAF , part of the RAF Second Tactical Air Force under the command of No. 83 Group RAF . 
 The tactics proved successful in the Canadian Wing . Johnson scored his 19 — 21 victories on 23 and 26 August , whilst claiming yet another Fw 190 on 4 September 1943 . Johnsons 19th victory was gained against Oberfeldwebel ( First @-@ Sergeant ) Erich <unk> 10 . / JG 26 , who was killed . Johnson 's 21st victim , Oberfeldwebel Walter <unk> 10 . / JG 26 , was also killed . 
 = = = Normandy to the Rhine = = = 
 In the lead up to the Battle of Normandy and the D @-@ Day landings Johnson continued to score regularly . His 22 — 23rd victories were achieved on 25 April 1944 and Johnson became the highest scoring ace still on operations . These victories were followed by another Fw 190 on the 5 May ( no . 24 ) ; III . / JG 26 lost Feldwebel Horst <unk> and Unteroffizier Manfred <unk> killed during the air battle . After the landings in France on 6 June 1944 , Johnson added further to his tally , claiming another five aerial victories that month including two Bf 109s on 28 June . The mission in which Johnson recorded his 26th victory on 22 June was particularly eventful ; four more Fw 190s fell to his wing . After bouncing a formation of Bf 109s and Fw 190s , he shot down a Bf 109 for his 29th victory . Five days later , Johnson destroyed two Fw 190s to reach his 30 — 31st air victories . 
 Johnson 's wing was the first to be stationed on French soil following the invasion . With their radius of action now far extended compared to the squadrons still in Britain , the wing scored heavily through the summer . On 21 August 1944 , Johnson was leading No. 443 Squadron on a patrol over the Seine , near Paris . Johnson bounced a formation of Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190s , shooting down two , which were recorded on the cine camera . Climbing back to his starting point at 8 @,@ 000 ft , Johnson attempted to join a formation of six aircraft , he thought were Spitfires . The fighters were actually Messerschmitt Bf 109s . Johnson escaped by doing a series of steep climbs , during which he nearly stalled and blacked out . He eventually evaded the Messerschmitts , which had been trying to flank him on either side , while two more stuck to his tail . Johnson 's Spitfire IX was hit by enemy aircraft fire for the only time , taking cannon shells in the rudder and elevators . Johnson had now equalled and surpassed Sailor Malan 's record score of 32 , shooting down two Fw 190s for his 32 — 33 air victories . However Johnson considered Malan 's exploits to be better . Johnson points out , when Malan fought ( during 1940 — 41 ) , he did so outnumbered , and had matched the enemy even then . Johnson said : 
 Malan had fought with great distinction when the odds were against him . He matched his handful of Spitfires against greatly superior numbers of Luftwaffe fighters and bombers . He had been forced to fight a defensive battle over southern England and often at a tactical disadvantage , when the top @-@ cover Messerschmitts [ Bf 109s and Bf 110s ] were high in the sun . I had always fought on the offensive , and , after 1941 , I had either a squadron , a wing or sometimes two wings behind me . 
 In September 1944 Johnson 's wing participated in support actions for Operation Market Garden in the Netherlands . On 27 September 1944 , Johnson 's last victory of the war was over Nijmegen . His flight bounced a formation of nine Bf 109s , one of which Johnson shot down . During this combat Squadron Leader Henry " Wally " MacLeod , of the Royal Canadian Air Force , and his squadron had joined Johnson . It was during this action that MacLeod went missing , possibly shot down by Siegfried Freytag of Jagdgeschwader 77 ( Fighter Wing 77 ) . 
 The wing rarely saw enemy aircraft for the remainder of the year . Only on 1 January 1945 did the Germans appear in large numbers , during Operation Bodenplatte to support their faltering attack in the Ardennes . Johnson witnessed the German attack his wing 's airfield at Brussels – Melsbroek . He recalled the Germans seemed inexperienced and their shooting was " atrocious " . Johnson led a Spitfire patrol to prevent a second wave of German aircraft attacking but engaged no enemy aircraft , since there was no follow @-@ up attack . From late January and through most of February , Johnson reduced his flying time . 
 In March 1945 , Johnson patrolled as Operation Plunder and Operation Varsity pushed Allied armies into Germany . There was little sign of the Luftwaffe . Numerous ground @-@ attack operations were carried out instead . On 26 March Johnson 's wing was relocated to Twente and he was promoted to group captain . Days later Johnson took command of No. 125 Wing . On 5 April , after returning from patrol in Spitfire Mk XIV <unk> , he switched off the engine just as a Bf 109 flew overhead . Seeing the Spitfire , it turned in for an attack ; Johnson took cover under his fighter while the airfield defences shot down the 109 . On 16 April 1945 Johnson 's Wing moved to RAF Celle in Germany . 
 During the last week of the war , Johnson 's squadron flew patrols over Berlin and Kiel as German resistance crumbled . During a flight over central Germany looking for jet fighters , Johnson 's squadron attacked Luftwaffe airfields . On one sortie , his unit strafed and destroyed 11 Bf 109s that were preparing to take off . On another sortie , an enemy transport was sighted , but took evasive action and retreated back to German held territory but Johnson 's pilots shot it down . On another occasion , Johnson intercepted a flight of four Fw 190s . The German fighters , however , waggled their wings to signal non @-@ hostile intent and Johnson 's unit escorted them to an RAF airfield . 
 After the German capitulation in May 1945 , Johnson relocated with his unit to Copenhagen , Denmark . Here , his association with the Belgian No. 350 Squadron RAF led him to be awarded the Croix de Guerre with Palm and the rank of Officer of the Order of Léopold with Palms . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 After the war Johnson commanded RAF Second Tactical Air Force at RAF Wildenrath in the West Germany from 1952 to 1955 . In 1956 he wrote his wartime memoir , Wing Leader and in followed it up in 1964 with Full Circle , a history of air fighting , co @-@ written with Percy " Laddie " Lucas , a former Member of Parliament and Douglas Bader 's brother @-@ in @-@ law . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 Johnson was given a permanent commission by the RAF after the war ( initially as a squadron leader , although retaining his wartime substantive rank as wing commander , and later confirmed in that rank ) , becoming OC Tactics at the Central Fighter Establishment . After an exchange posting to the USA , he flew North American F @-@ 86 Sabres with Tactical Air Command and went on to serve in the Korean War flying the Lockheed F @-@ 80 Shooting Star . Johnson did not leave any written record of his experiences in the Korean War . It is believed he saw action against enemy aircraft . For his service he received the Air Medal and Legion of Merit from the United States . 
 In 1951 , Johnson commanded a wing at RAF <unk> . The following year Johnson became air officer commanding ( AOC ) RAF Wildenrath from 1952 to 1954 . From 1954 to 1957 he was deputy director , operations at the Air Ministry . On 20 October 1957 , Johnson became AOC RAF Cottesmore in Rutland commanding V bombers . An air commodore by 1960 , he attended the Imperial Staff College and served in No. 3 Group RAF commanding RAF Middle East at Aden . In June 1960 , he was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) . In 1965 , Johnson was promoted air vice marshal and appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) . He retired in 1966 . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 Johnson was appointed a Deputy Lieutenant for the County of Leicestershire in 1967 . He established the Johnnie Johnson Housing Trust in 1969 and by 2001 the housing association managed over 4 @,@ 000 properties . After the death of his friend Douglas Bader in 1982 , Johnson , Denis Crowley @-@ Milling and Sir Hugh Dundas set up the Douglas Bader Foundation , to continue supporting disabled charities , of which Bader was a passionate supporter . 
 Johnson was also the first to recognise the skills of Robert Taylor , aviation artist , in the 1980s . Depictions of aircraft and battle scenes in print began to become popular and he helped Taylor promote them . The venture was successful and Johnson 's sons set up their own distribution networks in the United States and Britain . 
 Johnson spent most of the 1980s and 1990s as a keynote speaker , fundraiser and spending time on his hobbies ; travelling , fishing , shooting and walking his dogs . Johnson appeared on the long – running British television show This Is Your Life on 8 May 1985 , the 40th anniversary of VE Day . Among the programme 's guests was German fighter ace Walter <unk> . British wartime propaganda had alleged Johnson had challenged <unk> to a personal duel ; a version of events denied by Johnson . The two men arranged to meet after the war but were unable to do so until the TV programme . Among other guests was Hugh Dundas , " Nip " <unk> , who flew alongside Johnson on his first operation — in which he earned a rebuke from Bader — Crowley @-@ Milling , Johnson 's former Wing Commander Patrick Jameson and his uncle , Charlie Rossell who was over 100 years old at the time . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 As a teenager Johnson became fascinated by speed and joined the Melton Car Club with two boyhood friends . Johnson enjoyed the lifestyle of cars and " pacey women " . Although he had many early interests , Johnson would later settle and add to his family . On 14 November 1942 , Johnson married Pauline <unk> in Norwich during home leave . Hugh Dundas acted as best man and Lord Beaverbrook 's son , Wing Commander Max Aitken also attended . During the war Pauline worked for the Fire Service . They had two sons : Michael ( 16 October 1944 ) and Chris ( born 1 December 1946 ) . After the couple split up , Johnson lived with his partner Janet Partridge . 
 On 30 January 2001 , Johnson , aged 85 years , died from cancer . A memorial service took place on 25 April 2001 at St Clement Danes and the hymns Jerusalem and I Vow to Thee , My Country were played . His children scattered his ashes on the Chatsworth estate in Derbyshire . The only memorial was a bench dedicated to him at his favourite fishing spot on the estate ; the inscription reads " In Memory of a Fisherman " . 
 = = List of air victories = = 
 Johnson 's wartime record was 515 sorties flown , 34 aircraft claimed destroyed with a further seven shared destroyed ( three and one shared victories ) , three probable destroyed , 10 damaged , and one shared , destroyed on the ground . All his victories were fighters . As a Wing Leader , Johnson was able to use his initials " JE @-@ J " in place of squadron code letters . He scored the bulk of his victories flying two Mk IXs : <unk> / JEJ in which he shot down 12 aircraft and shared five plus six and one shared damaged , while commanding the Kenley Wing ; <unk> / JEJ , an L.F Mk . IX , 12 aircraft plus one shared , destroyed on the ground . His last victory of the war was scored in this aircraft . Johnson ended the war flying a Mk <unk> , <unk> / JEJ . His post @-@ war mount was <unk> / JEJ ; it was the last Spitfire to carry his initials . 
 The ability to verify British claims against the British ' main opponents in 1941 and 1942 , JG 26 and JG 2 , is very limited . Only two of the 30 volumes of War Diaries produced by JG 26 survived the war . Historian Donald Caldwell has attempted to use what limited German material is available to compare losses and air victory claims but acknowledges the lack of sources leave the possibility for error . 
 A list of the 34 individual victories . 
 = Within ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Within " is the eighth season premiere of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States on November 5 , 2000 on the Fox Network . It was written by executive producer and series creator Chris Carter , and directed by Kim Manners . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 5 and was watched by 15 @.@ 87 million viewers , marking a slight increase from the previous season 's finale " Requiem " . " Within " was largely well @-@ received by critics , although some fans felt alienated by the addition of Robert Patrick to the cast . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode — continuing from the seventh season finale " Requiem " when Mulder was abducted by aliens who are planning to colonize Earth — an FBI taskforce is organized to hunt for Mulder but Scully suspects the taskforce leader , Special Agent John Doggett ( Patrick ) , and instead chooses to search for her lost partner with Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) . Scully and Skinner travel to Arizona , only to be followed by Doggett 's task force . There , they find Gibson Praise ( Jeff Gulka ) and someone who they believe may very well be Mulder . 
 " Within " was a story milestone for the series . It introduced several new character changes for the season , including the departure of Mulder and the inclusion of Doggett as a main character to the cast . The episode was written as a way to both explain Mulder 's absence as well as appease fans who would otherwise lament the loss of Duchovny . " Within " also marked the first major change to the opening credits since the show first started , with new images and updated photos for David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson , and the addition of Robert Patrick . " Within " has been analyzed due to its themes of death and resurrection . In addition , the experiments performed on Mulder after his abduction have been thematically compared to the Crucifixion of Jesus . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) has been deeply distraught since Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) was abducted by aliens . One morning , she arrives in her partner 's office to find it being searched by FBI agents . Scully subsequently learns that the Bureau 's newly promoted deputy director , Alvin Kersh ( James Pickens , Jr . ) , has launched a manhunt in search for Mulder . The investigation is being led by an FBI special agent named John Doggett . Scully and Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) are taken to the task force 's field office to be questioned , despite protests that they would be the most qualified to lead the manhunt themselves . As Skinner is being interrogated , Scully is accosted by an unnamed person who starts asking her about Mulder . When Scully finds out that he is actually Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , she angrily throws water in his face and leaves . 
 Back at Scully 's apartment , she runs a background check of Doggett on her computer , learning about his background as a former NYPD detective . She feels sick and leaves the computer , and later on calls her mom , Margaret ( Sheila Larken ) . When she realizes her phone is tapped , she looks outside the window to see if anyone is out there . She angrily calls Doggett to protest him monitoring her phone conversations , which he seems genuinely surprised about . She notices a mysterious man and runs into the hall to pursue him , but meets her landlord Mr. <unk> who tells her that he had seen Mulder . 
 Meanwhile , Skinner visits the Lone Gunmen , who are monitoring UFO activity in the United States in the hopes of tracking down Mulder . Skinner later finds out that someone has used Mulder 's FBI pass to gain access to the X @-@ Files , and that the Bureau task force considers him the main suspect . Meanwhile , Doggett has gathered enough evidence to track Mulder 's whereabouts before his so @-@ called abduction , discovering that Mulder was dying and had his name engraved in his family 's gravestone to mark his death in 2000 . Later on , more evidence of high UFO activity in Clifton , Arizona is found by The Lone Gunmen . Concurrently , Doggett receives information about Gibson Praise ( Jeff Gulka ) when someone slips his file under his door . 
 Scully and Skinner leave for Arizona without giving any of their information to Doggett . At the same time , Doggett believes that to find Mulder they must first find the whereabouts of Praise . They locate him in <unk> , Arizona , in the middle of the desert . By the time Doggett 's taskforce arrives , he has already escaped via a window and is leaving for a desert hill top with another person : Mulder . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting and development = = = 
 The seventh season was a time of closure for The X @-@ Files . Characters within the show were written out , including The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) and Mulder 's mother ( Rebecca Toolan ) , and several plot threads were resolved , including the fate of Fox Mulder 's sister Samantha . After settling his contract dispute , Duchovny quit full @-@ time participation in the show after the seventh season . This contributed to uncertainties over the likelihood of an eighth season . Carter and most fans felt the show was at its natural endpoint with Duchovny 's departure , but it was decided Mulder would be abducted at the end of the seventh season , leaving it open for the actor 's return in 11 episodes the following year . " Requiem " , the seventh season finale , was written by Carter both as a possible series finale and as a way to segue into a new season . However , the producers found it difficult to convincingly write Duchovny 's character out of the script , and explain Mulder 's absence in the episodes of the upcoming season . 
 Hoping to continue the series , Carter introduced a new central character to replace Mulder : Doggett . More than 100 actors auditioned for the role , with only about ten considered by the producers . Lou Diamond Phillips and Hart Bochner were among the auditionees , and Phillips , Bochner and Bruce Campbell were considered for the role . In particular , Campbell , following his involvement with the sixth season episode " Terms of Endearment " , was considered , but , due to a contractual obligation , could not take any work during the filming of his series Jack of All Trades . On potentially being cast as the series regular , Campbell mused , " I had worked on an X @-@ Files episode before , and I think they sort of remembered me from that . It was nice to be involved in that – even if you don 't get it , it 's nice to hang out at that party . " Later in Campbell 's novel Make Love ! The Bruce Campbell Way , he joked that Patrick " stiffed him out of the role " . In the end , the producers eventually chose Robert Patrick . Reportedly , Patrick was cast due to the fact that his featured role in Terminator 2 : Judgment Day ( 1991 ) would attract a great 18- to 35 @-@ year @-@ old male demographic to the show . In fact , Fox executives reported a 10 percent overall increase in the demographic , solely due to Patrick 's casting . 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 Carter was inspired to write the scene in which Scully splashes water into Doggett 's face , since he was aware that new actor Robert Patrick would be facing opposition from some members of the fan community . The scene was even the first filmed , in order to truly introduce Patrick to the show . After the conclusion of The X @-@ Files television series in 2002 , Patrick commented that this part of the episode had been his favorite scene in the series , and admitted that he could not think of a better way to introduce his character because the scene not only said a lot , but it had actually helped him . Tom Braidwood , who appears in this episode as long @-@ running recurring character Frohike , similarly remarked that the first meeting of Doggett and Scully was one of his favorite scenes from the entire series . Both Robert Patrick and the director of this episode , Kim Manners , felt that it was the perfect introduction to the character of John Doggett as the leader of the taskforce sent to find Mulder . Manners stated that Patrick gave a new " sense of energy " to the show , since they had basically used the same characters for seven years . 
 Because the script of the episode does not specify the identity of an unseen person who slides a file about Gibson Praise under Doggett 's door , Kim Manners later had to ask the writers who the mysterious visitor was ; the director was told by Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz that the unseen person was actually Kersh . Robert Patrick asked the same question of Manners , around this time , but the director – not yet sure of the answer and hoping to avoid looking foolish – never gave the actor an answer . Patrick thought the reason that Manners was being purposefully secretive was that the director wanted Patrick to still be in wonderment as to the mysterious visitor 's identity , as a device for the actor to aid his performance . Manners later teased Patrick that the reason he had not answered the question was that he had not liked Patrick at the time , prompting the actor to ask what he had done to annoy Manners on the first night of filming the episode . Eventually , the director finally admitted to Patrick what had actually happened . Kersh 's actions are later revealed and explained in the ninth season premiere " Nothing Important Happened Today " . 
 The majority of the episode — like the rest of seasons six , seven , eight and nine — was filmed in and around the Los Angeles , California area . Before shooting the episode , Chris Carter reminded Patrick various times that he had to be in " good shape " . On the audio commentary , Patrick remembers being " nervous " for the shooting of the episode , since he was a big fan of The X @-@ Files before becoming a part of the acting crew . The scene in which Walter Skinner tells Doggett that he himself witnessed Mulder being taken away aboard a UFO was filmed in the second part of Patrick 's first night of production on the series ; this scene also marked the first time that Patrick got to work with Pileggi . The ending of the episode , as well as a majority of its follow @-@ up " Without " were filmed at Split Mountain in Anza @-@ Borrego State Park . According to producer Paul Rabwin , an " incredible heat wave " hit the area during the shooting , resulting in terrible filming conditions . In the desert , the cast and crew were informed that there was a " one in twenty @-@ five " chance that someone would be bit by a rattlesnake . Pileggi later joked that during the filming of his scenes all he could think about was stumbling upon a snake . 
 The original opening sequence was made in 1993 for the first season and remained unchanged until " Within " . The opening sequence then was modified to include new images , updated FBI badge photos for Duchovny and Anderson , as well as the addition of Patrick to the main cast . Duchovny , however , would only be featured in the opening credits when he appeared in an episode . Furthermore , the opening contains images of Scully 's pregnancy and , according to Frank Spotnitz , showed an " abstract " explanation of Mulder 's absence in this season , with him falling into an eye . Jim <unk> , a member of the production crew of The X @-@ Files , died during the filming of this episode via electrocution , an accident that injured six other crew members . This episode was dedicated to his memory . 
 = = Themes = = 
 As The X @-@ Files entered into its eighth season , " human resurrection and salvation " as well as " disease , suffering , and healing " became an increasingly central focus of the show . " Within " , along with various other episodes during the eighth season of the show , would be the first to explore themes of birth , death and resurrection . The sub @-@ theme of birth first emerged in this episode during Scully 's opening dream of an abducted Mulder , which " <unk> [ es ] strong birth imagery of the amniotic sack [ sic ] and fluid . " Then later in the episode , the themes of death and resurrection are touched upon when Scully is shown Mulder 's tombstone . This arc would continue in " The Gift " , where Mulder 's inoperable brain tumor and the resurrection of John Doggett is explored . In " Deadalive " , the theme reappears in full @-@ force : Billy Miles is found dead but resurrects , Mulder is buried for three months , and later , is brought back to life . This sub @-@ theme would continue well into the ninth season , in entries such as " Audrey Pauley " . 
 The episode is one of many to feature Mulder as a Christ @-@ like figure . These comparisons were first purposely inserted during the seventh season episode " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " , in which Mulder is placed on a cross @-@ like table , symbolic of the wooden cross that Jesus was nailed to . Michelle Bush , in her book Myth @-@ X notes that Mulder 's torture scenes in " Within " bear a resemblance to the Crucifixion of Jesus . She argues that the metal bars piercing his wrists and ankles are similar to the nails that held Jesus , the metal straps imbedded in his head are similar to the Crown of Thorns , and that his vivisection is reminiscent of the wound made by the Holy Lance . Furthermore , Bush parallels Jesus ' " horrific death in order to rise again " to Mulder 's abduction , death , and resurrection later on in " Deadalive " , which would further make allusions to the Christ @-@ like nature of Mulder . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Within " first aired on Fox on November 5 , 2000 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 5 , meaning that it was seen by 9 @.@ 5 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 9 @.@ 58 million households and 15 @.@ 87 million viewers . The episode marked an 11 % decrease from the seventh season opener , " The Sixth Extinction " , but a slight increase over the seventh season finale " Requiem " , which was viewed by 15 @.@ 26 million viewers . As soon as both " Within " and Without " were completed , Carter screened them at the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences . The two were played back @-@ to @-@ back " like a feature film " , according to Patrick . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " The new case is a manhunt . The new agent is a mystery . The new X @-@ File is Mulder . " The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 3 – Colonization , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien Colonist 's plans to take over the earth . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Overall , the episode received positive reviews from critics . Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity gave the episode a rare " A + " . The entry 's follow @-@ up , " Without " , would also receive a second " A + " , making them the only two episodes of The X @-@ Files to receive the prestigious rating from the site . Entertainment Weekly reviewer Ken Tucker gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it an A- . He said that Patrick 's portrayal of Doggett was " hardboiled alertness , " giving mostly positive reviews about his inclusion . Furthermore , he noted that Anderson enacted all " her <unk> " in this episode and its follow @-@ up , " Without " . Tom <unk> from Space.com also reacted positively toward the episode , enjoying the idea of making the character of Skinner into a " true " believer . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a more mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . Vitaris criticized both the unnatural elongation of Scully 's pregnancy and the glimpses of Mulder that are shown , calling both " little more than lip @-@ service . " 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five . The two wrote that " the episode sings when it reinvents the old and introduces the new . " However , Shearman and Pearson criticized the bringing back of Gibson Praise , noting that " the return of Gibson Praise almost derails the episode altogether [ … ] he only manages to make an episode that seemed as if it was giving The X @-@ Files a bold new beginning feel like it 's about to offer more of the same old stooge . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations wrote a moderately positive review of the episode . He noted , " In many ways , ' Within ' reminded us why we tune into The X @-@ Files every week . However , it also reminded us why the road ahead will be difficult . Fox Mulder may be gone , but he will never be forgotten . Or replaced . " 
 Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club wrote that both " Within " and " Without " form " a great way to pick up after the cliffhanger ending of the previous season " and that " the pair of episodes [ ... ] work well as an introduction to the new narrative status quo . " He awarded both entries a " B + " and praised the characterization of Doggett , writing that " Robert Patrick brings a distinct , charismatic energy to the part . " However , he was slightly critical of some of the episode 's features , such as the " trope " of Scully being sad or " melodramatic gloom and overheated monologues " . 
 Some fans , however , criticized the introduction of Doggett ; claiming that the character had been intentionally created to replace Mulder . Carter responded to this in an interview with National Public Radio ( NPR ) by stating , " What he brings is a different approach to The X @-@ Files . First of all , he ’ s a knee jerk skeptic so he couldn ’ t be more different than the character of Mulder . He ’ s an insider at the FBI , well liked , has buddies . Mulder , of course , he ’ s been banished to the basement along with all of his X @-@ files . So when he ’ s put together with Agent Scully , who has become something of a reluctant believer , the dynamic on the show changes completely " . 
 = Tourism in Malta = 
 Tourism in Malta is an important sector of the country 's economy , contributing to about 15 percent of the nation 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) . It is overseen by the Malta Tourism Authority , in turn falls under the responsibility of the Minister for Tourism , the Environment and Culture . Malta features a number of tourism attractions encompassing elements of the island 's rich history and culture , as well as aquatic activities associated with the Mediterranean Sea . In addition , medical tourism has become popular in Malta in recent years , especially since government efforts to market the practice to medical tourists in the United Kingdom . 
 The number of people who visited Malta in 2009 dropped considerably compared to the figures for 2008 - overall , the country 's tourism industry suffered an 8 percent drop from 2008 . Visits from non @-@ European Union countries dropped more considerably than visits from European Union countries ( and even more so than visits from Eurozone countries ) , while the average stay length remained the same for both 2008 and 2009 . Visitors from most countries require a visa to visit Malta . The nationalities requiring a visa are standardised as per European Union rules . Visitors already holding a valid Schengen Area visa most likely will not need to complete any more formalities to enter Malta ( so long as they are already inside the Schengen Area ) . Visitors holding citizenship of the European Union do not require a visa to enter Malta as they hold the right to free movement within the European Union . In recent years , the country 's tourism industry has been faced with a number of issues relating to the nation 's small size , both in terms of area and population . These issues include stretched resources and infrastructure ( such as water , waste management , beaches and roads ) , especially during the summer months of July and August . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 Malta has a long and rich history , and this is reflected in the island 's cultural attractions . The Phoenicians , the Carthaginians , the Romans and the Byzantines have all occupied Malta at some point in history , leaving a mix of many different architectural styles and artifacts to explore . The sovereignty of the Knights Hospitaller over Malta from 1530 to 1798 resulted in a legacy of elaborate artistry and architecture throughout Malta . The country 's modern museums and art galleries feature relics from Malta 's history for tourists and Maltese residents alike to enjoy . 
 There are also a number of aquatic activities to enjoy on Malta as well as Gozo and <unk> . Northern Malta is home to the country 's beach resorts and holiday areas , with the beaches most popular with holiday @-@ makers being <unk> Bay , <unk> <unk> and Golden Bay . These beaches are large enough to be able to house cafes , restaurants and kiosks , but small enough to be crowded rarely . Malta 's northwest is home to the island 's quietest beaches , and it is on these that the main island 's neighbouring two are nearest . Gozo and <unk> are also popular beach spots for holiday @-@ makers , although these are much more likely to be quieter , rockier and more suitable for snorkelling . The Mediterranean Sea surrounding Malta is popular for diving - while shallow dips may be attractive to beginning divers , more experienced divers may be able to dive deeper to find historical artifacts from World War II or earlier . 
 = = Major event tourism = = 
 Major event tourism , especially events centred on Catholicism , is an important segment of the Maltese tourism sector . During Holy Week , processions and religious services dominate the country and food stalls are set up in the village squares of Malta . Another popular major event is Carnival , a five centuries @-@ old traditional celebration lasting for the five days preceding Ash Wednesday . Celebrations for Carnival involve float @-@ based pageants , street parties and street food stalls . They are mostly Roman Catholic . 
 One of the biggest sporting events held on the island is the Malta Marathon . Held every year in late February or early March , the race attracts a number of international competitors and has been sponsored by Land Rover since 2009 , BMW from 2003 to 2008 , <unk> in 2002 and Flora Malta in 2001 and prior . In 2009 , the full marathon winner , a Belgian , recorded a time of 2 : 25 : 59 . In 2010 , approximately 1 @,@ 400 entrants participated . 
 = = Medical tourism = = 
 Since 2010 , the Malta Tourism Authority has been marketing Malta as a medical tourism destination . Focus areas for medical tourism include " cosmetic surgery , orthopedics , ophthalmic , neurological , <unk> , oncology , diagnostic , bariatric and cardiac services . " The focus target market for medical tourists in Malta is the United Kingdom , followed by North Africa , the Middle East , Russia and North America . Part of the reason for targeting the United Kingdom for medical tourists is that many members of Malta 's medical profession were trained in the United Kingdom , increasing the confidence of British patients in those taking care of them . In addition , unlike some medical tourism destinations , Malta has a stable political climate . The Maltese government supports the development of medical tourism on the island but believes that private medical providers should be performing medical procedures , not government @-@ run facilities . 
 = = Visas = = 
 In addition to a valid passport , " documents substantiating the purpose and the conditions of the planned visit " and " sufficient means of support , both for the period of the planned visit and to return to their country of origin , " travellers arriving in Malta may be required to have a visa for entry into the country . 
 European Union citizens have the right to travel freely into Malta without completing any special formalities . The nationals of many countries are not required to hold visas to enter Malta , although many are in accordance with uniform European Union regulations . A full list of nationalities required to hold visas to enter Malta and the Schengen Area is published on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ' web site . 
 While Malta cannot unilaterally drop the requirement for nations it makes agreements with to obtain visas to enter the Schengen Area through its border crossing points , it is permitted to offer visa discounts to certain nationalities . At present , Malta has ' visa facilitation agreements ' with eight nations : Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Moldova , Macedonia , Russia , Serbia and Ukraine . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Tourism is a major component of the Maltese economy , constituting about 40 per cent of Malta 's GDP in 2003 / 04 . 1 @,@ 183 @,@ 012 tourists visited Malta in 2009 . Although this is an 8 per cent drop from 2008 , the number of tourists is expected to reach 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 by the end of 2010 ( figures are not yet available ) . For the period January to December 2009 , drops were recorded in visits from most countries sending large numbers of tourists to Malta , including Belgium , France , Germany , Ireland , the Netherlands , Russia , the Scandinavian countries , Spain , the United Kingdom and the United States , whilst a 24 @.@ 7 per cent increase was recorded in visits to and from Libya . Visits from non @-@ European Union countries took the greatest hit , with visits from these countries decreasing by 15 per cent compared to 2008 . Comparatively , visits from European Union countries decreased only 7 @.@ 4 per cent . Visits from the Eurozone dropped by an even smaller proportion , recording a fall of only 5 @.@ 6 per cent . 
 The vast majority of visitors to Malta stayed for seven nights or longer , with the average stay length being 8 @.@ 5 nights . While the number of people staying seven nights or longer in Malta fell by 13 @.@ 4 per cent in 2009 compared to 2008 , the number of people staying four to six nights jumped 7 @.@ 5 per cent , and one to three nights by 1 @.@ 5 per cent . Expenditure by tourists to Malta declined 12 per cent when compared to 2008 levels , with a recorded value of EUR 916 @.@ 4 million . 
 = = = Arrivals by country = = = 
 Most visitors arriving to Malta on short term basis in 2015 were from the following countries of nationality : 
 = = = Historical trends = = = 
 Tourism in Malta began to grow beginning in the mid @-@ 1960s . During the 1970s , Maltese tourism grew significantly , with numbers growing from 170 @,@ 800 in 1970 to 705 @,@ 500 in 1981 . From 1981 , the figures dropped to approximately 500 @,@ 000 visitors per year until the late 1980s , when an upward trend began again . In the mid @-@ 1990s , figures were as high as 1 @.@ 2 million tourists per year . 
 The volatility of the Maltese tourism market in the past has been largely due to trends in the preferences of tourists from the United Kingdom , who comprise Malta 's largest tourism market . Although Malta 's uniform use of English , its traditional ties to the United Kingdom and low @-@ cost travel options have made it an attractive option to British tourists , changing preferences of these tourists can impact Malta 's tourism income quite significantly . For example , the increasing preference of British tourists for Spanish destinations during the 1980s was reflected in a drop in Malta 's tourism numbers during that period . 
 = = Market issues = = 
 Malta 's tourism industry faces a number of issues impacting on it now and threatening to impact on it in the future . One of the clearest issues facing Malta 's tourism industry is overcrowding as a result of the island nation 's relatively small size , in terms of both area and population . Malta is a nation of just under 450 @,@ 000 people , yet its infrastructure is required to support over 1 @.@ 1 million tourists every year . Malta 's water works , roads , waste management systems and beaches are stretched to capacity in the summer months of July and August of every year , when tourism numbers are at their peak . This is a challenge facing Maltese tourism operators as it means that they cannot simply pursue the kinds of ' mass tourism ' marketing measures taken by operators in other Mediterranean destinations with more space and resources to pursue them . In addition , Maltese tourism operators must balance increased tourism numbers with the needs of the ' native population ' , as when resources are stretched thin by tourists during the summer season , there are negative impacts on Maltese residents also . 
 = United States v. Lara = 
 United States v. Lara , 541 U.S. 193 ( 2004 ) , was a United States Supreme Court case which held that both the United States and a Native American ( Indian ) tribe could prosecute an Indian for the same acts that constituted crimes in both jurisdictions . The Court held that the United States and the tribe were separate sovereigns ; therefore , separate tribal and federal prosecutions did not violate the Double Jeopardy Clause . 
 In the 1880s , Congress passed the Major Crimes Act , divesting tribes of criminal jurisdiction in regard to several felony crimes . In 1990 , the Supreme Court ruled in Duro v. Reina that an Indian tribe did not have the authority to try an Indian criminally who was not a member of that tribe . The following year , Congress passed a law that stated that Indian tribes , because of their inherent sovereignty , had the authority to try non @-@ member Indians for crimes committed within the tribe 's territorial jurisdiction . 
 The defendant , Billy Jo Lara , was charged for acts that were criminal offenses under both the Spirit Lake Sioux Tribe 's laws and the federal United States Code . Lara pleaded guilty to the tribal charges , but claimed double jeopardy against the federal charges . The Supreme Court ruled that double jeopardy did not apply to Lara since " the successive prosecutions were brought by separate and distinct sovereign bodies " . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 The Sioux people consist of three main groups , the Lakota in the west , the Western Dakota in the center , and the Eastern Dakota in the east . In the east , the Santee was originally from the Minnesota area . The Chippewa or Ojibwe people were also from the same general area . The two tribes had been at war from at least 1736 and by 1750 the Chippewa had forced the Santee to the west into the prairie . The war between the tribes continued until at least the 1850s . Only after 1862 , when the Santee rose up against the whites and were subsequently removed to the Dakota Territory , did the fighting cease . In 1872 , the Sisseton and Wahpeton bands of the Santee signed a treaty that resulted in their moving to the Spirit Lake Reservation . 
 = = = Major Crimes Act = = = 
 Originally , crimes committed by Indians against Indians were not subject to federal or state jurisdiction , but were handled by tribal law . In 1881 , a Brulé Lakota named Crow Dog shot and killed another Indian , Spotted Tail , on the Great Sioux Reservation in South Dakota . Crow Dog was tried in federal court for murder , found guilty , and sentenced to hang . He petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus to the Supreme Court , and in Ex parte Crow Dog the Supreme Court found that the federal government did not have jurisdiction to try the case . Crow Dog was ordered released , having made restitution under tribal law to Spotted Tail 's family . 
 In response to Ex Parte Crow Dog , Congress passed the Major Crimes Act in 1885 . The Act provided that the federal government had exclusive jurisdiction over certain Indian @-@ on @-@ Indian crimes when the crimes were committed in " Indian country . " In 1886 , the Act was upheld by the Supreme Court in United States v. Kagama . 
 = = = Duro v. Reina = = = 
 In 1990 , the Supreme Court held in Duro v. Reina that an Indian tribe did not have jurisdiction to try an Indian of another tribe . Tribal leaders urged Congress to fix the problem that the Duro decision created . In 1991 , Congress amended the Indian Civil Rights Act ( ICRA ) to recognize that Indian tribes had inherent power to exercise criminal jurisdiction over all Indians . This legislation became known as the " Duro fix " , and was based on tribal sovereignty rather than a federal delegation of power . 
 = = = Arrest = = = 
 Billy Jo Lara was an enrolled member of the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians located in northern North Dakota near the Canadian border . The Spirit Lake Reservation is approximately 90 miles ( 140 km ) south of the Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation . Lara had married a member of the Spirit Lake Santee tribe and had resided on the Spirit Lake Reservation with her and their children until he was banished from the reservation due to several serious misdemeanors . Lara returned to the reservation , where he was arrested and charged with public intoxication . After the arrest , Bureau of Indian Affairs ( BIA ) officer Bryon Swan took Lara to the police station where Lara was informed of a Sioux order excluding him from the reservation . Lara then struck Swan , who as a BIA officer was considered both a tribal officer and a federal law enforcement officer . 
 = = = Procedural history = = = 
 = = = = Trial courts = = = = 
 Following his arrest , the tribal court of the Spirit Lake Sioux Tribe charged Lara with assaulting the arresting officers , along with four other charges . Lara pleaded guilty to the tribal charge of " violence to a policeman " . Soon after , federal prosecutors charged Lara with assault on a federal officer and a federal grand jury indicted him . Lara moved to dismiss the charge based on double jeopardy and other constitutional grounds . The Federal District Court , with Magistrate Judge Alice R. Senechal sitting by consent , denied the motions and Lara entered a conditional guilty plea , reserving the right to appeal . Senechal noted that two other trial courts in the circuit had already ruled that double jeopardy did not apply , that the ICRA only recognized the inherent sovereignty of the tribes and did not delegate prosecutorial power to the tribe . She further noted that another circuit court had ruled the same way . Lara also argued that the Petite doctrine , if applied , would preclude his prosecution , and that since it was never applied to federal prosecutions following convictions in tribal court , it discriminated against Indians . Senechal denied this motion , noting that Lara had shown no examples of other races not being prosecuted for like offenses . 
 = = = = Court of Appeals = = = = 
 Lara appealed the denial of his motion to dismiss to the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals , arguing that the Tribal Court obtained its authority from the ICRA , an act of Congress , and that both the Tribal Court and the Federal Court derived their power from the same sovereign . A three @-@ judge panel of the Circuit Court affirmed the decision of the District Court , holding that the tribe derived its power from its own retained sovereignty that was separate from the sovereignty of the United States . The Eighth Circuit 's panel noted that in the Duro decision , the Supreme Court had observed that Congress could address the jurisdictional system , which Congress did . When Congress amended the ICRA , they were addressing a federal common law issue , not a constitutional issue , and were within their authority to recognize the sovereignty of the tribes . The panel then affirmed the trial court on the Petite claim . Judge Hansen dissented , believing that the tribe drew its authority to try Lara from the federal government . 
 Lara then requested a rehearing en banc by the full court . The request was granted , and the full court reversed the decision of the three @-@ judge panel , ordering that the federal indictment be dismissed on the grounds of double jeopardy . While the court noted that the Fifth Amendment allowed prosecution by two separate sovereigns , such as the federal government and a state government , it found that an Indian tribe derived its authority to prosecute offenders from the ICRA , which was federal law . The court noted that in previous Supreme Court rulings , the determination of tribal jurisdiction was based on the tribal membership of the individual , not on his race as an Indian . This meant that double jeopardy attached . The United States then appealed to the Supreme Court , which granted certiorari to hear the case . 
 = = Supreme Court = = 
 = = = Arguments = = = 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 Solicitor General Ted Olson argued that Congress , in response to the Duro decision , acted to " recognize and affirm " the Indian tribe 's inherent power to enforce its criminal laws against Indians of other tribes . Olson noted that the United States v. Wheeler decision clearly stated that a tribe could prosecute a tribal member for a crime and that the Federal government could subsequently prosecute for the same criminal acts without invoking double jeopardy if the actions of the accused violated Federal law . Olson noted that the legislative history of the Duro fix bill clearly indicated that Congress intended to restore , not delegate , authority to prosecute non @-@ member Indians by a tribe . The government argued that the limitation in Duro was a statutory limitation of the tribe 's sovereignty , not a constitutional limit , and that Congress had the authority to remove that limitation . He noted that a tribe 's sovereignty has allowed prosecution of non @-@ member Indians for centuries , until it was limited by Congress . The United States was supported by amicus briefs filed by the State of Washington and seven other states , the State of Idaho and five other states , the National Congress of American Indians , and eighteen Indian tribes . 
 = = = = Lara = = = = 
 Alexander F. Reichert was appointed by the Supreme Court to argue the case for Lara . Reichert argued that an Indian tribe had no inherent sovereignty in regards to non @-@ member Indians , but only the power that Congress decided to give the tribe , citing Duro , Wheeler , and Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe to support his argument . He stated that it was the place of the Supreme Court , not Congress , to determine the inherent sovereignty of the tribe . Lara argued that since the tribe had no such inherent sovereignty , it could only prosecute a non @-@ member Indian based upon federal sovereignty , which would make a subsequent Federal prosecution a violation of the prohibition of double jeopardy . It was noted that members of Indian tribes were at the same time United States citizens , and protected under the constitution in the same manner as any other citizen . Reichert stated that Duro was decided as a constitutional issue , not as a matter of common law , and it was the Court 's place to determine the issue , not the place of Congress . To subject Lara to a prosecution by a tribal court , which was not subject to the Bill of Rights , would deprive Lara of his rights as a United States citizen . Lara 's position was supported by amicus curiae briefs filed by the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers , Lewis County , Idaho , ( along with several other counties ) , the Citizen 's Equal Rights Foundation , and T. Morris , E. Morris , and R. Morris ( individual Indians ) . 
 = = = Opinion of the Court = = = 
 Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the court on April 19 , 2004 . Breyer believed that the question the Court needed to answer was whether Congress had the authority to relax restrictions that had been imposed on an Indian tribe 's inherent sovereignty . He noted that the intent of Congress was clear , not only based on the plain language of the statute , but also from its legislative history . 
 Breyer stated that the Indian Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution granted Congress " plenary and exclusive " power to legislate in respect to the Indian tribes . He noted that the Indian Treaty Clause did not specifically grant Congress the right to legislate , but that treaties made pursuant to the clause could grant Congress the authority to legislate in regards to treaty matters . 
