 The constitution has been both idealized and criticized for either not going far enough or for being too radical . As it remained in force for only 18 months and 3 weeks , its influence was in any case limited . For generations , the memory of the constitution — recognized by political scientists as a progressive document for its time — helped keep alive Polish aspirations for an independent and just society , and continued to inform the efforts of its authors ' descendants . Bronisław Dembiński , a Polish constitutional scholar , stated a century later that , " The miracle of the Constitution did not save the state but did save the nation . " In Poland it is mythologized , and viewed as a national symbol and the culmination of enlightenment in Polish history and culture . In the words of two of its co @-@ authors , Ignacy Potocki and Hugo Kołłątaj , it was " the last will and testament of the expiring Country . " The May 3 anniversary of its adoption has been observed as Poland 's most important civil holiday since Poland regained independence in 1918 . 
 The constitution was a milestone in the history of law and the rise of democracy . Irish statesman Edmund Burke described it as " the noblest benefit received by any nation at any time ... Stanislas II has earned a place among the greatest kings and statesmen in history . " It was the first to follow the 1788 ratification of the United States Constitution . Poland and the United States , though geographically distant , displayed similarities in their approaches to the design of political systems . The May 3 Constitution has been called the second constitution in world history . American expert on constitutional law Albert Blaustein called it the " world 's second national constitution " , and American journalist Bill Moyers wrote that it was " Europe 's first codified national constitution ( and the second oldest in the world ) " . British historian Norman Davies calls it " the first constitution of its type in Europe " . Together with the Great Sejm , it has been subject to a large body of works by Polish scholars , starting with the still @-@ often cited 19th @-@ century works of Walerian Kalinka and Władysław <unk> , and continued in the 20th century by Bogusław <unk> . 
 The document 's official name was Ustawa <unk> ( " Government Act " ) , where " government " referred to the political system . In the Commonwealth , the term " constitution " ( Polish : <unk> ) had denoted all the legislation , of whatever character , that had been passed by a Sejm . 
 = = = Holiday = = = 
 May 3 was declared a Polish holiday ( Constitution Day — <unk> Konstytucji 3 Maja ) on May 5 , 1791 . The holiday was banned during the partitions of Poland but reinstated in April 1919 under the Second Polish Republic — the first holiday officially introduced in the newly independent country . It was again outlawed during World War II by both the Nazi and Soviet occupiers . It was celebrated in Polish cities in May 1945 , although in a mostly spontaneous manner . The 1946 anti @-@ communist demonstrations did not endear it to the Polish communists , and it competed for attention with the communist @-@ endorsed May 1 Labor Day celebrations in the Polish People 's Republic ; this led to its " rebranding " as Democratic Party Day and removal from the list of national holidays by 1951 . Until 1989 , May 3 was a frequent occasion for anti @-@ government and anti @-@ communist protests . May 3 was restored as an official Polish holiday in April 1990 after the fall of communism . In 2007 , May 3 was declared a Lithuanian national holiday . Polish @-@ American pride has been celebrated on the same date , for instance in Chicago , where since 1982 Poles have marked it with festivities and the annual Polish Constitution Day Parade . 
 = Brian & Stewie = 
 " Brian & Stewie " is the 17th episode of the eighth season of the American animated television series Family Guy , and 150th episode of the series overall . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 2 , 2010 . The episode features anthropomorphic dog Brian and baby Stewie after they are accidentally trapped inside a bank vault over a weekend . The two are ultimately forced to reveal their true feelings about each other , and eventually go on to question each other 's existence and purpose in life . Brian and Stewie become even closer to each other as time goes on , and <unk> help each other survive being trapped inside the vault . The episode breaks from the show 's usual set @-@ up , and is the only episode of the series not to use any cutaway gags with Brian and Stewie being the only two characters featured in the entire episode . In repeats of the episode there is no main title sequence , nor is any music played over the end credits . 
 The episode was written by Gary Janetti and directed by Dominic Bianchi . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its serious dialogue , but poor reviews for its gross @-@ out humor , in addition to receiving criticism from the Parents Television Council . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 68 million homes in its original airing . The episode aired along with a series of musical numbers from throughout the show 's eight seasons . " Brian & Stewie " was released on DVD along with ten other episodes from the season on December 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Brian and Stewie visit the local Quahog bank so that Brian can deposit holiday money in his safe deposit box . Stewie then wants to go to a store to return a $ 3 @,@ 000 Thom Browne sweater . While they are still inside the vault , the door closes at the end of the work day and locks them inside until the next morning . Frightened , Stewie soils his diaper . Worried he will get a rash from the dirty diaper , Stewie desperately tries to make Brian eat his feces by threatening him with a gun that Brian had stored in his deposit box . They discover that Stewie has a cellphone in his pocket , but there 's only enough charge in the battery for one short phone call . Unfortunately , Stewie uses the last of the phone 's battery charge to call the clothing store rather than for help . Enraged , Brian strikes Stewie , throws his phone on the ground ( thus damaging the phone ) , and yells at Stewie , making him cry . Instantly remorseful and wanting to repair his relationship with Stewie , Brian reluctantly agrees to eat Stewie 's feces in order to provide him with a clean diaper and make up for making Stewie cry . While watching Brian eating , Stewie becomes nauseated and throws up ; Stewie then convinces Brian to eat the vomit . Realizing that he has nothing to clean his bottom with , Stewie manages to convince Brian to clean his bottom with his tongue in order to avoid infection , much to Stewie 's pleasure . Afterward , they both decide to take a nap , but soon they realize that the next day is Sunday , meaning that they will have to wait another day before they can be released from the vault . 
 Awaking from his nap , Brian decides to drink a bottle of scotch that he had stored in his safety deposit box . He offers Stewie a sip , and they both become so drunk that Brian agrees to pierce Stewie 's ear with a pin from his sweater , leaving Stewie with a bloody ear for the rest of the episode . Stewie and Brian discuss The Dog Whisperer and Cesar Millan , and Brian explains that he is inspired by the philosophy about dogs ' instinctive ability to live in the present and with purpose . Stewie , however , points out that Brian himself does not appear to live with any specific purpose . Angered at the implication , Brian begins insulting Stewie , who bitterly retaliates by revealing that he could have gone all day without having his diaper changed , and only thinks of Brian as a passing amusement . Stewie dares Brian to shoot him with the revolver in the deposit , which Brian earlier said to be bullet @-@ free . It is revealed that Brian lied , and he attempts to shoot Stewie . The two then find a security camera hanging on a wall of the vault . Brian tries to use it to call for help , but Stewie points out if there was someone out there , they would have been saved . Brian then realizes that the camera has recorded him cleaning Stewie , which amuses the infant , but Brian is upset about gaining a laughingstock reputation . Stewie then prematurely causes the gun to discharge , causing the bullet to randomly ricochet off the vault walls , smashing Stewie 's already @-@ broken phone and the bottle of Scotch , and forcing the two under the table . 
 Soon after sobering up , Stewie stretches and takes out a Jenny Craig Anytime Bar from his shopping bag . Brian loses his temper with Stewie for not revealing that he had been storing food the entire time . After Brian calms down , Stewie asks him why he had the gun in the first place , eventually coaxing Brian into revealing that he keeps the gun in case he ever wants to commit suicide . Brian confesses that he cannot find his purpose in life , and finds comfort in knowing he has the option of killing himself . He admits that the Scotch was to be a last drink . Stunned , Stewie admits that he would be lost without Brian , claiming he is the only person in the world that he really cares about , and he eventually confesses that he loves him as an irreplaceable friend , and that he gives his life meaning . Brian tells Stewie he loves him back . In addition , Stewie reminds Brian that maybe making someone else happy is enough , because it is the best gift one person can give , for which Brian thanks him . Stewie falls asleep as Brian reads the beginning of David Copperfield to him . The following morning , the vault door opens , and Brian carries a sleeping Stewie and their belongings out of the room in silence . The credits also roll in silence . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was written by series consulting producer Gary Janetti as his second episode of the season , and directed by series regular Dominic Bianchi , also in his second episode of the season . In an interview with Forbes , series producer Kara Vallow revealed that the plot was inspired by an episode of the CBS sitcom All in the Family entitled " Archie in the Cellar , " in which Archie Bunker is locked in a cellar , breaking from the show 's usual storyline . Vallow and Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane were fans of All in the Family during its original airing and came up with the original concept for the episode . Vallow went on to state that the episode " [ is ] like a one @-@ act stage play in a way , " because it " [ doesn 't ] rely on our standard cutaways and gags . " In a first for the series , the only voice actor to perform in the episode was series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane , who portrays both characters . In addition , neither composer Ron Jones nor composer Walter Murphy contributed any background music to the episode whatsoever . The writer of the episode , Gary Janetti , wrote the episode based on a loose script written by MacFarlane , as well as various phone conversations about the structure of the storyline , and the various acts . 
 " Brian & Stewie " , along with the eleven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini @-@ feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 In its initial airing , the episode aired with a framing device involving Stewie and Brian standing in front of a red curtain and addressing the television audience . The two begin the program by introducing the " very special " episode and , after the episode aired , conclude it by introducing a series of musical numbers . Together , the episode and musical number aired as an hour @-@ long special , in celebration of a week @-@ long " Fox Rocks " television event . The initial airing included musical numbers from the fourth season episode " The Fat Guy Strangler " , the sixth season episode " Play It Again , Brian " , and the eighth season episode " Business Guy " , as well as other numbers , including " You 've Got A Lot to See " from " Brian Wallows and Peter 's Swallows " , " Shipoopi " from " Patriot Games " , and " My Drunken Irish Dad " from the episode " Peter 's Two Dads " . In repeats of the episode the usual main title sequence is replaced by a still shot of the show 's logo on a black background , whilst the end credits are shown without any musical accompaniment . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In addition to " Archie in the Cellar " , the plot of the episode is inspired by the All in the Family episode " Two 's a Crowd " , in which Archie and Mike are locked in a storeroom , drink brandy and share their deepest secrets . The episode also makes reference to an episode of The Twilight Zone entitled " Time Enough at Last " , in which a banker named Henry Bemis sneaks into a bank vault and is knocked unconscious . In the episode , Henry Bemis is reading a copy of David Copperfield , which Brian also reads during the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In an improvement over the previous six episodes , the episode was viewed in 7 @.@ 68 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with Desperate Housewives on ABC , Celebrity Apprentice on NBC and Cold Case on CBS . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating The Simpsons , The Cleveland Show , as well as the accompanying musical special , which received a total rating of 3 @.@ 3 . 
 The episode received varied reviews from critics and viewers . Reviewers generally disliked the episode 's humor , but were positive about the more serious moments . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club believed that the show 's concept , which allowed only two characters and a single scene , was " ambitious " but that the end result was " flaccid . " He commented that with no cut @-@ away gags or side plots , the episode was " basically everything critics of the show would like the show to have " but was deprived of Family Guy 's trademark fast pace and reduced to " a series of what amounts to grossout comedy sketches . " Television critic Ramsey Isler of IGN added that the gross @-@ out humor " didn 't work for me " and found the " more serious stuff " in the episode to be the most entertaining . Said Isler , " the addition of more dramatic themes and the elimination of the cutaway gags really showed what this show could be if Seth [ MacFarlane ] and team put more effort in . " In a subsequent review of Family Guy 's eighth season , Isler listed " Brian & Stewie " as being " surprisingly dramatic , " and , " had it not been for the extended poop @-@ eating jokes and rehashed musical numbers in the second half , I 'd say it was one of the better efforts the show has ever put out . " Jason Hughes of TV Squad was also " more than a little disturbed " by the amount of time spent on Stewie 's soiled diaper . However , he noted , " I didn 't laugh much at ' Brian & Stewie ' , but I found myself absolutely captured by their discussion throughout the episode . " Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly described the episode as " tedious , predictably vulgar , and , by the end , sentimental . " Adam Rosenberg of MTV wrote , " Beneath all of the more disturbing elements there 's actually some very thoughtful , mature discussion of suicide and what love means amidst it all . " Andrew Hanson of The Los Angeles Times found the soiled diaper gag " too sick to watch " and " the grossest " moment featured in Family Guy so far , but conceded that that may have been the producer 's intention . Still , Hanson described Brian 's suicidal confession as " deep " and stated , " It ’ s nice to see that Family Guy is still trying new things and going out on a limb even at episode No. 150 . " The episode was voted # 5 on BBC Three 's list of Top Ten Family Guy episodes . 
 The Parents Television Council , a conservative media watchdog group and frequent critic of MacFarlane @-@ produced programs , called on the Federal Communications Commission to investigate Family Guy after the episode aired , citing the scenes where Brian is talked into eating Stewie 's feces and vomit . PTC president Tim Winter said that , " Given the patently offensive depictions of one character eating excrement out of a diaper , then eating vomit , and finally licking the remaining excrement from a baby ’ s bottom – while the baby expresses physical gratification from having his bottom licked – we believe that the broadcast decency law has been broken . It seems as though Family Guy creator , Seth MacFarlane , carefully reviewed the legal definition of broadcast indecency and set out to violate it as literally as he could . " The Parents Television Council went on to name the episode as its " Worst TV Show of the Week " , ending the week of May 7 , 2010 , citing the extreme indecency of the episode . 
 = Harold L. George = 
 Not to be confused with Harold Huston George for whom George Air Force Base was named 
 Harold Lee George ( July 19 , 1893 – February 24 , 1986 ) was an American aviation pioneer who helped shape and promote the concept of daylight precision bombing . An outspoken proponent of the industrial web theory , George taught at the Air Corps Tactical School and influenced a significant group of airmen passing through the school , ones who had powerful influence during and after World War II . He has been described as the leader of the so @-@ called " Bomber Mafia " , the men who advocated an independent military arm composed of heavy bombers . George helped shape America 's bomber strategy for the war by assisting Air War Plans Division with the development of a complete aircraft production and bombing strategy . 
 In 1934 , George helped institute the Order of Daedalians , and served as that organization 's first Wing Commander . 
 During World War II , George led the Air Transport Command , taking it from 130 obsolescent aircraft to 3 @,@ 000 modern transports , operated by 300 @,@ 000 airmen . Following the war , he helped Hughes Aircraft become a very profitable company , and was twice elected mayor of Beverly Hills , California . 
 = = Early career = = 
 George was born July 19 , 1893 in Somerville , Massachusetts , to Horace and Susan E. George . He attended George Washington University , but decided to interrupt his studies when the United States became directly involved in World War I. George joined the United States Army and on May 21 , 1917 , received his commission as second lieutenant in the Cavalry as a reserve officer . A month later , he went on active duty with the Cavalry at Fort Myer , Virginia , and married Anna Virginia Helms on August 10 . In October George resigned his reserve commission to become a flying cadet with the Aviation Section , U.S. Signal Corps . 
 George attended the <unk> School of Military Aeronautics ( an eight @-@ week ground school ) set up on the campus of Princeton University and learned to fly at Love Field , Texas , receiving his rating of Reserve Military Aviator and a new commission on March 28 , 1918 . George went to France that September with an initial assignment to the 7th Aviation Instruction Center ( bombardment ) at Clermont @-@ Ferrand . Two months later he was posted to <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Meuse with the 163rd Aero Squadron , one of two DH @-@ 4B day bomber squadrons of the new 2nd Day Bombardment Group , Second Army Air Service . In the week in which it saw action in November 1918 , just prior to the armistice , the 163d flew 69 sorties in support of the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive . George observed that massed bombers , flying in formation , swamped enemy defenses and so reduced the attacker 's casualties . 
 = = Bombing advocate = = 
 In France , George met William " Billy " Mitchell and became convinced that Mitchell 's vision of an independent Air Force was the best future direction for the American military . 
 After the war , George was assigned to the 49th Bombardment Squadron at Kelly Field , Texas . On July 1 , 1920 , when the Air Service became a combat arm of the line , he transferred to it in the permanent grade of 1st lieutenant . He next served with the 14th Bombardment Squadron at Langley Field , Virginia , and with the Aberdeen Proving Ground , Maryland from 1921 to 1925 . There George assisted Mitchell in his bombing demonstration against old battleships , and helped develop air @-@ to @-@ ship tactics . In August 1925 , George went to Washington as chief of the Bombardment Section in the Operations Division of the Office of the Chief of Air Service . Later that year , still at the rank of first lieutenant , he was one of several young air officers to testify at Mitchell 's court @-@ martial . 
 In July 1929 , George was ordered to Hawaii for two years with the 5th Composite Group at Luke Field . In September , 1931 , he went to Maxwell Field , Alabama , to study at the Air Corps Tactical School ( ACTS ) where he helped refine the precision daylight bomber doctrine taught there . He was promoted to captain during the assignment , on December 1 , 1931 . Following graduation , George became an instructor at ACTS , teaching air tactics and precision bombing doctrine , and became de facto leader of the influential " Bomber Mafia " . With Haywood S. Hansell , Laurence S. Kuter and Donald Wilson , George researched , debated and codified what the men believed would be a war @-@ winning strategy that Wilson termed " industrial web theory " . In 1934 , George was made director of the Department of Air Tactics and Strategy , and vigorously promoted the doctrine of precision bombing in which massed air fleets of heavy bombers would be commanded independently of naval or ground warfare needs . 
 George was promoted to the temporary rank of major in July 1936 . He graduated from the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , the following year and returned to Langley as commanding officer of the 96th Bombardment Squadron . George flew to South America as a part of Air Corps goodwill flights in February 1938 and November 1939 , and received for his participation the Order of the Southern Cross ( Knight ) , from the government of Brazil . In 1940 , George took command of the 2d Bombardment Group , which in 1937 had become the first unit equipped with the B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bomber . Promoted to the temporary rank of lieutenant colonel on December 30 , 1940 , he also filled the position of Executive Officer of the 2nd Bombardment Wing from January 1941 . 
 In July 1941 , George was appointed assistant chief of staff for Air War Plans Division , a unit of the newly created USAAF Air Staff in Washington . In that capacity he assembled a small group of " bomber mafia " members ( including Hansell , Kuter , and Kenneth N. Walker ) to prepare AWPD – 1 , an estimate of air resources needed in the event of war that became the plan for the air war against Germany . He was promoted to to colonel on January 2 , 1942 , and to brigadier general on April 19 , 1942 when he took command of the Air Corps Ferrying Command ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Air transport = = 
 In June 1942 , <unk> was redesignated Air Transport Command and tasked to become not just a delivery service of aircraft from factory to the field , but a worldwide cargo and personnel air transportation service . George led it brilliantly throughout World War II , with the able assistance of many staff officers including his deputy , General C. R. Smith , peacetime president of American Airlines . 
 New organizations were formed and new cross ocean routes were established in the face of the enemy and under difficult conditions . George took the ferrying command from 130 obsolescent aircraft to 3 @,@ 000 modern military transports , and expanded the personnel from 11 @,@ 000 to 300 @,@ 000 . For this major contribution to his country , George received the Distinguished Service Medal , Legion of Merit , Distinguished Flying Cross , and Air Medal , as well as decorations from Great Britain , France , Brazil , Peru and China . 
 After the war he served for a while as director of information for the USAAF and as senior Air Force representative of the military staff of the United Nations . He retired from active duty December 31 , 1946 , with rank of lieutenant general dating back to March 1945 . 
 = = Post @-@ war activity = = 
 George accepted a position at Hughes Aircraft to work for Howard Hughes , along with fellow bomber advocate Ira C. Eaker . Eaker and George transformed Hughes Aircraft into a very profitable military contractor , reaching $ 100M in sales in 1948 . George expanded the company beyond the manufacture of aircraft to focus on the new field of military electronics , primarily by bringing together expert electronics designer Dean Wooldridge and engineer @-@ businessman Simon Ramo , both hired by George in 1946 . In August 1953 , Ramo and Wooldridge resigned . George followed a few months later to help form the Ramo @-@ Wooldridge Corporation , competing directly with Hughes by developing ballistic missile defenses . In 1958 , Ramo @-@ Wooldridge would merge with Thompson Products , to become Thompson Ramo Wooldridge , which was shortened to TRW in 1965 . 
 After moving there in 1948 , George was elected to the City Council of Beverly Hills , California , in 1952 , and in 1954 he was elected mayor , a one @-@ year term . He served a second term in 1959 . During his second term , George established an annual award to honor outstanding Beverly Hills police officers , given in the name of Clinton H. Anderson , the city 's police chief . 
 In 1955 , George was recalled to active duty in the United States Air Force for eight months as special consultant to the Air Force Chief of Staff . George was relieved from active duty November 4 , 1955 . 
 By 1984 , George was living in Laguna Hills , California . That year , he collected and donated more than $ 21 @,@ 000 to various Republican Party candidates and conservative causes including the Jesse Helms @-@ founded National Congressional Club and the " Helms for Senate " campaign . On February 24 , 1986 , George died in Laguna Hills . He was survived by his wife Violette , three daughters and one son . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In his directorship of ACTS , George is known today as the unofficial leader of the men in the Army Air Corps who closed ranks and pushed exclusively toward the concept of daylight precision bombing as a strategic , war @-@ winning doctrine . Though he played a fundamental role in the development of U.S. air power strategy , he is perhaps better known as the first commander of Air Transport Command — the man who guided and expanded that organization throughout World War II . 
 The Order of Daedalians has , since 1956 , awarded the " Lieutenant General Harold L. George Civilian <unk> Award " , a trophy " presented annually to the pilot , copilot and / or crew of a United States certified commercial airline selected by a Federal Aviation committee to have demonstrated ability , judgment and / or heroism above and beyond normal operational requirements . " The Air Force Aid Society bestows the " Lieutenant General Harold Lee George Educational Grant Award . " 
 = = Recognition = = 
 George was awarded : 
 Distinguished Service Medal 
 Legion of Merit 
 Distinguished Flying Cross 
 Air Medal 
 1939 - Knight of the Order of the Southern Cross ( Brazil ) 
 = = Effective dates of promotion = = 
 Second Lieutenant - May 21 , 1917 
 First Lieutenant - April 1921 
 Captain - December 31 , 1931 
 Major - July 1936 
 Lieutenant Colonel - February 1941 
 Colonel - January 1942 
 Brigadier General - April 1942 
 Major General - June 1942 
 Lieutenant General - March 16 , 1945 . 
 = These Are the Voyages ... = 
 " These Are the Voyages ... " is the series finale of the UPN American science fiction television show Star Trek : Enterprise . The 22nd episode of the fourth season and the 98th of the series overall , it first aired on May 13 , 2005 , in the United States . " These Are the Voyages ... " is a frame story , where the 22nd century events of Star Trek : Enterprise are shown through a 24th @-@ century holodeck re @-@ creation during the Star Trek : The Next Generation episode " The Pegasus " . The episode features guest stars Jonathan Frakes , Marina Sirtis , and Jeffrey Combs , as well as a voice cameo from Brent Spiner . Series creators Rick Berman and Brannon Braga , who co @-@ wrote the episode , conceived " These Are the Voyages ... " as a valentine to Star Trek fans . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , the story moves to the year 2370 , when Commander William Riker grapples with making a difficult admission to his commanding officer about a cover @-@ up . Riker , after consulting Counsellor Troi , turns to the simulated events of the year 2161 for guidance , when the crew of Enterprise travels home to Earth for both decommissioning and the formation of the United Federation of Planets . 
 Reaction to " These Are the Voyages ... " was negative . Critics and cast alike believed The Next Generation frame robbed the characters and their fans of closure , and that the death of Commander Tucker felt forced and unnecessary . The final episode attracted 3 @.@ 8 million viewers , the highest number since the previous season . After a strong premiere , Enterprise had grappled with declining ratings throughout its run . By the fourth season , fewer than three million viewers tuned in each week despite what some fans and critics considered an increase in episode quality . After selling the syndication rights , UPN and Paramount announced in February 2005 that the fourth season would be the show 's last . With no new Star Trek episodes in the fall of 2005 , the 2005 – 2006 season was the first year without a first @-@ run Star Trek in 18 years . Despite the cancellation , Paramount hoped to revive the series , and Berman began work on a possible new Star Trek film , which was ultimately rejected in favor of the J. J. Abrams @-@ directed Star Trek . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2370 , Commander William Riker , aboard Enterprise @-@ D , is troubled by the events of " The Pegasus " and seeks guidance . At Lieutenant Commander Deanna Troi 's suggestion , Riker sets a holo @-@ program to the date 2161 , some six years after the events of " Terra Prime " , to a time when the original Enterprise ( NX @-@ 01 ) is due to be decommissioned after ten years of active service . The starship and its crew are also returning to Earth for the signing of the Federation Charter , and Captain Archer frets over the speech he will give to the assembled delegates . 
 En route , Riker and Troi observe as Enterprise is contacted by Shran , a former Andorian Imperial Guard who Archer believed was dead . Apparently his young daughter has been kidnapped , and he asks for Archer 's help in rescuing her from Rigel X. Archer decides to assist , despite Commander T 'Pol 's warning that they may be late returning for the ceremony . Riker joins the Enterprise crew as it assaults Shran 's enemies and brings his daughter safely back . Troi also advises that Riker assume the role of ship 's chef , hoping to earn the confidence of the simulated crew . As he prepares food with the crew , he learns more about their memories and impressions of Tucker . 
 He also watches as the kidnappers board Enterprise , and how , in order to save Archer 's life , Commander Tucker overloads two conduits and dies after becoming mortally wounded . He notices that Archer is troubled that he must write a speech about how worthwhile their explorations have been , despite his friend 's death , but T 'Pol assures him that Tucker would have considered it worthwhile . On Earth , Troi watches as Archer enters a crowded grand hall to give his speech and Riker joins her , now sure of what course he should take . The final shot of the episode is a montage of the ships named Enterprise as Captains Picard , Kirk , and Archer recite the " Where no man has gone before " monologue . 
 = = Production = = 
 " These Are the Voyages ... " was written by Braga and Berman , the pair 's only script of the fourth season . Enterprise writer Mike Sussman told TrekNation in May 2005 that Braga had considered the idea of an episode crossover featuring characters from other Star Trek series prior to the finale . Sussman 's original idea for the episode was to have The Doctor of Star Trek : Voyager treating an ill patient who may or may not have been Archer trapped in the future . Due to the subject matter , Sussman said his version would not have been suitable for the final episode . In interviews , Berman said that the episode had always been intended as the season finale regardless of cancellation , and gave conflicting answers regarding whether Trip would still have been killed if the show was to continue . 
 Allan Kroeker directed the episode , his third series finale following Star Trek : Deep Space Nine 's " What You Leave Behind " and Star Trek : Voyager 's " Endgame " . " These Are the Voyages ... " featured guest appearances by Jonathan Frakes and Marina Sirtis as their Next Generation characters William Riker and Deanna Troi . Brent Spiner , another Next Generation veteran who had guest @-@ starred earlier in the fourth season of Enterprise , had an off @-@ screen speaking role as the android Data . Jeffrey Combs appeared as the Andorian Shran , whom Coto had wanted to be a permanent addition to the cast in the event of another season . 
 Filming of the final episode began on Friday , February 25 , after the first half of the day was spent completing " Terra Prime " . Principal photography took eight days to complete , one day longer than usual . The snowy complex set of Rigel X , first seen in the pilot episode , was used , as was the rarely seen Enterprise 's galley . Enterprise @-@ D locations such as hallways and the observation lounge were re @-@ created . Frakes and Sirtis arrived at the lot at the same time that a " Save Enterprise " rally was being held outside the gates . Similar to " What You Leave Behind " , many of the production staff cameoed for a large crowd scene at the end of the episode , as Archer prepares to give his speech . Fifteen " VIPs " including writers Judith and Garfield Reeves @-@ Stevens , André Bormanis , and Manny Coto joined two dozen extras in forming part of the audience . The rest of the digital set was filled by a computer @-@ generated crowd . After their parts were finished , the final dismissal of each cast member was met with applause . Jolene Blalock and Scott Bakula were the last actors to be released , and Bakula gave a speech thanking the production crew for making the cast feel welcome . Filming ended on Tuesday , March 8 , and the sets were struck . Frakes and Sirtis returned on March 9 to complete green screen shots , which would be used when their characters entered or exited the holodeck . Before the episode 's release , Berman would not elaborate on the final episode 's content , saying " It 's going to have some surprising twists and turns . It 's somewhat of a valentine . " 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " These Are the Voyages ... " was negatively received by both critics and the show 's cast . Before the episode aired , Blalock called the episode " appalling . " She followed up her remarks by saying she was upset over the finale being a The Next Generation episode rather than an end for Enterprise . Connor Trinneer ( who played Commander Trip Tucker ) , felt that the finale should have had a memorable farewell that he described as a " M * A * S * H moment " , but that the producers did not want to focus on such an element . Anthony Montgomery ( who played Ensign Travis Mayweather ) was similarly displeased with the finale and said " I feel there could have been a more effective way to wrap things up for our show as well as the franchise as a whole . It just seemed to take a little bit away from what the Enterprise cast and crew worked so diligently to achieve over the past four years . " While Frakes enjoyed working with Sirtis again , he said that " the reality is it was a bit of a stretch to have us shut down [ the Enterprise cast 's ] show , " and that in hindsight it was a disservice to them . The early criticism forced the show 's producers to hold a conference and address the issue . Braga admitted there was cast unrest , but defended the episode as a way to close not just Enterprise but Star Trek as a whole . 
 Reviewers were also critical of the Next Generation tie @-@ in . Sci Fi Weekly 's Patrick Lee said the framing story " reduces [ the Enterprise cast ] to the status of lab rats . " Lee further noted that even without the guest appearances , the episode did not live up to the best offerings of the season , including " In a Mirror , Darkly " . National Post 's Alex Strachan called the Next Generation cameos reminders of better Star Trek , compared to the " bad make @-@ up effects , bad acting , bad music " of the latest show . Rob Salem of the Toronto Star said the cameos served no narrative purpose , and that the episode " robs [ the ] characters ( and their fans ) of any significant long @-@ term development or satisfying sense of closure . " Reviewers also criticized the episode 's ending , where viewers never got to see Archer 's rousing speech . IGN said that the episode was " Berman and Braga 's parting shot , making sure that everyone knew who was in charge , " and that the sharp contrast between " These Are the Voyages ... " and " Terra Prime " brought into relief the reason why both should not be allowed to produce Star Trek ever again . 
 The death of Tucker was another object of controversy . Salem described the development as " a major character is pointlessly killed off in service of a pointless plot device , " a complaint echoed by IGN . Actor Connor Trinneer , who played Trip , said during a convention appearance that the character had " gotten out of much worse scrapes than that , " and the death seemed forced . The writers , Trinneer contended , wanted to kill off a character to " get the fans talking , " and so Trip was killed off simply to manipulate viewers . Several critics ended their reviews by saying that whether fans would be disappointed or pleased by the episode , the majority of casual viewers would not care one way or another . 
 In response to some of these criticisms , Coto stated that he personally considered the two @-@ part story " Demons " and " Terra Prime " that preceded " These Are the Voyages ... " the actual finale of the Enterprise storyline . Berman said " I 've read a lot of the criticisms and I understand how some people feel , but [ Braga ] and I spent a lot of time coming up with the idea and a somewhat , I would say , unique ending to a series , especially when you ’ re ending it prematurely . [ ... ] You never like to disappoint people , but I think it 's nonsense to say that it was more a Next Generation episode than an Enterprise episode . The only elements of [ The Next Generation ] that were present were there as a sounding board to allow us to look at a mission that took place six years after " Terra Prime " . " 
 The episode was released on DVD home media as part of the season four box set on November 1 , 2005 in the United States . The Blu ray release of the final season of Enterprise was made available on April 29 , 2014 . 
 = = Series cancellation = = 
 " Broken Bow " , Enterprise 's 2001 premiere episode , attracted 12 @.@ 5 million viewers in its first broadcast , but ratings quickly dropped to a low of 5 @.@ 9 million viewers . Enterprise was threatened with cancellation by the third season . The show survived by slashing its budget amid broadcaster UPN 's schedule revamp . The show was moved to Fridays in 2004 , while the rest of UPN 's programming became more female @-@ friendly , in part due to the success of America 's Next Top Model . The third season introduced a season @-@ long story arc , to some of the best reviews of the entire series . In the fourth season , Manny Coto became executive producer after writing and co @-@ producing the show since 2003 . While Coto 's episodes were hailed by critics and fans as equaling the quality of previous Star Trek television series , the average viewership dropped to 2 @.@ 9 million , with a series @-@ low showing of 2 @.@ 5 million in January 2005 . According to TrekNation , Enterprise 's final episode attracted 3 @.@ 8 million viewers , an increase of 69 % over the previous season 's finale . 
 On February 3 , 2005 , UPN and Paramount announced that the fourth season of the show would be its last . The network waited until the series had been sold to syndication before making the announcement . The cancellation marked the first time new Star Trek episodes would not appear on television in 18 years , since Star Trek : The Next Generation premiered . The fourth season continued production so that Paramount could sell an attractive 98 episodes to syndicates . 
 A series @-@ ending wrap party was held for the cast and crew at the Roosevelt Hotel in April . Cast members spoke about their feelings about the end of the series . John Billingsley said the show " was a great ride , and it changed my life . It 's something that will last forever for me . " He was happy to say goodbye to the two @-@ hour makeup sessions to create his character , Phlox . Many of the cast were taking a break and going on vacation before seeking new acting jobs . Among the notable guests were Star Trek Nemesis screenwriter John Logan , who was not affiliated with Enterprise , and Peter Weller , who appeared as a villain in " Terra Prime " . 
 Actress Jolene Blalock ( T 'Pol ) criticized the early stories as boring and lacking intriguing content . She felt that early Enterprise scripts ignored basic tenets of Star Trek chronology , and offered " revealing costumes instead of character development " . UPN executives stated that the male @-@ oriented episodes of Enterprise did not mesh with the viewership of its other top shows , such as Top Model and Veronica Mars . Brannon Braga suggested that the reason for the cancellation was viewer fatigue , noting that " after 18 years and 624 hours of Star Trek , the audience began to have a little bit of overkill . " Fans , meanwhile , criticized Berman and Braga for ignoring Star Trek canon and refusing to fix their shows . Michael Hinman , news coordinator for SyFy Portal , stated that in addition to the oversaturation of Star Trek , there " also is an oversaturation of Braga and Berman . [ ... ] They couldn 't sit back and say , ' You know , we just can 't keep this fresh . ' No , it was more about their stupid egos , and their nonsensical ' Even if it 's broke , don 't fix it ' attitude . " Braga defended the series , noting that The Next Generation faced little competition from other science fiction shows , while Enterprise had to contend with a plethora of shows such as Battlestar Galactica . 
 Newspapers covering Enterprise 's cancellation and its final episode often said that the failure of Enterprise was evidence that the franchise had moved too far from its roots and grown too dark . Andy <unk> of MSNBC said that " while the writers and production designers deserve credit for offering worlds that were perhaps slightly more believable , they lost the fantastic , wondrous approach to space travel that The Next Generation borrowed from the original Star Trek and then perfected . " USA Today 's Michael Peck said that without the " dreams " of earlier series , " Star Trek becomes just another television drama . " Melanie McFarland of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , meanwhile , said the show " never found the sense of uniqueness within the Trek universe that every version that came before it possessed . " Despite the cancellation , Paramount remained optimistic . Studio head David <unk> looked " forward to a new chapter of this enduring franchise in the future . " Berman and screenwriter Erik <unk> developed a concept for a new film taking place after Enterprise but before the 1960s television show . Meanwhile , Paramount asked Roberto Orci for ideas to revive the franchise , resulting in the production of a reboot film set in an alternate timeline from the 1966 @-@ 2005 franchise simply titled Star Trek , released in May 2009 and directed by J. J. Abrams . 
 = History of Texas A & M University = 
 The history of Texas A & M University , the first public institution of higher education in Texas , began in 1871 , when the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas was established as a land @-@ grant college by the Texas Legislature . Classes began on October 4 , 1876 . Although Texas A & M was originally scheduled to be established under the Texas Constitution as a branch of the yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ created University of Texas , subsequent acts of the Texas Legislature never gave the university any authority over Texas A & M. In 1875 , the Legislature separated the administrations of A & M and the University of Texas , which still existed only on paper . The Agricultural and Mechanical College formally opened on Oct. 4 , 1876 . 
 For much of its first century , enrollment at Texas A & M was restricted to white men who were willing to participate in the Corps of Cadets and receive military training . During this time , a limited number of women were allowed to attend classes but forbidden from gaining a degree . During World War I , 49 % of A & M graduates were in military service , and in 1918 , the senior class was mustered into military service to fight in France . During World War II , Texas A & M produced over 20 @,@ 000 combat troops , contributing more officers than both the United States Military Academy and United States Naval Academy combined . 
 Shortly after World War II , the Texas Legislature redefined Texas A & M as a university and the flagship school of the Texas A & M University System , making official the school 's status as a clear and separate institution from the University of Texas . In the 1960s , the state legislature renamed the school Texas A & M University , with the " A & M " becoming purely symbolic . Under the leadership of James Earl Rudder , the school became racially integrated and coeducational . Membership in the Corps of Cadets became voluntary . 
 In the second half of the 20th century , the university was recognized for its research with the designations sea @-@ grant university and space @-@ grant university . The school was further honored in 1997 with the establishment of the George Bush Presidential Library on the western edge of the campus . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The US Congress laid the groundwork for the establishment of Texas A & M with their proposal of the Morrill Act . The Morrill Act , signed into law July 2 , 1862 , was created to enable states to establish colleges where the " leading object shall be , without excluding other scientific and classical studies and including military tactics , to teach such branches of learning as are related to agriculture and mechanical arts ... in order to promote the liberal and practical education of the industrial classes in the several pursuits and professions in life " . States were granted public lands to be sold at auctions to establish a permanent fund to support the schools . Both the Republic of Texas and the Texas State Legislature also set aside public lands for a future college . 
 The Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas , known as Texas A.M.C. , was established by the state legislature on April 17 , 1871 as the state 's first public institution of higher education . The legislature provided US $ 75 @,@ 000 for the construction of buildings at the new school , and state leaders invested profits from the sale of 180 @,@ 000 acres ( 730 km2 ) received under the Land @-@ Grant College Act in gold frontier defense bonds , creating a permanent endowment for the college . A committee tasked with finding a home for the new college chose Brazos County , which agreed to donate 2 @,@ 416 acres ( 10 km2 ) of land . Jefferson Davis , former President of the Confederate States of America , was offered the presidency of the college but turned it down . 
 The college officially opened on October 4 , 1876 with six professors . Forty students were present on the first day of classes , but by the end of the school year the number had grown to 106 students . Only men were admitted , and all students were required to participate in the Corps of Cadets and receive military training . The campus bore minimal resemblance to its modern counterpart . Wild animals roamed freely around the campus , and the area served as a meeting point for the Great Western Cattle Trail . 
 Despite its name , the college taught no classes in agriculture , instead concentrating on classical studies , languages , literature , and applied mathematics . After four years , students could attain degrees in scientific agriculture , civil and mining engineering , and language and literature . Local farmers complained that the college was abusing its mission , and , in November 1879 , the president and faculty were replaced and given a mandated curriculum in agriculture and engineering . 
 During these early years , student life was molded by the Corps of Cadets . The Corps was divided into a battalion of three companies , and rivalry among the companies was strong , giving birth to the Aggie spirit and future traditions . No bonfires , yell practices , or athletics teams existed as yet , and social clubs and fraternities were discouraged . 
 Enrollment , which had climbed as high as 500 students , declined to only 80 students in 1883 , the year the University of Texas opened in Austin , Texas . Although the Texas Constitution specified that the Agricultural and Mechanical College was to be a branch of a proposed University of Texas , the Austin school was established with a separate Board of Regents . Texas A.M.C. continued to be governed by its own Board of Directors . 
 The two Texas schools quickly began to battle over the limited funds that the state legislature made available for higher education . In 1887 , the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station was established at Texas A.M.C. , enabling the college to gain more funding . Many residents of the state saw little need for two colleges in Texas , and some wanted to close the agricultural and mechanical school . 
 = = Sul Ross era = = 
 Texas A.M.C. president Lawrence Sullivan Ross , known affectionately to students as " Sully " , is credited for saving the school from closure and transforming it into a respected military institution . Ross , the immediate past governor of Texas , had been a well @-@ respected Confederate Brigadier General and enjoyed a good reputation among state residents . 
 When Ross arrived at the school , he found no running water , a housing shortage , a disgruntled faculty , and many students running wild . As Ross began to make improvements , parents began to send their children to the school in the hopes that they would learn from Ross 's example . Although enrollment had always been limited to men , in 1893 , Ethel Hudson , the daughter of an A & M professor , became the first woman to attend classes at the school and helped edit the annual yearbook . She was made an honorary member of the class of 1895 . Several years later her twin sisters became honorary members of the class of 1903 , and slowly other daughters of Aggie professors were allowed to attend classes . 
 Under Ross 's seven and one @-@ half year tenure , many enduring Aggie traditions formed . These traditions include the first Aggie Ring , the first yearbook , and the formation of the Aggie Band . Ross 's tenure also saw the school 's first intercollegiate football game , played against the University of Texas . 
 = = Program expansion = = 
 By 1910 , the school listed eight degree programs , including agriculture , architecture , agricultural engineering , chemical engineering , civil engineering , electrical engineering , mechanical engineering , and textile engineering . Five years later the state legislature , in cooperation with the United States Department of Agriculture , established the Texas Agricultural Extension Service , organized the Texas Forest Service , and authorized a School of Veterinary Medicine at the college . The college was unprepared for the growth , and for the next ten years several hundred students lived in tents in a field in the middle of campus . 
 During this time , women were also given a more official standing . The Texas Legislature in 1911 refused to give A & M permission to hold a summer semester unless women were also permitted to attend . For the next several decades during the summers cadets were not required to be in uniform and women could attend class and participate in intramural activities . 
 Texas A & M graduates were called to use their military training during World War I , and by 1918 , 49 % of all graduates of the college were in military service , a larger percentage than any other college or university . In early September 1918 , the entire senior class was mustered into military service , with plans to send the younger students at staggered dates throughout the next year . Many of the seniors were fighting in France when the war ended two months later . In total , over 1200 former students served as commissioned officers during World War I. 
 Texas A & M Hillel , the oldest Hillel organization in the United States , was founded in 1920 . The organization occurred three years before the national Hillel Foundation was organized at the University of Illinois . 
 After the war , Texas A & M grew rapidly and became nationally recognized for its programs in agriculture , engineering , and military science . The first graduate school was organized in 1924 , and , in 1925 , Mary Evelyn Crawford Locke became the first female to receive a diploma from Texas A & M , although she was not allowed to participate in the graduation ceremony . The following month the Board of Directors officially prohibited all women from enrolling . In 1926 , they codified that women in summer school had an unofficial status and could not pursue a degree . By 1930 , however , over 1800 women had attended classes at A & M. 
 In the late 1920s , following the discovery of oil on university lands , Texas A & M and the University of Texas negotiated a settlement for the division of the Permanent University Fund which enabled A & M to receive one @-@ third of the revenue . This guaranteed wealth enabled A & M to expand . Enrollment increased even during the Great Depression , as student cooperative housing projects enabled the students to attend the school at low costs . During the Depression , as professors were forced to accept a 25 % pay cut , the Board of Directors partially rescinded its order against female enrollment , allowing no more than 20 females at a time to enroll in the school , and further restricting the group to daughters of professors . 
 Texas A & M expanded its degree offerings in the late 1930s and awarded its first Ph.D. in 1940 . Other programs at the college likewise began offering doctoral degrees throughout the next few decades . 
 World War II gave Texas A & M an opportunity to prove itself on a worldwide stage . The school produced 20 @,@ 229 fighting men who served in combat ; of these , 14 @,@ 123 were officers , more than the combined total of the United States Naval Academy and the United States Military Academy and more than three times the totals of any other Senior Military College . Seven Aggies received the Medal of Honor during the worldwide conflict , tying with Virginia Tech as the most of any school outside of the military academies at West Point and Annapolis , and 29 former students reached the rank of general . In addition , the college received nationwide exposure during the war when a reporter wrote a widely distributed story about the Aggie Muster on the island of Corregidor . The intense interest resulted in a World War II propaganda movie , We 've Never Been Licked , which was filmed on the A & M campus and showcased many of the school traditions . 
 Though Texas A & M was originally established as a branch of the yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ created University of Texas , subsequent acts of the Texas Legislature never gave the University any authority over Texas A & M. This internal legal conflict in Texas was nullified in 1948 when Texas A & M became the flagship school of the newly created Texas A & M University System , a clear and separate institution from the University of Texas System . A & M 's Board of Directors continued to oversee the system . Enrollment soared as many former soldiers used the G.I. Bill to further their education . Unprepared for the growth , between 1949 and 1953 Texas A & M used the former Bryan Air Force Base as an extension of the campus . An estimated 5 @,@ 500 men lived , studied , ate , showered , and attended classes at the base , which became known as the Annex ( and later as Riverside Campus ) . 
 = = Rudder era = = 
 The Texas Legislature defeated a nonbinding resolution in the 1950s to encourage A & M to admit women . The school newspaper , The Battalion began writing editorials to encourage coeducation , causing the Student Senate to demand the editor of the paper resign . Later in the year students defeated 2 – 1 a campus resolution on coeducation . 
 On March 26 , 1959 retired Major General James Earl Rudder , who ( outside of Sul Ross ) arguably had the most significant effect on the campus ( and especially in terms of transforming it into the modern university of today ) , became the 16th president of the college , his alma mater . At the time , the college was still an all @-@ male military school with a 7 @,@ 500 student enrollment . Within several years of his arrival , the 58th Legislature of Texas officially changed the name of the school from the Agricultural & Mechanical College of Texas to Texas A & M University . The Legislature specified that in the new name of the school , the A and the M were purely symbolic , reflecting the school 's past , and no longer stood for " Agricultural and Mechanical " . 
 With Rudder 's strong encouragement , in 1963 , the A & M Board of Directors officially reversed their stance on admitting women . The wives and daughters of faculty , staff and students as well as female staff members were finally allowed to officially participate in undergraduate programs , although they were not permitted to join the Corps of Cadets . 
 The following year the college was officially integrated as A & M welcomed its first African American student . More change ensued , as , in 1965 , the Board of Directors voted to make membership in the Corps of Cadets voluntary . The same year the Board voted to allow any woman , not just those connected to students and professors , to attend the university . The Board required that Rudder approve each female applicant ; he accepted any woman who met the academic requirements . During Rudder 's tenure , African @-@ American students were also welcomed , and in 1967 , James L. Courtney of Dallas became the first African American to receive an undergraduate degree from Texas A & M University . He remained at Texas A & M and , in 1970 , became the first African American to receive a <unk> degree from the College of Veterinary Medicine . 
 When Rudder died in 1970 , after 11 years as president of the school , Texas A & M University had grown to more than 14 @,@ 000 students from all 50 states and 75 nations . The school had become coeducational and had even begun construction of an all @-@ female dormitory . The curriculum had been broadened , with upgraded academic and faculty standards , and the school had initiated a multimillion @-@ dollar building program . 
 = = Recent years = = 
 On September 17 , 1971 , Texas A & M University was one of the first four institutions to be designated a sea @-@ grant college in recognition of oceanographic development and research . A third designation was added on August 31 , 1989 when Texas A & M was named a space @-@ grant college . The university remains one of few institutions nationwide to hold designations as a land- , sea- , and space @-@ grant college . 
 = = = Diversification = = = 
 The Corps welcomed its first female members in the fall of 1974 . At the time , the women were segregated into a special unit , known as W @-@ 1 , and suffered harassment from many of their male counterparts . Women were originally prohibited from serving in leadership positions or in the more elite Corps units such as the Fish Drill Team , the band , and Ross Volunteers . These groups were opened to female participation in 1985 , following a federal court decision in a class @-@ action lawsuit filed by a female cadet . Two years later , in 1990 , female @-@ only units were eliminated . 
 In November 1976 , the university denied official recognition to the Gay Student Services Organization on the grounds that homosexuality was illegal in Texas , and the group 's stated goals — offering referral services and providing educational information to students — were actually the responsibility of university staff . The students sued the university for violation of their First Amendment right to freedom of speech in February 1977 . For six years , Gay Student Services v. Texas A & M University wound its way through the courts ; although the trial court ruled in favor of Texas A & M several times , the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals repeatedly overturned the verdict . The U.S. Supreme Court declined to review the case , letting stand the circuit court ruling that the students ' free speech rights had been compromised . 
 The case set a national precedent by removing legal restrictions on gay rights groups on campuses . The subsequent recognition of the group provided a university precedent for allowing social organizations . In 1977 , the university had also denied recognition to Sigma Phi Epsilon , a national social fraternity , because its presence on campus might result in " a social caste system " . 
 = = = Presidential library = = = 
 The George Bush Presidential Library was established in 1997 on 90 acres ( 364 @,@ 220 m2 ) of land donated by Texas A & M at the western edge of the campus . This tenth presidential library was built between 1995 and 1997 and contains the presidential and vice @-@ presidential papers of George H.W. Bush and the vice @-@ presidential papers of Dan Quayle . 
 To coincide with the opening of the George Bush Presidential Library , Texas A & M established the George Bush School of Government and Public Service . The school , which offers a master 's degree in public policy and one in international affairs as well as two research degrees , officially launched in 1997 . It became a separate school within the university in 1999 . 
 = = = Bonfire collapse = = = 
 At 2 : 42 a.m. on November 18 , 1999 , the partially completed Aggie Bonfire , standing 40 feet ( 12 m ) tall and consisting of about 5000 logs , collapsed during construction . Of the 58 students and former students working on the stack , 12 were killed and 27 others were injured . The incident received nationwide attention , with over 50 satellite trucks broadcasting from the Texas A & M campus within hours . 
 On November 25 , 1999 , the date that Bonfire would have burned , Aggies instead held a vigil and remembrance ceremony on site . Over 40 @,@ 000 people , including former President George H.W. Bush and his wife Barbara and then @-@ Texas governor George W. Bush and his wife Laura , lit candles and observed up to two hours of silence at the site of the Bonfire collapse . 
 A commission put together by Texas A & M University discovered that a number of factors led to the Bonfire collapse , including " excessive internal stresses " on the logs and " inadequate containment strength " , where the wiring used to tie the logs together was not strong enough . The wiring broke after logs from upper tiers were " wedged " into lower tiers . 
 Texas A & M officials , Bonfire student leaders , and the university itself were the subject of several lawsuits by parents of the students injured or killed in the collapse . On May 21 , 2004 , Federal Judge Samuel B. Kent dismissed all claims against the Texas A & M officials , and , in 2005 , 36 of the 64 original defendants , including all of the student leaders , settled their portion of the case for an estimated US $ 4 @.@ 25 million , paid by their insurance companies . A federal appeals court dismissed the remaining lawsuits against Texas A & M and its officials in 2007 . 
 = = = Vision 2020 = = = 
 In 1997 , university president Ray Bowen appointed a task force to create a new strategic plan for the university . The task force , made up of more than 250 faculty , staff , students , former students , local residents , and various <unk> and public @-@ sector representatives , devoted more than two years to examining all aspects of the university and studying benchmark institutions before unveiling the plan , dubbed Vision 2020 , in 1999 . 
 Vision 2020 's goal is to make Texas A & M University recognized as a consensus " top 10 " public university by the year 2020 . The plan identifies 12 areas in which the university should focus on improving . Dr. Robert M. Gates succeeded Bowen in 2002 , and during his four @-@ year tenure as president , Vision 2020 's short @-@ term focus narrowed to four key steps : 
 Increasing the size of the faculty by 447 positions within five years . 
 Building new academic facilities totaling roughly US $ 272 million . 
 <unk> the undergraduate and graduate education experience . 
 Gates ' leadership resulted in the largest academic expansion in the university 's history . As of September 8 , 2006 , Vision 2020 's progress includes : 
 346 new teachers and researchers from around the world with completion slated for September 1 , 2007 
 Hispanic enrollment increased 9 @.@ 6 % , African American enrollment increased 9 @.@ 4 % , and Asian American enrollment rose 24 @.@ 3 % compared to 2005 . 
 Over $ 500 million in new construction across campus including Interdisciplinary Life Sciences Building ( US $ 95 million ) , two emerging technologies buildings ( US $ 50 million each ) , and a nuclear magnetic resonance imaging building ( US $ 8 million ) . 
 The student @-@ faculty ratio dropped from 22 : 1 in 2001 to 20 : 1 in the fall of 2005 . 
 = = = Hurricane relief = = = 
 Following Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , Texas A & M opened Reed Arena as a temporary shelter to house over 200 evacuees from New Orleans . Although school was barely in session and there was minimal notice , the students and staff of A & M prepared the facility , setting up several hundred beds on the arena floor and making arrangements for the evacuees to get new clothes and have medical checks . Aggie students organized a child care facility , and Aggie athletes escorted teenagers to the Aggie Rec Center to play basketball . Less than three weeks later , Reed Arena was again opened as a temporary shelter for people fleeing Hurricane Rita . 
 = = = Current status = = = 
 With strong support from Rice University and the University of Texas at Austin , the Association of American Universities inducted Texas A & M in May 2001 , based on the depth of the university 's research and academic programs . Furthermore , in 2004 , the honors organization Phi Beta Kappa opened its 265th chapter at Texas A & M. 
 On December 18 , 2006 , former Texas A & M University president Robert M. Gates was sworn in as the 22nd U.S. Secretary of Defense . Gates ' successor , Elsa Murano , on January 3 , 2008 became both the university 's first female and first Hispanic president . Murano 's term as president ended abruptly June 2009 , and was succeeded by Interim President R. Bowen Loftin . Loftin was eventually selected as university president in February 2010 . 
 As of the fall 2012 the university has a current enrollment of more than 50 @,@ 000 , the sixth @-@ largest university in the United States and the largest university in Texas . As of 2007 , the percentage of women and men at the school are roughly equal . However , for a number of years female of the freshman class have outnumbered males . The university has awarded more than 320 @,@ 000 degrees , of which 70 @,@ 000 have been graduate and professional degrees . Texas A & M has two branch campuses , one in Galveston , Texas , and one in the Middle Eastern country of Qatar . The latter branch campus had the distinction in 2011 of being the first school outside the U.S recognizing engineers as members of Tau Beta Pi , the Engineering Honor Society 
 In 2013 , Texas A & M Health Science Center was formally merged into the university . The university also purchased the Texas Wesleyan University School of Law and renamed it the Texas A & M School of Law . On October 23 , 2013 , plans to build a new branch campus , Texas A & M University at Nazareth - Peace Campus , in Israel , were announced . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 In 1914 , Texas A & M became a charter member of the Southwest Conference until its dissolution in 1996 . Texas A & M subsequently joined the Big Eight with The University of Texas at Austin , Baylor , and Texas Tech to form the Big 12 Conference . Texas A & M left the Big 12 Conference for the Southeastern Conference on July 1 , 2012 . This ended Texas A & M 's scheduled NCAA athletic competitions with its Texas Southwest Conference rivals . 
 As of the end of the 2012 athletics season , Texas A & M has won 17 national titles in all of its varsity sports . The school has two Heisman Trophy winners : John David Crow in 1957 and the 2012 winner , Johnny Manziel . 
 = Pine Island Glacier = 
 Pine Island Glacier ( PIG ) is a large ice stream glacier , and the fastest melting glacier in Antarctica , responsible for about 25 % of Antarctica 's ice loss . The glacier ice streams flow west @-@ northwest along the south side of the Hudson Mountains into Pine Island Bay , Amundsen Sea , Antarctica . It was mapped by the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) from surveys and United States Navy ( USN ) air photos , 1960 – 66 , and named by the Advisory Committee on Antarctic Names ( US @-@ <unk> ) in association with Pine Island Bay . 
 The area drained by Pine Island Glacier comprises about 10 percent of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet . Satellite measurements have shown that the Pine Island Glacier Basin has a greater net contribution of ice to the sea than any other ice drainage basin in the world and this has increased due to recent acceleration of the ice stream . 
 The ice stream is extremely remote , with the nearest continually occupied research station at Rothera , nearly 1 @,@ 300 km ( 810 mi ) away . The area is not claimed by any nations and the Antarctic Treaty prohibits any new claims while it is in force . 
 = = Ice sheet drainage = = 
 The Antarctic ice sheet is the largest mass of ice on earth , containing a volume of water equivalent to 57 m ( 187 ft ) of global sea level . The ice sheet forms from snow which falls onto the continent and compacts under its own weight . The ice then moves under its own weight toward the edges of the continent . Most of this transport to the sea is by ice streams ( faster moving channels of ice surrounded by slower moving ice walls ) and outlet glaciers . The Antarctic ice sheet consists of the large , relatively stable , East Antarctic Ice Sheet and a smaller , less stable , West Antarctic Ice Sheet . The West Antarctic Ice Sheet is drained into the sea by several large ice streams , most of which flow into either the Ross Ice Shelf , or the Filchner @-@ <unk> Ice Shelf . Pine Island and Thwaites Glaciers are two major West Antarctic ice streams which do not flow into a large ice shelf . They are part of an area called the Amundsen Sea <unk> . A total area of 175 @,@ 000 km2 ( 68 @,@ 000 sq mi ) , 10 percent of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet , drains out to the sea via Pine Island Glacier , this area is known as the Pine Island Glacier drainage basin . 
 = = Weak underbelly of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet = = 
 The Pine Island and Thwaites glaciers are two of Antarctica 's five largest ice streams . Scientists have found that the flow of these ice streams has accelerated in recent years , and suggested that if they were to melt , global sea levels would rise by 1 to 2 m ( 3 ft 3 in to 6 ft 7 in ) , destabilising the entire West Antarctic Ice Sheet and perhaps sections of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet . 
 In 1981 Terry Hughes proposed that the region around Pine Island Bay may be a " weak underbelly " of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet . This is based on the fact that , unlike the majority of the large West Antarctic ice streams , those flowing into the Amundsen Sea are not protected from the ocean by large floating ice shelves . Also , although the surface of the glacier is above sea level , the base lies below sea level and slopes downward inland , this suggests that there is no geological barrier to stop a retreat of the ice once it has started . 
 = = Acceleration and thinning = = 
 The speed of Pine Island Glacier increased by 73 percent from 1974 to the end of 2007 , with an 8 percent increase over the last 16 months of this period alone . This speed up has meant that by the end of 2007 the Pine Island Glacier system had a negative mass balance of 46 gigatonnes per year , which is equivalent to 0 @.@ 13 mm ( 0 @.@ 0051 in ) per year global sea level rise . In other words , much more water was being put into the sea by PIG than was being replaced by snowfall . Measurements along the centre of the ice stream by GPS demonstrated that this acceleration is still high nearly 200 km ( 120 mi ) inland , at around 4 percent over 2007 . It has been suggested that this recent acceleration could have been triggered by warm ocean waters at the end of PIG , where it has a floating section ( ice shelf ) approximately 50 km ( 31 mi ) long . It has also been shown that PIG underwent rapid thinning during the Holocene , and that this process may continue for centuries after it is initiated . 
 As the ice stream accelerates it is also getting steeper . The rate of thinning within the central trunk has quadrupled from 1995 to 2006 . If the current rate of acceleration were to continue the main trunk of the glacier could be afloat within 100 years . 
 = = Subglacial volcano = = 
 In January 2008 the British Antarctic Survey ( BAS ) scientists , Hugh Corr and David Vaughan , reported that 2 @,@ 200 years ago a volcano erupted under the Antarctic ice sheet . This was the biggest Antarctic eruption in the last 10 @,@ 000 years . The volcano is situated in the Hudson Mountains , close to Pine Island Glacier . The eruption spread a layer of volcanic ash ( or tephra ) over the surface of the ice sheet . This ash was then buried under the snow and ice . Corr and Vaughan were able to map this ash layer using an airborne radar system and calculate the date of the eruption from the depth of burial of the ash . This method uses dates calculated from nearby ice cores . The presence of the volcano raises the possibility that volcanic activity could have contributed , or may contribute in the future , to increases in the flow of the glacier . 
 = = History of fieldwork = = 
 = = = On the ice = = = 
 Due to the remoteness of Pine Island Glacier , most of the information available on the ice stream comes from airborne or satellite @-@ based measurements . 
 The first expedition to visit the ice stream was a United States over @-@ snow traverse , where they spent around a week in the area of PIG during January 1961 . They dug snow pits to measure snow accumulation and carried out seismic surveys to measure ice thickness . One of the scientists on this traverse was Charles R. Bentley , who claims " we didn 't know we were crossing a glacier at the time . " This is not surprising , because PIG is around 50 km ( 31 mi ) wide at the point visited and at ground level cannot be visually distinguished from the surrounding ice . This expedition was called the Ellsworth Highland Traverse . 
 Then in the 2004 / 2005 field season a team of 9 using a British Antarctic Survey ( BAS ) Twin Otter aircraft , equipped with ice penetrating radar , completed an aerial survey of PIG and its adjacent ice sheet . The team of 7 British & 2 Americans led by Dave Vaughan & Hugh Corr flew 30 km grid patterns over the PIG until mid @-@ January 5 , mapping the sub @-@ glacial terrain of that area roughly equal to the size of the State of Nevada . 
 Due to the remoteness of PIG and the logistical difficulties of caching enough fuel for the 04 / 05 expedition and future project ( s ) , BAS used the resources of the United States Antarctic Program ( <unk> ) and their ski @-@ equipped <unk> aircraft . 
 After many weeks of weather delays the first four men ( Ben <unk> , Rob Smith , Dave Anderson & Martin Bell ) arrived from McMurdo on 11 / 9 / 04 and began to establish camp and build a <unk> for the <unk> ’ s . Camp was established on the upper end of the ice stream at <unk> x <unk> The remaining members of the team arrived from Rothera approximately 10 days later in the Twin Otter , flown by survey pilot Dave <unk> . 
 Because of unusually good weather in the area that season the survey completed flying their grids early ( mid @-@ January ) and began flying 15 km grids of Thwaites Glacier for a <unk> expedition who had been experiencing unusually poor weather in their area that year . Flying over Antarctica ’ s Pine Island Glacier in a DC @-@ 8 research plane , scientists participating in NASA ’ s <unk> mission made a startling discovery on October 14 , 2011 : a massive crack running about 29 kilometers ( 18 mi ) across the glacier ’ s floating tongue . The rift is 80 metres ( 260 feet ) wide on average and 50 to 60 meters ( 160 to 200 ft ) deep , and it marks the moment of creation for a new iceberg that will span about 880 square kilometers ( 340 square miles ) once it breaks loose from the glacier . 
 All survey grids having been completed by the end of January , the survey crew flew back to Rothera leaving the two Americans and two British to dismantle the camp . A week later the remaining team members flew back to McMurdo leaving a fuel cache for future expeditions . 
 Another team from the British Antarctic Survey arrived at the ice stream on 8 December 2006 for the first of two field seasons . In the second field season , they spent three months there from November 2007 to February 2008 . Work on the glacier included radar measurements and seismic surveys . 
 In January 2008 Bob <unk> ( NASA ) landed on the floating ice shelf of PIG , this is at the downstream end where it floats on the sea . This landing , by a Twin Otter plane fitted with skis , was the first ever landing on this ice shelf . The reason for landing on the ice shelf was for a reconnaissance mission to investigate the feasibility of drilling through around 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) of ice , to lower instruments into the ocean cavity below . It is hoped that this will provide important information on the link between the ocean and Pine Island Glacier . It was decided that the small crevasse free area was too hard for further landings and so further fieldwork had to be postponed . Therefore , two GPS units and a weather station were positioned as near as possible to PIG . 
 Since then , the National Science Foundation has decided to establish a helicopter camp for the scientists to safely study the ice @-@ ocean interaction . During the 2010 – 11 summer field season in Antarctica , it is planned that tractors and sleds will haul all of the equipment needed to establish a camp near the ice shelf . A tractor train traverse of about 700 km ( 430 mi ) is needed to deliver the materials . The plan over the following two field seasons , 2011 – 12 and 2012 – 13 , is for scientists to use helicopters to fly to sites on the ice shelf , where they will deploy specially designed profilers down through the ice shelf to measure various ocean properties . 
 2011 @-@ 2012 field season : after five weeks of delays , the camp staff was finally able to establish the Main Camp just before New Years . The following week Dr <unk> and his team were able to arrive . Due to additional weather delays , the helicopters weren 't able to arrive by the NSF ' drop dead ' date and the field season was essentially cancelled . Fortunately limited science was still accomplished by the team thanks to a series of flights by <unk> back onto the glacier ; its seems that conditions had changed drastically since the last twin otter flights . 
 The British Antarctic Survey deployed a small team of four ( Dr Andrew Smith , Gabriel <unk> , Ashly <unk> , Ian Hey ) during the 2011 @-@ 12 summer field season to carry out a series of seismic and radar surveys on PIG . They also installed a series of overwintering GPS stations . During this same field season , a separate BAS team ( Dr Mark <unk> , Tom Stroud ) was inputted to the field parties location and they installed an overwintering autonomous <unk> station . This was followed by a radar traverse upstream using <unk> . This survey linked previous radar lines . 
 = = = From the sea = = = 
 The first ship to reach Pine Island Glacier 's ice shelf , in Pine Island Bay , was the USS / USCGC Glacier in 1985 . This ship was an icebreaker operated by the U.S. Coast Guard . The mission , known as Deep Freeze , had scientists on board who took sediment samples from the ocean floor . 
 During the summer field season , over two months from January to February 2009 , researchers aboard the U.S. Antarctic Program research vessel Nathaniel B. Palmer reached the ice shelf . This was the second time that the Palmer had successfully made it up to the glacier , the first time being in 1994 . In collaboration with the British , the scientists used a robotic submarine to explore the glacier @-@ carved channels on the continental shelf as well as the cavity below the ice shelf and glacier . The submarine , known as Autosub 3 , was developed and built at the National Oceanography Centre in the UK . It completed six successful missions , travelling a total of 500 km ( 310 mi ) under the ice shelf . Autosub is able to map the base of the ice shelf as well as the ocean floor and take various measurements and samples of the water on the way . The success of Autosub 3 was particularly notable because its predecessor Autosub 2 was lost beneath the Fimbul Ice Shelf on only its second such mission . 
 = Church Administration Building = 
 The Church Administration Building ( CAB ) is an administrative office building in Salt Lake City , Utah , serving as the headquarters of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) , the fourth @-@ largest Christian denomination in the United States . Completed in 1917 , the building is adjacent to Temple Square , between the Joseph Smith Memorial Building and the Lion House , on South Temple Drive . It differs from the Church Office Building in that it is much smaller and furnishes offices for the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles . It also houses offices for other general authorities and their personal staff . 
 Only church officials and their guests are permitted to enter . The CAB has been used for meetings between church leaders and political and community leaders . 
 = = Use and special events = = 
 Initially , the Church Administration Building housed all administrative offices of the LDS Church , but as membership grew and leadership and staff expanded , the workers were scattered in office buildings throughout downtown Salt Lake City — some as far away as the Granite Mountain Vaults in Little Cottonwood Canyon and at Brigham Young University , forty miles to the south in Provo . With construction of the Church Office Building to the east , the Church Administration Building was freed up for offices exclusively for general authorities , and it continues to serve as the church 's headquarters . 
 The Church Administration Building furnishes offices for the president of the LDS Church , as well as for his counselors in the First Presidency , the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles , and other general authorities , along with their staff . The building is overseen by the Church Security Department , with only certain employees , church officers and their guests are permitted to enter . 
 A variety of events have been held at the CAB , as well as receiving distinguished visitors . As part of the festivities for the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City , the Olympic torch was passed through the hands of members of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles on the steps of the CAB . It is also a tradition that funeral processions of past LDS Church presidents pass in front of the Church Administration Building . The building has hosted visitors including Michelle Obama and George W. Bush . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Constructed between 1914 and 1917 , the building is built of quartz monzonite from the same quarry in Little Cottonwood Canyon as the stone used for the Utah State Capitol and the nearby Salt Lake Temple . The Mt . Nebo Marble Company supplied marble and travertine for the interior of the CAB . According to the Utah Geological Survey , " the company quarried Birdseye marble in the Thistle area of Utah County , and travertine and onyx at Pelican Point near Utah Lake in Utah County and in the Cedar Mountains of Tooele County . " 
 Twenty @-@ four ionic columns form a colonnade around the structure , each weighing eight tons . The building 's exterior is constructed from 4 @,@ 517 granite blocks . 
 = Stewie Loves Lois = 
 " Stewie Loves Lois " is the first episode of the fifth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy , an episode produced for Season 4 . It originally aired on Fox on September 10 , 2006 . The episode features Stewie after his teddy bear , which has been destroyed by an unfamiliar dog at the park , is repaired by his mother , Lois , causing him to become overly affectionate of her . Meanwhile , Peter gets a prostate exam from Dr. Hartman , but believes that he has been raped instead , and decides to prosecute his doctor in court . 
 The episode was written by Mark Hentemann and directed by Mike Kim . It received mostly mixed reviews from critics for its storyline , and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 9 @.@ 93 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Ellen Albertini Dow , Dave Boat , Phil LaMarr , Kevin Michael Richardson and Anne @-@ Michelle Seiler , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Quahog becomes the subject of a flu epidemic , and Peter goes to see Dr. Hartman for a vaccine . Although the vaccines are in short supply and must be saved for the elderly , Peter manages to get one anyway ( by pretending to fall onto the syringe ) . While looking through Peter 's papers , Hartman realizes that Peter has not had a prostate exam . Peter agrees to get one , despite not knowing what it involves . Upon receiving the procedure , Peter feels sexually violated and proceeds to tell Lois about his ordeal , and she is rather unsupportive and finds it amusing , up to the point to calling him a " fucking idiot " . He then suffers a mental breakdown and tells his friends about the incident , at which point they reveal that Dr. Hartman also " raped " them . Peter decides to sue Hartman in a court of law , and Lois is unable to talk him out of it . 
 In the courtroom , Peter exaggerates the story . The judge is not convinced , and even recalls his own prostate exam being uneventful . However , after further prompting from Peter , the judge " remembers " being abused and declares Hartman guilty , revoking his license . As Peter celebrates his victory at The Drunken Clam , his frequent need to urinate causes concern among his friends , where Seamus informs him that his prostate may be infected . However , his lawsuit makes it unlikely that any doctor would treat him , and indeed , not one does . Peter visits Dr. Hartman in disguise and unsuccessfully tries to trick him into giving the exam , but the doctor decides that his Hippocratic Oath requires him to go ahead with the examination anyway . Peter 's constant urinating turns out to be due to a minor infection and blockage caused by Mr. Sulu somehow being up Peter 's rectum . In the epilogue , Dr. Hartman 's license is reinstated . 
 Meanwhile , Stewie plays at the park with his teddy , Rupert . A vicious dog grabs Rupert from him and tears it to shreds . Lois runs after the dog , retrieves Rupert , and repairs him , causing Stewie to rethink all the bad thoughts he 's had of Lois . Stewie becomes enamored with her , which she takes as refreshing at first , but eventually , she becomes exhausted and frustrated at his increased dependency and even has a nightmare of murdering him . Taking Brian 's advice , she starts ignoring his demands for attention ( faking he got sick from pills and claiming to be dying ) , until he injures himself falling down the stairs ; Lois tries to apologize for her behavior , but Stewie is so disgusted by it that it causes him to hate her once again . 
 = = Production = = 
 When Stewie is fantasizing about murdering and harming Lois , he performs several karate and kung @-@ fu moves . This is a reference to an individual whom Mark Hentemann , a writer for Family Guy , used to know . He was the boy who would come to school , car washes or other events and tell stories about the people who he had been in physical fights with . During the scene when Stewie describes Lois as being the female version of Bonnie Hunt , MacFarlane comments that he feels bad about that joke , as just before it was broadcast — Hunt telephoned him on his mobile phone and told him about how much she enjoyed the show , however the gag was not removed due to its expected airing date being so close to when the telephone call was made . On the uncut version of this episode , there is a scene where Peter sleepily mistakes Stewie 's mouth for Lois 's genitals , muttering , " Oh , you are so ready ! " The edited TV version does not have this part , but leaves in the first half , in which Peter sleepily mistakes Stewie 's nose for Lois 's nipple . 
 For a reason which was not specified , the sound of Lois 's footsteps when going down the basement stairs during her dream of killing Stewie , had to be overcome by Stewie talking more often . This line of Stewie making general conversation in the same scene , was altered several times due to lack of laughter from the audience . MacFarlane comments that the scene of Peter standing up to his teacher who was giving the class a test , is a reference to " 80 's TV bullshit " . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actress Ellen Albertini Dow , voice actors Dave Boat , Phil LaMarr and Kevin Michael Richardson , and actress Anne @-@ Michelle Seiler guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Lori Alan , Alex Breckenridge , writer Mike Henry , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener also made minor appearances . Recurring cast members Adam West and Patrick Warburton guest starred in the episode as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During the scene when a car is about to fall off a cliff , Robin the Boy Wonder appears and attempts to save the people . However , upon arrival , he is criticized as he will not be able to save them : this is a reference to the portrayal of Robin from the 1960s Batman series . Throughout the episode , other references are made to fictitious super heroes . In total , three references were made to Star Trek , all of which involve Star Trek actor George Takei 's character , Mr. Sulu . When Peter has a flashback about passing his college test he is running around with the song " I 'm Free " by Kenny Loggins playing in the background . This is a reference to the movie Footloose . When Peter is recounting what Hartman did to him , he goes into a flashback in court , and everything turns black and white and grainy : this is a reference to The Accused , starring Jodie Foster . During one of the kitchen scenes , Brian teases Stewie singing " Stewie loves Lois ! " Stewie retorts by singing , " Brian loves Olympia Dukakis ! " To which he replies , " Oh yeah , I do . " 
 When Stewie imagines how a holiday in Hawaii would be with Rupert , he references the classic Calvin and Hobbes series . 
 Lois makes a reference to Barbara Bush after waking up from her dream of killing Stewie . She claims " I 'm just like that Texas woman who gave her son brain damage by holding him underwater , I 'm just like Barbara Bush " . When the fisherman is telling Peter about the serious consequences of not getting a prostate exam , he shows Peter a picture of band Primus , to which Peter asks him why he carries such random pictures around with him . 
 The closing credits are a reference to All in the Family , an American sitcom that originally aired on CBS in the 1970s . At the beginning of the credits , the voice of Peter says " Family Guy was recorded on tape before a live audience " as ' footage ' of the city of Quahog is shown . 
 = = Reception = = 
 IGN 's Dan Iverson commented that " the Stewie / Lois story was really kind of funny " , noting that the scene was " a nice window in on parenting " . He describes the scene of Stewie shouting at Brian in Spanish as being " very funny " . However , Iverson criticized the episode , noting that the scene of Peter giving his story in court went from just " creepy and awkward to just plain disturbing " . The episode received a final rating by Iverson of 4 @.@ 5 / 10 . 9 @.@ 93 million people watched this episode in the US on its first airing ranking # 2 on FOX that night behind The Simpsons , this episode was the highest rated of season five . 
 = The Swarm ( roller coaster ) = 
 The Swarm ( officially stylized as " THE <unk> " ) is a steel Wing Coaster at Thorpe Park , a theme park in the United Kingdom . The Swarm was the world 's second Wing Coaster designed by Swiss roller coaster manufacturer Bolliger & Mabillard and the United Kingdom 's first Wing Coaster . Construction commenced in May 2011 , and the coaster opened on 15 March 2012 . Starting in 2013 , the last two rows of each train face backwards , while the first five rows face forward . This was removed in 2016 , with all riders facing forward once again . 
 The 775 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 2 @,@ 543 ft ) ride stands 39 metres ( 128 ft ) tall and features five inversions . On the one @-@ minute twenty @-@ five second ride , riders experience speeds of up to 59 miles per hour ( 95 km / h ) and 4 @.@ 5 times the force of gravity . A marketing campaign for the ride began 11 months before The Swarm was opened to the public . The ride has generally been well received , ranking highly amongst other roller coasters of its type . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning and announcement = = = 
 In 2010 , planning for The Swarm began behind closed doors . The ride was codenamed <unk> in the early process of its planning and construction . On 31 January 2011 , Thorpe Park submitted a planning application for their 2012 ride to the Runnymede Borough Council . The website gave further information about the new ride 's theme , that of an apocalyptic battle . 
 = = = Construction and opening = = = 
 At the time of the ride 's announcement construction was already underway . The track for The Swarm was complete by 18 November 2011 . Clearance testing started almost immediately ; the first operational test run was completed on 17 January 2012 . 
 On 15 March 2012 , The Swarm officially opened to the public . In January 2013 , Thorpe Park announced that the last two rows on The Swarm would be rotated to face backwards for 2013 , a first for a Wing Coaster . The park 's tag line for this experience is ' THE <unk> Brave It Backwards ' . The park additionally announced that they were adding a damaged , mangled billboard , which the train travels through . In 2016 the seats were returned to all facing forwards . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The Swarm is located on a reclaimed island adjacent to the Stealth roller coaster , with parts of the ride being built over water . A bridge links the core of Thorpe Park to an island which hosts the roller coaster station , merchandise outlet , a games zone and toilet buildings . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 The Swarm features two 28 @-@ seat Bolliger & Mabillard Wing Coaster trains . Each train is made up of seven rows of four seats each . One pair of seats in each row is located on either side of the ride 's track and slightly lower than the track , as with all Wing Coasters . The trains are themed to resemble alien @-@ like creatures ( the ride 's eponymous " Swarm " ) , with a number of red LED lights placed across the train . 
 = = = Theme = = = 
 The area is designed to appear as if it has been partially destroyed by explosions associated with a major disaster . The ride recreates the experience of flying through a crash scene and features a crashed aeroplane , upturned ambulance , half @-@ submerged fire engine and a helicopter . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 The roller coaster begins in the station , which is built to look like a partially destroyed church , and climbs up a 38 @.@ 7 @-@ metre ( 127 ft ) chain lift hill . Upon reaching the top of the lift hill , the track twists 180 degrees anticlockwise , so that riders are upside down , before plunging down the world 's first dive drop element . The train then proceeds to dive under the wing of a wrecked plane and into a zero @-@ g roll 30 @.@ 6 metres ( 100 ft ) above the ground before passing through a billboard and entering an inclined loop 23 metres ( 75 ft ) in height . It then enters a turnaround with a wrecked helicopter with slow @-@ spinning rotor blades in the centre . This is followed by a corkscrew , which passes through the inclined loop . Upon leaving the corkscrew , the train curves past a crashed fire engine with water and fire effects and proceeds through a keyhole : a partly destroyed church tower . The ride then flies over the station and enters into a last inline twist before a mid @-@ course brake run . Following this , the train makes a banked left @-@ hand turn into the final brakes . The train then goes back into the station . The ride previously featured an on @-@ ride video camera , filming riders and allowing the purchase of a DVD afterwards ; this was removed sometime in 2015 or 2016 . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 In late April 2011 , Thorpe Park began an advertising campaign for <unk> consisting of " The end is coming " posters in the park and a teaser website , <unk> The <unk> website featured a brief description hinting at the possible theme of the ride alongside a countdown until 1 August 2011 . As the date of the ride 's announcement approached , Thorpe Park released a video via Facebook stating that " WAR is coming " . 
 On 25 January 2012 , it was reported that an incident occurred when testing The Swarm . Limbs of test dummies were broken off when the ride passed an object that was located too close to the track . The Daily Mail suggested that the incident might have been a publicity stunt . 
 In March 2012 , Thorpe Park announced it had contracted the band You Me at Six to create the world 's first roller coaster single for the launch of The Swarm . The song , " The Swarm " , was released on iTunes on 18 March 2012 , a few days after the opening of the roller coaster . The song entered the UK Singles Charts at number 23 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Swarm has generally been well received . Nick Sim of Theme Park Tourist praised the ride and its theme , saying that it packs " a number of incredible elements into its compact circuit " . Sim stated the ride had " fallen just short of our sky @-@ high expectations " mainly because of " its short ride time " . He rated the ride 4 out of 5 . Joanna Churchill of the Daily Mirror gave a review of the backwards ride , stating that it is " a whole new adrenaline @-@ pumped experience that is simply not for the faint @-@ hearted " . Churchill stated that her " blood pressure and heart rate went through the roof " , but " there was barely time to process what was happening before we were back on terra firma " . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , The Swarm debuted at position 68 out of the 365 roller coasters in the poll . When compared with other Wing Coasters debuting in the 2012 poll , The Swarm performed fairly well ; X @-@ Flight at Six Flags Great America ranked 58 , Wild Eagle at Dollywood ranked 87 , and Raptor at Gardaland ranked 113 . It did not place in Amusement Today 's Golden Ticket Awards in 2012 , 2013 and 2014 , but made its first appearance in 2015 ranked at 30 . 
 Despite the positive reviews however , The Swarm failed to increase attendance . In fact , park gate figures fell by 200 @,@ 000 following the addition of the coaster . The park as well as many others have blamed the parks branding from 2009 to 2012 as the issue . 
 = Edmonton = 
 Edmonton / <unk> / is the capital of Alberta , Canada . Edmonton is on the North Saskatchewan River and is the centre of the Edmonton Capital Region , which is surrounded by Alberta 's central region . 
 The city had a population of 877 @,@ 926 in the 2014 census , is Alberta 's second @-@ largest city and Canada 's fifth @-@ largest municipality . This population represents 66 percent of the total 2014 population of 1 @,@ 328 @,@ 300 within the Edmonton census metropolitan area ( CMA ) , Canada 's fifth @-@ largest CMA by population . Edmonton is the most northern North American city with a metropolitan population over one million . A resident of Edmonton is known as an Edmontonian . 
 Edmonton 's historic growth has been facilitated through the absorption of five adjacent urban municipalities ( Strathcona , North Edmonton , West Edmonton , Beverly and Jasper Place ) and a series of annexations ending in 1982 . Edmonton serves as the northern anchor of the Calgary – Edmonton Corridor . Known as the " Gateway to the North " , the city is a staging point for large @-@ scale oil sands projects occurring in northern Alberta and large @-@ scale diamond mining operations in the Northwest Territories . 
 Edmonton is a cultural , governmental and educational centre . It hosts a year @-@ round slate of festivals , reflected in the nickname " Canada 's Festival City " . It is home to North America 's largest mall , West Edmonton Mall ( the world 's largest mall from 1981 until 2004 ) , and Fort Edmonton Park , Canada 's largest living history museum . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest known inhabitants settled in the area that is now Edmonton around 3 @,@ 000 BC and perhaps as early as 12 @,@ 000 BC , when an ice @-@ free corridor opened up as the last glacial period ended and timber , water , and wildlife became available in the region . 
 In 1754 , Anthony <unk> , an explorer working for the Hudson 's Bay Company ( HBC ) , may have been the first European to enter the Edmonton area . His expeditions across the Canadian Prairies were mainly to seek contact with the aboriginal population for the purpose of establishing the fur trade , as competition was fierce between the Hudson 's Bay Company and the North West Company . By 1795 , Fort Edmonton was established on the north bank of the river , as a major trading post for the Hudson 's Bay Company . The name of the new fort was suggested by John Peter <unk> after Edmonton , London , the home town of both the HBC deputy governor Sir James Winter Lake , and <unk> . 
 The coming of the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) to southern Alberta in 1885 helped the Edmonton economy , and the 1891 building of the Calgary and Edmonton ( C & E ) Railway resulted in the emergence of a railway townsite ( South Edmonton / Strathcona ) on the south side of the river , across from Edmonton . The arrival of the CPR and the C & E Railway facilitated the arrival of settlers and entrepreneurs from eastern Canada , Britain and continental Europe , U.S. and other parts of the world . The fertile soil and cheap land in the Edmonton area helped attract settlers , further establishing Edmonton as a major regional commercial and agricultural centre . Some people participating in the Klondike Gold Rush passed through South Edmonton / Strathcona in 1897 . Strathcona was the northernmost railway point in North America , but travel to the Klondike was still very difficult for the " <unk> " , and a majority of them took a steamship north to the Yukon from Vancouver . 
 Incorporated as a town in 1892 with a population of 700 and then as a city in 1904 with a population of 8 @,@ 350 , Edmonton became the capital of Alberta when the province was formed a year later , on September 1 , 1905 . In November 1905 , the Canadian Northern Railway ( CNR ) arrived in Edmonton , accelerating growth . 
 During the early 1900s , Edmonton grew very rapidly , causing speculation in real estate . In 1912 , Edmonton amalgamated with the City of Strathcona , south of the North Saskatchewan River ; as a result , the city extended south of the North Saskatchewan River for the first time . 
 Just prior to World War I , the boom ended , and the city 's population declined sharply from more than 72 @,@ 000 in 1914 to less than 54 @,@ 000 only two years later . Many impoverished families moved to subsistence farms outside the city and others fled to greener pastures in other provinces . Recruitment to the Canadian army during the war also contributed to the drop in population . Afterwards , the city slowly recovered in population and economy during the 1920s and 1930s and took off again during and after World War II . 
 The Edmonton City Centre Airport opened in 1929 , becoming the first licensed airfield in Canada . Originally named Blatchford Field in honour of former mayor Kenny Blatchford , pioneering aviators such as Wilfrid R. " Wop " May and Max Ward used Blatchford Field as a major base for the distribution of mail , food , and medicine to Northern Canada ; hence Edmonton 's emergence as the " Gateway to the North " . World War II saw Edmonton becoming a major base for the construction of the Alaska Highway and the Northwest Staging Route . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Edmonton is located on the North Saskatchewan River , and sits at an elevation of 671 metres ( 2 @,@ 201 ft ) . Edmonton is the most northerly city in North America with a metropolitan population of over one million . It is at the same latitude as Hamburg ( Germany ) , Dublin ( Ireland ) , Manchester ( United Kingdom ) , and Magnitogorsk ( Russia ) . North as it is , it is south of the geographic centre of Alberta , which is located near the Hamlet of Fort Assiniboine . The terrain in and around Edmonton is generally flat to gently rolling , with ravines and deep river valleys , such as the North Saskatchewan River valley . The Canadian Rockies are located about 220 km ( 140 mi ) to the southwest . 
 The North Saskatchewan River originates at the Columbia Icefield in Jasper National Park and bisects the city . Before the construction of two reservoirs near the mountains , it would sometimes flood Edmonton 's river valley , most notably in the North Saskatchewan River flood of 1915 . It empties via the Saskatchewan River , Lake Winnipeg , and the Nelson River into Hudson Bay . It runs from the southwest to the northeast and is fed by numerous creeks throughout the city , such as Mill Creek , Whitemud Creek and <unk> Creek ; this creates numerous ravines , some of which are used for urban parkland . Edmonton is within the Canadian Prairies Ecozone . Aspen parkland , surrounds the city and , acts a transitional area from the prairie to the south and boreal forest in the north . However , the aspen woods and forests in and around Edmonton have long since been reduced by farming and other human activities , such as oil and natural gas exploration . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Edmonton has a humid continental climate ( Köppen climate classification Dfb ) It falls into the NRC Plant Hardiness Zone 4a . 
 The city has milder winters than either Regina or Winnipeg , both further south of Edmonton in latitude . Its average daily temperatures range from a low of − 10 @.@ 4 ° C ( 13 @.@ 3 ° F ) in January to a summer peak of 17 @.@ 7 ° C ( 63 @.@ 9 ° F ) in July . With average maximum of 23 @.@ 1 ° C ( 73 @.@ 6 ° F ) in July , and minimum of − 14 @.@ 8 ° C ( 5 @.@ 4 ° F ) in January . Annually , temperatures can exceed 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) for an average of four to five days anytime from late April to mid @-@ September and fall below − 20 ° C ( − 4 ° F ) for an average of 28 days . The highest temperature recorded within the City of Edmonton was 37 @.@ 2 ° C ( 99 @.@ 0 ° F ) , on June 29 , 1937 . On July 2 , 2013 , a record high humidex of 43 was recorded , due to an unusually humid day with a temperature of 33 @.@ 9 ° C ( 93 @.@ 0 ° F ) and a record high dew point of 23 ° C ( 73 @.@ 4 ° F ) . The lowest overall temperature ever recorded in Edmonton was − 49 @.@ 4 ° C ( − 56 @.@ 9 ° F ) , on January 19 and 21 , 1886 . On January 26 , 1972 , the temperature was recorded at − 48 @.@ 3 ° C ( − 54 @.@ 9 ° F ) and at <unk> with the wind chill , making it the lowest temperature including the wind chill ever recorded in Edmonton . 
 Typically , summer lasts from late June until early September , and the humidity is seldom uncomfortably high . Winter lasts from November to March , and varies greatly in length and severity . Spring and autumn are both short and highly variable . Edmonton 's growing season is from May 9 to September 22 ; Edmonton averages 135 @-@ 140 frost free days a year . At the summer solstice , Edmonton receives seventeen hours and three minutes of daylight , with an hour and forty @-@ six minutes of civil twilight . On average Edmonton receives 2 @,@ 299 hours of bright sunshine per year and is one of Canada 's sunniest cities . 
 The summer of 2006 was a particularly warm one for Edmonton , as temperatures reached 29 ° C ( 84 ° F ) or higher more than 20 times during the year , from as early as mid @-@ May and again in early September . The winter of 2011 – 12 was particularly warm ; from December 22 , 2011 , till March 20 , 2012 , on 53 occasions Edmonton saw temperatures at or above 0 @.@ 0 ° C ( 32 @.@ 0 ° F ) at the City Centre Airport . 
 Edmonton has a fairly dry climate . On average , it receives 476 @.@ 9 millimetres ( 18 @.@ 78 in ) of precipitation , of which 365 @.@ 7 millimetres ( 14 @.@ 40 in ) is rain and 111 @.@ 2 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 38 in ) is the melt from 123 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 48 @.@ 6 in ) of snowfall per annum . Precipitation is heaviest in the late spring , summer , and early autumn . The wettest month is July , while the driest months are February , March , October , and November . In July , the mean precipitation is 91 @.@ 7 mm ( 3 @.@ 61 in ) . Dry spells are not uncommon and may occur at any time of the year . Extremes do occur , such as the 114 mm ( 4 @.@ 49 in ) of rainfall that fell on July 31 , 1953 . Summer thunderstorms can be frequent and occasionally severe enough to produce large hail , damaging winds , funnel clouds , and occasionally tornadoes . Twelve tornadoes had been recorded in Edmonton between 1890 and 1989 . The F4 tornado that struck Edmonton on July 31 , 1987 , killing 27 , was unusual in many respects , including severity , duration , damage , and casualties . It is commonly referred to as Black Friday due both to its aberrant characteristics and the emotional shock it generated . Then @-@ mayor Laurence <unk> cited the community 's response to the tornado as evidence that Edmonton was a " city of champions , " which later became an unofficial slogan of the city . 
 A massive cluster of thunderstorms occurred on July 11 , 2004 , with large hail and over 100 mm ( 4 in ) of rain reported within the space of an hour in many places . This " 1 @-@ in @-@ 200 year event " flooded major intersections and underpasses and damaged both residential and commercial properties . The storm caused extensive damage to West Edmonton Mall ; a small glass section of the roof collapsed under the weight of the rainwater , causing water to drain onto the mall 's indoor ice rink . As a result , the mall was forced to undergo an evacuation as a precautionary measure . 
 = = = Parkland and environment = = = 
 Edmonton 's river valley constitutes the longest stretch of connected urban parkland in North America , and Edmonton has the highest amount of parkland per capita of any Canadian city ; the river valley is 22 times larger than New York City 's Central Park . The river valley is home to various parks ranging from fully serviced urban parks to campsite @-@ like facilities with few amenities . This main " Ribbon of Green " is supplemented by numerous neighbourhood parks located throughout the city , to give a total of 111 km2 ( 27 @,@ 400 acres ) of parkland . Within the 7 @,@ 400 ha ( 18 @,@ 000 acres ) , 25 km ( 16 mi ) -long river valley park system , there are 11 lakes , 14 ravines , and 22 major parks , and most of the city has accessible bike and walking trail connections . These trails are also part of the 235 km ( 146 mi ) <unk> walking trail . The City of Edmonton has named five parks in its River Valley Parks System in honour of each of " The Famous Five " . 
 Edmonton 's streets and parklands also contain one of the largest remaining concentrations of healthy American elm trees in the world , unaffected by Dutch elm disease , which has wiped out vast numbers of such trees in eastern North America . Jack pine , lodgepole pine , white spruce , white birch , aspen , mountain ash , Amur maple , Russian olive , green ash , basswood , various poplars and willows , flowering crabapple , Mayday tree and Manitoba maple are also abundant ; bur oak , silver maple , hawthorn and Ohio buckeye are increasingly popular . Other introduced tree species include white ash , blue spruce , Norway maple , red oak , sugar maple , common horse @-@ chestnut , McIntosh apple , and Evans cherry . Three walnut species – butternut , Manchurian walnut , and black walnut – have survived in Edmonton . 
 Several golf courses , both public and private , are also located in the river valley ; the long summer daylight hours of this northern city provide for extended play from early morning well into the evening . Golf courses and the park system become a winter recreation area during this season , and cross @-@ country skiing and skating are popular during the long winter . Four downhill ski slopes are located in the river valley as well , two within the city and two immediately outside . 
 A variety of volunteer opportunities exist for citizens to participate in the stewardship of Edmonton 's parkland and river valley . Volunteer programs include River Valley Clean @-@ up , Root for Trees , and Partner in Parks . River Valley Clean @-@ up engages volunteers to pick up hundreds of bags of litter each year . 
 = = = Neighbourhoods = = = 
 Edmonton is divided into 375 neighbourhoods within 7 geographic sectors – a mature area sector , which includes neighbourhoods that were essentially built out prior to 1970 , and 6 surrounding suburban sectors . 
 Edmonton 's Downtown is located within the city 's mature area or inner city . It and the surrounding Boyle Street , Central McDougall , Cloverdale , Garneau , McCauley , Oliver , Queen Mary Park , Riverdale , Rossdale , Strathcona and University of Alberta form Edmonton 's Central Core . Oliver and Garneau are the city 's most populated and most densely populated neighbourhoods respectively . The mature area sector also contains the five former urban municipalities annexed by the city over its history – Beverly , Jasper Place , North Edmonton , Strathcona and West Edmonton ( Calder ) . 
 Larger residential areas within Edmonton 's six suburban sectors , each comprising multiple neighbourhoods , include : Heritage Valley , <unk> , Riverbend , <unk> Heights and Windermere ( southwest sector ) ; The Grange , Lewis Farms and West Jasper Place ( west sector ) ; Big Lake ( northwest sector ) ; Castle Downs , Lake District and The Palisades ( north sector ) ; Casselman @-@ Steele Heights , <unk> , Hermitage and Pilot Sound ( northeast sector ) ; and Ellerslie , The Meadows , Mill Woods and Southeast Edmonton ( southeast sector ) . Mill Woods is divided into a town centre community ( Mill Woods Town Centre ) and eight surrounding communities – <unk> , <unk> , Lakewood , <unk> , <unk> , Ridgewood , Southwood , and Woodvale – each having between two and four neighbourhoods . 
 Several transit @-@ oriented developments ( <unk> ) have begun to appear along the LRT line at <unk> , with future developments planned at Belvedere ( part of the Old Town Fort Road Redevelopment Project ) . Another <unk> , called Century Park , is being constructed at the site of what was once Heritage Mall , at the southern end of the LRT line . Century Park will eventually house up to 5 @,@ 000 residents . 
 The Edmonton City Centre Airport is planned to be redeveloped into a sustainable community of 30 @,@ 000 people comprising a transit @-@ oriented mixed use town centre , townhouses , low , medium and high rise apartments , neighbourhood retail and service uses , and a major park . 
 Edmonton has four major industrial districts – the Northwest Industrial District , the Northeast Industrial District , the Southeast Industrial District and the emerging Edmonton Energy and Technology Park , which is part of Alberta 's Industrial Heartland . The northwest , northeast and southeast districts each have smaller industrial areas and neighbourhoods within them . 
 The city has established 12 business revitalization zones – 124 Street and Area , Alberta Avenue , Beverly , Downtown , Chinatown and Little Italy , Fort Road and Area , Inglewood , Kingsway , North Edge , Northwest Industrial , Old Strathcona and Stony Plain Road . 
 = = = Metropolitan area = = = 
 Edmonton is at the centre of Canada 's sixth largest census metropolitan area ( CMA ) , which includes Edmonton and 34 other municipalities in the surrounding area . Larger urban communities include Sherwood Park ( an urban service area within Strathcona County ) , the cities of St. Albert , Leduc , Spruce Grove and Fort Saskatchewan , and the towns of Stony Plain , Beaumont , <unk> , and Devon . Major employment areas outside of Edmonton but within the CMA include the <unk> Industrial Business Park and the Edmonton International Airport ( including a planned inland port logistics support facility in support of the Port Alberta initiative ) in Leduc County , the Acheson Industrial Area in Parkland County , Refinery Row in Strathcona County and Alberta 's Industrial Heartland within portions of Fort Saskatchewan , Strathcona County and Sturgeon County . Alberta 's Industrial Heartland also extends beyond the CMA 's northeastern boundary into a portion of Lamont County . 
 The individual economic development interests and costs of service delivery in certain municipalities within the region has led to <unk> competition , strained <unk> relationships and overall fragmentation of the region . Although several attempts have been made by the City of Edmonton to absorb surrounding municipalities or annex portions of its neighbours , the city has not absorbed another municipality since the Town of Jasper Place joined Edmonton on August 17 , 1964 and the city has not annexed land from any of its neighbours since January 1 , 1982 . After years of mounting pressure in the early 21st century , the Province of Alberta formed the Capital Region Board ( CRB ) on April 15 , 2008 . The CRB consists of 24 member municipalities – 22 of which are within the Edmonton CMA and two of which are outside the CMA . The City of Edmonton subsequently announced in March 2013 its intent to annex 156 square kilometers of land ( including the Edmonton International Airport ) from Leduc County . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The population of the City of Edmonton according to its 2014 municipal census is 877 @,@ 926 , a 7 @.@ 4 % change from its 2012 municipal census population of 817 @,@ 498 . The 2012 census captured more detailed demographic information on residents , including age and gender , marital status , employment status , length of residency , prior residence , employment transportation mode , citizenship and school residency , as well as dwellings and properties , including ownership , structure and status . Per its municipal census policy , the city 's next municipal census is scheduled for 2016 . 
 In the 2011 Census , the City of Edmonton had a population of 812 @,@ 201 living in 324 @,@ 756 of its 348 @,@ 672 total dwellings , an 11 @.@ 2 percent change from its 2006 population of 730 @,@ 372 . With a land area of 684 @.@ 37 km2 ( 264 @.@ 24 sq mi ) , it had a population density of 1 @,@ 186 @.@ 8 / km2 ( 3 @,@ 073 @.@ 8 / sq mi ) in 2011 . The census also reported that 50 @.@ 2 percent of the population ( 407 @,@ 325 ) was female while 49 @.@ 8 percent ( 404 @,@ 875 ) was male . The average age of the city 's population was 36 @.@ 0 years while there was an average 2 @.@ 5 people per household . 
 The Edmonton census metropolitan area ( CMA ) has the sixth @-@ greatest population of CMAs in Canada and the second @-@ greatest in Alberta , but has the largest land area in Canada . It had a population of 1 @,@ 159 @,@ 869 in the 2011 Census compared to its 2006 population of 1 @,@ 034 @,@ 945 . Its five @-@ year population change of 12 @.@ 1 percent was second only to the Calgary CMA between 2006 and 2011 . With a land area of 9 @,@ 426 @.@ 73 km2 ( 3 @,@ 639 @.@ 68 sq mi ) , the Edmonton CMA had a population density of 123 @.@ 0 / km2 ( 318 @.@ 7 / sq mi ) in 2011 . Statistics Canada 's latest estimate of the Edmonton CMA population , as of July 1 , 2013 , is 1 @,@ 289 @,@ 564 . 
 The Edmonton population centre is the core of the Edmonton CMA . This core includes the cities of Edmonton , Fort Saskatchewan and St. Albert , the Sherwood Park portion of Strathcona County , and portions of Parkland County and Sturgeon County . The Edmonton population centre , the fifth @-@ largest in Canada , had a population of 960 @,@ 015 in 2011 , an 11 @.@ 3 percent increase over its 2006 population of 862 @,@ 544 . 
 In 2006 , people of European ethnicities formed the largest cluster of ethnic groups in Edmonton . These included ethnicities mostly of English , Scottish , German , Irish , Ukrainian , Polish , and French origin . According to the 2006 census , the City of Edmonton was 71 @.@ 8 percent White and 5 @.@ 3 percent Aboriginal , while visible minorities accounted for 22 @.@ 9 percent of the population . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 According to the 2001 census , 31 @.@ 2 percent of Edmonton residents are Protestant and 29 @.@ 4 percent are Catholic . 5 @.@ 5 percent belong to other Christian denominations , 2 @.@ 9 percent are Muslim , 0 @.@ 6 percent are Jewish , 5 @.@ 1 percent are adherents of other religions , and 24 @.@ 4 percent profess no religion . A Bahá 'í Centre is located in Edmonton . The first mosque established in Canada – the Al @-@ Rashid Mosque , founded by Abdullah Yusuf Ali – is situated in Edmonton . The Baitul Hadi Mosque is the only Ahmadiyya mosque in the city . Edmonton also hosts a Maronite Catholic church , on 76 Avenue / 98 Street , with services in English on Saturdays and Arabic on Sundays . The Lebanese community also has a Druze Community Centre on the north side of the city . The Edmonton Alberta Temple of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints was dedicated on December 11 , 1999 . The Hindu Community in Edmonton is served by the Hindu Society of Alberta ( North Indian Temple ) and the Maha Ganapathy Society of Alberta ( South Indian Temple ) . The Sikh community in Edmonton is served by four gurdwaras . The Jewish Community in Edmonton is served by Jewish Federation of Edmonton . The region is served by five synagogues . Edmonton is also home to two of Alberta 's five Unitarian Universalist congregations – the Unitarian Church of Edmonton and the Westwood Unitarian Congregation ; the other three are located in Calgary , Lethbridge , and Red Deer . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Edmonton is the major economic centre for northern and central Alberta and a major centre for the oil and gas industry . As of 2014 , the estimated value of major projects within the Edmonton Capital Region was $ 57 @.@ 8 @-@ billion , of which $ 34 @.@ 4 @-@ billion are within the oil and gas , oil sands and pipeline sectors . 
 Edmonton traditionally has been a hub for Albertan petrochemical industries , earning it the nickname " Oil Capital of Canada " in the 1940s . Supply and service industries drive the energy extraction engine , while research develops new technologies and supports expanded value @-@ added processing of Alberta 's massive oil , gas , and oil sands reserves . These are reported to be the second @-@ largest in the world , after Saudi Arabia . 
 Much of the growth in technology sectors is due to Edmonton 's reputation as one of Canada ’ s premier research and education centres . Research initiatives are anchored by educational institutions such as the University of Alberta ( U of A ) as well as government initiatives underway at the Alberta Research Council and Edmonton Research Park . The U of A campus is home to the National Institute for Nanotechnology . 
 During the 1970s and 1980s , Edmonton became a major financial centre , with both regional offices of Canada 's major banks and locally based institutions opening . However , the turmoil of the late @-@ 1980s economy radically changed the situation . Locally based operations such as Principal Trust and Canadian Commercial Bank would fail , and some regional offices were moved to other cities . The 1990s saw a solidification of the economy , and Edmonton is now home to Canadian Western Bank , the only publicly traded Schedule I chartered bank headquarters west of Toronto . Other major financial centres include ATB Financial , <unk> Credit Union ( formerly Capital City Savings ) , TD Canada Trust and <unk> Financial . 
 Edmonton has been the birthplace of several companies that have grown to international stature . The local retail market has also seen the creation of many successful store concepts , such as The Brick , Katz Group , <unk> , Boston Pizza , Pizza 73 , Liquor Stores GP ( which includes Liquor Depot , Liquor Barn , OK Liquor , and Grapes & Grains ) , Planet Organic , Shaw Communications , Empire Design , Running Room , Booster Juice , Earl 's , Fountain Tire and XS Cargo . 
 Edmonton 's geographical location has made it an ideal spot for distribution and logistics . CN Rail 's North American operational facility is located in the city , as well as a major intermodal facility that handles all incoming freight from the port of Prince Rupert in British Columbia . 
 = = = Retail = = = 
 Edmonton is home to several shopping malls , including Canada 's first mall , Westmount Centre ; and the largest mall in North America , West Edmonton Mall , which is also considered to be the 10th largest mall in the world . Other <unk> malls include Bonnie Doon Shopping Centre , Edmonton City Centre ( a combination of the former Edmonton Centre and Eaton Centre malls ) , Southgate Centre , Kingsway Mall , Northgate Centre , Abbotsfield Mall , Londonderry Mall , and Mill Woods Town Centre . 
 Edmonton also has many big box shopping centres and power centres . Some of the major ones include South Edmonton Common ( North America 's largest open air retail development ) , <unk> Power Centre , Terra <unk> Centre , Oliver Square , <unk> Centre , The Meadows , Christy 's Corner , and <unk> . In 2008 , construction started on the Windermere power centre . 
 In contrast to suburban centres , Edmonton has many urban retail locations . The largest of them all , Old Strathcona , includes many independent stores between 99 Street and 109 Street on Whyte Avenue and area . In around the downtown of Edmonton , there are a small handful of shopping districts , such as previously mentioned Edmonton City Centre mall , Jasper Avenue and 104 Street . Near Oliver , 124 Street is home to a significant number of retail stores . Edmonton is the Canadian testing @-@ ground for many American retailers , such as Bath & Body Works and Calvin Klein . 
 = = Arts and culture = = 
 Many events are anchored in the downtown Arts District , centred around Churchill Square ( named in honour of Sir Winston Churchill ) . On the south side of the river , the University district and Whyte Avenue contain theatres , concert halls , and various live music venues . 
 = = = Performing arts = = = 
 The Francis Winspear Centre for Music was opened in 1997 after years of planning and fundraising . Described as one of the most acoustically perfect concert halls in Canada , it is home to the Edmonton Symphony Orchestra and hosts a wide variety of shows every year . It seats 1 @,@ 932 patrons and houses the $ 3 @-@ million Davis Concert Organ , the largest concert organ in Canada . Across 102 Avenue is the Citadel Theatre , named after The Salvation Army Citadel in which Joe <unk> first started the Citadel Theatre Company in 1965 . It is now one of the largest theatre complexes in Canada , with five halls , each specializing in different kinds of productions . On the University of Alberta grounds is the 2 @,@ 534 @-@ seat Northern Alberta Jubilee Auditorium , which were undertaken over a year of heavy renovations carried out as part of the province 's 2005 centennial celebrations . Both it and its southern twin in Calgary were constructed in 1955 for the province 's golden jubilee and have hosted many concerts , musicals , and ballets . The Edmonton Opera uses the Jubilee as its base of operations . On the front of the building is a quote from Suetonius ' Life of Augustus : " He found a city built of brick – left it built of marble . " 
 The Old Strathcona neighbourhood is home to the Theatre District , which holds the ATB Financial Arts Barns ( headquarters of the Edmonton International Fringe Festival ) , The <unk> Playhouse , Catalyst Theatre , and the <unk> Theatre ( base of operations for several theatre companies , including Teatro la <unk> , Shadow Theatre , Die @-@ Nasty , and Oh Susanna ! ) . Edmonton was named cultural capital of Canada in 2007 . The Ukrainian Dnipro Ensemble of Edmonton , along with other Ukrainian choirs such as the Ukrainian Male Chorus of Edmonton , helps preserve the Ukrainian musical culture within the parameters of the Canadian multicultural identity in Edmonton . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 Edmonton plays host to several large festivals each year , contributing to its nickname , " Canada 's Festival City " . Downtown Edmonton 's Churchill Square host numerous festivals each summer . The Works Art & Design Festival , which takes place from late June to early July , showcases Canadian and international art and design from well @-@ known award @-@ winning artists as well as emerging and student artists . The Edmonton International Street Performer 's Festival takes place in mid @-@ July and showcases street performance artists from around the world . 
 Edmonton 's main summer festival is K @-@ Days , formerly Klondike Days , Capital Ex and originally the Edmonton Exhibition . Founded in 1879 , the Edmonton Exhibition was originally an annual fair and exhibition that eventually adopted a gold rush theme , becoming Klondike Days in the 1960s . Northlands , the operators , renamed the festival to " Edmonton 's Capital Ex " or " Capital Ex " in 2006 . In 2012 , Edmonton Northlands conducted a poll to rename the festival that resulted in changing the name to " K @-@ Days " . Activities include carnival rides and fairways , music , trade shows , and daily fireworks . 
 Since 1960 , the Sourdough Raft Races have also been a popular event . Later in November , Edmonton plays host to the Canadian Finals Rodeo and <unk> ; this is a significant event in Canada 's rodeo circuit and second only to the National Finals Rodeo in Las Vegas in prestige . 
 The Edmonton International Fringe Festival , held in mid @-@ August , is the largest fringe theatre festival in North America and second only to the Edinburgh Fringe Festival worldwide . In August , Edmonton is also host to the Edmonton Folk Music Festival , one of the most successful and popular folk music festivals in North America . Another major summer festival is the Edmonton Heritage Festival , which is an <unk> festival that takes place in <unk> Park on the Heritage Day long weekend . Many other festivals exist , such as Interstellar Rodeo , the Free Will Shakespeare Festival , the Dragon Boat Festival , the Whyte Avenue Art Walk , and the Edmonton International Film Festival . 
 = = = Museums and galleries = = = 
 There are many museums in Edmonton of various sizes . The largest is the Royal Alberta Museum ( RAM ) , which was formerly known as the Provincial Museum of Alberta until it was renamed in honour of Queen Elizabeth II 's 2005 Alberta centennial visit . The RAM houses over 10 million objects in its collection and showcases the culture and practices of the diverse aboriginal tribes of the region . The main building , overlooking the river valley west of the city centre in the Glenora neighbourhood , was opened in 1967 and is now in the early stages of large @-@ scale redevelopment . 
 The Telus World of Science is located in the <unk> neighbourhood northwest of the city centre . It opened in 1984 and has since been expanded several times . It contains five permanent galleries , one additional gallery for temporary exhibits , an IMAX theatre , a planetarium , an observatory , and an amateur radio station . The Edmonton Valley Zoo is in the river valley to the southwest of the city centre . 
 The Alberta Aviation Museum , located in a hangar at the City Centre Airport , was built for the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan . Its collection includes both civilian and military aircraft , the largest of which are a Boeing 737 and two CF @-@ 101 Voodoos . It also has one of only 3 <unk> missiles in Canada . 
 The Prince of Wales Armouries Heritage Centre is also home to the Loyal Edmonton Regiment Military Museum . The museum is dedicated to preserving the military heritage and the sacrifices made by the people of Edmonton and Alberta in general . The museum features two galleries and several smaller exhibits . The collection includes historic firearms , uniforms , souvenirs , memorabilia , military accoutrements , as well as a large photographic and archival collection spanning the pre @-@ World War One period to the present . The museum features an exhibit on the role of the 49th Battalion , CEF in Canada 's Hundred Days Offensive . The Telephone Historical Centre is a telephone museum also located in the Prince of Wales Armouries Heritage Centre in central Edmonton . In addition to a collection of artifacts tracing the history of the telephone , the museum has its own theatre featuring a brief film led by the robot <unk> . 
 The Alberta Railway Museum is located in the rural northeast portion of the city . It contains a variety of locomotives and railroad cars from different periods , and includes a working steam locomotive . Since most of its exhibits are outdoors , it is only open between Victoria Day and Labour Day . 
 Fort Edmonton Park , Canada 's largest living history museum , is located in the river valley southwest of the city centre . Edmonton 's heritage is displayed through historical buildings ( many of which are originals moved to the park ) , costumed historical interpreters , and authentic artifacts . In total , it covers the region 's history from approximately 1795 to 1929 ( represented by Fort Edmonton ) , followed chronologically by 1885 , 1905 , and 1920 streets , and a recreation of a 1920s midway . A steam train , streetcars , automobiles and horse @-@ drawn vehicles may be seen in operation ( and utilized by the public ) around the park . The John Walter Museum and Historical Area ( c . 1875 to 1901 ) is on the Canadian Register of Historic Places . The University of Alberta operates its own internal Museums and Collections service . 
 The Art Gallery of Alberta ( AGA ) is the city 's largest single gallery . Formerly housed in an inconspicuous 1970s building downtown , the AGA collection had over 5 @,@ 000 pieces of art . The former AGA building was demolished in July 2007 to make way for construction of a new facility designed by Randall Stout . It was estimated to cost over $ 88 @-@ million and the amount that Edmonton City Council donated towards its construction was met with some controversy . The AGA officially opened on January 31 , 2010 . Independent galleries can be found throughout the city , especially along the 124 Street / Jasper Avenue corridor , known as the " gallery walk " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 In the city 's early days , music was performed in churches and community halls . Edmonton has a history of opera and classical music performance ; both genres historically have been supported by a variety of clubs and associations . Edmonton 's first major radio station , CKUA , began broadcasting music in 1927 . The city is a centre for music instruction ; the University of Alberta began its music department in 1945 , and MacEwan University opened a jazz and musical theatre program in 1980 . Festivals of jazz , folk , and classical music are popular entertainment events in the city . 
 The Edmonton Symphony Orchestra has existed under various incarnations since 1913 . In 1952 , the Edmonton Philharmonic and the Edmonton Pops orchestras amalgamated to form the 60 @-@ member modern version . The Orchestra performs at the Francis Winspear Centre for Music . 
 The city also has a vibrant popular music scene , across genres including hip @-@ hop , reggae , R & B , rock , pop , metal , punk , country and electronica . Notable past and present local musicians include Robert Goulet , Tommy Banks , Tim <unk> , Cadence Weapon , <unk> Turner , The Smalls , <unk> , Social Code , <unk> , Ten Second Epic , Tupelo Honey , Mac DeMarco , Shout Out Out Out Out , Purity Ring , The Wet Secrets , and numerous others . 
 = = = Nightlife = = = 
 There are several key areas of nightlife in the city of Edmonton . The most popular is the Whyte Avenue ( 82 Avenue ) strip , located between 109 Street and 99 Street ; it has the highest number of heritage buildings in Edmonton , and the nightlife ( bars , clubs , and restaurants ) are located throughout , but mostly west of Gateway Boulevard ( 103 Street ) . Once the heart of the town of Strathcona ( annexed by Edmonton on February 1 , 1912 ) , it fell into disrepair during the middle of the 20th century . Beginning in the 1970s , a coordinated effort to revive the area through the establishment of a business revitalization zone has produced an area rich with restored historical buildings and pleasant streetscapes . Its proximity to the University of Alberta has led to a high number of establishments ranging from restaurants and pubs to trendy clubs while hosting a wide variety of retail and specialty shops during the day . This area also contains two independent movie theatres : the Garneau and Princess theatres , as well as several live theatre , music , and comedy venues . 
 Downtown Edmonton has undergone a continual process of renewal and growth since the mid @-@ 1990s . Many buildings were demolished during the oil boom , starting in the 1960s and continuing into the 1980s , to make way for office towers . As such , there have always been numerous pub @-@ type establishments , as well as many hotel lounges and restaurants . The past decade has seen a strong resurgence in more mainstream venues . Edmonton also has a high demand for pub crawl tours in the city . Various clubs are also to be found along Edmonton 's main street , Jasper Avenue . The Edmonton City Centre mall also houses an Empire Theatres movie theatre , featuring nine screens . The nonprofit Metro Cinema shows a variety of alternative or otherwise unreleased films every week . 
 West Edmonton Mall holds several after @-@ hour establishments in addition to its many stores and attractions . Bourbon Street has numerous eating establishments ; clubs and casinos can also be found within the complex . Scotiabank Theatre ( formerly known as Silver City ) , at the west end of the mall , is a theatre that features twelve screens and an IMAX . 
 = = Sports and recreation = = 
 Edmonton has a number of professional sports teams , including the Edmonton Eskimos of the Canadian Football League , Edmonton Oilers of the National Hockey League , Edmonton Energy of the International Basketball League , and FC Edmonton of the North American Soccer League . Junior sports clubs include the Edmonton Huskies and Edmonton Wildcats of the Canadian Junior Football League and the Edmonton Oil Kings of the Western Hockey League . Venues for Edmonton 's professional and junior sports teams include Commonwealth Stadium ( Eskimos ) , Argyll Velodrome , Rogers Place ( Oilers and Oil Kings ) , Edmonton Ballpark ( Prospects ) , the Universiade Pavilion ( Energy ) , and Clarke Stadium ( FC Edmonton , Huskies and Wildcats ) . 
 Edmonton 's teams have rivalries with Calgary 's teams and games between Edmonton and Calgary teams are often referred to as the Battle of Alberta . 
 Past notable hockey teams in Edmonton include : the original junior hockey incarnation of the Edmonton Oil Kings , with multiple league and national Memorial Cup championships playing in the Western Hockey League ; the Edmonton Flyers , with multiple Lester Patrick Cups and one national Allan Cup , and ; the Edmonton Roadrunners of the American Hockey League . Other past notable sports teams include ; the Edmonton Grads , a women 's basketball team with 108 local , provincial , national , and international titles and the world champions for 17 years in a row ; the Edmonton Trappers , a Triple @-@ A level baseball team with multiple division and league titles in the Pacific Coast League , and ; the Edmonton Rush , a box lacrosse team with one league championship . 
 Local university @-@ level sports teams include the U of A Golden Bears , the U of A Pandas , the NAIT <unk> , and the MacEwan Griffins . Local amateur teams , among others , include the Edmonton Gold of the Rugby Canada Super League and two flat track roller derby leagues : Oil City Roller Derby and E @-@ Ville Roller Derby . 
 From 2005 to 2012 , Edmonton hosted an annual circuit on the Indy Racing League known as the Edmonton Indy . In addition , Castrol Raceway hosts regular sprint car and a national <unk> events at their facility next to Edmonton International Airport . 
 Other past sporting events hosted by Edmonton include the 1978 Commonwealth Games , the 1983 World University Games ( Universiade ) , the 2001 World Championships in Athletics , the 2002 World <unk> Championships , the 2005 World Master Games , the 2006 Women 's Rugby World Cup , the 2007 and 2014 FIFA U @-@ 20 Women 's World Cup , the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup , and the CN Canadian Women 's Open . Edmonton shared hosting duties with Calgary for the 2012 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . 
 = = Government = = 
 In 1892 Edmonton was incorporated as a town . The first mayor was Matthew McCauley , who established the first school board in Edmonton and Board of Trade ( later Chamber of Commerce ) and a municipal police service . Due to mayor McCauley 's good relationship with the federal Liberals this helped Edmonton to maintain political prominence over Strathcona , a rival settlement on the south bank of the North Saskatchewan River . Edmonton was incorporated as a city in 1904 and became the capital of Alberta in 1905 . 
 Unions and radical organizations such as the Industrial Workers of the World struggled for progressive social change through the early years , with the first reformer , James East , being elected in 1912 , followed by the first official Labour alderman , James Kinney , the following year . Many thousands of workers participated in the Edmonton general strike of 1919 and a strong block of Labour representatives were on council after the next election : James Kinney , James East , Sam <unk> , Joe Clarke and Rice Sheppard . 
 Labour representation on city council would become a near @-@ majority in 1929 , and , during the Great Depression , a full majority from 1932 to 1934 . Jan Reimer became the city 's first female mayor , when she was elected in 1989 . 
 = = = Municipal politics = = = 
 Edmonton is represented by a mayor and 12 councillors — one for each of the 12 wards . On July 22 , 2009 City Council adopted an electoral system that divides Edmonton into 12 wards , instead of the previous two for each of six wards . This system came into effect with the following election in October 2010 . The most recent election was held in October 2013 , and elected members to a four @-@ year term . 
 = = = Provincial politics = = = 
 Edmonton is the capital of the province of Alberta and holds all main provincial areas of government such as the Provincial Legislature of Alberta . The Edmonton region is represented by 20 MLAs , one for each provincial electoral district . Many of these boundaries have been changed , adjusted and renamed while the city has grown . In the current 29th Alberta Legislature all of Edmonton 's districts are represented by members from the governing Alberta New Democratic Party . Six of these members are cabinet ministers while one of them is also the Premier of Alberta , Rachel <unk> . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 The city 's police force , the Edmonton Police Service , was founded in 1892 , and had approximately 1 @,@ 400 officers in 2012 . Edmonton experienced a decrease in crime in the 1990s , an increase in the early 2000s , and another downturn at the end of the decade . 
 The Edmonton census metropolitan area ( CMA ) had a crime severity index of 84 @.@ 5 in 2013 , which is higher than the national average of 68 @.@ 7 . Its crime severity index was the fifth @-@ highest among CMAs in Canada behind Regina , Saskatoon , Kelowna and Vancouver . Edmonton had the fourth @-@ most homicides in 2013 at 27 . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 Edmonton is home to 1 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group ( 1 CMBG ) , the Regular Force army brigade group of Land Force Western Area of the Canadian Army . Units in 1 CMBG include Lord Strathcona 's Horse ( Royal Canadians ) , 1 Combat Engineer Regiment , two of the three regular force battalions of Princess Patricia 's Canadian Light Infantry , and various headquarters , service , and support elements . Although not part of 1 CMBG , 408 Tactical Helicopter Squadron and 1 Field Ambulance are located with the brigade group . All of these units are located at Lancaster Park , immediately north of the city . From 1943 , as CFB <unk> ( now CFB Edmonton / Edmonton Garrison ) , it was a major air force base . In 1996 , all fixed @-@ wing aviation units were transferred to CFB Cold Lake . 
 The Canadian Airborne Training Centre had been located in the city in the 1980s . The move of 1 CMBG and component units from Calgary occurred in 1996 in what was described as a cost @-@ saving measure . The brigade had existed in Calgary since the 1950s , and Lord Strathcona 's Horse had traditionally been a Calgary garrison unit dating back to before World War I. 
 Edmonton also has a large army reserve element from 41 Canadian Brigade Group ( 41 CBG ) , including The Loyal Edmonton Regiment ( 4th Battalion , Princess Patricia 's Canadian Light Infantry ) ; 41 Combat Engineer Regiment ; HQ Battery , 20th Field Artillery Regiment ; and B Squadron of The South Alberta Light Horse , one of Alberta 's oldest army reserve units . Despite being far from Canada 's coasts , Edmonton is also the home of HMCS Nonsuch , a naval reserve division . There are numerous cadet corps of the different elements ( naval , army and air force ) within Edmonton as well . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 = = = = Aviation = = = = 
 Edmonton is a major air transportation gateway to northern Alberta and northern Canada . The Edmonton International Airport ( EIA ) is the main airport serving the city . 
 The EIA provides passenger service to destinations in the United States , Europe , Mexico , and the Caribbean . The EIA is located within Leduc County , adjacent to the City of Leduc and the <unk> Industrial Business Park . With direct air distances from Edmonton to places such as London in Europe being shorter than to other main airports in western North America , Edmonton Airports is working to establish a major container shipping hub called Port Alberta . 
 = = = = Rail = = = = 
 Edmonton serves as a major transportation hub for Canadian National Railway , whose North American operations management centre is located at their Edmonton offices . It is also tied into the Canadian Pacific Railway network , which provides service from Calgary to the south and extends northeast of Edmonton to serve Alberta 's Industrial Heartland . 
 Inter @-@ city rail passenger rail service is provided by Via Rail 's premier train , the Canadian , as it travels between Vancouver , British Columbia , and Toronto , Ontario . Passenger trains stop at the Edmonton railway station three days a week in both directions . The train connects Edmonton to multiple stops in British Columbia , Alberta , Saskatchewan , Manitoba , and Ontario . 
 = = = = Public transit = = = = 
 The Edmonton Transit System ( ETS ) is the city 's public transit agency , operating the Edmonton Light Rail Transit ( LRT ) line as well as a fleet of buses . Approximately one @-@ third of people in the Edmonton Capital Region ( mostly from Edmonton proper ) use ETS per day ( 354 @,@ 440 out of 1 @,@ 034 @,@ 945 ) . There are approximately 280 @,@ 000 ETS bus riders on average per day . 
 From the 1990s to early 2009 , Edmonton was one of two cities in Canada still operating trolley buses , along with Vancouver . On June 18 , 2008 , City Council decided to abandon the Edmonton trolley bus system and the last trolley bus ran on May 2 , 2009 . 
 Scheduled LRT service began on April 23 , 1978 , with five extensions of the single line completed since . The original Edmonton line is considered to be the first " modern " light rail line in North America ( i.e. , built from scratch , rather than being an upgrade of an old system ) . It introduced the use of German @-@ designed rolling stock that subsequently became the standard light rail vehicle of the United States . The Edmonton " proof @-@ of @-@ payment " fare collection system adopted in 1980 – modelled after European ticket systems – became the North American transit industry 's preferred approach for subsequent light rail projects . The four @-@ year South LRT extension was opened in full on April 24 , 2010 , which sees trains travelling to Century Park ( located at 23 Avenue and 111 Street ) , making stops at South Campus and Southgate Centre along the way . A line to the Northern Alberta Institute of Technology in north @-@ central Edmonton using the same high floor technology of the existing system opened September 6 , 2015 . Edmonton is also expanding the LRT to Mill Woods ( the southeast ) by 2020 and to Lewis Farms ( the west ) thereafter using low floor technology . 
 = = = = Roads = = = = 
 A largely gridded system forms most of Edmonton 's street and road network . The address system is mostly numbered , with streets running south to north and avenues running east to west . In built @-@ up areas built since the 1950s , local streets and major roadways generally do not conform to the grid system . Major roadways include Kingsway , Yellowhead Trail ( Highway 16 ) , Whitemud Drive and Anthony <unk> Drive , and the city is connected to other communities elsewhere in Alberta , British Columbia , and Saskatchewan via the Yellowhead Highway to the west and east and the Queen Elizabeth II Highway ( Alberta Highway 2 ) to the south . 
 = = = = Trail system = = = = 
 There is an extensive multi @-@ use trail system for bicycles and pedestrians throughout the city ; however , most of this is within the river valley parkland system . 
 = = = Electricity and water = = = 
 Edmonton 's first power company established itself in 1891 and installed streetlights along the city 's main avenue , Jasper Avenue . The power company was bought by the Town of Edmonton in 1902 and remains under municipal ownership today as EPCOR . Also in charge of water treatment , in 2002 EPCOR installed the world 's largest ultraviolet ( UV ) water treatment or ultraviolet disinfection system at its E.L. Smith Water Treatment Plant . 
 = = = Waste disposal = = = 
 The Edmonton <unk> Facility , the largest of its type in the world , is also the largest stainless steel building in North America . By 2016 , the city anticipates that it will divert more than 90 percent of the city 's household waste from the landfills . Among the innovative uses for the city 's waste includes a Christmas tree recycling program . The trees are collected each January and put through a woodchipper ; this material is used as an addition to the composting process . In addition , the wood chips absorb much of the odour produced by the compost by providing a <unk> element to trap odour causing gaseous results of the process . 
 Together , the Waste Management Centre and Wastewater Treatment plant are known as the Edmonton Waste Management Centre of Excellence . Research partners include the University of Alberta , the Alberta Research Council , the Northern Alberta Institute of Technology , and Olds College . 
 = = = Health care = = = 
 There are four main hospitals serving Edmonton : University of Alberta Hospital , Royal Alexandra Hospital , Misericordia Community Hospital , and Grey Nuns Community Hospital . Other area hospitals include Sturgeon Community Hospital in St. Albert , Leduc Community Hospital in Leduc , Westview Health Centre in Stony Plain , and Fort Saskatchewan Community Hospital in Fort Saskatchewan . Dedicated psychiatric care is provided at the Alberta Hospital . The Northeast Community Health Centre offers a 24 @-@ hour emergency room with no inpatient ward services . The University of Alberta Hospital is the centre of a larger complex of hospitals and clinics located adjacent to the university campus which comprises the Stollery Children 's Hospital , <unk> Alberta Heart Institute , Cross Cancer Institute , Zeidler Gastrointestinal Health Centre , <unk> Clinical Training Centre , and Edmonton Clinic . Several health research institutes , including the Heritage Medical Research Centre , Medical Sciences Building , Katz Group Centre for Pharmacy and Health Research , and Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Research Innovation , are also located at this site . A similar set @-@ up is also evident at the Royal Alexandra Hospital , which is connected to the Lois Hole Hospital for Women and Orthopaedic Surgery Centre . All hospitals are under the administration of Alberta Health Services , although Misericordia and Grey Nuns are run separately by Covenant Health . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 Edmonton has three publicly funded school boards ( districts ) that provide kindergarten and grades 1 – 12 . The vast majority of students attend schools in the two large English language boards : Edmonton Public Schools , and the separate Edmonton Catholic School District . Also , since 1994 , the Francophone minority community has had their own school board based in Edmonton , the Greater North Central Francophone Education Region No. 2 , which includes surrounding communities . The city also has a number of public charter schools that are independent of any board . All three school boards and public charter schools are funded through provincial grants and property taxes . 
 Some private schools exist as well , including Edmonton Academy , Progressive Academy and Tempo School . The Edmonton Society for Christian Education and <unk> Christian School ( not part of the former ) used to be private schools ; however , both have become part of Edmonton Public Schools as alternative programs . 
 Both the Edmonton Public Schools and the Edmonton Catholic School District provide support and resources for those wishing to homeschool their children . 
 = = = Post @-@ secondary = = = 
 Those post @-@ secondary institutions based in Edmonton that are publicly funded include Concordia University College of Alberta , MacEwan University , The King 's University College , <unk> College , the Northern Alberta Institute of Technology ( NAIT ) and the University of Alberta ( U of A ) . The publicly funded Athabasca University and the University of Lethbridge also have campuses in Edmonton . 
 The U of A is a board @-@ governed institution that has an annual revenue of over one billion dollars . In 2011 / 12 , the university had over 38 @,@ 000 students enrolled within nearly 400 undergraduate , graduate and professional programs , as well as over 15 @,@ 000 students enrolled in its faculty of extension . The U of A is also home to the second @-@ largest research library system in Canada . 
 In 2010 / 11 , MacEwan University had a total student population of over 43 @,@ 000 students , including nearly 14 @,@ 000 full @-@ time students , enrolled in programs offering bachelor 's degrees , university transfers , diplomas and certificates . NAIT has an approximate total of 61 @,@ 200 students enrolled in more than 200 programs while <unk> College has approximately 8 @,@ 500 students enrolled in various full @-@ time , part @-@ time and continuing education programs . 
 Other post @-@ secondary institutions within Edmonton include Taylor University College and Seminary and Yellowhead Tribal College , a First Nations college . 
 = = Media = = 
 Edmonton has seven local broadcast television stations shown on basic cable TV or over @-@ the @-@ air , with the oldest broadcasters in the city being CTV ( 1961 ) and CBC ( 1954 ) . Most of Edmonton 's conventional television stations have made the switch to over @-@ the @-@ air digital broadcasting . The cable television providers in Edmonton are Telus ( for IPTV ) and Shaw Cable . Twenty @-@ one FM and eight AM radio stations are based in Edmonton . 
 Edmonton has two large @-@ circulation daily newspapers , the Edmonton Journal and the Edmonton Sun . The Journal , established in 1903 and owned by the Postmedia Network , has a daily circulation of 112 @,@ 000 , while the Sun , established in 1978 and owned by Sun Media , has a circulation of 55 @,@ 000 . The Journal no longer publishes a Sunday edition as of July 2012 . 
 There is one free daily newspaper in the city , Metro . The magazine Vue Weekly is published on a weekly basis and focuses on alternative news . The Edmonton Examiner is a city @-@ wide community based paper also published weekly . There are also a number of smaller weekly and community newspapers . 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Edmonton has five sister cities , with one American city listed by Sister Cities International . 
 Gatineau , Quebec , Canada , since 1967 
 Harbin , China , since 1985 
 Nashville , Tennessee , United States , since 1990 
 Wonju , South Korea , since 1998 
 Bergen op Zoom , the Netherlands , since 2013 
 = Andy Harries = 
 Andrew D. M. Harries ( born 7 April 1954 ) is a British television and film producer . After graduating from Hull University in the 1970s , Harries began his television career on the Granada Television current affairs series World in Action , before moving on to freelance work . He directed and produced programmes for Jonathan Ross 's Channel X production company in the 1980s , before being appointed controller of the newly created comedy department at Granada in 1992 . Over the next decade he produced and executive produced several critically acclaimed series , including The Royle Family , Cold Feet and The <unk> . 
 In 2000 his portfolio was expanded to include Granada 's drama productions . He worked on the revivals of Prime Suspect and Cracker , as well as the BAFTA @-@ winning television play The Deal . In 2004 he began work producing The Queen , which was released to critical acclaim in 2006 . Though he had spent 14 years with Granada , part of the ITV network , he became increasingly dissatisfied with the management of ITV after its corporate merger in 2003 , and publicly criticized the network in 2006 . He announced he would not be renewing his contract and departed in 2007 to form Left Bank Pictures . Since 2007 , Left Bank has produced the television series Wallander , Strike Back , Married Single Other , the feature film The Damned United , and has several more television series in development . 
 In addition to the awards won by programmes he has worked on , Harries was given a Special Achievement award by BAFTA in 2007 for his contributions to British television . The same year , he was ranked in The Guardian 's Media Top 100 , and Broadcast 's Top 100 Producers . He is married to novelist and director Rebecca Frayn . 
 = = Family = = 
 Rebecca Frayn ( Spouse ) , Emmy Harries ( Daughter ) , Jackson ( Jack ) Harries , Finnegan ( Finn ) Harries , Eliza Frayn ( Niece ) , Shayne Finn <unk> ( Nephew ) 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Andy Harries was born in Inverness , Scotland on 7 April 1954 and grew up in Peterborough , England , receiving primary education at West Town Primary School until 1961 , and secondary education at the public Oakham School . He grew up aspiring to be a war correspondent in Vietnam , or an investigative journalist ; his idols were Harold Evans , Jon Swain and John Pilger . He left college at the age of 17 with poor A Level results and became a trainee reporter on the Peterborough Evening Telegraph newspaper . His time on the newspaper raised his awareness of politics , and he sought to further his understanding of it by studying at university . He applied to various northern universities to break away from his southern middle @-@ class lifestyle , and was accepted at Hull University . 
 Harries stayed at Hull until he was 21 , though continued to work at the Evening Telegraph during holidays . At university he developed an interest in music journalism and found an outlet for this by writing reviews for Melody Maker . 
 = = Early career ( 1976 – 1981 ) = = 
 After leaving Hull , Harries moved to London to work for the Southern News Service news agency , writing diary pieces for the Daily Mail and News of the World from 1975 to 1976 . On the advice of a friend , he applied for a position as a researcher for Granada Television in Manchester . He did not understand the appeal of television production , and as a result he was turned away at two interviews before being hired in 1976 . 
 Shortly after being hired he was taken aside by the news producer and asked to read the on @-@ air bulletin for the nightly broadcast . He read the news for three months until one night when he condensed a six @-@ minute bulletin into three minutes . He attributed this to stage fright , which caused him to speak too fast . The rest of the production crew were not ready to move on to the next news items , leaving Harries standing in silence for several minutes . Harries recalled in a 2007 interview that Steve Morrison , the producer of the bulletin , called him into his office and berated him , telling him he did not deserve to be on television and that he would no longer be reading the news . Morrison 's remarks angered Harries to such a point that he assaulted the man . Aware that he was going to lose his job , he contacted a Granada colleague who got him a new job at Granada 's London centre , which he took up at the age of 23 . 
 Pursuing his interest in investigative journalism , Harries worked as a researcher on the current affairs programme World in Action , where he met Paul Greengrass . While Greengrass achieved success in exposing alleged corruption involving Manchester United F.C. chairman Louis Edwards , Harries investigated irregularities in the British Singles Chart . Greengrass 's investigation was a success , though Harries admits his own programme " didn 't make a blind bit of difference " . 
 = = Freelance and Channel X ( 1981 – 1992 ) = = 
 In 1981 , Harries left Granada and moved into freelance producing and directing . He directed the documentary series Africa in 1984 before beginning a collaboration with Paul Yule , with whom he made four films in Peru between 1985 and 1989 — Martin <unk> and the Heirs of the Incas , Our God the Condor , <unk> , and Mario Vargas Llosa : The Novelist Who Would Be President — and working on editions of The South Bank Show and Arena . While directing a corporate video for BT he met Jonathan Ross , who was his assistant for the day . Ross invited Harries to direct a pilot for a chat show he and Alan Marke had developed that was based on Late Night with David Letterman . The pilot was a success and Ross found a television audience with The Last Resort with Jonathan Ross , which first aired in 1988 . 
 Harries formed a production company called Sleeping Partners with Greengrass in the latter part of the decade , which produced Ross 's The Incredibly Strange Film Show and comedian Lenny Henry 's Lenny Live and Unleashed film . The latter was directed by Harries and was edited together from a number of performances by Henry at the Hackney Empire in 1989 . The Guardian 's film critic called the direction " unobtrusive " . 
 The 1990s began with more direction and production for Ross and Marke 's Channel X production company ; in 1991 he made the documentary Viva Elvis ! and executive produced Middlemarch Films ' The Ghosts of Oxford Street , a musical about Oxford Street 's history . The script for Ghosts was written by Harries ' wife , Rebecca Frayn . The same year , he developed a script with Peter Morgan called Bhundu Beat , a film described by Variety as " a bizarre remake of A Hard Day 's Night featuring the briefly fashionable <unk> band the Bhundu Boys and Brit comic Lenny Henry " . With a development budget of £ 2 @,@ 000 , Harries sent Morgan on a research trip to Zimbabwe , taking a circuitous route that lasted for three days . Bhundu Beat was never made . 
 = = Second Granada career ( 1992 – 2007 ) = = 
 = = = Controller of Comedy = = = 
 At the 1991 Edinburgh Festival Fringe , Harries personally bought the television rights to An Evening with Gary Lineker , a comedy play written by Arthur Smith and Chris England based around a group of England fans at the 1990 FIFA World Cup . Smith bet Harries £ 100 that he would not be able to get the adaptation on television before the next World Cup . Harries tried selling Smith and England 's screenplay to the BBC , Channel 4 , LWT , Yorkshire Television and Central Independent Television to no avail . The BBC offered to produce it as a studio play but Harries wanted a full @-@ length film to distinguish it from the original play , which was by then playing at London 's West End . He was reluctant to offer the script to Granada because of his previous experience with the company . However , in 1992 he was accepted the position of controller of comedy at Granada and An Evening with Gary Lineker was made . Harries was disappointed that pressure from Granada 's management had forced him to replace so many of the original stage cast ; England was replaced by Paul Merton , leaving Caroline Quentin as the only original actor . The Edinburgh Fringe played an important role in Harries ' early commissions at Granada ; he was not fond of traditional styles of comedy and was always looking for alternative comedians . These included Caroline Aherne , Steve Coogan and John Thomson ( though Coogan " got away " from him after the BBC offered to produce his Alan Partridge shows ) . After the failure of Bhundu Beat , Harries commissioned Peter Morgan to write " Mickey Love " in 1993 , one of a series of short comedy films for the Rik Mayall series Rik Mayall Presents . 
 In 1994 , after turning down an offer for " the number three position " at Channel 4 and extending his contract with Granada to become controller of entertainment and comedy , he commissioned The Mrs Merton Show from Aherne . In negotiating a second series with the BBC a few years later , another series from Aherne was included ; The Royle Family , a sitcom featuring a working @-@ class northern family , aired on BBC One from 1998 to 2000 . The first two episodes were filmed with a studio audience , something Harries did not approve of . He scrapped these episodes and had them refilmed without a laugh track . The Royle Family returned for a one @-@ off special in 2006 , an achievement Harries described as giving him no greater pleasure . A spin @-@ off of The Mrs Merton Show was commissioned by Harries from Aherne in 1999 ; Mrs Merton and Malcolm was based around Mrs Merton and her son Malcolm , played by Craig Cash . The programme was Aherne 's first critical failure , which Harries blamed on the BBC One schedulers . 
 In 1995 he commissioned a comedy drama on spec from Mike Bullen , a BBC radio producer and first @-@ time writer . Like An Evening with Gary Lineker , The Perfect Match was based around football and received respectable reviews . Harries was interested in producing more comedy dramas , based on the success of American programmes like Thirtysomething , and assigned Granada producer Christine Langan to work with Bullen . Langan and Bullen developed Cold Feet , which was broadcast in 1997 and was commissioned for a full series in 1998 . It won the British Academy Television Award for Best Drama Series in 2002 , which Harries collected with Bullen and Spencer Campbell . Harries executive produced two more series of Bullen 's ; Life Begins ( 2004 – 2006 ) and All About George ( 2005 ) . 
 His first panel show produced came in 1999 with Mel and Sue 's Casting Couch . The show was Mel and Sue 's first programme made for ITV following the success of Light Lunch for Channel 4 . Casting Couch had low viewing figures and was not recommissioned . It was one of several comedies commissioned by Harries in 1999 that were produced by Justin Judd . Others included Dark Ages and My Wonderful Life . Judd and Harries began developing Dark Ages — a sitcom set at the turn of the 2nd millennium — in 1997 but could not make it work with the writer at the time . They proposed it to Red Dwarf writer Rob Grant , who liked the idea , and wrote all six episodes . Dark Ages aired nightly during the Christmas 1999 period . A second series was proposed — Harries said it would " hit its stride " then — but ITV did not recommission it . My Wonderful Life was another ratings disaster . Harries blamed ITV Network Centre and publicly criticised the network , courting the ire of its director of channels David Liddiment . 
 = = = Drama and film brief = = = 
 In September 2000 , Harries ' portfolio was significantly expanded when he was appointed Granada 's controller of drama , following the resignations of Sue Hogg and Simon Lewis . 2002 commissions included Doctor Zhivago and Henry VIII . ITV would provide only £ 750 @,@ 000 for each hour of the serials , so Harries approached US broadcaster WGBH to make up the remaining funds . Following the merging of Granada Films with Granada Productions in 2002 , Harries ' brief was expanded to include films . 
 2003 was a significant year for Harries ' drama output ; Peter Morgan approached Granada with an idea for a drama documenting the conjectured pact between Tony Blair and Gordon Brown before the Labour Party leadership election , 1994 . Granada 's chief executive Charles Allen was not keen on producing The Deal but Harries and John Whiston persuaded him otherwise . ITV initially agreed to show it but pulled out before filming began . Harries offered it to Channel 4 , who took it within 24 hours . The Deal was a critical success and won the British Academy Television Award for Best Single Drama . That same year Harries brought back the drama serial Prime Suspect , which had not been produced since the star Helen Mirren quit in 1995 . Mirren agreed to return for Prime Suspect : The Last Witness only if it was " about something " . Two years later it returned for the seventh and final serial , entitled The Final Act , in which Jane Tennison , Mirren 's character , confronts her alcoholism in a sub @-@ plot . Lynda La Plante , who created Prime Suspect in 1989 , was critical of the decision to " make [ Tennison ] a drunk " , though Harries rebutted , saying , " Lynda was the one who started Jane Tennison drinking heavily — it 's not out of character " . In 2004 , Harries was ranked number eleven on a list of the most powerful figures in British TV drama , compiled by industry experts for the Radio Times . 
 During the read @-@ throughs for The Last Witness Harries watched other actors and production staff react to Mirren as if she was " like the Queen " . Already in pre @-@ production was a follow @-@ up to The Deal that would focus on the royal family in the week following the death of Diana , Princess of Wales . Peter Morgan was due to return as the writer , Stephen Frears was signed on as director and Harries suggested to Mirren that she play the Queen . Mirren agreed and the film , co @-@ produced by Granada and Pathé , was released in September 2006 . Among the numerous awards for which it was nominated were the BAFTA Award for Best Film and the Academy Award for Best Picture ( the former it won ) . Despite the success of the film , Harries once again expressed disappointment with ITV for not giving enough backing . In an interview the month before The Queen was released he criticised the management of ITV for being deeply complacent and arrogant , and expressed disappointment that drama on the channel was not as good as it once was . At the end of the year he announced that he would not be renewing his contract with the company . Entertainment industry commentators suggested that he would set up his own independent production company . 
 = = Left Bank Pictures ( 2007 – present ) = = 
 Rumours that he would start his own company , possibly with Caroline Aherne , had circulated since the 1990s . The predictions came to fruition in May 2007 when Harries announced the formation of Left Bank Pictures , which BBC Worldwide immediately took a 25 % share in . Left Bank was the first British production house to receive investment from BBC Worldwide , and there was some concern that there was a conflict of interest for the publicly funded BBC ; in The Guardian , Steve Hewlett wrote that the deal was a " back @-@ door way of getting around the rules preventing the BBC producing programmes for its British rivals " . Hewlett also commented that the investment might limit Left Bank 's future prospects , as it was " tied to " the BBC . At Left Bank , Harries proposed to produce two features films per year , as well as several television series . The company 's first television commission is Wallander , a three @-@ part series based on Henning <unk> 's Kurt Wallander novels . The series was made in association with Swedish company Yellow Bird for the BBC . It was broadcast in November and December 2008 , and a second series followed in 2010 . 
 In 2009 , Left Bank 's first feature film , The Damned United ( adapted by Peter Morgan from the David Peace novel ) was released . Also broadcast in 2009 was the comedy series School of Comedy and the crime drama Father & Son . Comedy drama series Married Single Other was filmed for ITV and was broadcast in 2010 . Harries executive produced the third part of Peter Morgan 's " Blair trilogy " , The Special Relationship , for HBO Films and BBC Films . It was first broadcast on the HBO networks in the United States in May 2010 . 
 On 23 August 2012 , Sony Pictures Television acquired a majority stake in Left Bank . 
 = = Acclaim = = 
 Left Bank 's inception lead to Harries being listed in The Guardian 's Media Top 100 , making his entry at number 66 . At the end of the year he was listed in Broadcast 's Top 100 Producers , being described as " one of the UK 's most outstanding drama producers " . In May 2007 , the British Academy of Film and Television Arts awarded him the Special Award in Honour of Alan Clarke . In December 2009 , the Radio Times ranked him at number six in their " Faces of 2010 " feature , a compilation of " the biggest names and the coming stars in the year ahead " . In Broadcast 's Top 100 for 2010 , Harries was ranked at number two in the executive producers category . He received an Academy Award nomination as producer of The Queen which saw a run of six Academy Award nominations with Helen Mirren memorably winning Best Actress . 
 The Royal Television Society conferred a Fellowship on Harries on 23 May 2011 for outstanding contributions to the broadcasting industry . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Harries has been married to writer and director Rebecca Frayn since July 1992 . The couple have three children ; Jack and Finn ( identical twins ) born in 1993 , and Emmy Lou . Emmy Lou was conceived through in vitro fertilisation ( IVF ) , an experience Harries worked into the storyline of Cold Feet and Frayn used as the basis for her novel One Life . Emmy Lou also had a cameo in The Queen as the little girl who hands flowers to the Queen outside Buckingham Palace . In 2008 , Jack appeared in the Channel 4 Comedy Lab pilot School of Comedy , and the subsequent E4 series , which was produced by Left Bank . Finn appears in a School of Comedy sketch entitled " Continuity Errors " , as a clone of Jack 's character . Jack and Finn also run a successful YouTube channel , <unk> , which has attracted over 4 million subscribers . ( 3 @.@ 8 million subscribers , November 2014 ) 
 After producing a South Bank Show profile and The Ghosts of Oxford Street , Harries remained good friends with Malcolm McLaren , and spoke at his funeral in April 2010 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = St Mary 's Church , Nantwich = 
 St Mary 's Church is in the centre of the market town of Nantwich , Cheshire , England . The church is recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade I listed building . It has been called the " Cathedral of South Cheshire " and it is considered by some to be one of the finest medieval churches , not only in Cheshire , but in the whole of England . The architectural writer Raymond Richards described it as " one of the great architectural treasures of Cheshire " , and Alec Clifton @-@ Taylor included it in his list of " outstanding " English parish churches . 
 The building dates from the 14th century , although a number of changes have since been made , particularly a substantial 19th @-@ century restoration by Sir George Gilbert Scott . The church and its octagonal tower are built in red sandstone . Features of the church 's interior include the lierne @-@ vaulted ceiling of the choir , the carved stone canopies of the sedilia in the chancel , and the intricately carved wooden canopies over the choirstalls together with the 20 misericords at the back of the stalls . The church is an active Anglican parish church in the diocese of Chester , the archdeaconry of Macclesfield and the deanery of Nantwich . 
 = = History = = 
 The first building on the site was a chapel of ease in the parish of Acton . In about 1130 both Acton church and Nantwich chapel came under control of the Cistercian abbey of Combermere . The building of the present church started in about 1340 in the Decorated style , which was the style most commonly used in English church building at that time . The masons , who came from Yorkshire , used local sandstone , probably from Eddisbury near Delamere . Building work was interrupted between 1349 and 1369 , probably due to an outbreak of the Black Death plague . By the 1380s the town 's prosperity had recovered and building work resumed . This phase of construction was carried out by master masons associated with Lichfield and Gloucester cathedrals , now building in the Perpendicular style . The south transept was endowed as a chantry chapel in 1405 . In the late @-@ 15th or early @-@ 16th century , the south porch was added , the nave roof was raised and the clerestory windows were added . Following the dissolution of the monasteries , six chantry chapels were removed in 1548 . Between 1572 and 1577 the transept ceilings were renewed , and between 1615 and 1633 the church floor was raised because of flooding , a west gallery was built , and the walls were painted white , with the addition of scriptural texts . The church was briefly used as a prison for Royalists captured at the battles of Nantwich and Preston during the Civil War . 
 Between 1727 and 1777 , the north and south galleries and a new west door were added , and windows were repaired . However , by 1789 the general structure of the church had deteriorated so much that it was said to be " so ruinous that the inhabitants cannot safely assemble " . In the 19th century Sir George Gilbert Scott was brought in to direct a very extensive restoration . Amongst other alterations , he removed the galleries , the box pews , and many old memorials ; the floor level was lowered and the transept roofs were pitched higher . Much of the eroded stone was replaced by sandstone from quarries at Runcorn , but not everyone was happy with the scale and nature of Scott 's restoration . The architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner complained about the replacement of a Decorated doorway and a Perpendicular window with corresponding structures in the style of the late @-@ 13th century . The local representative of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings at the time was of the opinion that " Very great injury was done to this Church in the Restoration ... " . Clifton @-@ Taylor complained about the way in which part of the church walls have subsequently been pointed . The last major work to be carried out on the church was in 1878 , under the direction of local architect Thomas Bower , when the south porch was restored at a cost of £ 900 ( equivalent to £ 80 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The church is built in red sandstone and is cruciform in shape . Its plan consists of a four @-@ bay nave with north and south aisles , a south porch with two storeys , a central tower , north and south transepts , and a three @-@ bay chancel , to the north of which is a two @-@ storey treasury . The tower is square below and octagonal above . Both transepts are of three bays and the northernmost bay of the north transept was formerly a Lady chapel . The other two bays were dedicated to Saint George . The south transept was known as the Kingsley Chapel . Pevsner , in addition to complaining about some aspects of Scott 's restoration , comments on the abrupt change from the Decorated to the Perpendicular style , no doubt the consequence of the interruption to building work caused by the Black Death . This is particularly so in the chancel where the side windows are " very rich Decorated " , with crocketed gables and highly decorated buttresses and pinnacles , while the seven @-@ light east window , also under a crocketed gable , is " pure Perpendicular " . The aisle windows and all the windows in the north transept are Decorated , while in the south transept one window is Decorated and all the others are Perpendicular . The bell @-@ openings in the tower are Decorated . Pevsner describes the tower as being the " crowning motif " of the church . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 = = = = Nave , transepts and porch = = = = 
 The south wall of the nave shows the line of the original roof before it was raised , and contains faint remains of paintings dating from the 19th century , which consist of scriptural inscriptions . In the nave is a Jacobean pulpit , designed by Thomas Finch and made in 1601 , which was once part of a three @-@ decker pulpit . It was damaged in 1683 by a falling roof beam and was reduced in the 1855 restoration . Hanging on the wall of the nave are a number of Tudor boards which were taken from the ceiling of the south transept in 1964 ; one of these is dated 1577 . In the south aisle is a small painting of The Widow 's Mite by Jules Bouvier . A second pulpit , made of stone and dating from the late @-@ 14th century , is attached to the northeast pier of the crossing . This is designed to appear like a large chalice , and is decorated with panel tracery . The wooden crossing vault was designed by Scott . The roof of the north transept is also wooden , but of Tudor design . In the north wall of the transept is an aumbry and in the northeast corner is an oven with a chimney , which was used for baking Communion wafers . The transept contains an oak chest dated 1676 and a bench dated 1737 . In the east wall of north transept are a piscina and another aumbry . 
 There is another piscina in the south transept , although this is damaged , along with an alabaster effigy of Sir David Craddock , who died in about 1384 . The effigy was damaged in the Civil War , and was found buried under the chancel floor during the 19th @-@ century restoration . Sir David , who came from Nantwich , was once Mayor of Bordeaux , <unk> of Wales and a money @-@ lender to Richard II . The south transept also contains a tomb dated 1614 , which was transferred from the former St Chad 's Church , <unk> in 1982 . This is constructed of alabaster and limestone and includes effigies of Sir Thomas Smith , mayor and sheriff of Chester , and his wife , Anne . In addition the transept contains a number of brass memorials . At the back of the church along the west wall are the Jubilee curtains which were made by the church 's Tapestry Group to commemorate the silver jubilee of Elizabeth II in 1977 . In the porch the stone vaulting dates from 1879 and it contains the carving of a green man , while on the outside of the porch are carvings of the Four Evangelists . The room over the porch houses a library of theological books , including a complete edition ( which is thought to be unique ) of the Sarum Hymns and Sequences , printed in 1539 by Wynkyn de Worde . 
 = = = = Chancel = = = = 
 The ceiling of the chancel consists of a stone lierne vault with almost 70 carved bosses dating from the 14th century . The eastern bosses depict the life of Mary and the western ones Christ 's Passion and Resurrection . Over each <unk> is a carved wooden triple @-@ arched canopy . The canopies are described as having " a complexity unsurpassed in English medieval woodcarving " . Clifton @-@ Taylor considered that they are the finest in the country , although he complained that they have been stained nearly black . At the lower ends of the canopies are Victorian carvings of angels , grotesques and foliage and below these are carvings on corbels of subjects such as mermaids , centaurs , wyverns and musical angels . At the back of the choirstalls are 20 misericords which date from the early – mid 15th century . Under of each of these is a different carving ; the subjects include Saint George and the Dragon , the Virgin and a unicorn , and a pelican with her brood . At the ends of the choirstalls are carvings of poppyheads , wyverns and a green man . The altar table is Elizabethan and is dated 1638 . In the north wall of the sanctuary is an aumbry and on the opposite wall are a canopied piscina and a triple sedilia , also with canopies . These canopies are described as being " among the showpieces of the 14th century masons " . The reredos was dedicated in 1919 and contains carvings of Christ on the Cross , Mary and John , and the four national saints , Saints George , Andrew , Patrick and David . The canopies above them echo those of the choirstalls . 
 = = = = Stained glass and other features = = = = 
 The stained glass in the west window dates from 1875 ; it was made by Clayton and Bell and depicts the Presentation of Jesus at the Temple . Also by Clayton and Bell is a window at the west end of the north wall of the nave depicting Enoch , Noah , Job and Abel . To the east of this is a window designed by Michael Farrar @-@ Bell dated 1985 , to the memory of a local farmer , depicting the Creation . Beyond this is a window from 1901 made by Reuben Bennett which depicts the Good Shepherd with David and Miriam . On the south wall of the nave is a window from 1919 by Harry Clarke depicting Richard Coeur @-@ de @-@ Lion , saints and military emblems . In other windows on the south wall there are fragments of old glass . The north wall of the north transept contains a window with stained glass by Kempe which incorporates some pieces of medieval glass and depicts the Tree of Jesse . On the east wall of the transept are two windows by John Hardman which date from 1862 and 1864 . The south transept contains a window dating from 1855 with stained glass by William Wailes . The east window was <unk> in 1876 by Clayton and Bell ; it shows episodes from the life of Christ with figures of apostles and prophets . In the porch is more stained glass by Kempe , dating from 1878 . 
 The original organ was moved from its central position in the crossing to the north transept during Scott 's restoration . The instrument performed badly following the move , which was attributed to the cold and dampness of its new position . Consequently , it was moved to the south transept , but it performed no better there , and in 1889 it was sold to Haydock church . The present organ was built in 1890 by Forster and Andrews and partly rebuilt in about 1925 . It was again rebuilt in 1973 by Charles Whiteley and Company , who installed electro @-@ pneumatic action among other additions and repairs . Rushworth and <unk> made further additions during their 1994 restoration . The parish registers date back to 1539 and contain much material relating to Nantwich 's history . There is a ring of eight bells , four of which were cast by Rudhall of Gloucester in 1713 , and the other four by John Taylor and Company in 1922 . 
 = = Present day = = 
 The church attracts large numbers each Sunday . It offers a range of services , from the traditional to the contemporary . During the week there are activities for children , young people and adults . The Rector is Canon Dr. Barry Wilson . Other clergy include the Revd Stephen Snelling and the Revd Tim Watson . The Director of Music is Tony Metcalfe . Various events , including concerts , are held in the church . Nantwich Choral Society perform in a number of venues and its " chosen venue " is St Mary 's because " its acoustics are superb " . 
 = Monique Jeffries = 
 Detective Monique Jeffries is a fictional character played by Michelle Hurd in the American crime drama television series Law & Order : Special Victims Unit on NBC . A regular character during the first season , Jeffries is a tough and street @-@ wise detective with the New York City Police Department 's Special Victims Unit , and briefly the partner of John Munch ( Richard Belzer ) . After getting traumatized by a near @-@ death experience , Jeffries is relieved of active duty when she admits to having sex with a suspect in a previous rape case . 
 Hurd was cast after having appeared in other television shows by Law & Order creator Dick Wolf . Although Wolf promised her Jeffries would develop more over time , Hurd grew frustrated with the lack of material for her character . The show 's producers hesitated to keep her as Munch 's full @-@ time partner and considered eliminating the character from the show altogether . Hurd eventually departed herself to join the drama television series Leap Years . The actress earned some critical praise for her performance as Jeffries , but several commentators said the character was never properly fleshed out . 
 = = Character biography = = 
 Monique Jeffries is a tough and street @-@ wise detective with the Special Victims Unit of the New York City Police Department . After briefly partnering with Ken Briscoe ( Chris Orbach ) , she becomes the permanent partner of John Munch ( Richard Belzer ) after his previous partner , Brian Cassidy ( Dean Winters ) , leaves the unit . The two occasionally clash personalities and have a sarcastic rapport with each other . While chasing a rape suspect during one case , Jeffries is nearly killed when the suspect gets into a car that explodes . She initially appears traumatized by the incident , but later feels exhilarated over having survived and starts behaving recklessly . She begins having several one @-@ night stands and takes greater and greater risks at work , becoming something of a loose cannon at the Special Victims Unit . One night at a bar , she meets a man who had been a suspect in a previous rape case and has sex with him . When she reveals the incident during a session with a police therapist , she is taken out of active duty per One Police Plaza and works a desk job . She objects to the transfer and threatens to sue the department . Instead , she is transferred to the Vice department , and her old job in the Special Victims Unit is taken by Fin Tutuola ( Ice @-@ T ) . 
 = = Development = = 
 Michelle Hurd had appeared on the television series Law & Order , making a guest appearance on the seventh season episode " Entrapment " in 1997 . Hurd also previously appeared in the television shows New York Undercover and Players , both of which were produced by Law & Order creator Dick Wolf . When Wolf approached Hurd to play the part of Monique Jeffries , he warned her that the part was small at first but had the potential to develop , telling her , " Think of her as a flower , she 'll bloom later , but for the pilot she 's just got a scene . " The character also had less screen @-@ time than others in the series , in part so that Hurd could accept theater roles . However , Hurd felt the Jeffries character never received the development promised , claiming she " just read instructions " while playing the part . While she liked being part of the cast , Hurd said she was frustrated with the lack of material for her character , particularly when guest stars had more developed roles than Jeffries herself . 
 When Dean Winters departed from the show and a permanent replacement for the Brian Cassidy character was needed , Hurd had trouble convincing network officials she was correct for the part . Ted Kotcheff , the show 's co @-@ executive producer , said it was too redundant to have two man @-@ woman sets of partners , with protagonists Elliot Stabler and Olivia Benson already partnered together . Kotcheff felt Munch and Jeffries pairing diluted the relationship of Stabler and Benson because it was a " mirror image " of their partnership . Although Hurd felt more female characters should be part of a sex crimes unit , she said , " I understand the industry , and what networks want , and they wanted someone to have an impact , a rating . " The producers had discussions about removing Jeffries from the show so that Benson would be the only woman in the squad room , but no decisions were ever made . 
 Hurd ultimately departed from the series during the second season to join the Showtime drama series Leap Years . After her departure from the show , Hurd said , " I think it 's just sad they didn 't have faith to stick around with me . " However , she said she bore no ill feelings about her time on Law & Order : Special Victims Unit , but felt the casting on Leap Years was a " rare opportunity " . Roger Friedman , an entertainment journalist for Fox News , reported that Richard Belzer arranged for Hurd to be fired because her character was receiving too many story @-@ lines and distracting attention from him , but that report was never confirmed . Although Jeffries departed from the Special Victims Unit during the episode " <unk> " , her character was still present in the episode " Runaway " , which marked the character 's final appearance . " Runaway " was originally intended to air before " <unk> " but was broadcast out of order . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Gail Pennington of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch said of the character , " her role was so marginal that her absence hardly registered " after she departed the series . Ken Parish Perkins of the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram called Michelle Hurd a strong member of a " solid cast " . The South Florida Sun @-@ Sentinel said the character had " untapped potential " that appeared ready to be tapped after Dean Winters left the show , and the paper expressed disappointment it was never achieved . In an interview with Orlando Sentinel about the series , New York Police Department Detective Ted Sica said Jeffries ' wardrobe was too revealing for a detective , and that the real @-@ life department would not allow her tank tops and tight vests : " We don 't tolerate that , especially in a sex crimes unit . We 're trying to be a little dignified . " 
 = Millennium Park = 
 Millennium Park is a public park located in the Loop community area of Chicago in Illinois , US , and originally intended to celebrate the second millennium . It is a prominent civic center near the city 's Lake Michigan shoreline that covers a 24 @.@ 5 @-@ acre ( 99 @,@ 000 m2 ) section of northwestern Grant Park . The area was previously occupied by parkland , Illinois Central rail yards , and parking lots . The park , which is bounded by Michigan Avenue , Randolph Street , Columbus Drive and East Monroe Drive , features a variety of public art . As of 2009 , Millennium Park trailed only Navy Pier as a Chicago tourist attraction . In 2015 , the park became the location of the city 's annual Christmas tree lighting . 
 Planning of the park began in October 1997 . Construction began in October 1998 , and Millennium Park was opened in a ceremony on July 16 , 2004 , four years behind schedule . The three @-@ day opening celebrations were attended by some 300 @,@ 000 people and included an inaugural concert by the Grant Park Orchestra and Chorus . The park has received awards for its accessibility and green design . Millennium Park has free admission , and features the Jay Pritzker Pavilion , Cloud Gate , the Crown Fountain , the Lurie Garden , and various other attractions . The park is connected by the BP Pedestrian Bridge and the Nichols Bridgeway to other parts of Grant Park . Because the park sits atop a parking garage and the commuter rail Millennium Station , it is considered the world 's largest rooftop garden . 
 Some observers consider Millennium Park to be the city 's most important project since the World 's Columbian Exposition of 1893 . It far exceeded its originally proposed budget of $ 150 million . The final cost of $ 475 million was borne by Chicago taxpayers and private donors . The city paid $ 270 million ; private donors paid the rest , and assumed roughly half of the financial responsibility for the cost overruns . The construction delays and cost overruns were attributed to poor planning , many design changes , and cronyism . Many critics have praised the completed park . 
 = = Background = = 
 From 1852 until 1997 , the Illinois Central Railroad owned a right of way between downtown Chicago and Lake Michigan , in the area that became Grant Park and used it for railroad tracks . In 1871 , Union Base @-@ Ball Grounds was built on part of the site that became Millennium Park ; the Chicago White Stockings played home games there until the grounds were destroyed in the Great Chicago Fire . Lake Front Park , the White Stockings ' new ball grounds , was built in 1878 with a short right field due to the railroad tracks . The grounds were improved and the seating capacity was doubled in 1883 , but the team had to move after the season ended the next year , as the federal government had given the city the land " with the stipulation that no commercial venture could use it " . Daniel Burnham planned Grant Park around the Illinois Central Railroad property in his 1909 Plan of Chicago . In 1997 , when the city gained airspace rights over the tracks , it decided to build a parking facility over them in the northwestern corner of Grant Park . Eventually , the city realized that a grand civic amenity might lure private dollars in a way that a municipal improvement would not , and thus began the effort to create Millennium Park . The park was originally planned under the name Lakefront Millennium Park . 
 The park was conceived as a 16 @-@ acre ( 65 @,@ 000 m2 ) landscape @-@ covered bridge over an underground parking structure to be built on top of the Metra / Illinois Central Railroad tracks in Grant Park . Originally , the park was to be designed by Skidmore , Owings & Merrill , but gradually additional architects and artists such as Frank Gehry and Thomas Beeby were incorporated into the plan . Sponsors were sought by invitation only . 
 In February 1999 , the city announced it was negotiating with Frank Gehry to design a proscenium arch and orchestra enclosure for a bandshell , as well as a pedestrian bridge crossing Columbus Drive , and that it was seeking donors to cover his work . At the time , the Chicago Tribune dubbed Gehry " the hottest architect in the universe " in reference to the acclaim for his Guggenheim Museum Bilbao , and they noted the designs would not include Mayor Richard M. Daley 's trademarks , such as wrought iron and seasonal flower boxes . Millennium Park project manager Edward Uhlir said " Frank is just the cutting edge of the next century of architecture , " and noted that no other architect was being sought . Gehry was approached several times by Skidmore architect Adrian Smith on behalf of the city . His hesitance and refusal to accept the commission was overcome by Cindy Pritzker , the philanthropist , who had developed a relationship with the architect when he won the Pritzker Prize in 1989 . According to John H. Bryan , who led fund @-@ raising for the park , Pritzker enticed Gehry in face @-@ to @-@ face discussions , using a $ 15 million funding commitment toward the bandshell 's creation . Having Gehry get involved helped the city realize its vision of having modern themes in the park ; upon rumors of his involvement the Chicago Sun @-@ Times proclaimed " Perhaps the future has arrived " , while the Chicago Tribune noted that " The most celebrated architect in the world may soon have a chance to bring Chicago into the 21st Century " . 
 Plans for the park were officially announced in March 1998 and construction began in September of that year . Initial construction was under the auspices of the Chicago Department of Transportation , because the project bridges the railroad tracks . However , as the project grew and expanded , its broad variety of features and amenities outside the scope of the field of transportation placed it under the jurisdiction of the city 's Public Buildings Commission . 
 In April 1999 , the city announced that the Pritzker family had donated $ 15 million to fund Gehry 's bandshell and an additional nine donors committed $ 10 million . The day of this announcement , Gehry agreed to the design request . In November , when his design was unveiled , Gehry said the bridge design was preliminary and not well @-@ conceived because funding for it was not committed . The need to fund a bridge to span the eight @-@ lane Columbus Drive was evident , but some planning for the park was delayed in anticipation of details on the redesign of Soldier Field . In January 2000 , the city announced plans to expand the park to include features that became Cloud Gate , the Crown Fountain , the McDonald 's Cycle Center , and the BP Pedestrian Bridge . Later that month , Gehry unveiled his new winding design for the bridge . 
 Mayor Daley 's influence was key in getting corporate and individual sponsors to pay for much of the park . Bryan , the former chief executive officer ( CEO ) of Sara Lee Corporation who spearheaded the fundraising , says that sponsorship was by invitation and no one refused the opportunity to be a sponsor . One Time magazine writer describes the park as the crowning achievement for Mayor Daley , while another suggests the park 's cost and time <unk> were examples of the city 's mismanagement . The July 16 – 18 , 2004 , opening gala was sponsored by J.P. Morgan Chase & Co . 
 The community surrounding Millennium Park has become one of the most fashionable residential addresses in Chicago . In 2006 , Forbes named the park 's <unk> zip code as the hottest in terms of price appreciation in the country , with upscale buildings such as The Heritage at Millennium Park ( 130 N. Garland ) leading the way for other buildings , such as Waterview Tower , The Legacy and Joffrey Tower . The median sale price for residential real estate was $ 710 @,@ 000 in 2005 according to Forbes , also ranking it on the list of most expensive zip codes . The park has been credited with increasing residential real estate values by $ 100 per square foot ( $ 1 @,@ 076 per m2 ) . 
 = = Features = = 
 Millennium Park is a portion of the 319 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 3 km2 ) Grant Park , known as the " front lawn " of downtown Chicago , and has four major artistic highlights : the Jay Pritzker Pavilion , Cloud Gate , the Crown Fountain , and the Lurie Garden . Millennium Park is successful as a public art venue in part due to the grand scale of each piece and the open spaces for display . A showcase for postmodern architecture , it also features the McCormick Tribune Ice Skating Rink , the BP Pedestrian Bridge , the Joan W. and Irving B. Harris Theater for Music and Dance , Wrigley Square , the McDonald 's Cycle Center , the Exelon Pavilions , the AT & T Plaza , the Boeing Galleries , the Chase Promenade , and the Nichols Bridgeway . 
 Millennium Park is considered one of the largest green roofs in the world , having been constructed on top of a railroad yard and large parking garages . The park , which is known for being user friendly , has a very rigorous cleaning schedule with many areas being swept , wiped down or cleaned multiple times a day . Although the park was unveiled in July 2004 , some features opened earlier , and upgrades continued for some time afterwards . Along with the cultural features above ground ( described below ) the park has its own 2218 @-@ space parking garage . 
 = = = Jay Pritzker Pavilion = = = 
 The centerpiece of Millennium Park is the Jay Pritzker Pavilion , a bandshell designed by Frank Gehry . The pavilion has 4 @,@ 000 fixed seats , plus additional lawn seating for 7 @,@ 000 ; the stage is framed by curving plates of stainless steel , characteristic of Gehry . It was named after Jay Pritzker , whose family is known for owning Hyatt Hotels and was a major donor . The Pritzker Pavilion is Grant Park 's outdoor performing arts venue for small events , and complements Petrillo Music Shell , the park 's older and larger bandshell . The pavilion is built partially atop the Harris Theater for Music and Dance , the park 's indoor performing arts venue , with which it shares a loading dock and backstage facilities . The pavilion is seen as a major upgrade from the Petrillo Music Shell for those events it hosts . Initially , the pavilion 's lawn seats were free for all concerts , but this changed when Tori Amos performed the first rock concert there on August 31 , 2005 . 
 The Pritzker Pavilion is the home of the Grant Park Symphony Orchestra and Chorus and the Grant Park Music Festival , the nation 's only remaining free , municipally supported , outdoor , classical music series . The Festival is presented by the Chicago Park District and the Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs . The Pavilion hosts a wide range of other music series and annual performing arts events . Performers ranging from mainstream rock bands to classical musicians and opera singers have appeared at the pavilion , which also hosts physical fitness activities such as yoga . All rehearsals at the pavilion are open to the public ; trained guides are available for the music festival rehearsals , which are well @-@ attended . 
 The construction of the pavilion created a legal controversy , given that there are historic limitations on the height of buildings in Grant Park . To avoid these legal restrictions , the city classifies the bandshell as a work of art rather than a building . With several design and assembly problems , the construction plans were revised over time , with features eliminated and others added as successful fundraising allowed the budget to grow . In the end , the performance venue was designed with a large fixed seating area , a Great Lawn , a trellis network to support the sound system , and a headdress fashioned from signature Gehry stainless steel . It features a sound system with an acoustic design that replicates an indoor concert hall sound experience . The pavilion and Millennium Park have received favorable recognition by critics , especially for their accessibility ; an accessibility award ceremony held at the pavilion in 2005 described it as " one of the most accessible parks — not just in the United States but possibly the world " . 
 = = = AT & T Plaza and Cloud Gate = = = 
 The AT & T Plaza is a public space that hosts the Cloud Gate sculpture . The plaza opened in July 2004 with the unveiling of the sculpture during the grand opening weekend of the park . Ameritech donated $ 3 million for the naming right for the plaza , but it was SBC Plaza when the park opened , as a merger had changed the company name to SBC Communications . The 2005 merger of SBC and AT & T Corporation led to the present name . The sculpture and the AT & T Plaza are located on top of Park Grill , between the Chase Promenade and McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink . The plaza has become a place to view the McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink . During the holiday season , the plaza hosts Christmas caroling . Cloud Gate is a three @-@ story steel sculpture that has been dubbed " The Bean " by Chicagoans , because of its legume @-@ like shape . The sculpture is the first public artwork in the United States by world @-@ renowned artist Anish Kapoor . The privately funded piece cost $ 23 million , considerably more than the original estimate of $ 6 million . Composed of 168 stainless steel plates welded together , its highly polished exterior has no visible seams . It is 33 by 66 by 42 feet ( 10 m × 20 m × 13 m ) and weighs 110 short tons ( 100 t ; 98 long tons ) . 
 After Kapoor 's design for the sculpture was selected during a design competition , numerous technological concerns regarding the design 's construction and assembly arose , in addition to concerns regarding the sculpture 's upkeep and maintenance . Experts were consulted , some of whom believed the design could not be implemented . Eventually , a feasible method was found , but the sculpture 's construction fell behind schedule . Cloud Gate was unveiled in an incomplete form during the Millennium Park grand opening celebration , as the grid of welds around each metal panel was still visible . The sculpture was concealed again while it was completed ; in early 2005 , workers polished out the seams . Cloud Gate was formally dedicated on May 15 , 2006 , and it has since gained considerable popularity , both domestically and internationally . 
 Cloud Gate ( also known as " the Bean " ) is a reflective steel sculpture that is inspired by liquid mercury ; the sculpture 's surface reflects and distorts the city 's skyline . The curved , mirror @-@ like surface of the sculpture provides striking reflections of visitors , the city skyline ( particularly the historic Michigan Avenue " streetwall " ) and the sky . Visitors are able to walk around and under Cloud Gate 's 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) high arch . On the underside is the " omphalos " ( Greek for " navel " ) , a concave chamber that warps and multiplies reflections . The sculpture builds upon many of Kapoor 's artistic themes and is popular with tourists as a photo @-@ taking opportunity for its unique reflective properties . 
 = = = Crown Fountain = = = 
 The Crown Fountain is an interactive work of public art and video sculpture , named in honor of Chicago 's Crown family and opened in July 2004 . It was designed by Catalan conceptual artist Jaume Plensa and executed by Krueck and Sexton Architects . The fountain is composed of a black granite reflecting pool placed between a pair of transparent glass brick towers . The towers are 50 feet ( 15 m ) tall , and use light @-@ emitting diodes behind the bricks to display digital videos on their inward faces . Construction and design of the Crown Fountain cost $ 17 million . 
 Weather permitting , the water operates from May to October , intermittently cascading down the two towers and spouting through a nozzle on each tower 's front face . To achieve the effect in which water appears to be flowing from subjects ' mouths , each video has a segment where the subject 's lips are puckered , which is then timed to correspond to the spouting water , reminiscent of gargoyle fountains ; this happens roughly every five minutes . The park and fountain are open to the public daily from 6 a.m. to 11 p.m. 
 Residents and critics have praised the fountain for its artistic and entertainment features . It highlights Plensa 's themes of dualism , light , and water , extending the use of video technology from his prior works . The fountain promotes physical interaction between the public and the water in an artistic setting . Both the fountain and Millennium Park are highly accessible because of their universal design . 
 The Crown Fountain has been the most controversial of all the Millennium Park features . Before it was built , some were concerned that the sculpture 's height violated the aesthetic tradition of the park . After construction , surveillance cameras were installed atop the fountain , which led to a public outcry ( and their quick removal ) . However , the fountain has survived its somewhat contentious beginnings to find its way into Chicago pop culture . It is a popular subject for photographers and a common gathering place . While some of the videos displayed are of scenery , most attention has focused on its video clips of local residents , in which almost a thousand Chicagoans randomly appear on two screens . The fountain is a public play area and offers people an escape from summer heat , allowing children to frolic in the fountain 's water . 
 = = = Lurie Garden = = = 
 The Lurie Garden is a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ acre ( 10 @,@ 000 m2 ) public garden located at the southern end of Millennium Park ; designed by Kathryn Gustafson , Piet Oudolf , and Robert Israel , it opened on July 16 , 2004 . The garden is a combination of perennials , bulbs , grasses , shrubs and trees . It is the featured nature component of the world 's largest green roof . The garden cost $ 13 @.@ 2 million and has a $ 10 million financial endowment for maintenance and upkeep . It was named after philanthropist Ann Lurie , who donated the $ 10 million endowment . The garden is a tribute to the city , whose motto is " Urbs in Horto " , Latin for " City in a Garden " . The Lurie Garden is composed of two " plates " . The dark plate depicts Chicago 's history by presenting shade @-@ loving plants , and has a combination of trees that will provide a shade canopy for these plants when they fill in . The light plate , which has no trees , represents the city 's future with sun @-@ loving perennials that thrive in heat and light . 
 = = = McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink and Park Grill = = = 
 The McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink is a multipurpose venue located along the western edge of Millennium Park opposite the streetwall of the Historic Michigan Boulevard District . On December 20 , 2001 , it became the first attraction in Millennium Park to open , a few weeks ahead of the Millennium Park underground parking garage . The $ 3 @.@ 2 million plaza was funded by a donation from the McCormick Tribune Foundation . For four months a year , it operates as McCormick Tribune Ice Rink , a free public outdoor ice skating rink . It is generally open for skating from mid @-@ November until mid @-@ March and hosts over 100 @,@ 000 skaters annually . It is known as one of Chicago 's better outdoor people watching locations during the winter months . The rink is operated by the Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs rather than the Chicago Park District , which operates most major public ice skating rinks in Chicago . 
 For the rest of the year , it serves as The Plaza at Park Grill or Park Grill Plaza , Chicago 's largest al fresco dining facility . The 150 @-@ seat outdoor restaurant offers scenic views of the park , and hosts various culinary events and musical performances during its months of operation . From June 21 to September 15 , 2002 , the plaza served as an open @-@ air exhibition space and hosted the inaugural exhibit in Millennium Park , Exelon Presents Earth From Above by Yann Arthus @-@ Bertrand , a French aerial photographer . 
 The Park Grill Plaza is affiliated with the 300 @-@ seat indoor Park Grill restaurant , located beneath the AT & T Plaza and Cloud Gate . The Park Grill is the only full @-@ service restaurant in Millennium Park and opened on November 24 , 2003 . It regularly places among the leaders in citywide best @-@ of competitions for best burger , and it is widely praised for its views . The restaurant has been the focus of controversies about the numerous associates of Mayor Daley who are investors , its exclusive location and lucrative contract terms . One of the most financially successful restaurants in Chicago , the Park Grill remains exempt from property taxes after a multi @-@ year litigation which reached the appellate courts in Illinois . 
 = = = BP Pedestrian Bridge = = = 
 The BP Pedestrian Bridge is a girder footbridge over Columbus Drive that connects Millennium Park with Maggie Daley Park ( formerly , Daley Bicentennial Plaza ) , both parts of the larger Grant Park . The pedestrian bridge is the first bridge Gehry designed to be built , and was named for BP plc , which donated $ 5 million to the construction of the park . It opened on July 16 , 2004 , along with the rest of Millennium Park . Gehry had been courted by the city to design the bridge and the neighboring Jay Pritzker Pavilion , and eventually agreed to do so after the Pritzker family funded the Pavilion . The bridge is known for its aesthetics , and Gehry 's style is seen in its biomorphic allusions and extensive sculptural use of stainless steel plates to express abstraction . The bridge is referred to as snakelike in character due to its curving form . The bridge 's design , which meets highway standards to accommodate rushes of pedestrian traffic simultaneously exiting Pritzker Pavilion events , enables it to bear a heavy load . 
 The pedestrian bridge serves as a noise barrier for the pavilion , blocking traffic sounds from Columbus Drive . It is a connecting link between Millennium Park and destinations to the east , such as the nearby lakefront , other parts of Grant Park and a parking garage . The BP Bridge uses a concealed box girder design with a concrete base , and its deck is covered by hardwood floor boards . It is designed without handrails , using stainless steel parapets instead . The total length is 935 feet ( 285 m ) , with a five percent slope on its inclined surfaces that makes it barrier @-@ free and accessible . It has won awards for its use of sheet metal . Although the bridge is closed in winter because ice cannot be safely removed from its wooden walkway , it has received favorable reviews for its design and aesthetics . 
 = = = Harris Theater = = = 
 The Joan W. and Irving B. Harris Theater for Music and Dance is a 1525 @-@ seat theater for the performing arts located along the northern edge of Millennium Park . Constructed in 2002 – 03 , it is the city 's premier performance venue for small- and medium @-@ sized performance groups , which had previously been without a permanent home and were underserved by the city 's performing venue options . The theater , which is largely underground due to Grant Park @-@ related height restrictions , was named for its primary benefactors , Joan and Irving Harris . It serves as the park 's indoor performing venue , a compliment to Jay Pritzker Pavilion , which hosts the park 's outdoor performances . Among the regularly featured local groups are the Joffrey Ballet , Hubbard Street Dance Chicago and Chicago Opera Theater . It provides subsidized rental , technical expertise , and marketing support for the companies using it , and turned a profit in its fourth fiscal year . 
 The Harris Theater has hosted notable national and international performers , such as the New York City Ballet , which made its first visit to Chicago in over 25 years ( in 2006 ) . The theater began offering subscription series of traveling performers in its 2008 – 09 fifth anniversary season . Performances through this series have included the San Francisco Ballet , Mikhail Baryshnikov , and Stephen Sondheim . 
 The theater has been credited as contributing to the performing arts renaissance in Chicago , and it has been favorably reviewed for its acoustics , sightlines , proscenium and for providing a home base for numerous performing organizations . Although it is seen as a high @-@ caliber venue for its music audiences , the theater is regarded as less than ideal for jazz groups , because it is more expensive and larger than most places where jazz is performed . The design has been criticized for traffic flow problems , with an elevator bottleneck . However , the theater 's prominent location and its underground design to preserve Millennium Park have been praised . Although there were complaints about high @-@ priced events in its early years , discounted ticket programs were introduced in the 2009 – 10 season . 
 = = = Wrigley Square = = = 
 Wrigley Square is a public square located in the northwest corner of Millennium Park near the intersection of East Randolph Street and North Michigan , across from the Historic Michigan Boulevard District . It contains the Millennium Monument , a nearly full @-@ sized replica of the semicircle of paired Greek Doric @-@ style columns ( called a peristyle ) that originally sat in this area of Grant Park between 1917 and 1953 . The square also contains a large lawn and a public fountain . The William Wrigley , Jr . Foundation contributed $ 5 million for the monument and square , which was named in its honor . The pedestal of the Millennium Monument 's peristyle is inscribed with the names of the 115 financial donors who made the 91 contributions of at least $ 1 million each to help pay for Millennium Park . 
 = = = McDonald 's Cycle Center = = = 
 The McDonald 's Cycle Center is a 300 @-@ space heated and air conditioned indoor bike station located in the northeast corner of Millennium Park . The facility provides lockers , showers , a snack bar with outdoor summer seating , bike repair , bike rental and other amenities for downtown bicycle commuters and utility cyclists . The bike station also accommodates runners and in @-@ line skaters , and provides space for a Chicago Police Department Bike Patrol Group . The city @-@ built center opened in July 2004 as the Millennium Park Bike Station ; since June 2006 , it has been sponsored by McDonald 's and several other partners , including city departments and bicycle advocacy organizations . Suburban Chicago @-@ based McDonald 's sponsorship of the Cycle Center fit in well with its efforts to help its customers become more healthy by encouraging " balanced , active lifestyles " . The Cycle Center is accessible by membership and day pass . 
 Planning for the Cycle Center was part of the larger " Bike 2010 Plan " , in which the city aimed to make itself more accommodating to bicycle commuters . This plan ( since replaced by the " Bike 2015 Plan " ) included provisions for front @-@ mounted two @-@ bike carriers on Chicago Transit Authority ( CTA ) buses , permitting bikes to be carried on Chicago ' L ' trains , installing numerous bike racks and creating bicycle lanes in streets throughout the city . Additionally , the Chicago metropolitan area 's other mass transit providers , Metra and Pace , have developed increased bike accessibility . Mayor Daley was an advocate of the plan , noting it is also an environmentally friendly effort to cut down on traffic . Environmentalists , urban planners and cycling enthusiasts around the world have expressed interest in the Cycle Center , and want to emulate what they see as a success story in urban planning and transit @-@ oriented development . Pro @-@ cycling and environmentalist journalists in publications well beyond Chicago have described the Cycle Center as exemplary , impressive , unique and ground @-@ breaking . The Toronto Star notes that it is revered as " a kind of Shangri @-@ La " , and describes it as " a jewel @-@ like glass building on the Chicago waterfront , [ that ] has many of the amenities of an upscale health club [ ... ] close to the heart of the city " , with the additional statement that " It 's not heaven , but it 's close " . A Vancouver official told The Oregonian that it was " the ultimate in bicycle stations " , and would be natural for bicycle friendly cities to emulate . 
 = = = Exelon Pavilions = = = 
 The Exelon Pavilions are a set of four solar energy @-@ generating structures in Millennium Park . The pavilions provide sufficient energy to power the equivalent of 14 Energy star @-@ rated energy @-@ efficient houses in Chicago . The pavilions were designed in January 2001 and construction began in January 2004 . The Southeast and Southwest Exelon Pavilions ( jointly the South Exelon Pavilions ) along Madison Street were completed and opened in July 2004 , and flank the Lurie Garden . The Northeast and Northwest Exelon Pavilions ( jointly the North Exelon Pavilions ) flank the Harris Theater along Randolph Street and were completed in November 2004 , with a grand opening on April 30 , 2005 . Besides producing energy , three of the four pavilions provide access to the park 's underground parking garages and the fourth serves as the park 's welcome center . Exelon , a company that generates the electricity transmitted by its subsidiary Commonwealth Edison , donated approximately $ 6 million for the pavilions . 
 = = = Boeing Galleries = = = 
 The Boeing Galleries are a pair of outdoor exhibition spaces within Millennium Park ; they are located along the south and north mid @-@ level terraces , above and east of Wrigley Square and the Crown Fountain . They were added after the park opened ; in March 2005 , Boeing President and Chief Executive Officer James Bell announced the firm would make a $ 5 million grant to fund construction of the spaces , and for an endowment to " help fund visual arts exhibitions " in them . The galleries , which were built between March and June 2005 , have hosted grand @-@ scale art exhibits , some of which have run for two full summers . 
 = = = Chase Promenade = = = 
 The Chase Promenade is an open @-@ air tree @-@ lined pedestrian walkway in Millennium Park that opened July 16 , 2004 . The promenade was made possible by a gift from the Bank One Foundation ; Bank One merged with JPMorgan Chase in 2004 , and the name became Chase Promenade . The 8 @-@ acre ( 32 @,@ 000 m2 ) walkway accommodates exhibitions , festivals and other family events . It also serves as a private @-@ event rental venue . The Chase Promenade hosted the 2009 Burnham Pavilions , which were the cornerstone of the citywide Burnham Plan centennial celebration . 
 = = = Nichols Bridgeway = = = 
 The Nichols Bridgeway , a pedestrian bridge that opened on May 16 , 2009 , connects the south end of Millennium Park with the Modern Wing of the Art Institute of Chicago . The bridge begins at the southwest end of the Jay Pritzker Pavilion 's Great Lawn and extends across Monroe Street , where it connects to the third floor of the Art Institute 's West Pavilion . The bridge design by Renzo Piano , the architect of the Modern Wing , was inspired by the hull of a boat . 
 The Nichols Bridgeway is approximately 620 ft ( 190 m ) long and 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide . The bottom of the bridge is made of white , painted structural steel , the floor is made of aluminum planking and the 42 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) tall railings are steel set atop stainless steel mesh . The bridge features anti @-@ slip walkways and heating elements to prevent the formation of ice . It meets standards for universal accessibility , as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ( ADA ) . The bridge is named after museum donors Alexandra and John Nichols . 
 = = Budget = = 
 During development and construction of the park , many structures were added , redesigned or modified . These changes often resulted in budget increases . For example , the bandshell 's proposed budget was $ 10 @.@ 8 million . When the elaborate , cantilevered Gehry design required extra pilings to be driven into the bedrock to support the added weight , the cost of the bandshell eventually spiraled to $ 60 @.@ 3 million . The cost of the park , as itemized in the following table , amounted to almost $ 500 million . 
 Mayor Daley at first placed much of the blame for the delay and cost overrun on Frank Gehry , who designed the pavilion and its connecting bridge ; Daley 's office later apologized to the architect . A 2001 investigative report by the Chicago Tribune described the park then under construction and its budget overruns as an " expensive public @-@ works debacle that can be traced to haphazard planning , design <unk> and cronyism " . According to Lois Weisberg , commissioner of the Department of Cultural Affairs , and James Law , executive director of the Mayor 's Office of Special Events , once the full scope of the project was finalized the project was completed within the revised budget . 
 = = Use = = 
 Millennium Park had 3 million visitors in its first year ; annual attendance was projected to grow to between 3 @.@ 31 and 3 @.@ 65 million by 2010 . According to Crain 's Chicago Business , however , the park had about 4 million visitors in 2009 . In addition to the different uses detailed for each of the permanent features ( above ) , the park has hosted some other notable events , including the annual Grant Park Music Festival , and two temporary pavilions to mark the centennial of Daniel Burnham 's 1909 Plan of Chicago . Millennium Park has also been featured in several films and television shows . 
 = = = Grant Park Music Festival = = = 
 The Grant Park Music Festival ( formerly Grant Park Concerts ) is an annual 10 @-@ week classical music concert series , which features the Grant Park Symphony Orchestra and the Grant Park Chorus as well as guest performers and conductors . Since 2004 , the festival has been housed in the Jay Pritzker Pavilion in Millennium Park . On occasion , the festival has been held at the Harris Theater instead of the Pritzker Pavilion . The festival has earned non @-@ profit organization status , and claims to be the nation 's only free , outdoor classical music series . 
 The Grant Park Music Festival has been a Chicago tradition since 1931 , when Chicago Mayor Anton Cermak suggested free concerts to lift spirits of Chicagoans during the Great Depression . The tradition of symphonic Grant Park Music Festival concerts began in 1935 . The 2004 season , during which the festival moved to the Pritzker Pavilion , was the event 's 70th season . Formerly , the Grant Park Music Festival was held at the Petrillo Music Shell in Grant Park . 
 Over time the festival has had various financial supporters , three primary locations and one name change . At times it has been broadcast nationally on the National Broadcasting Corporation ( NBC ) and Columbia Broadcasting Service ( CBS ) radio networks , and many of the world 's leading classical musicians have performed there . In 2000 , the festival organizers agreed to release some of the concerts to the public via compact disc recordings . 
 = = = Installation of Burnham Pavilions in 2009 = = = 
 In 2009 , architects Zaha Hadid and Ben van Berkel were invited to design and build two pavilions on the Chase Promenade South , to commemorate the 100th anniversary of Daniel Burnham 's 1909 Plan of Chicago . The pavilions were privately funded and were designed to be temporary structures . They served as the focal point of Chicago 's year @-@ long celebration of Burnham 's Plan , and were meant to symbolize the city 's continued pursuit of the plan 's architectural vision . 
 The van Berkel Pavilion was composed of two parallel rectangular planes joined by curving scoops , all built on a steel frame covered with glossy white plywood . It was situated on a raised platform , which was sliced by a ramp entrance , making it ADA accessible . The Hadid Pavilion was a tensioned fabric shell fitted over a curving aluminum framework made of more than 7 @,@ 000 pieces . A centennial @-@ themed video presentation was projected on its interior fabric walls after dark . 
 Both pavilions were scheduled to be unveiled on June 19 , 2009 . However , Hadid 's pavilion was not ready in time ; it had construction delays and a construction team change , which led to coverage of the delay in The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal . Only its aluminum skeleton was available for public viewing on the scheduled date ; the work was completed and unveiled on August 4 , 2009 . The van Berkel pavilion was temporarily closed for repairs August 10 – 14 , due to unanticipated wear and tear . Both pavilions were dismantled after November 1 , 2009 ; the materials from van Berkel 's were recycled , while Hadid 's was stored for possible exhibition elsewhere . 
 = = = Christmas tree = = = 
 In October 2015 , the City announced that its official annual Christmas tree lighting , which had been held at Daley Center since 1966 ( except for 1982 ) , would be held at the park in order that the official Christmas tree of the city could be closer to ice skating at McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink , the annual Christmas caroling at Cloud Gate and to the new offerings of the nearby Maggie Daley Park . The annual lighting will occur near Michigan Avenue and Washington Street . Some parties opposed the move that separated the annual tree from the <unk> and the Chicago Picasso . The city 's first official tree lighting by Mayor Carter Harrison , Jr. in 1913 had been held in Grant Park on Michigan Avenue two blocks south of the new location . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Jeff Garlin claims that I Want Someone to Eat Cheese With was the first Hollywood movie to incorporate Millennium Park . The film was not released until 2006 , after the release of several other movies . These include the 2005 film The Weather Man , which starred Nicolas Cage and was filmed in part at the park 's McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink . The 2006 romantic comedy The Break @-@ Up shot scenes in the park , then had to reshoot some of them because Cloud Gate was under cover in some of the initial shots . Other movies which include scenes filmed in Millennium Park include the 2005 thriller Derailed , the 2006 romance The Lake House , and the 2007 thriller Butterfly on a Wheel . At least two television series have filmed in the park , including Leverage and Prison Break , which featured shots of the Crown Fountain in the first few episodes of its first season ( 2005 ) . In the ending scene of Source Code ( 2011 ) , Jake Gyllenhaal 's and Michelle Monaghan 's characters are seen walking through Millennium Park , and make their way to the Cloud Gate . In the 2012 romantic comedy , The Vow , the characters run from the Art Institute of Chicago across the Nichols Bridgeway to Millennium Park , where they kiss under Cloud Gate . 
 = = Criticism and controversy = = 
 = = = Height restrictions = = = 
 In 1836 , a year before Chicago was incorporated , the Board of Canal Commissioners held public auctions for the city 's first lots . Foresighted citizens , who wanted the lakefront kept as public open space , convinced the commissioners to designate the land east of Michigan Avenue between Randolph Street and Park Row ( 11th Street ) " Public Ground — A Common to Remain Forever Open , Clear and Free of Any Buildings , or Other Obstruction , whatever . " Grant Park has been " forever open , clear and free " since , protected by legislation that has been affirmed by four previous Illinois Supreme Court rulings . In 1839 , United States Secretary of War Joel Roberts Poinsett upon decommissioning the Fort Dearborn reserve , declared the land between Randolph Street and Madison Street east of Michigan Avenue " Public Ground forever to remain vacant of buildings " . 
 Aaron Montgomery Ward , who is known both as the inventor of mail order and the protector of Grant Park , twice sued the city of Chicago to force it to remove buildings and structures from Grant Park and to keep it from building new ones . In 1890 , arguing that Michigan Avenue property owners held easements on the park land , Ward commenced legal actions to keep the park free of new buildings . In 1900 , the Illinois Supreme Court concluded that all landfill east of Michigan Avenue was subject to dedications and easements . In 1909 , when Ward sought to prevent the construction of the Field Museum of Natural History in the center of the park , the courts affirmed his arguments . 
 As a result , the city has what are termed Montgomery Ward height restrictions on buildings and structures in Grant Park . However , the Crown Fountain and the 139 @-@ foot ( 42 m ) Pritzker Pavilion were exempt from the height restrictions , because they were classified as works of art and not buildings or structures . According to The Economist , the pavilion is described as a work of art to dodge the protections established by Ward , who is said to continue to rule and protect Grant Park from his grave . The Harris Theater , which is adjacent to Pritzker Pavilion , was built almost entirely underground to avoid the height restrictions . The height of the Crown Fountain , which is also exempted as a work of art , has been described as stemming from a " pissing contest " with other park feature artists . 
 = = = Financial issues = = = 
 The Millennium Park project has been the subject of some criticism since its inception . In addition to concerns about cost overruns , individuals and organizations have complained that the money spent on the park might have gone to other worthy causes , citing poverty in Chicago and problems in the city 's schools . Although the park 's design and architectural elements have won wide praise , there has been some criticism of its aesthetics . Other criticism has revolved around the larger issue of corruption and political favoritism in the city ; The New York Times reported in July 2004 that an inflated contract for park cleanup had gone to a company that made large contributions to Mayor Daley 's election campaign . The park 's only full service restaurant , Park Grill , has been criticized for its connection to numerous friends and associates of the mayor . 
 Concerns have also been raised over the mixed use of taxpayer and corporate funding and associated naming rights for sections of the park . While a monument in Wrigley Square honors the park 's many private and corporate donors , many park features are also named for their corporate underwriters , with the sponsors ' names prominently indicated with stone markers ( The Boeing Gallery , The Exelon Pavilion , The AT & T Plaza , The Wrigley Square ) . Some critics have deemed this to be inappropriate for a public space . Julie Deardorff , Chicago Tribune health and fitness reporter , described the naming of the McDonald 's Cycle Center as a continuation of the " ' <unk> ' of America " and as somewhat " insidious " because the company is making itself more prominent as the social sentiment is to move away from fast food . Timothy Gilfoyle , author of Millennium Park : Creating a Chicago Landmark , notes that a controversy surrounds the " tasteless " corporate naming of several of the Park 's features , including the BP Bridge , named for an oil company . Naming rights were sold for high fees , and Gilfoyle was not the only one who chastised park officials for selling naming rights to the highest bidder . Public interest groups have crusaded against commercialization of Chicago parks . However , many of the donors have a long history of local philanthropy and their funds were essential to provide necessary financing for several park features . 
 Ticket prices for both the Harris Theater and the Pritzker Pavilion have been controversial . John von Rhein , classical music critic for the Chicago Tribune , notes that the theater 's size poses a challenge to performers attempting to fill its seats , and feels that it overemphasizes high @-@ priced events . In 2009 – 2010 , the theater introduced two discounted ticket programs : a $ 5 lunchtime series of 45 @-@ minute dance performances , and a $ 10 ticket program for in @-@ person , cash @-@ only purchases in the last 90 minutes before performances . Once the pavilion was built , the initial plan was that the lawn seating would be free for all events . An early brochure for the Grant Park Music Festival said " You never need a ticket to attend a concert ! The lawn and the general seating section are always admission free . " However , when parking garage revenue fell short of estimates during the first year , the city charged $ 10 for lawn seating at the August 31 , 2005 , concert by Tori Amos . Amos , a classically trained musician who chose only piano and organ accompaniment for her concert , earned positive reviews as the inaugural rock and roll performer in a venue that regularly hosts classical music . The city justified the charge by contending that since the pavilion is an open @-@ air venue , there were many places in Millennium Park where people could have enjoyed the music or the atmosphere of the park without having to pay . 
 = = = Use restrictions = = = 
 When Millennium Park first opened in 2004 , Metra police stopped a Columbia College Chicago journalism student working on a photography project , and confiscated his film because of fears of terrorism . In 2005 , Cloud Gate attracted some controversy when a professional photographer without a paid permit was denied access to the piece . As is the case for all works of art currently covered by United States copyright law , the artist holds the copyright for the sculpture . The public may freely photograph Cloud Gate , but permission from Kapoor or the City of Chicago ( which has licensed the art ) is required for any commercial reproductions of the photographs . Initially the city charged photographers permit fees of $ 350 per day for professional still photographers , $ 1 @,@ 200 per day for professional videographers and $ 50 per hour for wedding photographers . The policy has been changed so permits are only required for large @-@ scale film , video and photography requiring 10 @-@ person crews . 
 Almost all of Millennium Park was closed for a day for corporate events in 2005 and 2006 . Closing a public park partly paid for with taxpayer money was controversial , as was the exclusion of commuters who walk through the park and tourists lured by its attractions . On September 8 , 2005 , Toyota Motor Sales USA paid $ 800 @,@ 000 to rent all park venues from 6 a.m. to 11 p.m , except Wrigley Square , the Lurie Garden , the McDonald 's Cycle Center and the Crown Fountain . The city said the money was used to fund day @-@ to @-@ day operations , and for free events in the park , including the Lurie Garden Festival , a Steppenwolf Theater production , musical performers along the Chase Promenade all summer long , a jazz series , and children 's concerts . The name of Toyota , one of the sponsors , was included on Millennium Park brochures , web site , and advertising signage . The closure provided a public relations opportunity for General Motors , which shuttled 1 @,@ 500 tourists from the park to see other Chicago attractions . Toyota said it considered $ 300 @,@ 000 a rental expense and $ 500 @,@ 000 a sponsoring donation . On August 7 , 2006 , Allstate , which paid $ 200 @,@ 000 as a rental expense and $ 500 @,@ 000 as a sponsoring donation , acquired the visitation rights to a different set of park features ( including Lurie Garden ) , and only had exclusive access to certain features after 4 p.m. 
 The park is closed from 11 p.m. to 6 a.m. daily . Chicago is a dog @-@ friendly city with a half dozen dog beaches , however the city does not permit dogs in the park . Only on @-@ duty service dogs for the disabled or visually impaired are permitted . 
 = = = Surveillance cameras = = = 
 In November 2006 , the Crown Fountain became the focus of a public controversy when the city added surveillance cameras atop each tower . Purchased with a $ 52 million Department of Homeland Security grant , the cameras augmented eight others covering all of Millennium Park . City officials had consulted the architects who collaborated with Plensa on the tower designs , but not Plensa himself . Public reaction was negative , as bloggers and the artistic community decried the cameras as inappropriate and a blight on the towers . The city said that the cameras would be replaced with permanent , less intrusive models in several months ; it contended that the cameras , similar to those used throughout Chicago in high @-@ crime areas and at traffic intersections , had been added largely for security reasons but also partly to help park officials monitor burnt @-@ out LED lights on the fountain . The Chicago Tribune published an article on the cameras and the public reaction ; the cameras were removed the next day , with Plensa 's support . 
 = = Reception and recognition = = 
 The Financial Times describes Millennium Park as " an extraordinary public park that is set to create new iconic images of the city " , and further notes that it is " a genuinely 21st @-@ century interactive park [ that ] could trigger a new way of thinking about public outdoor spaces " . Time magazine views both Cloud Gate and the Jay Pritzker Pavilion as part of a well @-@ planned visit to Chicago . Frommer 's lists exploring Millennium Park as one of the four best free things to do in the city , and it commends the park for its various artistic offerings . Lonely Planet recommends an hour @-@ long stroll to see the park 's playful art . The park is praised as a " showcase of art and urban design " by the San Francisco Chronicle , while Time refers to it as an " artfully re @-@ arranged [ ... ] civic phantasmagoria like Antonio Gaudí 's Park Güell in Barcelona , with the difference that this one is the product of an ensemble of creative spirits " . The book 1 @,@ 000 Places to See in the U.S.A. & Canada Before You Die describes Millennium Park as a renowned attraction . 
 The park was designed to be accessible ; it only needs a single wheelchair lift and its accessibility won its project director the 2005 Barrier @-@ Free America Award . The McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink and the Jay Pritzker Pavilion both provide accessible restrooms . The park opened with 78 women 's toilet fixtures and 45 for men , with heated facilities on the east side of the Pritzker Pavilion . It also had about six dozen park benches designed by Kathryn Gustafson , the landscape architect responsible for the Lurie Garden . In 2005 , the park won the Green Roof Award of Excellence in the Intensive Industrial / Commercial category from Green Roofs for Healthy Cities ( <unk> ) . <unk> considers the park to be one of the largest green roofs in the world ; it covers " a structural deck supported by two reinforced concrete cast @-@ in @-@ place garages and steel structures that span over the remaining railroad tracks " . In 2005 the park also received Travel + Leisure 's Design Award for " Best Public Space " , and the American Public Works Association 's " Project of the Year " Award . In its first year , the park , its features and associated people received over 30 awards . 
 Some mayors from other cities have admired the park as an example of successful urban planning . The mayor of Shanghai enjoyed his visit to the park , and San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom wished his city could create a similar type of civic amenity . Closer to home , Blair Kamin , the Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning architecture critic for the Chicago Tribune , concluded his 2004 review of Millennium Park with the following : " ... a park provides a respite from the city , yet it also reflects the city . In that sense , all of Millennium Park mirrors the rebirth of Chicago ... the ambition of its patrons , the creativity of its artists and architects , and the ongoing miracle of its ability to transform a no place into a someplace that 's extraordinary . " In 2009 Millennium Park won the Rudy Bruner Award for Urban Excellence silver medal . 
 = Uppsala Cathedral = 
 Uppsala Cathedral ( Swedish : Uppsala <unk> ) is a cathedral located between Uppsala University and the River Fyris in the centre of Uppsala , southeastern Sweden . Controlled by the Lutheran Church of Sweden , Uppsala Cathedral is the seat of the Archbishop of Uppsala , the primate of Sweden . The archbishop is Antje Jackelén and the current bishop is Ragnar <unk> . 
 The cathedral dates to the late 13th century and at a height of 118 @.@ 7 metres ( 389 ft ) , it is the tallest church in the Nordic countries . Originally built under Roman Catholicism , it was used for coronations of Swedish monarchs for a lengthy period following the Protestant Reformation . Several of its chapels were converted to house the tombs of Swedish monarchs , including Gustav Vasa and John III . Carl Linnaeus , Olaus Rudbeck , Emanuel Swedenborg , and several archbishops are also buried here . 
 The church was designed in the French Gothic style by French architects including Étienne de Bonneuil . It is in the form of a cross formed by the nave and transept . Most of the structure was built between 1272 and 1420 but the western end was completed only in the middle of the 15th century . Twin towers were built shortly afterwards on the west end of the church . High spires were added later , but after a fire in 1702 , they were adorned with low helms by Carl Hårleman in 1735 . They were completely redesigned by Helgo <unk> who undertook substantial changes to the building in the 1880s . The cathedral 's principal construction material is brick but the pillars and many details are of Gotland limestone . 
 The vaults were all built according to the original 13th @-@ century plan although some of them were erected as late as around 1440 . In addition to the artwork in the funeral chapels , several of the church 's older furnishings can be seen in the Treasury Museum . In 1702 , many features were destroyed in a major fire . During the renovation work carried out in the 1970s , many of the medieval frescoes which had been whitewashed over after the Reformation were uncovered and restored . 
 = = History = = 
 At the end of the Viking Era , the pagan temple at Gamla Uppsala ( Old Uppsala ) , about 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) to the north of today 's Uppsala , was replaced by a Christian church . Although the exact date of its construction is not known , in 1123 Siward was ordained Bishop of Uppsala by the Archbishop of Bremen @-@ Hamburg . It is however uncertain if Siward ever assumed office , as he had been expelled and was in Germany in the early 1130s . The catalogue of bishops mentions <unk> as the first bishop , and he may have been the replacement for Siward . Henrik , ‘ Finland 's Apostle ’ , was the fourth bishop . In 1164 , Sweden became an archbishopric under the control of Lund . The first archbishop was the Cistercian monk Stefan of <unk> . 
 After the cathedral in Gamla Uppsala was damaged by fire in 1204 , the Chapter sought permission from the Holy See to move the building to a larger site . Pope Alexander IV granted this request in 1258 on condition that the name of Uppsala be maintained . At a meeting in <unk> in September 1270 , Archbishop Fulco Angelus and the cathedral chapter decided the site should be in Östra Aros . Formal authorization of the move was issued in 1271 by Bishop Carolus of Västerås whom the Pope had appointed to oversee the case . 
 About 1272 , work began on building a new cathedral in Östra Aros near the Fyris River to the south . It was constructed on the site of the earlier stone church dedicated to the Holy Trinity , located almost exactly where the cathedral 's chancel now stands . It was here that Sweden 's patron saint Eric <unk> had attended mass before he was murdered in 1160 . The name of Uppsala was kept , and the surrounding town Östra Aros soon changed its name accordingly . The relics of Saint Eric , the treasure of Uppsala , were moved from Gamla Uppsala to the new site in 1273 , along with the formal move of the archbishopric . The church was designed by French architects although the name of the author of the detailed initial plans who supervised work until 1281 has not been recorded . In 1287 , a promissory note drawn up by the provost of Paris covers the expenses to be incurred by master builder Étienne de Bonneuil and his assistants in travelling to Sweden to work on the construction of a cathedral at Uppsala . Étienne is credited with work at the east and south chapels of the chancel , the transepts and probably the south portal , although in most of his work he appears to have meticulously followed the plans of his predecessor . Progress was slow as a result of the cold climate , the plague and many financial difficulties . It was not until the end of the 14th century that work on the initial plans was completed , thanks in particular to the contribution of the master builder Nikolaus från Västerås who began construction of the nave . 
 When consecrated in 1435 by Archbishop Olaus Laurentii , the cathedral still was not complete . It was dedicated to Saint Lawrence , highly cherished in all of Sweden at that time ; Saint Eric , the patron saint of Sweden ( though never canonised by the Roman Catholic Church ) ; and Saint Olaf , the patron saint of Norway . It was completed over the following decades . Although there are no documentary records of the consecration , there are several references from the same period to the cathedral 's chapels , including their altars which were dedicated to the Holy Cross , to the Virgin Mary or to other saints . The last main component of the cathedral , the towers , were built between 1470 and 1489 . The cathedral was damaged by fire on several occasions , especially during the great fire of 1702 which destroyed much of the city . Restoration work was not completed until the middle of the century . 
 The church was not the regular place of worship of laypeople until the Reformation . It was reserved for official services of the Catholic Church hierarchy ( by the cathedral 's canons ) . The parish churches in Uppsala were the Holy Trinity Church or <unk> , ‘ Peasant Church ’ , as it was often called ; Church of Saint Peter ; Church of Our Lady ; and a Franciscan friary . The last three had been built on the east side of the Fyris River , which was the central business district , and remains so to date . They were successively torn down during the Reformation . The Cathedral was also the coronation church for many of Sweden 's kings and queens until 1719 . It was the site of celebrating coronations from the Middle Ages until the end of the 17th century . Stockholm 's Cathedral Storkyrkan became the official coronation church . 
 From 1885 to 1893 , the architect Helgo Zettervall ( 1831 @-@ 1907 ) undertook comprehensive restoration work , seeking to give the cathedral a French High Gothic appearance although he has been criticized for not respecting the building 's original Baltic Gothic style . He also added pointed French spires to the towers , bringing the cathedral up to a height of 118 @.@ 7 m ( 389 ft ) , so making it as high as it was long . In an attempt to give the cathedral a slimmer appearance , Zettervall significantly altered large portions of the medieval outer brick walls and removed the decorative white @-@ washed ‘ blind windows ’ on the gables which had been similar to those on the nearby Holy Trinity Church . 
 Further renovation work in the early 1970s led to improvements in the building 's structure and included restoration of the walls and windows . Large portions of cement additions by Zettervall to the exterior structure of the cathedral were removed decades later as they adversely affected the building 's fabric . In 1989 , Pope John Paul II took part in an ecumenical service in Uppsala Cathedral with Archbishop Bertil <unk> . Fire protection equipment was installed in 2010 and the electrical and heating systems have been replaced . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The cathedral is the tallest church building in Scandinavia . Its height of 118 @.@ 7 m ( 389 ft ) is the same as its length while it has a breadth of 45 m ( 148 ft ) . The height inside is 27 metres ( 89 ft ) . The church was designed in the French High Gothic style by French master builders including Étienne de Bonneuil . Built high on a gravel ridge southwest of the River Fyris , its Latin cross ground plan consists of a three @-@ aisled basilica ( a central nave flanked by two lateral aisles ) with single @-@ aisle transepts , and a four @-@ bay chancel with an ambulatory surrounded by five chapels . The seven @-@ bay nave is bordered by chantry chapels on either side . Starting with the eastern end of the church and the chapels surrounding the chancel , most of the structure was built between 1270 and 1420 but the western end of the nave was completed only in the middle of the 15th century while the towers took decades more to complete . The principal material is red brick but the cathedral was built on a stone foundation and the chancel pillars and many details are of Gotland limestone . ( The nave pillars were originally of brick but were replaced with limestone as part of the restoration work carried out under Helgo Zettervall from 1885 to 1893 . ) 
 The twin towers at the west end of the church were first mentioned in 1563 . Several additions to both the interior and exterior of the church were made after a fire in 1572 under the leadership of Franciscus <unk> , known for his work on castles . The turret and pinnacles which can be seen in older drawings were added as well as the first spires on the west towers which were designed by Antonius <unk> . In the 1690s , Nicodemus Tessin designed a new burial chapel to the east of the south transept , the most significant alteration to the plan of the cathedral since the Middle Ages . From the outside , his design respected the traditions of medieval architecture with tall Gothic windows but the interior was decorated in Tessin 's usual Classical Baroque style . 
 In the 17th century , the towers were redesigned in the Dutch Renaissance style but after the serious fire of 1702 they were temporarily replaced by low wooden tops . At the same time , the buttresses were removed giving the cathedral the rather plain look conveyed by pictures of the period . Only in 1740 were copper @-@ faced spires installed , designed by Carl Hårleman . At the same time , Hårleman carried out significant work on the west façade . Today 's towers are the work of Helgo Zettervall who completely rebuilt them in the 1880s , substantially increasing their height . After the serious fire of 1702 , the original flying buttresses were removed and a higher roof was built . 
 Although the cathedral was designed by French architects , it exhibits a number of differences from the cathedrals of northern France . Above all , it is essentially constructed of brick rather than stone . Brick could easily be produced locally but stone had to be imported from the distant quarries of Gotland . As bricks and mortar are not as strong as stone , the walls had to be thicker although the pillars needed to support the vaulted ceiling of the chancel were made of limestone ( although those in the nave are of brick ) . The north transept portal is also built of limestone , no doubt as it was needed to support the rose window , also structured in limestone itself . While the chancel and the transept are clearly of French design , the nave which was built somewhat later displays German and Swedish characteristics . Constructed in about 1330 , the rose window over the northeast portal is still entirely French . Nicolaus from Västerås , the Swede who directed work on the nave from the 1360s , appears to have slightly modified the original plans , adding confessional side @-@ chapels and including a few features of German origin . It is interesting to note that cross @-@ vaults were nevertheless installed , rather than star @-@ shaped vaults which were more common at the time . Work on the western end of the building began in 1431 with the construction of the west portal which was influenced by the style of <unk> Abbey . The towers , however , still exhibited features typical of 13th @-@ century French architecture , indicating that the original plans were still in use at the time . Overall , despite minor differences , Uppsala Cathedral still reflects the style of the 13th @-@ century cathedrals of northern France . 
 = = Interior = = 
 The Coronation Vault stands 27 m ( 89 ft ) above the point at which the transept crosses the nave . It is where most of Sweden 's monarchs were crowned from the Middle Ages until 1719 . During the restoration in the 1880s , the interior ceiling and walls of the cathedral were decorated in the Neo @-@ Gothic style . Some depictions , such as one of the Reformation 's Martin Luther , added figures beyond the cathedral 's medieval heritage . During the renovation work carried out in the 1970s , many of the medieval frescoes which had been whitewashed over after the Reformation were uncovered and restored . The high altar is used for the cathedral 's services on the most important feast days in the church calendar . It is also here that all Swedish bishops are ordained . The silver chandelier is from 1647 . The large crucifix in silver and crystal from <unk> was installed in 1976 . 
 = = = Chapels = = = 
 The cathedral 's largest chapel , the Vasa Chapel , at the eastern end of the chancel , was originally known as the Chapel of the Virgin Mary . It later became a burial monument for Gustav Vasa and his family . Completed in 1583 , it is decorated with the national arms of Sweden as well as with some of the oldest known Swedish and Finnish coats of arms . The Finsta Chapel or St Eric 's Chapel on the north @-@ west corner of the chancel houses the relics of Eric the Holy , the patron saint of Sweden , who was killed in 1160 on the site where Uppsala Cathedral was later built . His shrine was moved from the first cathedral in Gamla Uppsala as soon as work began on the new building . In 1580 , King John III melted his shrine down but replaced it with a new gold @-@ plated one which still contains Eric 's relics and crown . The name Finsta originates from the Uppland estate where Judge Birger Persson and his wife were born . They were entombed in the chapel in 1328 . A relic of their daughter Saint Bridget housed in a small gold @-@ plated shrine was donated by the Saint Bridget Order in 1990 . 
 Next to the Finsta Chapel , the Sture Chapel is the memorial tomb of the three members of the Sture family who were murdered in by King Eric XIV in 1567 . The reredos ( 1520 ) depicts the story of Mary 's parents , Anne and Joachim . At the end of the 16th century , the church 's sacristy was converted into a burial chapel for Queen Catherine <unk> or Katarina Jagellonica , the wife of King John III , who is also entombed there . The Jagellonica Chapel takes its name from her . The monument , crowned by a marble vault , was designed by Willem Boy . 
 = = = Windows = = = 
 Several windows maintain their original shape and size . The original stained @-@ glass decorations were almost all lost in the 1702 fire and were simply replaced by normal glass . The current stained @-@ glass designs were added during the renovation at the end of the 19th century , most of them by the Gothenburg firm , Svenska <unk> . The large windows above the portals depict the Trinity : God the Father over the west door , God the Son above the south door ( the largest in the church ) , and God the Holy Spirit above the north door . Crafted in limestone , the rose window at the north portal is the oldest , unchanged since the 13th century . 
 = = = Treasury and artefacts = = = 
 Located in the north tower , the cathedral Treasury Museum displays a number of gold and silver articles used in the religious services . There is also a collection of textiles including Queen Margaret 's golden gown . The burial regalia of Gustav Vasa , John III and their wives can also be seen . 
 Other artefacts in the cathedral include tapestries in the Chapel of Remembrance from 1976 which record important events in the cathedral 's history . The ornate pulpit ( 1710 ) , the largest in Sweden , was designed by Nicodemus Tessin and carved by Burchard <unk> . It was a gift from Queen Hedvig Eleonora after the fire of 1702 . Decorations include John the Baptist preaching in the desert , Saint Paul in Athens and the parable of the Labourers in the Vineyard . 
 One of the new bells installed after the devastating fire of 1702 is called <unk> . It was taken from Toruń , Poland as war booty in 1703 by the Swedish forces of Carl XII during the Great Northern War . 
 In the Vasa Chapel , there are seven large fresco paintings executed by Johan Gustaf Sandberg ( 1782 – 1854 ) over a period of several years . They depict important events in the life of Gustav Vasa . One of the most famous is <unk> till <unk> vid Mora <unk> ( Speech to the people of Dalarna outside Mora Church ) . <unk> also decorate the vaults of the nave . 
 Initially , as in some of the continental cathedrals , the interior was decorated with designs emphasizing the arch ribs and portal components . Even the brick was painted with red and white stripes . In the 15th century , frescos of figures in the Late Gothic style with decorative vine leaves were painted in various parts of the church . Traces of these have been found in the chancel and in the chapel which was originally dedicated to St Eric and St Olaf . Unfortunately , they have now been heavily restored . The frescos in the chancel were probably painted by Albertus Pictor 's workshop . 
 = = <unk> notables = = 
 A number of Swedish monarchs and other notable people were buried inside the cathedral : 
 Gustav Vasa , 16th @-@ century King of Sweden . Nearly a decade before his death , he had expressed a wish to be buried in the cathedral . He is buried with his three wives , although only two are depicted on the sarcophagus designed by Willem Boy . The king and his wives are interred in what was once the Chapel of the Virgin Mary . The only remaining indication of the original intention of the chapel are the painted yellow stars against a blue background on its vaulted ceiling , symbols of Saint Mary in Catholic tradition . 
 John III ( died 1592 ) , the second son of Gustav Vasa , and his second wife Gunilla <unk> are also buried in the Virgin Mary Chapel . His first wife , Catherine Jagiellon from Poland , has a burial chapel of her own on the north side of the chancel . 
 Princess Elizabeth ( died 1597 ) , Gustav Vasa 's youngest daughter is buried in the Finsta Chapel adjacent to Virgin Mary 's Chapel . 
 The noblemen Svante Sture ( 1517 – 1567 ) and his sons Nils ( 1543 – 1567 ) and Erik ( 1546 – 1567 ) who were all killed by Erik XIV in the Sture Murders are entombed in the Sture Chapel . The clothes they were wearing at the time of their death are displayed in the Treasury Museum . 
 Carl Linnaeus ( 1707 – 1778 ) , the 18th @-@ century world @-@ famous botanist and professor at Uppsala University , has a memorial designed by Tobias Sergel next to the Chapel of Remembrance . 
 Olaus Rudbeck , Swedish polymath and one of the discoverers of the lymphatic system . 
 Emanuel Swedenborg , 18th @-@ century scientist and mystic . He was not originally interred here , but his remains were transported to Uppsala from England in 1908 . 
 Nathan Söderblom ( 1866 – 1931 ) , archbishop of Uppsala and Nobel Peace Prize recipient . His tomb is at the foot of the steps to the high altar . 
 Eric the Saint , 12th @-@ century king and national saint , whose relics are in the Finsta Chapel . 
 Laurentius Petri ( 1499 – 1573 ) , Sweden 's first Lutheran archbishop , buried at the foot of the altar steps . 
 Relics of Saint Bridget or <unk> Birgitta ( 1303 – 1373 ) have been placed in a shrine in the Finsta Chapel inspired by the clothing of the Saint Bridget Order . 
 Folke Johansson <unk> , Archbishop of Uppsala ( 1267 – 1277 ) 
 = = = Dag Hammarskjöld memorial = = = 
 In the cathedral there is a small memorial to Dag Hammarskjöld , former Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations , who was posthumously awarded the Nobel Peace Prize . A stone bears the inscription : 
 Icke jag 
 utan Gud i <unk> 
 Dag Hammarskjöld 1905 – 1961 
 The English translation is " Not I , but God in me . " 
 = = Open to visitors = = 
 The cathedral is located on <unk> in the centre of Uppsala . It is open to visitors most days from 8 am to 6 pm . The Treasury Museum in the north tower is open from 10 am to 4 pm , Sundays from 12 @.@ 30 pm . 
 = UFC 94 = 
 UFC 94 : St @-@ Pierre vs. Penn 2 was a mixed martial arts ( MMA ) pay @-@ per @-@ view event promoted by the Ultimate Fighting Championship ( UFC ) on January 31 , 2009 . The card featured five televised MMA bouts , as well as five un @-@ aired preliminary bouts . It was the second UFC event of 2009 and took place on the weekend of Super Bowl XLIII . 
 The main event featured the UFC Welterweight Champion , Georges St @-@ Pierre , defending his title against UFC Lightweight Champion and former UFC Welterweight Champion B.J. Penn . This represented the first time two current titleholders competed against each other in the UFC . The contest was heavily promoted , featuring a publicity tour to Canada and Hawaii , as well as the introduction of UFC Primetime , a preview show that cost $ 1 @.@ 7 million to produce . The co @-@ main event of the evening was a battle between two undefeated light heavyweights sporting 13 – 0 records in Lyoto Machida and Thiago Silva . 
 = = Background = = 
 The main event featured the UFC Welterweight Champion Georges St @-@ Pierre defending his championship against UFC Lightweight Champion B.J. Penn in a fight contested at the UFC welterweight limit of 170 pounds ( 77 @.@ 1 kg ) . The fight represented the first time two current title holders faced off in the UFC . Penn also sought to become the first fighter in the UFC to concurrently hold two championships in two separate weight classes . The UFC 94 main event was met with a high level of anticipation from both the media and the fans . Sherdog called the fight between St @-@ Pierre and Penn the most anticipated bout of 2009 , and NBC Sports described it as one of the most anticipated fights in MMA history . In an article previewing the fight , Dave Meltzer discussed the over @-@ usage of exaggerations to promote contests in combat sports , but argued that the January 31 match between St @-@ Pierre and Penn was " one of the true epic matches in the history of the sport . " The fans voiced their opinion in a poll conducted by Inside MMA , where 45 percent of the viewers voted the match up between St @-@ Pierre and Penn as the most anticipated fight to take place between December and February . The poll also featured ( in descending order according to the results ) Fedor <unk> vs. Andrei <unk> , Wanderlei Silva vs. Quinton Jackson , and Rich Franklin vs. Dan Henderson . 
 St @-@ Pierre is a fighter with very strong wrestling , and trains with the Canadian Olympic team . His conditioning , strength and athleticism have also been identified as strong attributes . He became the undisputed UFC Welterweight Champion by winning the interim @-@ championship against Matt Hughes at UFC 79 , and successfully unifying the championship against Welterweight title holder Matt Serra at UFC 83 in Quebec , St @-@ Pierre 's home province . St @-@ Pierre 's fight prior to the UFC 94 event was a successful title defense against Jon Fitch at UFC 87 via unanimous decision , where he won every round on the judge 's scorecards . Penn is a fighter noted for his outstanding jiu @-@ jitsu , as he is the first non @-@ Brazilian to win the World Jiu @-@ Jitsu Championship at the black belt level . His other notable strengths include boxing , and wrestling / takedown defense . Penn captured the vacant UFC Lightweight Championship by defeating Joe Stevenson at UFC 80 . The belt was vacant as a result of the California State Athletic Commission stripping then @-@ champion Sean Sherk of the title for testing positive for anabolic steroid <unk> , or more commonly known as <unk> , following a title defense . Penn entered the UFC 94 fight following a successful title defense as well , with a 3rd round TKO of former champion Sean Sherk at UFC 84 . St @-@ Pierre and Penn had fought once before in a welterweight number one contenders match at UFC 58 on March 4 , 2006 , where St @-@ Pierre won in a very evenly matched contest by split decision . 
 Promotion for the St @-@ Pierre and Penn contest began in November 2008 , with UFC President Dana White , and the two main event fighters embarking on publicity tours in Toronto , Canada and Honolulu , Hawaii . The fighters answered various fan questions , and signed autographs . In an effort to further promote the contest , the UFC introduced UFC Primetime , a three @-@ part series that cost $ 1 @.@ 7 million to produce . UFC Primetime detailed the final preparations of St @-@ Pierre and Penn 's before their fight . Spike aired the half @-@ hour episodes on the final three Wednesdays leading up to the fight , beginning on January 14 , 2009 and concluding on January 28 , 2009 . Camera crews spent twenty five days with each fighter rather than the three days for a standard UFC Countdown preview show , and episodes aired shortly after they were filmed . The episodes were aired quickly to provide weekly updates on each fighter 's current status . After the first episode aired , it was reported by <unk> that B.J. Penn was unhappy with his portrayal in the program , and wanted to withdraw from the project . Penn made a subsequent appearance on <unk> radio to discuss this report and confirmed that he has taken issue with his portrayal on the show . He was adamant that he would not continue to allow filming unless his portrayal changed . In the end , UFC Primetime proved to be a ratings success , as it was announced by Spike that the program was the most watched UFC preview show ever , drawing 1 @.@ 4 million viewers for its first episode ( 880 @,@ 000 viewers for first airing and 614 @,@ 000 viewers for an immediate repeat ) . The second episode averaged 825 @,@ 000 viewers , while the third episode drew 662 @,@ 000 viewers . 
 The co @-@ main event featured a bout between two top contenders and undefeated light heavyweights , Lyoto Machida and Thiago Silva . The two were originally scheduled to meet at UFC 89 , but a back injury forced Silva to withdraw from the contest . UFC President Dana White indicated in the pre @-@ fight press conference that Machida would receive a title shot with a victory , while Silva would need to defeat Machida and win one more contest before earning the same opportunity . Machida is a fighter who prefers to counter @-@ strike , and combines Shotokan Karate , sumo wrestling and Brazilian jiu @-@ jitsu to form his own style . Silva is a Brazilian jiu @-@ jitsu black belt , but prefers to fight standing . Machida entered the UFC 94 fight following a unanimous decision victory over former UFC Light Heavyweight Champion Tito Ortiz at UFC 84 , where he won every round on the judge 's scorecards . Thiago Silva entered the contest with 1st round <unk> over Antonio Mendes at UFC 84 , and Houston Alexander at UFC 78 . 
 The event also featured the return of two more fighters from injury , in Karo Parisyan and Stephan Bonnar . Parisyan , a judo standout , had to withdraw from a scheduled fight against Yoshiyuki Yoshida at UFC 88 with a back injury just one day before the fight . His opponent for UFC 94 was undefeated South Korean welterweight Dong Hyun Kim . Bonnar , a light heavyweight , was to take on Matt Hamill at UFC Fight Night 13 , but a left knee injury during training forced him out of that bout . His opponent , the 21 @-@ year @-@ old Jon Jones was a national amateur wrestling champion and coming off a unanimous decision victory over Andre Gusmão at UFC 87 , where he took the fight on three weeks notice . Rounding out the main card was a lightweight contest between the winner of the fifth season of the UFC 's reality television series and MMA competition The Ultimate Fighter , Nate Diaz , and contender Clay Guida . The Ultimate Fighter is a single @-@ elimination reality series featuring fledging professional MMA fighters competing for the title of The Ultimate Fighter , and a six @-@ figure , multi @-@ fight contract with the UFC . Diaz is a Brazilian jiu @-@ jitsu brown belt under Cesar Gracie , and Guida is noted by MMA journalist Sam Caplan as one of the UFC 's most highly regarded fighters . The two were expected to fight in December 2008 , but the fight failed to materialize due to a foot injury to Guida . 
 = = Event = = 
 The event consisted of ten mixed martial arts bouts all sanctioned by the Nevada State Athletic Commission and contested under the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts . All bouts consisted of three five @-@ minute rounds except for the main @-@ event championship match between St @-@ Pierre and Penn which was five five @-@ minute rounds . Five of the bouts were part of the non @-@ televised preliminary card . The reported attendance was 14 @,@ 885 with a total gate of $ 4 @,@ 290 @,@ 020 . The UFC announced on January 14 , 2009 that the event was completely sold out , however <unk> noted that at the time of announcement , it was still possible to find single tickets . The reported buyrate of the pay @-@ per @-@ view was 800 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Preliminary card = = = 
 The event 's five preliminary fights all went the full three rounds , ending in decisions . In the first bout of the evening , Dan Cramer became the first fighter to be successful in a professional mixed martial arts debut at a UFC pay @-@ per @-@ view event since Marcio Cruz at UFC 55 . In his fight with Matt Arroyo , Cramer executed a takedown and attempted punches on the ground while avoiding the Brazilian Jiu @-@ Jitsu brown @-@ belt 's submissions during the first two rounds , while the third and final round saw Arroyo taking Cramer 's back on the ground and unsuccessfully going for a rear naked choke . Two of the three judges scored the bout 29 – 28 for Cramer while the remaining third judge saw it 28 – 29 for Arroyo , giving Cramer the split @-@ decision victory . 
 In the second bout of the event , Jake O 'Brien rebounded from two TKO losses in a row with a split @-@ decision win over Christian Wellisch . O 'Brien , a former wrestler at Purdue University , was able to take Wellisch down and control his opponent on the ground but was hurt on the feet in the first and second rounds . The judges saw it 29 – 28 , 28 – 29 and 29 – 28 in favor of O 'Brien . This was both fighters first fight at light heavyweight after dropping down from heavyweight . 
 In one of the two bouts being awarded " Fight of the Night " bonuses , John Howard defeated Chris Wilson by split decision in their welterweight contest . Howard was able to take down Wilson in all three rounds where he scored with ground @-@ and @-@ pound and once went for a rear naked choke . Wilson had some success on his feet , but Howard landed the harder strikes . The contest was scored twice 29 – 28 for Howard and once 28 – 29 for Wilson . 
 The only lightweight bout on the preliminary card saw Thiago Tavares defeating Manny Gamburyan by unanimous decision . Tavares went for ground @-@ and @-@ pound after takedowns , while the smaller Gamburyan tried to push the pace on the feet but was unable to counter Tavares ' more powerful strikes . All three judges scored it 29 – 28 in favor of Tavares . 
 In the last fight on the preliminary card , American Kickboxing Academy 's Jon Fitch faced Akihiro Gono . The bout saw Fitch continually taking down Gono and landing with ground @-@ and @-@ pound punches on the downed opponent . Fitch came close to submitting Gono in the first and second rounds when he went for a rear naked choke and an armbar respectively , but he was unable to finish the Japanese fighter . All three judges scored the bout in favor of Fitch , two scoring it 30 – 27 with one judge seeing it 30 – 26 giving Fitch the unanimous decision victory . 
 = = = Main card = = = 
 The first bout on the televised portion of the event saw Nate Diaz taking on Clay Guida in a lightweight contest . Diaz , who had an eight @-@ inch reach advantage on Guida , was able to frustrate him with punches on the feet while Guida has success with leg @-@ kicks followed by a right hand straight . After closing the distance , Guida used his wrestling experience to avoid submissions while controlling and pressuring Diaz both in the clinch and on the ground throughout the fight . Diaz rallied with punches in the final round but was unable to finish off Guida . The judges scored the bout 29 – 28 twice for Guida and once for Diaz for the split @-@ decision victory . The bout was awarded the event 's second " Fight of the Night " honor gaining both fighters a $ 65 @,@ 000 bonus . 
 The second bout saw two judo black belts fighting as Karo Parisyan went up against undefeated Dong Hyun Kim in a matchup at welterweight . Kim took Parisyan 's back in the first round and threatened with submissions as Parisyan attempted to regain position , while the second round saw Parisyian executing a judo @-@ throw and going for a kimura @-@ submission . The final round was mostly spent in the clinch with both fighters getting takedowns . Parisyian was awarded a split @-@ decision victory with the scores 29 – 28 , 28 – 29 and 29 – 28 . However , the result was later changed to a " no contest " after Parisyian tested positive for three banned painkillers in the post @-@ fight drug test also resulting in a nine months suspension and $ 32 @,@ 000 fine . 
 In only his second fight for the UFC , Jon Jones took on The Ultimate Fighter 1 runner @-@ up Stephan Bonnar at light heavyweight in the third fight on the main card . Jones was able to execute multiple throws and takedowns during the first two rounds , at one point suplexing Bonnar . Jones also had the most success striking and was able to knock down his opponent with a spinning elbow @-@ strike . Bonnar rallied with strikes against the tiring Jones in the third round , but the bout went the distance with the judges scoring it 29 – 28 once and 30 – 27 twice all in favor of Jones . 
 The fourth fight featured two undefeated Brazilians meeting at light heavyweight in Lyoto Machida and Thiago Silva . Machida was able to knock down Silva twice during the first round before ultimately knocking him out after tripping him and jumping in landing the knockout punch at 4 : 59 of the first round . The finish marked the first win for Machida by knockout , and netted him a $ 65 @,@ 000 bonus as it was awarded " Knockout of the Night " . 
 The fifth and final bout of the main card was the UFC Welterweight Championship match between Georges St @-@ Pierre and B.J. Penn , regulated by referee Herb Dean . The bout started out with the two fighters clinching and throwing knees . St @-@ Pierre dropped down for a single @-@ leg takedown but Penn defended while standing on one leg with his back to the cage . Unable to get the takedown , St @-@ Pierre let go and connected with a right hand punch . They met up and clinched in the middle of the cage with St @-@ Pierre pushing Penn towards the fence . There , St @-@ Pierre attempted a takedown but went back the clinch when he was unable to finish it . The two fighters continued trading punches to end the first round . 
 Round two started with two fighters throwing strikes with St @-@ Pierre landing a punch drawing blood from Penn 's nose . St @-@ Pierre then clinched up and tripped Penn to the ground . There Penn attempted to defend using the rubber guard , but St @-@ Pierre passed to half @-@ guard and eventually side @-@ control while landing punches . The two continued grappling with Penn taking several ground @-@ and @-@ pound punches from St @-@ Pierre until the round ended . 
 The third and fourth rounds saw St @-@ Pierre continue his ground @-@ and @-@ pound on a visibly discouraged Penn , and at the end of the fourth , Penn 's corner motioned for the cage @-@ side doctor to stop the fight . The referee waved off the contest , officially declaring St @-@ Pierre the winner , retaining his UFC Welterweight Championship , by TKO due to " referee stoppage on doctor 's advice " . 
 = = St @-@ Pierre greasing controversy = = 
 The contest between St @-@ Pierre and Penn was a source of significant controversy . In between rounds one and two , as well as round three , one of St @-@ Pierre 's cornermen , Phil Nurse , was seen applying petroleum jelly ( brand name Vaseline ) on the shoulder and the back of St @-@ Pierre by members of the Nevada State Athletic Commission ( NSAC ) . Vaseline is used to aid cuts in boxing as well as MMA , but applying it to parts of the body other than the face is illegal because of the element of grappling in the sport . A fighter that is " slippery " as a result of the vaseline will have an added advantage , because friction and grip are compromised . UFC President Dana White addressed the issue during a radio appearance in Boston , Massachusetts . He indicated that he did not believe the vaseline influenced the outcome of the fight , but still expected Nurse to be punished . 
 Penn 's brother revealed two days after the bout that the Penn camp would be making a formal complaint to the NSAC . In addition , Penn 's head coach , Rudy Valentino alleged that St @-@ Pierre also had an illegal substance on his body during his April 2008 rematch with Matt Serra . NSAC Executive Director Keith Kizer confirmed that improprieties had occurred in St @-@ Pierre 's corner . He witnessed St @-@ Pierre 's cornerman Phil Nurse apply Vaseline to St @-@ Pierre 's face and then immediately rub St @-@ Pierre 's shoulders and back before Nurse wiped his hands . Kizer had St @-@ Pierre 's back wiped down after the second round , and confirmed after the third round that no Vaseline was being applied . Kizer was critical of the cornerman 's action , but expressed doubts that the controversy would overturn St @-@ Pierre 's victory . 
 On March 12 , 2009 , B.J. Penn filed a formal request for investigation to the NSAC stating that St @-@ Pierre used an illegal " greasing " agent on his body during the fight . The formal , written complaint consisted of twenty pages . It began by stating that " other renowned fighters " have also had similar experiences with St @-@ Pierre , that his body was " unnaturally slippery . " It continued by accounting an apparent " pre @-@ bout warning " made by Penn 's camp to the NSAC that St @-@ Pierre will engage in the illegal application of vaseline . Next , a request to monitor St @-@ Pierre and members of the team to prevent future misconduct was made , namely a monitored shower of St @-@ Pierre and / or hygiene cleansing . The written statement concluded with Penn seeking fines against trainer Greg Jackson , Nurse , and " other unnamed individuals " of $ 250 @,@ 000 each . In addition , that St @-@ Pierre 's license be suspended or revoked , and that the result of the bout be changed to a no @-@ contest . 
 St @-@ Pierre 's trainer Greg Jackson denied any wrongdoing , stating that Nurse was rubbing and tapping on St @-@ Pierre 's body as part of a drill to aid in his breathing techniques . Jackson said that any Vaseline transferred from residue on Nurse 's fingers was accidental and wiped off when pointed out . Georges St @-@ Pierre spoke to Sports Illustrated with regard to the controversy stating , " I haven 't seen the fight yet , but I remember at some point something happened and the athletic commission was complaining . They used a towel to wet my back and wipe it off . I don 't mind . I didn 't put Vaseline on myself and I 'm not a cheater . " However , St @-@ Pierre offered Penn a rematch in the summer that Penn verbally accepted but is unlikely to happen due to the fact they have both since been scheduled for title defenses . 
 On March 17 , 2009 , the NSAC held a formal hearing about the matter . Penn , his mother Lorraine Shin , and his attorney were present to make statements . Greg Jackson , Phil Nurse , and St @-@ Pierre 's attorney participated in the hearing as the opposing side . St @-@ Pierre himself was not present . Shin read from a written statement , urging the NSAC to " do the right thing " , and punish St @-@ Pierre to the " fullest extent of authority . " Jackson and Nurse apologized for the incident , but maintained that they did not knowingly cheat . At the hearing 's conclusion , the NSAC Executive Director stated that St @-@ Pierre 's victory would not be changed to a no contest , nor would other sanctions , such as the loss of licenses be taken , unless a member of the NSAC files a disciplinary complaint against any of the accused . However , the committee left it ambiguous whether the matter was conclusively closed . Representatives from the Penn camp indicated that they were " unsure " of their next move . 
 = = Subsequent events = = 
 Following the main event at UFC 94 , top welterweight contender Thiago Alves made his way into the cage to congratulate St @-@ Pierre on the victory . After interviews with both fighters , it was announced that Alves would be next to challenge for St @-@ Pierre 's championship . This fight has since taken place and was the co @-@ main event of the UFC 100 card . St @-@ Pierre 's dominant victory also opened up discussion for a possible " <unk> " with UFC Middleweight Champion Anderson Silva in 2010 . Dana White stated that this bout was a possibility , and he would like to see it . St @-@ Pierre has also expressed interest in the fight . 
 After Penn 's loss to St @-@ Pierre , reports surfaced that the UFC Lightweight Champion was contemplating retirement . However , during his first public appearance since the loss in Honolulu , Hawaii , he announced that he would continue to fight . He admitted that he was affected by the loss , and that " a lot of things were going through his head . " In regards to his next bout , Penn stated that he was in negotiation to fight top contender Kenny Florian in the summer of 2009 . Penn would go on and defeat Florian at UFC 101 , winning in the fourth round by rear naked choke . 
 In the wake of the Vaseline controversy , the UFC responded by implementing immediate rule changes on February 7 , 2009 . These changes were discussed by longtime <unk> Jacob " Stitch " Duran . According to Duran , under the new rules , only <unk> who are independent of both corners will be allowed to apply Vaseline to the fighter 's faces . However , Duran was not able to confirm whether the rules will apply at all UFC events or just the events that take place in Nevada . 
 Despite Lyoto Machida 's knockout of Thiago Silva , Dana White indicated that he was not the number one contender for a title shot . Instead , a scheduled fight between former UFC Light Heavyweight Champion Quinton Jackson and Keith Jardine would determine Machida 's title fate . A victory for Jackson would earn him a fight with champion Rashad Evans , but a win for Jardine would mean Machida will be awarded with a title shot . Jackson won the fight via unanimous decision , but torn ligaments in his jaw forced the former champion out of the bout . Instead , Machida will challenge Evans for the UFC Light Heavyweight Championship at UFC 98 . Jackson will retain his title shot against the winner of that match upon returning from injury . Following the loss to Machida , Thiago Silva was scheduled to return to action against former champion Forrest Griffin at UFC 101 , but his opponent was later changed to Keith Jardine . 
 Karo Parisyan 's next fight was to be against American Kickboxing Academy 's Josh Koscheck at UFC 98 . However , due to Parisyan 's nine @-@ month suspension from the NSAC for a failed drug test due to painkillers , the future of this fight is uncertain . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = Bonus awards = = 
 The UFC awarded some fighters $ 65 @,@ 000 bonuses for their performance . 
 Fights of the Night : Clay Guida vs. Nate Diaz and John Howard vs. Chris Wilson 
 Knockout of the Night : Lyoto Machida 
