 These powers included the ability to both restrict tribal powers or to relax such restrictions . Congress has done both , such as in the withdrawal of federal recognition of the Menominee tribe with the Menominee Termination Act in 1954 , and the Menominee Restoration Act to restore tribal recognition and powers . The earlier decisions in Duro , Wheeler , and Oliphant dealt with cases where Congress had restricted a tribe 's inherent powers but pointed at nothing in the Constitution or established precedent that prohibits Congress from relaxing such restrictions . The decision in Duro was one of federal common law , and it is clear that Congress has the power to change that law . Since the power exercised by the Spirit Lake Sioux Tribe was that of inherent tribal sovereignty , double jeopardy did not attach . 
 Breyer noted Lara 's other arguments , but as the double jeopardy issue was dispositive , he declined to address those issues . He did note that " we are not now faced with a question dealing with potential constitutional limits on congressional efforts to legislate far more radical changes in tribal status . " The decision allowed both courts to prosecute Lara . Since separate sovereign bodies had filed the charges , double jeopardy did not apply to Lara 's case . The decision of the Eighth Circuit Court was reversed in the 7 @-@ 2 decision . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = = = = Justice Stevens = = = = 
 Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a concurring opinion that argued that the Indian tribes have a stronger claim on inherent sovereign powers than do individual states . He noted that the Indian tribes governed themselves since before Columbus arrived , and that most states never governed themselves outside of the United States . 
 = = = = Justice Kennedy = = = = 
 Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote a concurrence which stated that Congress was very careful to base the changes to the statute on inherent tribal powers and not on a delegation of authority . Kennedy states that is all that is needed to decide the case , but that the Court went further than was necessary when it decided that Congress had the power under the constitution to authorize tribes to prosecute non @-@ member Indians . Finally , Kennedy was concerned that the court did not address the question of the Equal Protection Clause . He would have reversed the Eighth Circuit without going into the additional detail . 
 = = = = Justice Thomas = = = = 
 Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a concurring opinion stating that it was time to re @-@ examine the entire concept of tribal sovereignty . He noted that doubtful precedents stated that Congress , and not another part of the government had the power to regulate everything that a tribe could or could not do , which renders tribal sovereignty a " nullity . " Thomas did not believe that Congress has the constitutional authority to set the " <unk> and bounds of tribal sovereignty . " He noted that such authority was not in the Indian Treaty Clause nor the Indian Commerce Clause . " In [ his ] view , the tribes either are or are not separate sovereigns , and our federal Indian law cases <unk> hold both positions simultaneously . " Thomas further questioned the law ending the practice of making treaties with the tribes , noting that this was the one clear constitutional provision that provides for dealing with other sovereigns . Thomas noted that a delegation of prosecutorial power is always to an executive branch and that the tribes are not part of any executive branch of the Federal government . Therefore , the case hinges on the tribes ' inherent sovereignty , and based on precedent , the tribes possess that power . 
 = = = Dissent = = = 
 Justice David Souter wrote a dissenting opinion , which was joined by Justice Antonin Scalia . Souter referenced prior cases dealing with sovereignty and jurisdiction , from the decision made in United States v. Kagama , to the opinion made in South Dakota v. Bourland . Souter stated that the decision in this case did not align with precedent established in previous cases . Since Duro held that the tribes had lost their inherent sovereignty , the only way for the tribes to regain jurisdiction over non @-@ member Indians would be by the delegation of that jurisdiction by Congress . Bourland was even more specific as to that point . Souter believed that the only two ways that the tribes could regain their sovereignty would be for Congress to declare that they were independent of the United States , as it did with the Philippines , or for the Court to overturn the concept of a dependent domestic sovereign . 
 Souter wrote that this dissonance in court decisions will lead to confusion , stating : " And confusion , I fear , will be the legacy of today 's decision , for our failure to stand by what we have previously said reveals that our conceptualizations of sovereignty and dependent sovereignty are largely rhetorical . " Souter concluded that he would stand by the decisions made in Duro and Oliphant . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 = = = Release of Lara = = = 
 Lara was released from federal prison on August 19 , 2005 , about a year and four months after the Supreme Court delivered their decision . 
 = = = Law reviews = = = 
 This case has been the subject of numerous law review articles since the decision was made . Points raised include : 
 Indians are very integrated across tribal boundaries , intermarrying across tribes and sharing child and medical care services across tribes . Lara was an example of this ; he married a Spirit Lake Sioux woman and moved to that reservation before his exclusion by the tribe . 
 " As ' domestic dependent nations , ' Indian tribes possess criminal jurisdiction in Indian Country that is ' complete , inherent , and exclusive , ' except as limited by Congress . " 
 The decision enhanced tribal self @-@ determination because tribes could act even in the presence of related federal activity . They noted that Lara had been in numerous altercations with the tribal police at Spirit Lake for intoxication , spousal abuse , and resisting arrest . Only when the tribe ran out of options did it issue an exclusion order to bar him from the reservation . 
 The decision limited tribal sovereignty by affirming the ability of Congress to relax or to restrict tribal powers . The opinion of Justice Thomas was especially telling in this , as Thomas had opined that plenary power and tribal sovereignty were mutually exclusive . 
 = = = Books and media = = = 
 The case has been widely covered in books and news media . Tribal court authority has been altered by the U.S. government for decades , affecting jurisdictional powers . In Justice Thomas 's conclusion at the end of this case , he stated , " History points in both directions . " Thomas further stated , " Federal Indian policy , is , to say the least , schizophrenic . " Thomas 's statements directly address the Supreme Court 's confusion on both present and future Federal Indian Policy . As Justice Souter stated in his dissent , this remains " an area peculiarly susceptible to confusion . " 
 = Have a nice day = 
 Have a nice day is a commonly spoken expression used to conclude a conversation ( whether brief or extensive ) , or end a message by hoping the person to whom it is addressed experiences a pleasant day . Since it is often uttered by service employees to customers at the end of a transaction , particularly in Israel and the United States , its repetitious and dutiful usage has resulted in the phrase developing , according to some journalists and scholars , especially outside of these two countries , a cultural connotation of impersonality , lack of interest , passive – aggressive behavior , or sarcasm . The phrase is generally not used in Europe , as some find it artificial or even offensive . Critics of the phrase characterize it as an imperative , obliging the person to have a nice day . Other critics argue that it is a parting platitude that comes across as pretended . While defenders of the phrase agree that " Have a nice day " can be used insincerely , they consider the phrase to be comforting , in that it improves interactions among people . Others favor the phrase because it does not require a response . 
 A variant of the phrase — " have a good day " — is first recorded in Layamon 's Brut ( c . 1205 ) and King Horn . " Have a nice day " itself first appeared in the 1948 film A Letter to Three Wives . The phrase was subsequently popularized by truck drivers talking on CB radios . Variations on the phrase include " have a good one " and " have a nice one " . In conjunction with the smiley face , the phrase became a defining cultural emblem of the 1970s and was a key theme in the 1991 film My Own Private Idaho . By 2000 , " have a nice day " and " have a good day " were taken metaphorically , synonymous with the parting phrase " goodbye " . 
 = = History = = 
 The Oxford English Dictionary recorded the earliest uses of one the phrase 's variants — " have a good day " — as being " <unk> alle <unk> <unk> " in Layamon 's Brut ( c . 1205 ) and " <unk> , have wel <unk> day " in King Horn ( 1225 ) . According to Roland Dickison of California State University , " have a good day " first appeared in Geoffrey Chaucer 's 1387 The Canterbury Tales : " And <unk> <unk> every man the <unk> way , there was <unk> but ' Fare wel , have a good day ' " . <unk> employed by Chaucer in his literary works , " have a good day " disappeared for several centuries before its revival . 
 William Safire of The New York Times wrote that " have a nice day " first appeared in the 1948 film A Letter to Three Wives . The American Heritage Dictionary of Idioms stated that " have a nice day " first came into being in 1920 , and the phrase and its variants became widely used after the 1950s . In 1964 , Carol Reed of WCBS @-@ TV spread the phrase in the New York metropolitan area by closing her weather reports with " have a happy day " , which , according to Safire , is a variant of " have a nice day " . The 1960s saw the phrase " have a good day " become prevalent and supersede " happy day " . Numerous hippies , when parting , told each other to " have a nice day " or " have a beautiful day " . In 1970 , " have a nice city " was a mayoralty slogan in San Francisco . In 1972 , during the Vietnam War , family members of POW / MIA members of the American armed forces participated in South Boston 's Saint Patrick 's Day march . They carried a black banner that read " POW / MIA Families Never Have a Nice Day " . They received scowls and jeers from a hostile crowd . One woman said , " They should be shot for bringing this here . " 
 By around 2000 , " have a nice day " and " have a good day " were taken metaphorically , morphing into synonyms of the parting phrase " goodbye " . 
 = = = Smiley face and " have a nice day " = = = 
 Abigail Goldman of the Los Angeles Times , wrote that the smiley face and the expression " have a nice day " " helped to define the ' 70s " . In the early 1970s , Philadelphian brothers Murray and Bernard Spain designed and sold products including bumper stickers and coffee mugs that each contained the yellow smiley face , usually attributed to Harvey Ball . They later changed the phrase to " Have a nice day " . 
 The 1991 film My Own Private Idaho ironically ends with the parting phrase " have a nice day " , which for the fourth time invokes the smiley face . Smiley faces represent optimism and appear to ask the characters , who are characterized as " marginal figures " , how nice their days are . While traveling to Idaho , the protagonists ' motorcycle breaks down , and one of the characters , Mike , gazes at the sun on the horizon and links it with the motto " have a nice day " . He says , " I 've been on this road before . Looks like a fucked @-@ up face . Like it 's saying ' have a nice day ' or something . " 
 In the 1994 film Forrest Gump , title character Forrest is jogging down the street when a T @-@ shirt salesman approaches him , asking him to put his face on T @-@ shirts as inspiration to people . While the men are jogging , a truck splashes mud into Forrest 's face , and the salesman gives him a yellow shirt to wipe the mud off . Forrest rolls up the shirt and hands it back , saying " have a nice day " . <unk> the shirt , the man finds a smiley face outlined on it . Thus the film credits Forrest Gump with inventing the Smiley logo and the have a nice day slogan . 
 In September 2005 , Bon Jovi released the album Have a Nice Day . The album cover contains a red smiley face which guitarist Richie Sambora stated echoes its title song . Sambora explained that " It 's [ like ] ' Have a nice day ; get out of my face ' — therefore the smirk . To me , it 's much more of a Clint Eastwood ' Have a nice day ' than a smiley face ' Have a nice day . ' " 
 = = Usage = = 
 The phrase " have a nice day " is typically spoken by service employees or clerks to customers at the end of a transaction . A mercantile method of expressing " thank you " as in " thank you for shopping with us " or " thank you for using our service " , it is commonly used among people in the United States and by retailers in New Zealand and elsewhere . In the 1970s , the American supermarket chain Kmart opened a store in Brisbane , Australia . The workers were trained to say , " Thank you for shopping at K @-@ Mart . Have a nice day . " 
 Other versions of " have a nice day " are " have a good one " and " have a nice one . " The phrase was universalized after 1950 by truck drivers conversing on their CB radios . Scientific studies indicate that people who regularly smile are more likely to say " have a nice day " . The phrase can have passive – aggressive connotations , and can be caustically used to end transactions with abusive customers . The speaker may also use the phrase ironically , in either a purposeful or unintentional manner . 
 Roly Sussex of The Courier @-@ Mail wrote that " have a nice day " can sound " a touch brusque " in comparison with " you have a nice day " . Deeming the word " you " as moderating the imperative , Sussex stated that the word " you " causes the phrase to seem like a mixture of a command and a hope . He wrote that using " you " in imperatives is more common with people under 25 . In her 2001 book The Facts on File Dictionary of <unk> , Christina <unk> wrote about the growing usage of " have a good meal " in restaurants . <unk> opined that the phrase " induces teeth @-@ gnashing irritation when voiced by a particularly incompetent waiter " . 
 Academic Sandi Mann 's interviews found that the British wished and demanded cordiality from service personnel , more than from their coworkers . Israelis , Americans , and Australians , on the other hand , wanted friendliness from both their coworkers and service personnel . Mann explains that the British do not expect a " smiley " display from colleagues because they have more time to build longer @-@ term relationships . Those in the service industry , though , have to become " one @-@ minute friends " each time they interact with customers . 
 = = = In crime = = = 
 On July 14 , 1979 , the Chicago Tribune published an article titled " This is a holdup ; have a nice day " about a Minneapolis robber ; while robbing the First Federal Savings & Loan Association of Chicago , the man gave a note to the bank teller that said " Thank you , and have a nice day " . On November 3 , 2007 , two robbers equipped with handguns stole money from a kiosk at a Vale , North Carolina store ; the Hickory Daily Record called them " courteous crooks " because after the theft , they told people to " have a nice day " . 
 Before the Binghamton shootings on April 3 , 2009 , the perpetrator sent a rambling diatribe against the police to News 10 Now ; the letter concluded with the chilling message " COP <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> COP MUST <unk> . AND YOU HAVE A <unk> DAY " . In the Cumbria shootings on June 2 , 2010 , the belligerent mocked one of his victims by saying " have a nice day " to her while he shot her in the face . The victim , who survived the incident , told reporters later she felt " [ i ] t was just like something out of The Terminator " . 
 = = = In Israel = = = 
 " Have a nice day " is frequently used in the Israeli retail and service industries . Jerry Levin wrote in his 2005 book West Bank Diary : Middle East Violence as Reported by a Former American Hostage about a woman in a coffee shop telling him to " have a nice day " after he purchased a sweet roll and coffee . Levin stated that there is also a " grimmer version of the pervasive <unk> " . After an Israeli soldier destroyed the memory card of Levin 's camera , the soldier told him with a jocular smirk , " have a nice day " . 
 In 2005 , the <unk> Center for Arab Rights in Israel paid for ads on television and radio stations in Israel . In the television ads , the Arabic phrase for " have a nice day " would flash onto the screen in black letters and on a red background . Immediately following the Arabic phrase would be a Hebrew phrase that said , " Are you already against it without even knowing what it says ? All we wanted to say is have a nice day . " Spokeswoman Abir Kopty stated that " [ t ] he purpose of this campaign was mainly to cause the Israeli public sitting at home , or walking down the street , to ask itself why it had a negative reaction to everything Arab , even if it is the simplest phrase . " Kopty further said that the <unk> Center wanted to encourage Arabs to be more active and more visible in the community . 
 = = = In Korea = = = 
 According to Korean Studies published by the University of Hawaii at Manoa , " have a nice day " is sometimes used in Korea . Korean Studies wrote that it " seemed somehow to fit nicely " with the phrase " <unk> <unk> yo " , which is frequently used in Korean shops to say goodbye . 
 = = = In Europe = = = 
 Europeans generally feel the phrase " have a nice day " is fake and that the speaker is solely interacting with the listener for business purposes . It is generally not used in the United Kingdom . 
 The phrase " have a nice day " spread to Britain from the United States . In Britain , the variants " have a fine day " and " have a good day " are frequently used in place of " have a nice day " . British customers generally consider it to be obnoxious and overbearing , instead usually preferring the gentler expression " enjoy the rest of your afternoon " . 
 In their 2002 book Different Games , Different Rules , Haru Yamada and Deborah Tannen recalled teaching a class in London , where a student construed " have a nice day " to be insincere . The student said that Americans " say things like that with this big fake smile on their face , and they don 't really mean it " . Not having the context of the metaphor , the student took the phrase literally and was unable to discern the intended cordiality . Conversely , when Americans visit stores in Britain where the salespeople engage not in " have a nice day " salesmanship , Americans regard British as lacking customer service . 
 Guy Browning penned an article in 2007 titled " How to ... have a nice day " for The Guardian , writing that sarcasm will creep into the discussion if the British say " have a nice day " . Browning explained that in Britain , people assume that the day will be horrible — even catastrophic . He wrote that for the United States though , " nice days and the having thereof are written into the constitution " . 
 In Germany , " <unk> Tag noch ! " , the German phrase for " have a nice day " , is being used more frequently by its vendors and waiters . German author Hyde Flippo wrote that many Germans deem " have a nice day " to be affected and shallow . Flippo further opined that the phrase is an appropriate example of culturally improper language . He compared it to smiling arbitrarily at a German person which would give the impression that the smiler is a " little simple @-@ minded or not quite ' all there ' " . Writing that Germans prefer " Auf Wiedersehen ! " or " <unk> ! " ( both meaning " goodbye " ) — which German shopkeepers frequently use — to " dubious wishes for a nice day " he opined that that is why Germans generally favor visiting a small shop instead of a large department store . 
 The French also concur that the phrase is insincere . Author Natalie Schorr wrote that the French frequently say " bonne journée " — " good day " in French — and do not consider it to be insincere . Schorr explains that " bonne journée " is a " gracious <unk> de <unk> " , similar to <unk> and s 'il vous <unk> . However , " have a nice day " sounds like a trite phrase spoken by a telemarketer . 
 In Sweden , Lennart Fridén , a member of the Parliament of Sweden , lamented in a January 1995 speech to Parliament the usage of " ha en bra dag " — " have a nice day " in Swedish . Fridén stated that the increased usage of English loan expressions like " ha en bra dag " " impairs our sense of language and style " . He proposed a motion that an authoritative body , working in conjunction with linguistic institutions , be delegated the job of " caring for the Swedish language " ; the motion did not pass . 
 The Boston @-@ born American author Edith <unk> wrote in her 2003 book Peace Comes Dropping Slow that when the Irish stereotyped Americans , they tended to use the phrase " have a nice day " . While lodging at a house in Ireland , <unk> found a drawing on the wall for American visitors like her . Drawn by her host 's daughters , the picture had the phrase " Have a _ _ _ _ _ _ Day " , with a smiley faced affixed instead of the word " nice " . Irish author Aidan Higgins wrote in his 2004 book A Bestiary that the Americanization of Ireland led the Irish to say phrases like " No problem ! " or " Have a nice day ! " even when there is drenching rain . 
 = = = In the United States = = = 
 In the United States , " good morning " , " good afternoon " , " good evening " , and " good night " were previously the normal farewell addresses for a lengthy period of time . The common valediction has become " have a nice day " . According to the Handbook of Hispanic Cultures in the United States , " [ t ] <unk> un nice day " is an example of Cuban Spanglish . This is distinguished from Chicano Spanish , in that the Chicano second @-@ generation and beyond , who are inclined to code @-@ switch , generally do not speak in the formal address form of " <unk> " . 
 In a New York courtroom , a judge sentenced a man to a seven- to ten @-@ year jail term at the Auburn State Prison for committing a robbery . The judge 's final words were " You are hereby remanded to the custody of the sheriff 's department for delivery to the custody of state officials . Have a nice day . " Jack Sheehan of <unk> stated that the convict " almost sank to his knees . The phrase had worked its magic . " 
 Jewish @-@ American comedian Alan King joked in his book <unk> Balls for Breakfast that Jews rarely say " ' have a nice day ' , or even have one " . He wrote that " [ t ] o be honest , I 've never heard a Jew say that . " 
 = = " Have a Nice Day " culture = = 
 Sandi Mann , a business psychologist at the University of Central Lancashire , defines the " Have a Nice Day " culture as filled with " fake smiles , forced bonhomie , and meaningless demands by workers to ' have a nice day ' " . Managers compel their employees to be attentive and affable with customers despite the fact that some employees do not feel these emotions . 
 Sandi Mann concludes from her research that the " Have a Nice Day " culture will prevail , becoming used by more companies and countries . In the service industry , for example , she explains that products have become more uniform over the past few decades . Thus , the sole way for companies to distinguish themselves is to have better customer service . She notes that there are positive and negative effects . A positive effect is that it is beneficial for business and for people who enjoy fake displays . A negative effect is that emotions incompatible with the " Have a Nice Day " culture are repressed , leading to what Mann terms the " Have a Nice Day " syndrome . In an interview for the Wall Street Journal , an employee of the telemarketing company <unk> Marketing , was called a son of a bitch . Clenching his teeth , he responded " Thank you very much , you have a nice day . " The stress of suppressing their feelings and faking cheerfulness caused people like the telemarketer to feel insincere and phony . Individuals affected by the " Have a Nice Day " syndrome must carry out emotional labor , which could lead to diminished self @-@ esteem , depression , and cynicism . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 Linguistically , " have a nice day " is a command in that the subject , the pronoun you , is intimated . It could be regarded as an exhortation to achieve an outcome that the recipient has no power to influence . However , it is also possible to interpret the phrase as a contraction of " I hope that you have a nice day " . 
 Kerry LePage wrote in his 2004 book Some Day Never Comes that he chooses to have a nice day based on his own choice , not that of another person . J. Broad wrote in his 2007 book Some Day Never Comes that the phrase causes people to feel they have an obligation to have a nice day . Mike Royko wrote in his 2002 book For the Love of Mike that people may have a bad day , not a nice one , because they " confront a demanding boss , a nasty customer , a crabby teacher " . 
 According to author John <unk> , the tediousness of the phrase is exemplified by employees uttering the words so faintly as to be barely audible . The phrase is occasionally used in an ironic manner when others have been disrespectful or have negatively impacted the speaker . In Detroit , a supermarket started a program to have its cashiers tell every customer to " have a nice day " after completing their transactions . After conducting surveys , they realized that more than half of the customers were unaware of whether the clerk had said the phrase . In addition , a number of customers commented that they despised being told to " have a nice day " . In a 2006 study , researchers at Frankfurt University discovered that people who must smile and say " have a nice day " in their jobs are more prone to illness . Flight attendants , waiters , and call center operators , as well as others who are forced to act cheerfully , are more likely to become depressed . This can lead to decreased immune system function . 
 Australian Andrew Biggs of the Bangkok Post wrote that in the past , the phrase was heard exclusively in Hollywood movies and American soap operas . He lamented that by the 1970s , Aussie teenagers were compelled to tell customers to " have a nice day " , a " blatant American cliche " . Biggs stated that " have a nice day " is " an idiom that 's been mashed and mangled over the decades " . 
 Jan C. Snow laments that the phrase was trite and indicative of the speaker 's lack of vocabulary . She wrote that on Saturdays , people could be asked to " have a relaxing day " . People with highly variable jobs such as emergency room nurses may appreciate " have a routine day " , while mothers of young children may wish to " have a quiet day " . Debbie Lundberg wrote in her 2008 book Have a Nice Day Is Not Thank You , and No Problem Is Not You 're Welcome that service people should say " thank you " instead of " have a nice day " . She argued that " thank you " is shorter and is a " recognition of the ability you have to thank someone " , which adds more worth to the purchase than something that will occur in the future . Paul V. Marshall , the bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Bethlehem , concurred , writing in the Reading Eagle that he prefers " thank you " to " have a nice day " or " have a great day " even though " thank you " has a " host of socially acceptable responses " . He stated that when people say " thank you " , they admit that they are dependent on others , which leads to a healthier , safer society . 
 J. Broad wrote that the phrase " have a nice day " is an apt middle ground for the " drop dead " the cashier is thinking and the " come back soon " the owner wants . Broad stated that the phrase is meaningless because it has been castrated by excessive usage and pretense . He compared the phrase to the salutation " How are you ? " and the phrase " had a lovely time " , which are " conversational space @-@ fillers " that help prevent embarrassing silences . Usage of the term has been compared to inserting the phrase " you know " or the word " like " in sentences . In 1982 , comedian George Carlin joked at Carnegie Hall , " That 's the trouble with ' Have a nice day ' ; it puts all the pressure on you . Now you 've got to go out and somehow manage to have a good time , all because of some loose @-@ lipped cashier . ' Have a nice day ... ' Maybe I don 't feel like having a nice day . Maybe , just maybe , I 've had 116 nice days in a row and I 'm ready , by God , for a crappy day . " 
 William Safire of The New York Times wrote that when the speaker of the phrase is genuine and maintains eye contact , the act is a " social asset and a note of civility " in a busy world . However , he stated that when the phrase is robotically said or said in a tone similar to " get lost " , the utterance " comes across with a resounding clank of falsity " . Marilyn Gardner of The Christian Science Monitor wrote that the " bland age of ' Have @-@ a @-@ nice @-@ day ' should come to a deserving end " . She opined that service could not be " peddled as an image " , and that substance is more important than style . Satirical commentator Russell Baker wrote in the Chicago Tribune that he did not know Ma Bell was waning until she began using the phrase " have a nice day " . 
 Miss Manners wrote in her 1990 book Miss Manners ' Guide for the Turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Millennium that although the phrase was trite , she wondered whether there was " so much deeply felt good will " permeating through the world that shallow friendliness ought to desist . She stated that for her , saying " goodbye " is sufficient because it expresses the same well @-@ wishing farewell sentiment . <unk> Lowndes wrote in her 2009 book How to Instantly Connect with Anyone that if someone says " have a nice day " , the recipient should refrain from sarcastically responding " Thanks , but I have other plans " or " Gee , I was planning on having a miserable one , but now that you mention it , I think I 'll have a nice one . " Lowndes suggested that the response merely be " You , too . " 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 Carol <unk> of the Chicago Tribune wrote that although saying " have a nice day " may not be sincere , the speaker has acknowledged that the recipient is there . She argued " [ h ] <unk> we become so analytic that we can 't accept these little niceties without asking ourselves , ' Did he really mean it ? Does she really care if I have a nice day ? ' " Writing that society has become so automated that going through a check @-@ out line at a grocery store without having made eye contact or spoken with the checker is possible , <unk> favored " insincerely meant human kindness to a robot " . She encouraged people to respond to " have a nice day " with " you have a nice day , too " because she hoped that when a sufficient number of people do this , there could be a time when people will sincerely intend it . 
 Jeff Corbett of The Newcastle Herald defended " have a nice day " despite his characterization of the phrase as " wincingly American and so patently false in its sing @-@ song delivery " by cashiers . Corbett favored the phrase to the inquiries of the shopkeepers about his life ; he preferred " have a nice day " because it did not entail a response . 
 Janice Turner of The Times supported the phrase , writing that she is indifferent to it being used insincerely or 1 @,@ 000 times a day . She wrote that " have a nice day " is " soothing , even kind " , in that it improves the interactions among millions of people crowded together . 
 William F. Wyatt Jr. of the Chicago Tribune wrote that " have a nice day " used to be new and " fill [ ed ] a needed slot " . " Goodbye " , he stated , inappropriately indicates that salespeople are intimate with customers they do not know and would seem forced . " Farewell " , Wyatt said , would feel abnormal and could only be employed in an ironic context . The close of a transaction needed an oral ending . " Have a nice day " was the apt phrase for those who serve people they do not know to end a transaction . 
 = 1st Airborne Division ( United Kingdom ) = 
 The 1st Airborne Division was an airborne infantry division of the British Army during the Second World War . The division was formed in late 1941 during World War II , after the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , demanded an airborne force , and was initially under command of Major @-@ General Frederick Arthur Montague Browning . The division was one of two airborne divisions raised by the British Army during the war , with the other being the 6th Airborne Division , created in May 1943 , using former units of the 1st Airborne Division . 
 The divisions first two missions – Operation Biting , a parachute landing in France , and Operation Freshman , a glider mission in Norway – were both raids . Part of the division was sent to North Africa at the end of 1942 , where it fought in the Tunisia Campaign , and when the Allies invaded Sicily in July 1943 , the division undertook two brigade sized landings . The first , Operation Ladbroke , carried out by glider infantry of the 1st Airlanding Brigade and the second , Operation Fustian , by the 1st Parachute Brigade , were far from completely successful . The 1st Airborne Division then took part in a mostly diversionary amphibious landing , Operation Slapstick , part of the Allied invasion of Italy in September 1943 . 
 In December , most of the 1st Airborne Division ( minus the 2nd Parachute Brigade ) returned to England , and began training and preparing for the Allied invasion of Normandy . It was not involved in the Normandy landings in June 1944 , being held in reserve . In September 1944 it took part in Operation Market Garden . The division , with the Polish 1st Parachute Brigade temporarily attached , landed 60 miles ( 97 km ) behind German lines , to capture crossings on the River Rhine , and fought in the Battle of Arnhem . After failing to achieve its objectives , the division was surrounded and took very heavy casualties , but held out for nine days before the survivors were evacuated . 
 The remnants of the 1st Airborne Division was returned to England soon after . The division never fully recovered from their losses at Arnhem and the 4th Parachute Brigade was disbanded . Just after the end of the war in Europe , the depleted formation took part in Operation Doomsday in Norway in May 1945 . They were tasked with the disarmament and repatriation of the German occupation army . The 1st Airborne Division then returned to England and was disbanded in November 1945 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Impressed by the success of German airborne operations during the Battle of France , British Prime Minister Winston Churchill directed the War Office to investigate the possibility of creating a force of 5 @,@ 000 parachute troops . As a result , on 22 June 1940 , No. 2 Commando assumed parachute duties , and on 21 November was re @-@ designated the 11th Special Air Service Battalion , with a parachute and glider wing . 
 On 21 June 1940 the Central Landing Establishment was formed at Ringway airfield near Manchester . Although tasked primarily with training parachute troops , it was also directed to investigate the use of gliders to transport troops into battle . At the same time , the Ministry of Aircraft Production contracted General Aircraft Ltd to design and produce a glider for this purpose . The result was the General Aircraft Hotspur , which was capable of transporting eight soldiers and was used for both assault and training purposes . 
 The success of the first British airborne raid , Operation Colossus , prompted the War Office to expand the airborne force through the creation of the Parachute Regiment , and to develop plans to convert several infantry battalions into parachute and glider battalions . On 31 May 1941 , a joint army and air force memorandum was approved by the Chiefs @-@ of @-@ Staff and Winston Churchill ; it recommended that the British airborne forces should consist of two parachute brigades , one based in England and the other in the Middle East , and that a glider force of 10 @,@ 000 men should be created . 
 = = Formation history = = 
 The existing 11th Special Air Service Battalion was renamed the 1st Parachute Battalion and , together with the newly raised 2nd and 3rd Parachute Battalions , formed the first of the new airborne formations , 1st Parachute Brigade , commanded by Brigadier Richard Nelson Gale who would later command the 6th Airborne Division . The 2nd and 3rd Battalions were formed from volunteers , between the ages of twenty @-@ two and thirty @-@ two , who were already serving in infantry units . Only ten men from any one unit were allowed to volunteer . 
 In October 1941 , Frederick Arthur Montague Browning was promoted to Major General , named the Commander Parachute and Airborne Troops , and ordered to form a headquarters to develop and train airborne forces . The next unit formed was the 1st Airlanding Brigade on 10 October 1941 , by the conversion of the mountain warfare trained 31st Independent Infantry Brigade Group , commanded by Brigadier George F. Hopkinson . The brigade comprised four battalions : the 1st Border Regiment , 2nd South Staffordshire Regiment , 2nd Oxford and Bucks Light Infantry , and the 1st Royal Ulster Rifles . The men who were unsuitable for airborne forces were replaced by volunteers from other units . By the end of the year Browning 's command had become the headquarters of 1st Airborne Division . 
 = = = 1942 – 1943 = = = 
 Browning expressed his opinion that the force must not be sacrificed in " penny packets " , and urged the formation of a third brigade . Permission was finally granted in July 1942 , and the 2nd Parachute Brigade , commanded by Brigadier Ernest Down , was formed . The 2nd Parachute Brigade was assigned the existing 4th Parachute Battalion , and two new battalions converted from line infantry units , the 5th ( Scottish ) Parachute Battalion , converted from the 7th Queen 's Own Cameron Highlanders , and the 6th ( Royal Welch ) Parachute Battalion , from the 10th Royal Welch Fusiliers . 
 The 3rd Parachute Brigade , comprising the 7th Parachute Battalion , previously the 10th Somerset Light Infantry , the 8th Parachute Battalion , converted from 13th Royal Warwickshire Regiment , and the 9th Parachute Battalion , which was previously the 10th Essex Regiment , Parachute Battalions , was formed in November 1943 , and also assigned to the division . Soon afterwards , the 1st Parachute Brigade left the division , to take part in the Operation Torch landings in North Africa . 
 In April 1943 , the commander of the 1st Airlanding Brigade , Hopkinson , was promoted to Major General and given command of the division . Later that year , the division was deployed to Tunisia for operations in the Mediterranean theatre . The 3rd Parachute Brigade and two battalions from the 1st Airlanding Brigade – the 1st Royal Ulster Rifles and 2nd Oxford and Bucks Light Infantry – remained behind in England , forming the nucleus of the newly raised 6th Airborne Division . On arrival , the 1st Airborne was reinforced by the 4th Parachute Brigade . The 4th Parachute Brigade had been formed in the Middle East during 1942 . In addition to the 156th Parachute Battalion , which had been raised from British troops stationed in India , it comprised the 10th and 11th Parachute Battalions , which had been raised from troops based in Egypt and Palestine . 
 The division took part in two brigade sized operations in Sicily , and an amphibious assault at Taranto in Italy . During the fighting in Italy , Major General Ernest Down became the divisional commander , after his predecessor died of wounds received in the fighting . After service in the Mediterranean , the division returned to England in December 1943 , leaving the 2nd Parachute Brigade behind as an independent formation . 
 = = = 1944 – 1945 = = = 
 After the division arrived in England , Ernest Down was posted to India to oversee the formation of the 44th Indian Airborne Division , and was replaced by Major General Roy Urquhart . In September 1944 , for Operation Market Garden in the Netherlands , the 1st Polish Parachute Brigade was attached to the division . Following Market Garden , fewer than 2 @,@ 200 men from the 10 @,@ 000 that were sent to the Netherlands returned to the British lines . Having suffered such severe casualties , the 4th Parachute Brigade was disbanded , with its surviving men being posted to the 1st Parachute Brigade . The division then went through a period of reorganisation , but had still not fully recovered by the end of the war , due to the acute shortage of manpower throughout the British Army in 1944 @-@ 1945 . Still under strength in May 1945 , it was sent to Norway to disarm the German army of occupation ; returning to Britain in November 1945 where the 1st Airborne Division was disbanded . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = France = = = 
 Operation Biting , also known as the Bruneval Raid , was the codename for a raid by Combined Operations in 1942 . Their objective was a German Würzburg radar installation at Bruneval in France . Due to the extensive coastal defences erected by the Germans to protect the array , it was thought a commando raid from the sea would incur heavy losses , and give the garrison sufficient time for the radar equipment to be destroyed . It was therefore decided that an airborne assault followed by sea @-@ borne evacuation would be the ideal way to surprise the garrison and seize the technology intact . 
 On the night of 27 February , ' C ' Company , 2nd Parachute Battalion , under the command of Major John Frost , parachuted into France a few miles from the installation . The force then proceeded to assault the villa in which the radar equipment was kept , killing several members of the German garrison and capturing the installation after a brief fire @-@ fight . A technician that had come with the force partially dismantled the Würzburg radar array and removed several key pieces to take back to Britain , the raiding force then retreated to the evacuation beach . The detachment assigned to clear the beach had failed to do so , however , and another brief fire @-@ fight was required to eliminate the Germans guarding the beach . The raiding force was then picked up by a small number of landing craft and transferred to several Motor Gun Boats which brought them back to Britain . The raid was entirely successful . The airborne troops suffered only a few casualties , and the pieces of the radar they brought back , along with a German radar technician , allowed British scientists to understand German advances in radar and to create counter @-@ measures to neutralise those advances . 
 = = = Norway = = = 
 Operation Freshman was the first British airborne operation conducted using gliders , its target was the Vemork Norsk Hydro chemical plant in Norway , which produced heavy water for Nazi Germany . By 1942 the German atomic weapons programme had come close to being able to develop a nuclear reactor , but in order for the reactor to function it would require a great deal of heavy water . The source of this water was the Norsk Hydro plant , which had been occupied in 1940 ; when the British government learned of the German nuclear developments , it was decided that a raid would be launched to destroy the plant and deny the Germans the heavy water . Several tactics were discussed and discarded as impractical , and it was finally decided that a small force from the 1st Airborne Division , comprising 30 sappers from the Royal Engineers , would land by glider a short distance from the plant , and demolish it with explosives . 
 Two aircraft , each towing one glider , left Scotland on the night of 19 November 1942 . All managed to reach the Norwegian coast , but none were able to reach their objective . The first pair suffered from navigational difficulties and severe weather , which resulted in the tow rope snapping and the first glider crash @-@ landing , with its towing aircraft returning to base ; eight airborne troops were killed outright , four were severely injured and five unhurt . The survivors were captured shortly after the crash . The second pair fared even worse , with both aircraft and glider crashing into a mountain for unknown reasons ; the aircrew and several men were killed outright , and those who survived were taken prisoner . None of the prisoners survived for very long , being either poisoned or executed as a result of Adolf Hitler 's Commando Order , which stated that all British Commandos personnel were to be killed immediately when captured . 
 = = = Sicily = = = 
 Operation Turkey Buzzard , also known as Operation Beggar , was a supply mission to North Africa that took place between March and August 1943 . The mission was undertaken by the division 's glider pilots and No. 295 Squadron Royal Air Force , as part of the preparations for the Allied invasion of Sicily . 
 The mission involved Halifax bombers towing Horsa gliders 3 @,@ 200 miles ( 5 @,@ 100 km ) from England to Tunisia . The Horsas were needed to complement the smaller American Waco gliders , which did not have the capacity required for the planned operations . During the mission two German Condor patrol aircraft located and shot down a Halifax @-@ and @-@ Horsa combination . Altogether five Horsas and three Halifaxes were lost , but 27 Horsas arrived in Tunisia in time to participate in the invasion of Sicily . 
 Operation Ladbroke was a glider assault by the 1st Airlanding Brigade near Syracuse , that began on 9 July 1943 as part of the invasion of Sicily . The brigade were equipped with 144 Waco and six Horsa gliders . Their objective was to land near the town of Syracuse , secure the Ponte Grande Bridge , and ultimately take control of the city itself with its strategically important docks . 
 On the way to Sicily , 65 gliders were released too early by the towing aircraft and crashed into the sea , drowning around 252 men . Of the remainder , only 87 men arrived at the Pont Grande Bridge , which they successfully captured and held beyond the time they were to be relieved . Finally , with their ammunition expended and only 15 soldiers remaining unwounded , they surrendered to the Italian forces . The Italians sought to demolish the bridge after regaining control of it , but were unable to do so because the airborne forces had removed the explosive charges . Other troops from the airlanding brigade , who had landed elsewhere in Sicily , destroyed communications links and captured artillery batteries . 
 Operation <unk> , the division 's second mission in Sicily , was carried out by the 1st Parachute Brigade . Their objective was the Primosole Bridge across the Simeto River . The intention was for the parachute brigade , with glider @-@ borne forces in support , to land on both sides of the river . While one battalion seized the bridge , the other two battalions would establish defensive positions to the north and south . They would then hold the bridge until relieved by the advance of XIII Corps , part of the Eighth Army which had landed on the south eastern coast three days previously . 
 The start of the operation was a disaster . Many of the aircraft carrying the paratroopers from North Africa were shot down , or were damaged and turned back , due to both friendly fire and enemy action . The evasive action taken by the pilots scattered the brigade over a large area , and only the equivalent of two companies of troops were landed in the correct locations . Despite this and the defence by German and Italian forces , the British paratroops captured the bridge . Resisting attacks from the north and south , they held out against increasing odds until nightfall . 
 The relieving force led by the 50th ( Northumbrian ) Infantry Division , which was short of transport , found it hard going to reach the parachute brigade and were still 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) away when they halted for the night . By this time , with casualties mounting and supplies running short , the brigade commander , Brigadier Gerald Lathbury , had relinquished control of the bridge to the Germans . The following day the British units joined forces , and the 9th Battalion , Durham Light Infantry with armour support attempted to recapture the bridge . It was not finally secured until three days after the start of the operation , when another battalion of the Durham Light Infantry , led by the paratroopers , established a bridgehead on the northern bank of the river . 
 = = = Italy = = = 
 Operation Slapstick was an amphibious landing at the Italian port of Taranto , part of the Allied invasion of Italy in September 1943 . The mission had been planned at short notice , following an offer by the Italian government to open the ports of Taranto and Brindisi on the heel of Italy to the Allies . The 1st Airborne Division was selected to undertake the mission , but at the time they were located in North Africa . A shortage of transport aircraft meant the division could not land by parachute and glider , and all the landing craft in the area were already allocated to the other landings : Operation Avalanche at Salerno on the western coast , and Operation Baytown at Calabria . Instead , the division had to be transported across the Mediterranean by ships of the Royal Navy . The landing was unopposed , and the airborne division successfully captured the ports of Taranto , and later Brindisi on the Adriatic coast , in working order . 
 The only German forces in the area were elements of the German 1st Parachute Division , which engaged the advancing British in ambushes and at roadblocks during a fighting withdrawal north . By the end of September , the 1st Airborne Division had advanced 125 miles ( 201 km ) to Foggia . Reinforcements from two infantry divisions , the 8th Indian and British 78th , had by then been landed behind them , which allowed the airborne troops to be withdrawn back to Taranto . Despite casualties for the 1st Airborne Division in Italy being relatively light , the General Officer Commanding ( GOC ) , Major @-@ General George Hopkinson , was killed while watching an assault by the 10th Parachute Battalion where he was mortally wounded by a burst of machine gun fire . He was replaced by Brigadier Ernest E. Down , previously the commander of 2nd Parachute Brigade . 
 = = = England = = = 
 By December 1943 the division had returned to England and begun training for operations in North @-@ West Europe under the supervision of I Airborne Corps . Although the 1st Airborne Division was not scheduled to take part in the Normandy landings , a contingency plan , Operation <unk> , was drawn up whereby the division would be parachuted in to support any of the five invasion beaches if serious delays were experienced . This plan turned out not to be required . 
 While the 6th Airborne Division were still fighting in Normandy , numerous plans to parachute the 1st Airborne Division into France were formulated , all to no avail . In June and July 1944 , the plans included Operation Reinforcement , which was a landing to the west of St Sauveur @-@ le @-@ Vicomte to support the US 82nd Airborne Division , and Operation Wild Oats to seize Carpiquet airfield in support of the First Canadian Army . There was also Operation <unk> , intended to support the American XX Corps in capturing St Malo , and Operation Lucky Strike which had the objective of seizing bridges across the River Seine at Rouen . In Operation Sword Hilt , the division was to isolate the port of Brest and destroy the Morlaix viaduct . Operation Hands Up was intended to support the US Third Army by seizing the Vannes airfield . 
 By August the division was still waiting to be deployed , but now plans envisioned using them as part of a larger force . Operation <unk> involved the division , the 52nd ( Lowland ) Infantry Division , the US 101st Airborne Division , and the 1st Polish Parachute Brigade landing at Rambouillet St <unk> , to close the gap between Orléans and Paris . Operation <unk> , using the same force , was to seize the bridges over the River Seine in support of 21st Army Group . Operation Boxer , with the same force , was to seize Boulogne and assault V1 flying bomb sites . Near the end of the month , Operation Linnet , with the same units as before , was formulated to seize crossings over the <unk> . Operation <unk> , drawn up in early September , involved the entire I Airborne Corps landing in Belgium to trap the retreating German armies in the Scheldt estuary , as well as aiming to threaten Antwerp . 
 Finally , in September , there was Operation Comet , in which the division 's three brigades were to land in the Netherlands and each capture a river crossing . The first of these was the bridge over the River Waal at Nijmegen , the second the bridge over the River Maas at Grave , and the last was the bridge over the River Rhine at Arnhem . Planning for Comet was well advanced when on 10 September the mission was cancelled . Instead , a new operation was proposed with the same objectives as Comet but to be carried out by three divisions of the First Allied Airborne Army . 
 = = = Arnhem = = = 
 Operation Market Garden was an airborne assault by three divisions in the Netherlands in September 1944 , including the 1st and the American 82nd and 101st , to secure key bridges and towns along the expected Allied axis of advance . Farthest north , 1st Airborne , supported by the 1st Polish Parachute Brigade , landed at Arnhem to secure bridges across the Nederrijn . Initially expecting an easy advance , XXX Corps planned to reach the airborne force at Arnhem within two to three days . 
 1st Airborne landed some distance from its objectives and was quickly hampered by unexpected resistance , especially from elements of the 9th SS and 10th SS panzer divisions . Only a small force was able to reach the Arnhem road bridge , while the main body of the division was halted on the outskirts of the city . Meanwhile , XXX Corps was unable to advance north as quickly as anticipated and failed to relieve the airborne troops . After four days , the small British force at the bridge was overwhelmed and the rest of the division became trapped in a pocket north of the river , where they could not be sufficiently reinforced by the Poles , or by XXX Corps when it arrived on the southern bank . After nine days of fighting , the shattered remains of the airborne forces were eventually withdrawn south of the Rhine . 1st Airborne lost 8 @,@ 000 men during the battle and never saw combat again . 
 = = = Norway post @-@ war = = = 
 In May 1945 , immediately after the Allied Victory in Europe Day , the 1st Airborne Division was sent to disarm and repatriate the 350 @,@ 000 @-@ strong German occupation army in Norway . The division maintained law and order until the arrival of the remainder of Force 134 , the occupation force . During its time in Norway , the division was tasked with supervising the surrender of the German forces in Norway , as well as preventing the sabotage of important military and civilian facilities . 
 The German Instrument of Surrender was delivered on 8 May to General Franz Böhme , the commander of all German forces stationed in Norway ; the 1st Airborne Division landed near Oslo and Stavanger between 9 and 11 May . Most of the transport aircraft carrying the division landed safely , but one crash caused several fatalities . The division encountered little of the expected German resistance . Operational duties included welcoming back King Haakon , looking after Allied ex @-@ prisoners of war , arresting war criminals and supervising the clearing of minefields . While in Norway , the division was also able to investigate what happened to the airborne troops that had taken part in Operation Freshman . The division returned to Britain , and was disbanded on 26 August 1945 . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 = = = Commanders = = = 
 Major @-@ General Frederick Browning 
 Major @-@ General George F. Hopkinson 
 Major @-@ General Ernest Down 
 Major @-@ General Roy Urquhart 
 = = = Units = = = 
 1st Parachute Brigade 
 1st Airlanding Brigade 
 2nd Parachute Brigade 
 3rd Parachute Brigade 
 4th Parachute Brigade 
 Divisional troops 
 Divisional headquarters and signal squadron 
 1st Airlanding Light Regiment , Royal Artillery 
 1st Forward ( Airborne ) Observation Unit , Royal Artillery 
 21st Independent Parachute Company , Army Air Corps 
 1st Airborne Reconnaissance Squadron 
 9th ( Airborne ) Field Company , Royal Engineers 
 261st ( Airborne ) Field Park Company , Royal Engineers 
 250th ( Airborne ) Light Company , Royal Army Service Corps 
 93rd Company , Royal Army Service Corps 
 Detachment Ordnance Field Park 
 Detachment , Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers Workshop 
 89th Field Security Section , Intelligence Corps 
 1st Airborne Division , Provost Company , Royal Military Police 
 = Rhabdomyolysis = 
 Rhabdomyolysis is a condition in which damaged skeletal striated muscle breaks down rapidly . Breakdown products of damaged muscle cells are released into the bloodstream ; some of these , such as the protein myoglobin , are harmful to the kidneys and may lead to kidney failure . The severity of the symptoms , which may include muscle pains , vomiting , and confusion , depends on the extent of muscle damage and whether kidney failure develops . The muscle damage may be caused by physical factors ( e.g. , crush injury , strenuous exercise , medications , drug abuse , and infections ) . Some people have a hereditary muscle condition that increases the risk of rhabdomyolysis . The diagnosis is usually made with blood tests and urinalysis . The mainstay of treatment is generous quantities of intravenous fluids , but may include dialysis or hemofiltration in more severe cases . 
 Rhabdomyolysis and its complications are significant problems for those injured in disasters such as earthquakes and bombings . Relief efforts in areas struck by earthquakes often include medical teams with the skills and equipment to treat survivors with rhabdomyolysis . The disease was first described in the 20th century , and important discoveries as to its mechanism were made during the Blitz of London in 1941 . Horses may also develop rhabdomyolysis from a variety of causes . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The symptoms of rhabdomyolysis depend on its severity and whether kidney failure develops . Milder forms may not cause any muscle symptoms , and the diagnosis is based on abnormal blood tests in the context of other problems . More severe rhabdomyolysis is characterized by muscle pain , tenderness , weakness and swelling of the affected muscles . If the swelling is very rapid , as may happen after someone is released from under a collapsed building , the movement of fluid from the bloodstream into damaged muscle may cause low blood pressure and shock . Other symptoms are nonspecific and result either from the consequences of muscle tissue breakdown or from the condition that originally led to the muscle breakdown . Release of the components of muscle tissue into the bloodstream causes electrolyte disturbances , which can lead to nausea , vomiting , confusion , coma or abnormal heart rate and rhythm . The urine may be dark , often described as " tea @-@ colored " , due to the presence of myoglobin . Damage to the kidneys may give rise to decreased or absent urine production , usually 12 to 24 hours after the initial muscle damage . 
 Swelling of damaged muscle occasionally leads to compartment syndrome — compression of surrounding tissues , such as nerves and blood vessels , in the same fascial compartment — leading to the loss of blood supply and damage or loss of function in the part ( s ) of the body supplied by these structures . Symptoms of this complication include pain or reduced sensation in the affected limb . A second recognized complication is disseminated intravascular coagulation ( DIC ) , a severe disruption in blood clotting that may lead to uncontrollable bleeding . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Any form of muscle damage of sufficient severity can cause rhabdomyolysis . Multiple causes can be present simultaneously in one person . Some have an underlying muscle condition , usually hereditary in nature , that makes them more prone to rhabdomyolysis . 
 = = = Common and important causes = = = 
 = = = Genetic predisposition = = = 
 Recurrent rhabdomyolysis may result from intrinsic muscle enzyme deficiencies , which are usually inherited and often appear during childhood . Many structural muscle diseases feature episodes of rhabdomyolysis that are triggered by exercise , general anesthesia or any of the other causes of rhabdomyolysis listed above . Inherited muscle disorders and infections together cause the majority of rhabdomyolysis in children . 
 The following hereditary disorders of the muscle energy supply may cause recurrent and usually exertional rhabdomyolysis : 
 Glycolysis and glycogenolysis defects : McArdle 's disease , phosphofructokinase deficiency , glycogen storage diseases VIII , IX , X and XI 
 Lipid metabolism defects : carnitine <unk> I and II deficiency , deficiency of subtypes of acyl CoA dehydrogenase ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency ) , <unk> deficiency 
 Mitochondrial myopathies : deficiency of succinate dehydrogenase , cytochrome c oxidase and coenzyme Q10 
 Others : glucose @-@ 6 @-@ phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency , <unk> deaminase deficiency and muscular <unk> 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Damage to skeletal muscle may take various forms . Crush and other physical injuries cause damage to muscle cells directly or interfere with blood supply , while non @-@ physical causes interfere with muscle cell metabolism . When damaged , muscle tissue rapidly fills with fluid from the bloodstream , including sodium ions . The swelling itself may lead to destruction of muscle cells , but those cells that survive are subject to various disruptions that lead to rise in intracellular calcium ions ; the accumulation of calcium outside the <unk> reticulum leads to continuous muscle contraction and depletion of ATP , the main carrier of energy in the cell . ATP depletion can itself lead to uncontrolled calcium influx . The persistent contraction of the muscle cell leads to breakdown of intracellular proteins and disintegration of the cell . 
 Neutrophil granulocytes — the most abundant type of white blood cell — enter the muscle tissue , producing an inflammatory reaction and releasing reactive oxygen species , particularly after crush injury . Crush syndrome may also cause reperfusion injury when blood flow to decompressed muscle is suddenly restored . 
 The swollen , inflamed muscle may directly compress structures in the same fascial compartment , causing compartment syndrome . The swelling may also further compromise blood supply into the area . Finally , destroyed muscle cells release potassium ions , phosphate ions , the heme @-@ containing protein myoglobin , the enzyme creatine kinase and uric acid ( a breakdown product of purines from DNA ) into the blood . Activation of the coagulation system may precipitate disseminated intravascular coagulation . High potassium levels may lead to potentially fatal disruptions in heart rhythm . Phosphate binds to calcium from the circulation , leading to low calcium levels in the blood . 
 Rhabdomyolysis may cause kidney failure by several mechanisms . The most important is the accumulation of myoglobin in the kidney tubules . Normally , the blood protein haptoglobin binds circulating myoglobin and other heme @-@ containing substances , but in rhabdomyolysis the quantity of myoglobin exceeds the binding capacity of haptoglobin . <unk> , the presence of myoglobin in the urine , occurs when the level in plasma exceeds 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 5 mg / dl ; once plasma levels reach 100 mg / dl , the concentration in the urine becomes sufficient for it to be visibly discolored and corresponds with the destruction of about 200 grams of muscle . As the kidneys reabsorb more water from the <unk> , myoglobin interacts with Tamm – Horsfall protein in the <unk> to form casts ( solid aggregates ) that obstruct the normal flow of fluid ; the condition is worsened further by high levels of uric acid and acidification of the <unk> , which increase cast formation . Iron released from the heme generates reactive oxygen species , damaging the kidney cells . In addition to the myoglobinuria , two other mechanisms contribute to kidney impairment : low blood pressure leads to constriction of the blood vessels and therefore a relative lack of blood flow to the kidney , and finally uric acid may form crystals in the tubules of the kidneys , causing obstruction . Together , these processes lead to acute tubular necrosis , the destruction of the cells of tubules . <unk> filtration rate falls and the kidney is unable to perform its normal excretory functions . This causes disruption of electrolyte regulation , leading to a further rise in potassium levels , and interferes with vitamin D processing , further worsening the low calcium levels . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 A diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis may be suspected in anyone who has suffered trauma , crush injury or prolonged immobilization , but it may also be identified at a later stage due to deteriorating kidney function ( abnormally raised or increasing creatinine and urea levels , falling urine output ) or reddish @-@ brown discoloration of the urine . 
 = = = General investigations = = = 
 The most reliable test in the diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis is the level of creatine kinase ( CK ) in the blood . This enzyme is released by damaged muscle , and levels above 5 times the upper limit of normal ( <unk> ) indicate rhabdomyolysis . Depending on the extent of the rhabdomyolysis , concentrations up to 100 @,@ 000 U / l are not unusual . CK concentrations rise steadily for 12 hours after the original muscle injury , remain elevated for 1 – 3 days and then fall gradually . Initial and peak CK levels have a linear relationship with the risk of acute kidney failure : the higher the CK , the more likely it is that kidney damage will occur . There is no specific concentration of CK above which kidney impairment definitely occurs ; concentrations below 20 @,@ 000 U / l are unlikely to be associated with a risk of kidney impairment , unless there are other contributing risk factors . Mild rises without kidney impairment are referred to as " <unk> " . Myoglobin has a short half @-@ life , and is therefore less useful as a diagnostic test in the later stages . Its detection in blood or urine is associated with a higher risk of kidney impairment . Despite this , use of urine myoglobin measurement is not supported by evidence as it lacks specificity and the research studying its utility is of poor quality . 
 Elevated concentrations of the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) may be detected . Other markers of muscle damage , such as <unk> , <unk> , carbonic anhydrase type 3 and fatty acid @-@ binding protein ( <unk> ) , are mainly used in chronic muscle diseases . The transaminases , enzymes abundant in both liver and muscle tissue , are also usually increased ; this can lead to the condition being confused with acute liver injury , at least in the early stages . The incidence of actual acute liver injury is 25 % in people with non @-@ traumatic rhabdomyolysis ; the mechanism for this is uncertain . 
 High potassium levels tend to be a feature of severe rhabdomyolysis . <unk> ( ECG ) may show whether the elevated potassium levels are affecting the conduction system of the heart , as suggested by the presence of T wave changes or broadening of the QRS complex . Low calcium levels may be present in the initial stage due to binding of free calcium to damaged muscle cells . 
 <unk> by urine test strip may reveal a positive result for " blood " , even though no red blood cells can be identified on microscopy of the urine ; this occurs because the reagent on the test strip reacts with myoglobin . The same phenomenon may happen in conditions that lead to hemolysis , the destruction of red blood cells ; in hemolysis the blood serum is also visibly discolored , while in rhabdomyolysis it is normal . If kidney damage has occurred , microscopy of the urine also reveals urinary casts that appear pigmented and granular . 
 = = = Complications = = = 
 Compartment syndrome is a clinical diagnosis , i.e. , no diagnostic test conclusively proves its presence or absence , but direct measurement of the pressure in a fascial compartment , and the difference between this pressure and the blood pressure , may be used to assess its severity . High pressures in the compartment and a small difference between compartment pressure and blood pressure indicate that the blood supply is likely to be insufficient , and that surgical intervention may be needed . 
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation , another complication of rhabdomyolysis and other forms of critical illness , may be suspected on the basis of unexpected bleeding or abnormalities in hematological tests , such as a decreasing platelet count or prolongation of the prothrombin time . The diagnosis can be confirmed with standard blood tests for DIC , such as D @-@ dimer . 
 = = = Underlying disorders = = = 
 If an underlying muscle disease is suspected , for instance if there is no obvious explanation or there have been multiple episodes , it may be necessary to perform further investigations . During an attack , low levels of carnitine in the blood and high levels of <unk> in blood and urine may indicate a lipid metabolism defect , but these abnormalities revert to normal during convalescence . Other tests may be used at that stage to demonstrate these disorders . Disorders of glycolysis can be detected by various means , including the measurement of lactate after exercise ; a failure of the lactate to rise may be indicative of a disorder in glycolysis , while an exaggerated response is typical of mitochondrial diseases . <unk> ( EMG ) may show particular patterns in specific muscle diseases ; for instance , McArdle 's disease and phosphofructokinase deficiency show a phenomenon called cramp @-@ like contracture . There are genetic tests available for many of the hereditary muscle conditions that predispose to myoglobinuria and rhabdomyolysis . 
 Muscle biopsy can be useful if an episode of rhabdomyolysis is thought to be the result of an underlying muscle disorder . A biopsy sample taken during an episode is often uninformative , as it will show only evidence of cell death or may appear normal . Taking the sample is therefore delayed for several weeks or months . The <unk> appearance on the biopsy indicates the nature of the underlying disorder . For instance , mitochondrial diseases are characterized by ragged red fibers . Biopsy sites may be identified by medical imaging , such as magnetic resonance imaging , as the muscles may not be uniformly affected . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 The main goal of treatment is to treat shock and preserve kidney function . Initially this is done through the administration of generous amounts of intravenous fluids , usually isotonic saline ( 0 @.@ 9 % weight per volume sodium chloride solution ) . In victims of crush syndrome , it is recommended to administer intravenous fluids even before they are extracted from collapsed structures . This will ensure sufficient circulating volume to deal with the muscle cell swelling ( which typically commences when blood supply is restored ) , and to prevent the deposition of myoglobin in the kidneys . Amounts of 6 to 12 liters over 24 hours are recommended . The rate of fluid administration may be altered to achieve a high urine output ( 200 – 300 ml / h in adults ) , unless there are other reasons why this might lead to complications , such as a history of heart failure . 
 While many sources recommend additional intravenous agents to reduce damage to the kidney , most of the evidence supporting this practice comes from animal studies , and is inconsistent and conflicting . <unk> acts by osmosis to enhance urine production and is thought to prevent myoglobin deposition in the kidney , but its efficacy has not been shown in studies and there is a risk of worsening kidney function . The addition of bicarbonate to the intravenous fluids may alleviate acidosis ( high acid level of the blood ) and make the urine more alkaline to prevent cast formation in the kidneys ; evidence suggesting that bicarbonate has benefits above saline alone is limited , and it can worsen hypocalcemia by enhancing calcium and phosphate deposition in the tissues . If urine alkalinization is used , the pH of the urine is kept at 6 @.@ 5 or above . Furosemide , a loop diuretic , is often used to ensure sufficient urine production , but evidence that this prevents kidney failure is lacking . 
 = = = Electrolytes = = = 
 In the initial stages , electrolyte levels are often abnormal and require correction . High potassium levels can be life @-@ threatening , and respond to increased urine production and renal replacement therapy ( see below ) . Temporary measures include the administration of calcium to protect against cardiac complications , insulin or salbutamol to redistribute potassium into cells , and infusions of bicarbonate solution . 
 Calcium levels initially tend to be low , but as the situation improves calcium is released from where it has precipitated with phosphate , and vitamin D production resumes , leading to hypercalcemia ( abnormally high calcium levels ) . This " overshoot " occurs in 20 – 30 % of those people who have developed kidney failure . 
 = = = Acute kidney impairment = = = 
 Kidney dysfunction typically develops 1 – 2 days after the initial muscle damage . If supportive treatment is inadequate to manage this , renal replacement therapy ( RRT ) may be required . RRT removes excess potassium , acid and phosphate that accumulate when the kidneys are unable to function normally and is required until kidney function is regained . 
 Three main modalities of RRT are available : hemodialysis , continuous hemofiltration and peritoneal dialysis . The former two require access to the bloodstream ( a dialysis catheter ) , while peritoneal dialysis is achieved by instilling fluid into the abdominal cavity and later draining it . Hemodialysis , which is normally done several times a week in chronic kidney disease , is often required on a daily basis in rhabdomyolysis . Its advantage over continuous hemofiltration is that one machine can be used multiple times a day , and that continuous administration of anticoagulant drugs is not necessary . <unk> is more effective at removing large molecules from the bloodstream , such as myoglobin , but this does not seem to confer any particular benefit . <unk> dialysis may be difficult to administer in someone with severe abdominal injury , and it may be less effective than the other modalities . 
 = = = Other complications = = = 
 Compartment syndrome is treated with surgery to relieve the pressure inside the muscle compartment and reduce the risk of compression on blood vessels and nerves in that area . <unk> is the incision of the affected compartment . Often , multiple incisions are made and left open until the swelling has reduced . At that point , the incisions are closed , often requiring debridement ( removal of non @-@ viable tissue ) and skin grafting in the process . The need for <unk> may be decreased if mannitol is used , as it can relieve muscle swelling directly . 
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation generally resolves when the underlying causes are treated , but supportive measures are often required . For instance , if the platelet count drops significantly and there is resultant bleeding , platelets may be administered . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 The prognosis depends on the underlying cause and whether any complications occur . Rhabdomyolysis complicated by acute kidney impairment in patients with traumatic injury may have a mortality rate of 20 % . Admission to the intensive care unit is associated with a mortality of 22 % in the absence of acute kidney injury , and 59 % if kidney impairment occurs . Most people who have sustained kidney impairment due to rhabdomyolysis fully recover their kidney function . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The exact incidence of rhabdomyolysis is difficult to establish , because different definitions have been used . In 1995 , hospitals in the U.S. reported 26 @,@ 000 cases of rhabdomyolysis . Up to 85 % of people with major traumatic injuries will experience some degree of rhabdomyolysis . Of those with rhabdomyolysis , 10 – 50 % develop acute kidney injury . The risk is higher in people with a history of illicit drug use , alcohol misuse or trauma when compared to muscle diseases , and it is particularly high if multiple contributing factors occur together . Rhabdomyolysis accounts for 7 – 10 % of all cases of acute kidney injury in the U.S. 
 Crush injuries are common in major disasters , but especially so in earthquakes . The aftermath of the 1988 Spitak earthquake prompted the establishment , in 1995 , of the Renal Disaster Relief Task Force , a working group of the International Society of <unk> ( a worldwide body of kidney experts ) . Its volunteer doctors and nurses assisted for the first time in the 1999 İzmit earthquake in Turkey , where 462 people received dialysis , with positive results . Treatment units are generally established outside the immediate disaster area , as aftershocks could potentially injure or kill staff and make equipment unusable . 
 = = History = = 
 The Bible may contain an early account of rhabdomyolysis . In Numbers 11 : 4 – 6 @,@ 31 – 33 , the Pentateuch says that the Jews demanded meat while traveling in the desert ; God sent quail in response to the complaints , and people ate large quantities of quail meat . A plague then broke out , killing numerous people . Rhabdomyolysis after consuming quail was described in more recent times and called <unk> ( after Coturnix , the main quail genus ) . Migrating quail consume large amounts of hemlock , a known cause of rhabdomyolysis . 
 In modern times , early reports from the 1908 Messina earthquake and World War I on kidney failure after injury were followed by studies by London physicians Eric <unk> and Desmond Beall , working at the Royal Postgraduate Medical School and the National Institute for Medical Research , on four victims of The Blitz in 1941 . Myoglobin was demonstrated in the urine of victims by spectroscopy , and it was noted that the kidneys of victims resembled those of patients who had hemoglobinuria ( hemoglobin rather than myoglobin being the cause of the kidney damage ) . In 1944 <unk> demonstrated experimentally that the kidney failure was mainly caused by myoglobin . Already during the war , teams of doctors traveled to bombed areas to provide medical support , chiefly with intravenous fluids , as dialysis was not yet available . The prognosis of acute kidney failure improved markedly when dialysis was added to supportive treatment , which first happened during the 1950 – 1953 Korean War . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 Rhabdomyolysis is recognized in horses . Horses can develop a number of muscle disorders , many of which may progress to rhabdomyolysis . Of these , some cause isolated attacks of rhabdomyolysis ( e.g. , dietary deficiency in vitamin E and selenium , poisoning associated with pasture or agricultural poisons such as organophosphates ) , while others predispose to exertional rhabdomyolysis ( e.g. , the hereditary condition equine polysaccharide storage myopathy ) . 5 – 10 % of thoroughbred horses and some <unk> horses suffer from the condition equine exertional rhabdomyolysis ; no specific cause has been identified , but an underlying muscle calcium regulation disorder is suspected . 
 Rhabdomyolysis affecting horses may also occur in outbreaks ; these have been reported in many European countries , and later in Canada , Australia , and the United States . It has been referred to as " atypical myopathy " or " myoglobinuria of unknown etiology " . No single cause has yet been found , but various mechanisms have been proposed , and a seasonal pattern has been observed . Very high creatine kinase levels are detected , and mortality from this condition is 89 % . 
 = = Etymology and pronunciation = = 
 The word rhabdomyolysis ( / <unk> / ) uses the combining forms <unk> + <unk> + <unk> , yielding " striated muscle breakdown " . 
 = William Edward Sanders = 
 William Edward Sanders VC , DSO ( 7 February 1883 – 14 August 1917 ) was a New Zealand recipient of the Victoria Cross ( VC ) , the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces . 
 Born in Auckland , Sanders took up a seafaring career in 1899 . He initially worked aboard steamships before transferring to sailing ships working around New Zealand waters to enhance his career prospects . After the outbreak of the First World War , he earned a master 's certificate in late 1914 . He then served in the Merchant Navy working aboard troopships until April 1916 , when he was commissioned in the Royal Naval Reserve . He completed his military training in the United Kingdom after which he served aboard the Helgoland , a Q @-@ ship which operated against German submarines . He performed well on his first two patrols and was given his own command , HMS Prize , in February 1917 . He was awarded the Victoria Cross for his actions while on his first patrol as captain , when the Prize engaged and saw off a German U @-@ boat that had earlier attacked and damaged his own ship . He was killed in action during the Prize 's fourth patrol when his ship was sunk by a U @-@ boat . His Victoria Cross was presented to his father and is currently held by the Auckland War Memorial Museum . Several memorials exist to Sanders ' memory , including the Sanders Cup , a sailing trophy for 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) <unk> X @-@ class yachts . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Sanders was born in the Auckland suburb of Kingsland on 7 February 1883 . His father , Edward Helman Cook Sanders , was a boot maker , who with his wife Emma Jane Sanders ( née Wilson ) , would have three more children . His maternal grandfather was a sea captain and worked for the family 's shipping company . 
 Sanders attended Nelson Street School but in 1894 , when his family moved to Takapuna , he shifted to Takapuna School . The school was close to Lake <unk> , where he learned to sail . He earned the nickname Gunner Billy for his exploits with a small cannon that a classmate brought to school . He left school at the age of 15 , and due to the influence of his parents was apprenticed to a mercer in Auckland . He was not particularly interested in the profession and , desiring a career at sea , would go down to the wharfs to inspect the berthed ships and chat with their captains and crewmen . 
 In 1899 , Sanders joined the <unk> as a cabin boy . An officer on the ship , a coastal steamer which worked the coast north of Auckland , was an acquaintance and advised Sanders of the availability of a position on board as a cabin boy , which he promptly applied for . He remained with the company that operated the <unk> for three years . In 1902 he joined the <unk> , operated by the Union Steam Ship Company , which traded between New Zealand and India . He transferred to the NZGSS Hinemoa in 1906 as an ordinary seaman . The Hinemoa was a government steamer which serviced lighthouses along the New Zealand coast and depots on offshore islands . 
 With his seafaring career to date spent working on steamships , Sanders decided to spend time under sail with the Craig Line . At the time , steam was looked down upon by seafarers with sailors being regarded as more skillful . After taking his mate 's certificates , he sailed aboard the Joseph Craig . However , the ship foundered on the <unk> bar on 7 August 1914 . 
 = = First World War = = 
 During the early part of the war , Sanders worked as second mate on the Moeraki . He also sat for his Masters certificate , passing with honours on 7 November 1914 . He was then discharged from the Moeraki in December and applied for the Royal Naval Reserve . However , he was not called up and in the interim served as a Merchant Navy officer on the troopships <unk> and Tofua . 
 After repeated pleas to authorities , Sanders traveled to London and on 19 April 1916 was finally appointed an acting sub @-@ lieutenant in the Royal Naval Reserve . After a period of time at the HMS Excellent training facility on Whale Island , he was granted a position on the Helgoland , a Q @-@ ship operating against German submarines in the Western Approaches . 
 Q @-@ ships were merchant ships crewed by Navy personnel and bearing hidden weaponry . When attacked by U @-@ boats , a portion of the ship 's crew ( referred to as a panic party ) would appear to evacuate the vessel , sometimes setting smoke fires to simulate damage . This would encourage its attacker to approach and when the U @-@ boat was close enough , the Q @-@ ship 's guns would become operational and open fire , hopefully destroying the submarine . 
 The Helgoland was a Dutch brigantine armed with 12 @-@ pounder guns and a machine gun . Sanders , second in command to fellow New Zealander Lieutenant A.D. Blair , helped oversee its conversion to a Q @-@ ship . On its first patrol in September 1916 his ship participated in two actions against U @-@ boats , and on its second the following month , it again engaged two U @-@ boats . During the first engagement , the Helgoland was becalmed , without engines and extremely vulnerable . Surrounded by three submarines and with limited manoeuvrability it was forced to reveal its identity early in the engagement . On this occasion a screen concealing one of the guns jammed ; Sanders and Blair exposed themselves to potential gun fire from the U @-@ boat being attacked in order to cut away the screen with axes and crowbars . 
 = = = HMS Prize = = = 
 His conduct on the Helgoland resulted in a promotion to lieutenant for Sanders , and he was also recommended for command of his own ship . In February 1917 , he was appointed captain of HMS Prize , a three @-@ masted topsail schooner that was sailing under the German flag when it was seized in 1914 and converted to a Q @-@ ship in early 1917 . At midnight on 30 April 1917 about 180 miles south of Ireland , in the Atlantic , the Prize was attacked by a U @-@ boat , the U @-@ 93 commanded by Edgar von Spiegel von und zu <unk> . It was genuinely badly damaged by shellfire from the U @-@ boat 's deck guns . Sanders , remaining under cover , moved about the vessel reassuring his men . 
 After the ' panic party ' had taken to the boats and the ship appeared to be sinking , the U @-@ boat approached to within 80 yards of her port quarter , whereupon Sanders ordered the White Ensign hoisted and the Prize opened fire . Within a few minutes the submarine was on fire and her bows rose in the air , whilst the Prize was further damaged . The U @-@ boat disappeared from sight , and was believed to have been sunk by the crew of the Prize and by several of the German crew ( including her captain ) who had been blown or jumped into the sea . However , neither of the crippled ships had sunk , with the Prize being towed in flames back to Kinsale . The U @-@ 93 struggled back to the Sylt nine days later . 
 Badly damaged , the Prize had to spend several weeks being repaired . During this time the First Sea Lord Admiral Sir John Jellicoe offered Sanders command of a destroyer of his choosing , which he declined . He returned to sea in May with the Prize conducting a second patrol for three weeks . Sanders was wounded slightly in an action on 12 June , in which the Prize was fired at 30 times by the U @-@ boat being attacked . His award of the Victoria Cross ( VC ) for his actions on 30 April was gazetted in June , while he was at sea on a third patrol . Because the use of Q @-@ ships such as the Prize were still secret , the published details of his award when it was gazetted simply read 
 In recognition of his conspicuous gallantry , consummate coolness , and skill in command of one of H.M. Ships in action . 
 The Prize was lost on its fourth patrol , Sanders having been promoted to lieutenant commander . On 14 August 1917 , UB @-@ 48 spotted the Prize . The Q @-@ ship was recognised by the captain of the U @-@ boat , who had been warned by the survivors of U @-@ 93 and did not approach the Prize too closely . Instead , it remained submerged and fired two torpedoes into the sailing ship , blowing her to pieces . Rescue craft were unable to find a trace of her crew when they arrived in the area , long after the U @-@ boat had escaped . 
 = = Medals and legacy = = 
 Sanders , a bachelor , died without knowledge of the award of a Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) for his actions on 12 June 1917 . The emergence of correspondence with his first Q @-@ ship commander , A.D Blair , makes it clear that he at least knew of his VC prior to his death , even if he had not received it . In June 1918 , Sanders ' father received his son 's VC and DSO from the Governor @-@ General of New Zealand . Sander 's VC , the only one awarded to a New Zealander serving in the navy , and DSO is on display at the Auckland War Memorial Museum . 
 There are many memorials to Sanders , including an exhibit of photographs and his citations at Takapuna Primary School , which he attended , a bronze tablet in the church at Milford Haven , the home port of the Prize , and The Sanders Memorial Scholarship at the University of Auckland for children of members of the Royal Navy or the Mercantile Marine . The best @-@ known memorial is the Sanders Cup for interprovincial competition between 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) <unk> X @-@ class yachts , still contested to this day . 
 = Platinum = 
 Platinum is a chemical element with symbol Pt and atomic number 78 . It is a dense , malleable , ductile , highly unreactive , precious , gray @-@ white transition metal . Its name is derived from the Spanish term platina , which is literally translated into " little silver " . 
 Platinum is a member of the platinum group of elements and group 10 of the periodic table of elements . It has six naturally occurring isotopes . It is one of the rarer elements in Earth 's crust with an average abundance of approximately 5 μg / kg . It occurs in some nickel and copper ores along with some native deposits , mostly in South Africa , which accounts for 80 % of the world production . Because of its scarcity in Earth 's crust , only a few hundred tonnes are produced annually , and given its important uses , it is highly valuable and is a major precious metal commodity . 
 Platinum is one of the least reactive metals . It has remarkable resistance to corrosion , even at high temperatures , and is therefore considered a noble metal . Consequently , platinum is often found chemically uncombined as native platinum . Because it occurs naturally in the alluvial sands of various rivers , it was first used by pre @-@ Columbian South American natives to produce artifacts . It was referenced in European writings as early as 16th century , but it was not until Antonio de Ulloa published a report on a new metal of Colombian origin in 1748 that it began to be investigated by scientists . 
 Platinum is used in catalytic converters , laboratory equipment , electrical contacts and electrodes , platinum resistance thermometers , dentistry equipment , and jewelry . Being a heavy metal , it leads to health issues upon exposure to its salts ; but due to its corrosion resistance , metallic platinum has not been linked to adverse health effects . Compounds containing platinum , such as cisplatin , oxaliplatin and carboplatin , are applied in chemotherapy against certain types of cancer . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 Pure platinum is a lustrous , ductile , and malleable , silver @-@ white metal . Platinum is more ductile than gold , silver or copper , thus being the most ductile of pure metals , but it is less malleable than gold . The metal has excellent resistance to corrosion , is stable at high temperatures and has stable electrical properties . Platinum reacts with oxygen slowly at very high temperatures . It reacts vigorously with fluorine at 500 ° C ( 932 ° F ) to form tetrafluoride . It is also attacked by chlorine , bromine , iodine , and sulfur . Platinum is insoluble in hydrochloric and nitric acid , but dissolves in hot aqua regia to form chloroplatinic acid , H2PtCl6 . 
 Its physical characteristics and chemical stability make it useful for industrial applications . Its resistance to wear and tarnish is well suited to use in fine jewelry . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 The most common oxidation states of platinum are + 2 and + 4 . The + 1 and + 3 oxidation states are less common , and are often stabilized by metal bonding in bimetallic ( or polymetallic ) species . As is expected , tetracoordinate platinum ( II ) compounds tend to adopt 16 @-@ electron square planar geometries . Although elemental platinum is generally unreactive , it dissolves in hot aqua regia to give aqueous chloroplatinic acid ( H2PtCl6 ) : 
 Pt + 4 HNO3 + 6 HCl → H2PtCl6 + 4 NO2 + 4 H2O 
 As a soft acid , platinum has a great affinity for sulfur , such as on dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) ; numerous DMSO complexes have been reported and care should be taken in the choice of reaction solvent . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Platinum has six naturally occurring isotopes : 190Pt , <unk> , <unk> , 195Pt , <unk> , and 198Pt . The most abundant of these is 195Pt , comprising 33 @.@ 83 % of all platinum . It is the only stable isotope with a non @-@ zero spin ; with a spin of 1 / 2 , 195Pt satellite peaks are often observed in 1H and 31P NMR spectroscopy ( i.e. , Pt @-@ phosphine and Pt @-@ alkyl complexes ) . 190Pt is the least abundant at only 0 @.@ 01 % . Of the naturally occurring isotopes , only 190Pt is unstable , though it decays with a half @-@ life of 6 @.@ 5 × 1011 years , causing an activity of 15 Bq / kg of natural platinum . 198Pt can undergo alpha decay , but its decay has never been observed ( the half @-@ life is known to be longer than 3 @.@ 2 × 1014 years ) ; therefore , it is considered stable . Platinum also has 31 synthetic isotopes ranging in atomic mass from 166 to 202 , making the total number of known isotopes 37 . The least stable of these is <unk> , with a half @-@ life of 300 µs , whereas the most stable is <unk> with a half @-@ life of 50 years . Most platinum isotopes decay by some combination of beta decay and alpha decay . <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> decay primarily by electron capture . 190Pt and 198Pt have double beta decay paths . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 Platinum is an extremely rare metal , occurring at a concentration of only 0 @.@ 005 ppm in Earth 's crust . It is sometimes mistaken for silver ( Ag ) . Platinum is often found chemically uncombined as native platinum and as alloy with the other platinum @-@ group metals and iron mostly . Most often the native platinum is found in secondary deposits in alluvial deposits . The alluvial deposits used by pre @-@ Columbian people in the Chocó Department , Colombia are still a source for platinum @-@ group metals . Another large alluvial deposit is in the Ural Mountains , Russia , and it is still mined . 
 In nickel and copper deposits , platinum @-@ group metals occur as sulfides ( e.g. ( Pt , Pd ) S ) , tellurides ( e.g. PtBiTe ) , antimonides ( PdSb ) , and arsenides ( e.g. PtAs2 ) , and as end alloys with nickel or copper . Platinum arsenide , <unk> ( PtAs2 ) , is a major source of platinum associated with nickel ores in the Sudbury Basin deposit in Ontario , Canada . At Platinum , Alaska , about 17 @,@ 000 kg ( 550 @,@ 000 ozt ) had been mined between 1927 and 1975 . The mine ceased operations in 1990 . The rare sulfide mineral <unk> , ( Pt , Pd , Ni ) S , contains platinum along with palladium and nickel . <unk> occurs in the Merensky Reef within the Bushveld complex , Gauteng , South Africa . 
 In 1865 , <unk> were identified in the Bushveld region of South Africa , followed by the discovery of platinum in 1906 . The largest known primary reserves are in the Bushveld complex in South Africa . The large copper – nickel deposits near Norilsk in Russia , and the Sudbury Basin , Canada , are the two other large deposits . In the Sudbury Basin , the huge quantities of nickel ore processed make up for the fact platinum is present as only 0 @.@ 5 ppm in the ore . Smaller reserves can be found in the United States , for example in the Absaroka Range in Montana . In 2010 , South Africa was the top producer of platinum , with an almost 77 % share , followed by Russia at 13 % ; world production in 2010 was 192 @,@ 000 kg ( 423 @,@ 000 lb ) . 
 Platinum deposits are present in the state of Tamil Nadu , India. and a MOU has been signed between Geological Survey of India with <unk> – Tamil Nadu Minerals Ltd . 
 Platinum exists in higher abundances on the Moon and in meteorites . Correspondingly , platinum is found in slightly higher abundances at sites of bolide impact on Earth that are associated with resulting post @-@ impact volcanism , and can be mined economically ; the Sudbury Basin is one such example . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 = = = Halides = = = 
 <unk> acid mentioned above is probably the most important platinum compound , as it serves as the precursor for many other platinum compounds . By itself , it has various applications in photography , zinc etchings , indelible ink , plating , mirrors , porcelain coloring , and as a catalyst . 
 Treatment of hexachloroplatinic acid with an ammonium salt , such as ammonium chloride , gives ammonium hexachloroplatinate , which is relatively insoluble in ammonium solutions . Heating this ammonium salt in the presence of hydrogen reduces it to elemental platinum . Potassium hexachloroplatinate is similarly insoluble , and hexachloroplatinic acid has been used in the determination of potassium ions by <unk> . 
 When hexachloroplatinic acid is heated , it decomposes through platinum ( IV ) chloride and platinum ( II ) chloride to elemental platinum , although the reactions do not occur stepwise : 
 ( H3O ) <unk> · nH2O ⇌ <unk> + 2 HCl + ( n + 2 ) H2O 
 <unk> ⇌ <unk> + Cl2 
 <unk> ⇌ Pt + Cl2 
 All three reactions are reversible . Platinum ( II ) and platinum ( IV ) bromides are known as well . Platinum hexafluoride is a strong oxidizer capable of oxidizing oxygen . 
 = = = Oxides = = = 
 Platinum ( IV ) oxide , PtO2 , also known as Adams ' catalyst , is a black powder that is soluble in KOH solutions and concentrated acids . PtO2 and the less common <unk> both decompose upon heating . Platinum ( II , IV ) oxide , <unk> , is formed in the following reaction : 
 2 <unk> + + <unk> + + 4 O2 − → <unk> 
 = = = Other compounds = = = 
 Unlike palladium acetate , platinum ( II ) acetate is not commercially available . Where a base is desired , the halides have been used in conjunction with sodium acetate . The use of platinum ( II ) acetylacetonate has also been reported . 
 Several barium <unk> have been synthesized in which platinum exhibits negative oxidation states ranging from − 1 to − 2 . These include <unk> , Ba 
 <unk> 
 2 , and Ba 
 <unk> . Caesium platinide , Cs 
 <unk> , a dark @-@ red transparent crystalline compound has been shown to contain <unk> − anions . Platinum also exhibits negative oxidation states at surfaces reduced <unk> . The negative oxidation states exhibited by platinum are unusual for metallic elements , and they are attributed to the relativistic stabilization of the 6s orbitals . 
 Zeise 's salt , containing an ethylene ligand , was one of the first organometallic compounds discovered . <unk> ( <unk> @-@ 1 @,@ 5 @-@ diene ) platinum ( II ) is a commercially available olefin complex , which contains easily <unk> cod ligands ( " cod " being an abbreviation of 1 @,@ 5 @-@ cyclooctadiene ) . The cod complex and the halides are convenient starting points to platinum chemistry . 
 <unk> , or cis @-@ <unk> ( II ) is the first of a series of square planar platinum ( II ) <unk> chemotherapy drugs , including carboplatin and oxaliplatin . These compounds are capable of crosslinking DNA , and kill cells by similar pathways to alkylating chemotherapeutic agents . ( Side effects of cisplatin include nausea and vomiting , hair loss , tinnitus , hearing loss , and nephrotoxicity . ) 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early uses = = = 
 Archaeologists have discovered traces of platinum in the gold used in ancient Egyptian tombs and hieroglyphics as early as 1200 BC . However , the extent of early Egyptians ' knowledge of the metal is unclear . It is quite possible they did not recognize there was platinum in their gold . 
 The metal was used by pre @-@ Columbian Americans near modern @-@ day <unk> , Ecuador to produce artifacts of a white gold @-@ platinum alloy . They employed a relatively sophisticated system of powder metallurgy . The platinum used in such objects was not the pure element , but rather a naturally occurring mixture of the platinum group metals , with small amounts of palladium , rhodium , and iridium . 
 = = = European discovery = = = 
 The first European reference to platinum appears in 1557 in the writings of the Italian humanist Julius Caesar Scaliger as a description of an unknown noble metal found between Darién and Mexico , " which no fire nor any Spanish artifice has yet been able to liquefy " . From their first encounters with platinum , the Spanish generally saw the metal as a kind of impurity in gold , and it was treated as such . It was often simply thrown away , and there was an official decree forbidding the adulteration of gold with platinum impurities . 
 In 1741 , Charles Wood , a British metallurgist , found various samples of Colombian platinum in Jamaica , which he sent to William Brownrigg for further investigation . Antonio de Ulloa , also credited with the discovery of platinum , returned to Spain from the French <unk> Mission in 1746 after having been there for eight years . His historical account of the expedition included a description of platinum as being neither separable nor <unk> . Ulloa also anticipated the discovery of platinum mines . After publishing the report in 1748 , Ulloa did not continue to investigate the new metal . In 1758 , he was sent to superintend mercury mining operations in <unk> . 
 In 1750 , after studying the platinum sent to him by Wood , Brownrigg presented a detailed account of the metal to the Royal Society , stating that he had seen no mention of it in any previous accounts of known minerals . Brownrigg also made note of platinum 's extremely high melting point and <unk> toward borax . Other chemists across Europe soon began studying platinum , including Andreas Sigismund Marggraf , Torbern Bergman , Jöns Jakob Berzelius , William Lewis , and Pierre <unk> . In 1752 , Henrik Scheffer published a detailed scientific description of the metal , which he referred to as " white gold " , including an account of how he succeeded in fusing platinum ore with the aid of arsenic . Scheffer described platinum as being less pliable than gold , but with similar resistance to corrosion . 
 = = = Means of malleability = = = 
 Carl von Sickingen researched platinum extensively in 1772 . He succeeded in making malleable platinum by alloying it with gold , dissolving the alloy in hot aqua regia , precipitating the platinum with ammonium chloride , igniting the ammonium chloroplatinate , and hammering the resulting finely divided platinum to make it cohere . Franz Karl Achard made the first platinum crucible in 1784 . He worked with the platinum by fusing it with arsenic , then later <unk> the arsenic . 
 Because the other platinum @-@ family members were not discovered yet ( platinum was the first in the list ) , Scheffer and Sickingen made the false assumption that due to its hardness — which is slightly more than for pure iron — platinum would be a relatively non @-@ pliable material , even brittle at times , when in fact its ductility and malleability are close to that of gold . Their assumptions could not be avoided because the platinum they experimented with was highly contaminated with minute amounts of platinum @-@ family elements such as osmium and iridium , amongst others , which <unk> the platinum alloy . Alloying this impure platinum residue called " <unk> " with gold was the only solution at the time to obtain a pliable compound , but nowadays , very pure platinum is available and extremely long wires can be drawn from pure platinum , very easily , due to its crystalline structure , which is similar to that of many soft metals . 
 In 1786 , Charles III of Spain provided a library and laboratory to Pierre @-@ François Chabaneau to aid in his research of platinum . Chabaneau succeeded in removing various impurities from the ore , including gold , mercury , lead , copper , and iron . This led him to believe he was working with a single metal , but in truth the ore still contained the yet @-@ undiscovered platinum @-@ group metals . This led to inconsistent results in his experiments . At times , the platinum seemed malleable , but when it was alloyed with iridium , it would be much more brittle . Sometimes the metal was entirely incombustible , but when alloyed with osmium , it would <unk> . After several months , Chabaneau succeeded in producing 23 kilograms of pure , malleable platinum by hammering and compressing the sponge form while white @-@ hot . <unk> realized the <unk> of platinum would lend value to objects made of it , and so started a business with Joaquín Cabezas producing platinum ingots and utensils . This started what is known as the " platinum age " in Spain . 
 In 2007 , Gerhard Ertl won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for determining the detailed molecular mechanisms of the catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide over platinum ( catalytic converter ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 Platinum , along with the rest of the platinum @-@ group metals , is obtained commercially as a by @-@ product from nickel and copper mining and processing . During electrorefining of copper , noble metals such as silver , gold and the platinum @-@ group metals as well as selenium and tellurium settle to the bottom of the cell as " anode mud " , which forms the starting point for the extraction of the platinum @-@ group metals . 
 If pure platinum is found in placer deposits or other ores , it is isolated from them by various methods of subtracting impurities . Because platinum is significantly denser than many of its impurities , the lighter impurities can be removed by simply floating them away in a liquid . Platinum is paramagnetic , whereas nickel and iron are both ferromagnetic . These two impurities are thus removed by running an electromagnet over the mixture . Because platinum has a higher melting point than most other substances , many impurities can be burned or melted away without melting the platinum . Finally , platinum is resistant to hydrochloric and sulfuric acids , whereas other substances are readily attacked by them . Metal impurities can be removed by stirring the mixture in either of the two acids and recovering the remaining platinum . 
 One suitable method for purification for the raw platinum , which contains platinum , gold , and the other platinum @-@ group metals , is to process it with aqua regia , in which palladium , gold and platinum are dissolved , whereas osmium , iridium , ruthenium and rhodium stay unreacted . The gold is precipitated by the addition of iron ( II ) chloride and after filtering off the gold , the platinum is precipitated as ammonium chloroplatinate by the addition of ammonium chloride . Ammonium chloroplatinate can be converted to platinum by heating . <unk> hexachloroplatinate ( IV ) may be reduced with elemental zinc , and a similar method is suitable for small scale recovery of platinum from laboratory residues . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Of the 218 tonnes of platinum sold in 2014 , 98 tonnes were used for vehicle emissions control devices ( 45 % ) , 74 @.@ 7 tonnes for jewelry ( 34 % ) , 20 @.@ 0 tonnes for chemical production and petroleum refining ( 9 @.@ 2 % ) , and 5 @.@ 85 tonnes for electrical applications such as hard disk drives ( 2 @.@ 7 % ) . The remaining 28 @.@ 9 tonnes went to various other minor applications , such as medicine and biomedicine , glassmaking equipment , investment , electrodes , anticancer drugs , oxygen sensors , spark plugs and turbine engines . 
 = = = Catalyst = = = 
 The most common use of platinum is as a catalyst in chemical reactions , often as platinum black . It has been employed as a catalyst since the early 19th century , when platinum powder was used to catalyze the ignition of hydrogen . Its most important application is in automobiles as a catalytic converter , which allows the complete combustion of low concentrations of unburned hydrocarbons from the exhaust into carbon dioxide and water vapor . Platinum is also used in the petroleum industry as a catalyst in a number of separate processes , but especially in catalytic reforming of straight @-@ run <unk> into higher @-@ octane gasoline that becomes rich in aromatic compounds . PtO2 , also known as Adams ' catalyst , is used as a hydrogenation catalyst , specifically for vegetable oils . Platinum also strongly catalyzes the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen and it is used in fuel cells as a catalyst for the reduction of oxygen . 
 = = = Standard = = = 
 From 1889 to 1960 , the meter was defined as the length of a platinum @-@ iridium ( 90 : 10 ) alloy bar , known as the International Prototype Meter bar . The previous bar was made of platinum in 1799 . The International Prototype Kilogram remains defined by a cylinder of the same platinum @-@ iridium alloy made in 1879 . 
 The standard hydrogen electrode also uses a <unk> platinum electrode due to its corrosion resistance , and other attributes . 
 = = = As an investment = = = 
 Platinum is a precious metal commodity ; its bullion has the ISO currency code of <unk> . Coins , bars , and ingots are traded or collected . Platinum finds use in jewellery , usually as a 90 – 95 % alloy , due to its inertness . It is used for this purpose for its prestige and inherent bullion value . Jewellery trade publications advise jewellers to present minute surface scratches ( which they term patina ) as a desirable feature in attempt to enhance value of platinum products . 
 In watchmaking , Vacheron Constantin , Patek Philippe , Rolex , Breitling , and other companies use platinum for producing their limited edition watch series . <unk> appreciate the unique properties of platinum , as it neither tarnishes nor wears out ( the latter quality relative to gold ) . 
 The price of platinum , like other industrial commodities , is more volatile than that of gold . In 2008 , the price of platinum dropped from $ 2 @,@ 252 to $ 774 per oz , a loss of nearly 2 / 3 of its value . By contrast , the price of gold dropped from ~ $ 1 @,@ 000 to ~ $ 700 / oz during the same time frame , a loss of only 1 / 3 of its value . 
 During periods of sustained economic stability and growth , the price of platinum tends to be as much as twice the price of gold , whereas during periods of economic uncertainty , the price of platinum tends to decrease due to reduced industrial demand , falling below the price of gold . Gold prices are more stable in slow economic times , as gold is considered a safe haven . Although gold is used in industrial applications , its demand is not so driven by industrial uses . In the 18th century , platinum 's rarity made King Louis XV of France declare it the only metal fit for a king . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 In the laboratory , platinum wire is used for electrodes ; platinum pans and supports are used in <unk> analysis because of the stringent requirements of chemical inertness upon heating to high temperatures ( ~ 1000 ° C ) . Platinum is used as an alloying agent for various metal products , including fine wires , <unk> laboratory containers , medical instruments , dental prostheses , electrical contacts , and thermocouples . Platinum @-@ cobalt , an alloy of roughly three parts platinum and one part cobalt , is used to make relatively strong permanent magnets . Platinum @-@ based anodes are used in ships , pipelines , and steel piers . 
 = = = Symbol of prestige = = = 
 Platinum 's rarity as a metal has caused advertisers to associate it with exclusivity and wealth . " Platinum " debit and credit cards have greater privileges than " gold " cards . " Platinum awards " are the second highest possible , ranking above " gold " , " silver " and " bronze " , but below diamond . For example , in the United States , a musical album that has sold more than 1 million copies , will be credited as " platinum " , whereas an album that sold more than 10 million copies will be certified as " diamond " . Some products , such as blenders and vehicles , with a silvery @-@ white color are identified as " platinum " . Platinum is considered a precious metal , although its use is not as common as the use of gold or silver . The frame of the Crown of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother , manufactured for her coronation as Consort of King George VI , is made of platinum . It was the first British crown to be made of this particular metal . 
 = = Health issues = = 
 According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , short @-@ term exposure to platinum salts may cause irritation of the eyes , nose , and throat , and long @-@ term exposure may cause both respiratory and skin allergies . The current OSHA standard is 2 micrograms per cubic meter of air averaged over an 8 @-@ hour work shift . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health has set a recommended exposure limit ( REL ) for platinum as 1 mg / m3 over an 8 @-@ hour workday . 
 Platinum @-@ based antineoplastic agents are used in chemotherapy , and show good activity against some tumors . 
 As platinum is a catalyst in the manufacture of the silicone rubber and gel components of several types of medical implants ( breast implants , joint replacement prosthetics , artificial lumbar discs , vascular access ports , etc . ) , the possibility that platinum could enter the body and cause adverse effects has merited study . The Food and Drug Administration and other institutions have reviewed the issue and found no evidence to suggest toxicity in vivo . 
 = Maximilian von Spee = 
 Maximilian Reichsgraf von Spee ( 22 June 1861 – 8 December 1914 ) was a naval officer of the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) , who famously commanded the German East Asia Squadron during World War I. Spee entered the navy in 1878 and served in a variety of roles and locations , including on a colonial gunboat in German West Africa in the 1880s , the East Africa Squadron in the late 1890s , and as commander of several warships in the main German fleet in the early 1900s . During his time in Germany in the late 1880s and early 1890s , he married his wife , Margareta , and had three children , his sons Heinrich and Otto and his daughter Huberta . By 1912 , he had returned to the East Asia Squadron as its commander , and was promoted to the rank of Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) the following year . 
 After the outbreak of World War I in July 1914 , Spee led his squadron across the Pacific to the coast of South America . Here on 1 November , he defeated the British 4th Cruiser Squadron under Rear Admiral Christopher Cradock in the Battle of Coronel , sinking two of Cradock 's cruisers and forcing his other two ships to retreat . A month later , Spee decided to attack the British naval base in the Falkland Islands , though a superior British force surprised him . In the ensuing Battle of the Falkland Islands , Vice Admiral Doveton Sturdee 's squadron , which included two powerful battlecruisers , destroyed the East Asia Squadron . Spee and his two sons , who happened to be serving on two of his ships , were all killed , along with about 2 @,@ 200 other men . Spee was hailed as a hero in Germany , and several ships were named in his honor , including the heavy cruiser Admiral Graf Spee , which was built in the 1930s and was defeated in the Battle of the River Plate during World War II . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Maximilian Johannes Maria Hubert von Spee was born in Copenhagen , Denmark , on 22 June 1861 , though he was raised in the Rhineland in Germany , where his family had an estate . He joined the Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) in 1878 and initially served in the main German naval base at Kiel . He was commissioned an officer at the rank of Leutnant zur See ( Lieutenant at Sea ) , and was assigned to the gunboat SMS Möwe , which was sent to western Africa . During this voyage , the Germans signed treaties with local rulers in Togo and Cameroon , creating the colonies of Togoland and Kamerun , respectively . In 1887 , Spee was transferred to Kamerun where he commanded the port at Duala . He contracted rheumatic fever while there , and had to be sent back to Germany to recover , though he occasionally suffered from rheumatism for the rest of his life . After returning to Germany in 1889 , he married his wife , Margareta Baroness von der Osten @-@ Sacken . With her he had two sons – Otto , born on 10 July 1890 , Heinrich , born on 24 April 1893 – and one daughter , Huberta , born on 11 July 1894 . 
 In December 1897 , Spee was stationed in Germany 's East Asia Squadron after it seized the concession at Kiautschou Bay , with its port at Tsingtao . Here , he served on the staff of Vizeadmiral Otto von Diederichs . During the Boxer Rebellion in China in 1900 , Spee saw action at Tsingtao and on the Yangtze . After arriving back in Germany , he was promoted to the rank of Korvettenkapitän ( Corvette Captain ) and assigned as the first officer aboard the pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Brandenburg . Between 1900 and 1908 , Spee held command of several ships , including the aviso Hela , the minelayer Pelikan , and finally the pre @-@ dreadnought Wittelsbach . During this period , he was promoted to Fregattenkapitän ( Frigate Captain ) on 27 January 1904 and to Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) exactly a year later ; his command of Wittelsbach followed the latter promotion . In 1908 , he was assigned as the chief of staff to the commander of the North Sea Station , and in 1910 he was promoted to the rank of Konteradmiral ( <unk> – Counter Admiral ) . Spee was then assigned as the deputy commander for the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . 
 = = East Asia Squadron = = 
 In late 1912 , Spee was given command of the East Asia Squadron , replacing <unk> Günther von Krosigk on 4 December . Spee raised his flag on the armored cruiser Scharnhorst , and departed on a tour of the southwest Pacific along with Scharnhorst 's sister ship Gneisenau , during which Spee made visits to several ports , including Singapore and Batavia . Spee was promoted to Vizeadmiral the following year . Over the following year and a half , Spee met with the leaders of several East Asian countries . From 1 April to 7 May 1913 , Scharnhorst took Spee to Japan to meet the Taishō Emperor . Later in the year , Spee met with Chulalongkorn , the King of Siam . In May 1914 , Spee took Scharnhorst and the torpedo boat <unk> on a visit to Port Arthur and then to Tianjin ; Spee continued on to Beijing , where he met with Yuan Shikai , the first President of the Republic of China . He came back aboard Scharnhorst on 11 May and the ship returned to Tsingtao . 
 Spee thereafter began preparations for a cruise to German New Guinea ; Scharnhorst departed on 20 June . The two armored cruisers proceeded to Nagasaki , Japan , where they coaled in preparation for their tour . While en route to Truk in the Caroline Islands , they received news of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand , heir to the throne of Austria @-@ Hungary . On 17 July , the East Asia Squadron arrived in Ponape in the Carolines , where the ships remained while tensions steadily rose in Europe . In Ponape , Spee had access to the German radio network , and he learned of the Austro @-@ Hungarian declaration of war on Serbia on 28 July , followed shortly thereafter by the Russian mobilization — tantamount to a declaration of war — against Austria @-@ Hungary and possibly Germany . On 31 July , word came that the German ultimatum that Russia demobilize its armies was set to expire ; Spee ordered his ships ' crews to prepare for war . On 2 August , Wilhelm II ordered German mobilization against Russia and its ally , France . Following Germany 's violation of neutral Belgium during its invasion of France , Britain declared war on Germany . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The East Asia Squadron consisted of Scharnhorst and Gneisenau and the light cruisers Emden , Nürnberg , and Leipzig . At the time , Nürnberg was returning from the west coast of the United States , where Leipzig had just replaced her , and Emden was still in Tsingtao . Spee recalled his ships to consolidate his forces ; Nürnberg arrived on 6 August and the three cruisers plus their colliers moved to Pagan Island in the Marianas , at that time a German colony . Emden and the liner Prinz Eitel Friedrich , which had been converted into an auxiliary cruiser , joined the squadron there on 12 August . The four cruisers , accompanied by Prinz Eitel Friedrich and several colliers , then departed the central Pacific , bound for Chile . On 13 August , Commodore Karl von Müller , captain of the Emden , persuaded Spee to detach his ship as a commerce raider . On 14 August , the East Asia Squadron departed Pagan for Enewetak Atoll in the Marshall Islands . While en route across the Pacific , Spee relaxed formalities aboard his ships , integrating the messes for officers and non @-@ commissioned and engineering officers . 
 To keep the German high command informed , on 8 September Spee detached Nürnberg to Honolulu to send word through neutral countries . Nürnberg returned with news of the Allied capture of German Samoa , which had taken place on 29 August . Scharnhorst and Gneisenau sailed to Apia to investigate the situation . Spee had hoped to catch a British or Australian warship by surprise , but upon his arrival on 14 September , he found no warships in the harbor . Spee decided against attacking the Allied troops ashore , since doing so would risk killing Samoans and damaging German property . On 22 September , Scharnhorst and the rest of the East Asia Squadron arrived at the French colony of Papeete . The Germans attacked the colony , and in the ensuing Battle of Papeete , they sank the French gunboat Zélée . The ships came under fire from French shore batteries but were undamaged . Fear of mines in the harbor prevented Spee from seizing the coal in the harbor . Spee then continued across the Pacific , passing through the Marquesas Islands , where his ships acquired supplies including fresh meat by barter , purchase , or confiscation . On 12 October , the squadron reached Easter Island , where it was reinforced by Leipzig , Dresden , and four more colliers . Spee 's ships were off the coast of Chile by 1 November , when he learned that the British cruiser Glasgow was moored in Coronel , ostensibly alone ; he decided to try to sink the ship . 
 = = = = Battle of Coronel = = = = 
 Glasgow was assigned to the 4th Cruiser Squadron , under Rear Admiral Christopher Cradock ; as it turned out , Glasgow was joined by the armored cruisers Good Hope and Monmouth and the auxiliary cruiser Otranto . After discovering the entire squadron off Coronel , Spee decided to engage the British ships , but he delayed the action using his ships ' superior speed until later in the day , when the setting sun would silhouette Cradock 's ships . The German ships would meanwhile be obscured against the Chilean coast , making the task of the British gunners more difficult . At 18 : 07 , Spee issued the order to open fire , with his two armored cruisers battling Cradock 's armored cruisers and his light cruisers engaging Glasgow and Otranto . Cradock quickly detached Otranto , as she had no place in the line of battle . By 18 : 50 , Gneisenau had disabled Monmouth and so shifted fire to Good Hope ; the combined firepower of Scharnhorst and Gneisenau neutralized Good Hope by 19 : 23 . Spee then withdrew his two armored cruisers and sent in his light cruisers to finish off Monmouth and Good Hope . The British had lost both ships and suffered more than 1 @,@ 600 dead , including Cradock , though the German ships had expended around 40 percent of their ammunition supply . Spee had inflicted the first defeat on a Royal Navy squadron since the Napoleonic Wars a century earlier . 
 After the battle , Spee took his ships north to Valparaiso . Since Chile was neutral , only three ships could enter the port at a time ; Spee took Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , and Nürnberg in first on the morning of 3 November , leaving Dresden and Leipzig with the colliers at Mas a Fuera . There , Spee 's ships could take on coal while he conferred with the Admiralty Staff in Germany to determine the strength of remaining British forces in the region . In addition , Spee sought to counter British press reports that attempted to minimize their losses and exaggerate German casualties . A reception followed at the German Club of Valparaiso , though Spee insisted that the event be restrained in tone . He received a bouquet of flowers to celebrate the victory at Coronel ; Spee replied that they would do nicely for his grave . He stated that , 
 You must not forget that I am quite homeless . I cannot reach Germany . We possess no other secure harbor . I must fight my way through the seas of the world doing as much mischief as can , until my ammunition is exhausted , or a foe far superior in power succeeds in catching me . But it will cost the wretches dearly before they take me down . 
 While in port , Spee received the order from the Admiralty Staff to attempt to break through to Germany . The ships remained in the port for only 24 hours , in accordance with the neutrality restrictions , and arrived at Mas a Fuera on 6 November , where they took on more coal from captured British and French steamers . Dresden and Leipzig took their turn in Valparaiso , after which the re @-@ formed squadron continued south and rounded Cape Horn into the South Atlantic . In the meantime , the Royal Navy sent a pair of battlecruisers — Invincible and Inflexible — commanded by Vice Admiral Doveton Sturdee to hunt down Spee 's squadron and avenge Cradock 's defeat . 
 = = = = Battle of the Falkland Islands = = = = 
 On the morning of 6 December , Spee held a conference with the ship commanders aboard Scharnhorst to determine their next course of action . The Germans had received numerous fragmentary and contradictory reports of British reinforcements in the region ; Spee and two other captains favored an attack on the Falkland Islands to destroy the British wireless station there , while three other commanders argued that it would be better to bypass the islands and attack British shipping off Argentina . Spee 's opinion carried the day and the squadron departed for the Falkland Islands at 12 : 00 on 6 December . The ships arrived off the Falkland Islands two days later ; Gneisenau and Nürnberg were delegated for the attack . As they approached , observers aboard Gneisenau spotted smoke rising from Port Stanley , but assumed it was the British burning their coal stocks to prevent the Germans from seizing them . As they closed on the harbor , 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) shells from the elderly battleship Canopus , which had been beached as a guard ship , began to fall around the German ships , which prompted Spee to break off the attack . As Spee withdrew , Sturdee quickly got steam up in his ships and sortied to chase the Germans . 
 By 13 : 20 , the battlecruisers had caught up with Spee , who realized his armored cruisers could not escape the much faster battlecruisers . He ordered the three light cruisers to attempt to break away while he tried to hold off the British squadron with Scharnhorst and Gneisenau . Sturdee instead ordered his cruisers to chase down the fleeing German light cruisers while Invincible and Inflexible dealt with Scharnhorst and Gneisenau . Spee deftly maneuvered his ships , taking the leeward position ; the wind kept his ships swept of smoke , which improved visibility for his gunners . This forced Sturdee into the windward position and its corresponding worse visibility . Scharnhorst straddled Invincible with her third salvo and quickly scored two hits on the British battlecruiser . The German flagship was herself not hit during this phase of the battle . Sturdee attempted to widen the distance by turning two points to the north to prevent Spee from closing to within the range of his numerous secondary guns . Spee counteracted this maneuver by turning rapidly to the south , which forced Sturdee to turn south as well to keep within range . This allowed Scharnhorst and Gneisenau to turn back north and get close enough to engage with their secondary 15 cm guns . Their shooting was so accurate that it forced the British to haul away a second time . 
 The British gunfire became increasingly accurate , and by 16 : 00 , Scharnhorst had begun to list badly , while fires raged aboard the ship . Spee ordered Gneisenau to try to disengage while he turned Scharnhorst toward his attackers in an attempt to launch torpedoes at them . At 16 : 17 , Scharnhorst capsized and sank , taking her entire crew with her , including Spee . The British , still focused on Gneisenau , made no effort to rescue survivors . Gneisenau , Leipzig , and Nürnberg were also sunk . Only Dresden managed to escape , but she was eventually tracked to the Juan Fernández Islands and sunk . The complete destruction of the squadron killed about 2 @,@ 200 German sailors and officers , including both of Spee 's sons ; Heinrich died aboard Gneisenau , and Otto was killed aboard Nürnberg . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In September 1917 , the second Mackensen @-@ class battlecruiser was named Graf Spee , and was christened by Spee 's widow Margarete . Construction of the ship had not been completed by the time of the Armistice of 11 November 1918 , and she was broken up for scrap by 1921 . In 1934 Germany named the new heavy cruiser Admiral Graf Spee after him ; as with the earlier vessel , a member of Spee 's family christened the ship , this time his daughter . In December 1939 , Admiral Graf Spee was scuttled by her crew after the Battle of the River Plate off the coast of Uruguay . Between 1959 and 1964 the Federal German Bundesmarine operated the training frigate Graf Spee . 
 = Southern Cross ( wordless novel ) = 
 Southern Cross is the sole wordless novel by Canadian artist Laurence Hyde ( 1914 – 1987 ) . Its 118 wood @-@ engraved images narrate the impact of atomic testing on Polynesian islanders . Hyde made the book to express his anger at the US military 's nuclear tests in the Bikini Atoll . 
 The wordless novel genre had flourished primarily during the 1920s and 1930s , but by the 1940s even the most prolific practitioners had abandoned it . Hyde was familiar with some such works by Lynd Ward , Otto Nückel , and the form 's pioneer Frans Masereel . The high @-@ contrast artwork of Southern Cross features dynamic curving lines uncommon in wood engraving and combines abstract imagery with realistic detail . It has gained appreciation in comics circles as a precursor to the Canadian graphic novel , though it had no direct influence . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The story tells of the American military evacuating villagers from a Polynesian island before testing nuclear weapons . A drunken soldier attempts to rape a fisherman 's wife during the evacuation , and the fisherman kills him . To avoid capture , the couple run to the forests with their child and hide . The child witnesses the death of its parents and destruction of its environment resulting from the ensuing atomic tests . 
 = = Background = = 
 Born in Kingston upon Thames in England in 1914 , Laurence Hyde moved with his family to Canada in 1926 . They settled in Toronto in 1928 , where Hyde studied art at Central Technical School . His strongest artistic influences included the painter Paul Nash and the printmakers Eric Gill , Rockwell Kent , and Lynd Ward ; he corresponded with Kent and Ward . 
 From the 1930s Hyde did commercial pen @-@ and @-@ ink and scratchboard illustrations , ran a business providing advertising illustrations , and made wood engravings and linocuts for books . He attempted but gave up on two series of prints , titled Discovery and Macbeth . Hyde worked in Ottawa for the National Film Board of Canada from 1942 until his 1972 retirement . 
 The wordless novel had enjoyed popularity in the 1920s and 1930s , but had become rare by the 1940s . Such books tended to be melodramatic works about social injustice . Hyde was familiar with some of Ward 's books and the German Otto Nückel 's Destiny ( 1926 ) . The only work he knew of the Flemish artist Frans Masereel , the form 's first and most prolific practitioner , was Passionate Journey ( 1919 ) , which he had read in a 1949 American edition . Like his forebears in the genre , Hyde had a left @-@ wing agenda that he expressed in his art . When Southern Cross appeared , the genre had been out of the public eye for so long that Hyde included a historical essay with the book to orient the reader . Hyde had asked Ward to proofread this history , but the book was published without Ward 's corrections — errors remained , such as Masereel 's forename given as " Hans " , and a listing of only four of Ward 's six wordless novels . 
 = = Creation and publication = = 
 " Words are capable of expressing very complicated and very subtle notions ... But for directness and universal interpretation , pictures , under certain conditions , are unrivalled . It really depends on what you want to say . " 
 Hyde made Southern Cross to express his anger at American nuclear tests in the Bikini Atoll in 1946 following the atomic bombings in Japan . He worked on it from 1948 to 1951 . Each image is 4 by 3 inches ( 10 @.@ 2 cm × 7 @.@ 6 cm ) , centred at the top third of the page and with broad margins . The one exception is of the bomb detonating , a 7 in × 6 in ( 18 cm × 15 cm ) full @-@ page image that bleeds off the page . Hyde carved dynamic curving lines uncommon in wood engraving . Blacks overwhelms the figures they surround , and abstract images contrast with realistic detail in the flora and fauna . 
 Published in a limited edition by Ward Ritchie Press in 1951 , it was printed on Japanese paper with the images on the recto and the verso left blank . Rockwell Kent provided the introduction . Hyde dedicated the book to the Red Cross Societies and the Society of Friends . Hyde was not present at the book 's pressing and thus was not able to correct some blocks which had not been carved deeply enough to produce satisfactory prints . 
 The book was republished twice in 2007 : Drawn and Quarterly released a deluxe facsimile edition with additional essays by Hyde and an introduction by wordless novel historian David Beronä , and George Walker included Southern Cross in his anthology of wordless novels Graphic Witness . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 " Man ... can tie himself up in words to the point of persuading himself that dropping atom bombs on people he 's never seen is a kind of shrewd move in an exciting chess game . He needs something simpler , like pictures , to remind him of what dropping bombs on innocent people is really like . " 
 In a talk with the CBC in 1952 , literary critic Northrop Frye praised Hyde 's visual skills , but said , " There 's no point in getting the book for your library unless you like the engravings themselves as separate works of art . " He found the book a quick read in contrast to the time it took to make it , and called its " continuity " a weak point . He considered the visualization of the bomb 's destruction of living things the strongest justification for the work . 
 Comics critic Sean Rogers praised the work , particularly the pacing and action sequences , but felt it had less impact that such earlier works as Masereel 's Passionate Journey ( 1919 ) or Ward 's Vertigo ( 1937 ) . Rogers found the anti @-@ nuclear message of the book less effective than that of later works in comics such as Keiji Nakazawa 's Barefoot Gen or Gary Panter 's Jimbo . Comics scholar Roger Sabin found the book unconvincing , " a well @-@ meaning but facile piece of agit @-@ prop " . Reviewer Erik Hinton praised the artwork while denigrating the story as " the progeny of historical lip @-@ service and the hot @-@ button anxiety of the <unk> of modern warfare " , and considered Ward and others of Hyde 's predecessors more proficient at the medium . 
 Southern Cross has gained appreciation in comics circles as a precursor to the graphic novel in Canada , though it had no direct influence on Canadian comics — it was marketed to book connoisseurs , a world far removed from that of consumers of cheap entertainment that comics served in the 1950s . Copies of Southern Cross joined the collections of the National Gallery of Canada in 1952 and the Burnaby Art Gallery in 1987 . The book received an Honorable Mention for Best Book at the 2008 Doug Wright Awards for Canadian Cartooning , accepted by Hyde 's son Anthony . 
 = Fire Emblem : New Mystery of the Emblem = 
 Fire Emblem : New Mystery of the Emblem : Heroes of Light and Shadow is a tactical role @-@ playing game developed by Intelligent Systems and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS handheld video game console in July 2010 . It is the twelfth entry in the Fire Emblem series , and a remake of the Super Famicom title Fire Emblem : Mystery of the Emblem . The story is based on the original story content from Mystery of the Emblem , while including a customizable Avatar as the main character alongside Marth , the protagonist of Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light . New Mystery of the Emblem also adapts the story content from the Satellaview title BS Fire Emblem into four additional story episodes dubbed the " New Archanea Chronicles " . 
 Preparations for New Mystery of the Emblem began during development of the 2008 DS remake of Shadow Dragon at the Blade of Light . Instead of building on Shadow Dragon for New Mystery of the Emblem , the staff started over and used the original Mystery of the Emblem as their starting point . Staff included producer Tohru Narihiro , co @-@ director and writer Kouhei Maeda , co @-@ director Masayuki Horikawa , and character designer Daisuke Izuka . Two of the major new elements were the customizable Avatar character and the " Casual Mode " , in which units defeated in missions are revived : the latter element was a point of fierce contention between staff due to the series ' long @-@ standing tradition of permanent death for characters . It was the first Fire Emblem to remain exclusive to Japan since Fire Emblem : The Binding Blade in 2002 . Upon release , it received critical acclaim from Japanese and Western journalists , and went on to sell over 274 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Fire Emblem : New Mystery of the Emblem is a tactical role @-@ playing game which puts players in the role of a customizable Avatar : their gender , appearance , character class and statistics can be tailored by the player . Missions are split between story @-@ based chapters and optional side chapters : side chapters give access to new playable characters outside the main narrative . Players can save at any time during battles , with the game opening offering a save at the end of each chapter . Outside battles , the player can visit towns to buy supplies and items such as weapons . Characters recruited by the player can also engage in support conversations accessed through the battle menu : these raise a character 's support rank and grant boons during battle . How characters connect through supports is documented using a relationship chart . 
 Battles take place on a grid @-@ based map , with the battle system employing a turn @-@ based system for the player , enemy units and allied units . The movement and attack ranges of enemies can be optionally displayed to players . While seventy @-@ four units are accessible in @-@ game by completing its chapters , only twelve can be taken into battle at any one time . When two units engage , a separate battle screen activates , and the battle plays out automatically . Enemy resistances to weapons are covered by the Weapon Triangle : lances are strong against swords , swords are strong against axes , and axes are strong against lances . Each unit gains experience points with each action , and when they accumulate 100 points , they level up and their stats are randomly raised . Each unit has a class , which affects their weaponry and movement range : these classes , when at level 10 , can be promoted to a stronger class using a Master Seal item . 
 In addition to the single @-@ player campaign , limited multiplayer functions are available through the Nintendo DS ' Wi @-@ Fi functionality . When the connection is active , players can battle each other in dedicated maps . Units can also be loaned between players , and an online shop is available to purchase new items and weapons with in @-@ game currency . The game also has a time @-@ based function where , when the game is left idle while characters are in the " unit barracks " , a meter will fill up and the characters will perform limited autonomous actions : these actions can involve leveling up , or crafting new items and weapons . The game can be played with two modes : Classic Mode , which enables permanent death for characters defeated in battle , and the new Casual Mode , which revives fallen units for the next battle . In addition to this are four difficulty levels : " normal " , " hard " , " maniac " and " lunatic " . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The story of New Mystery of the Emblem remains from the original version : the main difference is the addition of the Avatar . The game is set on the continent of Archanea , a land also featured in the first Fire Emblem title Fire Emblem : Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light . In Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light , the land was threatened by the dark sorcerer Gharnef , who summoned the dark dragon Medeus into the world . After becoming a fugitive from his kingdom after an attack on his kingdom , <unk> prince Marth went on a quest to reclaim his kingdom and defeat Gharnef and Medeus . By the events of New Mystery of the Emblem , Marth 's old ally Hardin has ascended the throne , but begins expanding the military and dominating the other regions of Archanea . Marth investigates , and discovers that both Gharnef and Medeus are still alive , and Hardin has been corrupted by them . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 The original version of Fire Emblem : Mystery of the Emblem was released in 1994 for the Super Famicom : it was in part a remake of Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light . Preparations for development of New Mystery of the Emblem began while development was still ongoing for Fire Emblem : Shadow Dragon , the 2008 DS remake of Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light . The original plan was to release New Mystery of the Emblem close to Shadow Dragon , but the staff decided that they could not make New Mystery of the Emblem using the systems of Shadow Dragon , instead using the original Mystery of the Emblem as a starting point . The staff included producer Tohru Narihiro , co @-@ director Masayuki Horikawa , co @-@ director and scenario writer Kouhei Maeda , and composers Hiroshi Morishita , Takeshi <unk> , Sei Murakami . Character artwork was done by Daisuke Izuka , who had worked on revamped character art for Shadow Dragon . The team added to the original narrative with new elements such as support conversations that expanded the personalities of some characters . The game 's subtitle , " Heroes of Light and Shadow " made reference to the player being a " shadow hero " , hidden behind the exploits of the main characters . 
 The biggest point of contention among the developers was including options allowing for the revival of fallen units in " Casual Mode " , a recurring discussion stretching back to the development of Fire Emblem : Genealogy of the Holy War ( 1996 ) . The dispute between Intelligent Systems and Nintendo staff was fierce , but positive comments from <unk> with the feature included helped those opposed come round to its inclusion . The four difficulty levels were made separate from the two modes of play , so players could adjust the experience to suit their needs . Another new element was the Avatar character , who was created so players would have an easier introduction , as the developers realized that they might end up creating the game assuming players would know about main protagonist Marth when that might not be the case . Alongside the Avatar was a new tutorial , which the developers needed to balance so it was enjoyable for series veterans while easing new players into the experience . Also new was the element of time passing when the system was turned off and the cartridge still in place . The content grew to the point that the developers contemplated dividing New Mystery of the Emblem itself into two releases . 
 New Mystery of the Emblem was announced by series publisher Nintendo in May 2010 . Its announcement formed part of the company 's 20th anniversary celebrations for the franchise . Its release date of July 15 , 2010 was announced the following month . New Mystery of the Emblem did not receive a Western release , making it the first title in the series to remain exclusive to Japan since Fire Emblem : The Binding Blade in 2002 . In addition to the original narrative of Mystery of the Emblem , the team remade story episodes from BS Fire Emblem , a prequel to the original game and Mystery of the Emblem originally released in 1997 for the Satellaview . The remade episodes were dubbed " New Archanea Chronicles " . This was the first time content from a Satellaview title had been re @-@ released in any form . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , the game topped Japanese gaming charts , with initial sales of 136 @,@ 000 units . Its debut sales were notably lower than its predecessor Shadow Dragon . In the following weeks , its position and sales varied , going from fourth to tenth to seventh place in the charts . As of 2012 , the game has sold a total of 274 @,@ 000 . 
 Famitsu was positive on how the new narrative elements and support conversations were incorporated into the existing narrative . RPGamer 's Mike Moehnke felt the additional dialogue unnecessary , as the story 's complexity had not noticeably increased over the original version . He also positively noted how the Avatar was incorporated into the story , with the added chapters revolving around them making them " far more than a throwaway " . 4Gamer.net 's Kojiro Nishioka likewise praised the inclusion of the BS Fire Emblem chapters and the new prologue and side chapters , but felt that those who had not played Shadow Dragon would be unable to understand some of the characters . 
 Commenting on the gameplay , Famitsu noted that it was rather simple , but approved of the inclusion of Casual Mode and praised the content of each chapter for being just the right size . Moehnke praised the alterations made from the original version , such as not needing to dismount steeds when indoors , but also noted that some elements such as mechanics surrounding Marth showed the game 's age . Nishioka generally enjoyed the gameplay experience , praising the inclusion of user @-@ friendly options , but felt that these same new additions would divide fans . 
 = 2002 – 03 S.L. Benfica season = 
 The 2002 – 03 season was Sport Lisboa e Benfica 's 99th season in existence and the club 's 69th consecutive season in the top flight of Portuguese football . During the season , which lasted from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003 , Benfica competed in the Primeira Liga and the Taça de Portugal . 
 Going into a second year without UEFA competitions , qualifying for Europe was one of the club 's top priorities ; to improve its competitiveness , Benfica signed some of the best domestic players , Ricardo Rocha and Petit , but also brought back former players , like Hélder and Nuno Gomes . Jesualdo Ferreira remained as manager for his first full season on the club . 
 Benfica 's season started with four consecutive victories , to lead the league . In late September , they experienced their first loss and went on a win @-@ less spree that saw them drop to fifth . In November , Benfica won again , but the results remained erratic and after a 7 – 0 trashing of Paços de Ferreira , they lost to Varzim . A few days later , in the Portuguese Cup , a home loss against Gondomar cost Ferreira his job . Fernando Chalana replaced him for one match , before the appointment of José Antonio Camacho . 
 With the Spaniard in charge , Benfica regained second place and slowly opened a gap over Sporting , eventually finishing with 75 points , qualifying for the 2003 – 04 UEFA Champions League . Despite this , Camacho was unable to close the distance to Porto , who finished 11 points ahead . The season was also the last that Benfica played in the original Estádio da Luz , before a new version was built ahead of UEFA Euro 2004 . Their final game was on 22 March 2003 , with the remaining games being played in the Estádio Nacional in Oeiras . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ season = = = 
 Although he only guided the team to fourth place in the previous campaign , Jesualdo Ferreira remained in charge of the team , with overwhelming support from inside the club , especially from former Director of Football Gaspar Ramos and former President Manuel <unk> , who said he was " the best solution to lead Benfica " . In the transfer season , Maniche and Robert Enke left the club as their contracts expired ; the former joined Porto , the latter , Barcelona . Marco <unk> and <unk> Jankauskas also left , as Benfica did not get their loan deals renewed ; with Jankauskas immediately moving to Porto . Benfica replaced Jankauskas with Nuno Gomes on a free transfer after the collapse of Fiorentina . Gomes scored 76 goals in his first spell at Benfica ; expectations were high , with crowds gathering to see him in training sessions . He joined a depleted attack , which only had the new signing from Porto Miklós Fehér as option , as both <unk> and Tomo <unk> were injured . The back four was also strengthened , with Benfica bringing back Hélder after six seasons abroad and adding Ricardo Rocha , a young defender from Braga . 
 The pre @-@ season began on 9 July with a week of training before the club travelled to Switzerland on the 13th , where they played their first two games of the pre @-@ season , against Étoile Carouge and Auxerre . After a game in Palermo with Inter Milan on 21 July , Benfica returned to Portugal the next day , meeting up with Sporting in the <unk> Trophy on the 28th . With three more matches in early August , including one in the Guadiana Trophy , Benfica closed its season preparation with a match against European champions Real Madrid on 17 August , a week before the first official game . 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Benfica started the 2002 – 03 Primeira Liga campaign at home against Marítimo , scoring twice in the first half , leading to a 3 – 0 win . The following Saturday , they played Beira @-@ Mar away and won 2 – 0 after an early lead ; according to Manuel Queiroz of Record , despite " dominating in the first half , [ Benfica ] suffered to retain the lead in the second , with the two nil only arriving right near the end " . The club ended the month sharing first place with two other teams , but with a higher goal average than them . 
 The team began September with a 3 – 2 away win against Moreirense ; Fehér had a decisive influence , earning a penalty and scoring the winner in the 78th minute . Benfica won their fourth consecutive game on 21 September , with a 3 – 1 win at home against União de Leiria . In the second half , Simão scored his fourth and fifth league goals , unlocking the game that was tied 1 – 1 at half @-@ time . They ended September with a visit to Estádio da Madeira to play Nacional . The game ended with a 0 – 1 loss ; according to José Ribeiro writing for Record , " after two warnings in the previous two games , the inevitable happened . With known defensive weaknesses , Benfica was winning because of their players intelligence ( <unk> and Petit ) and talent ( Simão ) . Only yesterday , none of that worked , given that <unk> read the game very well and found Benfica 's problems ... " . 
 Benfica hosted Vitória Setúbal on 5 October , dropping two points in a 1 – 1 draw , due to a " childish error , or better yet , a lack of sharpness of the back @-@ four " , in the words of Ricardo Tavares from Record . On 20 October , Benfica met Porto in Estádio das Antas for the Clássico . It was an intense match , with 3 ejections and 73 fouls . Porto won 2 – 1 because to António <unk> , they " reacted better to playing outnumbered , while Benfica lost their focus when Paulo Costa sent off <unk> and then Miguel " . Six days later , for the final game of the month , Benfica played Académica at home . The final score of 1 – 1 was the best possible , because Académica scored the first goal in the 86th minute , giving Benfica only a few minutes to level the game , which Carlitos did in the 90th minute . Benfica ended the month in fifth place , having won only two of nine possible points . 
 = = = November – February = = = 
 At the beginning of November , Benfica headed to the Azores to play Santa Clara . They won 2 – 1 due to a double from Simão . A week later , the team played Paços de Ferreira in the Estádio da Luz . The game ended with a 7 – 0 win for Benfica ; Antonio Tadeia writing for Record said the win " showed that Benfica it is alive and well in the league , even without two internationals , Simão and Petit " . On 16 November , Benfica played Varzim away , resulting in a 1 – 2 loss ; Rui Dias wrote for Record that , Varzim " adjusted better to the windstorm night and to the soaking wet field ... taking the initiative in the search for the three points " . 
 On 24 November , Benfica started the 2002 – 03 Taça de Portugal by playing Gondomar at home for the fourth round . A 10th @-@ minute goal from <unk> knocked Benfica out of the competition . Tinoco de Faria , the club vice @-@ president , called the defeat " unacceptable " ; Jesualdo Ferreira was relieved of his duties the day after . Benfica appointed Fernando Chalana as caretaker until they could agree terms with José Antonio Camacho . On the day Camacho arrived to sign with Benfica , Chalana led the team against Braga at home . He moved Miguel to right @-@ back and started Hélder instead of João Manuel Pinto ; Benfica defeated the visitors by 3 – 0 . 
 In the opening match of December , Benfica played Gil Vicente at home after re @-@ scheduling the game from 29 November to 4 December , because of an imminent players strike during the holidays . They won that match 3 – 1 with two first @-@ half goals ; António Varela wrote that the unpredictability of Simão " unbalanced the opponent and the game " ; Benfica climbed to second place before a match against Sporting . On 7 December , Benfica played their last game in the 46 @-@ year @-@ old Estádio de Alvalade against city rivals Sporting in the Derby de Lisboa . The game ended with a 2 – 0 win for Benfica , who controlled the game from the beginning ; as José Manuel Delgado wrote , " ... the advantage of the visitors starting in the clear superiority of Tiago and Petit in the direct contend with Paulo Bento and Rui Bento , while <unk> descended to guide the team ... " . A week later , the team played Belenenses at home . Simão scored the sole goal of the game in the 55th minute , helping Camacho to a third consecutive win . During the last game of the month , Benfica played Boavista away , drawing 0 – 0 ; José Manuel Delgado at Record criticized the players of both teams for " showing little inspiration and inability to break away from the tight tactical requirements of the game " . 
 Early in January 2003 , Benfica announced the signing of Brazilian midfielder <unk> , on a loan deal from Barcelona until the end of the season . On 11 January , the team played Vitória Guimarães away . The 1 – 1 draw after 90 minutes was a consequence of the constant interruptions for a large number of fouls signalled by the referee . In the stands , the problematic behaviour of the Benfica supporters group No Name Boys caused the governing body of the Portuguese league to punish both clubs by closing their stadiums for one game each . On the following Sunday , Benfica visited the Estádio dos Barreiros for a game against Marítimo , which Benfica won 2 – 1 after an individual effort from Nuno Gomes in the 74th minute . It was the first win there since 1994 – 95 . After selecting the Estádio Municipal Dr. Alves Vieira in Torres Novas to replace Estádio da Luz , Benfica hosted Beira @-@ Mar on 26 January , winning 1 – 0 with a goal from <unk> . Three days later , the team played the second friendly of the month after a 1 – 1 draw against Ajax a week before . During the game , intended to bring people to Da Luz , Benfica lost 0 – 1 to Barcelona . 
 On 1 February , Benfica played Moreirense at home , drawing 1 – 1 ; Rui Dias wrote that the team 's overconfidence was the main reason for the draw because they were " unsettled by the lack of space ... they allowed the clock to run , certain a goal would arrive , soon or later " . On 8 February , Benfica visited the Estádio Municipal da Marinha Grande to play União de Leiria . The final score , 3 – 0 to Benfica , was the biggest in the Camacho era ; António Tadeia , writing for Record , complimented the team for the " more pleasing performance , after the very poor display against Moreirense " . The following Sunday , Benfica played Nacional at home . According to Rui Dias ' match analysis in Record , the team strong first half " .. left the feeling that two goals were not enough in such a display of power ... " , allowing them to manage the game in the second half , ensuring a 2 – 0 win and reducing the distance to Porto to 10 points . Benfica won their third consecutive match on 22 February ; a 6 – 2 away win against Vitória Setúbal . The opponents took an early lead in the 18th minute when Pascal scored a goal , and doubled their advantage five minutes later ; however , in a strong second half , Benfica overturned the game . Simão scored a hat @-@ trick , aided by Tiago and Tomo <unk> , who also scored goals . 
 = = = March – June = = = 
 On 4 March , Benfica played Porto on the last Clássico to be held at the Estádio da Luz . Porto won 1 – 0 through Deco 's goal , in a match that Manuel Queiroz at Record defined as " ... ending the last doubts of who is the future champion and who is the best team in the league , defeating Camacho 's Benfica for the first time ... " Benfica rebounded with an away win against Académica on 15 March , beating them 4 – 1 in the Municipal José Bento Pessoa in Figueira da Foz . A week later , Benfica had its last game on the old Estádio da Luz before the 49 @-@ year @-@ old stadium 's demolition , playing against Santa Clara . The match ended in a 1 – 0 win for Benfica , but António Tadeia described the performance as " colourless " . 
 On 5 April , April Benfica played at Estádio da Mata Real against Paços de Ferreira . With three goals in the first half @-@ hour , Benfica secured the lead until the end to gain three points in a 3 – 1 win . With the league on international break , Benfica played two friendlies abroad ; one against Luxembourg 's <unk> <unk> and another against Paris Saint @-@ Germain . They resumed their league campaign on 21 April , hosting home games at the Estádio Nacional in Oeiras where they met Varzim . Benfica won 2 – 1 ; and according to António Magalhães writing for Record , they " wasted a excessive number of opportunities to score " . On the following Saturday , Benfica played away to Braga at the Estádio Primeiro de Maio . By winning 3 – 1 , they opened an 11 @-@ point gap above third @-@ place Sporting . 
 On 3 May , Benfica met Sporting for the second Derby de Lisboa of the season . In the words of António Tadeia , the visitors took on an approach of " ignoring the midfield ... and abusing of the long ball " , inflicting a 1 – 2 loss upon Benfica . A week later , Benfica defeated Belenenses in <unk> , securing the second place in the league with a 4 @-@ 2 victory and the associated berth to the third qualifying round of the 2003 – 04 UEFA Champions League . On 18 May , Benfica played Boavista at home . Camacho changed several players of the starting eleven , but the match ended in a 1 – 1 draw . Benfica closed the month with a 2 – 0 away win against <unk> Ribeiro Novo ; Rui Dias wrote that Benfica showed " professionalism , despite having nothing to fight for " . 
 Benfica played their last game of the season on 1 June at home against Vitória Guimarães , winning 4 – 0 ; <unk> scored a hat @-@ trick . Benfica finished in second place after the 34 @-@ game season with 23 wins , six draws and five losses for a total of 75 points . They scored 74 goals & <unk> : the most in the league – and conceded 27 , the second @-@ lowest league @-@ wide . Simão was the joint highest scorer in the Primeira Liga , with 18 goals , equal to Beira @-@ Mar 's Faye <unk> ; the latter took the Bola de Prata award due to having played fewer games . 
 = = Competitions = = 
 Win Draw Loss Postponed 
 = = = Overall record = = = 
 = = = Primeira Liga = = = 
 = = = = League table = = = = 
 = International Finance Corporation = 
 The International Finance Corporation ( IFC ) is an international financial institution that offers investment , advisory , and asset management services to encourage private sector development in developing countries . The IFC is a member of the World Bank Group and is headquartered in Washington , D.C. , United States . It was established in 1956 as the private sector arm of the World Bank Group to advance economic development by investing in strictly for @-@ profit and commercial projects that purport to reduce poverty and promote development . The IFC 's stated aim is to create opportunities for people to escape poverty and achieve better living standards by mobilizing financial resources for private enterprise , promoting accessible and competitive markets , supporting businesses and other private sector entities , and creating jobs and delivering necessary services to those who are poverty @-@ stricken or otherwise vulnerable . Since 2009 , the IFC has focused on a set of development goals that its projects are expected to target . Its goals are to increase sustainable agriculture opportunities , improve health and education , increase access to financing for microfinance and business clients , advance infrastructure , help small businesses grow revenues , and invest in climate health . 
 The IFC is owned and governed by its member countries , but has its own executive leadership and staff that conduct its normal business operations . It is a corporation whose shareholders are member governments that provide paid @-@ in capital and which have the right to vote on its matters . Originally more financially integrated with the World Bank Group , the IFC was established separately and eventually became authorized to operate as a financially autonomous entity and make independent investment decisions . It offers an array of debt and equity financing services and helps companies face their risk exposures , while refraining from participating in a management capacity . The corporation also offers advice to companies on making decisions , evaluating their impact on the environment and society , and being responsible . It advises governments on building infrastructure and partnerships to further support private sector development . 
 The corporation is assessed by an independent evaluator each year . In 2011 , its evaluation report recognized that its investments performed well and reduced poverty , but recommended that the corporation define poverty and expected outcomes more explicitly to better @-@ understand its effectiveness and approach poverty reduction more strategically . The corporation 's total investments in 2011 amounted to $ 18 @.@ 66 billion . It committed $ 820 million to advisory services for 642 projects in 2011 , and held $ 24 @.@ 5 billion worth of liquid assets . The IFC is in good financial standing and received the highest ratings from two independent credit rating agencies in 2010 and 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 The World Bank and International Monetary Fund were designed by delegates at the Bretton Woods conference in 1944 and the World Bank , then consisting of only the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development , became operational in 1946 . Robert L. Garner joined the World Bank in 1947 as a senior executive and expressed his view that private business could play an important role in international development . In 1950 , Garner and his colleagues proposed establishing a new institution for the purpose of making private investments in the developing countries served by the Bank . The U.S. government encouraged the idea of an international corporation working in tandem with the World Bank to invest in private enterprises without accepting guarantees from governments , without managing those enterprises , and by collaborating with third party investors . When describing the IFC in 1955 , World Bank President Eugene R. Black said that the IFC would only invest in private firms , rather than make loans to governments , and it would not manage the projects in which it invests . In 1956 the International Finance Corporation became operational under the leadership of Garner . It initially had 12 staff members and $ 100 million ( $ 844 @.@ 9 million in 2012 dollars ) in capital . The corporation made its inaugural investment in 1957 by making a $ 2 million ( $ 16 @.@ 4 million in 2012 dollars ) loan to a Brazil @-@ based affiliate of Siemens & Halske ( now Siemens AG ) . In 2007 , IFC bought 18 % stake in the Indian Financial firm , Angel <unk> . In December 2015 IFC supported Greek banks with 150 million euros by buying shares in four of them : Alpha Bank ( 60 million ) , <unk> ( 50 million ) , Piraeus Bank ( 20 million ) and National Bank of Greece ( 20 million ) . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The IFC is governed by its Board of Governors which meets annually and consists of one governor per member country ( most often the country 's finance minister or treasury secretary ) . Each member typically appoints one governor and also one alternate . Although corporate authority rests with the Board of Governors , the governors delegate most of their corporate powers and their authority over daily matters such as lending and business operations to the Board of Directors . The IFC 's Board of Directors consists of 25 executive directors who meet regularly and work at the IFC 's headquarters , and is chaired by the President of the World Bank Group . The executive directors collectively represent all 184 member countries . When the IFC 's Board of Directors votes on matters brought before it , each executive director 's vote is weighted according to the total share capital of the member countries represented by that director . The IFC 's Executive Vice President and CEO oversees its overall direction and daily operations . As of October 2012 , Jin @-@ Yong Cai serves as the Executive Vice President and CEO of the IFC . President of the World Bank Group Jim Yong Kim appointed Jin @-@ Yong Cai to serve as the new Executive Vice President and CEO of the IFC . Cai is a Chinese citizen who formerly served as a managing director for Goldman Sachs and has over 20 years of financial sector experience . 
 Although the IFC coordinates its activities in many areas with the other World Bank Group institutions , it generally operates independently as it is a separate entity with legal and financial autonomy , established by its own Articles of Agreement . The corporation operates with a staff of over 3 @,@ 400 employees , of which half are stationed in field offices across its member nations . 
 = = Services = = 
 = = = Investment services = = = 
 The IFC 's investment services consist of loans , equity , trade finance , syndicated loans , structured and securitized finance , client risk management services , treasury services , and liquidity management . In its fiscal year 2010 , the IFC invested $ 12 @.@ 7 billion in 528 projects across 103 countries . Of that total investment commitment , approximately 39 % ( $ 4 @.@ 9 billion ) was invested into 255 projects across 58 member nations of the World Bank 's International Development Association ( IDA ) . 
 The IFC makes loans to businesses and private projects generally with maturities of seven to twelve years . It determines a suitable repayment schedule and grace period for each loan individually to meet borrowers ' currency and cash flow requirements . The IFC may provide longer @-@ term loans or extend grace periods if a project is deemed to warrant it . Leasing companies and financial intermediaries may also receive loans from the IFC . Though loans have traditionally been denominated in hard currencies , the IFC has endeavored to structure loan products in local currencies . Its disbursement portfolio included loans denominated in 25 local currencies in 2010 , and 45 local currencies in 2011 , funded largely through swap markets . Local financial markets development is one of IFC ’ s strategic focus areas . In line with its AAA rating , it has strict concentration , liquidity , asset @-@ liability and other policies . The IFC committed to approximately $ 5 @.@ 7 billion in new loans in 2010 , and $ 5 billion in 2011 . 
 Although the IFC 's shareholders initially only allowed it to make loans , the IFC was authorized in 1961 to make equity investments , the first of which was made in 1962 by taking a stake in <unk> , a former manufacturer of auto parts in Spain that is now part of Bosch Spain . The IFC invests in businesses ' equity either directly or via private equity funds , generally from five up to twenty percent of a company 's total equity . IFC ’ s private equity portfolio currently stands at roughly $ 3 @.@ 0 billion committed to about 180 funds . The portfolio is widely distributed across all regions including Africa , East Asia , South Asia , Eastern Europe , Latin America and the Middle East , and recently has invested in Small Enterprise Assistance Funds ' ( <unk> ) Caucasus Growth Fund , <unk> Capital 's Kula Fund II ( Papua New Guinea , Fiji , Pacific Islands ) and Leopard Capital ’ s Haiti Fund . Other equity investments made by the IFC include preferred equity , convertible loans , and participation loans . The IFC prefers to invest for the long @-@ term , usually for a period of eight to fifteen years , before exiting through the sale of shares on a domestic stock exchange , usually as part of an initial public offering . When the IFC invests in a company , it does not assume an active role in management of the company . 
 Through its Global Trade Finance Program , the IFC guarantees trade payment obligations of more than 200 approved banks in over 80 countries to mitigate risk for international transactions . The Global Trade Finance Program provides guarantees to cover payment risks for emerging market banks regarding promissory notes , bills of exchange , letters of credit , bid and performance bonds , supplier credit for capital goods imports , and advance payments . The IFC issued $ 3 @.@ 46 billion in more than 2 @,@ 800 guarantees in 2010 , of which over 51 % targeted IDA member nations . In its fiscal year 2011 , the IFC issued $ 4 @.@ 6 billion in more than 3 @,@ 100 guarantees . In 2009 , the IFC launched a separate program for crisis response , known as its Global Trade Liquidity Program , which provides liquidity for international trade among developing countries . Since its establishment in 2009 , the Global Trade Liquidity Program assisted with over $ 15 billion in trade in 2011 . 
 The IFC operates a Syndicated Loan Program in an effort to mobilize capital for development goals . The program was created in 1957 and as of 2011 has channeled approximately $ 38 billion from over 550 financial institutions toward development projects in over 100 different emerging markets . The IFC syndicated a total of $ 4 @.@ 7 billion in loans in 2011 , twice that of its $ 2 billion worth of <unk> in 2010 . Due to banks <unk> from lending across borders in emerging markets , in 2009 the IFC started to syndicate parallel loans to the international financial institutions and other participants . 
 To service clients without ready access to low @-@ cost financing , the IFC relies on structured or securitized financial products such as partial credit guarantees , portfolio risk transfers , and Islamic finance . The IFC committed $ 797 million in the form of structured and securitized financing in 2010 . For companies that face difficulty in obtaining financing due to a perception of high credit risk , the IFC <unk> assets with predictable cash flows , such as mortgages , credit cards , loans , corporate debt instruments , and revenue streams , in an effort to enhance those companies ' credit . 
 Financial derivative products are made available to the IFC 's clients strictly for hedging interest rate risk , exchange rate risk , and commodity risk exposure . It serves as an intermediary between emerging market businesses and international derivatives market makers to increase access to risk management instruments . 
 The IFC fulfills a treasury role by borrowing international capital to fund lending activities . It is usually one of the first institutions to issue bonds or to do swaps in emerging markets denominated in those markets ' local currencies . The IFC 's new international borrowings amounted to $ 8 @.@ 8 billion in 2010 and $ 9 @.@ 8 billion in 2011 . The IFC Treasury actively engages in liquidity management in an effort to maximize returns and assure that funding for its investments is readily available while managing risks to the IFC . 
 = = = Advisory services = = = 
 In addition to its investment activities the IFC provides a range of advisory services to support corporate decisionmaking regarding business , environment , social impact , and sustainability . The IFC 's corporate advice targets governance , managerial capacity , scalability , and corporate responsibility . It prioritizes the encouragement of reforms that improve the trade friendliness and ease of doing business in an effort to advise countries on fostering a suitable investment climate . It also offers advice to governments on infrastructure development and public @-@ private partnerships . The IFC attempts to guide businesses toward more sustainable practices particularly with regards to having good governance , supporting women in business , and proactively combating climate change . 
 = = = Asset Management Company = = = 
 The IFC established IFC Asset Management Company LLC ( IFC AMC ) in 2009 as a wholly owned subsidiary to manage all capital funds to be invested in emerging markets . The AMC manages capital mobilized by the IFC as well as by third parties such as sovereign or pension funds , and other development financing organizations . Despite being owned by the IFC , the AMC has investment decision autonomy and is charged with a fiduciary responsibility to the four individual funds under its management . It also aims to mobilize additional capital for IFC investments as it can make certain types of investments which the IFC cannot . As of 2011 , the AMC managed the IFC Capitalization Fund ( Equity ) Fund , L.P. , the IFC Capitalization ( Subordinated Debt ) Fund , L.P. , the IFC African , Latin American , and Caribbean Fund , L.P. , and the Africa Capitalization Fund , Ltd . The IFC Capitalization ( Equity ) Fund holds $ 1 @.@ 3 billion in equity , while the IFC Capitalization ( Subordinated Debt ) Fund is valued at $ 1 @.@ 7 billion . The IFC African , Latin American , and Caribbean Fund ( referred to as the IFC ALAC Fund ) was created in 2010 and is worth $ 1 billion . As of March 2012 , the ALAC Fund has invested a total of $ 349 @.@ 1 million into twelve businesses . The Africa Capitalization Fund was set up in 2011 to invest in commercial banks in both Northern and Sub @-@ Saharan Africa and its commitments totaled $ 181 @.@ 8 million in March 2012 . As of 2012 , Gavin E.R. Wilson serves as CEO of the AMC . 
 = = Financial performance = = 
 The IFC prepares consolidated financial statements in accordance with United States GAAP which are audited by KPMG . It reported income before grants to IDA members of $ 2 @.@ 18 billion in fiscal year 2011 , up from $ 1 @.@ 95 billion in fiscal 2010 and $ 299 million in fiscal 2009 . The increase in income before grants is ascribed to higher earnings from the IFC 's investments and also from higher service fees . The IFC reported a partial offset from lower liquid asset trading income , higher administrative costs , and higher advisory service expenses . The IFC made $ 600 million in grants to IDA countries in fiscal 2011 , up from $ 200 million in fiscal 2010 and $ 450 million in fiscal 2009 . The IFC reported a net income of $ 1 @.@ 58 billion in fiscal year 2011 . In previous years , the IFC had reported a net loss of $ 151 million in fiscal 2009 and $ 1 @.@ 75 billion in fiscal 2010 . The IFC 's total capital amounted to $ 20 @.@ 3 billion in 2011 , of which $ 2 @.@ 4 billion was paid @-@ in capital from member countries , $ 16 @.@ 4 billion was retained earnings , and $ 1 @.@ 5 billion was accumulated other comprehensive income . The IFC held $ 68 @.@ 49 billion in total assets in 2011 . 
 The IFC 's return on average assets ( GAAP basis ) decreased from 3 @.@ 1 % in 2010 to 2 @.@ 4 % in 2011 . Its return on average capital ( GAAP basis ) decreased from 10 @.@ 1 % in 2010 to 8 @.@ 2 % in 2011 . The IFC 's cash and liquid investments accounted for 83 % of its estimated net cash requirements for fiscal years 2012 through 2014 . Its external funding liquidity level grew from 190 % in 2010 to 266 % in 2011 . It has a 2 @.@ 6 : 1 debt @-@ to @-@ equity ratio and holds 6 @.@ 6 % in reserves against losses on loans to its disbursement portfolio . The IFC 's deployable strategic capital decreased from 14 % in 2010 to 10 % in 2011 as a share of its total resources available , which grew from $ 16 @.@ 8 billion in 2010 to $ 17 @.@ 9 billion in 2011 . 
 In 2011 , the IFC reported total funding commitments ( consisting of loans , equity , guarantees , and client risk management ) of $ 12 @.@ 18 billion , slightly lower than its $ 12 @.@ 66 billion in commitments in 2010 . Its core mobilization , which consists of participation and parallel loans , structured finance , its Asset Management Company funds , and other initiatives , grew from $ 5 @.@ 38 billion in 2010 to $ 6 @.@ 47 billion in 2011 . The IFC 's total investment program was reported at a value of $ 18 @.@ 66 billion for fiscal year 2011 . Its advisory services portfolio included 642 projects valued at $ 820 million in 2011 , compared to 736 projects at $ 859 million in 2010 . The IFC held $ 24 @.@ 5 billion in liquid assets in 2011 , up from $ 21 billion in 2010 . 
 The IFC received credit ratings of AAA from Standard & Poor 's in December 2012 and <unk> from Moody 's Investors Service in November 2012 . S & P rated the IFC as having a strong financial standing with adequate capital and liquidity , cautious management policies , a high level of geographic diversification , and anticipated treatment as a preferred creditor given its membership in the World Bank Group . It noted that the IFC faces a weakness relative to other multilateral institutions of having higher risks due to its mandated emphasis on private sector investing and its income heavily affected by equity markets . 
 = State of Vietnam referendum , 1955 = 
 The State of Vietnam referendum of 1955 determined the future form of government of the State of Vietnam , the nation that was to become the Republic of Vietnam ( widely known as South Vietnam ) . It was contested by Prime Minister Ngô Đình Diệm , who proposed a republic , and former emperor Bảo Đại . Bảo Đại had abdicated as emperor in 1945 and at the time of the referendum held the title of head of state . Though published counts showed Diệm winning the election with 98 @.@ 2 % of the vote , the referendum was widely marred by electoral fraud . In the capital , Saigon , Diệm was credited with more than 600 @,@ 000 votes , although only 450 @,@ 000 people were on the electoral roll . He accumulated tallies in excess of 90 % of the registered voters , even in rural regions where opposition groups prevented voting . 
 The referendum was the last phase in the power struggle between Bảo Đại and his prime minister . Bảo Đại disliked Diệm and had frequently attempted to undermine him , having appointed him only because he was a conduit to American aid . At the time , the country was going through a period of insecurity , as Vietnam had been temporarily partitioned as a result of the 1954 Geneva Accords that ended the First Indochina War . The State of Vietnam controlled the southern half of the country , pending national elections that were intended to reunify the country under a common government . Still , the Vietnamese National Army was not in full control of southern Vietnam ; the Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo religious sects ran their own administrations in the countryside supported by private armies , while the Bình Xuyên organised crime syndicate controlled the streets of Saigon . Despite interference from these groups , Bảo Đại , and even French officials , Diệm managed to subdue the private armies and consolidate government control over the country by mid @-@ 1955 . 
 Emboldened by his success , Diệm began to plot Bảo Đại 's downfall . He scheduled a referendum for 23 October 1955 and pushed Bảo Đại out of the political scene , hindering the former emperor 's attempts to derail the poll . In the period leading up to the vote , campaigning for Bảo Đại was banned , while Diệm 's election campaign focused on personal attacks against Bảo Đại . These included pornographic cartoons of the head of state and unverified rumours claiming he was illegitimate and linking him to various mistresses . The government @-@ controlled media launched polemical attacks on Bảo Đại , and police went door @-@ to @-@ door , warning people of the consequences of failing to vote . After his brother Ngô Đình Nhu successfully rigged the poll , Diệm proclaimed himself president of the newly created Republic of Vietnam . 
 = = Background = = 
 The defeat of the French Army at Điện Biên Phủ in 1954 , followed by the Geneva Accords , led to a divided Vietnam . The French @-@ backed State of Vietnam , led by former Emperor Bảo Đại , provisionally held control south of the 17th parallel . Hồ Chí Minh 's Viet Minh held the north under the Democratic Republic of Vietnam , which Hồ Chí Minh had proclaimed in 1945 . The agreements stated that nationwide elections were to be held in 1956 to unify the country under a common government . In July 1954 , during the transition period , Bảo Đại appointed Diệm as Prime Minister of the State of Vietnam . 
 On 11 October 1954 , the border was closed by the International Control Commission , after a period of 300 days during which free passage between both halves of Vietnam had been allowed . Under the Geneva Accords , anti @-@ communist military personnel were obliged to evacuate to the south , while communist forces were to be moved north . Civilians were free to move to whichever zone they preferred . During the 300 days , Diệm and U.S. CIA adviser Colonel Edward Lansdale staged a campaign to convince people to move to South Vietnam . The campaign was particularly focused on Vietnam 's Catholics , who were to provide Diệm 's power base in his later years , with the use of the slogan " God has gone south " . Between 800 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 people migrated to the south , mostly Catholics . At the start of 1955 , French Indochina was dissolved , leaving Diệm in temporary control of the south . 
 At the time , Diệm had little authority beyond the gates of his own palace . Bảo Đại had little confidence in him and gave him meagre support — the pair had clashed in the past , with Diem resigning as Bảo Đại 's Interior Minister two decades earlier , believing the head of state to be weak and ineffective . Many historians believe that Bảo Đại may have selected Diệm for the latter 's ability to attract U.S. support and funding . During the transition period , the French Expeditionary Corps maintained a presence in South Vietnam . This led to tension between France and the State of Vietnam . Diệm , a passionate nationalist , detested the French , who reciprocated , hoping he would fail , even calling for his removal on occasions . 
 Diệm faced challenges to his authority from four more groups . The Hòa Hảo and Cao Đài religious sects had private armies that controlled the Mekong Delta and the areas west of Saigon , respectively . The Bình Xuyên was an armed , organised crime empire that controlled much of Saigon with a 40 @,@ 000 strong private army , while the Vietminh still controlled much of the rural area . Diệm 's Vietnamese National Army ( VNA ) was led by General Nguyễn Văn Hinh , a French citizen who loathed and frequently disobeyed him . Bảo Đại sold the operating license of the national police to the Bình Xuyên , effectively putting administrative control of the police in the hands of a crime syndicate . 
 Amid growing French and US skepticism of his ability to provide stable rule , Diệm forced the matter to a head in April 1955 . He ordered the Bình Xuyên to relinquish control of the National Police and submit to his command by integrating into the VNA or disbanding , threatening to crush them if they refused . He bribed Hòa Hảo and Cao Đài commanders into joining the VNA , gradually resulting in the defection of some commanders and their units , while others continued to lead their forces against Saigon . The Bình Xuyên defied Diệm 's ultimatum . On 27 April , the VNA initiated the Battle for Saigon . After a brief but violent battle that left between 500 and 1 @,@ 000 people dead and about 20 @,@ 000 homeless , the Bình Xuyên were crushed . Diệm had regained both U.S. confidence and control of the police . <unk> crowds lauded Diệm and denounced Bảo Đại , who had tried to dismiss him in the middle of the battle to prevent him from quelling the Bình Xuyên . In addition , General Paul Ely , the head of the French presence in Vietnam , tried to impede Diệm ; his troops put road blocks against the VNA and gave intelligence to the Bình Xuyên . 
 Buoyed by his successes , and fueled by increased hatred of both the French and Bảo Đại after their attempts to prevent him from dismantling the Bình Xuyên , Diệm became more confident as he went about consolidating his hold on power . On 15 May , Diệm abolished Bảo Đại 's Imperial Guard ; its 5 @,@ 000 men became the 11th and 42nd Infantry Regiments of the VNA . Diệm then stripped Bảo Đại of his extensive crown lands . On 15 June , Diệm had the Council of the Royal Family at Huế declare that Bảo Đại be stripped of his powers , and that he , Diệm , be made president . Bảo Đại 's relatives condemned him for abdicating as head of state , and for his links with France and the Bình Xuyên . Historians have speculated that the royals agreed to turn on Bảo Đại so Diệm would not seize their assets . 
 = = Organization of the referendum = = 
 On 7 July 1955 , the first anniversary of his installation as prime minister , Diệm announced that a national referendum would be held to determine the future of the country . On 16 July , Diệm publicly announced his intention to not take part in the reunification elections : " We will not be tied down by the [ Geneva ] treaty that was signed against the wishes of the Vietnamese people . " 
 Diệm contended that the Communists would never allow free elections in the north , so therefore South Vietnam must strike out on its own and establish a separate , non @-@ Communist state . This was echoed by the Saigon press , which ran articles assailing communist elections as shambolic , rigged , and meaningless ; at the time , the northern half of Vietnam had a greater population than the south . A month earlier , North Vietnamese Prime Minister Phạm Văn Đồng wrote to Saigon asking to begin negotiations over the specific details of the elections . While the Americans were happy to avoid elections because of fears of a communist victory , they hoped that Diệm would enter the dialogue over planning matters and wait for North Vietnam to object to a proposal , and thus use it to blame Ho [ Chi Minh ] for violating the Geneva Accords . The Americans had earlier advised Diệm , who had been acting in defiance of Bảo Đại , that continued aid was contingent on Diệm establishing a legal basis for usurping the head of state 's power . 
 On 6 October 1955 , Diệm announced the referendum would be held on 23 October . The election was open to men and women aged 18 or over , and the government arranged to have a polling station set up for every 1 @,@ 000 registered voters . The poll was contested by Bảo Đại , who had spent much of his time in France and advocated a monarchy , and Diệm , who ran on a republican platform . According to historian Jessica Chapman , it was a choice between " the country 's obsolete emperor and its far @-@ from @-@ popular prime minister , Ngo Dinh Diem " . In announcing the referendum , Diệm portrayed his decision as being motivated by a love of democracy and popular discontent with the rule of Bảo Đại . The prime minister cited a plethora of petitions from various social , religious , and political groups calling on him to stage a plebiscite to remove Bảo Đại , claiming he was motivated by these " legitimate and democratic " sentiments . Lansdale cautioned Diệm against electoral fraud , confident that Diệm would win a free election : " While I 'm away I don 't want to suddenly read that you have won by 99 @.@ 99 % . I would know that it 's rigged then . " U.S. officials thought that a fair election would have seen Diệm poll between 60 % and 70 % of the vote . 
 Under the <unk> Accords and the subsequent legislation that created the State of Vietnam in 1949 , Bảo Đại 's position as head of state was neither permanent nor indefinite . Sovereignty was presumed to rest solely upon the people , with Bảo Đại being a mere conduit . As a result , the referendum itself was within the law . Diệm had not been elected to his post , so he saw the referendum as an opportunity to rebuff opponents , who claimed that he was undemocratic and autocratic . The event also gave Diệm an opportunity to boost his prestige by defeating Bảo Đại in a head @-@ to @-@ head contest . It was previously agreed that a National Assembly would be elected first , but Diệm went ahead with the plebiscite , which meant that he would have total power if he deposed Bảo Đại before a legislature was formed . 
 U.S. diplomats were concerned that the move would be seen as a power grab , as Diệm was organising and driving an electoral process in which he was a candidate . The Americans felt that a legislature should be formed first and that the body should oversee the referendum , but Diệm ignored their advice . Ambassador G. Frederick Reinhardt informed Washington that Diệm had no intention of allowing a level playing field for the opposition , and that the foreign press had already made much of Diệm 's democratic pronouncements being a facade . The Department of State agreed and opted to avoid trumpeting the referendum as an exercise in democracy for fear of attracting negative reactions to their foreign policy . Nevertheless , U.S. officials in Vietnam were pleased with the referendum , as they saw it as an opportunity to strengthen South Vietnam and avoid defeat to the communists , as they saw a republican model as being more robust . 
 Having declared his disdain for the 1956 reunification elections , Diệm saw the referendum as the first step in creating a long @-@ term state to rule over South Vietnam . He repeatedly said that the creation of a legislature and a constitution for his new state would follow the referendum . 
 Diệm reportedly saw the poll as an opportunity to legitimise him as a symbol of Vietnamese democracy , so that he could frame and justify his refusal to participate in national elections as a struggle between freedom and communist authoritarianism . Diệm asserted that South Vietnam would eventually reunify the nation under a democratic administration and liberate their northern compatriots from communist oppression , and championed the referendum as a first step in nurturing democracy . His support base was to use this as a means of justifying the deposal of Bảo Đại , citing past decisions that according to them , were pro @-@ communist . 
 One of Diệm 's main themes was that the referendum would usher in a new era of unprecedented democracy : " This shall be but the first step made by our people in the free use of our political rights . " The day before the poll , Diệm said : " This 23 October , for the first time in our country 's history , our men and women will exercise one of many basic civil rights of a democracy , the right to vote . " A government proclamation four days before the poll said : " Dear compatriots , proclaim your will forcefully ! Go forward firmly in the path of Freedom , Independence and Democracy ! " 
 = = Campaign = = 
 Diệm ran a personal attack campaign against the head of state , for whom campaigning was prohibited . The army and national police went about enforcing the ban on pro @-@ Bảo Đại and anti @-@ Diệm activities . Police went from door to door , explaining the consequences of failing to vote . They organized conferences in rural villages and addressed the populace with loudspeakers . In general , Diệm 's line of attack was to portray Bảo Đại as a drunken womanizer who was preoccupied with immoral pleasures and unconcerned with the problems of the populace . Vietnam 's monarchic tradition was built on Confucianism and the emperor 's Mandate of Heaven , and Diệm 's campaign claimed Bảo Đại had lost this mandate through his debauched lifestyle . According to Joseph Buttinger , who was based in Vietnam as the second in command at the International Rescue Committee , the methods used to influence the poll were " outrageous " . Donald Lancaster , a journalist who covered the poll , said " Whereas Bao Dai was given no opportunity to defend himself , the government @-@ controlled press proceeded to overwhelm him with scurrilous abuse . " Diệm later banned Bảo Đại from entering the State of Vietnam . 
 Diệm 's advertising included the parading of giant pageant @-@ style floats of Bảo Đại through the streets of Saigon , depicted with bags of money on his shoulders , a deck of cards in his hands , and with naked blonde women and bottles of cognac in his arms . This was a reference to the head of state 's reputation for opulence , gambling and womanising . In particular , the blonde hair referred to Bảo Đại 's purported penchant for European mistresses with whom he liaised on the French Riviera . Bảo Đại 's dummy was accompanied by that of a Frenchman putting gold into his pockets , thereby questioning his nationalist credentials . Posters and effigies associating Bảo Đại with a pig 's head were disseminated , while a prominent newspaper composed and encouraged the people to sing insulting songs about Bảo Đại . 
 Walls and public transport vehicles were plastered with slogans , including " Beware of the evil king Bảo Đại 's preference for gambling , women , wine , milk , and butter . Those who vote for him betray their country . " Aside from referring to his opulent lifestyle , other slogans such as " Bao Dai , puppet king selling his country " , and " Bao Dai , master keeper of gambling dens and brothels " , referred to his alleged softness towards the communists . The radio was used to verbally abuse Bảo Đại , who was accused of treason and corruption in these broadcasts . 
 On the other hand , the bachelor Diệm was described as the " hero of the people " and " father of all children " . The slogans exhorted the populace to vote for the prime minister because " To vote for the revolutionary man Ngo Dinh Diem is to build a society of welfare and justice " . They portrayed Diệm as a patriotic and nationalist anti @-@ communist , proclaiming " To kill communists , depose the king , [ and ] struggle against colonialists is a citizen 's duty in Free Vietnam . " 
 Diệm 's government @-@ controlled press overwhelmed Bảo Đại with endless personal propaganda attacks , with special editions of newspapers being devoted to polemical biographical accounts of the former emperor . This allowed Diệm 's campaign to condemn Bảo Đại with much more salacious detail than was possible through mere slogans . This started in August when the daily newspaper Thoi Dai started a three @-@ week series that disseminated unsubstantiated and scandalous details about Bảo Đại 's life . These were written by editorialist Hong Van , who called Bảo Đại a " dung beetle who sold his country for personal glory " . Van claimed Bảo Đại was the illegitimate son of Emperor Khải Định , alleging Khải Định had been infertile and married a maid , before claiming the maid 's son , by another man , as his own . The paper claimed Bảo Đại was " big like a <unk> , had many children , and was very fond of women " while Khải Định was uncomfortable with females , hinting that the different personalities were inconsistent with a common biological lineage . 
 Capitalising on anti @-@ French sentiment , the paper went on to discuss Bảo Đại 's upbringing in France , claiming that he was already womanising as a teenager because of his European upbringing . Bảo Đại later married an ethnic Vietnamese French citizen , who became Empress Nam <unk> , who had been raised Catholic . The editorials accused her of being a French agent and claimed she had treated the queen mother badly , a serious character flaw as Confucianism strongly emphasized respect for elders . Hong Van went on to claim that Bảo Đại 's sequence of Gallic lovers was an indication that colonial officials were successfully using sex to turn the head of state into a puppet of France . 
 The culmination of the newspaper campaign was a satirical pornographic cartoon , entitled " The Story of Bảo Đại " . It summarized the scandalous depictions of the head of state made by Thoi Dai in the preceding weeks and was published on 19 October , four days before the referendum . The pictures featured full frontal nude depictions of Bảo Đại and his mistresses , with genitalia clearly visible , including a frame showing a naked blonde performing an erotic dance for the head of state . 
 Aside from painting Bảo Đại as a sexually insatiable glutton , Diệm 's campaign also attacked the head of state 's nationalist credentials . They criticised him as being too soft in his dealings with French colonial authorities , and for serving as the head of state of the Empire of Vietnam , a puppet regime set up by Imperial Japan after they invaded during World War II . They also accused him of ceding half the country to the communists . The communists had already captured more than half the country on the battlefield , and Diệm claimed he had no choice , but Diệm 's campaign portrayed him as incompetent and unwilling to take the blame . 
 Diệm used the Ministry of Information 's electoral education campaign as a partisan political tool . Instead of using it purely to explain the democratic process , the campaign was used to extol Diệm and his allies . After explaining what democracy was , a pamphlet outlined why <unk> a chief @-@ of @-@ state is a vital act . After elaborating on the powers of the head of state , the pamphlet went on to champion Diệm as an anti @-@ communist who could defend people 's freedom , while explaining why Bảo Đại was unfit to lead , saying that he did not have respect among the international community . 
 On 15 October , Bảo Đại issued a statement protesting against the referendum . He urged the governments of France , the United Kingdom , the United States , India and even the Soviet Union not to recognise Diệm , asserting that he was an obstacle to the reunification of Vietnam under the Geneva Accords . He accused Diệm 's poll of being " a governmental activity which conforms neither to the profound sentiment of the Vietnamese people nor to the common cause of peace " . 
 On 18 October , he made the token gesture of formally dismissing Diệm . The following day , he denounced " the police methods " of Diệm 's " dictatorship " and warned the Vietnamese populace " against a regime that was bound to lead them to ruin , famine , and war " . Bảo Đại accused Diệm of trying to foment conflict between the French and the Americans . On the eve of the poll , Bảo Đại stated " I can even tell you that I know the percentage of favourable votes that Mr. Diem has decided to obtain . " 
 = = Other opposition = = 
 The staging of the election was subsidised by foreign funding . The United States government and a combination of American Roman Catholic charities contributed US $ 2 million each . Ba Cụt , a leader of an anti @-@ government Hòa Hảo religious sect , distributed a pamphlet condemning Diệm as an American puppet , citing the funding as proof and further asserting that Diệm was going to " Catholicize " the country . The Vietnamese Socialist Party , which was affiliated to the Hòa Hảo , claimed Diệm had " bribed the world of laborers and young students to petition in support of Diem 's rise to chief @-@ of @-@ state and to petition in favor of deposing Bao Dai " , using the American election funding . Another Hòa Hảo rebel leader , General Trần Văn Soái , assailed Diệm 's undemocratic regime and declared the referendum illegal . He invited " friendly countries and the people of Vietnam to distrust this political maneuver " . Diệm had earlier told a cabinet minister that there was only one political party – Nhu 's outfit , and went about eradicating opposition by force . Opponents claimed Diệm 's declarations about the value of democracy were hollow . 
 = = Logistics and voting = = 
 Lansdale advised Diệm to print his ballots in red , while those of Bảo Đại were printed in green . In Vietnam , red is associated with good luck and prosperity , whereas green is often associated with a cuckold and bad luck . Diệm 's red ballots pictured him with youthful and modern @-@ looking people , while Bảo Đại 's photo was placed in old @-@ fashioned robes , which he never wore . In addition , Bảo Đại 's portrait showed him to appear dazed and bloated , while Diệm and those surrounding him were smiling and appeared to be energetic . The ballot claimed that a vote for Diệm would be a vote for democracy , stating " I depose Bảo Đại and recognise Ngô Đình Diệm as Head of State , charged with the commission of setting up a democratic regime . " Bảo Đại 's ballot read " I do not depose Bảo Đại and do not regard Ngô Đình Diệm as the Head of State charged with the commission of setting up a democratic regime . " The voters would place the red or green ballot into the box , according to their preference , while discarding the other , which meant the voting was actually not secret . 
 The logistics of the referendum were organised and supervised by Diệm 's brother and confidant , Nhu , who was the leader of the family 's secret Cần Lao party , which supplied the Ngôs ' electoral base . Reports of violence and intimidation were widespread . During the referendum , Nhu 's staff told voters to throw away the green ballots . Those who disobeyed were often chased down and beaten , with pepper sauce and water sometimes being forced into their nostrils . The violations were particularly flagrant in central Vietnam , a region over which another of Diệm 's younger brothers , Ngô Đình Cẩn , ruled . Cẩn was based in the former imperial capital city of Huế , home of the Nguyễn Dynasty and a source of support for Bảo Đại . He stifled this support by ordering the police to arrest 1 @,@ 200 people for political reasons in the week leading up to the vote . In the city of Hội An , several people were killed in election violence on the day of the poll . Voting started at 07 : 00 and ended at 17 : 00 . 
 = = Counting and results = = 
 Diệm 's government formulated procedural regulations ostensibly designed to ensure results and ballots were correctly accounted for and to prevent election fraud . In reality however , the votes were counted without independent supervision , which resulted in Diệm being credited with 98 @.@ 2 % of the vote . The prime minister tallied 605 @,@ 025 votes in Saigon , although only 450 @,@ 000 voters were registered in the capital . Diệm 's tally exceeded the registration numbers in other districts . French newspapers claimed that only half of the registered voters in Saigon had actually voted , and that the rest had boycotted the election , implying that more than 60 % of the votes in the capital were not authentic . Defenders of Diệm claim this was due to recently arrived , mostly Catholic , refugees from North Vietnam who voted without being enrolled , rather than large @-@ scale ballot stuffing . 
 Diệm 's regime had announced that 5 @,@ 335 @,@ 668 people were eligible to vote , but when the results were declared , there were 5 @,@ 784 @,@ 752 ballots . Diệm 's government claimed his candidacy had been endorsed by the mother of Bảo Đại , although Diệm had ordered the military to confiscate her family 's property and evict her from the land . The near unanimous voter turnout and support for Diệm was replicated in highland and Mekong Delta swamp areas , which were not even under the control of the government and its Vietnamese National Army . In some districts of the Mekong Delta , overwhelming tallies for Diệm in excess of 90 % of the registered voters were recorded , even though the Hòa Hảo warlord Ba Cụt and his army had prevented voting . 
 The referendum was widely condemned for being fraudulent . Historian and writer Jessica Chapman said " Even Diệm apologists like Anthony Trawick <unk> and American CIA officer Edward Lansdale concur with the prime minister 's harshest critics on the conclusion that the South Vietnamese government was either incapable of or unwilling to hold a truly free , representative plebiscite " . A CIA report written in 1966 adjudged the poll to be the most heavily manipulated in the first 11 years of South Vietnam 's history . The U.S. government privately concluded that the monopoly Diệm had on the media and the election campaign was a greater factor in the victory than intimidation and the fact that the voting was effectively public . Reinhardt cabled Washington , saying that the " referendum proved [ a ] resounding success for [ the ] Diem government " . He indicated that the poll results were not necessarily a reflection of reality by adding that the result did not show that Diệm had majority support but that he was able to control the country , effectively unchallenged . The U.S. government was heartened by Diệm 's apparent ability to negate communist and other opposition . 
 The scholar Bernard B. Fall stated that " there is not the slightest doubt that this plebiscite was only a shade more fraudulent than most electoral tests under a dictatorship " . The American journalist Stanley Karnow cited the dubious plebiscite as evidence of Diệm 's " mandarin mentality " . Chapman wrote that " ... no amount of unilateral campaigning , anti @-@ Bảo Đại sentiment , or Confucian political restraint could explain Diệm 's 98 percent margin of victory in a politically heterogeneous South Vietnam . Corruption and intimidation must have played a significant role . " Buttinger said that while the monarchy was " another rotten relic of Vietnam 's past " and Bảo Đại " its last , unworthy representative " , fraud and intimidation were unnecessary as Diệm would have won easily in any event . Historian David Anderson said the victory " was not a true representation of Diệm 's power or popularity . The emperor 's weakness , the disarray of the political opposition , and other such factors explain his triumph " . 
 = = Reaction and aftermath = = 
 Three days after the vote , Diệm proclaimed the creation of the Republic of Vietnam , naming himself as its president . He said " The October 23rd plebiscite in which [ the people of South Vietnam ] took such an enthusiastic part , constitutes an approval of the policies pursued thus far and at the same time augurs a whole new era for the future of our country . " Diệm reiterated that he would not partake in national reunification elections , saying that they would be futile unless " true liberty " came about in the communist North Vietnam , which impressed American observers , who feared a total communist takeover . 
 Having claimed the election was entirely without irregularities , the United States government hailed Diệm as a new hero of the " free world " . Senator Mike Mansfield ( D @-@ MT ) claimed the referendum " was a reflection of their [ the Vietnamese people 's ] search for a leader who would respond to their needs ... they sensed that Diệm could provide that kind of leadership . " Mansfield had been a professor of Asian history before entering politics ; as a result his opinions about Vietnam were more influential and held in high regard by his fellow senators . Archives of policy discussions show that the Americans were concerned more about the negative image created by Diem 's autocratic and <unk> style among the international community , rather than its possible effects on national cohesion . The US State Department spokesman said " the people of Viet @-@ Nam have spoken , and we , of course , recognise their decision " . An official congratulatory statement from the department said " The Department of State is gratified that according to reports the referendum was conducted in such an orderly and efficient manner and that the people of Viet @-@ Nam have made their choice unmistakably clear ... we look forward to a continuation of the friendly relations between the Government of Viet @-@ Nam and the United States . " 
 Reaction to Diệm 's victory among the American press varied with geographic location . Newspapers in the Midwest hailed Diệm 's win as a triumph for democracy and extolled the new president as a champion of democracy . However , The New York Times said that the extreme margin of victory made " Diem 's administrative control look more pervasive than is thought to be the case by a number of observers here . " However , the paper also obligingly claimed the poll a " sound democratic procedure " and a " public tribute to a strong @-@ willed leader " . Reader 's Digest called it an " overwhelming endorsement " and dubbed Diệm a " beacon of light , showing the way to free people " . 
 Diệm 's victory was seen as a blow to French stature in Vietnam , as the former colonial power had helped to set up Bảo Đại 's State of Vietnam in 1949 . They consistently opposed Diệm and his policies , and unsuccessfully tried to impede him . The U.S. media regarded Diệm 's victory as a signal that the United States would be the only Western power in South Vietnam . Some felt that this would enable Diệm to rule effectively without French hindrance , while others felt that this would leave too much of a burden on the American government . The French media and diplomatic corps viewed the result as a humiliation . Before the poll , French officials had privately predicted Diệm would dissolve the French High Command and use any victory as justification for scrapping the national reunification elections . The French media viewed the poll as undemocratic and a plot by the Americans to sabotage any prospect of national reunification , but France recognised the Republic of Vietnam soon after . 
 Diệm severed economic relations with France on 9 December 1955 , and withdrew from the French Union shortly afterwards . Neither the Soviet Union nor communist China overtly objected to Diệm 's actions in creating a new state in the southern half of Vietnam . Nevertheless , by the time of Diệm 's deposal and assassination in 1963 , France bought 46 @.@ 3 % of South Vietnam 's exports and accounted for most of the foreign investment in the country . French cultural influences and the language remained prevalent . 
 In January 1956 , with no legislature and constitution in place , Diệm used his absolute power to dissolve the Revolutionary Council by launching police raids on the members , forcing those from the Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo who had rallied to his side to go on the run . As a result , they turned against him . 
 = Battle of Kolubara = 
 The Battle of Kolubara ( Serbian : <unk> <unk> , <unk> bitka ) ( German : Schlacht an der Kolubara ) was fought between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia in November and December 1914 , during the Serbian Campaign of World War I. It commenced on 16 November , when the Austro @-@ Hungarians under command of Oskar Potiorek reached the Kolubara River during their third invasion of Serbia that year , having captured the strategic town of Valjevo and forced the Serbian Army to undertake a series of retreats . The Serbs withdrew from their capital , Belgrade , on 29 and 30 November , and it quickly fell into the hands of the Austro @-@ Hungarians . On 2 December , the Serbian Army launched a surprise counterattack all along the front . Valjevo and Užice were retaken by the Serbs on 8 December and the Austro @-@ Hungarians retreated to Belgrade , which 5th Army commander <unk> Ritter von Frank deemed to be untenable . The Austro @-@ Hungarians abandoned the city between 14 and 15 December and retreated back into Austria @-@ Hungary , allowing the Serbs to retake their capital the following day . 
 Both the Austro @-@ Hungarians and the Serbs suffered heavy casualties , with more than 20 @,@ 000 dead on each side . The defeat humiliated Austria @-@ Hungary , which had hoped to occupy Serbia by the end of 1914 . On 22 December , Potiorek and von Frank were relieved of their respective commands , and the 5th and 6th armies were merged into a single 5th Army of 95 @,@ 000 men . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 28 June 1914 , Bosnian Serb student Gavrilo Princip assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria in Sarajevo . The assassination precipitated the July Crisis , which led Austria @-@ Hungary to issue an ultimatum to Serbia on 23 July on suspicion that the assassination had been planned in Belgrade . The Austro @-@ Hungarian government made the ultimatum intentionally unacceptable to Serbia , and it was indeed rejected . The Austro @-@ Hungarians declared war on Serbia on 28 July and that same day the Serbs destroyed all bridges on the Sava and Danube rivers in order to prevent the Austro @-@ Hungarians from using them during any future invasion . Belgrade was shelled the following day , marking the beginning of World War I. 
 Fighting in Eastern Europe began with the first Austro @-@ Hungarian invasion of Serbia in early August 1914 , under the command of Oskar Potiorek . The number of Austro @-@ Hungarian troops assigned to the invasion was far smaller than the 308 @,@ 000 @-@ strong force intended when war was declared . This was because a large portion of the Austro @-@ Hungarian 2nd Army had moved to the Russian Front , reducing the number of troops involved in the initial stages of the invasion to approximately 200 @,@ 000 . On the other hand , the Serbs could muster some 450 @,@ 000 men to oppose the Austro @-@ Hungarians upon full mobilization . The main elements to face the Austro @-@ Hungarians were the 1st , 2nd , 3rd and Užice armies , with a combined strength of approximately 180 @,@ 000 men . The Serbian Army was commanded by Crown Prince Alexander , with the chief of the Serbian general staff , Radomir Putnik , who had commanded Serb forces in the Balkan Wars , as his deputy and de facto military leader . Petar Bojović , Stepa Stepanović , Pavle Jurišić Šturm and Miloš <unk> commanded the 1st , 2nd , 3rd and Užice armies , respectively . 
 The Balkan Wars had only just concluded and Serbia was still recovering . Over 36 @,@ 000 Serbian soldiers had been killed and 55 @,@ 000 seriously wounded . Few recruits had been gained from the newly acquired territories , and the Serbian Army had been stretched by the need to garrison them against Albanian insurgents and the threat of Bulgarian attack . To compound matters , the Serbs were dangerously short of artillery , and had only just begun to replenish their ammunition stocks . Their supply problems also extended to more basic items . Many soldiers lacked any uniform other than a standard issue greatcoat and a traditional Serbian cap known as a šajkača . Rifles were also in critically short supply . It was estimated that full mobilization would see some 50 @,@ 000 Serbian soldiers with no equipment at all . The Austro @-@ Hungarians , on the other hand , possessed an abundance of modern rifles and had twice as many machine guns and field guns as the Serbs . They also had better stocks of munitions , as well as much better transport and industrial infrastructure behind them . The Serbs had a slight advantage over the Austro @-@ Hungarians as many of their soldiers were experienced veterans of the Balkan Wars and better trained than their Austro @-@ Hungarian counterparts . Serb soldiers were also highly motivated , which compensated in part for their lack of weaponry . 
 The Serbs beat back an Austro @-@ Hungarian invasion in August , at the Battle of Cer . It marked the first Allied victory over the Central Powers in World War I. Potiorek was humiliated by the defeat and was determined to resume the assault against the Serbs . He was given permission in September to launch another invasion of Serbia provided that he " [ did not ] risk anything that might lead to a further fiasco . " Under pressure from the Russians to launch their own offensive and keep as many Austro @-@ Hungarian troops as possible away from the Eastern Front , the Serbs invaded Bosnia in September with the help of Chetnik irregulars but were repulsed after a month of fighting in what came to be known as the Battle of the Drina . Bojović was wounded during the battle and was replaced by Živojin Mišić as commander of the Serbian 1st Army . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Austro @-@ Hungarian plans = = = 
 The <unk> ( AOK ) acknowledged that an undefeated Serbia severed Austria @-@ Hungary 's connection to the Ottoman Empire and prevented the completion of the Berlin – Baghdad railway . The AOK also realized that the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army 's inability to defeat Serbia would discourage neutral countries — such as Bulgaria , Romania and Greece — from joining the Central Powers and would tempt Italy to open up a third front against Austria @-@ Hungary . Nevertheless , the AOK was hesitant to authorize a third invasion of Serbia . This changed in September 1914 , when Austro @-@ Hungarian troops discovered a map in an abandoned Semlin bookshop , titled The New Division of Europe . Originally printed in a Russian newspaper , the map was widely sold in Serbia and depicted the borders of Europe as they would appear following the war . Germany was to be divided into northern and southern confederations and Austria @-@ Hungary was to be abolished , its eastern provinces given to Russia , Romania , the Czechs and the Hungarians , and its southern provinces divided between Serbia and Italy . Alarmed by the prospect of Austria @-@ Hungary 's disintegration , Emperor Franz Joseph personally authorized a third invasion of Serbia in early October 1914 . 
 Having just repelled the Serbian incursion into Bosnia , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army regrouped and positioned itself for one final invasion before winter set in . Potiorek was again placed in charge of Austro @-@ Hungarian forces and was given command of the Austro @-@ Hungarian 6th Army . The Austro @-@ Hungarian 5th Army was commanded by <unk> Ritter von Frank . In total , the Austro @-@ Hungarians had 450 @,@ 000 troops at their disposal . The Serbian Army had 400 @,@ 000 soldiers ready to face the Austro @-@ Hungarian advance . In mid @-@ October , the Austro @-@ Hungarians launched another thrust into northwestern Serbia ; Potiorek appeared confident . " Soldiers of the 5th and 6th armies , " he said . " The goal of this war is nearly attained — the complete destruction of the enemy . The three @-@ month campaign is almost over ; we must only break the enemy 's last resistance before the onset of winter . " The Serbs were exhausted and demoralized . In a telegram to Putnik dated 27 October 1914 , Stepanović complained that the 2nd Army did not have enough shells to resist the Austro @-@ Hungarians effectively and requested that he be removed from his command ; Putnik denied the request , but ordered all units to resist the Austro @-@ Hungarian advance for as long as possible before retreating . This strategy had worked in Putnik 's favour during the summer months , but heavy rainfall in September and early October had reduced all of Serbia 's roads to " muddy quagmires " that made movement of troops , guns and wagons extremely difficult . Potiorek recognized that the Serbian Army was in a difficult situation ; he was certain that a third invasion would bring him the decisive victory that he so desperately wanted . In Vienna and Sarajevo , Austro @-@ Hungarian officials began planning for the occupation and dismantling of Serbia . The country was to be plundered and its territory used to bribe the neutral Balkan states into joining the Central Powers , with the Romanians getting the region of <unk> Krajina and the Bulgarians getting Macedonia and southeastern Serbia . The Austro @-@ Hungarians intended to annex everything west of the Morava River , as well as the cities of Scutari ( Shkodër ) and Durazzo ( Durrës ) in northern Albania . The Serbs living west of the Morava — or " the compact masses of the Serbian element " , as the Austro @-@ Hungarians called them — were to be expelled and replaced with Austrian settlers ( <unk> ) , who would " change the psychology [ of the region ] , making Serbia more Habsburg [ and ] less Serbian in outlook . " Ludwig <unk> , section chief of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Finance Ministry , wrote Potiorek in October , recommending " the West <unk> of the Serbs with a strong hand " as soon as Serbia was occupied . 
 Potiorek planned to launch a converging attack across northern and western Serbia ; the 5th Army was to capture Valjevo and envelope the Kolubara River from the north , and the 6th Army was to secure the <unk> plateau and outflank Serbian units on the Kolubara from the south . The capture of the southeastern Serbian city of Niš was Potiorek 's main objective ; Niš had been Serbia 's capital since July and was a crucial transportation hub for its military . It also acted as a clearing house for munitions produced at the arsenal in nearby Kragujevac . The city 's capture would effectively cut Serbia in two and scatter the Serbian Army . 
 = = = Third Austro @-@ Hungarian invasion of Serbia = = = 
 All of the valleys of northwestern Serbia were swamped by constant rainfall . The mountains had been covered in snow since early October . Acknowledging the opportunity that such conditions presented , Putnik told his closest advisors : " All my strategy consists in placing the ' Serbian national mud ' between the enemy 's fighting line and his supplies . " On 31 October , von Frank 's 5th Army pushed down into the region between the Sava and Drina rivers while Potiorek 's 6th Army drove west across the Drina and into the <unk> plateau . Austria @-@ Hungary 's third invasion of Serbia commenced on 6 November 1914 , with intense artillery fire strafing a series of Serbian border towns . On 7 November , the Austro @-@ Hungarian 5th and 6th armies attacked across the Drina . Despite being outnumbered and in desperate need of ammunition , the Serbian Army offered fierce resistance but was forced into strategic withdrawal . The 3rd Army fell back against a road by the Jadar River in an effort to block the Austro @-@ Hungarian advance towards Valjevo , while the 1st Army retreated southward into the Serbian interior and the Užice Army managed to prevent the Austro @-@ Hungarians from crossing the Drina . 
 On 8 November , the Austro @-@ Hungarians attacked the Serbian 2nd Army near Cer Mountain and came within 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 99 mi ) of the Serbian frontline , entrenching themselves at the foot of the mountain . The 2nd Army was given orders to hold the Austro @-@ Hungarians down for as long as possible and , if its position became untenable , retreat towards the right bank of the Dobrava River and position itself so as to block the approach to Valjevo . Elsewhere , the Austro @-@ Hungarians drove a wedge between the 1st and 3rd Army and forced another Serbian retreat . Later that day , the Serbian Government held a joint session with the Serbian Supreme Command with regard to Serbia 's worsening military position . Putnik stressed that it was critical for Serbia to hold the Kolubara and the towns within its vicinity and suggested that the Serbs make a separate peace with Austria @-@ Hungary if this proved impossible . This notion was rejected by the Prime Minister of Serbia , Nikola Pašić , who urged further resistance to the Austro @-@ Hungarians and threatened the resignation of his government if peace discussions began . The session ended with the Serbian Government and Supreme Command agreeing to fight on . 
 = = = Serbian retreat = = = 
 Putnik reasoned that Austro @-@ Hungarian supply lines would become overstretched as their forces pressed deeper into Serbia while the Serbs would continue to hold the railheads in the Serbian interior . On 10 November , he ordered a general retreat from the Jadar and withdrew the Serbian 2nd Army to Ub and positioned the 1st and 3rd armies north and west of Valjevo . Meanwhile , the Užice Army took up positions to defend the town from which it took its name . The Austro @-@ Hungarians pressed after the Serbs , hoping to capture the Obrenovac – Valjevo railroad . Clashes ensued and the Serbian Army managed to prevent the Austro @-@ Hungarians from taking the railroad for a time . It quickly became clear to Putnik that he had underestimated the Austro @-@ Hungarians , who managed to bring their heavy artillery through the muddy Serbian country roads . They established firing positions on the Serbian side of the Drina and began targeting the Serbian Army , which suffered heavy casualties . Morale plummeted amongst the Serbs , who were already significantly demoralized due a lack of cold @-@ weather clothing and ammunition and exhausted by the long retreat towards the Serbian interior . Putnik realized that his forces would need to regroup if they were to provide any effective resistance to the Austro @-@ Hungarians . He ordered that Valjevo be abandoned and had the Serbian Army take up positions on the Kolubara . The retreat towards the river was long and excruciating , with the Serbs being forced to destroy all bridges and telephone lines so that they would not fall into Austro @-@ Hungarian hands . The Serbian Army also abandoned most of its heavy equipment to speed up the withdrawal . Seeing that the situation was critical and that Serbian forces were lacking artillery , ammunition and supplies , Pašić sought the help of the Triple Entente . He sent a telegram to his envoys abroad , which read : " Urgent help is required . Beg and plead . " France provided the Serbs with munitions and supplies . Representatives of Russia and the United Kingdom " expressed understanding " , but those countries failed to deliver weapons and munitions . 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarians entered Valjevo on 15 November , prompting wild public celebrations in Vienna . Franz Joseph praised Potiorek for seizing the town ; cities across the empire made Potiorek an honorary citizen and Sarajevo even named a street after him . Valjevo 's capture led the Austro @-@ Hungarians to believe that they were on the verge of defeating Serbia and that the Serbian Army was no longer a coherent fighting force , but the scorched earth tactics employed by the Serbs during their withdrawal complicated the Austro @-@ Hungarian advance . Although the Austro @-@ Hungarians were right in assuming that the Serbian Army was exhausted , its defensive positions along the Kolubara had been prepared months in advance . Putnik 's carefully timed withdrawals had ensured that the losses of the Serbian Army were lighter than if it had stood and fought pitched battles with the Austro @-@ Hungarians . Moreover , the geography of northwestern Serbia favoured defensive operations since the approaches to the Kolubara did not offer any cover to armies invading from the direction of Austria @-@ Hungary and the river itself was surrounded by mountainous terrain . In October , the Serbs had fortified the <unk> and <unk> mountain ranges in anticipation of an Austro @-@ Hungarian attack . This gave them an advantage over the Austro @-@ Hungarians as it placed them in control of all roads leading to Kragujevac . The Serbs also established a series of field fortifications blocking the approach to Niš . The extensive series of fortifications and the difficulty of the terrain which they faced left the Austro @-@ Hungarians with no choice but to conduct operations in the gruelling Serbian countryside with almost no lines of communication . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = 16 – 26 November = = = 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarians reached the Kolubara on 16 November and launched an assault against Serbian defensive positions there the following day . The Serbs managed to force the Austro @-@ Hungarians back and over the course of the next five days , the two armies fought a series of battles under heavy rain and snowfall . Both sides suffered heavy casualties , with a large number of soldiers succumbing to frostbite and hypothermia . 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarian assault began at Lazarevac , a strategically located town just south of Belgrade whose capture would have given them access to the <unk> railway line and the ability to outflank the Serbian forces holding the road to Belgrade . Further south , the Austro @-@ Hungarians attacked the Serbian 1st Army . During this assault , they made the mistake of attacking its stronger right flank and were met with determined Serbian resistance which prevented them from gaining any ground . Military historian David Jordan notes that had the Austro @-@ Hungarians attacked the junction splitting the 1st and Užice armies , they might have been able to split the Serbs down the centre and gotten hold of an unimpeded passage to the Morava River . The Serbian 1st Army was quick to reinforce its left flank , realizing that any subsequent attack against it would be far less easy to repel . 
 During the night of 18 November , the Austro @-@ Hungarians moved into position to carry out a further assault , which began the following morning . The Austro @-@ Hungarians ' main goal was to break through the defenses of the Serbian 2nd Army , concentrated primarily around Lazarevac , and to drive the Serbian 1st Army back towards the town of Gornji <unk> while simultaneously assaulting Serbian positions around the villages of Čovka and Vrače Brdo which threatened the Austro @-@ Hungarian flank . The Austro @-@ Hungarians gained a foothold at Vrače Brdo by the evening of 19 November , and seized higher ground from the Serbs further to the south . The Serbian 1st Army was forced to retreat the following day , giving the Austro @-@ Hungarians the ability to advance down the main routes leading to Kragujevac . Potiorek believed it was possible that Putnik was trying to lure the Austro @-@ Hungarians deeper into Serbia for the purpose of encircling them and then attacking their flanks , but correctly assessed that the Serbian Army was in no position to carry out such an attack . 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarians made a renewed attack against the 1st Army on 21 November , forcing the Serbs back after a series of brutal engagements . The Austro @-@ Hungarians then advanced towards Mount <unk> , aiming to drive the 1st Serbian Army from its positions there . The Serbs withdrew from the mountain after three days of heavy fighting ; Potiorek decided not to pursue the retreating Serb units , allowing them to make an orderly withdrawal . The Austro @-@ Hungarians had suffered heavy casualties and the intensity of the fighting caused them to lose cohesion . As they advanced deeper into Serbia , the terrain became increasingly difficult and exhausted the already tired Austro @-@ Hungarian soldiers . While the Serbian 1st Army withdrew , the 2nd and 3rd armies fiercely resisted the Austro @-@ Hungarian advance . This led Potiorek to reinforce his positions around Lazarevac , which he aimed to capture and use as a pivot from which to attack Kragujevac while his right flank pushed down the West Morava valley . Austro @-@ Hungarian advances convinced Potiorek that his army had the upper hand . He envisaged that his forces would pursue the surviving soldiers from the Serbian 2nd and 3rd Armies and predicted that the Serbian 1st and Užice armies would be forced to manoeuvre towards Belgrade and Lazarevac , where they would be encircled and destroyed . Combat on the outskirts of Lazarevac intensified once again as a result , and the Serbian Army managed to repulse every Austro @-@ Hungarian assault despite a lack of ammunition . The Serbs quickly began to run out of shells and Stepanović asked the Serbian Supreme Command that the artillery of the 2nd Army be redirected to its rear , as he felt that its failure to contribute to the defense of Lazarevac frustrated his troops and was bad for morale . Putnik instructed Stepanović to keep the artillery of the 2nd Army on the front and told him that the Russians had sent artillery shells for its guns . Stepanović was skeptical that the Russians had sent supplies to the Serbs , but kept the artillery of the 2nd Army on the front line as Putnik had instructed . 
 By 24 November , Potiorek was predicting that Serbia would be defeated within a matter of days and appointed Stjepan <unk> to be the country 's governor once it was occupied . The Austro @-@ Hungarians made further gains on 25 November , forcing the Serbian Army from Čovka and Vrače Brdo with an intense artillery bombardment . On 26 November , they attempted to cross the Kolubara at its junction with the Sava River and managed to do so in their initial attack . The Serbs soon counterattacked and forced the invaders back , inflicting 50 percent casualties on the Austro @-@ Hungarians and causing their offensive to grind to a halt . On 27 November , the Serbian Army attacked Čovka and Vrače Brdo and succeeded in forcing the Austro @-@ Hungarians out . 
 = = = Fall of Belgrade = = = 
 Although the Serbian Army had put up fierce resistance and inflicted heavy casualties on the Austro @-@ Hungarians , Putnik became concerned that his lines were over @-@ extended . He began contemplating another strategic withdrawal , one in which Belgrade would have to be evacuated . On the night of 26 – 27 November , the Austro @-@ Hungarian 6th Army attacked all along the front and pushed deeper into the Serbian interior . 
 Defending along an over @-@ extended front , the Serbian Supreme Command decided to abandon Belgrade . The city was evacuated on 29 / 30 November . The Austro @-@ Hungarians entered the city on 1 December , prompting yet more celebrations in Vienna . The Serbian people withdrew alongside their army and many retreated to Niš , where news of Belgrade 's fall was greeted " impassively " , as it had been " expected since the beginning of the war " . Albin <unk> , a German agent in Niš , reported : " More refugees are arriving by the day , and despite many people being sent on south , there are certainly still 60 @,@ 000 people here . " Germany responded to the capture of Belgrade with delight and sent a congratulatory telegram to the Austro @-@ Hungarian leadership . The Austro @-@ Hungarians ascertained that their war with Serbia would soon be over and began preparing for the country 's occupation . On 2 December , the anniversary of Franz Joseph 's 66th year on the throne , Potiorek wrote that he was " laying town and fortress Belgrade at His Majesty 's feet " . 
 = = = Serbian counterattack = = = 
 It became increasingly clear to both Potiorek and Putnik that Austro @-@ Hungarian supply lines were over @-@ extended and so , on 1 December , Potiorek ordered the Austro @-@ Hungarian 6th Army to stop and wait for the 5th Army to secure its supply lines east of the Valjevo railway , resulting in a short pause to all Austro @-@ Hungarian military operations . Mišić exploited this brief respite by withdrawing the Serbian 1st Army a full 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) from the front line and ensured that his soldiers had an opportunity to rest . The Serbian Army then converged around Mount Rudnik , where it received long @-@ promised supplies from its allies via the Niš – Salonika railroad . Putnik 's confidence in the ability of his army to launch a counterattack was restored . On 2 December , he ordered his forces to attack the Austro @-@ Hungarians all along the front and informed his officers that the offensive was to have the specific purpose of improving Serbian morale . Determined to play his part , the aging Serbian king , Peter I , took a rifle and accompanied his troops to the front . The Serbian offensive caught the Austro @-@ Hungarians by surprise , and at the time that the attack was launched they were holding a large military parade through the streets of Belgrade . The Austro @-@ Hungarians now found themselves defending along an over @-@ extended front as Potiorek had just begun strengthening his left flank , leaving the front line very lightly held . Potiorek knew that he could avoid a serious reversal on the battlefield by preventing the Serbian 1st Army from reaching the watershed of the Kolubara and Morava rivers , but the Serbs were confident . They discovered that the Austro @-@ Hungarians had failed to adequately prepare for a Serbian counterattack , as their artillery was positioned well behind the front line . This meant that the Austro @-@ Hungarian defenders would be unable to use their heavy guns to break up any Serbian advance . Rested and resupplied , the Serbs pushed forward towards Belgrade . By the night of 2 December , the Serbian 1st Army pushed several kilometres past Austro @-@ Hungarian lines , taking a large number of prisoners and inflicting heavy casualties on the Austro @-@ Hungarians . The 2nd and 3rd armies captured a number of important positions on high ground , while the Užice Army met fierce resistance but was ultimately able to push the Austro @-@ Hungarians back . 
 The offensive 's initial success served to greatly enhanced the morale of Serbian troops , just as Putnik had wanted . Significantly weakened , the Austro @-@ Hungarians did not have time to recover before the offensive resumed the following morning and they were forced into retreat by the end of the day . On 6 December , the British ambassador to Serbia informed the British Government that the Serb offensive was " progressing brilliantly " . That day , the Serbian Army had broken the Austro @-@ Hungarians at their centre and on their right flank . Outmanoeuvred , the Austro @-@ Hungarians were forced into a full retreat , abandoning their weapons and equipment as they went . Meanwhile , the Austro @-@ Hungarians attempted to consolidate control around Belgrade . On 7 December , they attacked the right flank of the Serbian Army in the city 's outskirts . 
 On 8 December , the Austro @-@ Hungarians fell back against Užice and Valjevo . The Serbs anticipated that their opponents would entrench themselves and attempt to block the Serbian Army 's advance , but the Austro @-@ Hungarians had failed to construct any defensive networks and , as such , were in no position to block the Serbian offensive . The Austro @-@ Hungarians had ensured that Valjevo 's defenses were fortified and had laid down artillery plans for the town 's defense , but their lack of prior preparation meant that the hills surrounding the town were devoid of any significant defensive positions . The Serbs exploited this weakness by manoeuvring around the hills and encircling the Austro @-@ Hungarians , suffering minimal casualties . The Serbian 3rd Army then broke through the defenses of the 6th Army at Mount Suvobor and stormed Valjevo . In Niš , the Bulgarian ambassador to Serbia reported : " The most improbable news from the battleground , sweet to the Serb ear , has been going around since this morning . " He wrote that , in the last three to four days , the Serbian Army had captured one Austro @-@ Hungarian General , 49 officers and more than 20 @,@ 000 troops , as well as 40 cannon and " huge quantities of war matériel " . By 9 December , the Austro @-@ Hungarian counter @-@ offensive around Belgrade lost its momentum and the Austro @-@ Hungarians began to retreat back towards the city centre . One Austro @-@ Hungarian soldier wrote : " We could not have imagined that the Serbs were on our heels , after all we had recently been victorious . " On 10 December , the Serbian Army captured the lower reaches of the Drina , forcing the majority of surviving Austro @-@ Hungarian troops to flee across the river . They did not stop until they had crossed the Sava and the Danube and entered the Banat . Very few Austro @-@ Hungarian soldiers made it back into Bosnia . 
 On 13 December , von Frank informed Potiorek that he considered it impossible for Austro @-@ Hungarian forces to remain in Belgrade for much longer . As a result , Potiorek ordered the Austro @-@ Hungarian forces in the city to withdraw . The Austro @-@ Hungarians left Belgrade on 14 and 15 December and retreated back into Austria @-@ Hungary under the cover of their river monitors on the Sava and the Danube . The Serbian Army re @-@ entered Belgrade on 15 December and was in full control of the city by the end of the following day . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The battle ended in a decisive Serbian victory . A directive issued by the Serbian Supreme Command on 16 December reported : " The recapture of Belgrade marks the successful end of a great and magnificent period in our operations . The enemy is beaten , dispersed , defeated and expelled from our territory once and for all . " Franz Conrad von <unk> , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Chief of the General Staff , attributed the defeat to a Serbian " thunder bolt from the south " . The battle did not achieve any of Austria @-@ Hungary 's objectives : it failed to knock Serbia out of the war , it failed to induce Bulgaria to join the Central Powers and it failed to convince Romania to stay neutral . Austro @-@ Hungarian historians concluded after the battle that defeat by Serbia constituted " a serious diminution in the Dual Monarchy 's prestige and self @-@ confidence " . The battle , like the Battle of Cer before it , drew considerable attention to Serbia and many foreigners came to the country in late 1914 to offer political and humanitarian aid or to fight alongside the Serbian Army . German publicist Maximilian Harden wrote : " Serbia has risen from its grave on the field of Kosovo . From the source of the Kolubara River it will draw courage for the greatest battles of the whole century . " 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarians suffered about 225 @,@ 000 casualties , including 30 @,@ 000 killed , 173 @,@ 000 wounded and 70 @,@ 000 taken prisoner . They reported that 200 of their officers were taken prisoner during the battle and more than 130 cannon , 70 heavy machine @-@ guns and a large quantity of matériel were captured . The Serbs also suffered heavy casualties , with 22 @,@ 000 killed , 91 @,@ 000 wounded and 19 @,@ 000 missing or captured . The Western press was appalled with the scale of atrocities committed by the Austro @-@ Hungarian troops against Serbian civilians , including women and children . William Shepard , of the United Press , confirmed as an eyewitness that at least eighteen towns were fully abandoned , and the whole of northwestern Serbia was nearly depopulated . 
 Mišić was promoted to the rank of vojvoda for his command during the battle . Potiorek , on the other hand , was relieved of command on 22 December for " this most ignominious , rankling and derisory defeat " . The decision reportedly made him suicidal . He was replaced by Archduke Eugen of Austria , who the Austro @-@ Hungarians hoped would " restore Habsburg forces to the glory days of Prince Eugene " . Von Frank was dismissed as commander of the 5th Army and replaced by Karl <unk> von <unk> , who had commanded the 4th Corps at the Battle of Cer . The 5th and 6th armies were then merged into a single 5th Army consisting of 95 @,@ 000 men . 
 Dobrica Ćosić 's novel A Time of Death revolves around the battle . It was adapted into a stage play in 1983 , titled The Battle of Kolubara . 
 = Hot to the Touch = 
 " Hot to the Touch " is the first episode of the fourth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Cole Sanchez and Rebecca Sugar , from a story by Patrick McHale , Kent Osborne , and Pendleton Ward . It originally aired on Cartoon Network on April 2 , 2012 . The episode serves as a direct continuation of the third season episode " Incendium " . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Finn develops a crush on Flame Princess ( voiced by Jessica DiCicco ) and tries to get to know her , which proves difficult due to her destructive and uncontrollable power . 
 The episode was the first to be storyboarded by Sanchez and Sugar ; Sugar 's previous storyboard partner , Adam Muto , helped clean up the episode 's drawings . Sugar wrote a short rap for the episode , rapped by Andy Milonakis . Originally , Sugar wanted Milonakis to write his own , but he felt the song was of quality and he wanted to rap Sugar 's version . " Hot to the Touch " was seen by 2 @.@ 655 million viewers and marked a significant increase in ratings for the series . It received largely positive critical reviews , with reviewers from both The A.V. Club and Slate applauding the episode 's emotional range . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Finn pursues Flame Princess ( voiced by Jessica DiCicco ) , trying to explain to her that he does not want to hurt her . However , Flame Princess , confused by Finn 's aversion to fire , assumes that he merely wants to taunt her . She ventures to the Goblin Kingdom , intent on turning it into her new domain . Finn and Jake , meanwhile , return to the tree fort and , with the help of N.E.P.T.R. ( voiced by Andy Milonakis ) , build flame @-@ retardant battle robots . 
 The two heroes descend on the Goblin Kingdom , and begin putting out the fire ; this , in turn , hurts Flame Princess , both emotionally and physically , judging from her shedding of a single tear . Finn , horrified at the pain he has caused the object of his affections , exits his robot and calls for Flame Princess 's attention , before crying . The tears alert Flame Princess that Finn is a " water elemental " , and that the two will only hurt each other , due to the opposition of their natural states . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Hot to the Touch " was written and storyboarded by Cole Sanchez and Rebecca Sugar , from a story developed by series creator Pendleton Ward , Patrick McHale , and Kent Osborne . This was the first episode that Sugar and Sanchez worked on together ; Sugar 's previous partner Adam Muto served as the episode 's creative director , and also helped clean up the episode 's storyboards . Sugar was excited to get a chance to show how Flame Princess interacted in the Land of Ooo , because in " Incendium " , she was only shown inside of her lantern . The line about Finn wanting to play BMO with Flame Princess was based on Sanchez 's experiences with his high school girlfriend ; he reasoned that , since Finn was younger , his ultimate idea of love would be to sit next to his love interest and play video games . 
 The episode features Andy Milonakis reprising his role as N.E.P.T.R. , a character that was last seen in the first season episode " What is Life ? " The short rap " Working for the Master " that is sung by N.E.P.T.R. was written by Sugar . She had originally planned for her demo version to merely be a filler track , as she expected Milonakis to want to write his own rap . To her surprise , however , Milonakis enjoyed her version and wanted to perform it the way it was written . Sugar 's father , Rob , later released her demo version on his YouTube channel . Series composer Tim Kiefer produced the song 's instrumental . Inspired by Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's penchant for sampling , Kieffer took his music from the season one episode " What is Life ? " and edited it substantially , creating the " clattery <unk> ' beat " featured in the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Hot to the Touch " aired on Cartoon Network on April 2 , 2012 . The episode was seen by 2 @.@ 655 million viewers . The episode also ranked as the number one telecast for all children demographics , according to Nielsen ratings . It also marked a 96 percent increase in ratings , when the numbers for " Hot to the Touch " were compared to the ratings for the same time period in 2011 . The episode first saw physical release as part of the 2014 DVD , Princess Day , which included 16 episodes from the series ' second through sixth seasons . It was later re @-@ released as part of the complete fourth season DVD in October 2014 . 
 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club gave the episode a largely positive review , noting that " in the episode ’ s 10 minutes , the writers create an apt metaphor for pubescent dating , as Finn and FP struggle to make a relationship work . " He noted the symbolism inherent in making Flame Princess a fire elemental , writing that " fire is the perfect element for a hormonal teenage princess , and FP can ’ t control her emotions , burning everything in her path as she reacts to Finn ’ s advances . " Sava also complimented the return of N.E.P.T.R. , as well as his short rap , which Sava called " a perfect little musical interlude at the midway point of the episode . " 
 Mike <unk> of Slate magazine , in a review of the fourth season , wrote that " it 's frequently astonishing to observe the confidence and wide @-@ ranging appeal with which Adventure Time unswervingly depicts the many stages of infatuation . " The reviewer highlighted " Hot to the Touch " as an example of such an example , noting that Flame Princess represents " an uncomplicated yet vastly pertinent metaphor for the hypothesis that the closer you cherish someone , the likelier they are to singe your soft exterior and the easier it is for them to affectionately melt your exposed heart . " Marc Snetiker of Entertainment Weekly awarded the episode a " B " , noting that " the season four premiere of this inspired ' toon about a boy and his precocious dog is as colorful , clever , and unpredictably funny as ever . " 
 = Hydrogen = 
 Hydrogen is a chemical element with chemical symbol H and atomic number 1 . With an atomic weight of 1 @.@ <unk> u , hydrogen is the lightest element on the periodic table . Its monatomic form ( H ) is the most abundant chemical substance in the Universe , constituting roughly 75 % of all baryonic mass . Non @-@ remnant stars are mainly composed of hydrogen in the plasma state . The most common isotope of hydrogen , termed protium ( name rarely used , symbol 1H ) , has one proton and no neutrons . 
 The universal emergence of atomic hydrogen first occurred during the recombination epoch . At standard temperature and pressure , hydrogen is a colorless , odorless , tasteless , non @-@ toxic , nonmetallic , highly combustible diatomic gas with the molecular formula H2 . Since hydrogen readily forms covalent compounds with most non @-@ metallic elements , most of the hydrogen on Earth exists in molecular forms such as water or organic compounds . Hydrogen plays a particularly important role in acid – base reactions because most acid @-@ base reactions involve the exchange of protons between soluble molecules . In ionic compounds , hydrogen can take the form of a negative charge ( i.e. , anion ) when it is known as a hydride , or as a positively charged ( i.e. , cation ) species denoted by the symbol H + . The hydrogen cation is written as though composed of a bare proton , but in reality , hydrogen cations in ionic compounds are always more complex . As the only neutral atom for which the Schrödinger equation can be solved analytically , study of the energetics and bonding of the hydrogen atom has played a key role in the development of quantum mechanics . 
 Hydrogen gas was first artificially produced in the early 16th century by the reaction of acids on metals . In 1766 – 81 , Henry Cavendish was the first to recognize that hydrogen gas was a discrete substance , and that it produces water when burned , the property for which it was later named : in Greek , hydrogen means " water @-@ former " . 
 Industrial production is mainly from steam reforming natural gas , and less often from more energy @-@ intensive methods such as the electrolysis of water . Most hydrogen is used near the site of its production site , the two largest uses being fossil fuel processing ( e.g. , hydrocracking ) and ammonia production , mostly for the fertilizer market . Hydrogen is a concern in metallurgy as it can <unk> many metals , complicating the design of pipelines and storage tanks . 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Combustion = = = 
 Hydrogen gas ( <unk> or molecular hydrogen ) is highly flammable and will burn in air at a very wide range of concentrations between 4 % and 75 % by volume . The enthalpy of combustion is − 286 kJ / mol : 
 2 H2 ( g ) + O2 ( g ) → 2 H2O ( l ) + 572 kJ ( 286 kJ / mol ) 
 Hydrogen gas forms explosive mixtures with air in concentrations from 4 – 74 % and with chlorine at 5 – 95 % . The explosive reactions may be triggered by spark , heat , or sunlight . The hydrogen autoignition temperature , the temperature of spontaneous ignition in air , is 500 ° C ( 932 ° F ) . Pure hydrogen @-@ oxygen flames emit ultraviolet light and with high oxygen mix are nearly invisible to the naked eye , as illustrated by the faint plume of the Space Shuttle Main Engine , compared to the highly visible plume of a Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster , which uses an ammonium perchlorate composite . The detection of a burning hydrogen leak may require a flame detector ; such leaks can be very dangerous . Hydrogen flames in other conditions are blue , resembling blue natural gas flames . 
 The destruction of the Hindenburg airship was an notorious example of hydrogen combustion and the cause is still debated . The visible orange flames in that incident were the result of a rich mixture of hydrogen to oxygen combined with carbon compounds from the airship skin . 
 H2 reacts with every oxidizing element . Hydrogen can react spontaneously and violently at room temperature with chlorine and fluorine to form the corresponding hydrogen halides , hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride , which are also potentially dangerous acids . 
 = = = Electron energy levels = = = 
 The ground state energy level of the electron in a hydrogen atom is − 13 @.@ 6 eV , which is equivalent to an ultraviolet photon of roughly 91 nm wavelength . 
 The energy levels of hydrogen can be calculated fairly accurately using the Bohr model of the atom , which conceptualizes the electron as " orbiting " the proton in analogy to the Earth 's orbit of the Sun . However , the atomic electron and proton are held together by electromagnetic force , while planets and celestial objects are held by gravity . Because of the <unk> of angular momentum postulated in early quantum mechanics by Bohr , the electron in the Bohr model can only occupy certain allowed distances from the proton , and therefore only certain allowed energies . 
 A more accurate description of the hydrogen atom comes from a purely quantum mechanical treatment that uses the Schrödinger equation , Dirac equation or even the Feynman path integral formulation to calculate the probability density of the electron around the proton . The most complicated treatments allow for the small effects of special relativity and vacuum polarization . In the quantum mechanical treatment , the electron in a ground state hydrogen atom has no angular momentum at all — illustrating how the " planetary orbit " differs from electron motion . 
 = = = Elemental molecular forms = = = 
 There exist two different spin isomers of hydrogen diatomic molecules that differ by the relative spin of their nuclei . In the orthohydrogen form , the spins of the two protons are parallel and form a triplet state with a molecular spin quantum number of 1 ( 1 ⁄ 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 ) ; in the parahydrogen form the spins are antiparallel and form a singlet with a molecular spin quantum number of 0 ( 1 ⁄ 2 – 1 ⁄ 2 ) . At standard temperature and pressure , hydrogen gas contains about 25 % of the para form and 75 % of the ortho form , also known as the " normal form " . The equilibrium ratio of orthohydrogen to parahydrogen depends on temperature , but because the ortho form is an excited state and has a higher energy than the para form , it is unstable and cannot be purified . At very low temperatures , the equilibrium state is composed almost exclusively of the para form . The liquid and gas phase thermal properties of pure parahydrogen differ significantly from those of the normal form because of differences in rotational heat capacities , as discussed more fully in spin isomers of hydrogen . The ortho / para distinction also occurs in other hydrogen @-@ containing molecules or functional groups , such as water and methylene , but is of little significance for their thermal properties . 
 The uncatalyzed interconversion between para and ortho H2 increases with increasing temperature ; thus rapidly condensed H2 contains large quantities of the high @-@ energy ortho form that converts to the para form very slowly . The ortho / para ratio in condensed H2 is an important consideration in the preparation and storage of liquid hydrogen : the conversion from ortho to para is exothermic and produces enough heat to evaporate some of the hydrogen liquid , leading to loss of liquefied material . Catalysts for the ortho @-@ para interconversion , such as ferric oxide , activated carbon , <unk> asbestos , rare earth metals , uranium compounds , chromic oxide , or some nickel compounds , are used during hydrogen cooling . 
 = = = Phases = = = 
 Gaseous hydrogen 
 Liquid hydrogen 
 Slush hydrogen 
 Solid hydrogen 
 Metallic hydrogen 
 = = = Compounds = = = 
 = = = = Covalent and organic compounds = = = = 
 While H2 is not very reactive under standard conditions , it does form compounds with most elements . Hydrogen can form compounds with elements that are more electronegative , such as halogens ( e.g. , F , Cl , Br , I ) , or oxygen ; in these compounds hydrogen takes on a partial positive charge . When bonded to fluorine , oxygen , or nitrogen , hydrogen can participate in a form of medium @-@ strength noncovalent bonding with the hydrogen of other similar molecules , a phenomenon called hydrogen bonding that is critical to the stability of many biological molecules . Hydrogen also forms compounds with less electronegative elements , such as metals and metalloids , where it takes on a partial negative charge . These compounds are often known as hydrides . 
 Hydrogen forms a vast array of compounds with carbon called the hydrocarbons , and an even vaster array with heteroatoms that , because of their general association with living things , are called organic compounds . The study of their properties is known as organic chemistry and their study in the context of living organisms is known as biochemistry . By some definitions , " organic " compounds are only required to contain carbon . However , most of them also contain hydrogen , and because it is the carbon @-@ hydrogen bond which gives this class of compounds most of its particular chemical characteristics , carbon @-@ hydrogen bonds are required in some definitions of the word " organic " in chemistry . Millions of hydrocarbons are known , and they are usually formed by complicated synthetic pathways that seldom involve elementary hydrogen . 
 = = = = Hydrides = = = = 
 Compounds of hydrogen are often called hydrides , a term that is used fairly loosely . The term " hydride " suggests that the H atom has acquired a negative or anionic character , denoted H − , and is used when hydrogen forms a compound with a more electropositive element . The existence of the hydride anion , suggested by Gilbert N. Lewis in 1916 for group 1 and 2 salt @-@ like hydrides , was demonstrated by Moers in 1920 by the electrolysis of molten lithium hydride ( <unk> ) , producing a stoichiometry quantity of hydrogen at the anode . For hydrides other than group 1 and 2 metals , the term is quite misleading , considering the low electronegativity of hydrogen . An exception in group 2 hydrides is <unk> 
 2 , which is polymeric . In lithium aluminium hydride , the <unk> − 
 4 anion carries <unk> centers firmly attached to the Al ( III ) . 
 Although hydrides can be formed with almost all main @-@ group elements , the number and combination of possible compounds varies widely ; for example , more than 100 binary borane hydrides are known , but only one binary aluminium hydride . Binary indium hydride has not yet been identified , although larger complexes exist . 
 In inorganic chemistry , hydrides can also serve as bridging ligands that link two metal centers in a coordination complex . This function is particularly common in group 13 elements , especially in boranes ( boron hydrides ) and aluminium complexes , as well as in clustered carboranes . 
 = = = = Protons and acids = = = = 
 Oxidation of hydrogen removes its electron and gives H + , which contains no electrons and a nucleus which is usually composed of one proton . That is why H + is often called a proton . This species is central to discussion of acids . Under the <unk> @-@ Lowry theory , acids are proton donors , while bases are proton acceptors . 
 A bare proton , H + , cannot exist in solution or in ionic crystals because of its unstoppable attraction to other atoms or molecules with electrons . Except at the high temperatures associated with plasmas , such protons cannot be removed from the electron clouds of atoms and molecules , and will remain attached to them . However , the term ' proton ' is sometimes used loosely and metaphorically to refer to positively charged or cationic hydrogen attached to other species in this fashion , and as such is denoted " H + " without any implication that any single protons exist freely as a species . 
 To avoid the implication of the naked " solvated proton " in solution , acidic aqueous solutions are sometimes considered to contain a less unlikely fictitious species , termed the " hydronium ion " ( H 
 3O + ) . However , even in this case , such solvated hydrogen cations are more realistically conceived as being organized into clusters that form species closer to H 
 <unk> + 
 4 . Other <unk> ions are found when water is in acidic solution with other solvents . 
 Although exotic on Earth , one of the most common ions in the universe is the H + 
 3 ion , known as protonated molecular hydrogen or the trihydrogen cation . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Hydrogen has three naturally occurring isotopes , denoted 1H , 2H and 3H . Other , highly unstable nuclei ( 4H to 7H ) have been synthesized in the laboratory but not observed in nature . 
 1H is the most common hydrogen isotope with an abundance of more than 99 @.@ 98 % . Because the nucleus of this isotope consists of only a single proton , it is given the descriptive but rarely used formal name protium . 
 2H , the other stable hydrogen isotope , is known as deuterium and contains one proton and one neutron in the nucleus . All deuterium in the universe is thought to have been produced at the time of the Big Bang , and has endured since that time . Deuterium is not radioactive , and does not represent a significant toxicity hazard . Water enriched in molecules that include deuterium instead of normal hydrogen is called heavy water . Deuterium and its compounds are used as a non @-@ radioactive label in chemical experiments and in solvents for 1H @-@ NMR spectroscopy . Heavy water is used as a neutron moderator and coolant for nuclear reactors . Deuterium is also a potential fuel for commercial nuclear fusion . 
 3H is known as tritium and contains one proton and two neutrons in its nucleus . It is radioactive , decaying into helium @-@ 3 through beta decay with a half @-@ life of 12 @.@ 32 years . It is so radioactive that it can be used in luminous paint , making it useful in such things as watches . The glass prevents the small amount of radiation from getting out . Small amounts of tritium are produced naturally by the interaction of cosmic rays with atmospheric gases ; tritium has also been released during nuclear weapons tests . It is used in nuclear fusion reactions , as a tracer in isotope geochemistry , and in specialized self @-@ powered lighting devices . Tritium has also been used in chemical and biological labeling experiments as a <unk> . 
 Hydrogen is the only element that has different names for its isotopes in common use today . During the early study of radioactivity , various heavy radioactive isotopes were given their own names , but such names are no longer used , except for deuterium and tritium . The symbols D and T ( instead of 2H and 3H ) are sometimes used for deuterium and tritium , but the corresponding symbol for protium , P , is already in use for phosphorus and thus is not available for protium . In its nomenclatural guidelines , the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry allows any of D , T , 2H , and 3H to be used , although 2H and 3H are preferred . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery and use = = = 
 In 1671 , Robert Boyle discovered and described the reaction between iron filings and dilute acids , which results in the production of hydrogen gas . In 1766 , Henry Cavendish was the first to recognize hydrogen gas as a discrete substance , by naming the gas from a metal @-@ acid reaction " inflammable air " . He speculated that " inflammable air " was in fact identical to the hypothetical substance called " phlogiston " and further finding in 1781 that the gas produces water when burned . He is usually given credit for the discovery of hydrogen as an element . In 1783 , Antoine Lavoisier gave the element the name hydrogen ( from the Greek <unk> hydro meaning " water " and -γενής genes meaning " creator " ) when he and Laplace reproduced Cavendish 's finding that water is produced when hydrogen is burned . 
 Lavoisier produced hydrogen for his experiments on mass conservation by reacting a flux of steam with metallic iron through an incandescent iron tube heated in a fire . Anaerobic oxidation of iron by the protons of water at high temperature can be schematically represented by the set of following reactions : 
 Fe + H2O → FeO + H2 
 2 Fe + 3 H2O → Fe2O3 + 3 H2 
 3 Fe + 4 H2O → Fe3O4 + 4 H2 
 Many metals such as zirconium undergo a similar reaction with water leading to the production of hydrogen . 
 Hydrogen was liquefied for the first time by James Dewar in 1898 by using regenerative cooling and his invention , the vacuum flask . He produced solid hydrogen the next year . Deuterium was discovered in December 1931 by Harold Urey , and tritium was prepared in 1934 by Ernest Rutherford , Mark Oliphant , and Paul Harteck . Heavy water , which consists of deuterium in the place of regular hydrogen , was discovered by Urey 's group in 1932 . François Isaac de <unk> built the first de <unk> engine , an internal combustion engine powered by a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen in 1806 . Edward Daniel Clarke invented the hydrogen gas blowpipe in 1819 . The Döbereiner 's lamp and limelight were invented in 1823 . 
 The first hydrogen @-@ filled balloon was invented by Jacques Charles in 1783 . Hydrogen provided the lift for the first reliable form of air @-@ travel following the 1852 invention of the first hydrogen @-@ lifted airship by Henri Giffard . German count Ferdinand von Zeppelin promoted the idea of rigid airships lifted by hydrogen that later were called Zeppelins ; the first of which had its maiden flight in 1900 . Regularly scheduled flights started in 1910 and by the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , they had carried 35 @,@ 000 passengers without a serious incident . Hydrogen @-@ lifted airships were used as observation platforms and bombers during the war . 
 The first non @-@ stop transatlantic crossing was made by the British airship <unk> in 1919 . Regular passenger service resumed in the 1920s and the discovery of helium reserves in the United States promised increased safety , but the U.S. government refused to sell the gas for this purpose . Therefore , H2 was used in the Hindenburg airship , which was destroyed in a midair fire over New Jersey on 6 May 1937 . The incident was broadcast live on radio and filmed . Ignition of leaking hydrogen is widely assumed to be the cause , but later investigations pointed to the ignition of the aluminized fabric coating by static electricity . But the damage to hydrogen 's reputation as a lifting gas was already done . 
 In the same year the first hydrogen @-@ cooled <unk> went into service with gaseous hydrogen as a coolant in the rotor and the stator in 1937 at Dayton , Ohio , by the Dayton Power & Light Co . ; because of the thermal conductivity of hydrogen gas , this is the most common type in its field today . 
 The nickel hydrogen battery was used for the first time in 1977 aboard the U.S. Navy 's Navigation technology satellite @-@ 2 ( NTS @-@ 2 ) . For example , the ISS , Mars Odyssey and the Mars Global Surveyor are equipped with nickel @-@ hydrogen batteries . In the dark part of its orbit , the Hubble Space Telescope is also powered by nickel @-@ hydrogen batteries , which were finally replaced in May 2009 , more than 19 years after launch and 13 years beyond their design life . 
 = = = Role in quantum theory = = = 
 Because of its simple atomic structure , consisting only of a proton and an electron , the hydrogen atom , together with the spectrum of light produced from it or absorbed by it , has been central to the development of the theory of atomic structure . Furthermore , study of the corresponding simplicity of the hydrogen molecule and the corresponding cation H + 
 2 brought understanding of the nature of the chemical bond , which followed shortly after the quantum mechanical treatment of the hydrogen atom had been developed in the mid @-@ 1920s . 
 One of the first quantum effects to be explicitly noticed ( but not understood at the time ) was a Maxwell observation involving hydrogen , half a century before full quantum mechanical theory arrived . Maxwell observed that the specific heat capacity of H2 unaccountably departs from that of a diatomic gas below room temperature and begins to increasingly resemble that of a monatomic gas at cryogenic temperatures . According to quantum theory , this behavior arises from the spacing of the ( quantized ) rotational energy levels , which are particularly wide @-@ spaced in H2 because of its low mass . These widely spaced levels inhibit equal partition of heat energy into rotational motion in hydrogen at low temperatures . Diatomic gases composed of heavier atoms do not have such widely spaced levels and do not exhibit the same effect . 
 <unk> ( H ) is the antimatter counterpart to hydrogen . It consists of an antiproton with a positron . <unk> is the only type of antimatter atom to have been produced as of 2015 . 
 = = Natural occurrence = = 
 Hydrogen , as atomic H , is the most abundant chemical element in the universe , making up 75 % of normal matter by mass and more than 90 % by number of atoms . ( Most of the mass of the universe , however , is not in the form of chemical @-@ element type matter , but rather is postulated to occur as yet @-@ undetected forms of mass such as dark matter and dark energy . ) This element is found in great abundance in stars and gas giant planets . Molecular clouds of H2 are associated with star formation . Hydrogen plays a vital role in powering stars through the proton @-@ proton reaction and the CNO cycle nuclear fusion . 
 Throughout the universe , hydrogen is mostly found in the atomic and plasma states , with properties quite different from those of molecular hydrogen . As a plasma , hydrogen 's electron and proton are not bound together , resulting in very high electrical conductivity and high emissivity ( producing the light from the Sun and other stars ) . The charged particles are highly influenced by magnetic and electric fields . For example , in the solar wind they interact with the Earth 's magnetosphere giving rise to Birkeland currents and the aurora . Hydrogen is found in the neutral atomic state in the interstellar medium . The large amount of neutral hydrogen found in the damped Lyman @-@ alpha systems is thought to dominate the cosmological baryonic density of the Universe up to redshift z = 4 . 
 Under ordinary conditions on Earth , elemental hydrogen exists as the diatomic gas , H2 . However , hydrogen gas is very rare in the Earth 's atmosphere ( 1 ppm by volume ) because of its light weight , which enables it to escape from Earth 's gravity more easily than heavier gases . However , hydrogen is the third most abundant element on the Earth 's surface , mostly in the form of chemical compounds such as hydrocarbons and water . Hydrogen gas is produced by some bacteria and algae and is a natural component of <unk> , as is methane , itself a hydrogen source of increasing importance . 
 A molecular form called protonated molecular hydrogen ( H + 
 3 ) is found in the interstellar medium , where it is generated by ionization of molecular hydrogen from cosmic rays . This charged ion has also been observed in the upper atmosphere of the planet Jupiter . The ion is relatively stable in the environment of outer space due to the low temperature and density . H + 
 3 is one of the most abundant ions in the Universe , and it plays a notable role in the chemistry of the interstellar medium . Neutral triatomic hydrogen H3 can exist only in an excited form and is unstable . By contrast , the positive hydrogen molecular ion ( H + 
 2 ) is a rare molecule in the universe . 
 = = Production = = 
 H 
 2 is produced in chemistry and biology laboratories , often as a by @-@ product of other reactions ; in industry for the hydrogenation of unsaturated substrates ; and in nature as a means of expelling reducing equivalents in biochemical reactions . 
 = = = Steam reforming = = = 
 Hydrogen can be prepared in several different ways , but economically the most important processes involve removal of hydrogen from hydrocarbons , as about 95 % of hydrogen production came from steam reforming around year 2000 . Commercial bulk hydrogen is usually produced by the steam reforming of natural gas . At high temperatures ( 1000 – 1400 K , 700 – 1100 ° C or 1300 – 2000 ° F ) , steam ( water vapor ) reacts with methane to yield carbon monoxide and H 
 2 . 
 CH 
 4 + H 
 2O → CO + 3 H 
 2 
 This reaction is favored at low pressures but is nonetheless conducted at high pressures ( 2 @.@ 0 MPa , 20 atm or 600 inHg ) . This is because high @-@ pressure H 
 2 is the most marketable product and Pressure Swing Adsorption ( PSA ) purification systems work better at higher pressures . The product mixture is known as " synthesis gas " because it is often used directly for the production of methanol and related compounds . Hydrocarbons other than methane can be used to produce synthesis gas with varying product ratios . One of the many complications to this highly optimized technology is the formation of coke or carbon : 
 CH 
 4 → C + 2 H 
 2 
 Consequently , steam reforming typically employs an excess of H 
 2O . Additional hydrogen can be recovered from the steam by use of carbon monoxide through the water gas shift reaction , especially with an iron oxide catalyst . This reaction is also a common industrial source of carbon dioxide : 
 CO + H 
 2O → CO 
 2 + H 
 2 
 Other important methods for H 
 2 production include partial oxidation of hydrocarbons : 
 2 CH 
 4 + O 
 2 → 2 CO + 4 H 
 2 
 and the coal reaction , which can serve as a prelude to the shift reaction above : 
 C + H 
 2O → CO + H 
 2 
 Hydrogen is sometimes produced and consumed in the same industrial process , without being separated . In the Haber process for the production of ammonia , hydrogen is generated from natural gas . Electrolysis of brine to yield chlorine also produces hydrogen as a co @-@ product . 
 = = = Metal @-@ acid = = = 
 In the laboratory , H 
 2 is usually prepared by the reaction of dilute non @-@ oxidizing acids on some reactive metals such as zinc with Kipp 's apparatus . 
 Zn + 2 H + → Zn2 + + H 
 2 
 Aluminium can also produce H 
 2 upon treatment with bases : 
 2 Al + 6 H 
 2O + 2 OH − → 2 Al ( OH ) − 
 4 + 3 H 
 2 
 The electrolysis of water is a simple method of producing hydrogen . A low voltage current is run through the water , and gaseous oxygen forms at the anode while gaseous hydrogen forms at the cathode . Typically the cathode is made from platinum or another inert metal when producing hydrogen for storage . If , however , the gas is to be burnt on site , oxygen is desirable to assist the combustion , and so both electrodes would be made from inert metals . ( Iron , for instance , would oxidize , and thus decrease the amount of oxygen given off . ) The theoretical maximum efficiency ( electricity used vs. energetic value of hydrogen produced ) is in the range 80 – 94 % . 
 2 H 
 2O ( l ) → 2 H 
 2 ( g ) + O 
 2 ( g ) 
 An alloy of aluminium and gallium in pellet form added to water can be used to generate hydrogen . The process also produces alumina , but the expensive gallium , which prevents the formation of an oxide skin on the pellets , can be re @-@ used . This has important potential implications for a hydrogen economy , as hydrogen can be produced on @-@ site and does not need to be transported . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 There are more than 200 thermochemical cycles which can be used for water splitting , around a dozen of these cycles such as the iron oxide cycle , cerium ( IV ) oxide – cerium ( III ) oxide cycle , zinc zinc @-@ oxide cycle , sulfur @-@ iodine cycle , copper @-@ chlorine cycle and hybrid sulfur cycle are under research and in testing phase to produce hydrogen and oxygen from water and heat without using electricity . A number of laboratories ( including in France , Germany , Greece , Japan , and the USA ) are developing thermochemical methods to produce hydrogen from solar energy and water . 
 = = = Anaerobic corrosion = = = 
 Under anaerobic conditions , iron and steel alloys are slowly oxidized by the protons of water <unk> reduced in molecular hydrogen ( H 
 2 ) . The anaerobic corrosion of iron leads first to the formation of ferrous hydroxide ( green rust ) and can be described by the following reaction : 
 Fe + 2 H 
 2O → Fe ( OH ) 
 2 + H 
 2 
 In its turn , under anaerobic conditions , the ferrous hydroxide ( Fe ( OH ) 
