 On September 1 , the regiment , now numbering 400 , marched northwest from Centreville with the rest of Ferrero 's brigade . Although the men did not know it , they were among the handful of brigades chosen by Pope to deflect Jackson 's flanking movement . Forming battle lines in a field not far from Chantilly Plantation , the 21st watched the 51st New York advance into thick woods to probe the enemy lines . Orders were soon given to Col. Clark to lead the 21st into the woods to support the 51st . The woods were very dense and the advance was disorderly . Making matters worse , a powerful thunderstorm burst out as the 21st entered the woodland . Unknowingly , the regiment <unk> far to the left and lost contact with the 51st New York . Encountering a body of troops in their front and unable to identify them through the torrential rain , Col. Clark presumed he had found the 51st , ordered the 21st to rest in place and sent officer Lt. Colonel Joseph Parker Rice forward to make contact . The troops were , in fact , men of Jubal Early 's brigade and , before this could be ascertained , the Confederates unleashed a devastating volley on the unsuspecting 21st . " In the sudden anguish and despair of the moment , " wrote Capt. Walcott , " the whole regiment seemed to be lying bleeding on the ground . " Col. Clark immediately ordered a withdrawal and the 21st left more than 100 dead or wounded in the woods . 
 Reaching the open fields again , the 21st was ordered by Maj. Gen. Philip Kearny to fill a hole in the center of the Union line . As the 21st advanced , Kearny rode out in front of the regiment , strenuously urging them to hurry , and refuting warnings that Confederates were close by . Kearny was killed by a volley from a force of Confederates concealed just inside a nearby tree line . Now in very close range to the enemy , a tense standoff ensued with leveled muskets as the 21st and the Confederate regiment each demanded the surrender of the other . Finally , the Confederate regiment charged on the 21st . It was the first time and last time , according to the regimental historian , that the 21st gave wounds with the bayonet . The hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting was severe and great confusion resulted . Col. Clark was separated from the unit when most of the men around him were killed and he found himself lost in the Virginia countryside for four days before finding the unit again . This resulted in the mistaken printing of his obituary in Amherst . 
 Jackson 's flanking maneuver was successfully deflected and the Battle of Chantilly was fought to a stalemate . But the 21st had suffered severely with 35 percent casualties ( 38 killed , 76 wounded , 26 missing ) . 
 = = Maryland Campaign = = 
 Early in September 1862 , the IX Corps , Reno commanding , returned to the Army of the Potomac . Gen. Lee , emboldened by his victories , invaded Maryland and McClellan moved the Army of the Potomac northwest from Washington to meet the Confederates . Portions of the armies clashed during the Battle of South Mountain , during which the 21st played only a small part . Psychologically , however , it was a devastating fight in that it saw the death of Maj. Gen. Reno , who had been the 21st 's brigade commander at the start of the war . " There was not a man in the 21st who did not love him , " Capt. Walcott of the 21st wrote , " he always stood with his men in battle . " 
 = = = Battle of Antietam = = = 
 As McClellan 's Army slowly advanced , Lee took up a defensive position in Sharpsburg , Maryland , along Antietam Creek . The 21st , leaving two companies behind at South Mountain for guard detail , now numbered only 150 men . On September 16 , the IX Corps took up a position on the left flank of the Union army , near a 125 feet ( 38 m ) stone bridge soon to be known as Burnside 's Bridge . 
 The next day , McClellan began his attack with several advances by the Union right flank , far from the position of the 21st . For much of the day , the IX Corps could hear the fighting and awaited orders to take the bridge in their front . The 21st even was fortunate enough to have a mail call that morning , and the men sat down to read letters from home while fighting raged around the Dunker Church two miles ( 3 km ) away . Finally , orders came at noon and Ferrero 's brigade was moved closer to the bridge . It was a difficult target . On the opposite bank , a wooded bluff rose 100 feet ( 30 m ) above the creek . Concealed there was a small force of 400 Confederates who would successfully hold thousands of Union troops at bay for hours . The men of the 21st watched several successive charges on the bridge by brigades of the IX Corps , all of which were repulsed . Finally , Ferrero 's brigade was ordered forward . Reaching the bridge at a run , the 21st was ordered to take up a position next to the left abutment , supplying covering fire , while the 51st New York Infantry and the 51st Pennsylvania Infantry finally carried the position . As the Confederates retreated , Ferrero 's brigade was soon stationed at the top of the bluff . Later in the afternoon , around sunset , a Confederate counterattack nearly drove the IX Corps back across Antietam Creek . Ferrero 's brigade held the bluff , however , playing a key role in checking the counterattack , and taking severe casualties in the process . The 21st listed 10 killed and 35 wounded , casualties of 30 percent . 
 = = Fredericksburg Campaign = = 
 On November 7 , 1862 , Maj. Gen. McClellan was removed from command of the Army of the Potomac and replaced with Maj. Gen. Burnside . Over the course of November , Burnside moved the army south to Falmouth , Virginia , opposite the Rappahannock River from Fredericksburg . The 21st arrived in Falmouth on November 19 . Nearly a month passed before Burnside could organize a crossing of the river and an assault on the city and the heights beyond . The Battle of Fredericksburg took place on December 13 , 1862 . 
 = = = Battle of Fredericksburg = = = 
 The 21st crossed the Rappahannock on December 12 via the pontoon bridges that had been constructed by the Union army and spent the night along the west bank of the river . On the morning of the 13th , the regiment was ordered to the west part of the city , near the base of the heights . Here they removed the grey overcoats that had been issued to them for fear of being mistaken for Confederates . From this position , the 21st watched an assault by a portion of the II Corps over the open plain leading to heights and were shocked by the carnage that resulted from the failed attack . Just after this assault , Ferrero 's brigade was ordered to attack the heights and the 21st formed a line of battle on the open ground slightly after noon . The 21st advanced , according to Walcott , " under the best directed artillery fire we had ever suffered or seen . " Color bearers were repeatedly shot down . One , Sgt. Thomas Plunkett , was hit by an artillery shell that took off his right arm and left hand . Despite his wounds , he managed to keep the colors from falling . The flag is today in the collection at the Massachusetts State House and still bears the stains from Plunkett 's wounds . Plunkett was awarded the Medal of Honor for his bravery at Fredericksburg . 
 The 21st did not reach the stone wall on Marye 's Heights but took shelter in a very slight depression in the terrain , remaining pinned in that position until night . Under the cover of darkness , the regiment retired , only to be ordered to the same spot the next morning , expecting a Confederate counterattack which never came . The regiment lost a third of its numbers at <unk> . 
 = = Kentucky and Tennessee = = 
 Following his failure at Fredericksburg , Burnside was reassigned to the Department of the Ohio . The IX Corps , which he had formerly commanded , was reassigned with him . The 21st Massachusetts boarded trains for Cincinnati on March 28 , 1863 . They were then transported to Mount Sterling , Kentucky , to combat Confederate guerrillas . In April , due to the reduced numbers of the regiment ( now about 200 ) several officers , being effectively without commands , chose to resign their commissions , including Col. William S. Clark . Command of the regiment passed to Lt. Col. George P. Hawkes . 
 The regiment saw light duty around Lexington , Kentucky , during the summer of 1863 . In September , Burnside launched his effort to capture eastern Tennessee from Confederate hands . The 21st marched for Knoxville , Tennessee , on September 12 , 1863 . During the Knoxville Campaign , the 21st saw minor action , acting primarily in support of artillery due to their small numbers . 
 = = Overland Campaign and Siege of Petersburg = = 
 After roughly a month 's furlough back in Massachusetts during February and March 1864 , the 21st returned to the Army of the Potomac as part of a newly reorganized IX Corps , rejoining the army a day before the Battle of the Wilderness on May 4 , 1864 . Lt. Gen. Ulysses Grant had become general @-@ in @-@ chief of the Union army and intended to follow the Army of the Potomac in the field , relentlessly pushing Lee 's Confederate army over the course of the summer of 1864 . Walcott of the 21st wrote , " There was to be little of the romance or strategy of war in that horribly bloody work of that summer 's campaign in Virginia . " 
 During this campaign , the 21st suffered heavy casualties during the Battle of Spotsylvania and the Battle of Bethesda Church . In the latter engagement , the 21st acted as rear guard and bore the brunt of a fierce attack but held their position . Grant 's Overland Campaign concluded with several assaults on Petersburg , Virginia , on June 15 – 18 , 1864 . The 21st again took considerable casualties during these attacks , particularly during the assault on June 17 . Maj. Henry Richardson , commanding the 21st , was wounded in the thigh during the engagement and was shortly thereafter sent home . Now numbering less than 100 men , the regiment had been reduced to a tenth of its original size . Company A , by this time , had only three men on its active roster . 
 Following these failed assaults , both armies settled into trench warfare around Petersburg . There were numerous attempts , during the summer of 1864 , on the part of the Union army , to dislodge the Confederates from their lines . One of the most disastrous for the Union army was the Battle of the Crater during which explosives were detonated in a large mine tunneled beneath the Confederate entrenchments , temporarily creating a gap in their lines . Elements of the IX Corps , under the command of Maj. Gen. Burnside , were to charge through the gap , but instead became trapped in the enormous crater . Brig. Gen. James Ledlie 's division , of which the 21st was a part , led the attack . The division had been selected at the last minute over the United States Colored Troops who had actually trained for the operation . Unprepared , Ledlie 's division delayed in their attack , allowing the Confederates time to regroup . The 21st managed to advance , mingled with other regiments , to the furthest point penetrated by Union troops but by the afternoon they made the retreat " pell mell " with the rest of Burnside 's IX Corps . 
 = = Consolidation with the 36th Massachusetts = = 
 On August 18 , 1864 , the 21st 's three @-@ year enlistment came to an end . More than three @-@ quarters of the remaining men chose to re @-@ enlist . These men were consolidated into a battalion of three companies commanded by Capt. Orange S. Sampson . The day after their consolidation , the battalion participated in the Battle of Globe Tavern . The final engagement in which the remaining companies of the 21st participated as an independent unit was the Battle of Poplar Springs Church on September 30 , 1864 , during which the Union army attempted to extend its lines westward , further encircling Petersburg . Capt. Orange Sampson , commanding the 21st , was killed in this engagement . 
 On October 21 , 1864 , the battalion was consolidated with the 36th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry . When the 36th was mustered out in June 1865 , the three companies that had belonged to the 21st were consolidated with the 56th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry . They were finally mustered out of service on July 8 , 1865 . 
 = = Association with Clara Barton = = 
 The Civil War nurse Clara Barton was born and raised in Oxford , Worcester County , Massachusetts , and knew many of the men in the 21st Massachusetts . More than 40 of them had been her students when she was a teacher before the war . She therefore took an acute interest in their welfare . During the Maryland Campaign , she visited frequently with the regiment and cared for its wounded during the Battle of Antietam . Sgt. Plunkett , the color bearer of the 21st who suffered such grievous wounds during the Battle of Fredericksburg , credited Barton with saving his life . She was at his side when he was first treated , personally arranged his transport home , and carried on correspondence with him after the war . Barton declared the 21st her favorite regiment and , in turn , the men of the 21st voted her a " daughter " of the regiment . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the war , Col. William S. Clark became a prominent figure in early American / Japanese relations . After establishing the Massachusetts Agricultural College ( now the University of Massachusetts Amherst ) , Clark was invited by the government of Japan to establish a similar institution , the Sapporo Agricultural College ( now the University of Hokkaido ) . Clark 's fame persists in Japan where he is a household name due to the revolutionary western ideas he brought to Hokkaido and the influence he had on the development of the island . His military experience during the Civil War was an important factor in earning the respect of his Japanese superiors . 
 Today , the history of the 21st Massachusetts is interpreted by the Southern Piedmont Historical Reenactment Society ( <unk> ) , a reenacting group based in North Carolina . While dedicated primarily to the history of the 49th North Carolina Infantry , the <unk> does represent the 21st at living history events and reenactments throughout the year . 
 = Amador Valley High School = 
 Amador Valley High School is a public high school in Pleasanton , California , United States , a city east of Oakland . The school was founded as Amador Valley Joint Union High School ( <unk> ) , which graduated its first class in 1923 . The school has been named a California Distinguished School , a National School of Character , and a National Blue Ribbon School . Amador Valley is one of four high schools in the Pleasanton Unified School District , which includes Foothill High School , Village High School , and Horizon High School . 
 As of 2009 , Amador Valley offered its 2 @,@ 500 students 20 Advanced Placement courses , 23 varsity sports , a program to study local aquatic wildlife , and vocational training . A monthly school publication , the Amadon , reports on athletics , academic and extracurricular issues , and news of the school and community . Amador 's location allows it to be the launching point for parades and to host the site of the Amador Theater , Pleasanton 's central performing arts facility for more than 60 years . The Amador Theater has remained a part of the Amador Valley campus since the 1930s , despite major school construction in 1968 , 1997 , and 2004 . Amador is the rival of Foothill High School , across town . 
 Student groups , including the Marching Band and Math Team , have toured out @-@ of @-@ state after achieving high rankings in Californian competitions . In national competitions such as We the People : The Citizen and the Constitution , the Amador Valley team has ranked in the top four places from 1994 to 1996 , 2006 to 2009 , 2011 , 2013 , and 2014 . Similarly , the Amador Valley Robotics Team , <unk> , is recognized nationally as the best performing high @-@ school team in the autonomous underwater vehicle ( AUV ) competition hosted by the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International ( AUVSI ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Region and districts = = = 
 Amador Valley High School , originally Amador Valley Joint Union High School , was named for its location in the Amador Valley ( part of the Tri @-@ Valley area of the San Francisco East Bay ) . The valley 's namesake was a wealthy Californio rancher , Don José María Amador . The school was founded on March 14 , 1922 , as part of the Amador Valley Joint Union High School District ( AVJUHSD ) , out of concerns of overcrowding and transportation for students traveling to nearby Livermore High School . Amador Valley 's first class graduated in 1923 . 
 From 1922 to 1988 , the school was part of the AVJUHSD . Originally this district also taught students from nearby Dublin and served the local rural community . In the late 1930s , the Amador Theater was added to the main campus building . The " original " campus building ( <unk> ) was taken down in 1968 leaving only the theatre towards the front of the Amador Valley High School campus . The theater hosted school plays , band concerts , performances , lectures , and assemblies , and was the former home of the successful community theater group Cask and Mask , now known as The <unk> . The Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 led to the building of a series of freeways in the region , which led to increased population and an increase in student enrollment . 
 In 1988 , voters approved the unification of several school districts in the region . On July 1 , 1988 , the AVJUHSD merged with the Pleasanton Joint School District to form the Pleasanton Unified School District . As of 2009 , the district contained two comprehensive high schools ( Amador Valley and Foothill ) , two continuation high schools ( Horizon and Village ) , three middle schools , seven elementary schools , and an adult education program . 
 The school grounds are bordered on the east and southeast by Santa Rita Road , a Union Pacific railroad track on which the Altamont Commuter Express runs , and Arroyo Valle . To the north are several businesses and residential districts lie on the western border . The school is the launch point for the annual Pleasanton Hometown Holidays Celebration Parade and the annual Fall Festival Parade , a part of the Alameda County Fair since the 1940s . The Fall Festival parade , which features bands , floats , balloons , horses , and antique cars , starts on the Amador Valley parking lot , travels down Main Street , and ends near the fairgrounds . 
 = = = Court battle = = = 
 In 1978 , the AVJUHSD challenged the constitutionality of California Proposition 13 , which placed a cap on county real estate taxes . The proposition limited property tax assessments to the 1975 standard , eliminating $ 7 billion of the $ 11 @.@ 4 billion in property tax revenue collected each year . According to the Washington Post , the " severe " limitations this imposed on state funding forced local governments and most school districts in California to make " drastic cutbacks " . Furthermore , an article in the Los Angeles Times noted that Federal aid money for Californian schools , worth about $ 98 million each year , may be reduced if state @-@ funded programs are cut . A recent Congressional report had found that Proposition 13 would not result in any major " local spending " cuts . In order to receive Federal aid , the state needed to maintain present levels of spending on local programs or secure local matching funds . However , the enforcement of this spending was " flexible in many programs " and the Federal Impact Aid program for schools was therefore in jeopardy . 
 The district held that the measure was " so drastic and far @-@ reaching that it was ' a revision ' of the state Constitution and not a mere amendment " . Ultimately , the district was unsuccessful in its suit . In their ruling , the judges distinguished between " amendment " and " revision . " The court confirmed that an initiative cannot " revise " the constitution ; Proposition 13 , however , was an amendment to the California Constitution and not a " revision " . In 2009 , Amador Valley was cited by dissenting Justice Carlos R. Moreno in arguing the non @-@ constitutionality of California Proposition 8 . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The first class of eight students graduated in 1923 , and the school quickly became known for its municipal bands and sports teams , along with their cheerleaders . The school selected the Don as its mascot , in honor of the title used by Amador ; Don is a Spanish term used as a mark of high esteem for a distinguished nobleman or gentleman . 
 Parents of Amador Valley students became involved with student activities . In 1927 , Pleasanton mothers decided to start a school lunch program to provide students with a better environment for learning . Parents donated pots and pans , and a newly hired cook prepared lunches , to be eaten at new tables and benches . The tables and benches were constructed by the custodian and the music teacher from wood of horse stalls formerly on the campus . This project led to the formation of a Parent @-@ Teacher Association ( PTA ) chapter at Amador Valley in the late 1920s . 
 Much of the original Amador Valley High School building was demolished in 1968 leaving only the theatre to which a community fund raising effort restored . The following year , the school reached its maximum capacity , about 1 @,@ 895 students . To accommodate the larger student population , Dublin High School was founded . Both schools held classes on the Amador Valley campus during the 1968 – 69 school year . A continued influx of families to the Pleasanton region prompted the foundation of another high school , Foothill , in 1973 . 
 Starting November 3 in 1986 , Amador Valley teachers went on a rolling strike to " protest a breakdown in negotiations for a new contract . " The school brought in substitutes to replace the picketing teachers . Amador Valley teachers are unionized under the California Teachers Association and the National Education Association . 
 In March 1997 , the city passed Measure B , which granted the school district $ 69 million to replace old and crowded facilities and modernize the school campus . The renovations revived one of the school 's last original structures : the Amador Theater , the city 's most popular performing arts facility . The measure enabled the addition of renovated science classrooms , a multipurpose room , a library and media center , and a sound @-@ proofed music building . The parking lot and central quad were expanded , with more than 550 parking spaces in the new lot , and classrooms were equipped to be more energy efficient . 
 In 1999 , responding to a directive from the California Superintendent of Education , the district identified character education as one of its goals . As selected by the community , six character traits ( responsibility , compassion , self @-@ discipline , honesty , respect , and integrity ) were listed as " expected behaviors " for Pleasanton . In 2004 , Amador Valley and the school district won national recognition ( National School of Character ) for its program emphasizing the Community of Character . 
 In 2004 , a new two @-@ story building was completed , containing twenty @-@ four new classrooms . The following year , the Charles " Chuck " <unk> Aquatic Center was built for Amador Valley 's swimming , diving , and water polo teams . Lighting retrofits were added in December 2004 for improved energy efficiency and illumination . In 2005 , Amador Valley High School was the first high school to join the worldwide Go Green Initiative . In the same year , Pleasanton was selected as the " Go Green City of the Year . " 
 = = Academics = = 
 As of 2012 , Amador Valley operates on a 7 : 00 a.m. to 3 : 00 p.m. schedule . Most students do not take first period , with their schedules starting at 8 : 00 a.m. This includes seven periods of instruction , a lunch , and a brunch . Amador Valley is a closed campus ; students are not allowed to leave school supervision during school hours . 
 = = = Enrollment = = = 
 In the 2011 – 12 school year , Amador Valley High School had an enrollment of 2 @,@ 623 students and 170 faculty members , for a student @-@ faculty ratio of 15 : 1 . The student population at Amador Valley is predominantly White , with a large Asian minority and Hispanic and Latino Americans and African American minorities . Seven percent of Amador Valley students are involved in special education , three percent qualify for English language learner support , and two percent qualify for free or reduced price lunch . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The school has been deemed a three @-@ time California Distinguished School , a National School of Character , and a two @-@ time National Blue Ribbon School . Performance results for 2008 show Amador Valley with an Academic Performance Index ( API ) of 10 on a 10 @-@ point scale . The Daily Beast / Newsweek ranked Amador Valley High School <unk> in 2013 , and 238th in 2012 , in its list of the Best High Schools in America . In 2008 , a team of Amador Valley students won the national UNICEF @-@ sponsored Junior 8 Competition . The team traveled to <unk> , Japan to attend the 2008 Group of Eight ( G8 ) Summit of World Leaders to collaborate on solutions to world problems . Eight of Amador Valley 's teachers — Mark <unk> , Debbie Emerson , Jon Grantham , Tom Hall , Debbie Harvey , Brian Ladd , Marla Silversmith , and Eric Thiel — have been recognized as a Pleasanton Unified School District teacher of the year ; one of those honorees , Brian Ladd , was also designated an Alameda County teacher of the year . 
 = = = Programs = = = 
 As of 2009 , Amador Valley curriculum offered 20 Advanced Placement ( AP ) classes , the most popular of which are AP Psychology , AP English Language and Composition , AP Calculus , AP Government , and AP United States History . Nearly half of Amador Valley students participate in the school 's AP Program . The average participant takes 4 @.@ 3 exams per year and 87 @.@ 5 percent of students receive at least one score of 3 or greater . The school offers the complete range of AP courses in the STEM fields ( science , technology , engineering , mathematics ) , as well as AP Language courses and their literature complements in English , French , German , Japanese , and Spanish . Amador Valley also offers AP courses in social sciences and visual and performing arts . 
 The school offers specialized instruction through vocational education as part of the valley @-@ wide Regional Occupational Program . Courses offered include computer @-@ assisted drafting , electronics , welding , medical training , and auto body repair . 
 The Amador Valley science department initiated Project Creek Watch in 1994 . The project provides students with resources for the long term study of Arroyo Valle ; these resources include information about the chemistry in the creek , images of the creek , a guide to flora and fauna , and student projects on aquatic species . " The goal is to let kids realize there are a number of different physical and biological components that allow these organisms ( in the creek ) to coexist , " said Eric Thiel , an Amador Valley Biology teacher and a co @-@ founder of the project . " I hope they walk away able to see how complex ecosystems are . " In 1999 , the project received a Golden Bell Award for excellence in education from the California School Boards Association . Research projects about the creek and other topics have won first place awards at the Tri @-@ Valley Science and Engineering Fair . In 2001 , Thiel and the school received a National Semiconductor " Internet Innovator Award " for the Project Creek Watch website . 
 = = Extracurricular activities = = 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 As of 2009 , the school offered 12 varsity sports teams for boys and 11 varsity sports teams for girls . These sports are run under the Amador Valley Athletics Boosters and include baseball , basketball , cross country , football , golf , lacrosse , soccer , softball , spirit squad , swimming / diving , tennis , track , volleyball , water polo and wrestling . Amador Valley competes in the East Bay Athletic League and has won four East Bay Athletic League Championships . 
 The Amador Valley Booster Club also has hosted East Bay Special Olympics basketball tournaments , track meets , and volleyball competitions at Amador Valley High School since 2004 . The school coordinates parent and student volunteers , donates proceeds from snack sales , and provides facilities free of charge for three Special Olympic events : basketball , track , and volleyball . In 2006 , the Amador Valley Booster Club won " Volunteer Organization of the Year " from Special Olympics Northern California . In 2009 , the Booster Club provided over 200 volunteers to help with the logistics of the competition . 
 The Amador Valley Varsity Boys ' and Girls ' basketball teams both host an annual eight @-@ team basketball tournament , the Amador Basketball Classic ( ABC ) , in the first two weeks of December . The ABC brings high school basketball players and teams from within the state and outside of the state to play in Pleasanton . Each team plays four games between Wednesday and Saturday . Taking place every year since December 1961 , the ABC is the longest @-@ running eight @-@ team basketball championship in California . The girls ABC tournament has been held since December 1994 . 
 = = = Band and Color Guard = = = 
 Amador Valley 's music program was founded in 1928 by Harry Tripp , a native of England . Tripp , the director of bands at Amador Valley , established an orchestra and a glee club , and recruited performers for parades and numerous operettas . The Amador Valley band program is now the largest student activity on campus and hosts the annual Campana Jazz Festival , named after Jim Campana , who led the band from 1959 to 1979 . 
 Amador Valley 's band program consists of four concert bands : Wind Ensemble I , Wind Ensemble II , Wind Symphony , and Symphonic Band . At the annual California Music Educators Association Band Festivals , all four of Amador Valley 's concert bands regularly earn " Unanimous Superior " ratings . 
 The Marching Band and Color Guard compete in the Western Band Association ( WBA ) circuit . The band practices a competitive field show , performed at football halftime shows and competitions . The Marching Dons are classified into WBA Class AAAAA . The Amador Valley Marching Dons have received sweepstakes ( highest score in combined AAAA and AAAAA classes ) and first place awards and earned sixth place in 2008 at the WBA Championship . 
 In 2006 the marching band competed in the Bands of America Regional Competition for the first time , and placed fourth in the 2007 competition . In 2005 and 2009 , Amador Valley was invited to perform at the annual London New Year 's Day Parade . 
 In 2014 , the Amador Valley Marching Dons earned fourth place at the WBA Grand Championships with their program , " The Forest , " receiving a school @-@ high score of 93 @.@ 15 . 
 = = = Math Team = = = 
 The Amador Valley Math Team hosts outreach events and participates in mathematics competitions . The Mathematical Association of America placed Amador Valley High School on its School Merit Roll for performance on the American Mathematics Competitions series . The Math Team placed fifth nationally on the 2008 Collaborative Problem @-@ Solving Contest and placed in the top 25 nationwide in the 2005 – 2009 Fall Startup Events . 
 Amador Valley is the first high school in California to host a MathLeague.org tournament . The tournament was run by Amador Valley math teachers with help from the Amador Valley Math Team . The event served as a qualifier for MathLeague.org 's Northern California Championships and served as a tryout for the Bay Area American Regions Math League team . The math team was praised for " showing leadership in mathematics . " 
 At the 2009 Northern California Championships , the Math Team placed second in Northern California to <unk> High School and received an invitation to MathLeague.org 's multi @-@ state championship in Kansas City . Amador Valley High School , the first to represent California at the Midwestern event , finished fifth in the championship out of the ten qualifying teams . 
 The Math Team also hosts the Amador Valley Geometry Bee , modeled after the Scripps National Spelling Bee . This competition invites students from Amador Valley , Foothill High School , and the district 's three middle schools to compete in timed rounds . The style of the competition consists of rounds of 10 questions each , deviating from the traditional spelling bee format . 
 The Math Team also hosts an event for parents and students , Family Math Night . This event lets parents preview course material with their students through hands @-@ on activities run by math team members . The goal of Family Math Night is " to help parents become comfortable assisting their students with math homework . " 
 = = = Robotics Team = = = 
 The Amador Valley Robotics Team , founded in 1999 , is the first and only high school team to compete in the Autonomous Underwater Vehicle ( AUV ) Competition hosted by the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International ( AUVSI ) . Each year , with a minimal amount of outside technical assistance , the team develops an AUV to maneuver an underwater obstacle course . 
 The team first entered the competition in 2000 with its Hammerhead AUV , weighing 98 kg ( 220 pounds ) . They placed seventh in the field of twelve . According to Daryl Davidson , the executive director of AUVSI , " The Amador group really broke the ice by being the first high school team at the competition ... It caught everybody off @-@ guard and their enthusiasm was very infectious . " 
 At the 2001 competition , Amador Valley placed second to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with its Manta Ray AUV . The Manta Ray weighed less than 100 kg ( 220 pounds ) and featured a modular design . According to Jim Bales , technical director of the competition , the technical details of the Manta Ray impressed many judges and its performance surpassed a number of university teams . 
 The Amador Valley Barracuda line , started in 2002 , " is propelled by two laterally mounted <unk> thrusters controlling speed and heading and two auxiliary thrusters aligned vertically controlling pitch and depth . " To guide the AUV autonomously , a pressure sensor , compass , camera , and hydrophone array return navigation input data to the software . The AUV uses a Beagle Board single @-@ board computer that runs <unk> Linux . 
 In 2008 , several fundamental changes were made to the robot . The control system was reorganized and the mission control software was revamped to improve communication and to limit overhead . A low @-@ level <unk> @-@ based control system was added to free up system resources . This extra processing capability will be used for mission control and image processing tasks . 
 = = = Speech and Debate = = = 
 Amador Valley 's main Speech and Debate teams places a heavy emphasis on public speaking skills . The school 's Mock Trial team represented Alameda County at the California State Championships in 2007 , and competed as the wildcard in 2009 . The Mock Trial team has perennially been Alameda County finalists in this Constitutional Rights Foundation sponsored competition , holding the finalist title five of the six years from 2004 – 2009 . Alameda County Superior Court Judge George Hernandez , who presided over the final county round in 2007 , praised the level of preparedness of Amador Valley 's Mock Trial team . 
 The national We the People : The Citizen and the Constitution competition takes place each spring in Washington , D.C .. The Amador Valley " We the People " team has represented the state of California at the national competition more than a dozen times since 1992 . The team earned the national title in 1995 , and took second place in the 1996 , 2006 , and 2007 competitions , in addition to placing third in 1994 . In 2008 and 2009 , the team placed fourth and third in the national competition , respectively , and then took second place again in 2011 , 2013 , and 2014 . Congressman Jerry <unk> and Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi congratulated the 2009 team on Capitol Hill . 
 = = = Student outreach = = = 
 Amador Valley 's Interact Club was founded in coordination with the local Rotary chapter , and is one of 33 @,@ 000 Rotary chapters in the world . Every year , the Interact Club coordinates several local fundraisers as well as nationwide campaigns in conjunction with Rotary events . Club members are a part of millions of worldwide Rotary and Interact members who work " locally , regionally , and internationally to combat hunger , improve health and sanitation , provide education and job training , promote peace , and eradicate polio under the motto Service Above Self . " Amador Valley 's Interact Club has been praised for its efforts to " educate , advocate and fundraise for life @-@ changing programs . " 
 The Human Rights Club is a similar sort of outreach group , affiliated with Amnesty International and STAND . The club was founded in 2007 by Amador Valley student Shelby Margolin , the California state high school outreach coordinator on the national STAND leadership board . The club focuses on ways to address issues such as genocide , disease and poverty in Africa . The student group hosts educational seminars and keynote speakers in an annual Human Rights Conference in the hope of " raising awareness about and helping to end genocide . " 
 = = = Other extracurricular activities = = = 
 Additional Amador Valley clubs include Go Green , which encourages recycling on campus , and FISH Club , a non @-@ denominational Christian club . Around election years , Young Democrats and Young Republicans clubs are popular . The school 's Fashion Club hosts fashion shows , and the school 's Flight Club introduces students to aviation and aircraft . Cultural clubs at Amador Valley include Black Student Union , Muslim Student Association , and Multi Cultural Club . Other clubs at Amador Valley include Anime , Art of Movement , Astronomy , Bhangra , Book Club , California Scholastic Federation , DECA , Don Squad , Drama , Environmental , French , GO , Gay @-@ Straight Alliance , Interact , Junior State of America , Lumberjack , Model United Nations , Political Ideals , Puzzle , Rugby , Short Film , and Students Interested in Medical Sciences ( SIMS ) . 
 = = Notable people associated with school = = 
 = = = Alumni = = = 
 Craig <unk> – 2008 World Air Guitar Champion , 2006 and 2008 US National Air Guitar Champion 
 Cary C. Chun – former commander of the United States Air Force 's 50th Space Wing 
 Kevin Crow – former professional San Diego soccer player , manager , and coach 
 Aliya Deri – National Vocabulary Champion in 2008 , Scripps National Spelling Bee Runner Up in 2005 
 Rick Kane – NFL player for the Detroit Lions and the Washington Redskins . Running back , career total 1 @,@ 486 yards . Class of ' 73 . 
 Paul <unk> – filmmaker and actor 
 Joel <unk> – Former member of the PGA Tour , <unk> Tour and PGA Tour Canada . 
 Greg Kragen – Former NFL player for 13 years for the Carolina Panthers , Kansas City Chiefs , and Denver Broncos . Went to one Pro Bowl and started in three Super Bowls . 
 Kevin Laue – Division I Manhattan College basketball player with one hand , debuted in the 2009 – 2010 season . Former President George W. Bush asked to meet with Laue while he was a student at Amador Valley . 
 Abby Martin – journalist & community activist ; host of Breaking the Set on RT Network ; founder of Media Roots ( <unk> ) , a citizen journalism project . 
 Tom Orloff – district attorney for Alameda County 
 Scott Peters – Former NFL offensive lineman for the Arizona Cardinals 
 Stephen <unk> – Major League Baseball player for the St. Louis Cardinals . 
 Donna Theodore – singer and actress , Theatre World Award and Drama Desk Award recipient for role in Shenandoah 
 David Yost – actor known for his role of Billy Cranston on the television series Mighty Morphin Power Rangers 
 = = = Staff = = = 
 Jim <unk> – Mayor of Pleasanton , member of the Immortal 21 
 = = = Online resources = = = 
 = West Highland White Terrier = 
 The West Highland White Terrier , commonly known as the Westie or Westy , is a Scottish breed of dog with a distinctive white coat . The modern breed is descended from a number of breeding programs of white terriers in Scotland prior to the 20th century . Edward Donald Malcolm , 16th Laird of Poltalloch , is credited with the creation of the modern breed from his Poltalloch Terrier , but did not want to be known as such . 
 Other related breeds included George Campbell , 8th Duke of Argyll 's Roseneath Terrier and Dr. Americ Edwin Flaxman 's Pittenweem Terriers . This breed of small white Scottish terriers was given its modern name for the first time in 1908 , with recognition by major kennel clubs occurring around the same time . 
 The breed remains very popular in the UK , twice winner at Cruft 's , and is in the top third of all breeds in the US since the 1960s . It has been featured in television and film , including in Hamish Macbeth and in advertising by companies such as Cesar dog food and Scottish whisky Black & White . It is a medium @-@ sized terrier , although with longer legs than other Scottish breeds of terrier . It has a white double coat of fur which fills out the dog 's face , giving it a rounded appearance . The breed can be good with children , but does not always tolerate rough handling . The Westie is an active and intelligent breed , and is social with a high prey drive , as they were once used to hunt rodents . 
 Several breed @-@ specific and nonspecific health issues appear in the breed , including a condition in young dogs nicknamed " <unk> jaw " which causes an overgrowth of bone in the jaw of the dog . It can also be prone to skin disorders , with a breed @-@ specific condition called hyperplastic <unk> occurring . They are very energetic and need plenty of exercise . Cousin to the Cairn Terrier , the Westie was bred to hunt small rodents at places such as farms . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 Commonly , Westies have bright , deep @-@ set , almond @-@ shaped eyes that are dark in colour . Their ears are pointed and erect . Members of the breed typically weigh between 15 and 20 pounds ( 6 @.@ 8 and 9 @.@ 1 kg ) , and the average height is between 10 – 11 inches ( 25 – 28 cm ) at the withers . The body should be shorter than the height of the dog at the shoulder . 
 They also have a deep chest , muscular limbs , a black nose , and a short , closely fitted jaw with " scissors " bite ( lower canines locked in front of upper canines , upper incisors locked over lower incisors ) . The Westie 's paws are slightly turned out to give it better grip than flat @-@ footed breeds when it climbs on rocky surfaces . In young puppies , the nose and footpads have pink markings , which slowly turn black as they age . 
 They have a soft , dense , thick undercoat and a rough outer coat , which can grow to about 2 inches ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) long . The fur fills out the face to give a rounded appearance . As puppies develop into adults , their coarse outer coat is normally removed by either " hand @-@ stripping " , especially for dog @-@ showing , or otherwise clipping . 
 = = Temperament = = 
 The temperament of the West Highland White Terrier can vary greatly , with some being friendly towards children , whilst others prefer solitude . It will not tolerate rough handling such as a child pulling on its ears , and can be both <unk> and toy @-@ possessive . It is normally independent , assured , and self @-@ confident , and can make a good watchdog . It is a loyal breed that bonds with its owner , but is often always on the move , requiring good exercise ( 15 – 30 min ) . The Westie is highly social and is the most friendly and jolly of all the Scottish breeds of terriers . 
 It is a hardy breed , and can be stubborn , leading to issues with training . A Westie may need to have its training refreshed on occasion during its lifetime . Having a typical terrier prey drive , it tends to be highly interested in toys , especially chasing balls . It does retain the instincts of an earth @-@ dog , including inquisitive and investigative traits , as well as natural instincts to both bark and dig holes . It is ranked 47th in Stanley Coren 's The Intelligence of Dogs . 
 = = Health = = 
 The American breed club puts the lifespan of the Westie at 12 to 16 years . A club survey puts the average lifespan at 11 @.@ 4 years . Veterinary clinic data from the UK show a typical lifespan of 10 @.@ 5 to 15 years . The French Kennel Club database gives 8 to 16 years , with a median of 13 years . The typical litter size is between three and five puppies . However , some litters may contain more than this , one of which was a Westie called Isobel , which gave birth to a litter of 11 puppies on 10 April 2012 . 
 The breed is predisposed to conditions found in many breeds , such as abdominal hernias . Westie puppies may be affected by craniomandibular osteopathy , a disease also known as " lion jaw " , and is sometimes also referred to as " <unk> jaw " . The disease is an autosomal recessive condition , so a puppy can only be affected by it if both its parents are carriers of the faulty gene . The condition appears across many breeds , including several different types of terriers , as well as other unrelated breeds such as the Great Dane . It typically appears in dogs under a year old , and can cause problems for the dog to chew or swallow food . <unk> testing can be conducted to diagnose the condition , in which the bones around the jaw thicken ; additionally , the blood may show increased calcium levels and enzyme levels . The condition often stops progressing by the time the dog is a year old , and in some cases can recede . It is normally treated with anti @-@ inflammatory medications , and the feeding of soft foods . In some cases , tube feeding may be necessary . However , if the animal still cannot eat and is in uncontrolled pain , then euthanasia may be the only medical option remaining . 
 The breed is prone to skin disorders . About a quarter of Westies surveyed are affected by atopic dermatitis , a heritable chronic allergic skin condition . A higher proportion of males are affected compared to females . An uncommon but severe breed @-@ specific skin condition , hyperplastic <unk> , may affect West Highland White Terriers , both juveniles and adults dogs . Affected dogs can suffer from red hyperpigmentation , <unk> , and hair loss . In the initial stages , this condition can be misdiagnosed as allergies or less serious forms of dermatitis . 
 An inherited genetic problem that exists in the breed is <unk> cell <unk> . It is not breed @-@ specific , and can appear in Cairn Terriers and other breeds including Beagles and Pomeranians . It is a neurological disease where the dog lacks an enzyme called <unk> . The symptoms are noticeable as the puppy develops , and can be identified by the age of 30 weeks . Affected dogs have tremors , muscle weakness , and trouble walking . Symptoms slowly increase until limb paralysis begins to occur . Due to it being a hereditary condition , owners should avoid breeding affected animals to eliminate it from the breed . Another genetic condition that affects the breed is " white dog shaker syndrome " . As this condition is most commonly found in Westies and Maltese , the condition was originally thought to be connected to the genes for white coats , but the same condition has since been found in other nonwhite breeds including the Yorkshire Terrier and the Dachshund . The condition typically develops over one to three days , resulting in tremors of the head and limbs , ataxia , and <unk> . Affected males and females can be affected for different lengths of time , with symptoms in females lasting between four and six weeks , while males can be affected the rest of their lives . 
 Other less common conditions which appear in the breed include <unk> <unk> , which is where elevated levels of alpha @-@ <unk> acid are in the dog 's urine , blood plasma , and spinal fluid . It can cause seizures , muscle stiffness , and ataxia , but is more commonly found in Staffordshire Bull Terriers . A degeneration of the hip joint , known as Legg – Calvé – Perthes syndrome , also occurs in the breed . However , the chances of this condition occurring are much higher in some other breeds , such as the Australian Shepherd and the Miniature Pincher . The breed is also one of the least likely to be affected by a luxating patella , where the knee cap slips out of place . 
 = = History = = 
 Scottish white terriers were recorded as early as during the reign of James VI of Scotland , who reigned between 1567 and 1625 . The king ordered that a dozen terriers be procured from Argyll to be presented to the Kingdom of France as a gift . <unk> and brindle @-@ coloured dogs were seen as hardier than those of other colours , and white dogs were seen as being weak . At various times during the breed 's existence , it has been considered a white offshoot of both the Scottish Terrier and the Cairn Terrier breeds . 
 Reports of a ship from the Spanish Armada being wrecked on the island of Skye in 1588 indicated the ship carried white Spanish dogs , whose descendants were kept distinct from other breeds by Clan Donald , including the families of the Chiefs . Other families on Skye preserved both white and sandy @-@ coloured dogs . One such family was the Clan MacLeod , and it was reported by their descendants that at least two Chiefs kept white terriers , including " The Wicked Man " Norman MacLeod , and his grandson Norman , who became Chief after his death . 
 George Campbell , 8th Duke of Argyll , chief of Clan Campbell , bred a breed of white Scottish terriers known as the " Roseneath Terrier " . Another breed of white Scottish terriers also appeared at this point , with Dr. Americ Edwin Flaxman from Fife developing his line of " Pittenweem Terriers " out of a female Scottish Terrier which produced white offspring . The dog seemed to produce these white puppies regardless of the sire to which she was bred , and after drowning over 20 of these offspring , he came upon the theory that it was an ancient trait of the Scottish Terrier that was trying to reappear . He rededicated his breeding program to produce white Scottish Terriers with the aim of restoring it to the same stature as the dark @-@ coloured breed . Flaxman is credited with classes being added to dog shows for white Scottish Terriers towards the end of the 19th century . 
 The person most closely associated with developing the modern breed of West Highland White Terrier is Edward Donald Malcolm , 16th Laird of Poltalloch . Malcolm owned terriers used to work game ; the story told is that a reddish @-@ brown terrier was mistaken for a fox and shot . Following this , Malcolm decided to develop a white terrier breed , which became known as the " Poltalloch Terrier " . The first generation of <unk> had sandy @-@ coloured coats , and had already developed prick ears , which is a trait seen later in the modern breed . It is unknown if the Poltalloch Terriers and Pittenweem Terriers were interbred . In 1903 , Malcolm declared that he did not want to be known as the creator of the breed and insisted that his breed of white terriers be renamed . The term " West Highland White Terrier " first appears in Otters and Otter Hunting by <unk> Cameron , published in 1908 . 
 The first breed club was set up in 1904 ; Niall Campbell , 10th Duke of Argyll , was the society 's first president . A second club was subsequently set up , with the Countess of Aberdeen as chairman . Edward Malcolm succeeded the Countess as the club 's second chairman . Kennel Club recognition followed in 1907 , and the breed appeared at Crufts for the first time in the same year . The Westie was imported into the United States in 1907 – 1908 , when Robert Goelet imported Ch . Kiltie and Ch . Rumpus <unk> . Initially , it was also known at the time as the Roseneath Terrier , and the Roseneath Terrier Club was recognised by the American Kennel Club in 1908 . The club was renamed during the following year to the West Highland White Terrier Club of America . The breed spent the period that immediately followed as being " in vogue " , becoming popular almost immediately upon its arrival in the US . Canadian Kennel Club recognition followed in 1909 . Until 1924 in the UK , Westie pedigrees were allowed to have Cairn and Scottish Terriers in them . By the time of Malcolm 's death in 1930 , a stable type had appeared with prick ears , a white coat , and a short back . 
 In major conformation shows , the breed has been equally successful on both sides of the Atlantic . The first member of the breed to win a show championship was Ch . Morvan in 1905 , owned by Colin Young . The dog was registered at the time as a Scottish Terrier , and won the title at the Scottish Kennel Club show at the age of seven months . Because the breed was not yet recognised independently , the championship title was not retained when the dog was reregistered as a West Highland White Terrier . The first win at a major show came at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in 1942 when Constance Winant 's Ch . <unk> Pattern of <unk> won the title of Best in Show . The same title was taken by Barbara Worcester 's Ch . <unk> Simon in 1962 . It took a further 14 years before the breed took its first Best in Show title at Crufts , the UK 's major dog show . Ch . Dianthus Buttons , owned by Kath Newstead and Dorothy Taylor , took the title for the breed in 1976 . The most recent win for the breed at a major show was again at Crufts , this time in 1990 with the Best in Show title going to Derek Tattersall 's Ch . <unk> Moon Pilot . 
 The popularity of the breed during the early 20th century was such that dogs were being exchanged for hundreds of guineas . As of 2010 , the Westie is the third @-@ most popular breed of terrier in the UK , with 5 @,@ 361 puppies registered with the Kennel Club . However , this is a decrease in numbers since 2001 , when it was the most popular terrier breed , with 11 @,@ 019 new dogs registered . The breed 's position in the United States is more stable with it remaining in the top third of all breeds since around 1960 . It was ranked 30th @-@ most popular in 2001 , based on registrations with the American Kennel Club , which has varied around the 30s in the decade since , with it ranked 34th in 2010 . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = In public life = = = 
 Muhammed Ali Jinnah , founder of Pakistan , was known to own a Westie . 
 John Green ( author ) , novelist , co @-@ founder of the <unk> , is known to own a Westie , called Willie ( or Fireball Wilson Roberts ) . 
 = = = In branding = = = 
 Black & White whisky have used both Scottish Terriers and Westies in their advertisements , and the breed is used as the mascot of the dog food brand Cesar . 
 The Australian dog food manufacturer Mars Incorporated uses the West Highland White Terrier breed as the ' face ' of their ' My Dog ' brand . The Westie can be seen on ' My Dog ' packaging , website and television and print commercials . 
 = = = In film = = = 
 The film The Adventures of Greyfriars Bobby , released in the UK in February 2006 , cast a West Highland White Terrier as Bobby . The appearance of a Westie caused protests from the Skye Terrier breed club , which complained about the filmmaker 's use of an incorrect dog breed for the part . 
 In the film Lethal Weapon 3 , Carrie Murtaugh played by <unk> Smith , carried a Westie early in the movie when Martin Riggs ( played by Mel Gibson ) brings his laundry to the Murtaugh home . 
 = = = In television = = = 
 The titular character in the BBC Scotland @-@ produced television series Hamish Macbeth owned a Westie named " Wee Jock " . 
 In the TV show Jeeves and Wooster , Bertie 's Aunt Agatha owns a Westie named MacIntosh . 
 = William McAloney = 
 William Simpson " Bill " McAloney , GC , OBE ( 12 May 1910 – 31 August 1995 ) was a senior engineering officer in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) and an Australian exchange recipient of the George Cross , the highest civil decoration for heroism in the United Kingdom and formerly in the Commonwealth . Born in Adelaide , he worked as a mechanic before enlisting in the RAAF as an aircraft engine fitter in 1936 . In August the following year , he attempted to rescue the pilot of a crashed Hawker Demon aircraft engulfed in flames at an airfield in Hamilton , Victoria . The first on scene , McAloney rushed into the wreckage in an effort to extract the unconscious pilot . The pilot 's leg was trapped , however , and while struggling to free it one of the wing tanks burst , knocking McAloney unconscious . McAloney was pulled from the aircraft suffering severe burns and spent the next month in hospital . He was subsequently awarded the Albert Medal for his actions in the rescue attempt . 
 McAloney sufficiently recovered to return to his work in the RAAF , and during the Second World War was primarily involved in engine repair and engineering staff work in Australia . Commissioned as a flying officer in 1942 , he saw service in Dutch New Guinea during late 1944 . He received a permanent commission in the RAAF in 1948 , and was advanced to squadron leader in 1950 . During the Malayan Emergency , he served as technical officer to both No. 90 Wing and No. 1 Squadron , based in Singapore . In 1960 , he was made Officer Commanding Engineering Squadron at the Aircraft Research and Development Unit , and was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire for his efforts in the post . McAloney retired in 1966 with the honorary rank of group captain . In 1971 , the Albert Medal was discontinued and living recipients of the decoration were invited to exchange their medal for the George Cross ; McAloney took up the offer and formally became a recipient of the latter . He died in 1995 at the age of 85 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McAloney was born on 12 May 1910 in Adelaide , South Australia , the eldest son of William Samuel McAloney and his wife Mary ( née Murphy ) . The young McAloney was educated at <unk> Technical High School and the Adelaide School of Mines . In 1925 , McAloney registered for compulsory military training in the Citizen Military Force , serving as a private with the 43rd Battalion until November 1929 . During this time , he gained employment as an automotive mechanic with <unk> Ltd , where he received on @-@ the @-@ job training in place of a formal apprenticeship . McAloney was employed with <unk> for three years , before he took a position with Adelaide Car Service . 
 In 1931 , McAloney purchased a garage and engineering workshop in <unk> . He operated the establishment for the next five years , the business conducting work on various types of vehicle including cars , trucks and tractors . However , the business ultimately experienced financial difficulties and was forced to close . In a ceremony on 24 June 1935 , McAloney wed Dora Winifred Johnson ; the couple later had four daughters and three sons . 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = Airman and Albert Medal = = = 
 In light of his business closure , McAloney was forced to seek alternate employment and he consequently enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force on 1 July 1936 . Ranked aircraftman , he completed a fitters course and qualified as an aero fitter and turner before being attached to No. 1 Squadron at RAAF Base Laverton , Victoria , in September . He was employed in a maintenance role within the unit , working on the Jupiter Gipsy and Rolls @-@ Royce Kestrel engines of Bristol Bulldog and Hawker Demon aircraft respectively . During 1937 , McAloney completed a part @-@ time air gunner course . His first child , a son named William , was born later that year . 
 On 31 August 1937 , three Hawker Demon aircraft of No. 1 Squadron were on a training flight , during which they landed at an air base in Hamilton , Victoria . The exercise coincided with the local agricultural show , and the planes briefly provided a stationary display for the public . <unk> their journey , the first aircraft had already taken off when the second was seen to have difficulties . The pilot , Pilot Officer Kenneth McKenzie , had attempted a climbing turn when the aircraft 's engine stalled , sending the machine into a dive . McAloney — who was a passenger in the third aircraft — witnessed the incident and signalled for his pilot to stop . On doing this , McAloney immediately leapt out of his plane and ran across the airfield . Out of control , the second aircraft struck the ground and rapidly became engulfed in flames . The first on scene , McAloney dashed into the wreckage in an effort to extradite the two crew members , and was able to grab hold of McKenzie who was sprawled over the flaming main fuel tank . McAloney pulled McKenzie free of the cockpit and down on to the aircraft 's wing , though McKenzie 's leg became trapped in the wreckage . Despite this , McAloney continued his efforts to free McKenzie , burning his hands on the pilot 's smouldering clothes . At this point , one of the wing tanks burst , rendering McAloney unconscious . He was pulled from the aircraft suffering severe burns , and spent the next four weeks in hospital undergoing treatment . Both McKenzie and his observer @-@ gunner , Sergeant Norman Torrens @-@ Witherow , perished and it was later ascertained that , owing to the injuries sustained on impact , they would not have survived even if the rescue attempt had been successful . 
 Although McAloney 's rescue attempt was unsuccessful , the president of the RAAF court of inquiry into the incident , Squadron Leader Charles Eaton , noted his " conspicuous gallantry " and the coroner publicly commended McAloney 's actions . McAloney 's efforts that day were ultimately recognised with the award of the Albert Medal , the announcement of which was widely circulated in the media . The notification and accompanying citation for the decoration was published in the London Gazette on 18 February 1938 , reading : 
 Whitehall , February 4 , 1938 . 
 His Majesty The KING has been graciously pleased to award the Albert Medal to Aircraftman William Simpson McAloney , Royal Australian Air Force , for conspicuous gallantry in attempting to rescue an officer from the burning wreckage of an aircraft at Hamilton , Victoria , on the 31st August , 1937 . 
 Despite the fact that the aircraft was ablaze from nose to rudder , Aircraftman McAloney dashed into the flames and continued his efforts at rescue until pulled away in an unconscious condition , having received severe burns which necessitated his removal to hospital . 
 The award of McAloney 's Albert Medal is unique , as he is the only member of the RAAF to receive the decoration . The award also proved to be the last Albert Medal bestowed upon a living Australian , with all such subsequent presentations until the medal 's discontinuation in 1971 being posthumous . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 McAloney was presented with his Albert Medal by the acting Governor @-@ General of Australia , William <unk> , 5th Baron Huntingfield , in a ceremony at Parliament House , Melbourne on 31 May 1938 . McAloney recovered sufficiently from his injuries to return to his duties with the RAAF , and in September was attached to No. 1 Aircraft Depot for a period of three months . During this time he was promoted to leading aircraftman , before returning to service with No. 1 Squadron . He was formally transferred to No. 1 Aircraft Depot from August 1939 , and was advanced to corporal on 1 September that year . With the outbreak of the Second World War , McAloney received a rapid series of promotions over the following eighteen months , first to sergeant in April 1940 , flight sergeant in March 1941 , and finally to warrant officer in February 1942 . He was primarily consigned to engine repair and engineering staff work in Australia during the conflict . After making sergeant , he became No. 1 Aircraft Depot 's non @-@ commissioned officer in charge of overhaul and test work on the Rolls @-@ Royce Kestrel engine . His duties were expanded with his March 1941 promotion to include the overhaul , inspection and testing of both the Kestrel and Rolls @-@ Royce Merlin aircraft engines . 
 In August 1941 , McAloney was posted to the Directorate of Equipment at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne . In this capacity he advised on the procurement of equipment and spare parts for RAAF aircraft . He was further tasked with compiling a register of aeroplane equipment at RAAF flight training units and operational bases throughout Australia . The latter entailed McAloney visiting several Air Force units in Victoria , New South Wales and Queensland to check equipment stores . On 1 March 1942 , he was commissioned as a flying officer . Transferred to the Directorate of Equipment Administration in July , McAloney was made Officer Commanding Technical and Photographic Staffs and served as a liaison between his own directorate and that of Technical Services . 
 Promoted to temporary flight lieutenant on 1 August 1943 , McAloney was sent to the Directorate of Technical Services from November as the specialist officer on American and gas turbine jet engines . The following November , he was dispatched to Dutch New Guinea to rectify issues being experienced with Pratt & Whitney engines in operations by aircraft of the 1st Tactical Air Force . He returned to Australia and his position with Technical Services in December , and saw out the remainder of the war in this post . McAloney decided he wanted to remain in the Air Force on the cessation of hostilities , and subsequently sought a permanent commission in the post @-@ war RAAF . Having continued on a short @-@ service commission in the meantime , his application was ultimately approved in September 1948 and he was granted the substantive rank of flight lieutenant . His younger brother , Robert Simpson McAloney , also saw service with the RAAF in the Second World War . He had enlisted in late 1937 and rose to the rank of warrant officer before his discharge in 1946 , his final posting being to No. 1 Communication Unit . 
 = = = Post @-@ war and senior engineering officer = = = 
 In mid @-@ 1946 , McAloney was involved in an investigation into a series of engine failures experienced by RAAF aircraft . The inquiry led him to visit operational and transport units throughout Australia , in an attempt to determine whether the issues were the result of substandard maintenance or defective components . He returned to his duties at the Directorate of Technical Services on the investigation 's conclusion . Made squadron leader in March 1950 , he attended a land / air warfare course the following year . McAloney was posted to Singapore in June 1952 as the technical officer to the Changi @-@ based No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing , formed specifically for service in the Malayan Emergency . The attachment proved short lived with the disbandment of No. 90 Wing in December , at which point McAloney transferred to No. 1 Squadron , then operating out of Tengah . 
 McAloney returned to Australia in August 1953 , his next appointment being to the staff at the Department of Air in Melbourne . He possessed complete administrative control over matters pertaining to aircraft engines in this post , including the acquisition , repairs , modifications and financial expenditure on such . In 1956 , he completed a course in industrial mobilisation , later undertaking a unit in industrial electronics . With his January 1957 promotion to wing commander , McAloney was transferred to Maintenance Command , where he held a policy formulation position responsible for the servicing of aircraft . He served three years in this post , being made Officer Commanding Engineering Squadron at the Aircraft Research and Development Unit ( ARDU ) in October 1960 . The function of ARDU was to test aircraft from local and overseas manufacturers , evaluating whether they were suitable for acquisition by the RAAF . McAloney 's role focused on the supervision of maintenance for test aircraft , along with completing modifications and fitting specialised equipment trialled at ARDU . The introduction into service of the Mirage <unk> fighter coincided with his time in this post . He was set to retire from the RAAF on reaching the age limit for his rank in 1964 , but his appointment was extended a further two years owing to the shortage of technical officers . For his service with ARDU , McAloney was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 1966 New Year Honours List . The recommendation for the honour credited McAloney with enhancing the safety record at ARDU , and commended his constant efforts during the adoption of the Mirage and his actions to ensure the serviceability of the diverse variety of aircraft at the unit . He retired from the RAAF on 9 December 1966 and , in recognition of his 30 years of service , was granted the honorary rank of group captain . 
 = = Later life = = 
 McAloney retired to his home in Sandringham , Victoria , where he indulged his passions in gardening and golf . In 1971 , owing to the decline in status and significance of the Albert Medal , the British Government announced that living recipients of the decoration would be invited to exchange their medals for the George Cross , and henceforth formally become recipients of the latter award . All six living Australian Albert Medal recipients at the time opted to accept the offer , McAloney and four others travelling to London to receive their awards . The five men , Jack Chalmers , Stanley Gibbs , Robert Kavanaugh , Dick Richards and McAloney , were presented with their George Crosses at an investiture ceremony in Buckingham Palace by Queen Elizabeth II on 12 July 1972 . 
 Aged 85 , Bill McAloney died on 31 August 1995 ; the 58th anniversary of his rescue attempt . Remembered as " pleasant and fatherly – almost gracious " , he was survived by his wife and six of their seven children . Two of McAloney 's sons served with the Australian Army in the Vietnam War , Paul Simpson completing two tours as a corporal with the 6th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment , and John Douglas as a lieutenant with the 4th and 5th Battalions of the Royal Australian Regiment . John McAloney was decorated with the Military Cross for rescuing one of his men who had been wounded , and then personally clearing several caves defended by Viet Cong despite sustaining a wound himself . He rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel and commanded the 1st Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment in the mid @-@ 1980s before his death in 1991 . 
 = Amanita ravenelii = 
 Amanita ravenelii , commonly known as the pinecone Lepidella , is a species of fungus in the family Amanitaceae . The fruit bodies are medium to large , with caps up to 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) wide , and a stem up to 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) long and 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . The warts on the whitish cap surface are large — up to 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 in ) wide and 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 in ) high . The stem has a large bulb at its base , covered with whitish to brownish scales , that may root several centimeters into the soil . The ring on the stem is thick and <unk> or felt @-@ like . It is widely distributed in mixed and deciduous forests of the southeastern United States , where it grows solitarily or in groups on the ground in late summer and autumn . The mushrooms , which have an odor resembling bleaching powder , are not recommended for consumption . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described scientifically by Miles Joseph Berkeley and Moses Ashley Curtis in 1859 as Agaricus ravenelii . Pier Andrea Saccardo transferred it to the genus Amanita in 1887 . It is in the subsection Solitariae , section Lepidella in the genus Amanita . Other North American species in the section Lepidella include A. abrupta , A. atkinsoniana , A. chlorinosma , A. cokeri , A. daucipes , A. mutabilis , A. onusta , A. pelioma , A. polypyramis , and A. rhopalopus . 
 The specific epithet ravenelli honors the American mycologist Henry William Ravenel . The fungus is commonly known as the " pinecone Lepidella " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is 8 – 17 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 6 @.@ 7 in ) wide , initially hemispherical to almost round , later becoming convex to flattened . It is fleshy , white to yellowish @-@ white , usually dry , but occasionally slightly sticky with age . The universal veil remains as a pale yellow to brownish @-@ orange layer that breaks up into crowded , rather coarse , conical to truncate @-@ conical warts . The warts are up to 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 in ) wide and 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 in ) high , becoming more scale @-@ like towards the cap margin with age . The margin is non @-@ striate ( without any grooves ) , and appendiculate ( with partial veil remnants hanging along the cap margin ) . The gills are free from attachment to the stem , crowded together , moderately broad , and yellowish @-@ white to pale yellow . Interspersed among the gills are short gills ( lamellulae ) that do not extend completely to the stem ; they are somewhat truncated ( abruptly terminated ) to attenuated ( tapering gradually ) . The stem is 10 – 25 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 9 @.@ 8 in ) long and 1 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide , and decreases slightly in thickness near the apex . It is solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) , white to pale yellow , and covered with tufts of soft woolly hairs or fibrils . It has a large basal bulb , swollen in the middle , which roots in the ground up to 5 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) . The partial veil is yellowish @-@ white to pale yellow , forming an ring which is thick , woolly , delicate , and soon falls away . The universal veil remains at the stem base as thick scales , curved downward , often forming irregular rings . The flesh is firm , and white to pale yellow . The mushroom tissue has an odor of chlorinated lime ( bleaching powder ) , or " old tennis shoes " . The edibility of Amanita ravenelii mushrooms have been described variously as unknown , " not recommended " , or poisonous . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are ellipsoid , occasionally ovoid or obovoid , thin @-@ walled , hyaline , amyloid , and measure 8 – 11 by 5 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 5 µm . The spore deposit is white . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 40 – 65 by 7 – 11 @.@ 5 µm , four @-@ spored , with clamps at their bases . Cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are occasionally seen as small , club @-@ shaped cells measuring 15 – 35 by 10 – 15 µm , on thin @-@ walled hyphae that are 3 – 7 µm in diameter . The cap cuticle , which is not clearly differentiated from the cap tissue , consists of thin @-@ walled , interwoven hyphae 2 @.@ 5 – 9 µm in diameter . The tissue of the universal veil on the cap consists of more or less parallel and erect rows of roughly spherical , and ellipsoid to broadly ellipsoid cells , up to 78 by 65 µm and spindle- to club @-@ shaped cells up to 125 by 30 µm . These latter cells are terminal or in short , terminal chains , and are borne on moderately abundant , thin @-@ walled , branched , interwoven , sometimes nearly <unk> hyphae , 3 – 9 @.@ 5 µm diameter with a few scattered oleiferous ( oil @-@ containing ) hyphae , 5 – 12 @.@ 5 µm diameter . The distribution of hyphae at the stem base is similar to that on the cap , but with more filamentous hyphae . Clamp connections are present . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The fruit bodies of A. ravenelii are distinguished from A. chlorinosma by the presence of pale yellow to brownish orange , large , conical to truncate @-@ conical warts on the cap surface and a large basal bulb . The mushroom A. polypyramis is pure white , and lacks the pale yellow to brownish @-@ orange large conical warts typical of A. ravenelii . The North American species A. <unk> has a similar areolate cap surface , but unlike A. ravenelii , does not have a distinct basal bulb , and it is found in semi @-@ arid areas associated with aspen and old growth Douglas fir . Also from North America , A. mutabilis has pink tones on the cap and stem , and will turn pink when its flesh is cut ; it smells of anise . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Amanita ravenelii is a mycorrhizal fungus , meaning it forms mutualistic associations with shrubs and trees . Mushrooms grow on the ground solitarily , scattered , or in groups in mixed coniferous and deciduous forests . Although the specific tree associations preferred by A. ravenelii are unknown , in general , Amanita from section Lepidella tend to associate with <unk> pine ( that is , pines in subgenus Pinus ) , oak , and hickory . 
 Amanita ravenelii is widely distributed in the southeastern United States , where their occurrence is " occasional to frequent " in the late summer and autumn months of August to November ; mushrooms been collected from the US states of Maryland , North Carolina , South Carolina , Indiana , Tennessee , and Virginia . It has also been reported growing in northern Baja California , Mexico . 
 = = = Cited books = = = 
 Jenkins DB . ( 1986 ) . Amanita of North America . Eureka , California : Mad River Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 916422 @-@ 55 @-@ 0 . 
 = HMS Andromeda ( 1897 ) = 
 HMS Andromeda was one of eight Diadem @-@ class protected cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the 1890s . Upon completion in 1899 , the ship was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet where she helped to escort a royal yacht during its cruise through the Mediterranean Sea . After a refit , she was assigned to the China Station in 1904 and returned home three years later to be reduced to reserve . Andromeda was converted into a training ship in 1913 and remained in that role under various names until 1956 . That year she was sold for scrap and broken up in Belgium , the last Pembroke @-@ built ship still afloat . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Diadem class was designed to protect British merchant shipping from fast cruisers like the Russian Rurik and were smaller versions of the Powerful class . The ships had a length between perpendiculars of 435 feet ( 132 @.@ 6 m ) , a beam of 69 feet ( 21 @.@ 0 m ) and a draught of 25 feet 6 inches ( 7 @.@ 8 m ) . They displaced 11 @,@ 000 long tons ( 11 @,@ 000 t ) . The first batch of Diadems were powered by a pair of four @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which were designed to produce a total of 16 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 300 kW ) and a maximum speed of 20 @.@ 5 knots ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) using steam provided by 30 Belleville boilers . They carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 900 long tons ( 1 @,@ 930 t ) of coal and their hulls were sheathed with copper to reduce biofouling . Their complement numbered 677 officers and ratings . 
 The main armament of the Diadem @-@ class ships consisted of 16 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) QF 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . Four of these were on the forecastle and in the stern , all protected by gun shields . The remaining dozen guns were in armoured casemates on each broadside . The ships carried 200 rounds per gun . Protection against torpedo boats was provided by a dozen QF 12 @-@ pounder 3 in ( 76 mm ) , 12 @-@ cwt guns , for which 300 rounds per gun was provided , and 3 QF 3 @-@ pounder ( 1 @.@ 9 in ( 47 mm ) ) Hotchkiss guns . In addition , the ships carried a pair of Ordnance QF 12 @-@ pounder 8 @-@ cwt landing guns for use ashore . The ships were also armed with a pair of submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 The sloped armoured deck ranged in thickness from 2 @.@ 5 to 4 inches ( 64 to 102 mm ) on the flat and slopes , respectively . The casemates were protected by 6 inches of Harvey armour while the gun shields had 2 to 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 51 to 114 mm ) of armour . The conning towers were protected by 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) walls and their roofs were 2 inches thick . The tubes protecting the ammunition hoists were also 2 inches thick . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Andromeda was the fifth ship of her name to serve in the Royal Navy and was laid down on 2 December 1895 by Pembroke Dockyard . The ship was launched on 30 April 1897 by Lady Scourfield , wife of Sir Owen Scourfield Bt . She was fitted out at Pembroke Dock until 5 September 1898 and sailed later that month to Portsmouth Dockyard for completion . 
 Upon completion on 5 September 1899 , she was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet under the command of Captain John Burr , who was relieved on 12 March 1901 by Captain Francis Foley . That month the ship was one of two cruisers tasked to escort the ocean liner HMS Ophir , commissioned as a royal yacht for the world tour of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York ( later King George and Queen Mary ) , from Gibraltar to Malta , and then to Port Said . Captain Christopher Cradock was appointed in command on 24 March 1902 , and from 11 June that year Andromeda served as flagship to Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Baldwin Wake Walker , commander of the Cruiser Division of the Mediterranean Fleet . In May 1902 she visited Palermo to attend festivities in connection with the opening of an Agricultural Exhibition by King Victor Emmanuel , and the following month the ship was in Gibraltar for a coronation fête . 
 Andromeda returned home later that year and began a lengthy refit . She was assigned to the China Station in 1904 and returned home three years later . The ship was reduced to reserve at Chatham Dockyard upon her return , but transferred to Devonport Dockyard shortly afterwards . Andromeda was assigned to the 9th Cruiser Squadron of the new reserve Third Fleet in 1912 . The following year the ship was converted to a boys ' training ship and renamed Powerful II on 23 September 1913 . She was later renamed Impregnable II in November 1919 and finally , HMS Defiance on 20 January 1931 , when she became part of the torpedo school . The ship was sold for scrap in 1956 and arrived at <unk> , Belgium , on 14 August to begin demolition . 
 = Cyclone Anne = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Anne was one of the most intense tropical cyclones within the South Pacific basin during the 1980s . The cyclone was first noted on January 5 , 1988 as a weak tropical depression to the northeast of Tuvalu , in conjunction with the future Typhoon Roy in the North @-@ Western Pacific basin . Over the next few days , the system gradually developed while moving southwestward . Once it became a tropical cyclone , it was named Anne on January 8 . The next day , Anne rapidly intensified , becoming the fourth major tropical cyclone to affect Vanuatu within four years . On January 11 , Anne peaked in intensity while it was equivalent to a Category 5 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , and a Category 4 on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . After turning southward on January 12 , Anne struck New Caledonia , becoming the strongest tropical cyclone to affect the French Overseas Territory . The system subsequently weakened as it started to interact with Tropical Cyclone Agi . Anne weakened into a depression and was last noted on January 14 to the south @-@ east of New Caledonia . 
 Several islands within the Solomon Islands reported extensive property and crop damage . Within Vanautu , Anne brought heavy rains , flooding , and a storm surge . These effects damaged houses , crops , and property , especially on Ureparapara islands and the Torres Islands . Extensive damage was reported in New Caledonia after it was exposed to a prolonged period of storm force winds , with the eastern and southern coasts particularly affected . On January 12 , the system produced the highest daily rainfall totals since 1951 in several areas . Two people were killed after they attempted to cross a flooded river , and about 80 others were injured by the cyclone . Due to the impact of this storm , the name Anne was retired . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On January 5 , 1988 , the Fiji Meteorological Service ( FMS ) started to monitor a shallow tropical depression that developed within the monsoon trough about 540 km ( 335 mi ) northeast of Tuvalu . At around the same time , a twin depression developed within the Northern Hemisphere monsoon trough , which eventually became Typhoon Roy . Over the next two days the Southern Hemisphere system developed further as it was steered towards the south @-@ southwest along an area of high pressure , before it became equivalent to a tropical storm while passing through the Tuvaluan islands . As a result , the United States Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) designated the system as Tropical Cyclone 07P and started to issue advisories on it . After organized further , the FMS named the storm Anne after it became equivalent to a modern @-@ day Category 2 on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . On January 9 , the cyclone started to rapidly intensify while continuing to move towards the south @-@ southwest . Later that day , the JTWC upgraded the system to the equivalent of a Category 1 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale ( SSHWS ) , and the FMS upgraded Anne to a Category 3 severe tropical cyclone on the Australian Scale . Early on January 10 , the cyclone passed through Temotu Province and about 55 km ( 35 mi ) to the northwest of Anuta Island . 
 Later on January 10 , Anne directly passed over Vanuatu 's Torres Islands and came within 65 km ( 40 mi ) of Ureparapara in the Banks Islands . The cyclone continued to move to the south @-@ southwest and affected the northern islands of Vanautu . Early on January 11 , the FMS reported that Anne had peaked , with estimated 10 @-@ minute sustained winds near its center of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 4 severe tropical cyclone on the Australian scale . At around the same time the JTWC reported that Anne had peak 1 @-@ minute peak sustained winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) , which made it equivalent to a Category 5 hurricane on the SSHWS . This made it one of the most intense tropical cyclones of the 1980s . Over the next day , Cyclone Anne turned south and rapidly weakened as it encountered upper @-@ level wind shear , approaching the French overseas territory of New Caledonia . Late on January 12 , Anne weakened into a modern @-@ day Category 2 tropical cyclone , before it made landfall on New Caledonia about 110 km ( 70 mi ) to the north @-@ northwest of Noumea . After the cyclone re @-@ emerged into the Coral Sea , the JTWC downgraded Anne to tropical storm status . Later on January 13 , Cyclone Anne started to interact with Cyclone Agi , which had rapidly moved south @-@ eastward towards the " relatively deeper " Anne . Agi had developed two days prior near the Louisiade Archipelago , about 1 @,@ 200 km ( 745 mi ) northwest of Cyclone Anne . Early on January 14 , Anne weakened into a depression and subsequently dissipated southeast of New Caledonia as it was caught up in the upper westerly flow . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 During its early stages of development , Anne passed through the central islands of Tuvalu , causing minor damage to houses and crops such as bananas and coconuts . The storm passed to the north of Funafuti where strong gale force winds of 70 km / h ( 45 mph ) were recorded . The system subsequently affected the Solomon Island province of Temotu between January 9 – 10 while it had sustained winds of 150 km / h ( 95 mph ) . However , the cyclone 's center did not pass directly over any island , and the smaller islands escaped the destructive hurricane @-@ force winds . Because Anne moved through the province at about 30 km / h ( 20 mph ) , any gale and storm force winds that affected the islands were not prolonged . Anuta , <unk> , the Duff Islands and the Reef Islands all reported extensive damage to property and crops , with at least 25 houses and 5 classrooms damaged . 
 The system affected the Northern Vanuatu Islands between January 10 – 11 and was the fourth major tropical cyclone to affect the island nation since 1985 , after Severe Tropical Cyclones Eric , Nigel and Uma . Ahead of Anne affecting Vanuatu , various alerts and warnings were issued including a hurricane warning . During January 10 , the cyclone directly passed over the Torres Islands and came within 65 km ( 40 mi ) of the Banks Islands , although it missed Vanuatu 's most populated districts around Port Vila and the rest of Espiritu Santo . Within Vanuatu , over 1600 people were made homeless while wind gusts of up to 225 km / h ( 140 mph ) were recorded . Torrential rain , flooding and storm surge caused damage to houses , crops and property while triggering a landslide on the island of Epi . The hardest hit area was <unk> Province with severe damage recorded on the islands of Ureparapara and the Torres Islands , while extensive damage was recorded on the islands of Vanua Lava and <unk> . Within the province , virtually the whole population lost their houses , as well as their cash crops . There were reports of 4 – 5 m ( 13 – 16 ft ) tidal waves , washing away houses on the west coast of Ureparapara , while significant wave heights of over 11 m ( 36 ft ) were recorded . Within the province of <unk> , severe damage was recorded on Espiritu Santo after Anne flooded huts , unroofed school buildings , uprooted coconut trees and destroyed the main wharf . Overall the total damages from Anne in Vanuatu , were estimated at US $ 500 thousand . 
 In conjunction with Tropical Cyclone Agi , Anne affected the whole of New Caledonia between January 11 – 15 , becoming the most powerful tropical cyclone to affect the French overseas territory in 12 years . Winds in Noumea reached up to 150 km / h ( 95 mph ) , although there was no serious damage there . Prolonged storm force winds left extensive damage to the island , with the eastern and southern coasts particularly affected . On January 12 , the system produced the highest daily rainfall totals since 1951 , with Noumea recording 262 mm ( 10 @.@ 3 in ) . Larger rainfall totals included 713 mm ( 28 @.@ 1 in ) in Goro and 519 mm ( 20 @.@ 4 in ) in Thio . Two people were killed after they attempted to cross a flooded river . Floods also swept away crops , huts and topsoil belonging to indigenous Melanesians that lived in coastal villages . Some areas reported crop damage between 90 and 100 % . Most of the roads within the territory were left unusable while all international flights to the territory were cancelled . About half of the houses in <unk> were damaged or destroyed . The last wooden Royal Navy boat was scheduled to be sunk on January 12 , but was moved to January 19 due to the cyclones . Overall , there were about 80 injuries related to the cyclone in New Caledonia . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The aftermath of the cyclone was marked by a distinct lack of a quantitative assessment within the Solomon Islands ; with few boats or aircraft near the remote islands , relief measures were slow to get underway . However , 11 men aboard the United States Navy vessel USS Barbour County received Humanitarian Service Medals from the United States Department of Defense after aiding storm victims on Tikopia and Anuta from January 16 to 19 . 
 With some residents forced to seek refuge in caves , the Government of Vanuatu asked the Australian , New Zealand and American governments for emergency food supplies and other assistance . In accordance , the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) dispatched two Hercules transport planes to help with recovery efforts . The first carried a helicopter that transported Vanuatu military forces , medical teams and supplies to the affected northern islands , especially remote villages inaccessible to larger aircraft . The other plane was used to transport more than 16 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 35 @,@ 000 lb ) of fuel and relief supplies including food and shelter provisions . The Royal New Zealand Air Force also provided a plane , which transported relief supplies from Espiritu Santo to the northern islands up to three times daily , with the bulk of supplies donated by Australia . The European Commission provided Vanuatu with € 100 @,@ 000 in emergency aid to purchase local foods , including rice , preserved meat , and fish , and to distribute it to Anne 's victims . The total cost of relief and reconstruction efforts was estimated between US $ 1 @.@ 2 – 2 million . 
 Within the <unk> @-@ la @-@ <unk> area to the north of Noumea , New Caledonia Air Force helicopters rescued several people who had moved to the roofs of their houses . Despite the severe crop damage , no areas were declared disasters by January 20 . The South Pacific division of the Adventist Development and Relief Agency sent AU $ 5 thousand to New Caledonia for relief efforts . Emergency funding of <unk> thousand was given to New Caledonia to help with the relief effort by the French Minister of the Interior and Minister of Overseas Territories . The European Commission also provided New Caledonia with € 85 thousand , which was distributed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in the form of cash donations to the worst @-@ affected families . After the season , the name " Anne " was retired by the World Meteorological Organization . 
 = Gyroporus cyanescens = 
 Gyroporus cyanescens , commonly known as the bluing bolete or the cornflower bolete , is a species of bolete fungus in the family Gyroporaceae . First described from France in 1788 , the species is found in Asia , Australia , Europe , and eastern North America , where it grows on the ground in coniferous and mixed forests . 
 The yellowish to buff cap surface is fibrous and roughened , and reaches up to 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) in diameter . The thick stem , roughly the same color as the cap or lighter , is hollowed out into chambers . All parts of the mushroom turn an intense blue color within a few moments of bruising or cutting . The mushroom is edible , despite its hard stem . A less common variety occurs where the color change is to deep violet rather than blue . The bluing reaction results from the oxidation of a chemical called <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described scientifically by French botanist Jean Baptiste François Pierre Bulliard in his 1788 Herbier de la France . Later synonyms include Boletus constrictus by Christian Hendrik Persoon in 1801 , Leccinum <unk> by Samuel Frederick Gray in 1821 , Suillus cyanescens by Petter Karsten in 1882 , and <unk> cyanescens by Günther Beck von <unk> und <unk> in 1923 . The variety violaceotinctus was described by Roy Watling in 1969 from collections made in Michigan , USA . 
 The specific <unk> <unk> 's " green water " is commonly described as a dense bloom of free @-@ floating single @-@ cell algae is derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> , meaning " dark blue " , while the varietal epithet violaceotinctus means " having a violet tinge " . It is commonly known as the bluing bolete or the cornflower bolete . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of G. cyanescens is initially convex , but flattens out in maturity , sometimes becoming shallowly depressed ; it reaches a diameter of 4 – 12 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) . The cap is dry , and ranges in color from buff to yellowish to pale olive , occasionally with darker streaks of color . Its surface is uneven , sometimes with wrinkles and pits . The cap margin is initially curved inward , and sometimes splits in maturity . The flesh is whitish to pale yellow , and has a brittle texture . On the underside of the cap , the pore surface is white to yellowish , sometimes with olive or tan tinges . There are roughly two circular pores per millimeter , and the tubes that comprise the pores are 5 – 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) deep , but depressed around the top of the stem . Injury to the pores will cause them to stain first greenish yellow , then greenish blue or blue . 
 The stem is 4 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long by 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick , and is either roughly equal in width throughout its length , or has a basal or middle swelling . The stem tissue is hard and brittle ; it is initially stuffed with a soft pith that develops cavities , or becomes entirely hollow in maturity . Roughly the same color as the cap or lighter , the stem surface is dry and lacks reticulations . It is initially covered in coarse hairs that tend to disappear in maturity to leave a relatively smooth surface . All parts of the fruit body stain blue when cut or injured . The variety G. cyanescens var. violaceotinctus is nearly identical in appearance , but stains dark lilac to indigo when bruised . The odor and taste of the fruit bodies is indistinct . 
 The color of the spore print is pale yellow . Spores are ellipsoid , smooth , hyaline ( translucent ) , and have dimensions of 8 – 10 by 5 – 6 µm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club shaped , two- to four @-@ spored , and measure 24 – 30 by 8 – 10 µm . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the inner walls of the tubes ) are light yellow brown in color , club shaped , infrequent , and measure 25 – 38 by 7 @.@ 2 µm ; the cheilocystidia ( found on the tube edge ) are colorless , numerous , and measure 32 – 47 by 7 – 10 µm . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Although there are a few lookalike species with similar overall appearance , in the field , Gyroporus cyanescens is typically readily recognized by its characteristic straw @-@ yellow color and nearly instantaneous dark blue bruising . G. <unk> is smaller , with a dull brownish @-@ yellow cap . Although its flesh has a bluing reaction to injury , its yellow pore surface does not . It has larger spores , measuring 9 – 15 by 5 – 7 µm . G. <unk> , found along the Gulf Coast of the United States , is similar in appearance , but lacks the bluing reaction . Newly described from China in 2003 , G. <unk> closely resembles G. cyanescens , and was frequently confused with that species . It has a smaller fruit body , with a brownish cap up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter . Its staining reaction involves a change from light turquoise to dark turquoise or dark blue . Its spores are 5 – 8 @.@ 5 by 4 – 5 @.@ 3 µm . Suillus tomentosus has brownish pores that undergo a slower blue staining reaction . If the fruit bodies are not uprooted and only the top of the cap is examined , G. cyanescens can be confused with young Russula <unk> mushrooms . 
 = = = Uses = = = 
 Gyroporus cyanescens is edible , and considered " choice " by several sources . The fruit bodies , even if mature , are typically free of insect larvae . Specimens collected in sandy soil , however , are difficult to clean , but cleaning may be facilitated by washing the fruit bodies in a bowl of water so that the sand sinks to the bottom . The blue color largely disappears after two minutes of sautéing . Cooked mushrooms have a meaty texture , and mild nutty flavor that is enhanced if fried to crispness . Drying the mushrooms strengthens the taste . 
 The variety violaceotinctus is used in mushroom dyeing , and produces a light yellow , beige , gold , or brownish @-@ orange color depending on the mordant used . 
 = = Ecology and distribution = = 
 Gyroporus cyanescens is an ectomycorrhizal species that has a broad host range . Fruit bodies of Gyroporus cyanescens grow singly or scattered on the ground in deciduous and mixed forests . Often found in association with birch and poplar , the fungus tends to prefer sandy soil , and also frequents road banks and woodland edges . Fruiting occurs in summer and early autumn . Fruit bodies can be parasitized by the mold Sepedonium ampullosporum . Infection results in necrosis of the mushroom tissue , and a yellow color caused by the formation of large amounts of pigmented aleurioconidia ( single @-@ celled conidia produced by extrusion from the conidiophores ) . 
 Gyroporus cyanescens is found in Asia , Australia , North America , and Europe . In China , it is known from Guangdong and Yunnan . The fungus appears in eucalypt woodland in Australia . In North America , it is widespread east of the Rocky Mountains . The geographical distribution ranges from eastern Canada to Florida , and west to Minnesota , although it has been occasionally reported from the Pacific Northwest . G. cyanescens var. violaceotinctus has been reported from Japan . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 The identity of the chemical causing bluing upon tissue injury was reported in 1973 . The molecule , <unk> , is a highly oxidized bis @-@ phenol @-@ substituted <unk> that develops a blue color when it is oxidized . In contrast , the bluing of other boletes has been attributed to the oxidation of variegatic or xerocomic acid . <unk> is biosynthesized from intermediates supplied by the <unk> pathway , a metabolic route used by fungi for the synthesis of aromatic amino acids . 
 = Kingda Ka = 
 Kingda Ka is a steel accelerator roller coaster located at Six Flags Great Adventure in Jackson , New Jersey , United States . It is the world 's tallest roller coaster , the world 's second fastest roller coaster , and was the second strata coaster ever built . It was built by Stakotra , a subcontractor to Intamin . 
 The train is launched by a hydraulic launch mechanism to 128 miles per hour ( 206 km / h ) in 3 @.@ 5 seconds . At the end of the launch track , the train climbs the main top hat tower , reaching a height of 456 feet ( 139 m ) and spanning over a 3 @,@ 118 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 950 m ) track by the end of the ride . 
 = = History = = 
 Plans to build Kingda Ka were announced on September 10 , 2004 , at an event held for roller coaster enthusiasts and the media . The event revealed the park 's goal to build " the tallest and fastest roller coaster on earth " , reaching 456 feet ( 139 m ) and accelerating up to 128 miles per hour ( 206 km / h ) in 3 @.@ 5 seconds . On January 13 , 2005 , Kingda Ka 's tower construction was completed , and on May 21 , 2005 , the ride opened to the public . Kingda Ka became the " tallest " and " fastest " roller coaster in the world , taking both world records from Top Thrill Dragster at Cedar Point . It lost the title of world 's fastest when Formula Rossa at Ferrari World opened in November 2010 . Intamin designed both Kingda Ka and Top Thrill Dragster , and the two share a similar design and layout that differs primarily by the theme and the additional hill featured on Kingda Ka . Both rides were built by Stakotra and installed by Martin & Vleminckx . 
 On August 29 , 2013 , Six Flags Great Adventure officially announced Zumanjaro : Drop of Doom for the 2014 season . The new attraction was attached to the Kingda Ka coaster . The drop tower features three gondolas integrated into the existing structure which is also be built by Intamin . Kingda Ka closed at the start of the 2014 season in order construct Zumanjaro : Drop of Doom on to Kingda Ka . Kingda Ka reopened on weekends on Memorial Day Weekend and fully reopened when Zumanjaro : Drop of Doom was completed on July 4 , 2014 . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 Kingda Ka 's layout and experience is nearly identical to Top Thrill Dragster . After the train has been locked and checked , it moves slowly out of the station to the launch area . It passes through a switch track , which allows four trains ( on two tracks ) to load simultaneously . When the signal to launch is given , the train rolls back slightly ( to engage the catch car ) and the brakes on the launch track retract . There is a voice that says , " Arms down , head back , hold on " . The launch occurs five seconds after the hissing sound of the brake fins retracting or the warning voice . Kingda Ka 's horn previously sounded before each launch , but it was silenced due to noise complaints from nearby residents ; the horn now sounds only when Kingda Ka first launches after being idle for a length of time . When the train is in position , the hydraulic launch mechanism accelerates the train from 0 to 128 miles per hour ( 0 to 206 km / h ) in 3 @.@ 5 seconds . At the end of the launch track , the train climbs the main tower ( or top hat ) and rolls 90 degrees to the right before reaching a height of 456 feet ( 139 m ) . The train then descends 418 feet ( 127 m ) straight down through a 270 @-@ degree right @-@ hand spiral . The train climbs the second hill of 129 feet ( 39 m ) , producing a moment of weightlessness before being smoothly brought to a stop by the magnetic brakes ; it then makes a left @-@ hand U @-@ turn and enters the station . The ride lasts 28 seconds from the start of the launch . 
 = = = Theme = = = 
 Kingda Ka is themed as a mythical tiger , named for the 500 lb ( 230 kg ) Golden Tabby Bengal tiger who lived in an adjacent exhibit before moving to the park 's safari . The ride 's sign and station have a Nepalese style . The queue line is surrounded by bamboo , which augments the jungle theme . Jungle music is played during the wait and throughout the Golden Kingdom section of the park , which was built for the ride . 
 The hydraulic launch motor is capable of producing 20 @,@ 800 peak horsepower ( 15 @.@ 5 MW ) . Because of the high speed and open nature of the trains , the ride will not operate in light rain . 
 = = = Trains and station = = = 
 Kingda Ka 's four trains are color @-@ coded for easy identification ( green , dark blue , teal , and orange ) and are numbered ; the four colors are also used for the seats and restraints . Each train seats 18 people ( two per row ) . The rear car has one row , while the rest have two . The rear row of each car is positioned higher than its front row for better visibility . 
 Each of Kingda Ka 's trains has an extra row of seat mounts . The panels could be removed for the installation of additional seats in the future . This modification would increase the capacity of each train from 18 to 20 , and the hourly capacity of the coaster from 1400 to 1600 riders per hour . Kingda Ka 's station is prepared for this modification , with entrance gates for the currently @-@ nonexistent row of seats . 
 Kingda Ka 's over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraint system consists of a thick , rigid lap bar and two thin , flexible over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints . Because the over @-@ the @-@ shoulder portions of the restraint are not rigid , the hand grips are mounted to the lap bar . Kingda Ka 's restraints are also held down by a belt , in case the main locking system fails . To speed loading , riders are asked to secure their own restraints if possible . 
 Kingda Ka 's station has two parallel tracks , with switch tracks at the entrance and exit . Each of the station 's tracks is designed to accommodate two trains , so each of the four trains can be operated from its own station . While all of the trains are mechanically identical and able to load and unload at each of the four individual station bays the original plan was for all trains to operate at the same time and for each train to load and unload at their own station . During normal operation , trains on one side are loaded while trains on the other side are launched . When both sides of the station are in use an employee directs riders in line to go to a particular side , where they can choose to sit in the front or rear of the train . During recent seasons it has become common that only one train bay ( the forward one on the side opposite of the parking lot ) be used for the loading , unloading , and dispatching of trains and that the other train or trains in operation on any given day wait either in the station behind a loading / unloading train or outside of the station on the brakes that follow the second hill . Two operators load , check and dispatch each train ; another launches the trains . Kingda Ka 's music is by <unk> Duo ; almost their entire Episode II album is played in the queue and station . The other is the remix version of Survivor 's " Eye of the Tiger " , played by DJ Quicksilver . Both of these may be heard during the queue and in the station . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A train may occasionally experience a rollback following a launch . A rollback occurs when the train fails to make it over the top of the tower and descends back down the side it was launched . Kingda Ka includes retractable magnetic brakes on its launch track to prevent a train from rolling back into the loading station . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 = = = Bolt failure = = = 
 On June 8 , 2005 , a bolt failed inside a trough that the launch cable travels through . This caused the liner to come loose creating friction on the cable and preventing the train from accelerating to the correct speed . The rubbing of the cable against the inside of the metal trough caused sparks and shards of metal to fly out from the bottom of the train . The ride was closed for almost two months following the incident . 
 Damage occurred to the launch cable which was frayed and required replacement , to the engine including minor damage to seals , and to many of the brake fins . The brake fins in the launch section are mounted to keep fast @-@ moving trains from moving backward into the station . However , the fast @-@ moving train being pulled forward caused an unexpected stress on a number of fins bending them forward . Not all required replacement , but there were more damaged brake fins than Six Flags had replacements for . Extra brake fins had to be ordered from the manufacturer , Intamin in Switzerland , and the ride had to undergo thorough testing following the repair . Kingda Ka reopened on August 4 . 
 = = = Lightning strike = = = 
 Kingda Ka was struck by lightning in May 2009 and suffered serious damage . The ride was closed for three months while being repaired and reopened on August 21 , 2009 . 
 = = = Hurricane Irene = = = 
 On August 27 , 2011 , Kingda Ka suffered unspecified damage shortly before Hurricane Irene . On Saturday , August 27 , Six Flags Great Adventure did not open due to the approaching hurricane . While it is unknown whether additional damage occurred due to the storm , the coaster was damaged to the extent that it could not run before Irene . Kingda Ka remained closed until the start of the 2012 operating season on April 5 . 
 = = = Bird strike = = = 
 Shortly before 5 : 00 pm on July 26 , 2012 , a young boy was sent to the hospital after suffering minor injuries from being struck by a bird during normal operation . The ride resumed normal operation shortly after the incident . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Records = = 
 = Ghosts I – IV = 
 Ghosts I – IV is the sixth studio album by American industrial rock band Nine Inch Nails , released on March 2 , 2008 . The team behind the project included Nine Inch Nails front man Trent Reznor , studio @-@ collaborators Atticus Ross and Alan Moulder , and instrumental contributions from Alessandro Cortini , Adrian Belew , and Brian Viglione . Reznor described the music of Ghosts as " a soundtrack for daydreams " , a sentiment echoed by many critics who compared it with the work of Brian Eno and Robert Fripp . The songs are unnamed , and are identified only by their track listing and group number . 
 The album is the first independent release from Nine Inch Nails following its split from Interscope Records , and is an almost entirely instrumental album . Ghosts was initially intended to be a five @-@ track EP , but the final release consists of four nine @-@ track EPs , totaling 36 tracks . The album was released under a Creative Commons license ( BY @-@ NC @-@ SA ) , and in a variety of differing packages and price points , including a US $ 300 " Ultra @-@ Deluxe Limited Edition " . Ghosts was initially released digitally on the official Nine Inch Nails website without any prior advertisement or promotion . Via the official Nine Inch Nails YouTube profile , a user @-@ generated " film festival " was announced , where fans were invited to visually interpret the album 's music and post their results . 
 Critical reception of the album has been generally favorable , with its unorthodox release attracting positive comments from many critics . Much coverage of Ghosts I – IV has compared it to the digital @-@ download releases of Radiohead 's In Rainbows as well as Saul Williams ' The Inevitable Rise and Liberation of NiggyTardust ! , the latter produced by Reznor himself . The album was nominated for two 2008 Grammy Awards , in the categories " Best Rock Instrumental Performance " and " Best Box Set or Limited Edition Package " . These nominations represented the first time music released under a Creative Commons license had been nominated for a Grammy Award . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Recording and music = = = 
 Nine Inch Nails front man Trent Reznor announced in 2007 that the band had completed its contractual obligations to its record label , Interscope Records , and would no longer be working with the company . He also revealed that the band would likely distribute its next album independently , possibly in a fashion similar to Saul Williams ' 2007 album The Inevitable Rise and Liberation of NiggyTardust ! , which Reznor produced . 
 Following the Performance 2007 tour in support of the band 's previous album Year Zero ( 2007 ) , Reznor set out to make a record " with very little forethought " . Ghosts I – IV originated from an experiment : " The rules were as follows : 10 weeks , no clear agenda , no overthinking , everything driven by impulse . Whatever happens during that time gets released as ... something . " Reznor explained , " I 've been considering and wanting to make this kind of record for years , but by its very nature it wouldn 't have made sense until this point " . 
 The core creative team behind the project was Reznor , Atticus Ross , and Alan Moulder . Live @-@ band member Alessandro Cortini and studio musicians Adrian Belew and Brian Viglione also contributed instrumental performances on select tracks . Reznor described the band 's early intentions for the project as " an experiment " , and explained the group 's process : " When we started working with the music , we would generally start with a sort of visual reference that we had imagined : a place , or a setting , or a situation . And then attempt to describe that with sound and texture and melody . And treat it , in a sense , as if it were a soundtrack . " 
 The musicians created the album tracks through improvisation and experimentation . As a result , the initial plan to release a single EP of the material expanded to include the increasing amount of material . Viglione contributed percussion to tracks 19 and 22 . He stated that Reznor 's instructions to him were to " build a drumkit . Piece together any stuff that you want to bang on ; rent what you want to rent . Have fun and ... be creative — See where your mind and your ideas take you . " Viglione 's makeshift drum kit included a 50 @-@ gallon trash can , a pair of water cooler jugs , and a cookie tray with a chain across it . Alessandro Cortini is credited on a total of ten tracks from Ghosts for his contributions on guitar , bass guitar , dulcimer , and electronics . Cortini was brought onto the project two weeks into the process , and his involvement evolved from " first recording some extra parts to some tracks " and eventually into " a collaboration on [ the ] tracks noted in the booklet " . Adrian Belew was also brought on for select instrumental contributions , but as the project evolved Reznor expanded Belew 's involvement and shared writing credit with him on two tracks . 
 Ghosts I – IV is an almost entirely instrumental album , with only a few tracks containing sampled vocals . Reznor described the album 's sound as " the result of working from a very visual perspective — dressing imagined locations and scenarios with sound and texture ; a soundtrack for daydreams . " PopMatters ' review of the album compared its musical style to that of Brian Eno and Robert Fripp , ultimately categorizing it as " dark ambient " . The review went on to describe the music as " a tonal painting , a collection of moods and not all of these moods are good ones . " National Public Radio compared the album to the music of Erik Satie and Brian Eno ; Rolling Stone 's review to Brian Eno , specifically the album 's sound to the instrumentals of Another Green World ( 1975 ) and the rhythm collages of My Life in the Bush of Ghosts ( 1981 ) . Robert Christgau also compared the album to the work of Brian Eno , summarizing Ghosts ' sound as " mental wallpaper " . 
 Ghosts I – IV features a wide assortment of musical instruments , including piano , guitar , bass , synthesizer , marimba , tambourine , banjo , dulcimer , and xylophone , many of which were sampled and distorted electronically . Percussion instruments , contributed primarily by Brian Viglione , were constructed largely out of found objects and household items . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Rob Sheridan acted as the album 's art director , in collaboration with Artist in Residence . Sheridan was also art director for the previous two Nine Inch Nails studio albums , With Teeth ( 2005 ) and Year Zero . Since Ghosts was released in a variety of versions , some of the versions feature somewhat differing ( or additional ) album art and related artwork . A 40 @-@ page PDF comes with each version of the album and contains a photograph for each of the 36 tracks . These photographs are also embedded into the ID3 tags of every downloadable track . 
 = = Release = = 
 Ghosts I – IV was released online on March 2 , 2008 , on the official Nine Inch Nails website in a number of different formats at various price points . The only prior advertisement or notice of the release was a post by Reznor two weeks prior on the site saying " 2 weeks ! " Ghosts was the first album released by Reznor 's independent label The Null Corporation . Retail copies of the album were distributed by RED Distribution on April 8 on CD and vinyl formats , and May 1 for the " Deluxe " and " Ultra @-@ Deluxe " editions . The smallest Ghosts package contains the first nine tracks , available for free online from either the official Nine Inch Nails website or officially from various BitTorrent trackers , including The Pirate Bay . The entire album was also made available for download directly from the band for US $ 5 . Physical copies of the album were available for pre @-@ sale online , with immediate access to the digital version . A two @-@ disc version includes two audio CDs and a 16 @-@ page booklet for $ 10 . A " Deluxe Edition " is available for $ 75 and includes two audio CDs , a data @-@ DVD containing multitrack files of the album , a Blu @-@ ray Disc with the album in high @-@ definition stereo and accompanying slide show , and a 48 @-@ page hardcover book with photographs . A $ 300 " Ultra @-@ Deluxe Limited Edition " included everything in the " Deluxe " edition , as well as a 4 @-@ LP 180 gram vinyl set in a fabric slipcase , and two exclusive limited edition <unk> prints , unique to each copy . These were limited to 2 @,@ 500 pieces , each copy numbered and signed by Trent Reznor . Reznor described the limited edition release as " the most luxurious physical package we 've ever created . " Finally , the album was also released on 4 @-@ LP 130 gram vinyl , set in a double gate fold package , for $ 39 . 
 The album is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution Non @-@ Commercial Share Alike license , in effect allowing anyone to use or rework the material for any non @-@ profit purpose , as long as credit is provided and the resulting work is released under a similar license . Reznor explained this move by saying " It 's a stance we 're taking that we feel is appropriate [ ... ] with digital technology , and outdated copyright laws , and all the nonsense that 's going on these days " . Jim <unk> , then manager of Nine Inch Nails , explained the unconventional release of the album as " [ not ] a reaction to what doesn ’ t exist today . [ ... ] it ’ s more just like , ' Hey , in a vacuum I can do whatever I want to do . ' " The digital @-@ release of the album reportedly required an extensive overhaul of the Nine Inch Nails website in order for the site to cope with the influx of traffic , online @-@ payments , and customer service needs of releasing the album . These upgrades cost Reznor approximately $ 20 @,@ 000 to implement . Despite these measures , upon the release of Ghosts the site crashed , and additional servers were necessary to handle the traffic . 
 Reznor wrote in 2008 that " more volumes of Ghosts are likely to appear in the future . " In a 2009 interview with Trent <unk> , he repeated his intention to make another Ghosts album in the near future . Portions of the album were used as the soundtrack to the 2014 documentary film <unk> . 
 = = = Film festival = = = 
 Nearly two weeks after the release of the album , Reznor organized and announced a user @-@ created " film festival " as an accompaniment to the album , hosted at the official Nine Inch Nails YouTube channel . It was revealed that the album was stripped of much artwork and song titles to provide a blank canvas for the project . Reznor explained that the endeavor was not meant as a contest , but as " an experiment in collaboration and a chance for us to interact beyond the typical one @-@ way artist @-@ to @-@ fan relationship . " Over 2 @,@ 000 video submissions were posted and over 13 @,@ 000 members joined the festival group , which started in March 2008 . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Ghosts I – IV material was implemented into Nine Inch Nails live performances typically as a distinct section of instrumental songs mid @-@ way through the show . Ghosts material was performed in this manner primarily as part of the Lights in the Sky tour in 2008 , immediately after the album 's release . During these segments the music was largely acoustic , as opposed to the electric instrumentation of other Nine Inch Nails live sets . The Ghosts segment included instrumentation from a marimba , harmonium , glockenspiel , double bass , banjo and various homemade percussion instruments . The Ghosts section was later scrapped for the " <unk> " and " Wave Goodbye " tours , as Reznor felt the instrumental songs did not fit with the set lists . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales and chart performance = = = 
 The album 's initial release on the official Nine Inch Nails website suffered problems as the website was inundated with traffic , and was not fully operational until extra servers were added to handle the influx of downloads . A week after the album 's release , the official Nine Inch Nails site reported over 750 @,@ 000 purchase and download transactions , amassing over $ 1 @.@ 6 million in sales . Pre @-@ orders of the $ 300 " Ultra @-@ Deluxe Limited Edition " sold out in less than 30 hours of its release . Ghosts I – IV was the fourth most played album of 2008 on Last.fm , and was the best @-@ selling album on Amazon MP3 . 
 The physical release of the album placed on numerous charts worldwide , including a peak position of number 14 on the Billboard 200 album chart . The album also reached the top spot on Billboard 's Dance / Electronic Albums chart . Internationally , Ghosts peaked at number 15 on the Australian ARIA Charts , number 58 in Austria , number 3 in Canada , number 26 in New Zealand , and number 60 on the UK Albums Chart . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical response to Ghosts I – IV was generally favorable , with an average rating of 69 / 100 based on 12 reviews on Metacritic . Seth Colter Walls of Newsweek described the album as " the kind of absorbing musical experience that the surviving ranks of know @-@ it @-@ all record @-@ store clerks would be pushing on customers , if only they could offer it for sale . " IGN gave the album a rating of 8 @.@ 7 out of 10 and wrote , " The music is so engrossing and encompassing that time ceases to be a factor — at least until the music finally stops . " PopMatters gave the album an 8 out of 10 and described the album as " 36 tracks , but no songs " , and went on to call it " dark , brooding [ ... ] haunting . " Pitchfork Media criticized the album by saying " nearly every one of the untitled instrumental sketches here feels emaciated and half @-@ finished " , and gave the work a 5 @.@ 0 out of 10 @.@ 0 . Blender also criticized the album , summarizing the review by saying " Nine Inch Nails return with no label oversight , no boundaries and no tunes . " The Washington Post stated , " There 's too much here . Yet it 's the most interesting NIN in years . " The review went on to describe each track as " the sonic equivalent of a silver orb hovering in your living room [ which then ] explodes into a million shiny balls of mercury that splash to the floor before trickling , magnetically , back into a large round mass . " 
 The album 's unorthodox distribution methods also garnered the attention of various news agencies , such as Wired 's Eliot Van Buskirk , who labeled Ghosts as " a remarkably extensive release " . Ben Worthen of The Wall Street Journal hypothesized that " most business execs [ ... ] could learn a lot from [ Reznor 's ] experiments with online business models . " Many news agencies compared the release to Radiohead 's 2007 " pay what you want " digital release of In Rainbows , as well as the similar release of Saul Williams ' album The Inevitable Rise and Liberation of NiggyTardust ! the same year , which Reznor produced . Rolling Stone 's review called the album a " a new @-@ media showpiece " , while Tiny Mix Tapes said " the circumstances surrounding the release are so forward @-@ thinking that they could be considered just as key to appreciating the album as the music itself . " Financial website The Motley Fool wrote an article on the album 's release titled " Music Industry Gets Nailed Again " , forecasting that " Innovators like Nine Inch Nails are paving the way for new media business models that may bypass the middleman while making sure artists and fans are happy . " In its review of The Slip , however , PopMatters described Ghosts I – IV in retrospect as an " aimless batch of ... instrumentals packaged in a brilliant marketing scheme " and said that it was " basically a CD release with a couple of mail @-@ order special editions available for the ' true fans ' . " 
 = = = Awards and recognitions = = = 
 Ghosts was nominated for two Grammy Awards , under the categories Best Rock Instrumental performance for the track " 34 Ghosts IV " , and Best Boxed Set or Limited Edition Package for the " Ultra @-@ Deluxe " edition of the album . These nominations represented the first time music licensed under Creative Commons had been nominated for a Grammy Award . Following the release of Ghosts and the similar online release method of the band 's follow @-@ up , The Slip , Reznor was awarded the Webby Artist of the Year Award at the annual Webby Awards in 2009 . Rolling Stone magazine named Reznor number 46 in its " 100 People Who Are Changing America " list , concluding that he has " been more creative than anyone in embracing the post @-@ CD era " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross , except where noted . 
 = = = Bonus tracks = = = 
 Included with the " Deluxe " and " Ultra @-@ Deluxe " releases were two additional bonus tracks , accessible only by reconstructing them from multi @-@ track files provided on the DVD . The second bonus track features musical elements and a similar song structure to " Demon Seed " , track 10 from what would be the next Nine Inch Nails release , The Slip . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Album credits as adapted from the liner notes of Ghosts I – IV : 
 Trent Reznor – performance , production , art direction 
 Atticus Ross – programming , arranging , production 
 Adrian Belew – guitars ( 3 , 4 , 7 , 10 – 11 , 14 , 16 , 21 , 25 , 27 , 31 , 32 , 35 ) , electronics ( 25 ) , marimba ( 30 ) 
 Alessandro Cortini – bass ( 4 ) , guitars ( 4 , 11 , 17 , 20 , 24 , 28 ) , dulcimer ( 22 ) , additional electronics ( 19 , 22 , 29 , 33 ) 
 Brian Viglione – drums ( 19 , 22 ) 
 Alan Moulder – engineering , mix engineering , production 
 Tom Baker – mastering 
 Rob Sheridan – art direction , photography , visual and physical elements 
 Artist in Residence – art direction , photography , visual and physical elements 
 Phillip Graybill – photography 
 Tamar Levine – additional photography 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Tropical Storm Felice = 
 Tropical Storm Felice was a modest tropical cyclone that lightly impacted parts of the Gulf Coast of the United States in mid @-@ September 1970 . Spawned by an upper @-@ level trough over the Bahamas , the system crossed the Florida Keys and entered the Gulf of Mexico , where it gradually began to strengthen . Felice was a disorganized storm for its entire duration , plagued by dry air , a lack of deep thunderstorm activity , and an ill @-@ defined center of circulation , but nevertheless managed to peak as a high @-@ end tropical storm with winds just below Category 1 hurricane strength . Tracking northwestward , the storm brushed southern Louisiana on September 15 before making landfall northeast of Galveston , Texas , late that same day . Once ashore , Felice quickly deteriorated as it recurved into the central United States . While over southeastern Oklahoma , however , its remnants still closely resembled a formidable tropical cyclone . 
 In advance of the cyclone , officials prompted residents in vulnerable communities to leave their homes , and temporary storm shelters were established . However , the effects from Felice were generally light . Beneficial rains fell over parts of southern Florida , while sections of coastal Louisiana experienced minimal gale @-@ force winds and above @-@ normal tides . Winds gusting to 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) at Galveston — and estimated near 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) elsewhere — caused scattered power outages and minor tree damage , while heavy rainfall totaling over 6 in ( 150 mm ) triggered some street flooding . Felice delayed the local rice harvest and damaged some hay that had been cut before the storm . Significant precipitation and gusty winds accompanied the system into northern Texas and Oklahoma . Overall , the storm left no fatalities or widespread property damage anywhere along its path . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Developing as a tropical depression near Nassau in the Bahamas on September 12 , Felice had its origins in a persistent upper @-@ level trough over the area . The nascent depression tracked slowly toward the west @-@ southwest without much intensification , ultimately passing just north of Key West , Florida as it entered the Gulf of Mexico . Over the open waters of the Gulf , the system accelerated toward the west @-@ northwest along the southern periphery of a large ridge of high pressure to the north . While reconnaissance aircraft data on the storm suggested that the depression strengthened into a tropical storm midday on September 14 , the official Atlantic tropical cyclone database known as HURDAT indicates the disturbance attained tropical storm status at 0000 UTC on September 15 . 
 Despite continued gradual intensification , Felice remained disorganized as it approached the northern Gulf Coast at forward speeds of up to 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) . The storm 's center came within range of the weather radar site at New Orleans , Louisiana , resulting in close observation of the storm 's progress . Felice suffered from restricted outflow and a nebulous circulation , marked by the appearance of two centers . Near daybreak on September 15 , a more distinct center had apparently formed 100 mi ( 160 km ) to the west @-@ northwest of the storm 's initial core , which reportedly dissipated . Operationally , forecasters at the National Hurricane Center believed a surge of southerly inflow transported a significant amount of atmospheric vorticity away from the old center of low pressure , allowing for a new surface @-@ based circulation to form . Indeed , a special off @-@ hour advisory was issued to identify the storm 's new location . However , post @-@ season analysis of Felice determined that due to the cyclone 's disheveled nature , as well as technical problems at the time of observation , the center relocation could not be conclusively proven ; as a result , the official storm path does not reflect any significant jogs . 
 Felice moved nearly parallel to the southern coast of Louisiana as it began to show signs of improved structure . It reached its peak intensity as a high @-@ end tropical storm with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) at 0000 UTC on September 16 , while located about 100 mi south of Lafayette . Dry continental air from the north likely prevented Felice from reaching Category 1 hurricane strength . Even as a strong tropical storm , Felice lacked deep convection typical of mature tropical cyclones . Shortly after peaking , Felice moved ashore at High Island , Texas — about 30 mi ( 48 km ) to the northeast of Galveston — during the evening hours of September 15 local time . The storm rapidly deteriorated once over land and slowed in forward speed . Curving toward the northwest , Felice passed near Houston and weakened into a tropical depression . The diminishing system turned northward through north @-@ central Texas late on September 16 and entered southeastern Oklahoma by September 17 . 
 Although Felice officially dissipated at 1200 UTC on September 17 , its remnants retained a structure very similar to that of a healthy tropical cyclone , as depicted by radar imagery from the National Severe Storms Laboratory in Norman . Distinct rainbands harbored a noticeable eye feature , which passed about 90 mi ( 140 km ) southeast of Norman . Two aircraft flew into the area to collect data on the unique storm ; notably , they found the system still had a warm core compared to its environment . Throughout the day on September 17 , the remnants of Felice continued to weaken . The residual surface low recurved toward the east @-@ northeast over Oklahoma and Arkansas before fully dissipating after September 19 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As Felice neared the coast , gale warnings were in effect from Morgan City , Louisiana , to Galveston , while a hurricane watch extended from Morgan City to Port O 'Connor , Texas . Small craft advisories were also posted , cautioning light vessels to remain in port . All coastal advisories were discontinued by the early hours of September 16 . Residents in the path of the storm generally evacuated in a timely manner . Over 3 @,@ 000 fled the storm in Cameron Parish , Louisiana ; around half of the residents in the low @-@ lying southern part of the parish had already left before the mandatory evacuation was ordered . Farther west , one of two evacuation routes out of Sabine Pass , Texas had been rendered unusable a few days before the storm when a bridge was damaged in a maritime accident . As the remaining highway was considered susceptible to coastal flooding , officials quickly worked to evacuate 1 @,@ 300 people in Sabine Pass before the storm 's approach . The American Red Cross converted nine public schools into temporary storm shelters in and around Beaumont . Shelters were also set up in Houston and Baton Rouge , Louisiana , though they generally went unused . The post offices in Sabine Pass , Gilchrist , and Port Bolivar transferred money orders , first @-@ class parcels and postage stamps to the Beaumont office as a safety precaution . 
 While crossing the Florida Keys on September 13 , the depression dropped modest but beneficial rainfall , generally totaling 1 to 3 in ( 25 to 75 mm ) , over the southern Florida Peninsula . The highest tides associated with Felice ran 3 @.@ 9 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal at Cameron , Louisiana . Rainfall in Louisiana was light , peaking at around 2 @.@ 5 in ( 65 mm ) in areas closest to the storm 's path . Coastal locations experienced gusty winds , occasionally blowing gale @-@ force ; an anemometer at Grand Chenier recorded northeasterly gusts up to 42 mph ( 68 km / h ) on the evening of September 15 . Though the winds may have had an impact on the quality of sugar cane crops in extreme southern areas of the state , no flooding or property damage was reported . 
 Felice crossed the coast accompanied by appreciable rainfall , gusty winds , and heightened tides . At Crystal Beach , near where Felice made landfall , there was reportedly a distinct lull in the wind and rain coinciding with the storm 's poorly defined eye . Weather observers in Gilchrist and Humble estimated gusts at 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) from the east and southwest , respectively . Galveston endured sustained winds of 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) and gusts as high as 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) . The storm uprooted some newly planted palm trees in the city ; one tree struck a parked car . Isolated power outages affected parts of the area , including the east side of Galveston after an electrical transformer was hit by lightning . Elsewhere , Felice brought down numerous tree limbs and damaged utility lines . In Washington County to the north , the storm damaged trees and shrubs . Winds gusted to 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) at Houston . 
 Heavy rains , accumulating 6 @.@ 73 in ( 171 mm ) , triggered minor urban flooding in downtown Galveston . Moderate to heavy rainfall affected a broad area along the storm 's path , with several reports of 5 in ( 130 mm ) or more . The precipitation resulted in a few instances of inconsequential flooding , but often proved beneficial as it helped relieve dry conditions throughout eastern Texas . Rice and hay crops sustained minor damage , the harvest of the former delayed by about a week . Along the coast , storm tides peaked at 3 @.@ 0 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal , with several reports of 2 and 3 @-@ ft deviations . As the weakening storm proceeded inland , it continued to drop heavy rainfall . Over 6 in ( 150 mm ) of rain fell over Denton County in northern Texas . In southeastern Oklahoma , the remnants of Felice produced rainfall rates up to 2 in ( 50 mm ) per hour , contributing to totals over 4 in ( 100 mm ) . Relatively strong winds , peaking around 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , occurred near the remnant center of circulation . The system continued to generate showers and thunderstorms over the central Mississippi River Valley , producing a swath of 3 inch or greater rainfall totals across northern Arkansas . 
 = USS New Jersey ( BB @-@ 16 ) = 
 USS New Jersey ( BB @-@ 16 ) was the fourth of five Virginia @-@ class battleships of the United States Navy , and the first ship to carry her name . She was laid down at the Fore River Shipbuilding Company in Quincy , Massachusetts in May 1902 , launched in November 1904 , and commissioned into the fleet in May 1906 . The ship was armed with an offensive battery of four 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) guns and eight 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) guns , and she was capable of a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . 
 New Jersey spent her entire career in the Atlantic Fleet . In late 1906 , she took part in the Second Occupation of Cuba , and she participated in the Jamestown Exposition in April – May 1907 . At the end of the year , she joined the Great White Fleet for its circumnavigation of the globe , which lasted into 1909 . The ship spent the following five years conducting peacetime training . In April 1914 , New Jersey took part in the occupied Veracruz during the Mexican Revolution . During World War I , she was used as a training ship , and after the war , she was tasked with transporting American soldiers back from Europe . New Jersey was decommissioned in 1920 and slated for destruction in bombing tests in 1923 . Martin NBS @-@ 1 bombers sank the ship on 5 September 1923 in a series of bomb attacks . 
 = = Design = = 
 New Jersey was 441 feet 3 inches ( 134 @.@ 49 m ) long overall and had a beam of 76 ft 3 in ( 23 @.@ 24 m ) and a draft of 23 ft 9 in ( 7 @.@ 24 m ) . She displaced 14 @,@ 948 long tons ( 15 @,@ 188 t ) as designed and up to 16 @,@ 094 long tons ( 16 @,@ 352 t ) at full load . The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft triple @-@ expansion steam engines rated at 19 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 14 @,@ 000 kW ) and twelve coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers , generating a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . As built , she was fitted with heavy military masts , but these were quickly replaced by cage masts in 1909 . She had a crew of 812 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of four 12 inch / 40 Mark 4 guns in two twin gun turrets on the centerline , one forward and aft . The secondary battery consisted of eight 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) / 45 guns and twelve 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) / 45 guns . The 8 @-@ inch guns were mounted in four twin turrets ; two of these were superposed atop the main battery turrets , with the other two turrets abreast the forward funnel . The 6 @-@ inch guns were placed in casemates in the hull . For close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats , she carried twelve 3 @-@ inch / 50 guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull and twelve 3 @-@ pounder guns . She also carried two 1 @-@ pounder guns . As was standard for capital ships of the period , New Jersey carried four 21 in ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes , submerged in her hull on the broadside . 
 New Jersey 's main armored belt was 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick over the magazines and the machinery spaces and 6 in ( 152 mm ) elsewhere . The main battery gun turrets ( and the secondary turrets on top of them ) had 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) thick faces , and the supporting barbettes had the 10 in ( 250 mm ) of armor plating . The conning tower had 9 in ( 230 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for New Jersey was laid down at the Fore River Shipyard on 3 May 1902 . She was launched on 10 November 1904 ; the daughter of Franklin Murphy , then the Governor of New Jersey , christened the ship . She was commissioned into the US fleet on 12 May 1906 , Captain William Kimball in command . New Jersey began her initial training in the Atlantic and Caribbean , which was interrupted by a naval review for President Theodore Roosevelt in Oyster Bay in September . On 21 September , the ship was deployed to Cuba to take part in the Second Occupation of Cuba ; she remained there until 13 October . New Jersey participated in the Jamestown Exposition from 15 April to 14 May 1907 , which commemorated the 300th anniversary of the founding of the Jamestown colony . An international fleet that included British , French , German , Japanese , and Austro @-@ Hungarian warships joined the US Navy at the event . 
 New Jersey joined the Great White Fleet on 16 December 1907 , when they departed Hampton Roads to begin their circumnavigation of the globe . The purpose of the cruise was a show of naval strength , which was especially directed at Japan . Tensions between the two countries were high at the time , and the cruise served to defuse the situation . The fleet cruised south to the Caribbean and then to South America , making stops in Port of Spain , Rio de Janeiro , Punta Arenas , and Valparaíso , among other cities . After arriving in Mexico in March 1908 , the fleet spent three weeks conducting gunnery practice . The fleet then resumed its voyage up the Pacific coast of the Americas , stopping in San Francisco and Seattle before crossing the Pacific to Australia , stopping in Hawaii on the way . Stops in the South Pacific included Melbourne , Sydney , and Auckland . 
 After leaving Australia , the fleet turned north for the Philippines , stopping in Manila , before continuing on to Japan where a welcoming ceremony was held in Yokohama . Three weeks of exercises followed in Subic Bay in the Philippines in November . The ships passed Singapore on 6 December and entered the Indian Ocean ; they coaled in Colombo before proceeding to the Suez Canal and coaling again at Port Said , Egypt . The fleet called in several Mediterranean ports before stopping in Gibraltar , where an international fleet of British , Russian , French , and Dutch warships greeted the Americans . The ships then crossed the Atlantic to return to Hampton Roads on 22 February 1909 , having traveled 46 @,@ 729 nautical miles ( 86 @,@ 542 km ; 53 @,@ 775 mi ) . There , they conducted a naval review for President Theodore Roosevelt . 
 New Jersey spent the next several years in the peacetime routine of the Atlantic Fleet , with various training maneuvers and gunnery practice in the Atlantic and Caribbean . During this period , she spent a year out of commission at Boston from 2 May 1910 to 15 July 1911 , and in the summers of 1912 and 1913 , she conducted training cruises for midshipmen from the United States Naval Academy . The ship was deployed to the Caribbean to protect American interests as the Mexican Revolution worsened in late 1913 . On 21 April 1914 , the United States occupied Veracruz in the aftermath of the Tampico Affair . On 13 August , New Jersey departed Mexican waters and steamed to Santo Domingo , where unrest gripped both the Dominican Republic and Haiti . After observing conditions in the two countries , the ship continued on , arriving in Hampton Roads on 9 October . She spent the next three years conducting her normal training routine . 
 On 6 April 1917 , the United States declared war on Germany owing to the unrestricted submarine warfare campaign Germany initiated earlier that year . New Jersey was employed as a training ship for naval draftees , based in Chesapeake Bay . In November 1918 , Germany signed the Armistice that ended the war ; New Jersey was thereafter used to transport American soldiers back from Europe . In the course of four voyages between late 1918 and 9 June 1919 , she carried some 5 @,@ 000 soldiers . New Jersey was decommissioned on 6 August 1920 at the Boston Naval Shipyard , and was to be disposed of under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty signed in 1922 . New Jersey , along with her sister Virginia and the battleship Alabama were allocated for weapons tests conducted with the US Army Air Service , under the supervision of General Billy Mitchell . 
 The bombing tests against New Jersey were conducted on 5 September 1923 in the Atlantic Ocean off Diamond Shoals , North Carolina , by Martin NBS @-@ 1 bombers of the 2nd Bombardment Group . Observers were aboard the Army transport ship St. Mihiel . Four of the NBS @-@ 1s attacked New Jersey with 600 @-@ pound ( 270 kg ) bombs at an altitude of 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) , scoring four hits and several near @-@ misses , which caused significant flooding . Another attack was made , this time with 2 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 910 kg ) bombs at 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) , seven of which landed close to the ship . By this time , flooding had increased to the point that the casemate gun ports were submerged . Two more NBS @-@ 1s then attacked with two 1 @,@ 100 @-@ pound ( 500 kg ) bombs apiece ; the first two missed but the third was a direct hit . It caused a large explosion and New Jersey capsized and sank 24 minutes later . 
 = Nesomys narindaensis = 
 Nesomys narindaensis is an extinct rodent that lived in northwestern Madagascar . It is known from subfossil skull bones and isolated molars found in several sites during field work that started in 2001 . First described in 2010 , it is placed in the genus Nesomys together with three smaller living species , which may differ in some details of molar morphology . The presence of N. narindaensis , a rare element in the local rodent fauna , suggests that the region was previously more humid . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Remains of Nesomys narindaensis were found during fieldwork in northwestern Madagascar that started in 2001 . The species was described in a 2010 paper by Pierre Mein and colleagues , together with another extinct rodent , Brachytarsomys mahajambaensis . The specific name , narindaensis , where one of the sites where the species has been found is located . It is placed in the genus Nesomys , together with three smaller living species , N. <unk> , N. lambertoni , and N. rufus . Nesomys is classified in the exclusively Madagascan subfamily Nesomyinae of the family Nesomyidae , which includes various African rodents . 
 = = Description = = 
 Nesomys narindaensis is known from a damaged skull , missing part of the back , a mandible ( lower jaw ) with the first two molars ( m1 and m2 ) , and four isolated molars ( one first upper molar , M1 , one third upper molar , M3 , and two m2 ) . It is larger than each of the three living species , and the known material additionally differs from those in a few details that may not hold in larger samples . Total skull length is 61 @.@ 3 mm , longer than in the largest living species , N. lambertoni ( 50 @.@ 3 – 53 @.@ 8 mm ) . The width of the palate between the M1 is 8 @.@ 7 mm ( 7 @.@ 2 – 7 @.@ 9 mm in N. lambertoni ) and the length of the upper toothrow is 9 @.@ 04 and 9 @.@ 16 mm on the two sides of the skull ( 7 @.@ 2 – 7 @.@ 9 mm in N. lambertoni ) . 
 M1 is flat @-@ crowned . The anteroloph , a crest at the front of the tooth , lacks a smaller accessory spur that is present in N. rufus . The paracone , one of the main cusps , is quite small ; this cusp is more prominent in N. rufus . The mesoloph , a crest on the middle of the tooth , is distinct but short and located further to the back than in N. rufus . M2 has a longer mesoloph . M3 is largely flat @-@ crowned , but the paracone is a bit more prominent than the rest . The valley between the cusps at the front is deeper than the valleys at the back . Each of the upper molars has three roots . 
 The m1 is long and narrow . The anteroconid , the cusp at the front of the tooth , is oriented perpendicularly to the main axis of the tooth and on the lingual ( inner ) side is separated from the metaconid cusp . The protoconid , another cusp on the labial ( outer ) side , is connected at its back to a longitudinal crest , which in turn anchors the transverse mesolophid crest , and then joins the hypoconid labial cusp . In front of the hypoconid , an ectostylid ( a smaller cuspule ) is present . The entoconid cusp , located lingually , is relatively high and is separated from the mesolophid before it by a deep valley . Another crest , the posterolophid , is present behind the hypoconid . At the front of the m2 , crests known as the anterolophid and anterolabial cingulum are present before the protoconid and the metaconid . As on the m1 , a transverse mesolophid and an ectostylid are present . The hypoconid and the entoconid are present , as is the posterolophid behind them . Within the posterolophid , there is a small valley that is absent in N. rufus . Both m1 and m2 have two roots ; m3 is unknown . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Remains of Nesomys narindaensis have been found at the sites of <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> in northwestern Madagascar , which are late Pleistocene ( 126 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 years ago ) and Holocene ( less than 10 @,@ 000 years ago ) in age . Nesomys is a rare element of the rodent fauna , which is dominated by multiple species of Eliurus and Macrotarsomys . Modern Nesomys live on the ground in eastern ( N. <unk> and N. rufus ) and western ( N. lambertoni ) Madagascar . The only surviving western species , N. lambertoni , is restricted to a relict humid karst area ; the presence of N. narindaensis and Brachyuromys mahajambaensis suggests that the past environment in northwestern Madagascar was also more humid . Subfossil remains of Nesomys have been recorded from some other localities in northwestern Madagascar , but these have not been described . 
 = HMS Crescent ( 1931 ) = 
 HMS Crescent was a C @-@ class destroyer which was built for the Royal Navy in the early 1930s . The ship was initially assigned to the Home Fleet , although she was temporarily deployed in the Red Sea and Indian Ocean during the Abyssinia Crisis of 1935 – 36 . Crescent was sold to the Royal Canadian Navy in late 1936 and renamed HMCS Fraser . She was stationed on the west coast of Canada until the beginning of World War II when she was transferred to the Atlantic coast for convoy escort duties . The ship was transferred to the United Kingdom ( UK ) in May 1940 and helped to evacuate refugees from France upon her arrival in early June . Fraser was sunk on 25 June 1940 in a collision with the anti @-@ aircraft cruiser HMS Calcutta while returning from one such mission . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Crescent displaced 1 @,@ 375 long tons ( 1 @,@ 397 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 865 long tons ( 1 @,@ 895 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Crescent carried a maximum of 473 long tons ( 481 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 145 officers and men . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Crescent had a single QF 3 @-@ inch 20 cwt AA gun between her funnels , and two 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk II AA guns mounted on the aft end of her forecastle deck . The 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) AA gun was removed in 1936 and the 2 @-@ pounders were relocated to between the funnels . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch torpedoes . Three depth @-@ charge chutes were fitted , each with a capacity of two depth charges . After World War II began this was increased to 33 depth charges , delivered by one or two rails and two throwers . 
 Crescent was ordered on 30 January 1930 as part of the 1929 Naval Programme and laid down on 1 December 1930 at Vickers @-@ Armstrongs , Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness . She was launched on 29 September 1931 and completed on 15 April 1932 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 After the ship commissioned on 21 April 1932 , she was assigned to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla of the Home Fleet . Crescent collided with her sister HMS Comet at Chatham on 21 July and was under repair until 27 August . Crescent was refitted at Chatham between 30 March and 6 May 1933 , before deploying to the West Indies between January and March 1934 . She was given another refit at Chatham from 27 July to 3 September 1934 . Crescent was detached from the Home Fleet during the Abyssinian Crisis , and deployed in the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea from September 1935 to April 1936 . When the ship returned , she was refitted at Sheerness between 23 April to 13 June and placed briefly in reserve . 
 = = = Transfer to the Royal Canadian Navy = = = 
 Together with her sister HMS Cygnet , Crescent was sold to Canada on 20 October 1936 for a total price of £ 400 @,@ 000 . She was refitted again to meet Canadian standards , including the installation of ASDIC ( sonar ) , and taken over by them on 1 February 1937 . The ship was renamed as HMCS Fraser and commissioned into the RCN at Chatham on 17 February . Fraser was assigned to the Canadian Pacific Coast and arrived at Esquimalt on 3 May 1937 . She remained there until she was ordered to the East Coast on 31 August 1939 . 
 When World War II began on 3 September , Fraser was transiting the Panama Canal and arrived at Halifax on 15 September . She and her sisters were employed as local escorts to ocean convoys sailing from Halifax . In November the Royal Navy 's North America and West Indies Station took operational control of the Canadian destroyers . The ship escorted the convoy bringing most of the 1st Canadian Infantry Division to Britain part way across the North Atlantic in mid @-@ December . In March 1940 she was ordered to join the Jamaica Force for Caribbean patrols before being reassigned to Western Approaches Command two months later . On 26 May she left Bermuda for Britain and arrived at Plymouth on 3 June where she was pressed into service evacuating Allied troops from various French ports on the Atlantic coast . Sometime in 1940 , the ship 's aft set of torpedo tubes was removed and replaced by a 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) AA gun . 
 = = Loss = = 
 On 25 June 1940 , Fraser , her sister HMCS Restigouche , and the cruiser Calcutta were returning from St. Jean de Luz after rescuing refugees trapped by the German Army ( Operation Ariel ) , when Fraser was rammed by Calcutta in the Gironde estuary . Struck forward of the bridge by the cruiser 's bow , Fraser was cut in half and sank immediately . All but 45 of the ship 's crew were rescued by Restigouche and other nearby ships . Many of the survivors from Fraser transferred that later summer to HMCS Margaree , and were lost when that vessel sank on 22 October 1940 as a result of a collision with the freighter MV Port Fairy . 
 = Interstate 80 in Iowa = 
 Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) is a transcontinental Interstate Highway in the United States , stretching from San Francisco , California , to Teaneck , New Jersey . In Iowa , the highway travels west to east through the center of the state . It enters the state at the Missouri River in Council Bluffs and heads east through the southern Iowa drift plain . In the Des Moines area , I @-@ 80 meets up with I @-@ 35 and the two routes bypass Des Moines together . On the northern side of Des Moines , the interstates split and I @-@ 80 continues east . In eastern Iowa , it provides access to the University of Iowa in Iowa City . Northwest of the Quad Cities in Walcott is Iowa 80 , the World 's Largest <unk> . I @-@ 80 passes along the northern edge of Davenport and Bettendorf and leaves Iowa via the Fred Schwengel Memorial Bridge over the Mississippi River into Illinois . 
 Before I @-@ 80 was planned , the route between Council Bluffs and Davenport , which passed through Des Moines , was vital to the state . Two competing auto trails , the Great White Way and the River @-@ to @-@ River Road , sought to be the best path to connect three of the state 's major population centers . The two trails combined in the 1920s and eventually became U.S. Highway 32 ( US 32 ) in 1926 . US 6 , which had taken the place of US 32 , became the busiest highway in the state . In the early 1950s , plans were drawn up to build an Iowa Turnpike , to be the first modern four @-@ lane highway in the state , along the US 6 corridor . Plans for the turnpike were shelved when the Interstate Highway System was created in 1956 . 
 Construction of I @-@ 80 took place over 14 years . The first section opened on September 21 , 1958 , in the western suburbs of Des Moines . New sections of interstate opened up regularly over the next twelve years , though construction in eastern Iowa was completed in 1966 . The final piece of I @-@ 80 in Iowa , the Missouri River bridge to Omaha , Nebraska , opened on December 15 , 1972 . By the 1980s , I @-@ 80 had fallen into disrepair in Iowa and across the country . Federal funding was freed up in 1985 to allow reconstruction of the highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Interstate 80 is the longest Interstate Highway in Iowa . It extends from west to east across the central portion of the state through the population centers of Council Bluffs , Des Moines and the Quad Cities . The majority of the highway runs through farmland , yet roughly one @-@ third of Iowa 's population live along the I @-@ 80 corridor . 
 = = = Western Iowa = = = 
 I @-@ 80 enters Iowa on a bridge over the Missouri River , where it leaves Omaha , Nebraska , to enter Council Bluffs . Almost immediately after landing on the Iowa side of the bridge , it meets I @-@ 29 at a Y interchange . From eastbound I @-@ 80 , northbound I @-@ 29 is accessed via a left exit . The two interstates travel together through southern Council Bluffs for three miles ( 5 km ) . The speed limit through this section is 55 miles per hour ( 90 km / h ) . The South 24th Street interchange serves a commercial area anchored by the Mid @-@ America Center and Horseshoe Casino . The South Expressway exit , which marks the southern end of Iowa Highway 192 ( Iowa 192 ) , is adjacent to a big box store commercial center . I @-@ 29 and I @-@ 80 diverge at another Y interchange ; I @-@ 29 heads south and I @-@ 80 heads to the northeast . 
 East of the I @-@ 29 split , I @-@ 80 travels northeast for the next 20 miles ( 32 km ) . It passes through eastern Council Bluffs where it serves a shopping mall . Just after the Madison Avenue exit , the speed limit increases to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . Exit 8 is the first of many encounters with U.S. Highway 6 ( US 6 ) . The interstate leaves Council Bluffs and speed limits rise to the rural limit of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Here , I @-@ 80 roughly follows the course of Mosquito Creek past Underwood and Neola , both of which are served by interchanges . About two miles ( 3 km ) of Neola , I @-@ 80 curves to the east as it meets the eastern end of I @-@ 680 at a directional T interchange . 
 For the next 50 miles ( 80 km ) , I @-@ 80 runs in more or less a straight line . Interchanges occur at regular intervals ; 3 to 6 miles ( 5 to 10 km ) of <unk> and Cass county farmland separate each exit from the next . Near Avoca , it crosses the West Nishnabotna River and meets US 59 . East of the interchange , the interstate crosses the eastern branch of the West Nishnabotna . As I @-@ 80 approaches the area north of Atlantic , there are three interchanges , Iowa 173 , County Road N16 ( CR N16 ) , and US 71 , which serve the western , central , and eastern parts of the city , respectively . Iowa 173 , which serves Atlantic by way of Iowa 83 , also connects to Elk Horn and Kimballton . US 71 , which continues north towards Carroll , carries US 6 traffic to the interstate . At this point , US 6 begins the first of three instances when its traffic is routed along I @-@ 80 . In the eastern part of Cass County , the two routes meet the northern end of Iowa 148 . 
 As I @-@ 80 and US 6 approach Adair , the highways curve slightly to the south to bypass the community . There are two interchanges in Adair ; both of the intersecting roads , at one time or another , carried US 6 . CR G30 , the White Pole Road , was the original alignment of US 6 , while CR <unk> has not carried US 6 since 1980 . Further east is an interchange with Iowa 25 . About one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of the interchange is Freedom Rock . Each year for Memorial Day , the rock is repainted with a patriotic scene by local artist Ray " Bubba " Sorenson II . Near Dexter , I @-@ 80 and US 6 graze the northwestern corner of Madison County . After two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , the routes enter Dallas County and meet CR <unk> , another former alignment of US 6 . 
 = = = Central Iowa = = = 
 Continuing east , the two routes follow a due @-@ east section of highway , where they pass Earlham . Near the CR F90 / CR <unk> interchange , they start heading northeast towards Des Moines . At De Soto , US 6 splits away from I @-@ 80 at the interchange with US 169 . Tourists who want to see the covered bridges of Madison County ( made famous by the book The Bridges of Madison County ) and the birthplace of John Wayne , are directed to follow US 169 south to Winterset . Between De Soto and Van Meter , the interstate crosses the middle and north branches of the Raccoon River , which converge just south of the crossing of the North Raccoon . 
 As the highway gets closer to Des Moines , it moves more sharply to the northeast . In southern Waukee , near the entrance ramp to the eastbound rest area , there is an overpass which carries Alice 's Road . A new interchange is planned for this location , which is scheduled to be open in late 2013 or early 2014 . As I @-@ 80 enters West Des Moines , the speed limit lowers to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) and the path of the interstate straightens out to the east at the Jordan Creek Parkway exit . The highway adds a third lane eastbound and drops the third lane westbound . Almost two miles ( 3 km ) to the east is the interchange with I @-@ 35 , which also marks the beginning of I @-@ 235 . Eastbound I @-@ 80 exits the freeway via a flyover ramp to northbound I @-@ 35 ; eastbound I @-@ 235 begins as the continuation of the I @-@ 80 freeway . Locally , this exit is called the West Mixmaster . 
 I @-@ 80 shares the next 14 miles ( 23 km ) with I @-@ 35 on a six @-@ lane freeway where each direction 's three lanes are separated by a Jersey barrier . They begin their journey together by heading north ; they briefly run through West Des Moines and then cross into Clive at University Avenue . At the Clive – Urbandale city limits is the interchange with Hickman Road , which carries US 6 . Hickman Road serves a truck stop to the west and the Living History Farms visitor center to the east . The two interstates continue north through Urbandale where they pass Douglas Avenue . The Iowa 141 exit is at Rider Corner , the point where the I @-@ 35 / I @-@ 80 freeway curves 90 degrees to the east . 
 East of the 86th Street exit , the freeway begins a slow descent towards the Des Moines River . Merle Hay Road , named for the first Iowan to die in World War I , carries Iowa 28 from the south to its northern end at the interstates . They cross the Des Moines River just south of the mouth of Beaver Creek . Four miles ( 6 km ) to the east is Iowa 415 and one mile ( 2 km ) further east is US 69 . Between the interchanges there is a fourth lane in each direction . At the end of their 14 miles ( 23 km ) together , I @-@ 35 exits to the north and I @-@ 235 's eastern end is to the south at the East Mixmaster . 
 East of I @-@ 35 , I @-@ 80 meets up with US 65 on the outskirts of Altoona . The two routes only share the highway for one mile ( 2 km ) as US 65 splits away at the next exit . Here , US 6 rejoins I @-@ 80 for the second time and the interstate returns to its four @-@ lane configuration . After a third exit for Altoona , the interstate resumes its 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) rural limit . Near Colfax , the highways cross the South Skunk River . After an interchange with Iowa 117 , the highway is forced to the north to avoid crossing the river multiple times . As it returns south to its original line , it meets CR F48 , which was another former alignment of US 6 . At the Iowa 14 exit in Newton , US 6 exits off the interstate . East of Newton is an interchange that serves the Iowa Speedway . 
 Five miles ( 8 km ) east of the speedway in an exit for Iowa 224 which connects to Kellogg . After this interchange , the highway curves to the northeast and descends a hill to cross the North Skunk River . Shortly after the river , it curves back to the east and climbs up the hill . As the road straightens out , it begins a 35 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 56 km ) stretch of straight <unk> . Between the river and the Iowa 146 exit south of Grinnell , the farmland that surrounds the interstate undulates . Just south of Malcom , it meets US 63 . Further east , at exit 201 for Iowa 21 , there are competing truck stops on either side of the freeway . A hotel is located on the northern side . 
 = = = Eastern Iowa = = = 
 Now in Iowa County , I @-@ 80 continues towards the eastern end of the 50 @-@ mile ( 80 km ) stretch of straight highway . It turns slightly to the southeast near the Ladora exit and straightens again at the Marengo interchange , where <unk> Manufacturing , a farm implement manufacturer , advertises its business to passing travelers by arranging farm implements into sculptures . A few miles east , in Williamsburg , is the northern end of Iowa 149 . The Williamsburg exit is the location of a Tanger Outlet Mall . The next interchange marks the southern end of US 151 . Both the Iowa 149 and US 151 interchanges serve the Amana Colonies which are located 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the north . 
 As I @-@ 80 enters the Iowa City area , the speed limit drops to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . On the edge of Coralville is an interchange with US 218 and Iowa 27 . This interchange is also the beginning of I @-@ 380 , which heads north along US 218 and Iowa 27 towards Cedar Rapids and Waterloo . The I @-@ 80 / I @-@ 380 interchange was identified as the most likely location in Iowa for a semi @-@ trailer truck to overturn . According to the American Transportation Research Institute , 30 trucks rolled over at the interchange during the 8 @-@ year study period . The Iowa DOT has plans to replace the cloverleaf interchange with a turbine interchange , but the project would not take place until around 2025 . 
 At the I @-@ 380 interchange , I @-@ 80 becomes a six @-@ lane freeway . The Coral Ridge Avenue exit provides access to US 6 , which passes beneath the interstate just before the interchange , and the eponymous shopping center located to the southeast . The First Avenue exit in Coralville and Dubuque Street exit in Iowa City direct University of Iowa traffic to different parts of the university campus . The Iowa River flows between the two interchanges and also marks the boundary between Coralville and Iowa City . On Iowa City 's east side are the Iowa 1 and Herbert Hoover Highway exits . Between them , the highway drops back to four lanes and the speed limit increases to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . 
 As it enters Cedar County , it passes West Branch , the birthplace of and site of the library and museum of President Herbert Hoover . It approaches the Cedar River near the village of Rochester . Just east of the river crossing , Iowa 38 joins I @-@ 80 from the north . The county road that continues to the south from Iowa 38 leads to Moscow . The two highways travel together for four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) until they reach the Wilton area . Here , Iowa 38 exits to the south , while US 6 joins I @-@ 80 for the last time . 
 Before reaching the Quad Cities , I @-@ 80 passes Walcott and Iowa 80 , which is self @-@ billed as the " World 's Largest <unk> " . The 65 @-@ acre ( 26 ha ) truck stop has three restaurants , a gift shop , movie theater , museum , barber shop , and dentist on site . On average , the truck stop has served more than 1 @.@ 4 million customers per year since it opened in 1965 . 
 As I @-@ 80 and US 6 approach the Quad Cities metropolitan area , the speed limit drops to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) for the final time . Just within the city limits of Davenport is the I @-@ 280 interchange . US 6 exits to the south to join I @-@ 280 while I @-@ 80 is joined by US 61 . I @-@ 80 and US 61 only share 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of freeway before US 61 exits to its own freeway heading north . In between the two exits is an interchange with Northwest Boulevard , which marks the eastern end of Iowa 130 . A couple miles east of the eastern US 61 interchange is the western end of I @-@ 74 . Because of a " turn off to stay on " interchange with I @-@ 74 and I @-@ 280 near <unk> , Illinois , called " the Big X " , I @-@ 74 through traffic is urged to use I @-@ 80 around the Quad Cities to the Big X. At the Big X , traffic from both I @-@ 74 and I @-@ 80 must exit their respective freeways to continue on the same route . Near the Mississippi River , the interstate takes a sharp curve to the southeast to line up perpendicularly to the river . Just before the base of the bridge is an interchange with US 67 , the last exit in Iowa . I @-@ 80 ends its 306 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 492 km ) journey through Iowa over the Mississippi River on the Fred Schwengel Memorial Bridge . It enters rural Rock Island County , Illinois , and continues towards Chicago . 
 = = = Services = = = 
 The Iowa DOT operates 37 rest areas and one scenic overlook in 20 locations along its 780 miles ( 1 @,@ 260 km ) of interstate highway . Along I @-@ 80 , there are nine locations that have facilities for each direction of traffic . Parking areas are divided so passenger automobiles are separated from large trucks . Common among all of the rest stops are separate men 's and women 's restrooms , payphones with <unk> capabilities , weather reporting kiosks , vending machines , and free wireless Internet . Many stations have family restrooms and dump stations for recreational vehicles . 
 The first rest areas along Iowa 's interstates were built in the 1960s . They were modest facilities ; separate buildings housed the restrooms and vending machines . A few rest stops had another building with local tourist information . On August 4 , 1999 , the first modern rest area opened along eastbound I @-@ 80 near Wilton . The new facilities feature one large building housing as many as 28 more toilets than the older buildings , in addition to all the other common rest area amenities . They also feature artwork by local Iowa artists . Each new rest area is designed around a theme . For instance , the facility near Adair is a tribute to the life of Henry A. Wallace , the 33rd Vice President of the United States , who was born in nearby Orient . 
 = = History = = 
 Since before the primary highway system was created in 1920 , the Council Bluffs @-@ to @-@ Davenport , by way of Des Moines , corridor has always been important . Two roughly parallel auto trails , the Great White Way and the River @-@ to @-@ River Road , served cross @-@ state traffic . The two routes were merged into one route , the Whiteway Highway , in 1922 . Four years later , the Whiteway Highway would become US 32 . The US 32 designation was absorbed into an extended US 6 in 1931 . Previously , US 6 had existed only in the Northeastern United States . Within ten years , US 6 was the most @-@ traveled road in Iowa , with an average of " 1 @,@ 920 cars a day at any given rural point . " 
 = = = Iowa Turnpike = = = 
 In 1954 , Coverdale & Colpitts , a New York City @-@ based engineering firm working on behalf of the Iowa State Highway Commission , reported on the feasibility of building an east – west toll road , to be called the Iowa Turnpike , across the state . The firm found that the turnpike should closely parallel US 6 between Council Bluffs and Davenport . They concluded that the turnpike could be economically possible if $ 180 million ( $ 1 @.@ 59 billion in 2016 ) in revenue bonds were issued at interest rates no higher than 3 @.@ 5 % . 
 In early March 1955 , the Iowa General Assembly debated the pros and cons on building a toll road . Proponents of the turnpike said it would be a self @-@ financing project . The feasibility report suggested tolls of 1 @.@ 5 cents per mile ( 0 @.@ 93 ¢ / km ) , which in 2016 is 13 cents per mile ( 8 @.@ 1 ¢ / km ) . It was estimated that in 1953 , the turnpike could have generated $ 5 @.@ 9 million ( $ 52 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) . If traffic levels were not high enough to raise enough revenue , as the opponents of the project worried , the state would end up paying for the project , thus defeating the purpose of a toll road . 
 The proposed highway was to run from Illinois Route 80 near Port Byron , Illinois , which ran along the eastern bank of the Mississippi River , over a new bridge into Iowa , to the South Omaha Bridge where US 275 crossed the Missouri River . The entire route was to be in close proximity to US 6 across the state . It was to be the first modern four @-@ lane highway in the state , with 12 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) lanes and an at least 15 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) grassy median . Sixteen interchanges were planned along the route . Most interchanges were to be located near population centers ; an option to build a seventeenth near Grinnell , if necessary , was included . Eight service areas , similar in quality to those found on the Pennsylvania and New Jersey turnpikes , were planned as well . 
 On April 29 , 1955 , an enabling act , which created the Iowa Toll Road Authority , came into effect giving the Authority the power to further study the feasibility of building a turnpike across the state . Before any construction was to begin , the authority was tasked with developing working relationships with neighboring states ' toll road authorities . A provision in the enabling act prevented Iowa from issuing toll road bonds before neighboring states had issued similar bonds . Plans were stalled while Illinois 's toll road commission worked out litigation regarding the financing of its bonds . Illinois was the only neighboring state to have a toll @-@ road @-@ planning body . 
 Construction on the Iowa Turnpike would never begin . In January 1956 , the Federal @-@ Aid Highway Act of 1956 ( H.R. <unk> ) was introduced in Congress . H.R. <unk> created the Interstate Highway System , a national system of controlled @-@ access highways . President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed the bill into law on June 29 , 1956 . The new law was problematic for the Iowa Turnpike for a couple of reasons . Firstly , the law designated 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) of controlled @-@ access highway in Iowa , including a cross @-@ state route in the vicinity of the turnpike 's planned route . Secondly , the federal government was going to pay for ninety percent of the construction costs ; states were only required to match ten percent of costs ( however , tolls were generally prohibited ) . The Interstate Highway System 's completeness and financing rendered the Iowa Turnpike obsolete before it was ever constructed . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The first section of I @-@ 80 to open for traffic , 2 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) from the West Mixmaster to the Douglas Avenue interchange in Urbandale , opened on September 21 , 1958 . By the end of November 1959 , the new interstate extended around the north side of Des Moines to US 69 . Within a year , the East Mixmaster , where I @-@ 35 splits away to the north , was opened . By the end of 1960 , 40 miles ( 64 km ) from US 71 north of Atlantic to US 6 near Dexter , 20 miles ( 32 km ) from I @-@ 35 to US 6 west of Newton , and 28 miles ( 45 km ) from Iowa 38 near the Cedar River to US 61 in Davenport had opened to traffic . 
 In eastern Iowa , new sections of road were opened in series . 1962 saw the eastern section extended 20 miles west to Iowa City and the central section was extended 25 miles east to Grinnell . Iowa City 's section of interstate was completed on November 15 , 1963 . A 60 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 97 km ) section , the longest section to be opened at one time , connected the two sections in October 1964 . The easternmost section of I @-@ 80 , from US 61 to US 67 at the Mississippi River , opened a month later . This gave travelers nearly 185 miles ( 298 km ) of uninterrupted freeway driving . 
 Construction then moved to the western half of the state . A new 20 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 32 km ) section from US 71 west to US 59 north of Avoca opened in December 1965 . A year later , the interstate was 90 % completed when two stretches , a 50 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 80 km ) stretch from US 59 to I @-@ 29 , which included 16 miles ( 26 km ) of I @-@ 80N and the missing 25 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 40 km ) section between the western section and Des Moines , each opened to traffic . Sections of I @-@ 80 in the Council Bluffs area did not open for another couple years . A short section between Madison Avenue and US 6 opened in 1968 . The interstate was completed from the eastern junction with I @-@ 29 to I @-@ 80N in late December 1969 . 
 On both sides of the state , the respective river crossings opened to traffic nearly two years later than the connecting highways . Near LeClaire , the Fred Schwengel Memorial Bridge over the Mississippi River opened in 1966 after the highway had been completed to US 67 , which runs at the foot of the bridge , in 1964 . The center span of the Mississippi River bridge was installed on June 29 , 1966 . The 237 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 72 m ) , 520 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 470 t ) piece was floated into place by barge . In Council Bluffs , the Missouri River crossing opened on December 15 , 1972 , while the approach to the bridge opened in November 1970 . The Missouri River bridge 's completion marked the end of the 14 years it took to construct Interstate 80 . 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 As early as the 1980s , traffic levels on I @-@ 80 reached the road 's design capacity . As a result , the highway required significant repairs for which Iowa 's interstate maintenance program lacked funding . A 16 @.@ 2 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 26 @.@ 1 km ) section from CR F90 between Earlham and the western junction with I @-@ 35 needed $ 500 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @.@ 04 million in 2016 ) in annual repairs . Funds for needed interstate repair became available in 1985 when President Ronald Reagan signed a bill that freed up $ 7 billion ( $ 15 @.@ 4 billion in 2016 ) from the Highway Trust Fund , the national mechanism for funding repairs to the Interstate Highway System . Under the law , Iowa was slated to receive $ 200 million per year ( $ 440 million in 2016 ) for its interstates . 
 Reconstruction across the state took place in phases . Road crews worked in roughly 15 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 24 km ) zones divided into smaller sections . In each section , one direction of highway was closed while the other direction became a two @-@ lane , two @-@ direction road . When one section was completed , the crew would move on to the next section , preventing the entire zone from being closed at once . Iowa was not alone in the required repairs to I @-@ 80 . The Automobile Association of America reported that nearly every state along I @-@ 80 had reports of road work . In Iowa , though , there were two sections in 1988 which were particularly troublesome for travelers . The I @-@ 680 interchange near Neola was closed , so I @-@ 680 @-@ bound traffic was forced to travel through Neola on Iowa 191 to reach that highway . Another bottleneck occurred near Williamsburg , where it was a two @-@ lane road for six miles ( 10 km ) . 
 Another problem for travelers hoping to avoid the construction on I @-@ 80 was the lack of east – west , four @-@ lane highways in Iowa . At the time , the nearest interstates , I @-@ 70 and I @-@ 90 were far across state lines in Missouri and Minnesota , respectively . One traveler , interviewed by The Des Moines Register , who was traveling back to Iowa from New York , sought to avoid I @-@ 80 's construction woes entirely by driving through Canada . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Cross Road Blues = 
 " Cross Road Blues " ( more commonly known as " Crossroads " ) is a blues song written and recorded by American blues artist Robert Johnson in 1936 . Johnson performed it as a solo piece with his vocal and acoustic slide guitar in the Delta blues @-@ style . The song has become part of the Robert Johnson mythology as referring to the place where he supposedly sold his soul to the Devil in exchange for his musical talents , although the lyrics do not contain any specific references . 
 <unk> Elmore James revived the song with recordings in 1954 and 1960 – 1961 . English guitarist Eric Clapton with Cream popularized the song as " Crossroads " in the late 1960s . Their blues rock interpretation inspired many cover versions and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame included it as one of the " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " . Rolling Stone placed it at number three on the magazine 's list of the " Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time " in recognition of Clapton 's guitar work . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Little is known about Johnson 's life and musical career , although his recordings are well documented . In October 1936 , Johnson auditioned for music store owner and sometime talent scout H. C. <unk> in Jackson , Mississippi ; <unk> passed on Johnson 's contact information to Ernie <unk> , who was a representative for ARC Records . After a second audition , <unk> arranged for Johnson to travel to San Antonio , Texas , for a recording session . Johnson recorded 22 songs for ARC over three days from November 23 to 27 , 1936 . During the first session , he recorded his most commercially appealing songs . They mostly represented his original pieces and reflected current , piano @-@ influenced musical trends . The songs include " Terraplane Blues " ( his first single and most popular record ) along with " Sweet Home Chicago " and " I Believe I 'll Dust My Broom " , which became blues standards after others recorded them . 
 A second and third recording date took place in San Antonio after a two @-@ day break . Johnson reached back into his long @-@ standing repertoire for songs to record . The material reflects the styles of country blues performers Charley Patton and Son House , who influenced Johnson in his youth . The songs are among Johnson 's most heartfelt and forceful and music historian Ted Gioia sees a shift in the lyrical themes : 
 At the close of the San Antonio session , the darker , more apocalyptic side of Johnson 's work emerges ... [ he ] evokes the themes of damnation and redemption , darkness and light ... glimpses into the musician 's inner life , and all its attendant turmoils . 
 " Cross Road Blues " was recorded during Johnson 's third session in San Antonio , on Friday November 27 , 1936 . The sessions continued at an improvised studio in Room 414 at the Gunter Hotel . ARC producers Art Satherley and Don Law supervised the recording and used a portable disc cutting machine . It is unknown what input , if any , they had into Johnson 's selection of material to record or how to present it . Two similar takes of the song were recorded . 
 = = Lyrics and interpretation = = 
 A crossroads or an intersection of rural roads is one of the few landmarks in the Mississippi Delta , a flat featureless plain between the Mississippi and Yazoo rivers . It is part of the local iconography and various businesses use the name , such as gas stations , banks , and retail shops . A crossroads is also where cars are more likely to slow down or stop , thus presenting the best opportunity for a <unk> . In the simplest reading , Johnson describes his grief at being unable to catch a ride at an intersection before the sun sets . However , many see different levels of meaning and some have attached a supernatural significance to the song . 
 Both versions of the song open with the protagonist kneeling at a crossroads to ask God 's mercy , while the second sections tells of his failed attempts to hitch a ride . In the third and fourth sections , he expresses apprehension at being stranded as darkness approaches and asks that his friend Willie Brown be advised that " I 'm <unk> ' down " . The first take of the song , which was used for the single , includes a fifth verse that is not included in the second take . In it he laments not having a " sweet woman " in his distress . 
 The song has been used to perpetuate the myth of Johnson selling his soul to the Devil for his musical ability . The lyrics do not contain any references to Satan or a Faustian bargain , but they have been interpreted as a description of the singer 's fear of losing his soul to the Devil ( presumably in exchange for his talent ) . Music historian Elijah Wald believes that Johnson 's verses do not support the idea . Delta bluesman Tommy Johnson promoted himself as having made a deal with the Devil and Southern folklore identifies a crossroads or graveyard as the site of such a pact , which Wald identifies as likely sources of the myth . However , musicologist Robert Palmer points out that Johnson was " fascinated with and probably obsessed by supernatural imagery . " His song " <unk> on My Trail " tells of trying to stay ahead of the demon hound which is pursuing him and in " Me and the Devil Blues " he sings , " Early this mornin ' when you knocked upon my door , and I said ' Hello Satan I believe it 's time to go ' " . These songs contribute to the Faustian myth ; how much Johnson promoted the idea is debated , although many agree " the ' devil angle ' made for good marketing " . 
 Blues historian Samuel Charters sees the song as having elements of protest and social commentary . The second verse includes " the sun goin ' down now boy , dark gon ' catch me here " , a reference to the " sundown laws " or curfew during racial segregation in the United States . Signs in the rural South advised " Nigger , don 't let the sun set on you here " . Johnson may be expressing a real fear of trumped up vagrancy charges or even lynchings that still took place . Others suggest that the song is about a deeper and more personal loneliness . Writers Barry Lee Pearson and Bill McCulloch argue that the fifth verse in the single version captures the essence of the song : " left alone , abandoned , or mistreated , he stands at the crossroad , looking this way or that for his woman " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Cross Road Blues " reflects Johnson 's Delta blues roots and may have been in his repertoire since 1932 . It is the first recording to show his mastery of his mentor Son House 's style , particularly in his slide guitar work . Music historian Edward Komara identifies parts of " Straight <unk> Blues " by Leroy Carr and Scrapper Blackwell ( 1929 ) along with Roosevelt Sykes ' subsequent adaptation as " Black River Blues " ( 1930 ) as melodic precedents . However , Johnson infuses their relaxed urban approach with a more forceful rural one . Komara terms Johnson 's guitar playing a " blues harp style " . It contrasts with Johnson 's finger @-@ picking " piano style " , which uses a boogie @-@ style accompaniment on the bass strings while playing melody and harmonies on the higher strings . Harp @-@ style playing employs sharp percussive accents on the bass strings ( an imitation of the sharp draw used by harmonica players ) and allows Johnson to explore different chordings and fills . Johnson uses this technique for " Terraplane Blues " , which shares many common elements with " Cross Road Blues " . 
 The song 's structure differs from a well @-@ defined twelve @-@ bar blues . The verses are not consistent and range from fourteen to fifteen bars in length . Additionally , the harmonic progression is often implied rather than stated ( full IV and V chords are not used ) . Johnson uses a Spanish or open G tuning with the guitar tuned up to the key of B. This facilitates Johnson 's use of a slide , which features as prominently in the song as the vocal . The slide parts function more as a second " answer " vocal than accompaniment , with the tension underscoring the dark turmoil of the lyrics . Charters characterizes the song 's rhythm as ambiguous , imparting both a 44 and 88 feel . Music writer Dave Headlam elaborates on Johnson 's rhythm : 
 Meter itself is a compositional and performance device which comes in and out of focus in <unk> to the fluid <unk> and changing accents in the lower beats . The irregular groupings extend to smaller beat divisions , with an interplay between triplet ' swing ' and duple divisions of the beat ... Johnson 's irregular rhythms and variation in support of the metric beat suggest a more personal , idiosyncratic vision . 
 The two takes of the song are performed at moderate , but somewhat different tempos . Both begin slower and speed up ; the first is about 106 beats per minute ( bpm ) , while the second is about 96 bpm . Johnson prepares to go into the fifth section for the slower second take , but the engineer apparently cut him off because of the time limits of ten @-@ inch 78 rpm records . In addition to the slower tempo , Johnson sings the verses at a lower pitch , although both takes are in the same key . This allows for greater variation and nuance in the vocal . Together with refinements to some guitar parts , the differences serve to help further distinguish the second take from " Terraplane Blues " and give it more of its own character . 
 = = Releases = = 
 ARC and Vocalion Records issued the first take of " Cross Road Blues " in May 1937 on the then standard 78 rpm record . The single , with its flip side " Ramblin ' on My Mind " , sold poorly . The song remained out of print after its initial release until The Complete Recordings box set in 1990 . The second take was released in 1961 , when producer Frank Driggs substituted it for the original on Johnson 's first long @-@ playing record album compilation King of the Delta Blues Singers . This take was also included on the 1990 Complete Recordings ( at 2 : 29 , it is : 10 shorter than the original 2 : 39 single version ) . 
 = = Elmore James versions = = 
 American blues singer and guitarist Elmore James , who popularized Robert Johnson 's " Dust My Broom " , recorded two variations on " Cross Road Blues " . Both titled " Standing at the Crossroads " , they feature James ' trademark " Dust My Broom " amplified slide @-@ guitar figure and a backing ensemble . James ' lyrics focus on the lost @-@ love aspect of the song : 
 James first recorded the song in August 1954 at Modern Records ' new studio in Culver City , California . Maxwell Davis supervised the session and a group of professional studio musicians provided the backup . The song was produced in a newer style that Modern used successfully for B.B. King and James ' slide guitar was placed further back in the mix . Flair Records , another of the Bihari brothers ' Modern labels , released the single , backed with " Sunny Land " . The song became a regional hit , but did not reach the national charts . Labels associated with Modern included " Standing at the Crossroads " on several James compilation albums , such as Blues After Hours ( Crown ) , The Blues in My Heart – The Rhythm in My Soul ( Custom Records ) , and Original Folk Blues ( Kent Records ) . 
 In 1959 , producer Bobby Robinson signed James to his Fury / Fire / Enjoy group of labels . In addition to new material , Robinson had James revisit several of his older songs , including " Standing at the Crossroads " . James re @-@ recorded it at <unk> Studios in New York City in late 1960 or early 1961 during one of his last sessions . Studio musicians again provided the backup and the horn section included baritone saxophone by Paul Williams . Bell Records ' subsidiary labels released the song after James ' death in 1965 – Flashback Records released a single with a reissue of " The Sky Is Crying " and Sphere Sound Records included it on a James compilation album also titled The Sky Is Crying . Both the 1954 and 1960 – 1961 versions appear on numerous later James compilations . 
 Homesick James , who recorded and toured with his cousin Elmore , also recorded a rendition titled " Crossroads " . Homesick derived his guitar style from Elmore , which music critic Bill Dahl describes as " aggressive , sometimes chaotic slide work " . Unlike Elmore , however , he uses most of the lyrics from Johnson 's second take , which had been first issued in 1961 . The July 23 , 1963 , recording session produced Homesick 's only single for Chicago @-@ based USA Records , " Crossroads " backed with " My Baby 's Sweet " . 
 = = Eric Clapton / Cream interpretation = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In early 1966 , while still with John Mayall 's Bluesbreakers , Eric Clapton adapted the song for a recording session with an ad hoc studio group , dubbed Eric Clapton and the Powerhouse . Elektra Records producer Joe Boyd brought together Steve Winwood on vocals , Clapton on guitar , Jack Bruce on bass guitar , Paul Jones on harmonica , Ben Palmer on piano , and Pete York on drums for the project . Boyd recalled that he and Clapton reviewed potential songs ; Clapton wanted to record Albert King 's " <unk> Saw " , but Boyd preferred to adapt an older country blues . Their attention turned to Robert Johnson songs and Boyd proposed " Crossroads " and Clapton chose " Traveling Riverside Blues " . 
 For the recording , Clapton developed an arrangement using lyrics from both songs with an adaption of the guitar line from the latter . Biographer Michael Schumacher describes the Powerhouse 's performance as slower and more blues @-@ based than Cream 's . Winwood sings and Jones plays the riff on harmonica similar to what Clapton later used with Cream ( Jones also provides the instrumental solo ; Clapton plays rhythm guitar throughout the song ) . Elektra released the 2 : 32 recording , titled " Crossroads " , on the compilation album What 's Shakin ' in June 1966 . After the Powerhouse session , Clapton continued playing with Mayall . Author Marc <unk> lists " Crossroads " in a typical set for the Bluesbreakers in the spring of 1966 . 
 = = = Cream version = = = 
 " Crossroads " became a part of Cream 's repertoire when Clapton began performing with Jack Bruce and Ginger Baker in July 1966 . Their version features a prominent guitar riff with hard @-@ driving , upbeat instrumental backing and soloing . Clapton previously recorded " Ramblin ' on My Mind " with Mayall and " From Four Until Late " with Cream using arrangements that followed Johnson 's original songs more closely . However , he envisioned " Crossroads " as a rock song : 
 It became , then , a question of finding something that had a riff , a form that could be interpreted , simply , in a band format . In ' Crossroads ' there was a very definite riff . He [ Johnson ] was playing it full @-@ chorded with the slide as well . I just took it on a single string or two strings and embellished it . Out of all of the songs it was the easiest for me to see as a rock and roll vehicle . 
 Clapton simplifies Johnson 's guitar line and sets it to a straight eighth @-@ note or rock rhythm . He and Bruce on bass continuously emphasize the riff throughout the song to give it a strong and regular metric drive combined with Baker 's drumming . Johnson 's irregular measures are also standardized to typical twelve @-@ bar sections in which the I – IV – V blues progression is clearly stated . Clapton does not adapt Johnson 's slide guitar technique or open tuning ; instead he follows the electric guitar soloing approach of B.B. King and Albert King . However , he employs a Johnson guitar innovation , the duple shuffle pattern or boogie bass line , while singing ( Johnson only used it for two bars in " Cross Road Blues " ) . 
 Clapton also simplifies and <unk> Johnson 's vocal lines . Schumacher calls Clapton 's vocal on " Crossroads " his best and most assured with Cream . In addition to Johnson 's opening and closing lyrics , he twice adds the same section from " Traveling Riverside Blues " : 
 During the instrumental break , Cream takes an improvisational approach characteristic of their later live performances . Bruce 's bass lines blend rhythm and harmony and Baker adds fills and more complex techniques typical of drummers in jazz trios . However , the momentum is never allowed to dissipate and is constantly reinforced . 
 = = = Recording and releases = = = 
 Cream recorded the song on November 28 , 1966 , for broadcast on the BBC Guitar Club radio program . At less than two minutes in length , Clapton only sings the first and last sections , with his guitar solo replacing the middle " Traveling Riverside Blues " verse . It appeared on bootleg albums before finally being released in 2003 on BBC Sessions . On March 10 , 1968 , Cream recorded it again during a concert at the Winterland Ballroom in San Francisco . According to two music writers , the recording was edited from a much longer performance that was typical for the trio – in the notes for Clapton 's Crossroads box set , Anthony DeCurtis credits the trimming to engineer Tom Dowd , while critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine attributes the editing to producer Felix Pappalardi , who " cut together the best bits of a winding improvisation to a tight four minutes " , to allow the song 's drive more <unk> , Clapton biographer Schumacher does not mentioning editing and adds " Given the passion of the solo performances on ' Crossroads , ' it seems almost miraculous that Cream is able to return to the song itself . " " Crossroads " became the opening number on the live half of Cream 's Wheels of Fire double album , released in August 1968 by Polydor Records in the UK and Atco Records in the US . After the group 's breakup , Atco issued the song as a single in January 1969 , which reached number 28 on the US Billboard Hot 100 pop chart and 17 on Cashbox . Both the original album and single credit the songwriter as Robert Johnson or R. Johnson , although Clapton and Cream extensively reworked the song . 
 Cream played " Crossroads " during their final concert at the Royal Albert Hall on November 26 , 1968 . The expanded version of Cream 's Farewell Concert film released in 1977 contains the performance . During their 2005 reunion , Cream revisited the song at the Royal Albert Hall and it is included on the Royal Albert Hall London May 2 @-@ 3 @-@ 5 @-@ 6 , 2005 album and video . After Cream 's breakup in 1968 , Clapton continued to perform " Crossroads " in a variety of settings . Live recordings appear on Live at the Fillmore ( with Derek and the Dominos ) , Crossroads 2 : Live in the Seventies , The Secret Policeman 's Other Ball , and other albums . Clapton has also used the name for the Crossroads Centre , a drug rehabilitation centre he founded , and for the Crossroads Guitar Festivals to benefit the centre . 
 = = Recognition and influence = = 
 In 1986 , Robert Johnson 's " Cross Road Blues " was inducted into the Blues Foundation Hall of Fame . Writing for the foundation , Jim O 'Neal noted that " regardless of mythology and rock ' n ' roll renditions , Johnson 's record was indeed a powerful one , a song that would stand the test of time on its own " . In 1998 , it received a Grammy Hall of Fame Award to acknowledge its quality and place in recording history . In 1995 , the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame listed Cream 's " Crossroads " as one of the " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " . Rolling Stone magazine placed it at number three on its " Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time " . 
 AllMusic 's Richard Gilliam identifies Cream 's " Crossroads " as the first recording to bring Robert Johnson to the attention of popular music audiences and allow reissues of his original recordings to sell over a million copies . By combining elements of hard rock and blues , he adds it inspired " a new generation of blues @-@ influenced artists " . Rock musicians have recorded numerous renditions based on Cream 's arrangement . 
 = History of Ipswich Town F.C. = 
 Ipswich Town F.C. is an English association football club based in Ipswich , Suffolk and formed in 1878 . The side played amateur football until 1936 when the club turned professional and was elected into the Southern League . Ipswich Town were elected into Division Three of the Football League in place of Gillingham F.C. on 30 May 1938 . 
 The club experienced league success during the early 1960s , winning the Football League Championship in 1961 – 62 , one season after winning promotion from the Second Division . A decade later , under the guidance of Bobby Robson , the club achieved success both in the FA Cup and in European competition , winning the UEFA Cup in 1981 . 
 Ipswich Town have made a contribution to the history of the England national football team ; both Robson and Sir Alf Ramsey moved on from Ipswich to manage England , presiding over the nation 's best results in the World Cup : fourth place in 1990 and world champions in 1966 . 
 = = Foundation to professionalism : 1878 – 1936 = = 
 The club was founded on 16 October 1878 as an amateur side known as Ipswich A.F.C. , under the presidency of local MP Thomas Cobbold who had played football at Charterhouse School . George S Sherrington & J M Franks were elected joint Captains . Ipswich A.F.C. ' s first match was a 6 – 1 home victory over Stoke Wanderers at the Broom Hill ground on 2 November 1878 . This was followed by a 2 – 0 victory over Harwich in the club 's first away match . Losing only one game in 17 in its second season , the club was able to build enough interest to enrol players for a second team . Ipswich recorded their biggest ever victory during the 1880 – 81 season , a 15 – 0 defeat of East Stamford with one player , John Knights , registering a treble hat @-@ trick ; both achievements remain club records . The team moved to Portman Road , the current ground , in 1884 , and would share , until 1936 , the facilities with the East Suffolk Cricket Club who had played there since 1855 . The Cobbold family involvement continued when , in 1885 , Nathanael <unk> Cobbold was elected as a vice @-@ president of the club . Following his sudden death the following year , the position was then held by his nephew John Dupuis Cobbold . 
 The club won their first trophy in the 1886 – 87 season , triumphing 2 – 1 against a team representing Ipswich School in the final of the Suffolk Challenge Cup . In 1888 the club merged with Ipswich Rugby Club to form Ipswich Town F.C. In 1890 , the club entered the qualifying rounds of the FA Cup for the first time and was knocked out in the final qualifying round by the 93rd Highlanders . The club experienced scant success in the Cup during the 1890s but won a number of local cup competitions , including the Suffolk Senior Cup and the Ipswich Charity Cup . Having received invitations to join from both the Southern League and the Norfolk and Suffolk League , Ipswich joined the latter in the 1899 – 1900 season , finishing fourth in their first league season . 
 In 1907 , Ipswich became founder members of the Southern Amateur League . The club narrowly avoided relegation in many of the following seasons , and suffered a club record 15 – 1 defeat at the hands of the Corinthians at Portman Road on New Year 's Day , 1910 . The outbreak of the First World War and the commandeering of Portman Road by the Army curtailed the 1914 – 15 season and organised football did not return until the 1920 – 21 season . Just one year later , Ipswich Town became champions of the Southern Amateur League , clinching the title on the last day of the season . The club won the league a further three times , in 1929 – 30 , 1932 – 33 and 1933 – 34 , before becoming founder members of the Eastern Counties Football League at the end of the 1934 – 35 season . 
 = = Early Football League : 1936 – 1955 = = 
 In 1936 , local businessman Leonard P. Thompson threatened to lead a breakaway from the amateur club to create an entirely separate professional club , Ipswich United . John Murray Cobbold , the club President , called together rival factions for a meeting at the Town Hall on 1 May 1936 , at which it was agreed that Ipswich Town should turn professional . The club was unanimously elected to the Southern League for the 1936 – 37 season and former Irish international footballer Mick O 'Brien was appointed as the club 's first professional manager . 
 The club 's first professional game at Portman Road resulted in a 4 – 1 win against Tunbridge Wells Rangers and the club went on to win the Southern League in their debut season . O 'Brien left after just one season following the death of his wife . Ipswich Town were <unk> until 10 November 1936 when the club appointed Scott Duncan , who had left recently relegated Manchester United . He led Ipswich to third place in the 1937 – 38 season . 
 Ipswich Town F.C. were elected to The Football League on 30 May 1938 by a margin of just two votes , at the expense of Gillingham F.C. , initially playing in Division Three ( South ) . The club 's last competitive match before the league was suspended due to the Second World War was a 1 – 1 draw with local rivals , Norwich City . Both John Murray Cobbold and director Robert Nevill Cobbold were killed during the war , the position of director being filled by John Cavendish Cobbold in 1948 . Despite the interruption due to the war , Duncan managed the club for over 500 games between 1937 and 1955 . Following three successive top @-@ eight finishes , the 1949 – 50 season ended with Ipswich in 17th position in Division Three ( South ) , the club 's lowest ever league finish . 
 During the early 1950s striker Tom <unk> finished as club top @-@ scorer for four seasons in a row , and became the first professional Ipswich player to score four times in a game . During this period , Ipswich won the title and promotion to the Second Division in the 1953 – 54 season , during which eight consecutive wins were recorded . The club was relegated back to Division Three ( South ) the following year at the end of a poor season , the highlight of which was progress to the fifth round of the FA Cup , a run ended by First Division Preston North End . Duncan resigned but stayed on at the club in a secretarial role for a further three years . His replacement was a managerial novice , former England international and double Championship winner at Tottenham Hotspur , Alf Ramsey . 
 = = Ramsey and champions of England : 1955 – 69 = = 
 Alf Ramsey 's appointment led Billy Wright to comment , " In appointing Alf to become their manager Ipswich Town paid a tremendous tribute to intelligent football – and footballers who think ! " In Ramsey 's first season at the club , Ipswich scored 106 goals in 46 games and finished third in Division Three ( South ) . The following season , 1956 – 57 , the club won the Division Three ( South ) title for the second time and saw the emergence of local striker Ted Phillips who scored 46 times during the season ; this remains the highest number of goals scored by an Ipswich player in a season . During the same season , Ipswich played under floodlights for the first time , at Coventry City in September 1956 . At the end of that season that John Cavendish Cobbold was appointed as the club 's Chairman . Three seasons of mid @-@ table finishes followed as Ipswich established themselves in Division Two , along with moderate success in the FA Cup , most notably reaching the fifth round in the 1958 – 59 season . 
 Ipswich had their most successful season to that point in 1960 – 61 , winning the Second Division and promotion to the top level of English football , ahead of Sheffield United and Liverpool . In the top flight , Ipswich became champions of the Football League at the first attempt in 1961 – 62 , with Ray Crawford joint English and European top scorer with Derek Kevan of West Bromwich Albion . Matt Busby described the title @-@ winners as " ... one of the First Division 's most attractive sides ... " . As English league champions , Ipswich qualified for European football for the first time . They met Maltese side Floriana in the European Cup , defeating them 14 – 1 on aggregate in the first round before losing to AC Milan in the second round ; it would be another 11 years before the club would qualify for Europe again . Ramsey quit the club in April 1963 to take charge of the England national football team , and Ipswich finished only four places above relegation in the 1962 – 63 season . To commemorate Ramsey 's success at the club , a statue of him was unveiled outside Portman Road in 2000 by Ray Crawford . 
 Ramsey was replaced by Jackie Milburn , under whose leadership fortunes on the pitch declined . Two years after winning the league title , Ipswich dropped into the Second Division in 1963 – 64 , conceding 121 league goals in 42 games , still the highest number of goals conceded by Ipswich in a season . Patrick Mark Cobbold , John 's brother , joined the board of directors in 1964 and their mother , Lady Blanche Cobbold , became honorary president of the club . Milburn quit after just one full season and was replaced by Bill McGarry early in the 1964 – 65 season . The club remained in the Second Division for four years until McGarry guided Ipswich to promotion in the 1967 – 68 season , winning the division by a single point ahead of Queens Park Rangers . McGarry left to manage Wolves and was replaced by Bobby Robson in January 1969 . 
 = = Robson and Europe : 1969 – 82 = = 
 Bobby Robson 's appointment followed a chance encounter with Ipswich director Murray Sangster while scouting at Portman Road for Chelsea manager Dave Sexton . Robson had some experience of management from his time at Fulham , although he had been sacked after failing to avoid relegation from Division Two . Robson 's sides finished 18th and 19th in his first two seasons at Ipswich , but he kept the team in the top division , before finding greater success . Robson led the club to fourth place in the First Division and success in the Texaco Cup , beating local rivals Norwich City 4 – 2 , in the 1972 – 73 season . 
 The fourth @-@ place finish meant Ipswich qualified for the 1973 – 74 UEFA Cup . In the first round , they were drawn against six @-@ time European champions Real Madrid . Following a 1 – 0 victory at Portman Road , Ipswich needed to defend their slim lead . Ipswich captain Mick Mills was reported in the Spanish press suggesting that " El Real no es invincible " ( " Real are not invincible " ) and a 0 – 0 draw at the Bernabéu secured Ipswich 's shock passage into the second round . The club fell at the quarter final stage but fourth place in the league enabled Ipswich to return to the tournament in the following season . 
 In the 1974 – 75 season , Ipswich finished third in the First Division and were losing semi @-@ finalists in the FA Cup . Suffering from cancer and becoming less able to carry out his duties as Chairman , John Cobbold swapped roles with director Patrick Cobbold in 1976 . In the 1975 – 76 and 1976 – 77 seasons Ipswich finished in the top six of the league and in 1977 , they signed Paul Mariner from Plymouth for a club record £ 220 @,@ 000 . Mariner 's efforts ( including seven goals in the tournament ) helped the club to the second major honour in its history ; Roger Osborne scored the winning goal in a 1 – 0 victory over Arsenal in the FA Cup Final at Wembley Stadium . The club 's league fortunes dipped dramatically during the season finishing 18th , just three points above the relegation places , but the Cup success secured qualification for the following season 's European Cup Winners ' Cup . Over the next two seasons Robson brought Dutchmen Arnold Mühren and Frans Thijssen to the club while the team achieved two further top six finishes in the First Division . However , it was the 1980 – 81 season which , in Robson 's words , " ... helped put Ipswich on the map ... " . 
 The club finished second in the league once more and were losing semi @-@ finalists in the FA Cup , but the real success of the season was victory in the UEFA Cup . Beating Michel Platini 's AS Saint @-@ Étienne 4 – 1 at the Stade Geoffroy @-@ Guichard in the quarter @-@ finals and a 2 – 0 aggregate victory over 1 . FC <unk> in the semi @-@ final led Ipswich to the club 's first European final , played over two legs against AZ 67 Alkmaar . A 3 – 0 victory at Portman Road was followed by a 4 – 2 defeat at the Olympic Stadium in Amsterdam , resulting in a 5 – 4 aggregate victory over the Dutch side . 
 Ipswich therefore began the 1981 – 82 UEFA Cup campaign as holders , but lost in the first round to Scottish opponents Aberdeen . Domestically , the club had continued success , finishing second in the First Division yet again , this time four points behind Liverpool . 
 Robson 's achievements with Ipswich earned him an offer from the Football Association to become the England national coach ; he declined an offer of a ten @-@ year contract extension from Ipswich director Patrick Cobbold . On 7 July 1982 , two days after England were knocked out of the 1982 World Cup , Bobby Robson left Ipswich to succeed Ron Greenwood as coach of England . During his 13 @-@ year tenure at Ipswich , Robson brought in only 14 players from other clubs , relying instead on players developed through the club 's youth programmes . In 2002 , in recognition of Robson 's achievements with the club , a life @-@ size statue of him was unveiled opposite the Cobbold Stand at Portman Road . On 7 July 2006 , Robson was named as honorary president of Ipswich Town Football Club , the first since Lady Blanche Cobbold who had died in 1987 . 
 = = After Robson : 1982 – 1995 = = 
 Bobby Robson was replaced at Ipswich by his chief coach , Bobby Ferguson . Ferguson made the transition from coach to manager in July 1982 , but some success in the various cup competitions was offset by an end to the high league positions the club had enjoyed under Robson . In the three seasons from 1982 – 83 to 1984 – 85 , Ipswich reached the FA Cup quarter @-@ final and League Cup semi @-@ final in 1985 , but declined in the league , finishing 9th , 12th and 17th . In the following season , the team 's league form was even poorer , resulting in a 20th @-@ place finish and relegation to the Second Division . Ipswich finished fifth in the Second Division in the 1986 – 87 season to qualify for the play @-@ offs , but Ferguson resigned after losing to 2 – 1 on aggregate to Charlton Athletic . 
 From 1987 to 1990 , Ipswich Town were managed by John Duncan , but achieved only mid @-@ table finishes each season with the club gaining a reputation as a " competent Second Division side " . Duncan was sacked in June 1990 and was replaced by John Lyall , whose 14 @-@ year reign as West Ham United manager had ended the previous summer . During that time the Hammers had won the FA Cup twice and finished third in the league . Lyall guided Ipswich to a mid @-@ table finish in the 1990 – 91 season but a considerable improvement the following season led to winning the Second Division championship . The team was promoted to join the inaugural season of the FA Premier League . 
 After a good start to the season , Ipswich were in fourth place in the league in January 1993 , but a dip in form during the final weeks of the season saw the club finish 16th . The next season was almost a mirror of the previous ; Ipswich again made a good start , followed by a late slump in results . The club only avoided relegation when Sheffield United suffered a last @-@ gasp 3 – 2 defeat at Chelsea on the final day of the season . Lyall was sacked as Ipswich manager in December 1994 with the club at the bottom of the Premiership . His successor George Burley was unable to turn things around and Ipswich suffered a " humiliating " 9 – 0 defeat at Manchester United in early March , the biggest margin in a Premiership match . Relegation was confirmed soon afterwards and Ipswich ended the season having conceded 93 goals in 42 league games . Patrick Cobbold had left his role as club Chairman in 1991 , handing his position to John Kerr . His brother had died in 1983 and Patrick died suddenly in 1994 , but the Cobbold connection continued when Patrick and John 's nephew Major Philip William Hope @-@ Cobbold joined the board in 1995 . 
 = = Europe and administration : 1995 – present = = 
 Having served on the board of directors since 1986 , David <unk> was appointed as club Chairman in 1995 . The next four seasons brought near @-@ misses as the club flirted with promotion ; in 1995 – 96 , Ipswich fell one place short of the First Division play @-@ off zone , and the ensuing three seasons brought successive semi @-@ final play @-@ off defeats . In 2000 , Ipswich qualified for the Division One play @-@ off final , the last such match at Wembley Stadium before the stadium was to be redeveloped . They beat Barnsley 4 – 2 securing their return to the Premiership after an absence of five years . 
 Ipswich made only one major signing during the off @-@ season , buying Hermann <unk> from Wimbledon F.C. for a club record £ 4m two days before the season commenced . Television pundits Rodney Marsh and Mark Lawrenson both agreed relegation would be the obvious outcome . Ipswich surprised the doubters ; they sustained a high league position and narrowly missed out on qualification for the UEFA Champions League , when the team failed to win on the last day of the season against Derby County . The fifth @-@ place finish gained the club a UEFA Cup place and earned George Burley the title of FA Premier League Manager of the Year , an award that until 2010 had , in every other season , been given to the manager of the Premier League champions . 
 Matteo Sereni and Finidi George arrived before the 2001 – 02 season to boost the squad for its foray into Europe . The club 's league form was poor , and 18 games into the campaign , Ipswich were bottom of the table with just one league victory . However , there was some relief in the UEFA Cup with a victory over Inter Milan 1 – 0 at home in the third round , despite which the tie was lost over two legs after a 4 – 1 defeat at the San Siro . From bottom of the table at Christmas , a run of seven wins from eight fixtures appeared to have secured the team 's league status , but another decline set in and relegation was confirmed on the final day of the season with a 5 – 0 defeat by Liverpool at Anfield . The loss of income due to relegation to the Championship contributed to the club going into financial administration , resulting in the sale of a number of players including Jamie Clapham , Darren Ambrose , and club captain Matt Holland . Ipswich had the consolation of again qualifying for the UEFA Cup , through UEFA 's Fair Play system , losing in the second round to Czech side Slovan Liberec . A poor start to the domestic season , leaving the club 19th in the table by mid @-@ October , resulted in George Burley being sacked after nearly eight years as manager . 
 First team coach Tony Mowbray was in charge for four games as caretaker manager , winning once , but he was replaced as manager by the permanent appointment of former Oldham Athletic , Everton and Manchester City manager Joe Royle , whose managerial career had previously yielded four promotions and one FA Cup victory ; as a player , he had been named player of the year in his only full season at Ipswich 's local rivals Norwich City . 
 When Royle became Ipswich manager , the club was struggling near the Division One relegation zone , but the change in management sparked a revival and Ipswich narrowly failed to reach the 2002 – 03 play @-@ offs . The club came out of administration during the 2003 – 04 season , and continued to challenge for promotion back to the Premier League . Ipswich finished that season in fifth place , but were beaten in the play @-@ off semi finals by West Ham United 2 – 1 on aggregate . Ipswich missed automatic promotion in the 2004 – 05 season , finishing third , only two points behind second @-@ placed Wigan Athletic . Again , they lost to West Ham United in the play off semi @-@ finals , this time by a 4 – 2 aggregate score . Although they had been pre @-@ season promotion favourites for the 2005 – 06 season , Ipswich finished 15th , the club 's lowest finish since 1966 , and Joe Royle resigned on 11 May 2006 . 
 At a press conference held on 5 June 2006 , Jim Magilton was officially named as the new manager and former academy director Bryan <unk> was appointed as first team coach . In Magilton 's first season , the club reached a final placing of 14th place in the table . That year , Ipswich became the first carbon neutral football club in England following a collaboration between the fans and the club 's main sponsor <unk> In October 2007 , Ipswich agreed to sell a £ <unk> stake in the club to British businessman Marcus Evans who became the majority owner and shareholder . 2007 – 08 brought further progress for Magilton and his side , who finished eighth in the final table . Magilton 's team failed to gain promotion or reach the play @-@ offs in the 2008 – 09 season , and on 22 April 2009 Magilton was sacked . His successor , Roy Keane , was appointed as manager the following day . <unk> stood down as chairman after 14 years on 20 May 2009 . Ipswich started the 2009 – 10 season winless in the league after 14 games and bottom of the Championship , their worst ever start to a league season . Limited success throughout the year saw the club finish 15th in Keane 's first full season at the club . Keane 's second season at the club started well but by the start of 2011 , the club were 19th in the Championship , and he left the club on 7 January 2011 . First team coach Ian McParland stood in as caretaker manager for two matches , including a semi @-@ final first leg win in the League Cup against Arsenal , before Paul Jewell took the role on permanently in mid @-@ January 2011 . Ipswich finished 13th that season , and 15th the following , Jewell 's first full season at the club . The longest @-@ serving members of the Championship , Ipswich were bottom of the league by late October , and Jewell left the club by " mutual consent " , leaving Chris Hutchings in a caretaker role . After a single match , Hutchings was replaced by Mick McCarthy on a full @-@ time basis . McCarthy led Ipswich to finish in 14th position that season , and 9th in the following season . Despite losing their final match of the 2014 – 15 season , Ipswich finished in sixth place and secured a play @-@ off place where they played their local rivals Norwich City , losing 4 – 1 on aggregate . The following season Ipswich finished just outside the playoff places , in seventh place . 
 = Norepinephrine = 
 Norepinephrine ( NE ) , also called noradrenaline ( NA ) or <unk> , is an organic chemical in the catecholamine family that functions in the human brain and body as a hormone and neurotransmitter . The name " noradrenaline , " derived from Latin roots meaning " at / alongside the kidneys , " is more commonly used in the United Kingdom ; in the United States , " norepinephrine , " derived from Greek roots having that same meaning , is usually preferred . " Norepinephrine " is also the International Nonproprietary Name given to the drug . Regardless of which name is used for the substance itself , parts of the body that produce or are affected by it are referred to as noradrenergic . 
 Norepinephrine is synthesized and released by the central nervous system , and also by a division of the autonomic nervous system called the sympathetic nervous system . In the brain , norepinephrine is produced in closely packed brain cell neurons or nuclei that are small yet exert powerful effects on other brain areas . The most important of these nuclei is the locus coeruleus , located in the pons . In the sympathetic nervous system , norepinephrine is used as a neurotransmitter by sympathetic ganglia located near the spinal cord or in the abdomen , and it is also released directly into the bloodstream by the adrenal glands as sympathetic effector organs . Regardless of how and where it is released , norepinephrine acts on target cells by binding to and activating noradrenergic receptors located on the cell surface . 
 The general function of norepinephrine is to mobilize the brain and body for action . Norepinephrine release is lowest during sleep , rises during wakefulness , and reaches much higher levels during situations of stress or danger , in the so @-@ called fight @-@ or @-@ flight response . In the brain , norepinephrine increases arousal and alertness , promotes vigilance , enhances formation and retrieval of memory , and focuses attention ; it also increases restlessness and anxiety . In the rest of the body , norepinephrine increases heart rate and blood pressure , triggers the release of glucose from energy stores , increases blood flow to skeletal muscle , reduces blood flow to the gastrointestinal system , and inhibits voiding of the bladder and gastrointestinal motility . 
 A variety of medically important drugs work by altering the actions of norepinephrine systems . Norepinephrine itself is widely used as an injectable drug for the treatment of critically low blood pressure . Beta blockers , which counter some of the effects of norepinephrine , are frequently used to treat glaucoma , migraine , and a range of cardiovascular problems . Alpha blockers , which counter a different set of norepinephrine effects , are used to treat several cardiovascular and psychiatric conditions . Alpha @-@ 2 agonists often have a sedating effect , and are commonly used as anesthesia @-@ enhancers in surgery , as well as in treatment of drug or alcohol dependence . Many important psychiatric drugs exert strong effects on norepinephrine systems in the brain , resulting in side @-@ effects that may be helpful or harmful . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine . Its structure differs from that of epinephrine only in that epinephrine has a methyl group attached to its nitrogen , whereas the methyl group is replaced by a hydrogen atom in norepinephrine . The prefix <unk> is derived as an abbreviation of the word " normal " , used to indicate a <unk> compound . 
 = = Biochemical mechanisms = = 
 = = = Synthesis = = = 
 Norepinephrine is synthesized from the amino acid tyrosine by a series of enzymatic steps in the adrenal medulla and <unk> neurons of the sympathetic nervous system . While the conversion of tyrosine to dopamine occurs predominantly in the cytoplasm , the conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine by dopamine β @-@ monooxygenase occurs predominantly inside neurotransmitter vesicles . The metabolic pathway is : 
 Phenylalanine → Tyrosine → L @-@ DOPA → Dopamine → Norepinephrine 
 Thus the direct precursor of norepinephrine is dopamine , which is synthesized indirectly from the essential amino acid phenylalanine or the non @-@ essential amino acid tyrosine . These amino acids are found in nearly every protein and , as such , are provided by ingestion of protein @-@ containing food , with tyrosine being the most common . 
 Phenylalanine is converted into tyrosine by the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase , with molecular oxygen ( O2 ) and tetrahydrobiopterin as cofactors . Tyrosine is converted into L @-@ DOPA by the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase , with tetrahydrobiopterin , O2 , and probably ferrous iron ( Fe2 + ) as cofactors . L @-@ DOPA is converted into dopamine by the enzyme aromatic L @-@ amino acid decarboxylase ( also known as DOPA decarboxylase ) , with pyridoxal phosphate as cofactor . Dopamine is then converted into norepinephrine by the enzyme dopamine β @-@ monooxygenase ( formerly known as dopamine β @-@ hydroxylase ) , with O2 and ascorbic acid as cofactors . 
 Norepinephrine itself can further be converted into epinephrine by the enzyme phenylethanolamine N @-@ methyltransferase with S @-@ adenosyl @-@ L @-@ methionine as cofactor . 
 = = = Degradation = = = 
 In mammals , norepinephrine is rapidly degraded to various metabolites . The initial step in the breakdown can be catalyzed by either of the enzymes monoamine oxidase ( mainly monoamine oxidase A ) or COMT . From there the breakdown can proceed by a variety of pathways . The principal end products are either <unk> acid or a conjugated form of <unk> , both of which are thought to be biologically inactive and are excreted in the urine . 
 = = Functions = = 
 = = = Cellular effects = = = 
 Like many other biologically active substances , norepinephrine exerts its effects by binding to and activating receptors located on the surface of cells . Two broad families of norepinephrine receptors have been identified , known as alpha and beta adrenergic receptors . Alpha receptors are divided into subtypes α1 and α2 ; beta receptors into subtypes β1 , β2 , and <unk> . All of these function as G protein @-@ coupled receptors , meaning that they exert their effects via a complex second messenger system . Alpha @-@ 2 receptors usually have inhibitory effects , but many are located pre @-@ <unk> ( i.e. , on the surface of the cells that release norepinephrine ) , so the net effect of alpha @-@ 2 activation is often a decrease in the amount of norepinephrine released . Alpha @-@ 1 receptors and all three types of beta receptors usually have excitatory effects . 
 = = = = Storage , release , and reuptake = = = = 
 Inside the brain norepinephrine functions as a neurotransmitter , and is controlled by a set of mechanisms common to all monoamine neurotransmitters . After synthesis , norepinephrine is transported from the cytosol into synaptic vesicles by the vesicular monoamine transporter ( VMAT ) . Norepinephrine is stored in these vesicles until it is ejected into the synaptic cleft , typically after an action potential causes the vesicles to release their contents directly into the synaptic cleft through a process called exocytosis . 
 Once in the synapse , norepinephrine binds to and activates receptors . After an action potential , the norepinephrine molecules quickly become unbound from their receptors . They are then absorbed back into the presynaptic cell , via reuptake mediated primarily by the norepinephrine transporter ( NET ) . Once back in the cytosol , norepinephrine can either be broken down by monoamine oxidase or repackaged into vesicles by VMAT , making it available for future release . 
 = = = Sympathetic nervous system = = = 
 Norepinephrine is the main neurotransmitter used by the sympathetic nervous system , which consists of about two dozen sympathetic chain ganglia located next to the spinal cord , plus a set of <unk> ganglia located in the chest and abdomen . These sympathetic ganglia are connected to numerous organs , including the eyes , salivary glands , heart , lungs , liver , gallbladder , stomach , intestines , kidneys , urinary bladder , reproductive organs , muscles , skin , and adrenal glands . Sympathetic activation of the adrenal glands causes the part called the adrenal medulla to release norepinephrine into the bloodstream , from which , functioning as a hormone , it gains further access to a wide variety of tissues . 
 Broadly speaking , the effect of norepinephrine on each target organ is to modify its state in a way that makes it more conducive to active body movement , often at a cost of increased energy use and increased wear and tear . This can be contrasted with the acetylcholine @-@ mediated effects of the parasympathetic nervous system , which modifies most of the same organs into a state more conducive to rest , recovery , and digestion of food , and usually less costly in terms of energy expenditure . 
 The sympathetic effects of norepinephrine include : 
 In the eyes , an increase in production of tears , making the eyes more moist . , and pupil dilation through contraction of the iris dilator . 
 In the heart , an increase in the amount of blood pumped . 
 In brown adipose tissue , an increase in calories burned to generate body heat . 
 Multiple effects on the immune system . The sympathetic nervous system is the primary path of interaction between the immune system and the brain , and several components receive sympathetic inputs , including the thymus , spleen , and lymph nodes . However the effects are complex , with some immune processes activated while others are inhibited . 
 In the arteries , constriction of blood vessels , causing an increase in blood pressure . 
 In the kidneys , release of renin and retention of sodium in the bloodstream . 
 In the liver , an increase in production of glucose , either by glycogenolysis after a meal or by gluconeogenesis when food has not recently been consumed . Glucose is the body 's main energy source in most conditions . 
 In the pancreas , increased release of glucagon , a hormone whose main effect is to increase the production of glucose by the liver . 
 In skeletal muscles , an increase in glucose uptake . 
 In adipose tissue ( i. e . , fat cells ) , an increase in <unk> , that is , conversion of fat to substances that can be used directly as energy sources by muscles and other tissues . 
 In the stomach and intestines , a reduction in digestive activity . This results from a generally inhibitory effect of norepinephrine on the enteric nervous system , causing decreases in gastrointestinal mobility , blood flow , and secretion of digestive substances . 
 = = = Central nervous system = = = 
 The noradrenergic neurons in the brain form a neurotransmitter system , that , when activated , exerts effects on large areas of the brain . The effects are manifested in alertness , arousal , and readiness for action . 
 Noradrenergic neurons ( i.e. , neurons whose primary neurotransmitter is norepinephrine ) are comparatively few in number , and their cell bodies are confined to a few relatively small brain areas , but they send projections to many other brain areas and exert powerful effects on their targets . These noradrenergic cell groups were first mapped in 1964 by <unk> Dahlström and Kjell <unk> , who assigned them labels starting with the letter " A " ( for " aminergic " ) . In their scheme , areas A1 through A7 contain the neurotransmitter norepinephrine ( A8 through A14 contain dopamine ) . Noradrenergic cell group A1 is located in the caudal <unk> part of the medulla , and plays a role in the control of body fluid metabolism . Noradrenergic cell group A2 is located in a brainstem area called the solitary nucleus ; these cells have been implicated in a variety of responses , including control of food intake and responses to stress . Cell groups A5 and A7 project mainly to the spinal cord . 
 The most important source of norepinephrine in the brain is the locus coeruleus , which contains noradrenergic cell group A6 and adjoins cell group A4 . The locus coeruleus is quite small in absolute terms — in primates it is estimated to contain around 15 @,@ 000 neurons , less than one millionth of the neurons in the brain — but it sends projections to every major part of the brain and also to the spinal cord . 
 The level of activity in the locus coeruleus correlates broadly with vigilance and speed of reaction . LC activity is low during sleep and drops to virtually nothing during the REM ( dreaming ) state . It runs at a baseline level during wakefulness , but increases temporarily when a person is presented with any sort of stimulus that draws attention . Unpleasant stimuli such as pain , difficulty breathing , bladder distension , heat or cold generate larger increases . Extremely unpleasant states such as intense fear or intense pain are associated with very high levels of LC activity . 
 Norepinephrine released by the locus coeruleus affects brain function in a number of ways . It enhances processing of sensory inputs , enhances attention , enhances formation and retrieval of both long term and working memory , and enhances the ability of the brain to respond to inputs by changing the activity pattern in the prefrontal cortex and other areas . The control of arousal level is strong enough that drug @-@ induced suppression of the LC has a powerful sedating effect . 
 There is great similarity between situations that activate the locus coeruleus in the brain and situations that activate the sympathetic nervous system in the periphery : the LC essentially mobilizes the brain for action while the sympathetic system mobilizes the body . It has been argued that this similarity arises because both are to a large degree controlled by the same brain structures , particularly a part of the brainstem called the nucleus <unk> . 
 = = Pharmacology = = 
 A large number of important drugs exert their effects by interacting with norepinephrine systems in the brain or body . Their uses include treatment of cardiovascular problems , shock , and a variety of psychiatric conditions . 
 = = = <unk> and <unk> drugs = = = 
 <unk> drugs mimic or enhance at least some of the effects of norepinephrine released by the sympathetic nervous system ; <unk> drugs , in contrast , block at least some of the effects . Both of these are large groups with diverse uses , depending on exactly which effects are enhanced or blocked . Norepinephrine itself is classified as a sympathomimetic drug : its effects when given by intravenous injection of increasing heart rate and force and constricting blood vessels make it very useful for treating medical emergencies that involve critically low blood pressure . 
 = = = Beta blockers = = = 
 These are drugs that block the effects of beta noradrenergic receptors while having little or no effect on alpha receptors . They are sometimes used to treat high blood pressure , atrial fibrillation and congestive heart failure , but recent reviews have concluded that other types of drugs are usually superior for those purposes . Beta blockers may be a viable choice for other cardiovascular conditions , though , including angina and Marfan syndrome . They are also widely used to treat glaucoma , either in pill form or in <unk> . Because of their effects in reducing anxiety symptoms and tremor , they have sometimes been used by entertainers , public speakers and athletes to reduce performance anxiety , although they are not medically approved for that purpose and are banned by the International Olympic Committee . 
 Unfortunately , the usefulness of beta blockers is limited by a range of serious side effects , including slowing of heart rate , a drop in blood pressure , asthma , and reactive hypoglycemia . The negative effects can be particularly severe in people who suffer from diabetes . 
 = = = Alpha blockers = = = 
 These are drugs that block the effects of noradrenergic alpha receptors while having little or no effect on beta receptors . Drugs belonging to this group can have very different effects , however , depending on whether they primarily block alpha @-@ 1 receptors , alpha @-@ 2 receptors , or both . Alpha @-@ 2 receptors , as described elsewhere in this article , are frequently located on norepinephrine @-@ releasing neurons themselves and have inhibitory effects on them ; consequently blockage of alpha @-@ 2 receptors usually results in an increase in norepinephrine release . Alpha @-@ 1 receptors are usually located on target cells and have excitatory effects on them ; consequently blockage of alpha @-@ 1 receptors usually results in blocking some of the effects of norepinephrine . Drugs such as <unk> that act on both types of receptors can produce a complex combination of both effects . In most cases when the term " alpha blocker " is used without qualification , it refers to a selective alpha @-@ 1 antagonist . 
 Selective alpha @-@ 1 blockers have a variety of uses . Because one of their effects is to relax the muscles in the neck of the bladder , they are often used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia , and to help with the expulsion of bladder stones . Their effects on the central nervous system make them useful for treating generalized anxiety disorder , panic disorder , and posttraumatic stress disorder . They may , however , have significant side @-@ effects , including a drop in blood pressure . 
 Some antidepressants function partly as selective alpha @-@ 2 blockers , but the best @-@ known drug in that class is <unk> , which is extracted from the bark of the African <unk> tree . <unk> acts as a male potency enhancer , but its usefulness for that purpose is limited by serious side @-@ effects including anxiety and insomnia . <unk> can cause a dangerous increase in blood pressure . <unk> is banned in many countries , but in the United States , because it is extracted from a plant rather than chemically synthesized , it is sold over the counter as a nutritional supplement . 
 = = = Alpha @-@ 2 agonists = = = 
 These are drugs that activate alpha @-@ 2 receptors or enhance their effects . Because alpha @-@ 2 receptors are inhibitory and many are located presynaptically on norepinephrine @-@ releasing cells , the net effect of these drugs is usually to reduce the amount of norepinephrine released . Drugs in this group that are capable of entering the brain often have strong sedating effects , due to their inhibitory effects on the locus coeruleus . <unk> , for example , is used for the treatment of anxiety disorders and insomnia , and also as a sedative <unk> for patients about to undergo surgery . <unk> , another drug in this group , is also a powerful sedative and is often used in combination with ketamine as a general anaesthetic for veterinary surgery — in the United States it has not been approved for use in humans . 
 = = = Stimulants and antidepressants = = = 
 These are drugs whose primary effects are thought to be mediated by different neurotransmitter systems ( dopamine for stimulants , serotonin for antidepressants ) , but many also increase levels of norepinephrine in the brain . Amphetamine , for example , is a stimulant that increases release of norepinephrine as well as dopamine . Monoamine oxidase inhibitors are antidepressants that inhibit the metabolic degradation of norepinephrine as well as serotonin . In some cases it is difficult to distinguish the norepinephrine @-@ mediated effects from the effects related to other neurotransmitters . 
 = = Diseases and disorders = = 
 A number of important medical problems involve dysfunction of the norepinephrine system in the brain or body . 
 = = = Sympathetic hyperactivation = = = 
 <unk> of the sympathetic nervous system is not a recognized condition in itself , but it is a component of a number of conditions , as well as a possible consequence of taking sympathomimetic drugs . It causes a distinctive set of symptoms including aches and pains , rapid heartbeat , elevated blood pressure , sweating , palpitations , anxiety , headache , paleness , and a drop in blood glucose . If sympathetic activity is elevated for an extended time , it can cause weight loss and other stress @-@ related body changes . 
 The list of conditions that can cause sympathetic hyperactivation includes severe brain injury , spinal cord damage , heart failure , high blood pressure , kidney disease , and various types of stress . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A pheochromocytoma is a rarely occurring tumor of the adrenal medulla , caused either by genetic factors or certain types of cancer . The consequence is a massive increase in the amount of norepinephrine and epinephrine released into the bloodstream . The most obvious symptoms are those of sympathetic hyperactivation , including particularly a rise in blood pressure that can reach fatal levels . The most effective treatment is surgical removal of the tumor . 
 = = = Stress = = = 
 Stress , to a physiologist , means any situation that threatens the continued stability of the body and its functions . Stress affects a wide variety of body systems : the two most consistently activated are the hypothalamic @-@ pituitary @-@ adrenal axis and the norepinephrine system , including both the sympathetic nervous system and the locus coeruleus @-@ centered system in the brain . <unk> of many types evoke increases in noradrenergic activity , which mobilizes the brain and body to meet the threat . Chronic stress , if continued for a long time , can damage many parts of the body . A significant part of the damage is due to the effects of sustained norepinephrine release , because of norepinephrine 's general function of directing resources away from maintenance , regeneration , and reproduction , and toward systems that are required for active movement . The consequences can include slowing of growth ( in children ) , sleeplessness , loss of libido , gastrointestinal problems , impaired disease resistance , slower rates of injury healing , depression , and increased vulnerability to addiction . 
 = = = ADHD = = = 
 Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder is a psychiatric condition involving problems with attention , hyperactivity , and impulsiveness . It is most commonly treated using stimulant drugs such as methylphenidate ( Ritalin ) , whose primary effect is to increase dopamine levels in the brain , but drugs in this group also generally increase brain levels of norepinephrine , and it has been difficult to determine whether these actions are involved in their clinical value . Also there is substantial evidence that many people with ADHD show " biomarkers " involving altered norepinephrine processing . Several drugs whose primary effects are on norepinephrine , including guanfacine , clonidine , and atomoxetine , have been tried as treatments for ADHD , and found to have effects comparable to those of stimulants . 
 = = = Autonomic failure = = = 
 Several conditions , including Parkinson 's disease , diabetes and so @-@ called pure autonomic failure , can cause a loss of norepinephrine @-@ secreting neurons in the sympathetic nervous system . The symptoms are widespread , the most serious being a reduction in heart rate and an extreme drop in resting blood pressure , making it impossible for severely affected people to stand for more than a few seconds without fainting . Treatment can involve dietary changes or drugs . 
 = = Comparative biology and evolution = = 
 Norepinephrine has been reported to exist in a wide variety of animal species , including protozoa , <unk> and cnidaria ( jellyfish and related species ) , but not in ctenophores ( comb jellies ) , whose nervous systems differ greatly from those of other animals . It is generally present in deuterostomes ( vertebrates , etc . ) , but in protostomes ( arthropods , molluscs , flatworms , nematodes , annelids , etc . ) it is replaced by octopamine , a closely related chemical with a closely related synthesis pathway . In insects , octopamine has alerting and activating functions that correspond ( at least roughly ) with the functions of norepinephrine in vertebrates . It has been argued that octopamine evolved to replace norepinephrine rather than vice versa ; however , the nervous system of amphioxus ( a primitive chordate ) has been reported to contain octopamine but not norepinephrine , which presents difficulties for that hypothesis . 
 = = History = = 
 Early in the twentieth century Walter Cannon , who had popularized the idea of a <unk> @-@ adrenal system preparing the body for fight and flight , and his colleague Arturo <unk> developed a theory of two <unk> , sympathin E ( excitatory ) and sympathin I ( inhibitory ) , responsible for these actions . The Belgian pharmacologist <unk> <unk> as well as Canadian and US @-@ American pharmacologists between 1934 and 1938 suggested that noradrenaline might be a sympathetic transmitter . In 1939 , Hermann <unk> and Peter Holtz independently identified the biosynthetic mechanism for norepinephrine in the vertebrate body . In 1945 Ulf von Euler published the first of a series of papers that established the role of norepinephrine as a neurotransmitter . He demonstrated the presence of norepinephrine in sympathetically innervated tissues and brain , and adduced evidence that it is the sympathin of Cannon and <unk> . 
 = Pin Malakul = 
 Mom Luang Pin Malakul ( Thai : <unk> ่ <unk> ่ <unk> <unk> , 24 October 1903 – 5 October 1995 ) was a Thai educator and writer . His contributions to education in Thailand include the establishment of various institutions of higher education , the introduction of fixed class schedules , and the implementation of teacher @-@ training programmes . In his career he served as Director @-@ General of the Department of General Education , later becoming Permanent Secretary , and Minister , of Education . He was also a member of the Executive Board of UNESCO . His writings earned him the title of National Artist in 1987 , and the 100th anniversary of his birth was celebrated by the UNESCO in 2003 as recognition of his contribution to the advancement of education in Thailand and Southeast Asia . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Mom Luang Pin Malakul ( hereafter referred to as ML Pin ) was born on 24 October 1903 to Mom <unk> Pia ( MR Pia ) and <unk> Sa @-@ <unk> Malakul . He was the sixth of thirteen children ( although the fourth , and the only son , to survive past birth ) . His father , a nobleman and great @-@ grandson of King Buddha <unk> <unk> , had served as King Vajiravudh 's guardian during the king 's overseas studies and held posts including Ambassador to the United Kingdom . MR Pia 's work was instrumental in the establishment of higher education in Thailand ( then known as Siam ) and he later became the third Minister of Public Instruction under King Vajiravudh . 
 ML Pin recalled in his autobiography that although his mother was a kind and loving figure , his father was rather strict and acted more like a teacher than a father , and that he was often fearful of him . A loyal servant of the crown , MR Pia introduced ML Pin to King Vajiravudh when he was seven years old . Another often @-@ recounted story from his childhood is that of how , before having learned to count , when his mother asked him to gather half a bunch of betel leaves for her , ML Pin set down to picking up one leaf with each hand at a time , separating them equally into two piles . 
 At the age of four , ML Pin began receiving preliminary education from teachers who came to teach at the family home on Damrongrak Road , next to <unk> Palace . He enrolled at <unk> <unk> School ( then known as Wat <unk> School ) shortly before turning seven in 1910 , and after half a year his examination results placed him at <unk> 1 level . In 1914 he was accepted into the Royal Pages School ( now Vajiravudh College ) . Half a year later , King Vajiravudh named him one of eight Royal Page Students ( <unk> ็ <unk> ้ ) in the king 's personal service . Although he did not attend regular classes at the school afterwards , he passed exams at <unk> 5 level ( grade 11 ) at the end of the school year . 
 As a Royal Page Student , ML Pin 's duties included various tasks in the royal household as well as accompanying the king in his various activities . The Royal Page Students were involved in plays and sports games held in court and also in activities of the king 's scouting @-@ related paramilitary movement , the Wild Tiger Corps . ML Pin also became an editor of the Dusit Samit Magazine , part of the king 's Dusit Thani miniature city / micronation project . One memorable task appointed to him by the king was to determine the day of week King <unk> left Ayutthaya for his famous elephant duel , a problem ML Pin was unable to solve at the time , but became the inspiration for his later development of the " Everlasting Calendar " . He lived in the royal court most of the time and received a salary of twenty to thirty baht . 
 = = = Life in Europe = = = 
 In 1922 , when ML Pin was eighteen years old , the Ministry of Public Instruction , in accordance with the king 's wishes , granted him a government scholarship for a tertiary education in ancient Eastern languages in the United Kingdom . He departed abroad the MS ' <unk> ' on 23 January 1922 and arrived in London on 7 March . 
 During his first two years , ML Pin studied Pali and Sanskrit at the University of London School of Oriental and African Studies and lived with Mr and Mrs L J Marshall of 23 Portland Place in Brighton , from whom he also received additional instruction in mathematics , English , and French . Such was his talent in mathematics that Mr Marshall , who was head of Mathematics and Surveying at Brighton Technical College , wrote to the Superintendent of Siamese Government Students recommending that ML Pin major in mathematics instead and saying that his skills would undoubtedly warrant a university scholarship for mathematical studies . This , however , did not suit the requirements of the Ministry of Public Instruction , and so ML Pin did not continue his mathematics education . Nevertheless , his interest in the field did not waver , and he continued to produce works on the subject . Among these are his publication in 1927 in <unk> Sara , the journal of <unk> <unk> ( the Thai Association in the UK ) , of a formula which he called the " Everlasting Calendar " , upon which he later based the development of a set of slide rules which could be used to calculate the day of week for any given date , and his publication of Miscellaneous Problems , a collection of various mathematical problems he had worked on , later in 1960 . 
 In England ML Pin formed close friendships with fellow Thai students Prince <unk> <unk> , <unk> Krairiksh , and Phanom <unk> , the first of which with whom he had been friends since their time as Royal Page Students . He also developed a taste for opera and classical music , on which he recalled spending quite a disproportionate amount of his scholarship 's allowance , eventually building a collection of 317 records . 
 ML Pin was accepted into Brasenose College of the University of Oxford in 1924 , where he studied in the Honour School of Oriental Studies for four years . He graduated with a BA degree on 28 June 1928 . He then enrolled in a one @-@ year course in education also at Oxford , according to the wishes of the Ministry of Public Instruction . He practice @-@ taught at The Latymer School during the school year , but fell ill during the winter and again near the end of the school year late in the spring of 1929 , which adversely affected his studies . He was later awarded the Oxbridge MA degree on 15 October 1931 . 
 After finishing his studies , ML Pin accompanied Princess <unk> <unk> <unk> on a one @-@ month trip in Europe . Upon return to London , he attended the First World Conference on Adult Education on behalf of Siam , but during the same time his health deteriorated further , and he was diagnosed with tuberculosis . Accordingly , his return trip to Siam had to be postponed in order for him to recover in Switzerland . There he spent almost two years in Davos and later <unk> , until September 1931 when he attended the League of Nations annual conference before returning to Siam via a Nippon Yusen ship departing from Naples , Italy . He finally arrived in Siam on 23 October 1931 , after spending over nine years abroad . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 ML Pin married Miss <unk> Krairiksh , daughter of Chao Phraya <unk> and <unk> Klip , on 7 March 1932 . They lived at the Krairiksh family home before building a house on the Damrongrak Road property , and finally settled at Soi <unk> on <unk> Road in 1938 . They had no children . 
 = = Work = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Upon ML Pin 's return from Europe in 1931 , Public Instruction Minister Prince Dhani <unk> appointed him as a government official under Krom <unk> , a department of the ministry . He also served the prince in a somewhat unofficial capacity , assisting the prince 's work and observing the ministry 's various goings @-@ on . Under the prince 's directions , ML Pin became an instructor in mathematics , Thai , and English at Chulalongkorn University , in addition to the various duties he performed for the ministry . In 1934 , he became head of the university 's teacher @-@ preparation programme and headmaster of the <unk> Secondary School of Chulalongkorn University , which served as the country 's first demonstration ( teacher training ) school . He began developing projects for the school , although few of them were realised at the time . One such project was the creation of the country 's first school workshop . 
 In 1938 , <unk> Pibulsonggram , as President of Chulalongkorn University , assigned ML Pin the duty of overseeing the establishment of Chulalongkorn 's University Preparatory School according to the National Education Plan of BE <unk> ( 1936 CE ) . Although given a tight time frame of only three months , the new school was created on the location of <unk> School , and gradually absorbed the older school , the entire staff merging within a few years . ML Pin became the first director of the school , the country 's first coeducational school , now known as <unk> Udom <unk> School . It is widely regarded as one of the best schools in the country . During his term as director , which lasted until 1944 , he developed and implemented a fixed class schedule system , along with a mechanical timetable used to assign teaching periods , which is still in use today . 
 As World War II reached Thailand in December 1941 , Japanese troops raided and occupied the school , forcing teachers and students to evacuate and relocate to temporary locations around Bangkok , and later to various other provinces . At one point , ML Pin disguised himself as a janitor to smuggle important documents and cash out of the school . 
 In 1942 , not long after the invasion , Prime Minister Pibulsonggram assumed the post of education minister himself , and appointed ML Pin as Director @-@ General of the Department of General Education . Although resources were limited due to the war , ML Pin was able to manage the budget and personnel to allow a countrywide 12 baht salary for rural local schoolteachers . During his term , every province was provided with at least one upper @-@ secondary school . He also became involved in frequent school migrations due to both the war and changing policy . 
 One issue with which ML Pin was deeply concerned was that of the country 's teacher @-@ training system , an issue he stressed during an audience with King Ananda <unk> after the war in 1946 , and would later address during his term as Permanent Secretary of Education . 
 = = = As Permanent Secretary of Education = = = 
 ML Pin became Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education in 1946 . In this capacity , he oversaw the founding in 1949 of the Higher Teacher Training School at <unk> , now <unk> University , and the drafting of the first national education plan . 
 Administration @-@ wise , Krom <unk> ( or the Department of Curriculum and Instruction Development ) was re @-@ created in 1952 and the Department of Teacher Education was created in 1954 , along with the expansion of the Higher Teacher Training School to become the College of Education , of which ML Pin served as president until 1956 . He later oversaw the creation of the College 's <unk> Primary Demonstration School . 
 ML Pin also pioneered the field of distance education via the " educational radio " broadcasting station , which was set up at <unk> Maha Mek Technical College in 1954 . Despite obstacles and limited support , the programme proved successful and continually developed , and is now under the authority of the Centre for Educational Technology . 
 As permanent secretary , ML Pin acted as the head delegate for Thailand to the third UNESCO General Conference in Beirut in 1948 , where Thailand was an observer , and represented Thailand as the country filed for membership in 1949 and was accepted as the fifty @-@ fifth member state . He served as director and coordinator for the Seminar on Rural Adult Education in Mysore , India , that year , and regularly represented Thailand in subsequent UNESCO meetings . 
 He was elected to two terms on the UNESCO Executive Board from 1952 to 1956 , during which he supported and helped advance UNESCO 's programmes for promotion of universal compulsory education in Asian countries . His representation also lead to cooperative projects between the UNESCO and Thailand , including the Thailand UNESCO <unk> Teacher Education Project and the Thailand UNESCO Fundamental Education Center at Ubon Ratchathani Province , among others . Even after his term ended as permanent secretary , ML Pin was still involved in UNESCO activities in Thailand . He facilitated the establishment of UNESCO 's regional office in Bangkok , which opened in 1961 , and was among the founders of the Southeast Asian Ministers of Education Organization . 
 = = = As Minister of Education = = = 
 In 1957 Army Commander Sarit <unk> executed a coup and installed Pote Sarasin as prime minister . ML Pin subsequently received " an offer he could not refuse " to join his cabinet as Minister of Education and of Culture . ML Pin was also included in the following cabinets of <unk> <unk> and Sarit himself , with Sarit holding power as Thailand 's strongman leader until his death , after which he was succeeded by <unk> . Sarit pushed for a revival of the monarchy 's importance , which was aided by ML Pin 's royalist ideals , and school textbooks were revised to feature the monarchy prominently . ML Pin served as Minister of Education until 1969 , when general elections were held and the prime minister reshuffled the cabinet , replacing the six most senior members . ( The post of Minister of Culture was terminated in 1958 . ) 
 As Minister of Education , ML Pin established the Regional Education Development Project including higher education , which aimed to study the needs and limitations of education systems in the provinces . Spanning over two years , results of the project included the improvement of cooperation between government officials and Muslim locals in the four southernmost provinces , recognition of the need for children living near the Malay and Cambodian borders to be able to learn the Thai language before starting school , and the experimental development of a curriculum based on learners ' needs and interests at <unk> School . 
 As part of the project , ML Pin made preparations for the founding of Chiang Mai University , planning the campus and beginning construction , but the authority over the project was ultimately transferred to the Office of the Educational Council . He served three terms as President of <unk> University from 1965 to 1971 , during which he founded the university 's Sanam Chandra Palace Campus . There he intended to established a collegiate university system following that used at Oxford , as advised when he was Permanent Secretary of Education by Prime Minister Pibulsonggram , and Thap Kaew College was opened in 1968 . However , the college system turned out to be unsuccessful , lacking support from both the student body and the government , and was dissolved . 
 At Thap Kaew , ML Pin also arranged for the construction of the Sound Library , a remotely accessible on @-@ demand audio collection . King Bhumibol Adulyadej donated recordings of his speeches to the library , and later remote access via radio from Bangkok was developed , but the library was not maintained after ML Pin 's presidency ended and thus fell into disuse . 
 As minister , ML Pin also oversaw the construction of the Bangkok Planetarium , which opened in 1964 , and of the new National Library building at Tha <unk> , and the revival of the King 's Scholarship , among other things . After his ministerial term ended in 1969 , he served two terms as member of the Senate and another as a member of the National Legislation Assembly . 
 = = Later life = = 
 ML Pin spent much of his retirement working on various tributes to King Vajiravudh , who had died while ML Pin was studying in England . In 1970 he began working with a few others with the intent to secure and catalogue the king 's various literary works , some of which by then were at risk of disappearing . He and the group made records of Dusit Thani , obtaining old photographs and other documentation , and organised a " guided tour " of Dusit Thani of old in November that year , which was presented to Princess <unk> , among others . 
 The group 's work continued , and the Fine Arts Department established it into an official committee , with ML Pin as chairman , to make preparations for the 100th anniversary of the king 's birth , which would be recognised by UNESCO . ML Pin lobbied for the construction of <unk> Hall , a museum displaying the king 's works and duties , at the National Library . The hall was opened in 1981 , despite budget problems during construction , which ML Pin had to sell part of the property on Damrongrak Road to help fund . 
 The committee also conducted research on the Wild Tiger Corps , and determined the location in <unk> District , <unk> Province , of Ban Rai , where King Vajiravudh often set up camp with them . ML Pin initiated the construction there of a statue of the king in Wild Tiger Corps uniform , which was unveiled in 1988 , and the surrounding area was developed into Khai Luang Ban Rai scout camp , which also contains a medical station and kindergarten . 
 He was also a member of the Committee for the Renovation of Sanam Chandra Palace , but did not live to see the restoration completed . 
 ML Pin Malakul died on 5 October 1995 , at the age of ninety @-@ one . 
 = = Literary works = = 
 During his years as Royal Page Student , ML Pin closely served King Vajiravudh and became learned in Thai literature . He was a prolific writer and produced a great number of literary works , including 25 compilations of poetic works , 57 works on education , 58 plays , 8 travel writings , and 56 other works . Among these are the following works in English : 
 Writings on education 
 Seminar on Rural Adult Education 
 Education during the Time when H.H. Prince Dhani Was Minister of Public Instruction 
 Plays 
 School in the Village 
 Somsak in Trouble 
 Others 
 Miscellaneous Problems ( 1960 ) 
 Miscellaneous Problems or An Autobiography of a Would @-@ be Mathematician ( 1972 ) 
 The New Republic 
 Dramatic Achievement of King Rama VI 
 King Vajiravudh : Thailand 's Prolific Writer 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 ML Pin was awarded the title of National Artist in Literature by the National Culture Commission in 1987 for his diverse contributions to the domain of Thai literature . He received the ASEAN Award in 1992 " for his outstanding achievements and contributions to literature " . UNESCO celebrated the centenary of his birth in 2003 , recognizing the value and impact of his contributions to the development of education in Thailand and Southeast Asia , and to the literary arts and the safeguarding and conservation of historical monuments and sites . On the occasion , <unk> Building , the headquarters of UNESCO in Bangkok , was rededicated as the Mom Luang Pin Malakul Centenary Building and Room 57 , Building 1 at <unk> Udom <unk> School , ML Pin 's former office , was set up as an archive of his original works . 
 ML Pin received various decorations and medals , including the Orders of Chula Chom <unk> , the White Elephant , the Crown of Thailand and <unk> , and the <unk> Mala , Border Service , Chakrabarti Mala , Royal Cypher , Red Cross Commendation and Red Cross Awards Medals . Foreign decorations he received include the West German Federal Cross of Merit , Belgian Order of Leopold , Japanese Order of the Sacred Treasure , South Korean Order of Diplomatic Service Merit , and Republic of China Order of the Brilliant Star . 
 He received honorary degrees from Chulalongkorn , Indiana , <unk> , <unk> , Chiang Mai and <unk> Universities . He also served as Fellow and Honorary Fellow in Literature of the Royal Institute of Thailand and Honorary Member of the Education Society of Thailand . He was awarded the Elder Teacher 's Pin and named Exceptional Contributor to National Education by the Teacher 's Council of Thailand , and received the Golden Phra Kiao for outstanding contributions to the Thai language from Chulalongkorn University . 
 = Gnome Motion Picture Company = 
 The Gnome Motion Picture Company was a film production company that is credited with three productions between 1910 and 1911 . The purpose of the company to was to produce stories about gnomes . Alice in Funnyland , The Birth of the Gnomes and Alice 's New Year 's Party were all productions that were most likely never released . Announcements in trade publications ceased in January 1911 and the company treasurer , Frederick Kalmbach , was later sued by the City of New York for taxes . Of the three planned productions , two official synopses were released in The Nickelodeon . Despite no evidence of an actual release , the American Film Institute still recognizes all three films as being released in January 1911 . 
 = = History = = 
 According to The Nickelodeon the " Gnome Motion Picture Company was formed to manufacture pictures under the Meredith @-@ Jones camera patents , now owned and controlled , together with several other patents , by the Animated Picture Patents Company . " The company 's incorporation announcement stated it had $ 30 @,@ 000 in capital and its directors were Frederick Kalmbach , James C. Hutchinson and H. Meredith Jones . The studio and offices were located at the southwest corner of Park and Tremont Ave in Bronx , New York City , New York . According to a report , Gnome purchased a <unk> Moving Picture Machine and <unk> 's Standard Automatic Electric <unk> for their productions . 
 The company 's lead actress was Mildred Hutchinson and employed its staff to produce stories about fictional gnomes , specifically for child audiences . Hutchinson was a seasoned child actress at the time of the productions who had credits working with Edison , Vitagraph and <unk> the age of six . Records surrounding the release suggest that Alice in Funnyland , The Birth of the Gnomes and Alice 's New Year 's Party were never released . The venture ultimately failed and the City of New York sued Frederick Kalmbach , the company treasurer , for unpaid taxes on an assessment of $ 3 @,@ 000 . Kalmbach said that the Gnome Motion Picture Company was no longer conducting business when the assessment was made and the case was dismissed by the judge in 1918 . The last record of the Gnome Motion Picture Company in trade publications , in both announcements and advertisements , comes from a January 14 issue of Moving Picture World which announces all three of the films would be delayed for a " few days " . The American Film Institute still identifies all three films as having been released in January 1911 by Gnome . 
 The Moving Picture World 's Thomas Bedding provided the best recognition of the company . Bedding wrote , " The Gnome Company seem to be working on , what to our minds , is the most interesting phase of the Christmas sentiment . They are making fairy pictures for young people . We fully expect to see other makers follow suit , when they realize what the real Christmas sentiment is , namely one of lightness , brightness , <unk> . " Advertisements for the productions show the great desire of the company to produce the three films in the December 1910 season , but interest in the Christmas and New Year 's productions would have waned by mid @-@ January 1911 with the productions still not released . Ultimately , the Gnome Motion Picture Company represents an early attempt to cater film productions to children and during the Christmas season . 
