 = = Films = = 
 = = = The Birth of the Gnomes = = = 
 A published synopsis in The Nickelodeon reads as follows , " An old fairy realizing that her span of life is rapidly drawing to a close , brings to life a new race of people , called the Gnomes , who are governed by a new fairy . When the Gnomes appear , the old fairy informs them that their duties will be to perform acts of kindness to all people of the world . After thus admonishing them , the old fairy disappears , and the Gnomes start upon their career of well doing . Many beautiful acts of kindness are performed in the course of their travels , which is through wonderful scenery and in strange places . In one scene the Gnomes discover an old man bemoaning his fate , and him they magically transform to a youth of great beauty . Many other acts of kindness are performed , all of great interest . Finally , the band of Gnomes discover a balloon , and the fairy queen being helped into the basket by the Gnomes , is last seen flying away watched by her adoring subjects . " The film was billed at being 1000 feet in length and having a set release for December 12 , 1910 . Though an announcement stated that the release would be delayed to " Christmas week " . No release was ever confirmed in any trade publication after it was delayed into January 1911 . 
 = = = Alice in Funnyland = = = 
 A published synopsis in The Nickelodeon reads as follows , " The night before Christmas , Alice , a child of wealth , after going through the usual form of hanging up her stocking , is put to bed by her maid . Alice falls asleep and dreams . Enter Santa Claus and Gnomes who tell Alice to follow her and they will show her part of their Funnyland . Alice follows the little people under the special protection of a policeman two foot high . The little party are seen trotting through beautiful glens and dales until they reach Funnyland . Santa Claus tells her that if she is a good girl all the animals and toys here are hers ; as Alice touches each one they come to life . The teddy bear steps out to dance with Alice . As Alice removes the cover from Doll 's box the doll dances out , a little king gives a magical entertainment , a clown is very active and all the animals and dolls do some interesting act much to the surprise and delight of little Alice . At last , tired out , Alice falls asleep reclining upon the shoulders of Teddy bear . Then we see her again back in her own little bed . It is now Christmas morning . Her maid awakens and dresses her for the great event , takes her to the drawing room where she is welcomed by her parents to find that her dream has come true . " Originally the film was billed as being released for December 19 , 1910 and then it was later claimed to be December 26 , 1910 . This release was attributed in an issue of The Nickelodeon . However , the film was not released on December 19 because an advertisement in Moving Picture World in January 1911 said that the release would be delayed for a " few days " . It is unknown , and unlikely , if the film actually was released because no other publications , ads or materials surrounding the Gnome Motion Picture Company followed . 
 = = = Alice 's New Year 's Party = = = 
 Unlike the first two productions which were the subject of published synopses , Alice 's New Year 's Party was the subject of no detail in trade publications . This production was never given an exact release date , but was later affirmed to be set for a " Christmas week " release . The American Film Institute cites four bibliographic sources ending with an advertisement in Moving Picture World in January 1911 says that the releases would be delayed for a " few days " . The film does not appear to have ever been released . 
 = Peterloo Massacre = 
 The Peterloo Massacre occurred at St Peter 's Field , Manchester , England , on 16 August 1819 , when cavalry charged into a crowd of 60 @,@ 000 – 80 @,@ 000 who had gathered to demand the reform of parliamentary representation . 
 The end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 had resulted in periods of famine and chronic unemployment , exacerbated by the introduction of the first of the Corn Laws . By the beginning of 1819 , the pressure generated by poor economic conditions , coupled with the relative lack of suffrage in Northern England , had enhanced the appeal of political radicalism . In response , the Manchester Patriotic Union , a group agitating for parliamentary reform , organised a demonstration to be addressed by the well @-@ known radical orator Henry Hunt . 
 Shortly after the meeting began local magistrates called on the military authorities to arrest Hunt and several others on the hustings with him , and to disperse the crowd . Cavalry charged into the crowd with sabres drawn , and in the ensuing confusion , 15 people were killed and 400 – 700 were injured . The massacre was given the name Peterloo in an ironic comparison to the Battle of Waterloo , which had taken place four years earlier . 
 Historian Robert Poole has called the Peterloo Massacre one of the defining moments of its age . In its own time , the London and national papers shared the horror felt in the Manchester region , but Peterloo 's immediate effect was to cause the government to crack down on reform , with the passing of what became known as the Six Acts . It also led directly to the foundation of The Manchester Guardian ( now The Guardian ) , but had little other effect on the pace of reform . In a survey conducted by The Guardian in 2006 , Peterloo came second to the Putney Debates as the event from radical British history that most deserved a proper monument or a memorial . Peterloo is commemorated by a plaque close to the site , a replacement for an earlier one that was criticised as being inadequate as it did not reflect the scale of the massacre . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Suffrage = = = 
 In 1819 , Lancashire was represented by two Members of Parliament ( MPs ) . Voting was restricted to the adult male owners of freehold land with an annual rental value of 40 shillings or more – the equivalent of about £ 80 in 2008 – and votes could only be cast at the county town of Lancaster , by a public spoken declaration at the hustings . Constituency boundaries were out of date , and the so @-@ called rotten boroughs had a hugely disproportionate influence on the membership of the Parliament of the United Kingdom compared to the size of their populations : Old Sarum in Wiltshire , with one voter , elected two MPs , as did Dunwich in Suffolk , which by the early 19th century had almost completely disappeared into the sea . The major urban centres of Manchester , Salford , Bolton , Blackburn , Rochdale , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Oldham and Stockport , with a combined population of almost one million , were represented by either the two county MPs for Lancashire , or the two for Cheshire in the case of Stockport . By comparison , more than half of all MPs were returned by a total of just 154 owners of rotten or closed boroughs . In 1816 , Thomas Oldfield 's The Representative History of Great Britain and Ireland ; being a History of the House of Commons , and of the Counties , Cities , and Boroughs of the United Kingdom from the earliest Period claimed that of the 515 MPs for England and Wales 351 were returned by the patronage of 177 individuals and a further 16 by the direct patronage of the government : all 45 Scottish MPs owed their seats to patronage . These inequalities in political representation led to calls for reform . 
 = = = Economic conditions = = = 
 After the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 , a brief boom in textile manufacture was followed by periods of chronic economic depression , particularly among textile weavers and spinners ( the textile trade was concentrated in Lancashire ) . Weavers who could have expected to earn 15 shillings for a six @-@ day week in 1803 , saw their wages cut to 5 shillings or even 4s 6d by 1818 . The industrialists , who were cutting wages without offering relief , blamed market forces generated by the aftershocks of the Napoleonic Wars . Exacerbating matters were the Corn Laws , the first of which was passed in 1815 , imposing a tariff on foreign grain in an effort to protect English grain producers . The cost of food rose as people were forced to buy the more expensive and lower quality British grain , and periods of famine and chronic unemployment ensued , increasing the desire for political reform both in Lancashire and in the country at large . 
 = = = Radical mass meetings in Manchester = = = 
 Economic conditions in 1817 led to a group who became known as Blanketeers to organise a march from Manchester to London so they could petition the Prince Regent for parliamentary reform . A crowd of 25 @,@ 000 including 5 @,@ 000 men who intended to march gathered in St Peter 's Fields . After the magistrates read the Riot Act , the crowd was dispersed by the King 's Dragoon Guards . The ringleaders were arrested and subsequently released when serious charges against them were not forthcoming . In April 1819 three leading Blanketeers were convicted of sedition and conspiracy when witnesses alleged they had advocated the principal towns of the kingdom should elect representatives to a National Convention to demand their rights and if refused enforce them ' sword in hand ' during a meeting in Stockport in September 1818 . 
 By the beginning of 1819 pressure generated by poor economic conditions was at its peak and had enhanced the appeal of political radicalism among the cotton loom weavers of south Lancashire . In January 1819 , a crowd of about 10 @,@ 000 gathered at St Peter 's Fields to hear the radical orator Henry Hunt and called on the Prince Regent to choose ministers who would repeal the Corn Laws . The meeting , conducted in the presence of the cavalry , passed off without incident . 
 In July 1819 , the town 's magistrates wrote to Lord Sidmouth warning they thought a ' general rising ' was imminent , the " deep distress of the manufacturing classes " was being worked on by the " unbounded liberty of the press " and " the harangues of a few desperate demagogues " at weekly meetings . " Possessing no power to prevent the meetings " the magistrates admitted they were at a loss as to how to stem the doctrines being disseminated . 
 = = = August meeting = = = 
 Against this background , a " great assembly " was organised by the Manchester Patriotic Union formed by radicals from the Manchester Observer . The newspaper 's founder Joseph Johnson was the union 's secretary . He wrote to Henry Hunt asking him to chair a meeting in Manchester on 2 August 1819 . Johnson wrote : 
 Nothing but ruin and starvation stare one in the face [ in the streets of Manchester and the surrounding towns ] , the state of this district is truly dreadful , and I believe nothing but the greatest exertions can prevent an insurrection . Oh , that you in London were prepared for it . 
 Unknown to Johnson and Hunt , the letter was intercepted by government spies and copied before being sent to its destination . The contents were interpreted to mean that an insurrection was being planned , and the government responded by ordering the 15th Hussars to Manchester . 
 The mass public meeting planned for 2 August was delayed until 9 August . The Manchester Observer reported it was called " to take into consideration the most speedy and effectual mode of obtaining Radical reform in the Common House of Parliament " and " to consider the propriety of the ' Unrepresented Inhabitants of Manchester ' electing a person to represent them in Parliament " . The magistrates , led by William Hulton , had been advised by the acting Home Secretary , Henry Hobhouse , that " the election of a Member of Parliament without the King 's writ " was a serious misdemeanour , encouraging them to declare the assembly illegal as soon as it was announced on 31 July . The radicals sought a second opinion on the meeting 's legality which was that " The intention of choosing Representatives , contrary to the existing law , tends greatly to render the proposed Meeting seditious ; under those circumstances it would be deemed justifiable in the Magistrates to prevent such Meeting . " 
 On 3 August Hobhouse conveyed the view of the Attorney @-@ General that the magistrates were incorrect to declare the 9 August meeting illegal as it was called to consider the election of a representative and it was not the intention to elect an MP that was illegal , but the execution of that intention . On 4 August Hobhouse advised against any attempt to forcibly prevent the 9 August meeting if it went ahead , or do anything beyond collecting evidence for subsequent prosecution unless the meeting got out of hand : 
 even if they should utter sedition or proceed to the election of a representative Lord Sidmouth is of opinion that it will be the wisest course to abstain from any endeavour to disperse the mob , unless they should proceed to acts of felony or riot . We have the strongest reason to believe that Hunt means to preside and to deprecate disorder . " 
 The meeting on 9 August was postponed after magistrates banned it to discourage the radicals but Hunt and his followers were determined to assemble and a meeting was organised for 16 August , with its declared aim solely " to consider the propriety of adopting the most LEGAL and <unk> means of obtaining a reform in the Common House of Parliament " . The press had mocked earlier meetings of working men because of their ragged , dirty appearance and disorganised conduct , but the organisers were determined that those attending the St Peter 's Field meeting would be neatly turned out and march to the event in good order . Samuel Bamford , a local radical who led the Middleton contingent , wrote that " It was deemed expedient that this meeting should be as morally effective as possible , and , that it should exhibit a spectacle such as had never before been witnessed in England . " Instructions were given to the various committees forming the contingents that " Cleanliness , Sobriety , Order and Peace " and a " prohibition of all weapons of offence or defence " were to be observed throughout the demonstration . Each contingent was drilled and rehearsed in the fields of the townships around Manchester adding to the concerns of the authorities . A royal proclamation forbidding the practice of drilling had been posted in Manchester on 3 August but on 9 August an informant reported to Rochdale magistrates that at Tandle Hill the previous day , 700 men were " drilling in companies " and " going through the usual evolutions of a regiment " and an onlooker had said the men " were fit to contend with any regular troops , only they wanted arms " 
 = = Assembly = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 St Peter 's Field was a croft ( an open piece of land ) alongside Mount Street which was being cleared to enable the last section of Peter Street to be constructed . Piles of brushwood had been placed at the end of the field nearest to the Friends Meeting House , but the remainder of the field was clear . Thomas Worrell , Manchester 's Assistant Surveyor of Paving , arrived to inspect the field at 7 : 00 am . His job was to remove anything that might be used as a weapon , and he duly had " about a quarter of a load " of stones carted away . 
 Monday , 16 August 1819 , was a hot summer 's day , with a cloudless blue sky . The fine weather almost certainly increased the size of the crowd significantly ; marching from the outer townships in the cold and rain would have been a much less attractive prospect . 
 The Manchester magistrates met at 9 : 00 am , to breakfast at the Star Inn on Deansgate and to consider what action they should take on Henry Hunt 's arrival at the meeting . By 10 : 30 am they had come to no conclusions , and moved to a house on the southeastern corner of St Peter 's Field , from where they planned to observe the meeting . They were concerned that it would end in a riot , or even a rebellion , and had arranged for a substantial number of regular troops and militia yeomanry to be deployed . The military presence comprised 600 men of the 15th Hussars ; several hundred infantrymen ; a Royal Horse Artillery unit with two six @-@ pounder ( 2 @.@ 7 kg ) guns ; 400 men of the Cheshire Yeomanry ; 400 special constables ; and 120 cavalry of the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry . The Manchester & Salford Yeomanry were relatively inexperienced militia recruited from among local shopkeepers and tradesmen , the most numerous of which were <unk> . Recently mocked by the Manchester Observer as " generally speaking , the fawning dependents of the great , with a few fools and a greater proportion of <unk> , who imagine they acquire considerable importance by wearing <unk> , they were subsequently variously described as " younger members of the Tory party in arms " , and as " hot @-@ headed young men , who had volunteered into that service from their intense hatred of Radicalism " . Socialist writer Mark Krantz has described them as " the local business mafia on horseback " . 
 The British Army in the north was under the overall command of General Sir John Byng . When he had initially learned that the meeting was scheduled for 2 August he wrote to the Home Office stating that he hoped the Manchester magistrates would show firmness on the day : 
 I will be prepared to go there , and will have in that neighbourhood , that is within an easy day 's march , 8 squadron of cavalry , 18 companies of infantry and the guns . I am sure I can add to the Yeomanry if requisite . I hope therefore the civil authorities will not be deterred from doing their duty . 
 The revised meeting date of 16 August , however , coincided with his visit to the horse races at York , a fashionable event at which Byng had entries in two races . He once again wrote to the Home Office , saying that although he would still be prepared to be in command in Manchester on the day of the meeting if it was thought really necessary , he had absolute confidence in his deputy commander , Lieutenant Colonel Guy L 'Estrange . 
 = = = Meeting = = = 
 The crowd that gathered in St Peter 's Field arrived in disciplined and organised contingents . Each village or chapelry was given a time and a place to meet , from where its members were to proceed to assembly points in the larger towns or townships , and from there on to Manchester . Contingents were sent from all around the region , the largest and " best dressed " of which was a group of 10 @,@ 000 who had travelled from Oldham Green , comprising people from Oldham , Royton ( which included a sizable female section ) , Crompton , Lees , Saddleworth and Mossley . Other sizable contingents marched from Middleton and Rochdale ( 6 @,@ 000 strong ) and Stockport ( 1 @,@ 500 – 5 @,@ 000 strong ) . Reports of the size of the crowd at the meeting vary substantially . Contemporaries estimated it from 30 @,@ 000 to as many as 150 @,@ 000 ; modern estimates are 60 @,@ 000 – 80 @,@ 000 . Scholar Joyce Marlow describes the event as " The most numerous meeting that ever took place in Great Britain " and elaborates that the generally accepted figure of 60 @,@ 000 would have been six per cent of the population of Lancashire , or half the population of the immediate area around Manchester . 
 The assembly was intended by its organisers and participants to be a peaceful meeting ; Henry Hunt had exhorted everyone attending to come " armed with no other weapon but that of a self @-@ approving conscience " , and many were wearing their " Sunday best " clothes . Samuel Bamford recounts the following incident , which occurred as the Middleton contingent reached the outskirts of Manchester : 
 On the bank of an open field on our left I perceived a gentleman observing us attentively . He beckoned me , and I went to him . He was one of my late employers . He took my hand , and rather <unk> , but kindly , said he hoped no harm was intended by all those people who were coming in . I said " I would pledge my life for their entire <unk> . " I asked him to notice them , " did they look like persons wishing to outrage the law ? were they not , on the contrary , evidently heads of decent working families ? or members of such families ? " " No , no , " I said , " my dear sir , and old respected master , if any wrong or violence take place , they will be committed by men of a different stamp from these . " He said he was very glad to hear me say so ; he was happy he had seen me , and gratified by the manner in which I had expressed myself . I asked , did he think we should be interrupted at the meeting ? he said he did not believe we should ; " then , " I replied , " all will be well " ; and shaking hands , with mutual good wishes , I left him , and took my station as before . 
 Although some observers , like the Rev. W. R. Hay , chairman of the Salford Quarter Sessions , claimed that " The active part of the meeting may be said to have come in wholly from the country " , others such as John Shuttleworth , a local cotton manufacturer , estimated that most were from Manchester , a view that would subsequently be supported by the casualty lists . Of the casualties whose residence was recorded , sixty @-@ one per cent lived within a three @-@ mile radius of the centre of Manchester . Some groups carried banners with texts like " No Corn Laws " , " Annual Parliaments " , " Universal suffrage " and " Vote By Ballot " . The first female reform societies were established in the textile areas in 1819 and women from the Manchester Female Reform Society , dressed in white , accompanied Hunt to the platform . The society 's president Mary Fildes rode in Hunt 's carriage carrying its flag . The only banner known to have survived is in Middleton Public Library ; it was carried by Thomas Redford , who was injured by a yeomanry sabre . Made of green silk embossed with gold lettering , one side of the banner is inscribed " Liberty and Fraternity " and the other " Unity and Strength " . 
 At about noon , several hundred special constables were led onto the field . They formed two lines in the crowd a few yards apart , in an attempt to form a corridor through the crowd between the house where the magistrates were watching and the hustings , two waggons lashed together . Believing that this might be intended as the route by which the magistrates would later send their representatives to arrest the speakers , some members of the crowd pushed the waggons away from the constables , and pressed around the hustings to form a human barrier . 
 Hunt 's carriage arrived at the meeting shortly after 1 : 00 pm , and he made his way to the hustings . Alongside Hunt on the speakers ' stand were John Knight , a cotton manufacturer and reformer , Joseph Johnson , the organiser of the meeting , John Thacker Saxton , managing editor of the Manchester Observer , the publisher Richard Carlile , and George Swift , reformer and shoemaker . There were also a number of reporters , including John Tyas of The Times , John Smith of the Liverpool Echo and Edward Baines Jr , the son of the editor of the Leeds Mercury . By this time St Peter 's Field , an area of 14 @,@ 000 square yards ( 11 @,@ 700 m2 ) , was packed with tens of thousands of men , women and children . The crowd around the speakers was so dense that " their hats seemed to touch " ; large groups of curious spectators gathered on the outskirts of the crowd . The rest of Manchester was like a ghost town , the streets and shops were empty . 
 = = Cavalry charge = = 
 William Hulton , the chairman of the magistrates watching from the house on the edge of St Peter 's Field , saw the enthusiastic reception that Hunt received on his arrival at the assembly , and it encouraged him to action . He issued an arrest warrant for Henry Hunt , Joseph Johnson , John Knight , and James Moorhouse . On being handed the warrant the Chief Constable , Jonathan Andrews , offered his opinion that the press of the crowd surrounding the hustings would make military assistance necessary for its execution . Hulton then wrote two letters , one to Major Thomas Trafford , the commanding officer of the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry Cavalry , and the other to the overall military commander in Manchester , Lieutenant Colonel Guy L 'Estrange . The contents of both notes were similar : 
 Sir , as chairman of the select committee of magistrates , I request you to proceed immediately to no . 6 Mount Street , where the magistrates are assembled . They consider the Civil Power wholly inadequate to preserve the peace . I have the honour , & c . Wm . Hulton . 
 The notes were handed to two horsemen who were standing by . The Manchester and Salford Yeomanry were stationed just a short distance away in Portland Street , and so received their note first . They immediately drew their swords and galloped towards St Peter 's Field . One trooper , in a frantic attempt to catch up , knocked down a woman in Cooper Street , causing the death of her son when he was thrown from her arms ; two @-@ year @-@ old William Fildes was the first casualty of Peterloo . 
 Sixty cavalrymen of the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry , led by Captain Hugh Hornby Birley , a local factory owner , arrived at the house from where the magistrates were watching ; some reports allege that they were drunk . Andrews , the Chief Constable , instructed Birley that he had an arrest warrant which he needed assistance to execute . Birley was asked to take his cavalry to the hustings to allow the speakers to be removed ; it was by then about 1 : 40 pm . 
 The route towards the hustings between the special constables was narrow , and as the inexperienced horses were thrust further and further into the crowd they reared and plunged as people tried to get out of their way . The arrest warrant had been given to the Deputy Constable , Joseph Nadin , who followed behind the yeomanry . As the cavalry pushed towards the speakers ' stand they became stuck in the crowd , and in panic started to hack about them with their sabres . On his arrival at the stand Nadin arrested Hunt , Johnson and a number of others including John Tyas , the reporter from The Times . Their mission to execute the arrest warrant having been achieved , the yeomanry set about destroying the banners and flags on the stand . According to Tyas , the yeomanry then attempted to reach flags in the crowd " cutting most indiscriminately to the right and to the left to get at them " - only then ( said Tyas ) were <unk> thrown at the military : " From this point the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry lost all command of temper " . From his vantage point William Hulton perceived the unfolding events as an assault on the yeomanry , and on L 'Estrange 's arrival at 1 : 50 pm , at the head of his hussars , he ordered them into the field to disperse the crowd with the words : " Good God , Sir , don 't you see they are attacking the Yeomanry ; disperse the meeting ! " The 15th Hussars formed themselves into a line stretching across the eastern end of St Peter 's Field , and charged into the crowd . At about the same time the Cheshire Yeomanry charged from the southern edge of the field . At first the crowd had some difficulty in dispersing , as the main exit route into Peter Street was blocked by the 88th Regiment of Foot , standing with bayonets fixed . One officer of the 15th Hussars was heard trying to restrain the by now out of control Manchester and Salford Yeomanry , who were " cutting at every one they could reach " : " For shame ! For shame ! Gentlemen : forbear , forbear ! The people cannot get away ! " 
 Within ten minutes the crowd had been dispersed , at the cost of eleven dead and more than six hundred injured . Only the wounded , their helpers , and the dead were left behind ; a woman living nearby said she saw " a very great deal of blood " . For some time afterwards there was rioting in the streets , most seriously at New Cross , where troops fired on a crowd attacking a shop belonging to someone rumoured to have taken one of the women reformers ' flags as a souvenir . Peace was not restored in Manchester until the next morning , and in Stockport and Macclesfield rioting continued on the 17th . There was also a major riot in Oldham that day , during which one person was shot and wounded . 
 = = Victims = = 
 The exact number of those killed and injured at Peterloo has never been established with certainty . Sources claim 11 – 15 killed and 400 – 700 injured . The Manchester Relief Committee , a body set up to provide relief for the victims of Peterloo , gave the number of injured as 420 , while Radical sources listed 500 . The true number is difficult to estimate , as many of the wounded hid their injuries for fear of retribution by the authorities . Three of William Marsh 's six children worked in the factory belonging to Captain Hugh Birley of the Manchester Yeomanry , and lost their jobs because their father had attended the meeting . James Lees was admitted to Manchester Infirmary with two severe sabre wounds to the head , but was refused treatment and sent home after refusing to agree with the surgeon 's insistence that " he had had enough of Manchester meetings " . 
 A particular feature of the meeting at Peterloo was the number of women present . Female reform societies had been formed in North West England during June and July 1819 , the first in Britain . Many of the women were dressed distinctively in white , and some formed all @-@ female contingents , carrying their own flags . Of the 654 recorded casualties , at least 168 were women , four of whom died either at St Peter 's Field or later as a result of their wounds . It has been estimated that less than 12 per cent of the crowd was made up of females , suggesting that women were at significantly greater risk of injury than men by a factor of almost 3 : 1 . Richard Carlile claimed that the women were especially targeted , a view apparently supported by the large number who suffered from wounds caused by weapons . 
 Eleven of the fatalities listed occurred on St Peter 's Field . Others , such as John Lees of Oldham , died later of their wounds , and some like Joshua Whitworth were killed in the rioting that followed the crowd 's dispersal from the field . 
 = = Reaction and aftermath = = 
 = = = Public = = = 
 The Peterloo Massacre has been called one of the defining moments of its age . Many of those present at the massacre , including local masters , employers and owners , were horrified by the carnage . One of the casualties , Oldham cloth @-@ worker and ex @-@ soldier John Lees , who died from his wounds on 9 September , had been present at the Battle of Waterloo . Shortly before his death he said to a friend that he had never been in such danger as at Peterloo : " At Waterloo there was man to man but there it was downright murder . " When news of the massacre began to spread , the population of Manchester and surrounding districts were horrified and outraged . 
 After the events at Peterloo , many commemorative items such as plates , jugs , handkerchiefs and medals were produced ; they would be carried by radical supporters and may also have been sold to raise money for the injured . The People 's History Museum in Manchester has one of these Peterloo handkerchiefs on display . All the mementos carried the iconic image of Peterloo ; cavalrymen with swords drawn riding down and slashing at defenceless civilians . The reverse of the Peterloo medal carried a Biblical text : 
 The wicked have drawn out the sword , they have cast down the poor and needy and such as be of upright conversation . 
 Peterloo was the first public meeting at which journalists from important , distant newspapers were present and within a day or so of the event , accounts were published in London , Leeds and Liverpool . The London and national papers shared the horror felt in the Manchester region , and the feeling of indignation throughout the country became intense . James Wroe , editor of the Manchester Observer was the first to describe the incident at the " Peterloo Massacre " , coining his headline by combining St Peter 's Field with the Battle of Waterloo that had taken place four years earlier . He also wrote pamphlets entitled " The Peterloo Massacre : A Faithful Narrative of the Events " . Priced at 2d each , they sold out every print run for 14 weeks and had a large national circulation . Sir Francis Burdett , a reformist MP , was jailed for three months for publishing a seditious libel . 
 Percy Bysshe Shelley was in Italy and did not hear of the massacre until 5 September . His poem , The Masque of Anarchy , subtitled Written on the Occasion of the Massacre at Manchester was sent for publication in the radical periodical The Examiner but because of restrictions on the radical press , was not published until 1832 , ten years after the poet 's death . 
 = = = Political = = = 
 The immediate effect of Peterloo was a crackdown on reform . The government instructed the police and courts to go after the journalists , presses and publication of the Manchester Observer . Wroe was arrested and charged with producing a seditious publication . Found guilty he was sentenced to twelve months in prison and fined £ 100 . Outstanding court cases against the Manchester Observer were rushed through the courts and a continual change of sub @-@ editors was not sufficient defence against a series of police raids , often on the suspicion that someone was writing a radical article . The Manchester Observer closed in February 1820 . 
 Hunt and eight others were tried at York Assizes on 16 March 1820 , charged with sedition . After a two @-@ week trial , five defendants were found guilty . Hunt was sentenced to 30 months in Ilchester Gaol ; Bamford , Johnson , and Healey were given one year each , and Knight was jailed for two years on a subsequent charge . A civil case on behalf of a weaver wounded at Peterloo was brought against four members of the Manchester Yeomanry , Captain Birley , Captain Withington , Trumpeter Meagher , and Private Oliver , at Lancaster Assizes , on 4 April 1822 . All were acquitted , as the court ruled their actions had been justified to disperse an illegal gathering . 
 The government declared its support for the actions taken by the magistrates and the army . The Manchester magistrates held a supposedly public meeting on 19 August , so that resolutions supporting the action they had taken three days before could be published . Cotton merchants Archibald Prentice ( later editor of The Manchester Times ) and Absalom Watkin ( a later corn @-@ law reformer ) , both members of the Little Circle , organised a petition of protest against the violence at St Peter 's Field and the validity of the magistrate 's meeting . Within a few days it had collected 4 @,@ 800 signatures . Nevertheless , the Home Secretary , Lord Sidmouth , on 27 August conveyed to the magistrates the thanks of the Prince Regent for their action in the " preservation of the public peace " . That public exoneration was met with fierce anger and criticism . During a debate at Hopkins Street Robert Wedderburn declared " The Prince is a fool with his Wonderful letters of thanks ... What is the Prince Regent or King to us , we want no King – he is no use to us . " In an open letter , Richard Carlile said : 
 Unless the Prince calls his ministers to account and relieved his people , he would surely be deposed and make them all <unk> , despite all adherence to ancient and established institutions . 
 For a few months following Peterloo it seemed to the authorities that the country was heading towards an armed rebellion . Encouraging them in that belief were two abortive uprisings , in Huddersfield and Burnley , during the autumn of 1819 , and the discovery and foiling of the Cato Street Conspiracy to blow up the cabinet that winter . By the end of the year , the government had introduced legislation , later known as the Six Acts , to suppress radical meetings and publications , and by the end of 1820 every significant working @-@ class radical reformer was in jail ; civil liberties had declined to an even lower level than they were before Peterloo . Historian Robert Reid has written that " it is not fanciful to compare the restricted freedoms of the British worker in the post @-@ Peterloo period in the early nineteenth century with those of the black South African in the post @-@ Sharpeville period of the late twentieth century " . 
 One direct consequence of Peterloo was the foundation of the Manchester Guardian newspaper in 1821 , by the Little Circle group of non @-@ conformist Manchester businessmen headed by John Edward Taylor , a witness to the massacre . The prospectus announcing the new publication proclaimed that it would " zealously enforce the principles of civil and religious Liberty ... warmly advocate the cause of Reform ... endeavour to assist in the diffusion of just principles of Political Economy and ... support , without reference to the party from which they emanate , all serviceable measures " . 
 Events such as the Pentridge Rising , the March of the Blanketeers and the Spa Fields meeting , all serve to indicate the breadth , diversity and widespread geographical scale of the demand for economic and political reform at the time . Peterloo had no effect on the speed of reform , but in due course all but one of the reformers ' demands , annual parliaments , were met . Following the Great Reform Act of 1832 , the newly created Manchester parliamentary borough elected its first two MPs . Five candidates including William Cobbett stood , and the Whigs , Charles Poulett Thomson and Mark Philips , were elected . Manchester became a Municipal Borough in 1837 , and what remained of the manorial rights were purchased by the borough council . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 The <unk> Flag is believed to have been made in <unk> , in the West Riding of Yorkshire , in 1819 . It was in part made to honour the victims of the Peterloo Massacre . 
 The Free Trade Hall , home of the Anti @-@ Corn Law League , was built partly as a " cenotaph raised on the shades of the victims " of Peterloo . Until 2007 the massacre was commemorated by a blue plaque on the wall of the present building , the third to occupy the site , now the Radisson Hotel . It was regarded as a less than appropriate memorial because it under reported the incident as a dispersal , and the deaths were omitted completely . In a 2006 survey conducted by The Guardian , Peterloo came second to St. Mary 's Church , Putney , the venue for the Putney Debates , as the event from radical British history that most deserved a proper monument . A Peterloo Massacre Memorial Campaign was set up to lobby for a more appropriate monument to an event that has been described as Manchester 's Tiananmen Square . 
 In 2007 Manchester City Council replaced the original blue plaque with a red one , giving a fuller account of the events of 1819 . It was unveiled on 10 December 2007 by the Lord Mayor of Manchester , Councillor Glynn Evans . Under the heading " St. Peter 's Fields : The Peterloo Massacre " , the new plaque reads : 
 On 16 August 1819 a peaceful rally of 60 @,@ 000 pro @-@ democracy reformers , men , women and children , was attacked by armed cavalry resulting in 15 deaths and over 600 injuries . 
 In 1968 , in celebration of its centenary , the Trades Union Congress commissioned British composer Sir Malcolm Arnold to write the Peterloo Overture . Other musical commemorations include " Ned Ludd Part 5 " on electric folk group Steeleye Span 's 2006 album Bloody Men , and Rochdale rock band Tractor 's suite of five songs written and recorded in 1973 , later included on their 1992 release Worst Enemies . 
 = Windsor Castle = 
 Windsor Castle is a royal residence at Windsor in the English county of Berkshire . It is notable for its long association with the English and later British royal family and for its architecture . The original castle was built in the 11th century after the Norman invasion of England by William the Conqueror . Since the time of Henry I , it has been used by all monarchs , and is the longest @-@ occupied palace in Europe . The castle 's lavish early 19th @-@ century State Apartments were described by the art historian Hugh Roberts as " a superb and unrivalled sequence of rooms widely regarded as the finest and most complete expression of later Georgian taste " . Inside the castle walls is the 15th @-@ century St George 's Chapel , considered by the historian John Martin Robinson to be " one of the supreme achievements of English Perpendicular Gothic " design . 
 Originally designed to protect Norman dominance around the outskirts of London and oversee a strategically important part of the River Thames , Windsor Castle was built as a motte @-@ and @-@ bailey , with three wards surrounding a central mound . Gradually replaced with stone fortifications , the castle withstood a prolonged siege during the First Barons ' War at the start of the 13th century . Henry III built a luxurious royal palace within the castle during the middle of the century , and Edward III went further , rebuilding the palace to make an even grander set of buildings in what would become " the most expensive secular building project of the entire Middle Ages in England " . Edward 's core design lasted through the Tudor period , during which Henry VIII and Elizabeth I made increasing use of the castle as a royal court and centre for diplomatic entertainment . 
 Windsor Castle survived the tumultuous period of the English Civil War , when it was used as a military headquarters for Parliamentary forces and a prison for Charles I. At the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 , Charles II rebuilt much of Windsor Castle with the help of the architect Hugh May , creating a set of extravagant Baroque interiors that are still admired . After a period of neglect during the 18th century , George III and George IV renovated and rebuilt Charles II 's palace at colossal expense , producing the current design of the State Apartments , full of Rococo , Gothic and Baroque furnishings . Queen Victoria made a few minor changes to the castle , which became the centre for royal entertainment for much of her reign . Windsor Castle was used as a refuge for the royal family during the Luftwaffe bombing campaigns of the Second World War and survived a fire in 1992 . It is a popular tourist attraction , a venue for hosting state visits , and the preferred weekend home of Elizabeth II . Today , more than 500 people live and work in Windsor Castle – the largest inhabited castle in the world . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Windsor Castle occupies 13 acres ( 5 @.@ 3 ha ) , and combines the features of a fortification , a palace , and a small town . The present @-@ day castle was created during a sequence of phased building projects , culminating in the reconstruction work after a fire in 1992 . It is in essence a Georgian and Victorian design based on a medieval structure , with Gothic features reinvented in a modern style . Since the 14th century , architecture at the castle has attempted to produce a contemporary reinterpretation of older fashions and traditions , repeatedly imitating outmoded or even antiquated styles . As a result , architect Sir William Whitfield has pointed to Windsor Castle 's architecture as having " a certain fictive quality " , the Picturesque and Gothic design generating " a sense that a theatrical performance is being put on here " , despite late 20th century efforts to expose more of the older structures to increase the sense of authenticity . Although there has been some criticism , the castle 's architecture and history lends it a " place amongst the greatest European palaces " . 
 = = = Middle Ward = = = 
 At the heart of Windsor Castle is the Middle Ward , a bailey formed around the motte or artificial hill in the centre of the ward . The motte is 50 feet ( 15 m ) high and is made from chalk originally excavated from the surrounding ditch . The keep , called the Round Tower , on the top of the motte is based on an original 12th @-@ century building , extended upwards in the early 19th century under architect Jeffry Wyatville by 30 ft ( 9 m ) to produce a more imposing height and silhouette . The interior of the Round Tower was further redesigned in 1991 – 3 to provide additional space for the Royal Archives , an additional room being built in the space left by Wyatville 's originally hollow extension . The Round Tower is in reality far from cylindrical , due to the shape and structure of the motte beneath it . The current height of the tower has been criticised as being disproportionate to its width ; archaeologist Tim Tatton @-@ Brown , for example , has described it as a mutilation of the earlier medieval structure . 
 The western entrance to the Middle Ward is now open , and a gateway leads north from the ward onto the North Terrace . The eastern exit from the ward is guarded by the Norman Gatehouse . This gatehouse , which , despite its name , dates from the 14th century , is heavily vaulted and decorated with carvings , including surviving medieval lion masks , traditional symbols of majesty , to form an impressive entrance to the Upper Ward . Wyatville redesigned the exterior of the gatehouse , and the interior was later heavily converted in the 19th century for residential use . 
 = = = Upper Ward = = = 
 The Upper Ward of Windsor Castle comprises a number of major buildings enclosed by the upper bailey wall , forming a central quadrangle . The State Apartments run along the north of the ward , with a range of buildings along the east wall , and the private royal apartments and the King George IV Gate to the south , with the Edward III Tower in the south @-@ west corner . The motte and the Round Tower form the west edge of the ward . A bronze statue of Charles II on horseback sits beneath the Round Tower . Inspired by Hubert Le Sueur 's statue of Charles I in London , the statue was cast by Josias Ibach in 1679 , with the marble plinth featuring carvings by Grinling Gibbons . The Upper Ward adjoins the North Terrace , which overlooks the River Thames , and the East Terrace , which overlooks the gardens ; both of the current terraces were constructed by Hugh May in the 17th century . 
 Traditionally the Upper Ward was judged to be " to all intents and purposes a nineteenth @-@ century creation ... the image of what the early nineteenth @-@ century thought a castle should be " , as a result of the extensive redesign of the castle by Wyatville under George IV . The walls of the Upper Ward are built of Bagshot Heath stone faced on the inside with regular bricks , the gothic details in yellow Bath stone . The buildings in the Upper Ward are characterised by the use of small bits of flint in the mortar for <unk> , originally started at the castle in the 17th century to give stonework from disparate periods a similar appearance . The skyline of the Upper Ward is designed to be dramatic when seen from a distance or silhouetted against the horizon , an image of tall towers and battlements influenced by the picturesque movement of the late 18th century . Archaeological and restoration work following the 1992 fire has shown the extent to which the current structure represents a survival of elements from the original 12th @-@ century stone walls onwards , presented within the context of Wyatville 's final remodelling . 
 = = = = State Apartments = = = = 
 The State Apartments form the major part of the Upper Ward and lie along the north side of the quadrangle . The modern building follows the medieval foundations laid down by Edward III , with the ground floor comprising service chambers and cellars , and the much grander first floor forming the main part of the palace . On the first floor , the layout of the western end of the State Apartments is primarily the work of architect Hugh May , whereas the structure on the eastern side represents Jeffry Wyatville 's plans . 
 The interior of the State Apartments was mostly designed by Wyatville in the early 19th century . Wyatville intended each room to illustrate a particular architectural style and to display the matching furnishings and fine arts of the period . With some alterations over the years , this concept continues to dominate the apartments . Different rooms follow the Classical , Gothic and Rococo styles , together with an element of Jacobethan in places . Many of the rooms on the eastern end of the castle had to be restored following the 1992 fire , using " equivalent restoration " methods – the rooms were restored so as to appear similar to their original appearance , but using modern materials and concealing modern structural improvements . These rooms were also partially redesigned at the same time to more closely match modern tastes . Art historian Hugh Roberts has praised the State Apartments as " a superb and unrivalled sequence of rooms widely regarded as the finest and most complete expression of later Georgian taste . " Others , such as architect Robin Nicolson and critic Hugh Pearman , have described them as " bland " and " distinctly dull " . 
 Wyatville 's most famous work are those rooms designed in a Rococo style . These rooms take the fluid , playful aspects of this mid @-@ 18th @-@ century artistic movement , including many original pieces of Louis XV decoration , but project them on a " vastly inflated " scale . Investigations after the 1992 fire have shown though that many Rococo features of the modern castle , originally thought to have been 18th @-@ century fittings transferred from Carlton House or France , are in fact 19th @-@ century imitations in plasterwork and wood , designed to blend with original elements . The Grand Reception Room is the most prominent of these Rococo designs , 100 ft ( 30 m ) long and 40 ft ( 12 m ) tall and occupying the site of Edward III 's great hall . This room , restored after the fire , includes a huge French Rococo ceiling , characterised by Ian <unk> , the lead restorer , as possessing a " coarseness of form and crudeness of hand ... completely overshadowed by the sheer spectacular effect when you are at a distance " . The room is set off by a set of restored <unk> French tapestries . Although decorated with less gold leaf than in the 1820s , the result remains " one of the greatest set @-@ pieces of Regency decoration " . The White , Green and Crimson Drawing Rooms include a total of 62 trophies : carved , gilded wooden panels illustrating weapons and the spoils of war , many with Masonic meanings . Restored or replaced after the fire , these trophies are famous for their " vitality , precision and three @-@ dimensional quality " , and were originally brought from Carlton House in 1826 , some being originally imported from France and others carved by Edward Wyatt . The soft furnishings of these rooms , although luxurious , are more modest than the 1820s originals , both on the grounds of modern taste and cost . 
 Wyatville 's design retains three rooms originally built by Hugh May in the 17th century in partnership with the painter Antonio Verrio and carver Grinling Gibbons . The Queen 's Presence Chamber , the Queen 's Audience Chamber and the King 's Dining Room are designed in a Baroque , Franco @-@ Italian style , characterised by " gilded interiors enriched with florid murals " , first introduced to England between 1648 – 50 at Wilton House . Verrio 's paintings are " drenched in medievalist allusion " and classical images . These rooms were intended to show an innovative English " baroque fusion " of the hitherto separate arts of architecture , painting and carving . 
 A handful of rooms in the modern State Apartments reflect either 18th @-@ century or Victorian Gothic design . The State Dining Room , for example , whose current design originates from the 1850s but which was badly damaged during the 1992 fire , is restored to its appearance in the 1920s , before the removal of some of the gilded features on the pilasters . Anthony Salvin 's Grand Staircase is also of mid @-@ Victorian design in the Gothic style , rising to a double @-@ height hall lit by an older 18th @-@ century Gothic vaulted lantern tower called the Grand Vestibule , designed by James Wyatt and executed by Francis Bernasconi . The staircase has been criticised by historian John Robinson as being a distinctly inferior design to the earlier staircases built on the same site by both Wyatt and May . 
 Some parts of the State Apartments were completely destroyed in the 1992 fire and this area was rebuilt in a style called " <unk> Gothic " , named after the architect , Giles Downes . The style comprises " the rather stripped , cool and systematic coherence of modernism sewn into a reinterpretation of the Gothic tradition " . Downes argues that the style avoids " florid decoration " , emphasising an organic , flowing Gothic structure . Three new rooms were built or remodelled by Downes at Windsor . Downes ' new roof of St George 's Hall is the largest green @-@ oak structure built since the Middle Ages , and is decorated with brightly coloured shields celebrating the heraldic element of the Order of the Garter ; the design attempts to create an illusion of additional height through the gothic woodwork along the ceiling . The Lantern Lobby features flowing oak columns forming a vaulted ceiling , imitating an <unk> lily . The new Private Chapel is relatively small , only able to fit thirty worshippers , but combines architectural elements of the St George 's Hall roof with the Lantern Lobby and the stepped arch structure of the Henry VIII chapel vaulting at Hampton Court . The result is an " extraordinary , continuous and closely moulded net of tracery " , complementing the new stained glass windows commemorating the fire , designed by Joseph <unk> . The Great Kitchen , with its newly exposed 14th @-@ century roof lantern sitting alongside Wyatville 's fireplaces , chimneys and Gothic tables , is also a product of the reconstruction after the fire . 
 The ground floor of the State Apartments retains various famous medieval features . The 14th @-@ century Great Undercroft still survives , some 193 feet ( 59 m ) long by 31 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) wide , divided into 13 bays . At the time of the 1992 fire , the Undercroft had been divided into smaller rooms ; the area is now opened up to form a single space in an effort to echo the undercrofts at Fountains and Rievaulx Abbeys , although the floor remains artificially raised for convenience of use . The " beautifully vaulted " 14th @-@ century <unk> passage runs alongside the Kitchen Courtyard and is decorated with carved royal roses , marking its construction by Edward III . 
 = = = Lower Ward = = = 
 The Lower Ward lies below and to the west of the Round Tower , reached through the Norman Gate . Originally largely of medieval design , most of the Lower Ward was renovated or reconstructed during the mid @-@ Victorian period by Anthony Salvin and Edward Blore , to form a " consistently Gothic composition " . The Lower Ward holds St George 's Chapel and most of the buildings associated with the Order of the Garter . 
 On the north side of the Lower Ward is St George 's Chapel . This huge building is the spiritual home of the Order of the Knights of the Garter and dates from the late 15th and early 16th century , designed in the Perpendicular Gothic style . The ornate wooden choir stalls are of 15th @-@ century design , having been restored and extended by Henry Emlyn at the end of the 18th century , and are decorated with a unique set of brass plates showing the arms of the Knights of the Garter over the last six centuries . On the west side , the chapel has a grand Victorian door and staircase , used on ceremonial occasions . The east stained glass window is Victorian , and the oriel window to the north side of it was built by Henry VIII for Catherine of Aragon . The vault in front of the altar houses the remains of Henry VIII , Jane Seymour and Charles I , with Edward IV buried nearby . The chapel is considered by historian John Robinson to be " one of the supreme achievements of English Perpendicular Gothic " design . 
 At the east end of St George 's Chapel is the Lady Chapel , originally built by Henry III in the 13th century and converted into the Albert Memorial Chapel between 1863 – 73 by George Gilbert Scott . Built to commemorate the life of Prince Albert , the ornate chapel features lavish decoration and works in marble , glass mosaic and bronze by Henri de <unk> , Susan Durant , Alfred Gilbert and Antonio Salviati . The east door of the chapel , covered in ornamental ironwork , is the original door from 1246 . 
 At the west end of the Lower Ward is the Horseshoe Cloister , originally built in 1480 , near to the chapel to house its clergy . It houses the vicars @-@ choral , or lay clerks of the chapel . This curved brick and timber building is said to have been designed to resemble the shape of a fetlock , one of the badges used by Edward IV . George Gilbert Scott heavily restored the building in 1871 and little of the original structure remains . Other ranges originally built by Edward III sit alongside the Horseshoe , featuring stone perpendicular tracery . As of 2011 , they are used as offices , a library and as the houses for the Dean and Canons . 
 Behind the Horseshoe Cloister is the Curfew Tower , one of the oldest surviving parts of the Lower Ward and dating from the 13th century . The interior of the tower contains a former dungeon , and the remnants of a sally port , a secret exit for the occupants in a time of siege . The upper storey contains the castle bells placed there in 1478 , and the castle clock of 1689 . The French @-@ style conical roof is a 19th @-@ century attempt by Anthony Salvin to remodel the tower in the fashion of Eugène Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc 's recreation of Carcassonne . 
 On the opposite side of the chapel is a range of buildings including the lodgings of the Military Knights , and the residence of the Governor of the Military Knights . These buildings originate from the 16th century and are still used by the Knights , who represent the Order of the Garter each Sunday . On the south side of the Ward is King Henry VIII 's gateway , which bears the coat of arms of Catherine of Aragon and forms the secondary entrance to the castle . 
 = = = Park and landscape = = = 
 Windsor Castle 's position on top of steep ground has meant that the castle 's gardens are limited in scale . The castle gardens stretch east from the Upper Ward across a 20th @-@ century terrace . Windsor Castle is surrounded by extensive parkland . The immediate area stretching to the east of the castle is a 19th @-@ century creation known as the Home Park . The Home Park includes parkland and two working farms , along with many estate cottages mainly occupied by employees and the Frogmore estate . The Long Walk , a double lined avenue of trees , runs for 2 @.@ 65 miles ( 4 @.@ 26 km ) south of the castle , and is 240 ft ( 75 m ) wide . The original 17th @-@ century elms were replaced with alternating chestnut and plane trees . The impact of Dutch elm disease led to large @-@ scale replanting after 1945 . 
 The Home Park adjoins the northern edge of the more extensive Windsor Great Park , occupying some 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 020 ha ) and including some of the oldest broadleaved woodlands in Europe . In the Home Park , to the north of the castle , stands a private school , St George 's , which provides choristers to the chapel . Eton College is located within about half a mile of the castle , across the River Thames . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th and 12th centuries = = = 
 Windsor Castle was originally built by William the Conqueror in the decade after the Norman conquest of 1066 . William established a defensive ring of motte and bailey castles around London ; each was a day 's march – about 20 miles ( 32 km ) – from the city and from the next castle , allowing for easy reinforcements in a crisis . Windsor Castle , one of this ring of fortifications , was strategically important because of its proximity to both the River Thames , a key medieval route into London , and Windsor Forest , a royal hunting preserve previously used by the Saxon kings . The nearby settlement of <unk> , or <unk> , was an old Saxon residence . The initial wooden castle consisted of a keep on the top of a man @-@ made motte , or mound , protected by a small bailey wall , occupying a chalk <unk> , or bluff , rising 100 ft ( 30 m ) above the river . A second wooden bailey was constructed to the east of the keep , forming the later Upper Ward . By the end of the century , another bailey had been constructed to the west , creating the basic shape of the modern castle . In design , Windsor most closely resembled Arundel Castle , another powerful early Norman fortification , but the double bailey design was also found at Rockingham and Alnwick Castle . 
 Windsor was not initially used as a royal residence ; the early Norman kings preferred to use the former palace of Edward the Confessor in the village of Old Windsor . The first king to use Windsor Castle as a residence was Henry I , who celebrated Whitsuntide at the castle in 1110 during a period of heightened insecurity . Henry 's marriage to Adela , the daughter of Godfrey of Louvain , took place in the castle in 1121 . During this period the keep suffered a substantial collapse – archaeological evidence shows that the southern side of the motte subsided by over 6 ft ( 2 m ) . Timber piles were driven in to support the motte and the old wooden keep was replaced with a new stone shell keep , with a probable gateway to the north @-@ east and a new stone well . A chemise , or low protective wall , was subsequently added to the keep . 
 Henry II came to the throne in 1154 and built extensively at Windsor between 1165 and 1179 . Henry replaced the wooden palisade surrounding the upper ward with a stone wall interspersed with square towers and built the first King 's Gate . The first stone keep was suffering from subsidence , and cracks were beginning to appear in the stonework of the south side . Henry replaced the keep with another stone shell keep and chemise wall , but moved the walls in from the edge of the motte to relieve the pressure on the mound , and added massive foundations along the south side to provide additional support . Inside the castle Henry remodelled the royal accommodation . Bagshot Heath stone was used for most of the work , and stone from Bedfordshire for the internal buildings . 
 = = = 13th century = = = 
 King John undertook some building works at Windsor , but primarily to the accommodation rather than the defences . The castle played a role during the revolt of the English barons : the castle was besieged in 1214 , and John used the castle as his base during the negotiations before the signing of the Magna Carta at nearby Runnymede in 1215 . In 1216 the castle was besieged again by baronial and French troops under the command of the Count of Nevers , but John 's constable , <unk> de <unk> , successfully defended it . 
 The damage done to the castle during the second siege was immediately repaired in 1216 and 1221 by <unk> on behalf of John 's successor Henry III , who further strengthened the defences . The walls of the Lower Ward were rebuilt in stone , complete with a gatehouse in the location of the future Henry VIII Gate , between 1224 and 1230 . Three new towers , the Curfew , Garter and the Salisbury towers , were constructed . The Middle Ward was heavily reinforced with a southern stone wall , protected by the new Edward III and Henry III towers at each end . 
 Windsor Castle was one of Henry 's three favourite residences and he invested heavily in the royal accommodation , spending more money at Windsor than in any other of his properties . Following his marriage to Eleanor of Provence , Henry built a luxurious palace in 1240 – 63 , based around a court along the north side of the Upper Ward . This was intended primarily for the queen and Henry 's children . In the Lower Ward , the king ordered the construction of a range of buildings for his own use along the south wall , including a 70 ft ( 21 m ) long chapel , later called the Lady Chapel . This was the grandest of the numerous chapels built for his own use , and comparable to the Sainte @-@ Chapelle in Paris in size and quality . Henry repaired the Great Hall that lay along the north side of the Lower Ward , and enlarged it with a new kitchen and built a covered walkway between the Hall and the kitchen . Henry 's work was characterised by the religious overtones of the rich decorations , which formed " one of the high @-@ water marks of English medieval art " . The conversion cost more than £ 10 @,@ 000 . The result was to create a division in the castle between a more private Upper Ward and a Lower Ward devoted to the public face of the monarchy . Little further building was carried out at the castle during the 13th century ; the Great Hall in the Lower Ward was destroyed by fire in 1296 , but it was not rebuilt . 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 Edward III was born at Windsor Castle and used it extensively throughout his reign . In 1344 the king announced the foundation of the new Order of the Round Table at the castle . Edward began to construct a new building in the castle to host this order , but it was never finished . Chroniclers described it as a round building , 200 ft ( 61 m ) across , and it was probably in the centre of the Upper Ward . Shortly afterwards , Edward abandoned the new order for reasons that remain unclear , and instead established the Order of the Garter , again with Windsor Castle as its headquarters , complete with the attendant Poor Knights of Windsor . As part of this process Edward decided to rebuild Windsor Castle , in particular Henry III 's palace , in an attempt to construct a castle that would be symbolic of royal power and chivalry . Edward was influenced both by the military successes of his grandfather , Edward I , and by the decline of royal authority under his father , Edward II , and aimed to produce an innovative , " self @-@ consciously aesthetic , muscled , martial architecture " . 
 Edward placed William of Wykeham in overall charge of the rebuilding and design of the new castle and whilst work was ongoing Edward stayed in temporary accommodation in the Round Tower . Between 1350 and 1377 Edward spent £ 51 @,@ 000 on renovating Windsor Castle ; this was the largest amount spent by any English medieval monarch on a single building operation , and over one and a half times Edward 's typical annual income of £ 30 @,@ 000 . Some of the costs of the castle were paid from the results of ransoms following Edward 's victories at the battles of Crécy , Calais and Poitiers . Windsor Castle was already a substantial building before Edward began expanding it , making the investment all the more impressive , and much of the expenditure was lavished on rich furnishings . The castle was " the most expensive secular building project of the entire Middle Ages in England " . 
 Edward 's new palace consisted of three courts along the north side of the Upper Ward , called Little Cloister , King 's Cloister and the Kitchen Court . At the front of the palace lay the St George 's Hall range , which combined a new hall and a new chapel . This range had two symmetrical gatehouses , the <unk> Gatehouse and the Kitchen Gatehouse . The <unk> Gatehouse was the main entrance into the palace , whilst the Kitchen Gatehouse simply led into the kitchen courtyard . The great hall had numerous large windows looking out across the ward . The range had an unusual , unified roof @-@ line and , with a taller roof than the rest of the palace , would have been highly distinctive . The Rose Tower , designed for the king 's private use , set off the west corner of the range . The result was a " great and apparently architecturally unified palace ... uniform in all sorts of ways , as to roof line , window heights , cornice line , floor and ceiling heights " . With the exception of the Hall , Chapel and the Great Chamber , the new interiors all shared a similar height and width . The defensive features , however , were primarily for show , possibly to provide a backdrop for jousting between the two @-@ halves of the Order of the Garter . 
 Edward built further luxurious , self @-@ contained lodgings for his court around the east and south edges of the Upper Ward , creating the modern shape of the quadrangle . The Norman gate was built to secure the west entrance to the Ward . In the Lower Ward , the chapel was enlarged and remodelled with grand buildings for the canons built alongside . The earliest weight @-@ driven mechanical clock in England was installed by Edward III in the Round Tower in 1354 . William of Wykeham went on to build New College , Oxford and Winchester College , where the influence of Windsor Castle can easily be seen . 
 The new castle was used to hold French prisoners taken in at Poitiers in 1357 , including John II , who was held for a considerable ransom . Later in the century , the castle also found favour with Richard II . Richard conducted restoration work on St George 's Chapel , the work being carried out by Geoffrey Chaucer , who served as a diplomat and Clerk of The King 's Works . 
 = = = 15th century = = = 
 Windsor Castle continued to be favoured by monarchs in the 15th century , despite England beginning to slip into increasing political violence . Henry IV seized the castle during his coup in 1399 , although failing to catch Richard II , who had escaped to London . Under Henry V , the castle hosted a visit from the Holy Roman Emperor in 1417 , a massive diplomatic event that stretched the accommodation of the castle to its limits . 
 By the middle of the 15th century England was increasingly divided between the rival royal factions of the Lancastrians and the Yorkists . Castles such as Windsor did not play a decisive role during the resulting Wars of the Roses ( 1455 – 85 ) , which were fought primarily in the form of pitched battles between the rival factions . Henry VI , born at Windsor Castle and known as Henry of Windsor , became king at the young age of nine months . His long period of minority , coupled with the increasing tensions between Henry 's Lancastrian supporters and the Yorkists , distracted attention from Windsor . The Garter Feasts and other ceremonial activities at the castle became more infrequent and less well attended . 
 Edward IV seized power in 1461 . When Edward captured Henry 's wife , Margaret of Anjou , she was brought back to be detained at the castle . Edward began to revive the Order of the Garter , and held a particularly lavish feast in 1472 . Edward began the construction of the present St. George 's Chapel in 1475 , resulting in the dismantling of several of the older buildings in the Lower Ward . By building the grand chapel Edward was seeking to show that his new dynasty were the permanent rulers of England , and may also have been attempting to deliberately rival the similar chapel that Henry VI had ordered to be constructed at nearby Eton College . Richard III made only a brief use of Windsor Castle before his defeat at the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485 , but had the body of Henry VI moved from Chertsey Abbey in Surrey to the castle to allow it to be visited by pilgrims more easily . 
 Henry VII made more use of Windsor . In 1488 , shortly after succeeding to the throne , he held a massive feast for the Order of the Garter at the castle . He completed the roof of St George 's Chapel , and set about converting the older eastern Lady Chapel into a proposed shrine to Henry VI , whose canonisation was then considered imminent . In the event , Henry VI was not canonised and the project was abandoned , although the shrine continued to attract a flood of pilgrims . Henry VII appears to have remodelled the King 's Chamber in the palace , and had the roof of the Great Kitchen rebuilt in 1489 . He also built a three @-@ storied tower on the west end of the palace , which he used for his personal apartments . Windsor began to be used for international diplomatic events , including the grand visit of Philip I of Castile in 1506 . William de la Pole , one of the surviving Yorkist claimants to the throne , was imprisoned at Windsor Castle during Henry 's reign , before his execution in 1513 . 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 Henry VIII enjoyed Windsor Castle , as a young man " exercising himself daily in shooting , singing , dancing , wrestling , casting of the bar , playing at the recorders , flute , virginals , in setting of songs and making of ballads " . The tradition of the Garter Feasts was maintained and became more extravagant ; the size of the royal retinue visiting Windsor had to be restricted because of the growing numbers . During the Pilgrimage of Grace , a huge uprising in the north of England against Henry 's rule in 1536 , the king used Windsor as a secure base in the south from which to manage his military response . Throughout the Tudor period , Windsor was also used as a safe retreat in the event of plagues occurring in London . 
 Henry rebuilt the principal castle gateway in about 1510 and constructed a tennis court at the base of the motte in the Upper Ward . He also built a long terrace , called the North Wharf , along the outside wall of the Upper Ward ; constructed of wood , it was designed to provide a commanding view of the River Thames below . The design included an outside staircase into the king 's apartments , which made the monarch 's life more comfortable at the expense of considerably weakening the castle 's defences . Early in his reign , Henry had given the eastern Lady Chapel to Cardinal Wolsey for Wolsey 's future mausoleum . Benedetto Grazzini converted much of this into an Italian Renaissance design , before Wolsey 's fall from power brought an end to the project , with contemporaries estimating that around £ 60 @,@ 000 ( £ 295 million in 2008 terms ) had been spent on the work . Henry continued the project , but it remained unfinished when he himself was buried in the chapel , in an elaborate funeral in 1547 . 
 By contrast , the young Edward VI disliked Windsor Castle . Edward 's Protestant beliefs led him to simplify the Garter ceremonies , to discontinue the annual Feast of the Garter at Windsor and to remove any signs of Catholic practices with the Order . During the rebellions and political strife of 1549 , Windsor was again used as a safe @-@ haven for the king and the Duke of Somerset . Edward famously commented whilst staying at Windsor Castle during this period that " <unk> I am in a prison , here are no galleries , nor no gardens to walk in " . Under both Edward and his sister , Mary I , some limited building work continued at the castle , in many cases using resources recovered from the English abbeys . Water was piped into the Upper Ward to create a fountain . Mary also expanded the buildings used by the Knights of Windsor in the Lower Ward , using stone from Reading Abbey . 
 Elizabeth I spent much of her time at Windsor Castle and used it a safe haven in crises , " knowing it could stand a siege if need be " . Ten new brass cannons were purchased for the castle 's defence . It became one of her favourite locations and she spent more money on the property than on any of her other palaces . She conducted some modest building works at Windsor , including a wide range of repairs to the existing structures . She converted the North Wharf into a permanent , huge stone terrace , complete with statues , carvings and an octagonal , outdoor banqueting house , raising the western end of the terrace to provide more privacy . The chapel was refitted with stalls , a gallery and a new ceiling . A bridge was built over the ditch to the south of the castle to enable easier access to the park . Elizabeth built a gallery range of buildings on the west end of the Upper Ward , alongside Henry VII 's tower . Elizabeth increasingly used the castle for diplomatic engagements , but space continued to prove a challenge as the property was simply not as large as the more modern royal palaces . This flow of foreign visitors was captured for the queen 's entertainment in William Shakespeare 's play , The Merry Wives of Windsor . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 James I used Windsor Castle primarily as a base for hunting , one of his favourite pursuits , and for socialising with his friends . Many of these occasions involved extensive drinking sessions , including one with Christian IV of Denmark in 1606 that became infamous across Europe for the resulting drunken behaviour of the two kings . The absence of space at Windsor continued to prove problematic , with James ' English and Scottish retinues often quarrelling over rooms . 
 Charles I was a connoisseur of art , and paid greater attention to the aesthetic aspects of Windsor Castle than his predecessors . Charles had the castle completely surveyed by a team including Inigo Jones in 1629 , but little of the recommended work was carried out . Nonetheless , Charles employed Nicholas Stone to improve the chapel gallery in the Mannerist style and to construct a gateway in the North Terrace . Christian van Vianen , a noted Dutch goldsmith , was employed to produce a baroque gold service for the St George 's Chapel altar . In the final years of peace , Charles demolished the fountain in the Upper Ward , intending to replace it with a classical statue . 
 In 1642 the English Civil War broke out , dividing the country into the Royalist supporters of Charles , and the Parliamentarians . In the aftermath of the battle of Edgehill in October , Parliament became concerned that Charles might advance on London . John Venn took control of Windsor Castle with twelve companies of foot soldiers to protect the route along the Thames river , becoming the governor of the castle for the duration of the war . The contents of St George 's Chapel were both valuable and , to many Parliamentary forces , inappropriately high church in style . Looting began immediately : Edward IV 's bejewelled coat of mail was stolen ; the chapel 's organs , windows and books destroyed ; the Lady Chapel was emptied of valuables , including the component parts of Henry VIII 's unfinished tomb . By the end of the war , some <unk> oz ( 101 kg ) of gold and silver plate had been looted . 
 Prince Rupert of the Rhine , a prominent Royalist general , attempted to relieve Windsor Castle that November . Rupert 's small force of cavalry was able to take the town of Windsor , but was unable to overcome the walls at Windsor Castle – in due course , Rupert was forced to retreat . Over the winter of 1642 – 3 , Windsor Castle was converted into the headquarters for the Earl of Essex , a senior Parliamentary general . The Horseshoe Cloister was taken over as a prison for captured Royalists , and the resident canons were expelled from the castle . The Lady Chapel was turned into a magazine . Looting by the underpaid garrison continued to be a problem ; 500 royal deer were killed across the Windsor Great Park during the winter , and fences were burned as firewood . 
 In 1647 Charles , then a prisoner of Parliament , was brought to the castle for a period under arrest , before being moved to Hampton Court . In 1648 there was a Royalist plan , never enacted , to seize Windsor Castle . The Parliamentary Army Council moved into Windsor in November and decided to try Charles for treason . Charles was held at Windsor again for the last three weeks of his reign ; after his execution in January 1649 , his body was taken back to Windsor that night through a snowstorm , to be interred without ceremony in the vault beneath St George 's Chapel . 
 The Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 saw the first period of significant change to Windsor Castle for many years . The civil war and the years of the Interregnum had caused extensive damage to the royal palaces in England . At the same time the shifting " functional requirements , patterns of movement , modes of transport , aesthetic taste and standards of comfort " amongst royal circles was changing the qualities being sought in a successful palace . Windsor was the only royal palace to be successfully fully modernised by Charles II in the Restoration years . 
 During the Interregnum , however , squatters had occupied Windsor Castle . As a result , the " King 's house was a wreck ; the fanatic , the <unk> , and the squatter , having been at work ... Paupers had squatted in many of the towers and cabinets " . Shortly after returning to England , Charles appointed Prince Rupert , one of his few surviving close relatives , to be the Constable of Windsor Castle in 1668 . Rupert immediately began to reorder the castle 's defences , repairing the Round Tower and reconstructing the real tennis court . Charles attempted to restock Windsor Great Park with deer brought over from Germany , but the herds never recovered their pre @-@ war size . Rupert created apartments for himself in the Round Tower , decorated with an " extraordinary " number of weapons and armour , with his inner chambers " hung with <unk> , curious and effeminate pictures " . 
 Charles was heavily influenced by the works of Louis XIV of France , imitating French design at his palace at Winchester and the Royal Hospital at Chelsea . At Windsor , Charles created " the most extravagantly Baroque interiors ever executed in England " . Much of the building work was paid for out of increased royal revenues from Ireland during the 1670s . French court etiquette at the time required a substantial number of enfiladed rooms to satisfy court protocol ; the demand for space forced May to expand out into the North Terrace , rebuilding and widening it in the process . This new building was called the Star Building , because Charles II placed a huge gilt Garter star on the side of it . May took down and rebuilt the walls of Edward III 's hall and chapel , incorporating larger windows but retaining the height and dimensions of the medieval building . Although Windsor Castle was now big enough to hold the entire court , it was not built with chambers for the King 's Council , as would be found in Whitehall . Instead Charles took advantage of the good road links emerging around Windsor to hold his council meetings at Hampton Court when he was staying at the castle . The result became an " exemplar " for royal buildings for the next twenty @-@ five years . The result of May 's work showed a medievalist leaning ; although sometimes criticised for its " dullness " , May 's reconstruction was both sympathetic to the existing castle and a deliberate attempt to create a slightly austere 17th @-@ century version of a " neo @-@ Norman " castle . 
 William III commissioned Nicholas Hawksmoor and Sir Christopher Wren to conduct a large , final classical remodelling of the Upper Ward , but the king 's early death caused the plan to be cancelled . Queen Anne was fond of the castle , and attempted to address the lack of a formal garden by instructing Henry Wise to begin work on the <unk> Garden beneath the North Terrace , which was never completed . Anne also created the racecourse at Ascot and began the tradition of the annual Royal Ascot procession from the castle . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 George I took little interest in Windsor Castle , preferring his other palaces at St James 's , Hampton Court and Kensington . George II rarely used Windsor either , preferring Hampton Court . Many of the apartments in the Upper Ward were given out as " grace and favour " privileges for the use of prominent widows or other friends of the Crown . The Duke of Cumberland made the most use of the property in his role as the Ranger of Windsor Great Park . By the 1740s , Windsor Castle had become an early tourist attraction ; wealthier visitors who could afford to pay the castle keeper could enter , see curiosities such as the castle 's narwhal horn , and by the 1750s buy the first guidebooks to Windsor , produced by George Bickham in 1753 and Joseph Pote in 1755 . As the condition of the State Apartments continued to deteriorate , even the general public were able to regularly visit the property . 
 George III reversed this trend when he came to the throne in 1760 . George disliked Hampton Court , and was attracted by the park at Windsor Castle . George wanted to move into the Ranger 's House by the castle , but his brother , Henry was already living in it and refused to move out . Instead , George had to move into the Upper Lodge , later called the Queen 's Lodge , and started the long process of renovating the castle and the surrounding parks . Initially the atmosphere at the castle remained very informal , with local children playing games inside the Upper and Lower Wards , and the royal family frequently seen as they walked around the grounds . As time went by , however , access for visitors became more limited . 
 George 's architectural taste shifted over the years . As a young man , he favoured Classical , in particular Palladian styles , but the king came to favour a more Gothic style , both as a consequence of the Palladian style becoming overused and poorly implemented , and because the Gothic form had come to be seen as a more honest , national style of English design in the light of the French revolution . Working with the architect James Wyatt , George attempted to " transform the exterior of the buildings in the Upper Ward into a Gothic palace , while retaining the character of the Hugh May state rooms " . The outside of the building was restyled with Gothic features , including new battlements and turrets . Inside , conservation work was undertaken , and several new rooms constructed , including a new Gothic staircase to replace May 's 17th @-@ century version , complete with the Grand Vestibule ceiling above it . New paintings were purchased for the castle , and collections from other royal palaces moved there by the king . The cost of the work came to over £ 150 @,@ 000 ( £ 100 million in 2008 terms ) . The king undertook extensive work in the castle 's Great Park as well , laying out the new Norfolk and Flemish farms , creating two dairies and restoring Virginia Water Lake , and its grotto and follies . 
 At the end of this period Windsor Castle became a place of royal confinement . In 1788 the king first became ill during a dinner at Windsor Castle ; diagnosed as suffering from madness , he was removed for a period to the White House at Kew , where he temporarily recovered . After relapses in 1801 and 1804 , his condition became enduring from 1810 onwards and he was confined in the State Apartments of Windsor Castle , with building work on the castle ceasing the following year . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 George IV came to the throne in 1820 intending to create a set of royal palaces that reflected his wealth and influence as the ruler of an increasingly powerful Britain . George 's previous houses , Carlton House and the Brighton Pavilion were too small for grand court events , even after expensive extensions . George expanded the Royal Lodge in the castle park whilst he was Prince Regent , and then began a programme of work to modernise the castle itself once he became king . 
 George persuaded Parliament to vote him £ 300 @,@ 000 for restoration ( £ 245 million in 2008 terms ) . Under the guidance of George 's advisor , Charles Long , the architect Jeffry Wyatville was selected , and work commenced in 1824 . Wyatville 's own preference ran to Gothic architecture , but George , who had led the reintroduction of the French Rococo style to England at Carlton House , preferred a blend of periods and styles , and applied this taste to Windsor . The terraces were closed off to visitors for greater privacy and the exterior of the Upper Ward was completely remodelled into its current appearance . The Round Tower was raised in height to create a more dramatic appearance ; many of the rooms in the State Apartments were rebuilt or remodelled ; numerous new towers were created , much higher than the older versions . The south range of the ward was rebuilt to provide private accommodation for the king , away from the state rooms . The statue of Charles II was moved from the centre of the Upper Ward to the base of the motte . Sir Walter Scott captured contemporary views when he noted that the work showed " a great deal of taste and feeling for the Gothic architecture " ; many modern commentators , including Prince Charles , have criticised Wyatville 's work as representing an act of vandalism of May 's earlier designs . The work was unfinished at the time of George IV 's death in 1830 , but was broadly completed by Wyatville 's death in 1840 . The total expenditure on the castle had soared to the colossal sum of over one million pounds ( £ 817 million in 2008 terms ) by the end of the project . 
 Queen Victoria and Prince Albert made Windsor Castle their principal royal residence , despite Victoria complaining early in her reign that the castle was " dull and tiresome " and " prison @-@ like " , and preferring Osborne and Balmoral as holiday residences . The growth of the British Empire and Victoria 's close dynastic ties to Europe made Windsor the hub for many diplomatic and state visits , assisted by the new railways and steamships of the period . Indeed , it has been argued that Windsor reached its social peak during the Victorian era , seeing the introduction of invitations to numerous prominent figures to " dine and sleep " at the castle . Victoria took a close interest in the details of how Windsor Castle was run , including the minutiae of the social events . Few visitors found these occasions comfortable , both due to the design of the castle and the excessive royal formality . Prince Albert died in the Blue Room at Windsor Castle in 1861 and was buried in the Royal Mausoleum built at nearby Frogmore , within the Home Park . The prince 's rooms were maintained exactly as they had been at the moment of his death and Victoria kept the castle in a state of mourning for many years , becoming known as the " Widow of Windsor " , a phrase popularised in the famous poem by Rudyard Kipling . The Queen shunned the use of Buckingham Palace after Albert 's death and instead used Windsor Castle as her residence when conducting official business near London . Towards the end of her reign plays , operas and other entertainments slowly began to be held at the castle again , accommodating both the Queen 's desire for entertainment and her reluctance to be seen in public . 
 Several minor alterations were made to the Upper Ward under Victoria . Anthony Salvin rebuilt Wyatville 's grand staircase , with Edward Blore constructing a new private chapel within the State Apartments . Salvin also rebuilt the State Dining Room following a serious fire in 1853 . Ludwig Gruner assisted in the design of the Queen 's Private Audience Chamber in the south range . Blore and Salvin also did extensive work in the Lower Ward , under the direction of Prince Albert , including the Hundred Steps leading down into Windsor town , rebuilding the Garter , Curfew and Salisbury towers , the houses of the Military Knights and creating a new <unk> . George Gilbert Scott rebuilt the Horseshoe Cloister in the 1870s . The Norman Gatehouse was turned into a private dwelling for Sir Henry Ponsonby . Windsor Castle did not benefit from many of the minor improvements of the era , however , as Victoria disliked gaslight , preferring candles ; electric lighting was only installed in limited parts of the castle at the end of her reign . Indeed , the castle was famously cold and draughty in Victoria 's reign , but it was connected to a nearby reservoir , with water reliably piped into the interior for the first time . 
 Many of the changes under Victoria were to the surrounding parklands and buildings . The Royal Dairy at Frogmore was rebuilt in a <unk> style in 1853 ; George III 's Dairy rebuilt in a Renaissance style in 1859 ; the Georgian Flemish Farm rebuilt , and the Norfolk Farm renovated . The Long Walk was planted with fresh trees to replace the diseased stock . The Windsor Castle and Town Approaches Act , passed by Parliament in 1848 , permitted the closing and re @-@ routing of the old roads which previously ran through the park from Windsor to Datchet and Old Windsor . These changes allowed the Royal Family to undertake the enclosure of a large area of parkland to form the private " Home Park " with no public roads passing through it . The Queen granted additional rights for public access to the remainder of the park as part of this arrangement . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 Edward VII came to the throne in 1901 and immediately set about modernising Windsor Castle with " enthusiasm and zest " . Many of the rooms in the Upper Ward were de @-@ cluttered and redecorated for the first time in many years , with Edward " peering into cabinets ; ransacking drawers ; clearing rooms formerly used by the Prince Consort and not touched since his death ; dispatching case @-@ loads of relics and ornaments to a special room in the Round Tower ... destroying statues and busts of John Brown ... throwing out hundreds of ' <unk> old coloured photographs ' ... [ and ] rearranging pictures " . Electric lighting was added to more rooms , along with central heating ; telephone lines were installed , along with garages for the newly invented automobiles . The marathon was run from Windsor Castle at the 1908 Olympics , and in 1911 the pioneering aviator Thomas Sopwith landed an aircraft at the castle for the first time . 
 George V continued a process of more gradual modernisation , assisted by his wife , Mary of Teck , who had a strong interest in furniture and decoration . Mary sought out and re @-@ acquired items of furniture that had been lost or sold from the castle , including many dispersed by Edward VII , and also acquired many new works of art to furnish the state rooms . Queen Mary was also a lover of all things miniature , and a famous dolls ' house was created for her at Windsor Castle , designed by the architect Edwin Lutyens and furnished by leading craftsmen and designers of the 1930s . George V was committed to maintaining a high standard of court life at Windsor Castle , adopting the motto that everything was to be " of the best " . A large staff was still kept at the castle , with around 660 servants working in the property during the period . Meanwhile , during the First World War , anti @-@ German feeling led the members of the Royal Family to change their dynastic name from the German House of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha ; George decided to take the new name from the castle , and the Royal Family became the House of Windsor in 1917 . 
 Edward VIII did not spend much of his reign at Windsor Castle . He continued to spend most of his time at Fort Belvedere in the Great Park , where he had lived whilst Prince of Wales . Edward created a small aerodrome at the castle on Smith 's Lawn , now used as a golf @-@ course . Edward 's reign was short @-@ lived and he broadcast his abdication speech to the British Empire from the castle in December 1936 , adopting the title of Duke of Windsor . His successor , George VI also preferred his own original home , the Royal Lodge in the Great Park , but moved into Windsor Castle with his wife Elizabeth . As king , George revived the annual Garter Service at Windsor , drawing on the accounts of the 17th @-@ century ceremonies recorded by Elias Ashmole , but moving the event to Ascot Week in June . 
 On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 the castle was readied for war @-@ time conditions . Many of the staff from Buckingham Palace were moved to Windsor for safety , security was tightened and windows were blacked @-@ out . There was significant concern that the castle might be damaged or destroyed during the war ; the more important art works were removed from the castle for safe @-@ keeping , the valuable chandeliers were lowered to the floor in case of bomb damage and a sequence of paintings by John Piper were commissioned from 1942 – 4 to record the castle 's appearance . The king and queen and their children Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret lived for safety in the castle , with the roof above their rooms specially strengthened in case of attack . The king and queen drove daily to London , returning to Windsor to sleep , although at the time this was a well @-@ kept secret , as for propaganda and morale purposes it was reported that the king was still residing full @-@ time at Buckingham Palace . The castle was also used as a storage facility ; for example , the only purified heavy water at the time was rescued from France in the face of the imminent French defeat in 1940 , and most of it was sent to the castle to be stored in the basement alongside the Crown Jewels . After the war the king revived the " dine and sleep " events at Windsor , following comments that the castle had become " almost like a vast , empty museum " ; nonetheless , it took many years to restore Windsor Castle to its pre @-@ war condition . 
 In February 1952 , Elizabeth II came to the throne and decided to make Windsor her principal weekend retreat . The private apartments which had not been properly occupied since the era of Queen Mary were renovated and further modernised , and the Queen , Prince Philip and their two children took up residence . By the early 1990s , however , there had been a marked deterioration in the quality of the Upper Ward , in particular the State Apartments . Generations of repairs and replacements had resulted in a " diminution of the richness with which they had first been decorated " , a " gradual attrition of the original vibrancy of effect , as each change repeated a more faded version of the last " . A programme of repair work to replace the heating and the wiring of the Upper Ward began in 1988 . Work was also undertaken to underpin the motte of the Round Tower after fresh subsidence was detected in 1988 , threatening the collapse of the tower . 
 = = = = 1992 fire = = = = 
 On 20 November 1992 , a major fire occurred at Windsor Castle , lasting for 15 hours and causing widespread damage to the Upper Ward . The Private Chapel in the north @-@ east corner of the State Apartments was being renovated as part of a long term programme of work within the castle , and it is believed that one of the spotlights being used in the work set fire to a curtain by the altar during the morning . The fire spread quickly and destroyed nine of the principal state rooms , and severely damaged more than 100 others . Fire @-@ fighters applied water to contain the blaze , whilst castle staff attempted to rescue the precious artworks from the castle . Many of the rooms closest to the fire had been emptied as part of the renovation work , and this contributed to the successful evacuation of most of the collection . The fire spread through the roof voids and efforts continued through the night to contain the blaze , at great risk to the 200 fire @-@ fighters involved . It was not until late afternoon that the blaze began to come under control , although the fire continued during the night before being officially declared over the next morning . Along with the fire and smoke damage , one of the unintended effects of the fire @-@ fighting was the considerable water damage to the castle ; more than 1 @.@ 5 million gallons of water were used to extinguish it , which in many ways caused more complex restoration problems than the fire . 
 Two major issues for Windsor Castle emerged following the fire . The first was a political debate in Britain as to who should pay for the repairs . Traditionally , as the property of the Crown , Windsor Castle was maintained , and if necessary repaired , by the British government in exchange for the profits made by the Crown Estate . Furthermore , like other occupied royal palaces , it was not insured on grounds of economy . At the time of the fire , however , the British press strongly argued in favour of the Queen herself being required to pay for the repairs from her private income . A solution was found in which the restoration work would be paid for by opening Buckingham Palace to the public at selected times of the year , and by introducing new charges for public access to the parkland surrounding Windsor . The second major issue concerned how to repair the castle . Some suggested that the damaged rooms should be restored to their original appearance , but others favoured repairing the castle so as to incorporate modern designs . The decision was taken to largely follow the pre @-@ fire architecture with some changes to reflect modern tastes and cost , but fresh questions emerged over whether the restoration should be undertaken to " authentic " or " equivalent " restoration standards . Modern methods were used at Windsor to reproduce the equivalent pre @-@ fire appearance , partially due to the cost . The restoration programme was completed in 1997 at a total cost of £ 37 million ( £ 67 million in 2015 terms ) . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Windsor Castle , part of the Occupied Royal Palaces Estate , is owned by Queen Elizabeth II in right of the Crown , and day @-@ to @-@ day management is by the Royal Household . In terms of population , Windsor Castle is the largest inhabited castle in the world and the longest @-@ occupied palace in Europe , but it also remains a functioning royal home . As of 2006 , around 500 people were living and working in the castle . The Queen has increasingly used the castle as a royal palace as well as her weekend home and it is now as often used for state banquets and official entertaining as Buckingham Palace . In recent years , Windsor Castle has hosted visits from President Mbeki of South Africa , King Abdullah II of Jordan and President Chirac of France . The castle remains an important ceremonial location . The Waterloo ceremony is carried out in the presence of the Queen each year , and the annual ceremony of the Order of the Garter takes place in St George 's Chapel . While the queen is in residence , the Guard Mounting ceremony occurs on a daily basis . The Royal Ascot procession leaves the castle each year during the annual meeting . 
 During the Queen 's tenure much has been done , not only to restore and maintain the fabric of the building , but also to transform it into a major British tourist attraction , containing a significant portion of the Royal Collection of art , which is managed from Windsor . Archaeological work has continued at the castle , following on from limited investigations in the 1970s , the work on the Round Tower from 1988 – 92 and the investigations following the 1992 fire . During 2007 , 993 @,@ 000 tourists visited the castle . This has had to be achieved in co @-@ ordination with security issues and the castle 's role as a working royal palace . In late 2011 two water turbines were installed along the River Thames to provide hydroelectric power to the castle and the surrounding estate . In April 2016 it was announced that the Royal Collection Trust is to fund a £ 27m project that will reinstate the original entrance hall of the castle to visitors , as well as a new cafe that will be housed in the 14th Century undercroft . The project will be completed at the end of 2018 , and will include a visitor centre and a dedicated learning centre . 
 = A Many Splendored Thing ( Homicide : Life on the Street ) = 
 " A Many Splendored Thing " is the second season finale of the American police drama television series Homicide : Life on the Street , and the thirteenth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 27 , 1994 . In the episode , Pembleton and Bayliss investigate the S & M @-@ related murder of a young woman , which forces an uncomfortable Bayliss to confront his darker side . Meanwhile , Lewis is disturbed when a man commits murder over a $ 1 @.@ 49 pen , and a despairing Munch crashes Bolander 's date and ruins it by venting his own romantic woes . 
 Written by Noel Behn and directed by John McNaughton , " A Many Splendored Thing " was not originally planned to close the second season , but the expected finale " Bop Gun " was changed to the season premiere to capitalize on a guest performance by Robin Williams . The homicide case in " A Many Splendored Thing " involving a man who committed murder over a pen was based on a similar real @-@ life killing that took place in Anne Arundel County , Maryland . The episode featured the second of two guest appearances by actress Julianna Margulies as Linda , Bolander 's romantic interest , as well an appearance by Adrienne Shelly as the owner of an S & M fashion store . 
 " A Many Splendored Thing " marked the final appearance by Jon Polito , who had played Detective Steve Crosetti since the series debuted , but was dismissed reportedly because NBC officials were unhappy with his physical appearance . Polito was publicly critical of the show after his dismissal . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 11 @.@ 2 million household viewers , slight increase from the previous week 's episode , " Black and Blue " . It received generally positive reviews , and was identified by The Baltimore Sun as one of the ten best episodes of the series . " A Many Splendored Thing " was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay of an Episodic Drama . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Pembleton ( Andre Braugher ) and Bayliss ( Kyle Secor ) investigate the murder of Angela <unk> , who was found strangled in her bed clutching a note reading , " Ed did it " , although it proves to be a false lead . Their investigation leads the detectives to discover Angela had several strange boyfriends and worked at an S & M fashion store and a phone sex hotline . The two detectives visit the Eastern Shores Marketing Phone Sex operation where they speak with the manager , Ed . Ed tells them about a boyfriend of Angela 's named Chris Novoselic ( Dan Garrett ) who used to spend time with her at an S & M club called ' The Eve of Destruction ' on Fayette Street . Pembleton and Bayliss go to the Eve of Destruction to question Novoselic . During questioning , Bayliss gets angry and loses his cool with Novoselic slamming the leather @-@ clad , multi @-@ pierced freak against the wall telling him that if he doesn 't start giving them some answers , he is gonna slap some cuffs on him , take him downtown and knock him around ' whereby Novoselic responds by telling Bayliss , ' If you do that , I might have to kiss you ! ' . Pembleton calms Bayliss and they leave . While driving , Bayliss claims to be disgusted by the sexual taboos , but Pembleton insists everybody has a darker side and that until Bayliss recognizes his own , his virtues can never truly be tested . Pembleton and Bayliss return to the S & M fashion store and ask about leather belts with bead patterns matching the marks on Angela 's neck . Store owner Tanya ( Adrienne Shelly ) tells them Angela 's neighbor Jeremy ( Scott Nielson ) has a jacket with a matching belt . After an interrogation , Jeremy confesses to choking and accidentally killing Angela with the belt during quirky and violent ( but consensual ) sex . As a thank you for solving the case , Tanya brings Bayliss a leather jacket as gift , which he reluctantly accepts . That night , Bayliss visits Baltimore 's red light district wearing the jacket , as a way to test himself as Pembleton suggested . He is approached by a prostitute but rejects her , thus passing the test . 
 Lewis ( Clark Johnson ) and Crosetti ( Jon Polito ) investigate the fatal shooting of a man , who was apparently killed for a $ 1 @.@ 49 pen . Lewis believes there must be more to the story , refusing to believe a pen is worth killing for . When they search suspect Mitchell Forman 's ( Sal S. Koussa ) apartment , they find thousands of pens , many of which line the walls like bizarre decorations . Lewis later finds Forman at the police station , where he originally planned to turn himself in , but instead went up to the roof to commit suicide . Lewis lures Forman away from the ledge by enticing him with a beautiful golden pen , which belonged to Lewis ' deceased grandmother . Forman is taken into custody . Later , Lewis still cannot believe someone would kill over a pen , but Gee ( Yaphet Kotto ) suggests it is no worse than killing over a car or woman . Lewis , determined not to develop such a strong attachment to a material item , gives his grandmother 's pen to Felton ( Daniel Baldwin ) . 
 Meanwhile , although Munch ( Richard Belzer ) is cynical and despairing over his recent break @-@ up with ex @-@ girlfriend Felicia , the normally @-@ grumpy Bolander ( Ned Beatty ) is unusually cheerful as a result of his budding romantic relationship with Linda ( Julianna Margulies ) , a much younger ( 26 @-@ year @-@ old ) waitress . Nervous about his first real date with her , Bolander asks Howard ( Melissa Leo ) to go on a double @-@ date with him , along with Howard 's boyfriend , prosecuting attorney Ed Danvers ( Željko Ivanek ) . The double date goes well until a lonely Munch crashes , joins the table and ruins the mood of the evening complaining about his romantic woes . Bolander , Munch and Linda leave together and walk to Fort McHenry , where Linda offers Munch words of encouragement . Impressed with her , Munch leaves Linda and Bolander alone , where they happily watch a fireworks show . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A Many Splendored Thing " was written by Noel Behn and directed by John McNaughton , who previously directed Homicide star Richard Belzer in the film Mad Dog and Glory ( 1993 ) . Like the other three second season episodes , the script for " A Many Splendored Thing " was already finished by the time the first season ended , but due to poor Nielsen ratings throughout the duration of the show , NBC executives asked for several refinements – including fewer episode subplots and less camera movements and jump cuts – before approving a second season . " A Many Splendored Thing " was the second season finale . The season premiere , " Bop Gun " , was originally meant to serve as the finale , but NBC decided to instead open the season with it , with the hopes of getting increased ratings from a guest appearance by actor Robin Williams . 
 The title " A Many Splendored Thing " is a reference to the 1952 historical romance novel A Many @-@ <unk> Thing and the subsequent film Love Is a Many @-@ Splendored Thing ( 1955 ) . The title refers to the episode 's theme of the many variations of love , as demonstrated by the sexual taboos from the world of Angela <unk> , the dysfunctional relationship of Munch and Felicia , the budding romance between Bolander and Linda , and the twisted love Mitchell Forman harbors for pens . The Forman case was inspired by a real @-@ life murder that took place in Anne Arundel County , Maryland , in which a 23 @-@ year @-@ old man shot another man 10 times in a doughnut shop when the victim refused to sell the shooter his pen . During the double date Munch crashes , Howard becomes depressed about the hopelessness of life and love , leaving unhappily with Danvers . This scene foreshadows the eventual break @-@ up of Howard and Danvers , which occurs at an unspecified time in the third season . 
 The episode marked the final appearance by Jon Polito , who had been a regular cast member since the series debuted , but was dismissed reportedly because NBC officials were unhappy with his weight and physical appearance and did not believe he appealed to audiences . The departure was not amicable , as Polito publicly criticized the direction Homicide had taken in the second season and claimed he voiced concerns about the recent scripts to Fontana and Menaul . " A Many Splendored Thing " featured the second of two guest appearances by actress Julianna Margulies as Linda . A few months later , Margulies started her long @-@ running lead role as nurse Carol Hathaway on the medical drama series ER . She was cast in the part after having worked with Fontana on the unaired pilot of Philly Heat , an ABC miniseries he worked on about members of the Philadelphia Fire Department . Tom Fontana had offered Margulies a recurring role on Homicide , but she turned it down in favor of ER . " A Many Splendored Thing " also featured a guest appearances by Adrienne Shelly who played S & M fashion store owner Tanya Quinn , and Sal Koussa as murder suspect Mitchell Forman . Koussa was not a professional actor , and was working as a waiter at Ristorante i <unk> , a Washington , D.C. favorite , when the episode was filmed . 
 The songs " Hideaway " and " Out of Time " , both of which were written by Bernie McNabb and performed by Scarlet Bride , were featured in " A Many Splendored Thing " . Other featured songs include " Whoa " by Soul Asylum , the Donna Summer song " Bad Girls " , and a rendition of Italian composer Ottorino Respighi 's " <unk> Romane " , as performed by the Oregon Symphony . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 NBC had renewed Homicide for a second season to assess how the show performed in the Nielsen ratings and make a determination whether to continue the series . The series premiere , " Bop Gun " , drew unusually large viewership numbers due to a guest appearance by Robin Williams , but the subsequent episodes had dropped in the ratings , making the viewership of " A Many Splendored Thing " particularly important for the future of the series . Fontana said if the episode performed well , " NBC 's going to have to do some hard thinking . " In its original American broadcast on January 27 , 1994 , " A Many Splendored Thing " was watched by 11 @.@ 2 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research , earning the episode an 11 @.@ 9 rating . That constituted a slight increase from the previous week 's episode , " Black and Blue " , which was seen by 10 @.@ 83 million households . It was the 37th highest rated television show of the week , tied with the Fox animated comedy series The Simpsons . " A Many Splendored Thing " faced unusually tough competition in its timeslot from the ABC news series Primetime Live , which did a special report about convicted murderer Richard Allen Davis . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " A Many Splendored Thing " received generally positive reviews . It was identified by The Baltimore Sun as one of the ten best episodes of the series . Sun writers David Zurawik and Chris Kaltenbach particularly praised the creative pairing of Ned Beatty and Julianna Margulies , of whom they said , " somehow it is as touching a love story as you could want " . The Washington Post television reviewer Tom Shales strongly complimented the episode , especially for its serious and unflinching approach to disturbing and twisted events like the Forman murder : " Homicide is more than a superb cop show ; it 's a helpful guide on dealing with the madness of the modern world . It 's Attention Television – a program that grips one 's attention and rewards it . " The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution writer Drew <unk> said the episode " shifts deftly between the underbelly of cop work and the surprising moments of light that leak into these detectives ' lives " . Greg Paeth of The Cincinnati Post called it " another stunning installment of a cop drama that defines the genre " , and particularly praised the " perfect " performance of Ned Beatty . Baltimore Sun writer David Bianculli called the episode superb and said Adrienne Shelly left a " stunning impression in her performance . Bianculli said it left him " hungry for the next episode , " adding , " Personal plea to NBC : Please , please renew this series . " 
 " A Many Splendored Thing " was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay of an Episodic Drama , but ultimately lost to the Homicide episode " Bop Gun " . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " A Many Splendored Thing " and the rest of the first and second season episodes were included in the four @-@ DVD box @-@ set " Homicide : Life on the Street : The Complete Seasons 1 & 2 " , which was released by A & E Home Video on May 27 , 2003 for $ 69 @.@ 95 . 
 = Court McGee = 
 Courtney Scott McGee ( born December 12 , 1984 ) is an American mixed martial artist who competes in the welterweight division of the Ultimate Fighting Championship . A professional MMA competitor since 2007 , McGee mostly fought in local promotions in Utah before signing with the UFC in early 2010 . McGee was the winner of Spike TV 's eleventh season of The Ultimate Fighter in 2010 . 
 = = Mixed martial arts career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Court McGee participated in high school wrestling at Layton High School placing 6th in the 5A State Division in 2002 and 3rd in the 5A State Division in 2003 , under Mike Hansen . Later in life , after an absence from the sport , McGee returned to Layton High School to become an assistant wrestling coach . McGee also holds a background in karate , in which he has amassed over 100 <unk> . 
 McGee started his MMA career in 2007 in his home state of Utah , compiling a record of 10 @-@ 1 , with two technical knockouts and five submission wins . Two notable fights occurred during this period , with a submission win over <unk> Johnson and a loss to Jeremy Horn . 
 In September 2008 , McGee faced Isidro Gonzalez at the " Throwdown Showdown " event in Orem , Utah . McGee won the match after a unanimous decision . 
 McGee was scheduled to compete in December 2008 against Ray <unk> for the Gladiator Challenge Middleweight title . However , the bout never transpired for unknown reasons . McGee instead faced <unk> Jarvis in July 2009 . In what would turn out to be his final appearance on the local MMA circuit , McGee won by a Technical Knockout ( TKO ) over his opponent in under four minutes . 
 = = = The Ultimate Fighter = = = 
 In March 2010 , McGee was announced as part of the eleventh season of The Ultimate Fighter . In the elimination round , McGee narrowly defeated Seth <unk> after going to a sudden victory round . McGee was later picked by Chuck Liddell as his sixth pick and twelfth overall . 
 McGee was then defeated by the show 's number one pick Nick Ring in the sixth preliminary fight . After two rounds , the judges declared the fight a victory for Ring via majority decision ( 20 – 18 , 19 – 19 , 20 – 18 ) . Dana White and Chuck Liddell both stated that the fight should have gone to a third round . 
 When Rich <unk> broke his hand , his spot in the quarter @-@ finals became open . Due to the controversial loss to Ring , White selected McGee to fight in his place . In the quarter @-@ finals , McGee was set to have a rematch with Ring , but Ring pulled out of the competition due to a knee injury . James <unk> stepped in as Ring 's replacement . Early in the second round , McGee submitted <unk> with a rare standing guillotine choke . 
 In the semi @-@ finals he faced teammate Brad Tavares to earn a spot in the live finale . After a fairly even first two rounds , McGee dropped Tavares late in the third round with a left hook and locked in a fight @-@ ending rear naked choke . 
 This advanced him to the TUF 11 finale where he faced Team Ortiz / Franklin fighter , Kris McCray in the main event . McGee spent half of his training camp away from his usual gym " Victory MMA " , instead preferring to stick with his Ultimate Fighter coach , Chuck Liddell at The Pit . McGee defeated McCray by submission in the second round with a rear naked choke , making him the winner of the Ultimate Fighter Season 11 , despite all the difficulties and bad luck he encountered on the show . McGee was also awarded the Submission of the Night award . 
 = = = Ultimate Fighting Championship = = = 
 McGee 's first post @-@ TUF fight was against UFC veteran , Ryan Jensen at UFC 121 . Early in the first round , McGee was hit with a stiff shot that dropped him and later suffered a minor cut below his eye . In the second round , Jensen began to visibly tire and after being hit , began to bleed from the nose . McGee won the second round after a takedown just before the bell . In the third round , McGee successfully executed a takedown and a full mount , where he secured an arm triangle choke to force the <unk> at 1 : 21 of the final round . 
 McGee was expected to face Jesse <unk> on June 11 , 2011 at UFC 131 , but was reportedly forced out of the bout due to a knee injury . Matt Serra @-@ trained fighter Chris Weidman stepped up to take McGee 's place on the UFC 131 fight card against <unk> . 
 McGee faced <unk> Yang on September 17 , 2011 at UFC Fight Night 25 . He won the fight via unanimous decision . 
 McGee faced Costas Philippou on March 3 , 2012 at UFC on FX 2 . He lost the fight via unanimous decision . 
 McGee fought Nick Ring in a rematch at UFC 149 . McGee lost via a close unanimous decision . For the second time in a bout against Ring , the loss was regarded as controversial by many media sources . Stats after the fight showed that McGee <unk> Ring 32 @-@ 25 in the second round and 53 @-@ 16 in the final round . After the fight , McGee said " I felt like I had cage control , was more aggressive , out @-@ struck him and attempted a submission in the third round . I should not have left it in the hands of the judges and finished the fight . " 
 McGee made his welterweight debut against Josh Neer on February 23 , 2013 at UFC 157 . McGee was victorious , winning a unanimous decision after three rounds . According to <unk> , McGee broke the record for most significant strikes landed in a welterweight fight , landing 166 in the three round affair . 
 McGee faced fellow Ultimate fighter winner Robert Whittaker on August 28 , 2013 at UFC Fight Night 27 . He won the fight via split decision . 
 McGee was expected to face Kelvin Gastelum on December 14 , 2013 at UFC on Fox 9 . However , Gastelum pulled out of the bout with a knee injury and was replaced by Ryan <unk> . He lost the fight via unanimous decision . 
 Following his loss to Ryan <unk> , McGee was out of action for over 18 months recovering from a litany of injuries . He returned to face Márcio Alexandre Jr. on December 12 , 2015 at UFC 194 . McGee won the fight by unanimous decision . 
 McGee faced Santiago <unk> on April 16 , 2016 at UFC on Fox 19 . He lost the bout via TKO in the first round . 
 McGee is expected to face Dominique Steele on August 6 , 2016 at UFC Fight Night 92 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McGee and his wife Chelsea have two sons , Isaac and Crew Charles . The second son 's middle name was taken from McGee 's friend and Ultimate Fighter coach , Chuck Liddell 's first name . McGee is of Irish and Scottish descent . 
 McGee is a former heroin addict and in 2005 , he was declared clinically dead after overdosing on heroin at his cousin 's house before he was resuscitated . McGee had to learn to walk , speak and function again after his first overdose . McGee said that his path into drug and alcohol abuse began when he started to hang out with " the wrong people - drinking , partying . " After suffering an injury to his clavicle and elbow , McGee became dependent to painkillers , which he later mixed with alcohol . McGee had taken cocaine and heroin before overdosing . After his near @-@ death experience , McGee suffered a couple of relapses . On an episode of The Ultimate Fighter , McGee said " I took one drink in Vegas and I ended up in Iowa four days later with no pants on and a long sleeve shirt , looking for meth . " 
 Since April 2006 , McGee has been clean and uses his story to encourage those who may be struggling with addictions of their own . 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Ultimate Fighting Championship 
 The Ultimate Fighter 11 Middleweight Winner 
 Submission of the Night ( One time ) vs. Kris McCray 
 = = Mixed martial arts record = = 
 = = = Mixed martial arts exhibition record = = = 
 = = Boxing career = = 
 In addition to his Mixed Martial Arts career , McGee has also compiled a 2 – 0 record as a professional boxer in the cruiserweight division . Both fights took place in 2008 , in between his MMA career . 
 His first fight was against Francisco Antonio <unk> in May 2008 . McGee defeated him via unanimous decision ( 40 – 35 , 40 – 36 , 39 – 36 ) in a four round fight , having defeated Hank Weiss in an MMA fight just days earlier . 
 This was followed up by another unanimous decision victory ( 40 – 36 , 40 – 36 , 39 – 37 ) over Freddie Martinez . McGee revealed in June 2010 that this fight took place during his bachelor weekend . 
 = = Boxing record = = 
 = Pennsylvania Route 287 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 287 ( PA 287 ) is a 63 @.@ 9 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 102 @.@ 8 km ) state highway in the Tioga Valley of Pennsylvania . Route 287 begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 220 in the community of Larrys Creek in Piatt Township , Lycoming County to an intersection with Pennsylvania Route 49 just south of the New York state line in Lawrenceville , Tioga County . The route follows Larrys Creek through several isolated communities , including Salladasburg and English Center , before working its way towards Hoytville , where it meets Pennsylvania Route 414 . The route ends up in Wellsboro , where it meets U.S. Route 6 , and reaches Tioga . 
 The alignment of Route 287 has been successor to a set of plank roads from Larrys Creek to Lawrenceville . The southern plank road , known as the Larrys Creek Plank Road , dates back to 1850 as short highway from Larrys Creek to Salladasburg , and was completely gone by 1900 . The second part followed the Tioga and Lawrenceville Plank Road , which although is named from Tioga to Lawrenceville , went from Wellsboro to Tioga . The portion to Lawrenceville was never constructed . The route also followed several postal routes in the area . In 1911 , the Sproul Road Bill was passed , and Route 287 became segments of Legislative Route 22 , Legislative Route 106 , and Legislative Route 353 . In 1924 , the northernmost portion was designated Route 4 and the Susquehanna Trail . This was changed to part of U.S. Route 220 in 1926 . 
 In 1928 , U.S. Route 111 was designated , and along with Pennsylvania Route 84 , consisted of the alignment of Route 287 . Route 111 was redesignated as part of U.S. Route 15 . The highway was redesignated as Route 287 in 1961 when Route 84 was decommissioned in favor of Interstate 84 . The route was extended from Tioga to Lawrenceville in 2008 , when the construction of U.S. Route 15 was finished to the New York state line , and Route 287 was extended to Route 49 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old roads = = = 
 Much of the current @-@ day alignment for Route 287 has been constructed through many different post , plank and turnpike roads in Lycoming and Tioga counties . The earliest known plank road in the area of the current day highway dates back to 1810 , when a mail postal route was created along current day Route 287 from Wellsboro to Willardsburg ( later known as Tioga ) . The mail was delivered once a week on horseback for several years , with the service discontinued in 1818 . That year , the service was changed to a semi @-@ weekly service for delivery two times a week on horseback . In 1824 , this service was also discontinued when the mail route began to be used by coaches three times a week . This service was used and then decommissioned by 1835 , when a new system , which stretched from Wellsboro and past Willardsburg to the community of Lawrenceville , was established . 
 This route followed the alignment of Route 287 , making stops in Middlebury Center , Holliday , Willardsburg and Mitchell 's Creek before ending in Lawrenceville . This mail route was truncated back to Willardsburg in 1840 , when the nearby Corning and Blossburg Railroad was completed . The stagecoach lines started working along the three @-@ day process for about ten years , when the nearby Tioga and Wellsboro Plank Road was completed , which made stagecoaches run daily . Along with numerous competition , the service was discontinued in 1872 , when the Lawrenceville and Wellsboro Railroad was completed . At that time , the stagecoach lines has ceased operation . By 1883 , the only piece of mail routes in the area of Tioga County was a piece near Middlebury Center , but was not as large as the process once was . 
 Although the Corning and Blossburg Railroad had served as a good travel connection between Wellsboro and Lawrenceville ( the Tioga Valley ) , several communities in the Crooked Creek Valley felt they were not well accommodated . At that time , in locations where railroads were not a feasible option , the construction of plank roads became a highly popular option . In 1848 , the Pennsylvania State Legislature approved and chartered construction of a brand new plank road in the valley , to be called the Tioga and Elmira Plank Road , following the alignments of current @-@ day Route 287 , Pennsylvania Route 328 and New York State Route 328 to Elmira , New York . Construction was unable to start in 1848 , so a supplement to the charter was amended on April 5 , 1849 , which extended the work period to continue until 1856 . Yet another supplement was added in 1850 , when the Tioga and Lawrenceville Plank Road was chartered on May 14 . 
 This new plank road also had the ability to extend their plank road down to Wellsboro , which repealed the acts of 1848 and 1849 . The plank road was contracted and completed in a timely fashion down to Wellsboro from Tioga . In 1851 , the plank road was complete from Wellsboro to Tioga , and the thoroughfare became highly used by people transporting lumber , agriculture and merchandise . This helped farmers and producers in the communities of Middlebury Center , Holliday and Delmar ( now the area of Wellsboro Junction ) . The plank road would eventually get worn out from use , and the route was eventually changed from a plank road to a high use turnpike . The 17 miles ( 27 km ) long piece of plank road , created in the original charter from Tioga to Lawrenceville , was never constructed . 
 The southernmost portion of Route 287 was the location of a third plank road , this time beginning at the mouth of Larrys Creek in the eponymous community to the current day location of English Center . The road was first considered during the early 19th century ; James Williamson , a strong local entrepreneur lived in these areas and it is assumed that the road builders in this area of Lycoming County were in favor of his suggestions . On May 8 , 1850 , the Pennsylvania State Legislature chartered a brand new plank road along the riverbank of Larrys Creek . The stock of the plank road was 20 shares of $ 40 @.@ 00 ( 1850 USD ) . Williamson himself was awarded the job as contractor , and in 1850 , using full advantage of woodsmen who were unemployed , low wages , and wasted hemlock log trees , began construction . 
 By 1851 , the plank road had been constructed all the way to the community of Salladasburg . With the 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) -wide plank road came several tollhouses along the entire route to pay charge for using the roadway . A movable barrier was also installed , so people could not gain access without payment . The plank road was finished and prospered for many years . The common transport on the road was bark and hides , along with hauling leather over to the Larrys Creek Railroad . On June 1 , 1889 , a major flood hit the area around the plank road , and when things were all said and done , it had experienced extensive damage . In places where damage had occurred , the road was replaced by graded dirt roads . In 1900 , the remains of the plank road remained only from Salladasburg to the Larrys Creek Railroad Station . Later that year , a petition was raised to make this remaining piece of road free to access . The case was closed in support of the motion and the plank road company shut down forever . 
 = = = Designation of Route 84 = = = 
 On May 31 , 1911 , the state of Pennsylvania signed the Sproul Road Bill , which started a drastic state takeover of highways around the commonwealth . Originally , only several routes were assigned around the state . The bill had approved a road from Wellsboro to the New York state line , which was designated as Legislative Route 22 . At the time , this was the only state @-@ maintained portion of Route 287 that was in use . By 1915 , more of Route 287 was taken over by the state , with the portion from the current @-@ day intersection with Pennsylvania Route 414 in Morris Township to the intersection with Pennsylvania Route 660 in Wellsboro becoming designated as Legislative Route 106 , where it reached Legislative Route 22 and 21 . In 1916 , the portion from Legislative Route 23 ( now the intersection with U.S. Route 220 ) in Larrys Creek to the community of Brookside was taken over as Legislative Route 353 . 
 The designations remained in place until 1924 , when actual route designations were assigned in the commonwealth . The part that was later made as part of U.S. Route 15 , which was then changed to an alignment of Route 287 , was designated as Route 4 ( over the Susquehanna Trail ) . The route received another designation in 1926 , upon the creation of United States Highways across the country . The portion from Tioga to an intersection with the current day U.S. Route 15 was designated as part of U.S. Route 220 . 
 This remained in place for only two years , and when the Pennsylvania Department of Highways redesignated highways across the entire commonwealth , the alignment of the U.S. Route 220 portion was redesignated as U.S. Route 111 , while the entire alignment of Route 287 from the Larrys Creek to Tioga was redesignated as Route 84 . The entire alignment of Route 84 consisted of an intersection with U.S. Route 220 in Larrys Creek to U.S. Route 111 in Tioga , where the highway terminated . In 1930 , the concurrent piece of Legislative Route 4 was decommissioned , and the alignment of the highway remained as U.S. Route 111 . The portion from Tioga north remained as Route 111 until 1936 , when the highway was renumbered to U.S. Route 15 . 
 In that time , several intersections along Route 287 tied in with several former state highways . During the 1928 numbering , the intersection with Route 414 in Hoytville was designated as Route 893 , a local intersection in Antrim was designated as Route 961 , and the intersection in Somers Lane was designated as Route 826 . The routes were decommissioned in 1955 , 1946 , and 1941 respectively . After 1946 , when a mass decommissioning of state highways occurred , Route 84 remained in place for another 15 years , when the plans arose for Interstate 84 , which duplicated the state highway . Because of this duplication , Route 84 was reassigned as Route 287 . 
 = = = U.S. Route 15 conversion = = = 
 During the 1960s , plans developed to widen U.S. Route 15 for safety precautions . Construction progressed fast , reaching the Lycoming County line in 1968 . At the time , Route 287 terminated at an intersection with U.S. Route 15 at the Hammond Reservoir . Ten years later , Route 15 was completed up to Tioga , and that year , the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation extended Route 287 to the new interchange . At that point , U.S. Route 15 followed the northernmost alignment of PA 287 to Lawrenceville . This interchange was completed in late 2000 with an opening ceremony by then @-@ governor Tom Ridge . 
 With the proposal for the brand new Interstate 99 following U.S. Route 15 's alignment , construction was upgraded once again , and a new alignment for U.S. Route 15 was started in 2005 . The alignment was constructed for the final 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from Tioga to the state line . With the alignment 's completion , Route 15 was realigned onto the newly opened freeway on October 1 , 2008 . The entire project cost $ 102 million ( 2008 USD ) , including one new interchange and the completion of the Route 287 interchange in Tioga . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Lycoming County = = = 
 Route 287 begins at an interchange with westbound U.S. Route 220 in the Piatt Township community of Larrys Creek . The route heads north , following a former plank road through the rural areas to the west of Williamsport . After a while , the roadway becomes moderately developed , following residential houses for a short distance . The route enters the community of <unk> , where the route turns to the northwest through a line of forests . Route 287 intersects with Zinck Road , where the roadway becomes highly developed , following the route past residential homes and a large factory . The route crosses through a small patch of forests and enters Mifflin Township , where it intersects with Pennsylvania Route 973 . Route 973 becomes concurrent with Route 287 here , entering the community of Salladasburg , where the two highways fork . Route 287 continues northward on the right @-@ of @-@ way , while Route 973 heads to the northeast along Main Street . At an intersection with <unk> Street , a connector to Route 973 , Route 287 turns to the northwest and leaves Salladasburg . 
 Route 287 continues northward after leaving Salladasburg , paralleling Route 973 for a short distance until the two highways turn away . Route 287 heads northward , passing through deep patches of forests . This alignment and surroundings remain the same for several miles , passing a few local roads . The deep forests begin to clear as the highway enters the community of Brookside . In Brookside , Route 287 winds along a deep field , intersecting with the southern terminus of Pennsylvania Route 184 , which heads to the northeast . The route turns to the northwest , paralleling with Hughes Road , which merges in soon after . The highway continues northward in the fields north of Brookside until after Hughes Road , where it enters deep forests once again . 
 Route 287 winds around curves , until the intersection with Lick Run Road , where it turns to the northwest , entering the isolated community of English Center . In English Center , the route intersects with Little Pine Creek Road , where Route 287 turns to the north . The route returns to the deep forests , intersecting with Pennsylvania Route 284 . Route 287 turns to the northwest at that intersection , continuing through the deep forests . After several miles , the route turns to the northeast , passing to the west of a large pond . The forests began to clear as Route 287 enters the community of Pine Township , where the route continues northward , through fields and tree patches . At an intersection with Granger Lane , Route 287 crosses the county line into Tioga County . 
 = = = Tioga County = = = 
 After entering Tioga County , Route 287 continues to the north , entering the community of Texas , which mainly consists of large fields . The highway continues along this right @-@ of @-@ way , passing a large factory before entering the community of Mount Pleasant . At an intersection with Mount Pleasant Road , Route 287 turns to the northeast , bending around deep forests . The route crosses <unk> Hill Road , which is where the highway turns to the northwest . When the highway makes a curve to the northeast , Route 287 enters the community of Hoytville . In Hoytville , 
 Route 287 intersects with Pennsylvania Route 414 , which becomes concurrent with Route 287 for a distance . Routes 287 and 414 continue to the northeast , working its way along the residential homes in Hoytville . A short distance later , the highways enter the highly developed area in Hoytville in Morris Township . At an intersection in the center of the community , Route 287 turns to the north while Route 414 turns to the south , with the two highways splitting . Route 287 turns to the northeast , leaving the downtown area of Morris Township . After Morris Township , most of the route becomes surrounded by forests , except for a distance with residential homes following the northbound lanes . The surroundings return to the deep forests in both directions , with Route 287 continuing northward for several miles . 
 Route 287 begins to parallel a waterway , entering the community of Antrim , which is surrounded mainly by forests . After Antrim , the highway continues northward through the deep forests for several miles , until entering the community of Knapp . In Knapp , Route 287 continues to the northeast , passing several fields and intersecting with a local road towards Broughton Hollow . At an intersection with Dean Hill Road , the highway turns to the northeast through the fields , entering Coolidge Hollows , a small farming community . At an intersection with Sweetbriar Road , Route 287 turns to the north , passing some homes before turning to the northeast into the farmlands once again . Approaching the intersection with Shumway Hill Road , the highway makes a gradual bend to the northwest , passing a large pond to the west , where it gains the name of Central Avenue as the route enters the community of Wellsboro . 
 Route 287 heads along Central Avenue through a highly developed business and residential community until the intersection with Pennsylvania Route 660 ( Main Street ) , where the highway turns eastward on a concurrency with Route 660 . Routes 287 and 660 continue to the northeast along Main Street in the center of the community , where the two highways intersect with U.S. Route 6 . At the U.S. Route 6 intersection , Route 660 turns along U.S. Route 6 East while Route 287 continues along U.S. Route 6 Westbound . Routes 6 and 287 head to the northeast through the community center , passing to the east of Wellsboro Cemetery before the two highways turn to the northwest along Tioga Street . At an intersection with <unk> Road , Route 287 and Route 6 leave Wellsboro . The two highways enter Stokesdale , a residential community before a fork in the highway , with Route 6 turning towards the west and Route 287 towards the north . 
 Route 287 , after the split with Route 6 , heads to the northeast , entering the community of Wellsboro Junction . Wellsboro Junction is mainly fields , with the route heading as the main highway . After passing a few factories , Route 287 turns to the northeast and out of Wellsboro Junction . The highway passes a large pond , as well as a few residential homes . Route 287 continues along the rural alignment , entering a small community of residential homes and fields . The route continues to the northeast , entering the community of Middlebury Center , where it intersects with the terminus of Pennsylvania Route 249 and Mill Plank Road . The route turns to the northeast in the barren residential community . The route crosses over a river and heads on a straight northeast alignment , passing through a residential community . A short distance later , Route 287 turns to the northeast , paralleling a railroad . The route widens to three lanes where it passes a large field . Route 287 turns to the north , reaching the northern terminus of the nearby railroad . The route heads to the north , crossing the Tioga Dam along the Hammond Reservoir and entering the community of Crooked Creek . 
 The route continues northward along the eastern shore of the reservoir , until the northern end of the reservoir , where it turns to the east , entering the municipality of Tioga . In Tioga , Route 287 heads along Wellsboro Street in a moderately developed part of the community until turning to the north on North Main Street . Route 287 continues along North Main Street until leaving Tioga . A short distance later , Route 287 interchanges with U.S. Route 15 ( the Appalachian Thruway ) . Route 287 continues along the former alignment of Route 15 into Mitchell Creek , a small community . The route heads northward , entering Beeman which consists of a local business center . In the center , Route 287 intersects with the western terminus of Pennsylvania Route 328 . The route intersects with Somers Lane before entering the community of Somers Lane , which is a barren area . The route heads to the northwest along the Tioga River , crossing another railroad , and soon over the river . After the river , Route 287 enters the municipality of Lawrenceville , where the highway intersects with Pennsylvania Route 49 's eastern terminus . At that intersection , Route 287 terminates , with the right @-@ of @-@ way continuing the short distance as State Route 1015 to the New York state line . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Storm Front ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " Storm Front " is the first and second episodes of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise . They were first broadcast on October 8 , and October 15 , 2004 , respectively , on the UPN network within the United States . They were written by executive producer Manny Coto , and directed by Allan Kroeker . The episodes resolved the cliffhanger at the end of the third season finale , " Zero Hour " . It was Coto 's first episodes as the new show runner for the series . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship , Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , after destroying the Xindi weapon , Enterprise finds itself in the 20th century during World War II with Nazis in control of the North Eastern USA . Captain Archer ( Scott Bakula ) joins Silik ( John Fleck ) to stop the alien Nazis , restore the timeline , and end the Temporal Cold War . 
 The episodes featured the return of several recurring characters , as well as stunt casting in the form of appearances by Golden Brooks , Joe <unk> and Steve Schirripa . These were the first episodes of the franchise to be shot on digitally rather than using film stock , and the filming of the two halves were completed together over 14 days . The first part was seen by 2 @.@ 84 million viewers , increasing to 3 @.@ 11 for the second episode . " Storm Front " was poorly received by the critics , with complaints directed at the pace of the episode , the ending of the Temporal Cold War and the general premise itself . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part I = = = 
 Following the events of " Zero Hour " , Commander Charles " Trip " Tucker III ( Connor Trinneer ) and Ensign Travis Mayweather ( Anthony Montgomery ) survive the attacks by P @-@ 51 Mustangs on their shuttlepod and arrive back on Enterprise . Temporal Agent Daniels ( Matt Winston ) , near death , suddenly appears to Doctor Phlox ( John Billingsley ) in sickbay . He warns that an alien named Vosk ( Jack Gwaltney ) , the leader of a faction of the Temporal Cold War , has altered the timeline with catastrophic consequences . Enterprise was brought to the mid @-@ 20th century to end the Temporal Cold War between several factions including the Federation . On Earth , Captain Jonathan Archer ( Scott Bakula ) escapes from the Germans when American resistance fighters ambush his convoy . 
 Wounded , he is taken to a Resistance safehouse in Brooklyn . With the Germans controlling the U.S. Eastern Seaboard , it is revealed that the aliens , known as the Na <unk> , have sworn allegiance to Nazi Germany . Further , they are providing them with advanced weapons and technology in exchange for material and supplies to build a conduit that will take them back to their own time period . Meanwhile , Silik ( John Fleck ) , the leader of the Suliban Cabal , had boarded Enterprise and manages to steal a shuttlepod to fly to Earth . Tucker and Mayweather are then sent to find Silik along with the shuttlepod . Archer contacts Sub @-@ commander T 'Pol ( Jolene Blalock ) using a stolen communicator and is transported back to Enterprise . Before dying , Daniels asks Archer to stop the Na <unk> from using the conduit and becoming even more dangerous . On Earth , the away team find and destroy the shuttlepod , but are captured and taken in for interrogation . 
 = = = Part II = = = 
 Lieutenant Malcolm Reed ( Dominic Keating ) finds the point of divergence in the timeline : the 1916 murder of Lenin , where witnesses claimed Lenin 's killer " vanished into thin air . " The removal of Lenin prevents the October Revolution from successfully taking place , causing Hitler to not perceive Russia as a threat . The full weight of the Nazi war machine was therefore directed at Western Europe and the United States . Vosk seeks an alliance with Enterprise , releasing Mayweather and Tucker in hopes of forging a new understanding with Archer . Medical scans soon reveal that Tucker is actually Silik in disguise and he and Archer realize they need each other 's help . They enlist the help of the Resistance to destroy the shields of the Na <unk> complex and to help rescue Tucker . 
 Before they can complete the mission , Silik is killed by a guard near the conduit , and Archer is nearly shot by a confused Tucker . With the alien shields down , Enterprise then completes an atmospheric entry , flying over New York City and destroying the alien facility with photon torpedoes . The episode ends with Daniels showing Archer the threads of the timeline resetting themselves back to normal , as the Temporal Cold War finally ends with the death of Vosk . Archer demands that Daniels should never visit or bother Enterprise again . With their mission completed , Enterprise finally arrives back in its proper time period , where the crew are welcomed and escorted by an entire squadron of Starfleet vessels . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Premise and writing = = = 
 The decision to introduce a Nazi threat in Enterprise was decided upon when the producers were wrapping up the third season . Executive producer Brannon Braga explained afterwards that " I can 't remember who said ' Nazis , ' but we just somehow ended up with Nazis . Then that didn 't even feel like enough , so we decided to make them alien Nazis . " Only scene featuring the Nazis was filmed during the previous episode , " Zero Hour " . The intention was to resolve this quickly at the start of the fourth season and avoid a lengthy storyline . 
 Further changes occurred prior to the start of the fourth season ; executive producers Braga and Rick Berman both took a step back from the show and brought in Manny Coto as the new showrunner for Enterprise . Coto found that after he got through the Nazi story leftover from season three , he would have greater freedom to connect the series to Star Trek : The Original Series . He described that cliffhanger as one in which the characters needed to be written out of , as there was no set plan in place on how to resolve it . He made the decision to switch the story from being purely @-@ time travel based to one which featured alternate history , while resolving the Temporal Cold War , and wrote the script for both parts himself . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Fleck and Winston resumed their recurring roles on Enterprise in both parts of " Storm Front " , as Silik and Daniels . J. Paul Boehmer resumed his role from " Zero Hour " as an SS Agent ; he had previously appeared as a Nazi in the Star Trek : Voyager episode " The Killing Game " , as well as the Vulcan <unk> in the Enterprise episode " Carbon Creek " . Two other actors who returned in " Storm Front " from previous Voyager appearances were Tom Wright who had appeared as Tuvix in the titular episode , and Christopher Neame who played <unk> in " Heroes and Demons " . 
 There were also several Star Trek debuts in " Storm Front " , including Golden Brooks , better known for her main cast role in UPN 's Girlfriends ; and Joe <unk> and Steve Schirripa , who both appeared in HBO 's The Sopranos . These three appearances were described as " stunt casting " by UPN President Dawn Ostroff . Jack Gwaltney was cast as Vosk , the villain of the two @-@ parter . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began on July 15 , 2004 , and marked the first occasion that an episode of the Star Trek franchise was shot digitally rather than using traditional film stock . Director of photography Marvin V. Rush later explained that this was an easy transition , and added that this made the filming process easier as a high @-@ definition monitor was available on set allowing departments , such as make @-@ up , to make immediate adjustments . Directing Enterprise once again was Allan Kroeker for the first half of " Storm Front " , who had helmed the previous episode " Zero Hour " . The production of the two parts intermingled over 14 days , with the second half directed by David Straiton . The initial two days of filming took place on the standing sets representing the Enterprise and the shuttlepod . The shoot moved to Stage 9 on the Paramount lot when it resumed after a weekend break , which had been set up to represent the interior of a New York City apartment . 
 Subsequently , an area of the Paramount backlot was dressed to appear as the exterior areas of a Nazi occupied New York City . This included a reproduction of a boxing poster previously shown in The Original Series episode " The City on the Edge of Forever " , as well as a number of references to the production crew . A couple of locations which had appeared before in the franchise were shown , including a street corner shown in the Enterprise episode " Carpenter Street " , The Next Generation 's " Time 's Arrow " and the Voyager episode " 11 : 59 " . Furthermore , a bus stop from Voyager 's " Non Sequitur " was also re @-@ used . 
 Most of the filming for the second half of the episode wasn 't on the standing sets . Scenes were shot elsewhere , including on site shooting at Griffith Park , which had previously been used in the Voyager episode " Future 's End " . Other locations used included the re @-@ dressed Paramount backlot , as well as an alleyway elsewhere on the same site . A night shoot was required for a firefight sequence featuring explosions and stunt work . Additional post production work was required to show Silik 's shapeshifting , although Fleck appeared in a number of scenes without the prosthetics he normally wears for that role . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 The first part of " Storm Front " debuted on October 4 , 2004 , at a gala evening on the Paramount lot hosted by Kevin Frazier . The screening was followed with a panel discussion featuring Coto , Braga , Kroeker , Rush , Bakula , supervising producer Peter Lauritson , and Sony executives Yasuhiko Mikami and Andrew <unk> . The fourth season of Enterprise was moved to Friday nights on UPN network . The first episode of " Storm Front " was broadcast on October 8 , watched by 2 @.@ 84 million viewers . When the second part was shown the following week , the number of viewers had increased to 3 @.@ 11 million . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Charlie McCollum for the Knight Ridder newspapers said that the first half fell flat on promises made to rejuvenate the series , adding that " Storm Front " represented " a confusing premise , flat production and recycled stories . " Jamahl Epsicokhan , at his website Jammer 's Reviews , gave both parts two and a half out of four stars . He wrote that the episode " inherits so much nonsensical time @-@ travel baggage from previous episodes ( including last season 's final 60 seconds ) that the premise is all but indefensible " and ultimately the episode " breaks down the entire temporal war ( at least I think it does ) to a single battle in Earth 's past , that revolves around a single sci @-@ fi MacGuffin : Vosk 's conduit that the Nazis are constructing for him . " 
 At TrekNation , Michelle Erica Green described the first part as " thoroughly entertaining " but was uneasy that the series was producing something so " irrelevant " . However , she felt that the episodes were a refreshing change from the Xindi arc in the third season . She said that the second part inherited the same issues from past episodes , but that the opening was strong with the fake newsreel footage of Adolf Hitler arriving in New York City . She didn 't like that the Temporal Cold War storyline ended without any clear resolution , and the lack of character moments in the episode . 
 KJB of IGN gave the first half 3 out of ten , adding that the first episode suffered from a lack of pace , and described it as " awful " . The second episode was rated four out of ten and called " thin on plot " , but Coto was praised for killing off " long term pain " Silik , adding that the <unk> were " still the worst aliens ever created for the Trek franchise " . KJB closed on a hope that " With some of the conceptual flotsam flushed away , Coto may actually have a chance to give Enterprise a decent final run before its inevitable and grisly end . " 
 Ronald B. Moore , Daniel Curry and David Takemura won the award for Best Visual Effects in a Broadcast Series at the Visual Effects Society Awards in 2004 for their work on the second part of " Storm Front " . The other nominees were the pilot episode of Stargate : Atlantis and " Lost City " , a two @-@ part episode of Stargate : SG @-@ 1 . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 Both parts of " Storm Front " released on home media in the United States on November 1 , 2005 , as part of the season four DVD box set of Enterprise . The Blu @-@ ray edition was released on April 1 , 2014 . 
 = Eustace Balfour = 
 Colonel Eustace James Anthony Balfour ( 8 June 1854 – 14 February 1911 ) was a London @-@ based Scottish architect . The brother of one British Prime Minister and nephew of another , his career was built on family connections . His mother was the daughter of a Marquess , and his wife Frances , a noted suffragist , was the daughter of a Duke . Frances 's sister in @-@ law was Princess Louise , daughter of the reigning Queen Victoria . 
 Balfour 's initial work was on English and Scottish country houses , but he won only one major commission in this field . However , his appointment as surveyor of the Grosvenor Estate in London gave him architectural control over much of Mayfair and Belgravia in the 1890s and 1900s , and the opportunity to design many buildings himself . 
 Balfour was a senior officer of the Volunteer Force in London . His outspokenness on military matters was a factor in his appointment as an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to King Edward VII . 
 A fastidious and somewhat withdrawn individual , Balfour succumbed to alcoholism in his fifties . This brought about his early death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Balfour was born at Whittingehame House in East Lothian , the youngest of five sons son of James Maitland Balfour and his wife Lady Blanche Mary Harriet Gascoyne @-@ Cecil , daughter of James Gascoyne @-@ Cecil , 2nd Marquess of Salisbury . His paternal grandfather James Balfour was a nabob who had made the family 's fortune as a contractor supplying the Royal Navy in India and became a Tory Member of Parliament ( MP ) , while his mother 's father was a Conservative cabinet minister in the 1850s . Her brother , Robert Gascoyne @-@ Cecil , 3rd Lord Salisbury , was three times Prime Minister before being succeeded in 1902 by Eustace 's elder brother Arthur Balfour . 
 Eustace Balfour was educated at Harrow and at Trinity College , Cambridge , where he graduated in 1873 . He then studied architecture under Basil Champneys , the designer of Newnham College , Cambridge , before setting up his own practice in 1879 , with an office in Addison Road , North Kensington which was also his home until his death . 
 On 12 May 1879 he wed Lady Frances Campbell , the fifth daughter and tenth of twelve children of George Campbell , 8th Duke of Argyll . The couple had met at a ball given in London by Lord and Lady Goschen , and married soon afterwards in St John 's Presbyterian Church in London . Frances 's father was shocked at their haste . Out of respect for Balfour 's mother , who had died in 1878 , the wedding was modest , with no formal meal and no honeymoon . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Balfour 's first years of architectural practice consisted of small projects for family and friends . These included the restoration of Inveraray Castle for his father @-@ in @-@ law the Duke of Argyll , an extension to his brother Arthur 's hunting lodge Strathconan House in Ross @-@ shire , and the church of St Mary Magdalene in the hamlet of Hatfield Hyde . The church , which is now in Welwyn Garden City , was originally known as Hyde Chapel . Built as a chapel of ease within the parish of Hatfield for Balfour 's uncle the Marquis of Salisbury , it became the parish church of Hatfield Hyde in 1928 . 
 In 1885 , Balfour began a professional partnership with Hugh Thackeray Turner , which lasted until Balfour 's death . Balfour had been a member of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings since his undergraduate days in Cambridge , and Turner was the Society 's secretary . Together the two men were engaged to rebuild <unk> Hall in Suffolk , which had been destroyed by fire Their design , in a restrained Jacobean style , was Balfour 's only major country house commission . 
 Work was scarce after <unk> 's completion in 1889 , and in 1890 Balfour applied for the post of surveyor for the 1st Duke of Westminster 's Grosvenor Estate , to succeed Thomas <unk> . He seemed unlikely to be selected , but Frances made a direct approach to the Duke ( who was also her uncle ) , and he got the job . Balfour 's social standing appears to have been a significant factor in his appointment . He was the son @-@ in @-@ law of a Duke , nephew of a Marquess , and his wife was the sister @-@ in @-@ law of Queen Victoria 's 4th daughter Princess Louise ( who had married her oldest brother John in 1871 ) . Balfour had a strong sense of social class , and Frances Balfour later described the 1st Duke of Westminster as having run the estate " not as today on commercial lines , but more as a Principality " . Even so , his brother Gerald 's wife Lady Elizabeth Balfour noted that when the surveyor called on the Duke in his professional role he was " never offered a chair and never expected one " . 
 The post involved a lot of design work for Balfour , who seems to have been able to take whatever commissions he wanted , often delegating them to Turner . In the 1890s , Balfour and Turner appear to have been the most prolific designers of private houses on the estate , and in 1892 Balfour was made a Fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects . Their own work included most of the wholly redeveloped Balfour Place in Mayfair , formerly known as Portugal Street and renamed for the architect . 
 Balfour also supervised projects which were contracted to other designers . The Duke favoured the domestic revival style of architecture , and particularly insisted on red brick for dwelling houses . Balfour , who deplored the previously fashionable Gothic revivalism , laid down strict architectural guidelines , sometimes even redesigning the work of others . 
 Balfour and Turner also designed Aldford House on Park Lane , an " ornate but stunted " free @-@ standing stone mansion for the diamond magnate Alfred Beit which was replaced in 1932 by a modernist apartment block designed by Val Myer . Their other most notable work was St Anselm 's Church in Davies Street , believed to have been mostly Turner 's work , which was regarded as eccentric . Using an arts and crafts @-@ style blending of influences , it had a plain frontage with a basilican interior , and some gothic tracery . When its demolition was planned in 1938 , it was dismissed by H. S. Goodhart @-@ Rendel as " a purely personal record of Thackeray Turner 's particular tastes " . However , the building was not in fact demolished . Instead , it was dismantled and reconstructed in altered form at Uppingham Avenue in Belmont as the church of St <unk> Belmont . The parish describes it as " a genuinely recycled building " . 
 Balfour held the surveyor 's post until 1910 , when he was succeeded by Edmund <unk> . His second decade in the role was less significant than the first , because the death in 1899 of the 1st Duke brought the estate a bill for £ 600 @,@ 000 in death duties ( equivalent to £ 60 @.@ 9 million in 2016 ) . The resulting financial pressure meant that little rebuilding occurred until 1906 , and when it resumed Balfour 's influence was diminished . He had little affinity with the hedonistic young Hugh Grosvenor , 2nd Duke ( grandson of the 1st ) , who Edwin Lutyens and others had persuaded to adopt a less rigid architectural policy . 
 = = Volunteer = = 
 In 1882 , Balfour joined the Volunteer Force in 1882 , becoming a Lieutenant in 1883 , and Lieutenant @-@ Colonel in command of the London Scottish Regiment of Volunteers from 1894 to 1903 . 
 He began to take a wider interest in defence issues , writing extensively on the subject , such as The Conditions and Requirements of the Volunteer Force ( 1886 ) . In July 1899 , as the Second Boer War loomed , Balfour offered to raise a thousand men to go and fight , but it was considered too early to begin that effort . His offer to the minister George Wyndham was ignored by the War Office , and Balfour reacted angrily , complaining that volunteers were " expected to be fit for service while we are vigorously debarred from seeing any " . 
 Eventually 20 @,@ 000 volunteers were called up and fought in the war . However , Balfour 's need to liaise with the 2nd Duke of Westminster , who had just inherited the Grosvenor Estate , prevented him from joining his force when they travelled to South Africa at the end of 1899 . He remained in command of the London Scottish until 1900 , when he resigned in protest at financial controls that prevented payments to volunteers if there was an insufficient number of raised troops . 
 At the end of December 1902 , Balfour was awarded the Volunteer Officers ' Decoration . Despite his differences with government , or possibly because of them , King Edward VII appointed Balfour in January 1903 as a military aide @-@ de @-@ camp for Volunteer Forces . 
 = = Personal life and family = = 
 Eustace and Frances Balfour had five children : 
 Blanche Elizabeth Campbell Dugdale ( 1880 – 1948 ) , a biographer of her uncle the Prime Minister Arthur Balfour , and later a noted <unk> 
 Francis Cecil Campbell Balfour ( 1884 – 1965 ) , who became a colonial Governor in Sudan in the 1920s 
 Oswald Herbert Campbell Balfour ( 1894 – 1953 ) , Military Secretary to the Governor @-@ General of Canada , 1921 – 23 
 Joan Eleanor Campbell Balfour ( died 1939 ) 
 Alison Catherine Campbell Balfour ( died 3 September 1955 ) 
 Accounts of their marriage diverge widely . Frances 's congenital hip dislocation left her in constant pain , and often irritable . The couple 's temperament and interests were opposites , France 's enthusiasm for politics and intellectual company contrasting with her husband 's lifelong passion for shooting and his later interest in the military . 
 Hartley writes that theirs was " not a particularly happy marriage " . Knox confirms this view , noting that neither Blanche Dugdale 's memoirs nor Frances Balfour 's autobiography write much about their relationship with Eustace , and that Frances wrote at length about his brother Arthur who she " far preferred to Eustace " . 
 Author Joan B. Huffman is more cautious , noting that crucial sources are unavailable since Frances destroyed all Eustace 's letters to her . However , Huffman records that she did support her husband when his sister Alice repeatedly challenged him over his drinking . 
 = = Death = = 
 Balfour 's drinking problem became serious around 1906 , and in 1909 his health began to deteriorate seriously . In December 1910 he returned to Whittingehame , where he died aged 56 at 6am on 14 February 1911 , surrounded by his family . Eustace was the third of the five Balfour bothers to die relatively young , Cecil and Francis having both been killed in accidents in the early 1880s . 
 Balfour was buried at Whittingehame , with his parents and grandparents . Frances survived him by 20 years ( until 1931 ) , and was buried alongside him . 
 Rudyard Kipling , a member like Balfour of the Savile Club in London , described him as " a large , loveable man , and one of the best of talkers " . 
 = Cerro Azul ( Chile volcano ) = 
 Cerro Azul ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] , blue hill in Spanish ) , sometimes referred to as Quizapu , is an active stratovolcano in the Maule Region of central Chile , immediately south of Descabezado Grande . Part of the South Volcanic Zone of the Andes , its summit is 3 @,@ 788 metres ( 12 @,@ 428 ft ) above sea level , and is capped by a summit crater that is 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) wide and opens to the north . Beneath the summit , the volcano features numerous scoria cones and flank vents . 
 Cerro Azul is responsible for several of South America 's largest recorded eruptions , in 1846 and 1932 . In 1846 , an effusive eruption formed the vent at the site of present @-@ day Quizapu crater on the northern flank of Cerro Azul and sent lava flowing down the sides of the volcano , creating a lava field 8 – 9 square kilometres ( 3 – 3 @.@ 5 square miles ) in area . Phreatic and Strombolian volcanism between 1907 and 1932 excavated this crater . In 1932 , one of the largest explosive eruptions of the 20th century occurred at Quizapu Crater and sent 9 @.@ 5 cubic kilometres ( 2 @.@ 3 cu mi ) of ash into the atmosphere . The volcano 's most recent eruption was in 1967 . 
 The South Volcanic Zone has a long history of eruptions and poses a threat to the surrounding region . Any volcanic hazard — ranging from minor ashfalls to pyroclastic flows — could pose a significant risk to humans and wildlife . Despite its inactivity , Cerro Azul could again produce a major eruption ; if this were to happen , relief efforts would probably be quickly organized . Teams such as the Volcano Disaster Assistance Program ( VDAP ) are prepared to effectively evacuate , assist , and rescue people threatened by volcanic eruptions . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 = = = Regional setting = = = 
 Volcanism in the Chilean Andes is caused by subduction of the Nazca and Antarctic tectonic plates under the South American Plate . Volcanoes in Chile occur in the Central ( CVZ ) , South ( SVZ ) , and Austral Volcanic Zones ( <unk> ) . The gap that separates the Central and South Volcanic Zones is caused by shallow @-@ angle subduction in the Pampean flat @-@ slab segment where the more buoyant Juan Fernández Ridge subducts under the South American continent . This buoyant region prevents the slab ( subducting tectonic plate ) from diving deep into the mantle , where the heat and pressure would destabilize the mineral chlorite , releasing water that would in turn cause melting and volcanism . The Patagonian Volcanic Gap , which separates the South and Austral Volcanic Zones , is caused by the subduction of the Chile Ridge , though it is less clear whether this gap also is due to flat @-@ slab subduction ; it may instead arise because melting of the subducting slab there produced felsic igneous rocks instead of volcanoes . 
 Offshore volcanism also occurs in Chile . <unk> volcanism generated from the Easter and Juan Fernández hotspots has formed many Chilean islands , including Isla Salas y Gómez , Easter Island , and the Juan Fernández Islands . Underwater volcanism occurs due to seafloor spreading along the Chile Ridge . 
 Nearly 100 Quaternary ( <unk> or Holocene @-@ age ) independent volcanoes exist in the country , in addition to 60 volcanic complexes and caldera systems . Of the 200 historically active volcanoes in the Andean Range , 36 are found in Chile . 
 = = = Local setting = = = 
 Cerro Azul is part of the South Volcanic Zone , which runs through central and western Chile and extends south to Argentina . This range includes at least nine caldera complexes , more than 70 of Chile 's stratovolcanoes and volcanic fields that have been active in the Quaternary , and hundreds of minor eruptive centres . The South Volcanic Zone is the most volcanically active region in Chile , and produces around one eruption per year . Its largest historical eruption was at Quizapu Crater , located on the north side of Cerro Azul 's summit ( see below ) , and its most active volcanoes are Llaima and Villarrica . 
 Cerro Azul , just 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) south of Descabezado Grande volcano , is part of the Descabezado Grande – Cerro Azul eruptive system , a volcanic field which comprises its two large namesake volcanic edifices and several smaller vents , including 12 Holocene calderas . Both volcanoes lie on top of the <unk> Shield , a plateau built of over 100 lava flows that erupted in at least 12 volcanic episodes during the Quaternary period . The upper lava layers are dated at 340 @,@ 000 years . 
 As with the majority of the Andean volcanoes , Cerro Azul is a stratovolcano , meaning that it consists of layers , or strata , of volcanic ash and lava flows . The cone of Cerro Azul has a total volume of about 11 cubic kilometres ( 3 cu mi ) , and is a young feature , formed in the Holocene . It is made of agglutinated pyroclasts and some dacite – <unk> lavas . The cone has a few volcanic craters ; the majority of its eruptions in recorded history have originated from Quizapu Crater on the northern flank of Cerro Azul 's cone . Other craters lying on the flanks of the main cone are Caracol ( " Snail " ) , Crater los <unk> , Crater la <unk> , and Crater sin Nombre ( " Nameless Crater " ) . All of the craters lie between 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 and 9 @,@ 800 ft ) in elevation , except Quizapu , which is 3 @,@ 292 metres ( 10 @,@ 801 ft ) up the volcano . The summit of Cerro Azul is crowned by an asymmetric crater about 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 640 ft ) in diameter . Pleistocene glacial activity is evident in the form of 500 meter ( 1 @,@ 640 ft ) deep struts in the volcanoes ' sides . These deep cuts have revealed strata of older rock . 
 = = = Quizapu Crater = = = 
 Quizapu , which formed during the 1846 eruption , is the most prominent crater . It is also known as Cerro del Medio ( " Middle Hill " ) or Volcan Nuevo ( " New Volcano " ) . The volcanic vent formed during an effusive eruption involving hornblende – dacite flows accompanied by tephra , and the crater was excavated by phreatic and Strombolian eruptions between 1907 and 1932 . <unk> @-@ up pressure within the volcano spawned an enormous Plinian eruption in 1932 . The volume of lava ejected during this single event is roughly equal to that ejected during the rest of the eruptive history at Quizapu , since its formation in 1846 . Although 9 @.@ 5 cubic kilometers ( 2 @.@ 3 cu mi ) of material was ejected , no subsidence was detected from the removal of magma . Because of aerodynamic drag , a Plinian eruption excavates a circular crater . As the earlier eruptions had already formed an approximately circular caldera , the Plinian eruption was able to proceed efficiently , with minimal drag and minimal reshaping of the crater . 
 The Quizapu Crater is almost perfectly circular , and rises to a prominence of 150 to 250 meters ( 490 to 820 ft ) above the surrounding portions of the volcano . <unk> at 3 @,@ 292 meters ( 10 @,@ 801 ft ) in elevation , Quizapu is one of the highest known Plinian craters . The radius of the crater floor , which is the current inner vent , is around 150 meters ( 500 ft ) , while the radius of its rim is 300 – 350 meters ( 980 – 1 @,@ 150 ft ) . The crater floor lies at 2 @,@ 928 meters ( 9 @,@ 606 ft ) , and the rim lies 150 – 300 meters ( 500 – 1 @,@ 000 ft ) above that , giving the walls an average slope of 34 – 35 degrees ( close to the angle of repose ) . The western wall is cut by two long , dacitic lava flows : probably the remnants of a dome or an eruption . The crater is surrounded by debris from its 1932 eruption , and topped by layers — 50 meters ( 160 ft ) thick — of mafic scoria and ash . 
 = = Climate and vegetation = = 
 Cerro Azul is situated in a Mediterranean climate zone , characterized by hot and dry summers but mild and wet winters . The temperatures and precipitation are strongly dependent on topography . In the Andes the annual average maximum temperatures lie in the range 20 to 25 ° C ( 68 to 77 ° F ) , while minimum temperatures are below 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) . Annual precipitation is up to 800 mm ( 31 @.@ 5 inches ) . 
 Vegetation in the Andes varies with elevation . Above 1 @,@ 600 meters ( 5 @,@ 249 ft ) the slopes of mountains are covered by Alpine @-@ like steppe , while below there are zones of Nothofagus forest , <unk> forest , <unk> forest , and <unk> . The number of plant species is likely to exceed 2 @,@ 000 , although no comprehensive study of the flora of Central Chile has been undertaken . 
 = = Eruptive history = = 
 Cerro Azul has a history of eruptions dating back to at least 1846 . The known events include effusive eruptions ( lava flows ) , which created the Quizapu vent , explosive eruptions , and phreatic eruptions . Pyroclastic flows have also been observed as a result of some of these explosive eruptions . The earliest recorded eruption began on November 26 , 1846 , while the volcano 's last eruption began on August 9 , 1967 . The volcano has produced two of the largest eruptions in South America in recorded history , in 1846 and 1932 . Both released 4 – 5 cubic kilometers ( 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 2 cu mi ) of the dacitic magma . 
 = = = First record of activity , 1846 = = = 
 On November 26 , 1846 , Cerro Azul erupted . This was the first report of activity at the volcano , and no trace of fumaroles , adjacent vents , or pre @-@ eruptive activity exists . Most descriptions of the eruption come from the backcountry herdsmen ( <unk> ) . One , who was camped in a valley approximately 7 kilometers ( 4 mi ) east of Quizapu , heard " a great noise and a cloud of ash " emanate from the mountain in the late afternoon . No precursor activity was reported , and the herdsman claimed that there were no earthquakes during the late afternoon eruption . 
 That night , two herdsmen near the site heard a continuous roar , punctuated by loud bangs and crackling sounds " like that of great rockslides " . Lightning and thunder accompanied the spectacle . They saw many blue flames , and were choked by sulfurous gas . Observers in Talca 85 kilometers ( 53 mi ) away heard the eruption noises , and the sulfurous odors reached them the day after the eruption . None of the reports mention earthquakes or ash fall , though the crackling and banging sounds could be from block lavas ( ʻaʻā ) . 
 This first recorded eruption of Cerro Azul was effusive , and formed the volcanic vent at Quizapu . <unk> – dacite lava erupted with small masses of tephra , which had been <unk> shortly before the eruption . Lava flowed over the Estero Barroso Valley and westward into the Río <unk> Valley . By November 28 , the volcano appeared at rest , and the herdsman returned to the place of first observation . There , they found a blocky lava field . The lava was still hot , fuming and crackling with gas and flame . Fascinated by the volcano , Ignacy <unk> traveled to Chile to study the field and found its width to be 8 – 9 square kilometers ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 5 sq mi ) . By 1992 the field had grown to twice that size . 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 Cerro Azul was quiet from 1846 to the beginning of the 20th century . After a possible precursor explosive event in 1903 , Cerro Azul once again erupted in 1907 . Between 1907 and 1914 , plumes and clouds of ash frequently rose out of the caldera , and at least a few of these events were explosive . On September 8 , 1914 , an explosive eruption sent a plume 6 or 7 kilometers ( about 4 mi ) into the air over 8 minutes . By 1916 , these eruptions had produced a caldera nearly identical to the one in existence today . 
 The volcano also erupted <unk> several times , as recorded by Vogel in 1913 and 1920 , with its activity increasing from 1916 to 1926 . During these years , the eruptions grew more frequent and more violent . A major outburst on November 2 , 1927 started a period of nearly continuous violent eruptions that lasted until 1929 . During this period , Cerro Azul sometimes erupted daily , sending columns of ash as far as 6 or 7 kilometers ( about 4 mi ) into the air . Quizapu Crater grew slightly during this eruptive period . 
 Pre @-@ 1932 volcanism was largely phreatic or fumarolic , as evidenced by the lack of tephra generated by these eruptions . Photographs from 1912 show vapor plumes containing little ash , rising 1 – 2 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 2 mi ) above the crater . 
 = = = Major eruption , 1932 = = = 
 By 1932 , Quizapu had produced many phreatic events and one effusive eruption , but no large Plinian eruptions . This frequency of minor eruptive activity proved to be a precursor for a major eruption . On 25 January 1932 , observers in <unk> saw a large black cloud over the summit . By 9 April , the volcano emitted green gas and started to " bellow like a bull " . On April 10 , Cerro Azul finally erupted , releasing a towering column or plume of white gas . After 10 AM , the plume turned black with ash and began to form an umbrella shape . The ash was carried by wind into Puesto El Tristan in Argentina , about 47 kilometers ( 29 mi ) away , where beginning at 1 PM it rained down for hours . At 4 PM , coarser sandy material and some pumice lapilli began to fall . 
 Cerro Azul 's April 1932 eruption was one of the largest of the 20th century . Releasing 9 @.@ 5 cubic kilometers ( 2 cu mi ) of lava , the volcano ejected primarily dacitic tephra , accompanied by rhyodacite , andesite , and minuscule amounts of andesitic and basaltic scoria . At least one eruptive period lasted for 18 hours , creating an " exceptionally uniform " deposit . Eruption columns , extending 27 – 30 kilometers ( 17 – 19 mi ) into the air , were sighted . <unk> were similar to the effusive eruption in 1846 . Soon after , both the <unk> and Descabezado Grande volcanoes began erupting , sending clouds of ash 800 kilometers ( 500 mi ) into Argentina . The eruption had a Volcanic Explosivity Index ( VEI ) of at least 5 . 
 Since the eruption of 1932 Quizapu has been quiet . In 1949 and 1967 small ash clouds were reported , while in the 1980s there were no signs of activity other than fumaroles . 
 = = Threats and preparedness = = 
 Cerro Azul is in the South Volcanic Zone , where many volcanoes pose a threat to human life . Among the other active volcanoes of the South Volcanic Zone are Mount Hudson , Llaima , and Villarrica . Villarrica and Llaima together have more than 80 reported episodes of volcanism since 1558 , and at least 40 South Volcanic Zone volcanoes have had Holocene @-@ age eruptions . 
 Every known type of eruption ( Hawaiian , Strombolian , Plinian , <unk> , phreatic , phreatomagmatic , and Vulcanian ) has occurred at some point in the range . Cerro Azul itself has experienced phreatic , Strombolian , and Plinian activity in human history . The type of eruption tends to correspond with lava composition . Strombolian eruptions at Llaima , Antuco , Villarrica , and elsewhere have been produced by basaltic to basaltic – andesitic activity . <unk> to rhyolitic lavas have been linked to <unk> and Plinian eruptions , such as those at Quizapu ( 1932 ) and Hudson ( 1991 ) . Because of this variability , volcanic hazards from Cerro Azul and the surrounding region could come in many different forms . Historical eruptions typically have produced lahars , lava flows , and ashfalls . Lava flows and lahars could wipe out entire cities or towns . <unk> produced by explosive eruptions could interfere with air traffic . Most threatening of all is the risk of pyroclastic flows or avalanches , which have historically traversed as far as 100 kilometers ( 62 mi ) in the region . 
 Past eruptions of Quizapu Crater ejected enormous amounts of ash that traveled as far as Brazil . After the 1932 eruption , the local vegetation was devastated , and the area remained barren until the 1990s , though human life was not impacted . Despite the extent of its eruptions , the threat to humans from Quizapu is relatively small because of the remote location of Cerro Azul . Nevertheless , the size of past eruptions is large enough for scientists to be worried . Evidence of a potentially deadly threat lies in a lahar at Descabezado Grande . Historically , lahars have killed thousands in the Andes . There is , however , a possibility that a large reservoir of rhyodacite magma may exist under the Azul – Descabezado complex . If this is the case , all previous eruptions in 1846 – 1967 were only preliminary , <unk> leaks from the large magma chamber beneath , and a large caldera @-@ forming eruption may be expected in the future . 
 If Cerro Azul were to erupt , relief efforts could be orchestrated . The Volcanic Disaster Assistance Program ( VDAP ) formed in response to the famous eruption of Nevado del Ruiz in Colombia , and responded to the 1991 eruption of Mount Hudson in Chile . The team 's stated aim is to " reduce eruption @-@ caused fatalities and economic losses in developing countries " . Made up of various USGS offices ( such as the Cascades Volcano Observatory ; CVO that are responsible for monitoring Mount St. Helens ) , the team is outfitted with equipment capable of monitoring any volcano . This equipment allows them to predict volcanic eruptions effectively and rapidly , and to evacuate nearby homes . 
 = Urmston = 
 Urmston / <unk> / is a town in Trafford , Greater Manchester , England , with a population of 41 @,@ 825 at the 2011 Census . Historically in Lancashire , it is about six miles ( 10 km ) southwest of Manchester city centre . The southern boundary is the River Mersey , with Stretford lying to the east and Flixton to the west . Davyhulme lies to the north of the town centre . Urmston covers an area of 4 @,@ 799 acres ( 19 km ² ) . 
 The town has early medieval origins , and until the arrival of the railway in 1873 was a small farming community . The railway acted as a catalyst , transforming the town into a residence for the middle classes . Today , Urmston is one of the major urban areas in Trafford : it includes the areas of Davyhulme and Flixton . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1983 , during an excavation by South Trafford Archaeological Group , fragments of Roman pottery were found in the area now occupied by the cemetery – previously the site of Urmston Old Hall – suggesting that there may have been a Roman settlement on the site . In the early 13th century , Lord Greenhalgh and his family lived at Highfield House ( under what is now the M60 motorway ) . 
 Shortly after the Norman conquest of England , between 1069 and 1070 , William the Conqueror led a military campaign against the Saxon Earl Edwin , who ruled England north of the River Mersey . On the campaign 's successful conclusion , William gave his kinsman Roger de Poictou all of the land between the River Mersey and the River Ribble . Part of this land was in turn given to Albert de <unk> , who towards the end of the 12th century , bestowed as much land as a team of oxen could plough in one @-@ year on Orme Fitz Seward , the son of Edward Aylward . It is probable that the name Urmston is derived from Orme 's Easton , or <unk> , the " tun " or dwelling of Orme Fitz Seward . 
 The Manor of Urmston was rented by a family using the local surname . The earliest known member of the Urmston family is Richard de Urmston , who was recorded in 1193 – 4 as giving 40 shillings " for having the king 's good will " . Orme Fitz Seward 's land passed to Richard de Trafford in the 13th century . The de Trafford family later lost the land , but won it back as the result of a duel . 
 Urmston Old Hall was the home of the manorial lord , and a centre of power in the area during the Middle Ages . The Old Hall was completely rebuilt in brick and timber in the late 16th century . New Croft Hall , also in Urmston , was the residence of a wealthy freeman and may have been moated . Urmston was only one of three manors in Trafford to have had two medieval halls , the others being Hale and Timperley . Neither of the halls has survived to the present day . 
 Farming was the main occupation in Urmston until the early 19th century , when weaving became a significant source of employment , although this later declined due to competition from large industry . In 1848 , the population was recorded as being 771 , with around 80 % of the land being farmed . The opening of the Cheshire Lines Railway in 1873 allowed the town to grow as a commuter town : between 1871 and 1901 the population grew by over 650 % , from 996 to 6 @,@ 594 . By 1901 , farming had virtually died out , and the town became a residence for the middle classes . 
 In 1948 the Minister for Health , Aneurin Bevan , conducted the symbolic inauguration of the National Health Service at Davyhulme 's Park Hospital , now renamed Trafford General Hospital . The area was home to the first District heating system in England . In operation by 1948 , a boiler house supplied hot water to 200 homes on a newly built housing estate . The water was heated with low @-@ grade fuels such as peat and coke , with houses built in groups of four for better efficiency . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Once a township in the parish of Flixton , Urmston became an urban district of the administrative county of Lancashire , under the Local Government Act 1894 . The Local Government Act 1972 abolished the Urban District of Urmston and in 1974 Urmston became a district of the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford , in the metropolitan county of Greater Manchester . 
 The parliamentary constituency of Stretford and Urmston was formed in 1997 . Kate Green , a member of the Labour Party , became the MP at the 2010 General Election , with a majority of 8 @,@ 935 , representing 48 @.@ 6 % of the vote . The Conservatives took 28 @.@ 7 % of the vote , the Liberal Democrats 16 @.@ 9 % , the United Kingdom Independence Party 3 @.@ 4 % , the Green Party 2 @.@ 0 % , and the Christian Party 0 @.@ 4 % . 
 Urmston is one of the four major urban areas in Trafford , the other three being Altrincham , Sale and Stretford . In local elections for Trafford Council , Urmston is split into four wards : Davyhulme East , Davyhulme West , Flixton and Urmston . Like every other ward in Trafford they are each represented by three local councillors , giving Urmston 12 of the 63 seats on Trafford Council ; as of the 2012 local election nine of these were held by the Conservative Party , and three by Labour . The wards elect in thirds on a four yearly cycle . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Urmston occupies an area of 7 @.@ 5 square miles ( 19 @.@ 4 km2 ) , at 53 ° 26 ′ 55 ″ N 2 ° 22 ′ 29 ″ W ( 53 @.@ <unk> , − 2 @.@ <unk> ) ; it is approximately 137 feet ( 42 m ) above sea level at its highest point . The land is relatively flat , sloping gently from north to south . Urmston 's climate is generally temperate , with few extremes of temperature or weather . The mean temperature is slightly above average for the United Kingdom . Annual rainfall and average amount of sunshine are both slightly below the average for the UK . 
 Urmston comprises the areas of Davyhulme , Dumplington , Flixton , and Urmston , with the River Mersey forming the southern boundary . For administrative reasons , Partington is sometimes considered to be part of Urmston . The most southerly part of Urmston lies within the flood plain of the River Mersey , an area known as Urmston Meadows , part of the Mersey Valley . Much work was carried out in the 1970s to <unk> the Mersey , in an effort to speed up the flow of floodwater and thus reduce the risk of flooding . Upstream emergency <unk> such as Sale Water Park , lying just to the east of Urmston , have also been constructed . The M60 Manchester orbital motorway passes through the northern half of Urmston , from southeast to northwest , and the M62 motorway lies just to the west . The Thirlmere Aqueduct also passes through the Urmston area . 
 = = Demography = = 
 As of the 2001 UK census , Urmston had a population of 40 @,@ 964 . The population density was 10 @,@ 881 inhabitants per square mile ( 4 @,@ 201 / km2 ) , and for every 100 females , there were 93 @.@ 0 males . Of the 19 @,@ 172 households in Urmston , 39 @.@ 9 % were married couples living together , 29 @.@ 6 % were one @-@ person households , 7 @.@ 7 % were co @-@ habiting couples and 8 @.@ 9 % were lone parents . Of those aged 16 – 74 in Urmston , 25 @.@ 5 % had no academic qualifications , slightly high compared to 21 @.@ 3 % for all of Trafford but slightly lower than the and 28 @.@ 9 % in England . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The Trafford Centre , a large shopping and leisure complex , is at Dumplington , north of Urmston . Some locals felt that it brought about the decline of Urmston Precinct , the town 's central shopping area – dating back to the 1960s – where many units closed or became " pound shops " . Beginning in 2007 , Urmston Precinct was demolished and a £ 45 million redevelopment of the site got underway , to include 140 @,@ 000 square feet ( 13 @,@ 006 m2 ) of retail and leisure space and 144 apartments . This redevelopment project is now known as Eden Square . A new Sainsbury 's opened in the summer of 2009 as did the relocated local library with the rest of the new shopping precinct expected to follow later in the year . This was followed by the opening of an Aldi supermarket ; a few budget stores ; bars ; and cafes . 
 The average price for a semi @-@ detached home in Urmston is £ 155 @,@ 475 , whilst a detached house will cost on average £ 247 @,@ 630 . Semi @-@ detached prices have more than doubled from an average of £ 60 @,@ 000 in 1998 , although house prices in most areas of the country have seen a similar increase . These figures are , however , below the England and Wales average . 
 As of the 2001 UK census , Urmston had a possible workforce of approximately 32 @,@ 996 people . The economic activity of residents in Urmston was 46 @.@ 1 % in full @-@ time employment , 12 @.@ 6 % in part @-@ time employment , 6 @.@ 9 % self @-@ employed , 2 @.@ 1 % unemployed , 2 @.@ 5 % students with jobs , 3 @.@ 0 % students without jobs , 14 @.@ 7 % retired , 4 @.@ 5 % looking after home or family , 5 @.@ 4 % permanently sick or disabled and 2 @.@ 2 % economically inactive for other reasons . Urmston has a low rate of unemployment ( 2 @.@ 1 % ) compared with Trafford ( 2 @.@ 7 % ) and England ( 3 @.@ 3 % ) . The Office for National Statistics estimated that during the period of April 2001 to March 2002 the average gross weekly income of households in Urmston was £ 504 ( £ 26 @,@ 209 per year ) . 
 According to the 2001 UK census , the industry of employment of residents in Urmston was 17 @.@ 1 % retail and wholesale , 14 @.@ 0 % health and social work , 13 @.@ 9 % manufacturing , 13 @.@ 4 % property and business services , 8 @.@ 1 % transport and communications , 7 @.@ 2 % education , 6 @.@ 8 % construction , 5 @.@ 3 % finance , 4 @.@ 9 % public administration and defence , 3 @.@ 4 % hotels and restaurants , 0 @.@ 9 % energy and water supply , 0 @.@ 4 % agriculture , 0 @.@ 1 % in mining , and 4 @.@ 3 % other . This was roughly in line with national figures . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Cultural events and venues = = = 
 Urmston Musical Theatre was formed as the Urmston and District Operatic Society in 1911 . Its current president is actor Matthew Kelly , who was born in Urmston . It performs an adult main show in October with rehearsals running from June to October and a pantomime in January / February with rehearsals running from November to the date of the show . Both shows are performed at the Poolside Theatre within the Urmston Leisure Centre . Its youth section performs a show in May at St Antony 's Catholic College in Urmston . 
 Canterbury Players is a local amateur dramatic society . Performances are given on stage at the Davyhulme ( Wesley ) Methodist Church located in Brook Road , Flixton . Most famed in recent times for the notable appearance of Garry Dennis Carr , a famed socialite and artist from the area . Young people spilled out of the church and car park just to get a glimpse of him and rumoured friend Noel Fielding ( of the Mighty Boosh fame ) In the mid @-@ 20th century there were 20 cinemas in Trafford , of which the only survivor is the New Curzon , in Princess Road . It opened in 1931 as the Curzon . It was converted to a twin cinema and bingo club in the 1970s , and re @-@ opened under its present name of the New Curzon in 1980 , after a £ 100 @,@ 000 conversion . Since 2003 , the building has been shared with Flixton Dance Studio . Recently , due to financial reasons , the New Curzon has been forced to close down . 
 = = = The Beatles = = = 
 In 1963 the council booked the Beatles to play at the Urmston Show at Abbotsfield Park in Chassen Road on Monday 5 August . At the time of the booking , they were not well known , but had risen in popularity by the time of their appearance . David Hamilton who was the compere , for which he received ten guineas ( £ 10 @.@ 50 ) , commented : " The boys were smuggled in in a van ... screaming girls rushed the stage , trying to get hold of their idols ... it was certainly a hard day 's night . " 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Urmston Cricket Club was founded in 1846 as Urmston & Flixton Cricket Club . As well as serving as a social club , it expanded to include other sports including hockey , tennis , and bowls . The club has been located on Moorside Road since 1870 . Urmston Riding Club was established in 1956 on Southgate on the Urmston – Flixton border , and has approximately 150 members . AFC Urmston provides football coaching facilities , and has teams ranging from under 7s to under 17s . The club was founded in 1977 , as Meadowside Athletic FC , and has won the Manchester County FA Youth Cup . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Junctions 9 and 10 of the M60 orbital motorway connect Urmston to the rest of Greater Manchester and the motorway network . A junction previously existed further east along the motorway under its old <unk> designation , but was closed on the opening of the A6144 ( M ) in 1987 . A well known local landmark , opened in 1960 , is the Barton High level motorway bridge , which crosses the Manchester Ship Canal . 
 Urmston is connected to Liverpool and Manchester by the Cheshire Lines Committee railway line which passes through Warrington , and Liverpool South Parkway ( for Liverpool John Lennon Airport ) . There are three railway stations in the Urmston area ( Urmston station in Urmston town centre , Chassen Road and Flixton stations in neighbouring Flixton ) . Trains stopping at these stations are operated by Northern Rail . Urmston is not served by Metrolink . The nearest Metrolink stations are in Stretford and Eccles . 
 Pre @-@ 1969 , most bus services were provided by Manchester Corporation Transport and the North Western Road Car Company . North Western had a depot on Higher Road in Urmston town centre . The services of both undertakings transferred into SELNEC ( South East Lancashire , North East Cheshire , later to become Greater Manchester ) PTE , later renamed as GMPTE , and then on 1 April 2011 renamed to Transport for Greater Manchester . Today , the area is generally well served by both commercially operated and tendered bus services . Some areas have a frequent service of every 10 – 15 minutes on some routes , with half @-@ hourly frequencies on other routes . Services are run variously by Stagecoach in Manchester , First Greater Manchester , <unk> , Go Goodwins and Arriva North West , providing transport to many parts of Greater Manchester including Manchester city centre , Bolton , Stockport , the Trafford Centre and Altrincham 
 = = Education = = 
 Along with the rest of Trafford , Urmston maintains a selective education system assessed by the Eleven Plus examination . 
 There are four primary , infant or junior schools in Urmston , including Urmston Infant School , together with an independent prep school , Abbotsford Preparatory School , in addition to four secondary schools , Urmston Grammar School and St Antony 's Catholic College , <unk> and Flixton Girls School . Urmston Grammar School is a specialist science and language college ; the school was assessed as " outstanding " in its February 2006 Ofsted report . St Antony 's Catholic College is a specialist Business and Enterprise College . In its October 2005 Ofsted report the school was assessed as " a good and improving school with some outstanding features " . 
 = = Religion = = 
 As of the 2001 UK census , 82 @.@ 3 % of Urmston 's residents reported themselves as being Christian , 0 @.@ 8 % Muslim , 0 @.@ 2 % Hindu , 0 @.@ 1 % Jewish , 0 @.@ 1 % Buddhist and 0 @.@ 1 % Sikh . The census recorded 10 @.@ 5 % as having no religion , 0 @.@ 1 % had an alternative religion and 6 @.@ 6 % did not state their religion . Urmston is in the Catholic Diocese of Salford , and the Church of England Diocese of Manchester . 
 There are three listed churches in Urmston : the Church of St Clement ( Grade II ) , the Church of St Michael 's ( Grade II * ) , and the Church of All Saints ( Grade I ) . 
 The Church of All Saints was built in 1867 – 8 by E. W. Pugin , in the Gothic Revival style ; the church is said to be a " notably complete and unspoiled " example of Pugin 's best work . St Clement 's Church was built in 1868 by J Medland Taylor , also in the Gothic Revival style . The Church of St Michael was first mentioned in 1189 – 91 although may be even older . It was rebuilt in 1815 , 1824 , and 1888 . There are two listed structures in the grounds of the church , the sundial and the Jones Chest tomb . The Church of St Michael is one of 11 Grade II * listed buildings in Trafford , and All Saints is one of six Grade I listed buildings in Trafford . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Suzanne Charlton , BBC weather presenter and daughter of Bobby Charlton , was born in Urmston , as was Judy Loe , actress mother of Kate Beckinsale and wife of the late Richard Beckinsale . Other people born in the town include actor and entertainer Matthew Kelly , two former Manchester City footballers , David White and Michael Johnson , Franklin Charles Buckley ( more commonly known as Major Frank Buckley ) an English football player and notable manager for both Blackpool and Wolverhampton Wanderers , Lynda Baron , best known for playing Nurse Gladys Emmanuel in Open All Hours , and Jeremy " Jez " Kerr , singer and bassist of post @-@ punk band A Certain Ratio . Actor George Coulouris was partly brought up in Urmston . Keith Hopwood , the rhythm guitarist of Herman 's Hermits , attended Urmston Grammar School . Former Manchester United player David Herd has a home in Urmston ; Herd has owned a local garage that still bears his name . Debbie Moore , founder of Pineapple Dance Studios was born in the area and Danielle Hope , the winner of BBC TV 's Over the Rainbow , was also a resident . 
 The 18th @-@ century caricaturist and satirical poet John Collier , who used the pseudonym Tim Bobbins , was born in Urmston in 1708 . A self @-@ styled Lancashire Hogarth , his first and most famous work , A View of the Lancashire Dialect , or , <unk> and Mary , appeared in 1746 , the earliest significant piece of published Lancashire dialect . A local public house , The Tim Bobbin , is named after him . 
 Steven Patrick Morrissey , former lead singer of The Smiths , was born here in 1959 . 
 Ian McShane , actor , grew up in Urmston and attended Stretford Grammar School 
 Peter Noone , Singer with Hermans Hermits 
 Eileen Derbyshire , Actress who plays Emily Bishop in Coronation Street 
 = = = External maps and images = = = 
 Map of the Borough of Trafford from Trafford MBC 
 Map of Urmston Town Centre from Trafford MBC 
 Urmston from the air 
 = Riverina = 
 The Riverina / <unk> / is an agricultural region of south @-@ western New South Wales ( NSW ) , Australia . The Riverina is distinguished from other Australian regions by the combination of flat plains , warm to hot climate and an ample supply of water for irrigation . This combination has allowed the Riverina to develop into one of the most productive and agriculturally diverse areas of Australia . Bordered on the south by the state of Victoria and on the east by the Great Dividing Range , the Riverina covers those areas of New South Wales in the Murray and Murrumbidgee drainage zones to their confluence in the west . 
 Home to Aboriginal groups for over 40 @,@ 000 years , the Riverina was originally settled by Europeans in the mid @-@ 19th century as a pastoral region providing beef and wool to markets in Australia and beyond . In the 20th century , the development of major irrigation areas in the Murray and Murrumbidgee valleys has led to the introduction of crops such as rice and wine grapes . The Riverina has strong cultural ties to Victoria , and the region was the source of much of the impetus behind the federation of Australian colonies . 
 Major population and service centres in the Riverina include the cities of Wagga Wagga , Albury and Griffith . Albury and Wagga Wagga are home to campuses of Charles Sturt University , the only local provider of higher education for the region . Wagga Wagga is home to two major Australian Defence Force establishments . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The delineation of the Riverina region by government agencies and other bodies varies , but in common usage it generally comprises the agricultural and pastoral areas of New South Wales , west of the Great Dividing Range and in the drainage basin of the snow @-@ fed Murray and Murrumbidgee Rivers . The northern boundary beyond the Riverina is determined by the Lachlan River catchment area and is referred to as the Central West . Along the Murray to the south , the Riverina borders the state of Victoria . West of the confluence of the Murray and Murrumbidgee is the beginning of the more arid Far West region . 
 In general , the Riverina is an alluvial plain formed by deposition carried from the Great Dividing Range by streams between 30 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 years ago . The terrain includes rolling hills to the east but then becomes flatter to the west with most of that plain reaching less than 200 metres ( 660 ft ) above sea level . The western Riverina consists largely of featureless saltbush plain . 
 = = = <unk> and hydrology = = = 
 The geology of the Riverina comprises several troughs and sedimentary basins . The western Riverina is presumed to be a continuation of the Ballarat and Bendigo geological zone while eastern sections are underlain by western portions of the Lachlan Fold Belt . There is potential for the Riverina to host several mineral deposit types including coal , petroleum , coal seam methane , gypsum , orogenic gold , Cobar style polymetallic systems , heavy mineral sands and possibly diamonds in these fold belt rocks and basins . Riverina soils are generally sandy along the river channels , with more saline grey and brown clays found on rarely flooded areas on the perimeter of the floodplain . As the Murrumbidgee passes downstream , the water and soil become more saline . 
 The Riverina is drained by the large Murray @-@ Darling Basin . Rivers and streams in the Riverina generally flow east to west . As well as the Murray , Murrumbidgee and Lachlan , other streams include Billabong Creek and the Edward River , an <unk> of the Murray . Much of the water carried by these streams is diverted . In 2001 – 2002 , 52 % of the Murray and Murrumbidgee water runoff was diverted , 77 % of which was used for irrigation . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The Bureau of Meteorology classify the Riverina in the Hot Dry Zone ( with cooler winters ) climatic zone . Places in this zone can be very hot in the summer months while in the winter , nights can be very cold with cool to mild days . Mean daily maximum temperatures in the Riverina range from 31 @.@ 0 ° C ( 87 @.@ 8 ° F ) in January and 12 @.@ 4 ° C ( 54 @.@ 3 ° F ) in July in Wagga Wagga to 33 @.@ 2 ° C ( 91 @.@ 8 ° F ) in January and 14 @.@ 8 ° C ( 58 @.@ 6 ° F ) in July in Hillston . 
 Rainfall levels in the Riverina are generally low with the median annual rainfall over most of the region between 250 – 500 millimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 – 19 @.@ 7 in ) , rising to between 500 – 800 mm ( 20 – 31 in ) on the eastern fringe . Rain generally falls in the winter in the southern Riverina and around Hay while in the north rainfall patterns are fairly consistent throughout the year . Corowa , in the south eastern Riverina has an average rainfall of 539 @.@ 4 millimetres ( 21 @.@ 2 in ) per year while mean annual rainfall at Hay is 367 @.@ 2 millimetres ( 14 @.@ 5 in ) . Drought in 2006 has seen the lowest ever recorded rainfall in towns such as Lockhart , Tarcutta and Narrandera . 
 = = = Riverina bioregion = = = 
 One method of classification of boundaries for the Riverina is the Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia that defines the bioregion as an area comprising 9 @,@ 704 @,@ 469 hectares ( 23 @,@ 980 @,@ 270 acres ) , with biogeographic subregions covering each of the Lachlan , Murrumbidgee , Murray Fans , Victorian Riverina , Robinvale Plains , and Murray Scroll Belt . 
 The New South Wales Parks and Wildlife Service has divided New South Wales into 17 distinct bioregions . <unk> are quite large areas of land that capture a geophysical pattern which is linked to fauna and flora ecosystems . The Riverina bioregion is an area of land that comprises part of the larger Riverina area but also extends into Victoria . It has been defined by the New South Wales Parks and Wildlife Service as extending from Ivanhoe in the Murray Darling Depression <unk> south to Bendigo , and from Narrandera in the east to Balranald in the west . 74 @.@ 03 % of the bioregion is in New South Wales , the remainder in Victoria . 
 In another mapping the World Wildlife Fund has made this area part of the larger Southeast Australia temperate savanna ecoregion that covers the western plains of New South Wales . 
 River channels in the region support River Red Gum ( Eucalyptus camaldulensis ) and River <unk> ( Acacia stenophylla ) communities . Nearby higher areas contain Black Box ( Eucalyptus <unk> ) woodlands and a salt @-@ tolerant grass , saltbush and daisy understorey . Yellow Box ( Eucalyptus melliodora ) and Grey Box ( Eucalyptus microcarpa ) occur along with Cypress Pine ( Callitris <unk> ) on areas rarely subjected to flooding . The area away from the rivers often consists of treeless plains , consisting of various saltbush ( Atriplex ) species , Cotton Bush ( <unk> <unk> ) and varieties of Danthonia and <unk> native grasslands . 
 Significant mammals endemic to forests in the bioregion include various species of glider , such as Sugar Gliders ( Petaurus breviceps ) , Feathertail Gliders ( Acrobates pygmaeus ) and Squirrel Gliders ( Petaurus <unk> ) as well as Koalas ( Phascolarctos cinereus ) A wide variety of birdlife makes its home in wetlands in the Riverina , including many migratory species . Competition from introduced species and the effect of clearing , grazing and pasture improvement has led to a decline in the diversity of native flora and fauna in the area . 
 = = History = = 
 Aboriginal people are thought to have inhabited the Riverina for at least 40 @,@ 000 years . The Wiradjuri people were the original inhabitants of much of south western New South Wales including much of the Riverina region along the Murrumbidgee and Lachlan rivers . Other groups living along the Murrumbidgee included the Nari @-@ Nari on the western plains where the town of Hay , the <unk> @-@ <unk> along the <unk> , <unk> and the <unk> @-@ <unk> of Oxley . Along both sides of the Murray River lived the <unk> <unk> people inhabiting the area of the Riverina as far east as the present day city of Albury and as far north as the Finley and Deniliquin districts . The Murray was also home to other groups such as the <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> , Wadi @-@ Wadi , Dadi @-@ Dadi and <unk> communities . 
 The rivers played a leading role in the lifestyle of the Aboriginal people , acting as a source of food and a means of communication and trade . Murray cod and shellfish were gathered for food and bark canoes were used for travel along the rivers . Scars on many trees alongside the rivers are evidence of this extensive use of canoes . In the summer it is likely that the <unk> and Wiradjuri joined the Monaro groups in the Bogong moth feasts in the alpine country to the east . 
 = = = Exploration and pastoral settlement = = = 
 The first European explorer in the Riverina was John Oxley in 1817 following the Lachlan River to what is now the town of <unk> . Oxley was followed by Charles Sturt , who followed the Murrumbidgee downstream to Lake Alexandrina in South Australia between 1828 – 1831 and Major Thomas Mitchell in 1836 on his way to the Wimmera and the Western District . 
 Pastoral settlement followed soon after , with grazing runs established along the Murray and Murrumbidgee as far west as Hay by 1839 . At the time , the area was known as the Murrumbidgee District . Moulamein , in the western Riverina , appears to make legitimate claims as the oldest town in the Riverina , and indeed to being older than Melbourne . The settlers often came into conflict with the indigenous inhabitants . In the Narrandera district , a battle took place between settlers and the local <unk> clan at a location now known as Massacre Island , reportedly leaving only one survivor . 
 Cattle raising was the major industry in the 1840s with sheep becoming predominant in the 1860s . At this time many Victorians settled in the Riverina to breed sheep and cattle to feed the miners taking part in the Victorian Gold Rush . The herds were considered inferior at first , but these pastures were good for stock , and the land which seemed a desert was actually good fattening country . In the 1860s and 1870s , German settlers from the Barossa Valley travelled upstream to settle in the eastern Riverina . Because of their religious distinctiveness as Lutherans , they preferred to form clustered German settlements . In 1867 and 1868 several land parcels were taken up in the <unk> area . 56 German farmers , in 1869 , took six weeks to travel six hundred miles in covered wagons to establish the town of Walla Walla . Nearby Holbrook was originally named Germantown after these settlers until changing its name in 1914 as a result of tensions caused by World War I. 
 The name " Riverine " , coined from the Entre Ríos Province ( between two rivers ) in Argentina , South America , was in use as early as 1857 : a long letter under the caption " Riverine Colony " appeared in the Albury Border Post of 24 January that year . The name was coined by Dunmore Lang who translated it from the Spanish . 
 Dunmore Lang was also involved with the short lived Riverina secession movement which was active in the 1860s . The movement was inspired by the success of the Victorian and Queensland secession movements and motivated by a desire to draw more public funds to the region and maintain the favourable land tenure the " squatter " pastoralists enjoyed . With the movement strongest in Deniliquin and Albury , Dunmore Lang , unrelated squatter and parliamentarian Gideon Lang and other influential pastoralists joined with local newspaper editors , George Mott and David Jones in the campaign . This culminated in presenting petitions to the Governor of New South Wales , Sir John Young and the Colonial Secretary , Edward Cardwell . Soon after the movement fell apart due to the differences between the squatters on one side and the small farmers and townspeople on the other causing its objectives to become obscured by other associated issues such as inter @-@ colonial tariffs and rail links . 
 = = = Riverboats and railways = = = 
 From 1853 , the Riverina was linked to markets through a series of riverboats along the Murray and Murrumbidgee to the river ports of Mannum and <unk> in South Australia and from 1864 , to Echuca connected by rail to Melbourne . Riverboats reached as far upstream as Gundagai and Albury and towns such as Darlington Point , Narrandera and Moulamein became important river ports . The riverboat era peaked in the twenty years from 1870 – 1890 , declining with the coming of the railway and finally ending with the disruption to the workforce caused by World War I. 
 From Melbourne , broad gauge railway lines opened to Deniliquin in 1876 and west to Moulamein and Balranald in 1926 . The Moulamein – Balranald section closed in the 1980s . The North East line reached Wodonga in 1873 , and was connected to Albury at a break @-@ of @-@ gauge in 1883 , and the Melbourne @-@ Shepparton line was extended to Tocumwal in 1908 . 
 The number of cross border railways expanded with the passing of the 1922 Border Railways Act , with the Benalla – <unk> branch line extended to Oaklands in 1938 , both lines meeting standard gauge lines that were subsequently closed . Victorian Railways commenced construction of a railway from Robinvale to <unk> and Lette in New South Wales in 1924 ( the Lette railway line ) , but this railway was never completed . The Murray River bridge between Robinvale and Euston was instead converted to a road bridge , which will be demolished when the new road bridge currently under construction is completed . The Stony Crossing railway line was built from <unk> to <unk> in 1924 and Stony Crossing ( originally called <unk> ) in 1928 under an agreement with New South Wales . No passenger services were carried on the section beyond <unk> after 1932 and it was closed about 1943 . 
 Standard gauge rail services from Sydney came with the extension of the Main Southern line to Cootamundra and Junee in 1878 and the construction of the Murrumbidgee River Railway Bridge in 1881 allowed the line to be extended past Wagga Wagga to Henty and Albury later that year . A branch line was constructed to Temora in 1893 and extended to <unk> in 1908 , Griffith in 1916 and Hillston in 1923 . Further south , a branch line was completed from Junee to Narrandera in 1881 and extended to Hay by 1882 . Another branch pushed south from Narrandera toward the Victorian border reaching Jerilderie in 1884 and the Murray at Tocumwal in 1898 . 
 = = = Bushrangers = = = 
 Transport links assisted the development of the Riverina economy , at the same time areas of the region found themselves under threat from robbery and murder by various bushrangers . Between 1862 and 1865 , the eastern Riverina between Wagga Wagga and Albury saw the depredations of Dan " Mad Dog " Morgan . Having previously been convicted of armed robbery , Morgan came to the attention to authorities in the Riverina when he bailed up a police magistrate , Henry Baylis , near Urana in 1863 . In 1864 , Morgan bailed up Round Hill station , a large sheep farm near Morven , killing a station hand . Later that year , the bushranger shot dead a policeman in cold blood near <unk> . The reward placed on his head reached £ 1 @,@ 000 before , in April 1865 , he was shot dead near Wangaratta , Victoria . 
 The infamous Australian bushranger , Ned Kelly , made possibly his most daring raid in the Riverina , at Jerilderie in 1879 . After riding overland from north east Victoria , Kelly and his gang in a brazen move captured two local policemen and stole their uniforms . <unk> the police , they then proceeded to rob the Bank of New South Wales and held the town captive for several days . While in Jerilderie , he sought to have his manifesto published , the famous Jerilderie letter , a rambling 8 @,@ 000 word condemnation of the colonial administration in Victoria and specifically the treatment of the Irish . Being unable to find the local newspaper editor , he left the letter with a member of the bank staff and returned to Victoria £ 2 @,@ 000 richer . 
 = = = Riverina and Federation = = = 
 The close geographic and cultural ties between the Riverina and northern Victoria , combined with continuing frustration with inter colonial tariffs , made the Riverina a fertile area for ideas for uniting the various colonies in an Australian federation . This would see the southern Riverina in particular take a leading role in bringing about federation . 
 Prior to federation , the various Australian colonies could , and often did , charge tariffs on goods from the other colonies , ostensibly for the protection of their domestic manufacturing industries , mainly based in the larger cities such as Sydney and Melbourne . For a border community such as the southern Riverina , these tariffs were a sore burden , making goods purchased from Melbourne , the closest large city , more expensive and reducing the competitiveness of these towns supplying the Melbourne and Adelaide markets . In addition , crossing the border on the Murray River was a tiresome experience as each border crossing had customs posts inspecting goods and luggage to ensure all duty was paid and to reduce smuggling , a popular activity . Another item of concern was the lack of adequate river crossings . Along the Riverina the Murray was — and remains — part of New South Wales , who had no interest in assisting border residents to access goods and services in Victoria that may otherwise have been sourced from Sydney . 
 In the early 1890s , for mainly patriotic reasons , the Australian Natives ' Association helped establish the Federation League , a society dedicated to the creation of a federal nation . Following a series of addresses by the future Prime Minister , Edmund Barton to large crowds , some 15 League branches were established in the towns along the southern border . One of these towns , Corowa , was the location for the first conference of the Australian Federation League in 1893 . At this conference , Dr John Quick , a delegate from Bendigo , proposed a resolution calling for the colonial legislatures to pass an act providing for the election of representatives to a convention to develop a federal constitution . This has been seen as the turning point in the push for Federation . The momentum generated from this point lead to a series of conventions and elections and finally , the inauguration of a federal constitution on 1 January 1901 . 
 = = = Irrigation and closer settlement = = = 
 Large scale irrigation commenced with the establishment of the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area ( MIA ) in 1912 which diverted water from the Murrumbidgee River near Narrandera . The River Murray Waters Agreement of 1915 allowed 26 weirs to be constructed with locks to provide permanent riverboat access to Echuca . When riverboat transport was no longer significant , the weirs supported irrigation . Irrigation in the region continued to develop with the construction of the Hume Dam between 1919 and 1931 , the Burrinjuck Dam built in 1928 and <unk> Dam built in 1968 . 
 Development and promotion of the MIA led to large scale settlement on land described by Oxley 100 years earlier as " country which , for barrenness and desolation , can I think , have no equal . " Settlers came from a diverse range of backgrounds and nationalities . In particular , the Italian community prospered in the Area , owning nearly half of all the farms around Griffith by 1954 . Later , further irrigation was developed for areas in the Murray valley starting with the <unk> Irrigation District in 1932 , then the <unk> and <unk> Irrigation Districts in 1938 , the <unk> Irrigation District in 1939 and the <unk> Irrigation Area in 1942 . The Coleambally Irrigation Area , established in 1968 , was the last of the major government @-@ sponsored irrigation developments in New South Wales . 
 = = Agriculture = = 
 The high soil fertility and abundance of water in the Riverina floodplain has made the Riverina region one of the most productive farming regions in Australia with rice , wheat , maize , canola , citrus and wine grapes being grown in the area . The Riverina contains many irrigation schemes including the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area . 182 @,@ 000 hectares ( 450 @,@ 000 acres ) are under irrigation in the region . 
 For the first few decades following the 1830s , European pastoral activity focused in the main on cattle production but by the 1860s sheep were the predominant stock . 
 At the beginning of the twenty @-@ first century , the region 's agricultural and horticultural production was worth more than A $ 1 billion . The region produces : 
 over 25 % of the state 's fruit and vegetables 
 90 % of NSW citrus products 
 80 % of NSW wine / grape production 
 livestock feedlots , sales and processing facilities 
 nearly 20 % of all NSW crop production and two thirds of its total value . 
 In 1991 – 92 sheep and lamb numbers in the region were close to 7 million and there were 500 @,@ 000 meat cattle . 
 The Riverina is also a significant almond growing region . 
 = = = Wool = = = 
 Much of the dryland areas of the Riverina contain large sheep stations , producing medium class wool . The Peppin Merino sheep was first bred in the area around Wanganella . As many as 70 percent of today ’ s Australian Merinos are said to be directly descended from the Peppin @-@ developed sheep . The Riverina is home to many Merino studs and the saltbush plains are regarded as one of Australia 's best wool growing regions . 
 = = = Rice = = = 
 The Riverina produces the vast majority of rice grown in Australia , particularly in the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area ( MIA ) , but also around the Finley , Coleambally and Deniliquin areas . The first commercial rice crops in the Riverina were grown in the Leeton and <unk> district in 1924 , expanding to <unk> during World War II , the <unk> and <unk> Irrigation Areas in the 1950s and Coleambally and Finley in the 1960s . In recent years , rice is also grown in the Hay , Carrathool and Hillston areas . 
 Historically , well over one million tonnes of Australian rice has been produced each year and exported to over 70 countries , generating A $ 500 million in export income and supporting 63 towns in the Riverina and northern Victoria . More recently , drought has drastically reduced this quantity to less than 30 @,@ 000 tonnes with resultant economic effects . Recent rains however will see this volume increase . The headquarters of <unk> Limited , who trade under the <unk> name , is located in Leeton , Australia 's rice capital . Major rice mills are located in Leeton , Coleambally and the largest rice mill in the southern hemisphere in Deniliquin . 
 = = = Wine = = = 
 The area generally known as " the Riverina " is broader than the area legally defined as the Riverina wine region Australian Geographical Indication ( AGI ) as registered in the Register of Protected GIs . The Riverina GI is centred on Griffith and is roughly circular with towns on the boundary including <unk> , Condobolin , Temora , Junee , <unk> , Berrigan , Finley , Deniliquin and Moulamein . It does not extend as far south as the Murray River . 
 The Riverina region is one of the most prosperous grape growing regions in Australia ( particularly in Griffith ) , along with the Barossa Valley in South Australia . The region grows 55 % of wine grapes in New South Wales and 15 % of the total grape production within Australia and 80 % of wine / grape production of New South Wales ; the region is Australia 's largest producer of wine . Over 50 % of the Riverina 's wine production is exported . As a producer of specialist wine grapes , its wine style of international importance is <unk> <unk> and the outstanding speciality made from these grapes is a " <unk> @-@ style " dessert wine . 
 Irrigation made it possible to grow grapes for wine . The first grapes were planted at <unk> in the spring of 1913 by John James McWilliam and his eldest son Jack who had come to the district from their winery in Junee . Irrigation was by carting of water until the irrigation channels were opened a few months later . The first grapes were picked in 1916 and sent to Junee for processing . <unk> established their winery in the region in 1919 . 
 = = Cities , towns and settlements = = 
 At the 2001 census , the population of the Murray @-@ Murrumbidgee ( Statistical Region Sector ) , consisting almost entirely of the Riverina , was 255 @,@ 881 , 2 @.@ 9 % of whom were indigenous and 7 @.@ 4 % born outside Australia . Other than the United Kingdom and Ireland , the largest ethnic groups in the Riverina were Italians and Germans . 
 The Riverina includes three cities ; Wagga Wagga , Albury and Griffith . Other large towns include Leeton , Deniliquin , Cootamundra , Narrandera , Junee , Hay and Temora . 
 Wagga Wagga is the largest inland city in New South Wales and serves as an important employment , educational , cultural , social and entertainment centre for surrounding towns throughout the Riverina . Wagga Wagga 's facilities are of metropolitan standards with shopping , cafes , recreational facilities and nightlife present within the city . 
 Albury offers similar facilities to Wagga Wagga to the far south of New South Wales and northern Victoria . The three largest centres in population in the region after Wagga Wagga and Albury are Griffith , Leeton and Deniliquin and they provide advanced services to the outlying farming regions . 
 Parts of the Riverina experienced substantial population growth in the late 1990s and early 2000s ; in the five @-@ year period between 1996 and 2001 , Griffith 's population increased by 10 @.@ 8 % . Until recently Wagga Wagga 's population was declining slowly and ageing with strong growth in age groups 40 and over . This has now changed and Wagga Wagga has become one of Australia 's leading examples of the " sponge " city phenomenon , attracting residents from smaller towns in the Riverina such as Urana . In the year ended 30 June 2006 , the population of Wagga Wagga grew by 1 @.@ 3 % , driven by its role as the regional centre for the Riverina and its hosting of a campus of Charles Sturt University and Australian Defence Force bases . 
 = = Politics = = 
 The Riverina is represented at the federal level in two divisions of the Australian House of Representatives , the Division of Riverina , covering the Murrumbidgee valley ; and the Division of Farrer , the area along the Murray River . In 2015 , Riverina is held by the National Party and Farrer by the Liberal Party , who , in coalition , are the governing parties . At the state level , the electoral districts of Albury , Cootamundra , Murray and Wagga Wagga cover the Riverina region . 
 There are a range of local government authorities in the region , ranging from the cities of Wagga Wagga , Albury and Griffith ; to the municipalities of Edward River , Federation , Gundagai , Murray River , Murrumbidgee and Snowy Valleys ; and the shires of Balranald , Berrigan , Carrathool , <unk> , Greater Hume , Hay , Junee , Leeton , Lockhart , Narrandera , and Temora . These councils are arranged into Regional Organisations of Councils ( ROC ) s : Riverina and Murray ROC and Riverina Eastern ROC . 
 = = Facilities and services = = 
 Higher education in the Riverina is provided by Charles Sturt University ( CSU ) , with campuses serving the Riverina in Albury and Wagga Wagga . The university was established in 1989 with the amalgamation of the Albury and Wagga Wagga campuses of the Riverina @-@ Murray Institute of Higher Education with the Mitchell College of Advanced Education in Bathurst . CSU provides specialist services to the Riverina in areas such as viticulture and winemaking . 
 Other educational facilities in the region include the Riverina Institute of TAFE providing technical and vocational training at a number of campuses throughout the region . Most larger centres have public high schools and most smaller centres are serviced by a public primary school . 
 The health service in the Riverina is administered by Greater Southern Area Health Service , formed on 1 January 2005 with the amalgamation of the Greater Murray Area Health Service , servicing the Riverina and Southern Area Health Service , servicing areas east of the Great Dividing Range and south of Wollongong . Base Hospitals are located at Albury , Wagga Wagga and Griffith while Deniliquin , Hillston , Henty and Narrandera among others are home to regional hospitals . 
 Situated between the large cities of Melbourne , Sydney and Adelaide , the Riverina is a transportation hub . Major transportation links in the region include the Hume Highway , Newell Highway and Sturt Highway ; all part of the Australian National Highway . Other highways include the Riverina Highway , Cobb Highway , Olympic Highway , Kidman Way , Irrigation Way and Burley Griffin Way . 
 NSW TrainLink provide rail services to Griffith , Albury and Wagga Wagga with connecting buses reaching smaller communities . V / Line provide services linking Griffith , Deniliquin and the towns along the Murray with public transport access to Melbourne . 
 The Riverina is host to two major Australian Defence Force training facilities . The Army Recruit Training Centre is located at Kapooka , 9 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 9 mi ) south west of Wagga Wagga and RAAF Base Wagga is the home of the RAAF Ground Training Wing base . These bases along with a Royal Australian Navy Defence Communications Station play an integral role in the local economy . 
 = = Sports = = 
 The Riverina is well known for the quality and range of its sports activity and many famous sportsmen and women have hailed from the Riverina . These include : 
 Tennis champions Margaret Court and <unk> Goolagong Cawley 
 Cricketers Mark Taylor , Geoff Lawson and Michael Slater 
 Rugby League players Peter Sterling and Laurie Daley and the Mortimer brothers : Chris Mortimer , Peter Mortimer and Steve Mortimer 
 Australian rules footballers Haydn Bunton Senior , Paul Kelly , Brett Kirk , Shane Crawford and Wayne Carey 
 Soccer players Archie Thompson and Joshua Kennedy . 
 Jockeys Arthur " Scobie " Breasley and Roy Higgins . 
 The " Wagga Effect " is a term that has been used frequently in the Australian media to describe the disproportionately large number of elite sportsmen and women that originate from the town . It is speculated that the phenomenon may arise in rural areas where the population is large enough to sustain the presence of a large number of sporting codes , but small enough to ensure that talented individuals are exposed to adult @-@ level competition at an earlier age . 
 Unusually for New South Wales , Australian rules football is quite popular as the Riverina is south of the Barassi Line , and there are many clubs and leagues in the district , including the Riverina Football League , Farrer Football League , Hume Football League , Northern Riverina Football League and Coreen & District Football League . In addition , many clubs along the border play in Victorian leagues such as the Ovens & Murray Football League , Murray Football League , <unk> & District Football League and the Golden Rivers Football League . 
 In the northern part of the Riverina , Rugby League and Rugby Union are both strong . Rugby League competitions in the district include Group 9 , Group 17 and Group 20 Rugby League . Teams from Corowa and Finley play in the Goulburn Murray Rugby League . Rugby Union in the district is run by the ACT and Southern NSW Rugby Union , with clubs from Albury , Wagga Wagga , Cootamundra , Temora and Hay competing in the Southern Inland Rugby Union . 
 Other popular sports in the Riverina include cycling , bowls , cricket , netball , tennis and horse racing . The Riverina is home to many racecourses and picnic race meetings are held regularly at places such as Corowa , Berrigan , Carrathool , Tumut and Lockhart . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The Riverina was the setting for some of Australia 's great artistic and literary works of the 19th and early 20th century . Most of these works reflected the rural lifestyle and agricultural pursuits common in the Riverina at that time and projected an image of Australia and Australians that would later change rapidly . 
 The writer Joseph Furphy worked as a <unk> for 10 years in the area around Hay from 1872 . Later , using the pen name Tom Collins , Furphy wrote Such Is Life set in the Riverina during the drought and depression of the 1890s and drawing on his experiences as a <unk> . Although a slow seller , the novel was described as " fitted to become an Australian classic " by A.G. Stephens , the literary critic of The Bulletin . 
 Published in 1921 , Around the <unk> Log and Other Verses was written by Patrick Joseph Hartigan , under the pen name John O 'Brien . A Roman Catholic priest , after early stints at <unk> and Berrigan , in 1917 Hartigan was appointed as the parish priest of Narrandera where he stayed until 1944 . His poems recorded the everyday lives and mateship of the people of the Riverina . His friend and well @-@ known poet C. J. Dennis hailed them in the Bulletin as in ' the direct Lawson @-@ Paterson line mainly — unaffected talk about Australians , much as they would naturally talk about themselves ' . Around the <unk> Log ran to five editions and 18 @,@ 000 copies by 1926 . 
 The artist and key member of the Heidelberg School , Tom Roberts spent some time on a sheep station near Brocklesby prior to and during the painting of his most celebrated artwork , Shearing the Rams . The painting was criticised in its time for the depiction of strong manual labour rather than the common " high art " themes of the day . It is seen now as reflecting Australia 's largest industry at the time and the work of ordinary Australians . The painting is now in the collection of the National Gallery of Victoria . 
 Scots of the Riverina , a poem written by one of Australia 's most renowned writers , Henry Lawson , is set in Gundagai . The poem describes a father 's anger at his son 's desertion at harvest time and later his grief when the son dies in battle in World War I. Hay and Hell and <unk> , written by Banjo Paterson , is a humorous take on life on the flat western Riverina plan . 
 Today , major cultural institutions in the Riverina include the Museum of the Riverina , the Riverina Theatre Company and the Wagga Wagga Art Gallery , all located in the regional centre of Wagga Wagga with outreach to the smaller towns . Many regional towns including Hay , Deniliquin and Gundagai house museums of significant regional interest . The <unk> Theatre group , based in Albury takes live theatre to small towns throughout the Riverina . The tiny town of <unk> holds an annual night at the opera , hosting performances by <unk> and the Victorian Opera . Popular music groups from the Riverina include one of Australia 's most distinctive and popular bands of the ' 90s and 2000s , Spiderbait who come from the southern Riverina town of Finley . 
 = Strike Back : Project Dawn = 
 Strike Back : Project Dawn , as it is known in the United Kingdom is a ten @-@ part British @-@ American action television serial and is the second series of Strike Back . However , the only cast member to return from the first series was Richard Armitage in the first episode . The main cast for the series includes Philip Winchester , Sullivan Stapleton , Amanda Mealing , Eva Birthistle , Michelle Lukes and Rhashan Stone . The series follows the actions of Section 20 , a secret branch of the British Secret Intelligence Service ( MI6 ) , particularly two of its officers , Michael Stonebridge ( Winchester ) and former American Delta Force operative Damian Scott ( Stapleton ) . Section 20 leads a worldwide manhunt to find and capture Pakistani terrorist Latif , who is plotting an operation of his known as " Project Dawn " . 
 Sky announced Strike Back would be returning for a third series after the first aired . They entered a co @-@ production deal with the American premium cable network Cinemax , who wanted to introduce new original drama series to the network . In order to prepare for their roles several main cast members spent a month training with former officers of the Special Air Service and Special Boat Service . Filming began in February 2011 and took place across South Africa and Hungary . 
 The series began broadcasting on Cinemax in the United States on 12 August 2011 , with the premiere being seen by nearly 1 @.@ 1 million viewers , the highest ratings achieved by the network since 2005 . It later began broadcasting on Sky1 in the United Kingdom on 21 August with higher ratings than that of the first series . Critical reaction of the series was generally favourable in the United States , however British reviewers were more mixed . Reviewers made comparisons to various other television dramas including 24 , Sleeper Cell , Spooks and The Unit . Project Dawn was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray disc in Region 2 on 14 November 2011 . In October 2011 , Cinemax announced it has renewed Strike Back for another 10 @-@ part series , to be titled Strike Back : Vengeance . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In this table , the number in the first column refers to the episode 's number within the entire series , " US viewers in millions " refers to how many Americans watched the episode on Cinemax , while " UK viewers in millions " refers to how many Britons watched the episode on Sky1 . The series plays out as five two @-@ part episodes . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Philip Winchester plays Sergeant Michael Stonebridge , a " by @-@ the @-@ book " Royal Marine and former Special Boat Service ( SBS ) commando , now assigned to Section 20 who is partnered with Scott to help track down a kidnapped Porter . Stonebridge works for Section 20 and is in charge of his team on the ground . Although the character is married to his wife Kerry ( Alexandra Moen ) , he has an affair with colleague Kate Marshall ( played by Birthistle ) . Winchester describes Stonebridge as " dedicated , disciplined , always plays by the rules and often saves the day . Stonebridge directs his energy trying to protecting others , " though as the story unfolds , the audience would see that Stonebridge " is not the knight in shining armour . " 
 Sullivan Stapleton plays Damien Scott , a former United States Delta Force operator who is familiar with the antagonists of the second series , and an acquaintance of John Porter . He is recruited by Section 20 to help Sergeant Michael Stonebridge find and rescue the kidnapped Porter . Stapleton describes Scott as cocky , rebellious and arrogant , and that it was good to have somebody like him in Section 20 because " he is the one that usually goes in first and takes the bullets , whereas Stonebridge arrives at the last minute and saves the day . " The actor opined that Scott is chosen for the dangerous role because he is daring and does not have any immediate family members who rely on him . Of Scott and Stonebridge 's working relationship , Stapleton said " they have a professional respect for each other " but start to annoy each other . When the actor first read the script for Project Dawn , he saw himself for the role as Scott . Because Stapleton is an Australian actor , he had to speak with an American accent throughout the series . He was wary whether he did it right because he barely worked with Americans on the show , but believed he did okay when HBO , the network that operated Cinemax , was satisfied with it . Stapleton has signed up for another Strike Back series should it be commissioned . 
 Amanda Mealing plays Colonel Eleanor Grant , a " smart , tough military leader who is skilled with a gun and diplomacy , but knows when to break a rule or two . " She is the new head of Section 20 , replacing Hugh Collinson from the first series . Mealing described Grant as " hard as nails , " " very contained , very direct , " and " very driven . " Grant is also very distant from her team ; " she commands so she is not their pal but , at the same time , the guys are like her family . They spend so much time together moving from place to place . But , in a kind of motherly way , she has to keep them in check and sometimes they need a firm hand . " The actress called her role " the best role I 've ever had , " adding " when I 'm doing action scenes like flying in helicopters , the hardest thing is to keep a serious face as all I want to do is scream for joy . " She researched for her role by taking advice from a female officer in a similar high @-@ ranking position as Grant is . One piece of advice the officer gave Mealing was " you mustn 't try to be one of the boys or they 'll lose respect for you , but you 've got to be in charge . " 
 Eva Birthistle plays Captain Kate Marshall , a " crack commando " who oversees Section 20 's military personnel . She and Stonebridge have an affair . The actress was taken by the script , and although she was cast for the role , she had not done action in her past acting career , and felt it would be a " fun experience " to play the character . When Birthistle went through military training , her goal was " just to keep up with everybody and not give up , pass out , throw up or cry . " Rhashan Stone plays Major Oliver Sinclair , Grant 's right @-@ hand man who helps her gather intelligence . Mealing called their working relationship as " very strong " and " simpatico . " Sinclair is the section 's second @-@ in @-@ command . Michelle Lukes plays Sergeant Julia Richmond , one of the newer recruits of Section 20 . Lukes describes her character as " exceptionally bright and technically brilliant , " with the ability to speak seven languages . Jimi Mistry plays the antagonist Latif , the terrorist mastermind behind Project Dawn . Richard Armitage returns as John Porter , the protagonist of the original Strike Back series , in the first episode . Originally , Armitage 's role in the series was not clarified when production was announced . In January 2011 , the Herald Sun reported he dropped out of the series because he would be playing Thorin Oakenshield in The Hobbit films . However , it was later reported he would return for the second series in a secondary rather than primary role . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Strike Back began as a six @-@ part series from Sky1 , based on a book of the same name from former Special Air Service ( SAS ) soldier turned novelist Chris Ryan . It transmitted two episodes weekly from 5 to 19 May 2010 . The first two episodes more than tripled Sky1 's audience share in its timeslot in the past three months . On August 2010 , Sky1 controller Stuart Murphy commissioned a second series to consist of a longer run of ten episodes . Left Bank Pictures continued their role as the production company . In February 2011 , it was announced that Sky entered a co @-@ production deal with the American television network Cinemax , as the network wanted to introduce new drama series . Strike Back became one of two television projects to be produced by British and American networks in 2011 , the other being Torchwood : Miracle Day , which was produced between the BBC and Starz . 
 Frank Spotnitz , Richard <unk> , Tony Saint and Simon Burke were contracted as the series writers , while Alex Holmes , Bill Eagles , Paul <unk> and Daniel Percival serve as the series directors . Andy Harries and Elaine Pyke were the show 's executive producers , with Percival and Spotnitz working as Co @-@ Executive Producers . In addition , Michael Casey , Trevor Hopkins and Sue De Beauvoir were the series producers , with Bill Shepard serving as co @-@ producer . Spotnitz wrote the first episodes . He was approached to write for the series because the producers needed somebody to reimagine the show as Armitage was committed to The Hobbit in New Zealand , by introducing two new leads . Spotnitz described the process ; " We had this great format , this great world of ' Strike Back ' and then we had to imagine who were the new characters who were going to drive the show in the second year . " Before Project Dawn was even announced , the crew were scouting for locations in South Africa , where the first series was shot , as well as investigating other parts of the world including the United States , South America , and Europe . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 Before filming began , several of the main cast members were sent to a boot camp in South Africa and went through intensive and rigorous military training by former SAS and SBS soldiers . Stapleton and Winchester had more training than Birthistle , who just wanted to make sure she could at least be a believable soldier . The actors were trained in several aspects including running , teamwork , and weapons . Mealing meanwhile , did not go through as much training as the other actors , but did spend mornings training with a commander for the SBS who is also a military adviser on the show . Winchester recalled , " Sully and I would meet every morning at 6am . We would run to a chosen location and on the way we had to memorise street names and directions and then our trainers would say ' that car that you just passed what was the licence plate number ? ' Our trainers were ex @-@ SAS guys who made us study everything in detail , for example , we learnt step by step how to enter a room in twos , then alone . At the same time , we had to be constantly aware of where our weapon was trained . " 
 The physical trainers also had to ensure that not only do the actors look like soldiers before filming , but they had to remain that way throughout the shoot . In addition , Stapleton and Winchester had to lose and gain weight , respectively . Winchester had to be on a diet of 4 @,@ 000 calories a day , which included taking protein shakes between meals . The actor described the diet as " a workout in itself , " having found it " exhausting " eating more food than he was used to . In total , training took approximately one month . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began in February 2011 , and concluded in the late summer ( from the Northern Hemisphere 's perspective ) . Filming largely took place in South Africa , particularly in Cape Town , but also in Durban and Springbok , Northern Cape . Outside South Africa the series was also filmed in Budapest , Hungary , and the UK . Among the separate locations the series takes place in , the New Delhi hotel in the first two episodes were shot in Cape Town , and the suburbs of Hout Bay doubled as Mozambique . Throughout the shoot the actors were allowed to perform the majority of their own stunts . Military advisors were on hand to teach the actors how to perform certain stunts , and to tell them what they did wrong during the take . The series includes a number of sex scenes , many of which were performed by Stapleton . In an interview with the British newspaper Metro , the actor stated " I 've done my fair share of nude scenes in the past but not as much as this – not as risqué , anyway , " adding that while he got used to it , he was always " a bit nervous running around in front of 50 people with no clothes on . The sex scenes were usually with an actress I 'd just met , so it 's like : ' How 's it going ? I 'm Sullivan and this is me nude . ' It 's nerve @-@ racking at first but you have as much fun as you can with it . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcast and ratings = = = 
 Project Dawn began broadcasting on 12 August 2011 in the United States . The first telecast at 10 pm was seen by 567 @,@ 000 viewers , while the 11 pm and midnight encores almost doubled viewership , adding 500 @,@ 000 , giving a total of nearly 1 @.@ 1 million viewers . Although Cinemax is available in 16 @.@ 7 million homes at the time of the broadcast , it was the best ratings performance for the network since a broadcast of the film Titanic in 2005 . It was also on @-@ par with the pilot of the Starz series Spartacus : Blood and Sand in 2010 , which also aired on the same timeslot . In the United Kingdom , the series began broadcast on 21 August 2011 . The first episode , airing at 9 pm was seen by a total of 616 @,@ 000 viewers , with an audience share of 2 @.@ 6 per cent . As far as overnight ratings are concerned , it performed better than the first episode of the previous series , which was seen by 398 @,@ 000 , and a 1 @.@ 7 per cent audience share . 
 = = = Home video release = = = 
 Project Dawn was released on both DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc , published by 2entertain , in the United Kingdom on 14 November 2011 . It was released with an " 18 " British Board of Film Classification ( BBFC ) certificate ( indicating it is unsuitable for viewers under the age of 18 years ) . Special features include Top Secrets : Making Strike Back : Project Dawn , Firearms Training and Scott Vs Igor Fight Scene featurettes , as well as broadcast titles . In the United States the series was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on 7 August 2012 , with the inclusion of audio commentaries by Daniel Percival . 
 = = Critical reactions = = 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The American review site Metacritic rated the series a 64 out of 100 , indicating " generally favorable reviews " from 12 critics . David Hinkley of the New York Daily News rated it four stars out of five , stating it is " a little cartoonish in the same way Seagal or Arnold Schwarzenegger action movies were cartoonish , exaggerating characters and action . But " Strike Back " also differs sharply and significantly in that the villains here aren 't the random abstract caricatures from those films , like throwback Nazis or Jamaican drug lords , " adding that the villains give the series " an added level of intensity , because we have a more visceral sense of the potential consequences . " Linda Stasi of the New York Post rated it three out of four stars , summing up the series as ; " Good action , good characters and , besides , it 's the only show in the history of TV where the term , " [ fucking prick ] " is code . I mean , you gotta love that , no ? " 
 Aaron Riccio of Slant Magazine also rated it three out of four stars , stated " Strike Back isn 't brilliant television , but it 's plenty entertaining , and by fitting the action of 24 with the grit of The Unit ( and the nudity of Cinemax ) , it fills a .22 caliber hole in American television . " However Riccio added that the downside to the series was that " not enough time is given over to the fractious " buddy @-@ cop " relationship between the two main characters , Scott and Stonebridge , whereas quite a bit of time is spent with the villains . " Hank Stuever of The Washington Post called it " surprisingly stylish and addictive , " adding " Fans of " 24 , " which bowed last year , still ask me how to fill that void . They want just enough intelligence @-@ agency hooey to make the unbelievable seem somewhat real . Until " Strike Back , " I didn 't have a good answer . " Stuever lauded Scott and Stapleton 's portrayal , stating he is " the real find here , a thoroughly unlikable loser " who " saves the show from a dour sense of duty , " adding that <unk> " seems to have been created in a laboratory experiment that grafted Ewan McGregor 's personality and smile onto Hugh Jackman 's body — with more than adequate results . " 
 Matt Fowler of IGN rated it seven out of ten , noting that American viewers do not have to see the first series to be caught up , but added " British fans might lament the absence of Richard Armitage 's John Porter who was the ass @-@ kicking hero of the original series . " Mike Hale of The New York Times described the series as a " variation on " 24 " that offers reasonably competent action scenes , depressingly casual depictions of torture and death , and a comic @-@ book conspiracy story line while also being an efficient nudity delivery system . " Brent MacKnight rated the series five out of ten , calling it a " decent enough action yarn with slick production values , " but was critical that the series was " more concerned with gratuitous nudity [ ... ] each episode includes a lifetime 's worth of breasts and butt cheeks – than creating a story with any substance , character , or emotional weight . " Rob Owen of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette was more critical of the series , stating " At first , " Strike Back " seems like a highbrow series on the order of " [ Spooks ] , " but after a few minutes it " conforms to the <unk> nickname with a graphic sex scene , " with " multiple exclamations of the f @-@ word and bloodshed galore . " Owen summed " Strike Back shows off high production values and an intense , fast @-@ paced story reminiscent of 24 or Sleeper Cell that occasionally dips into the ridiculous [ ... ] It 's too bad the show 's graphic nature , especially the bloodshed , is so off @-@ putting as to make the series unwatchable . " 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 After the series premiered in the United Kingdom , British critics were mixed in their reviews . Jonathan Bernstein of The Guardian gave the series a positive review , stating " It 's awesome ! Everything that 's capable of exploding explodes . What was a decent but unexceptional military action show is now Naked 24 . " Jonathan Angwin of CultBox rated it three out of five stars , called it " the body of Spooks with very little of the brains , " adding that the series is " silly , immature , shocking , but undoubtedly entertaining and certainly not boring . " Patrick Samuel of Static Mass also rated Project Dawn three out of five stars , stating that the main story was " an intriguing one with implications of a conspiracy deep within MI6 , " but was critical that the series mostly focused on Scott rather than the other main characters , the movement of the storyline , and that Scott and Stonebridge " seemed to be most inapt pair to lead missions as they blow their cover on several occasions , endangering others . " However , Samuel praised the series ' action sequences , saying that they " [ did ] not disappoint . " 
 Paul Dean of Faded Glamour believed that Strike Back " remains pretty good at what it does — providing Sky viewers with their weekly Die Hard fix , " adding " series two won 't win any new converts , but it looks very much like it will continue to serve up the same pacey , unpretentious and unambiguous action as its predecessor . " Jack Foley of IndieLondon rated it 2 @.@ 5 out of five . Foley felt the death of Porter in the first episode was " striking " since Armitage was the " main reason for watching . " The reviewer also believed that while the first series " offered a keen mix of Spooks and 24 that expertly blended top @-@ drawer action with some emotional complexity and intrigue , " the second series " already feels inferior to both by virtue of the fact that its brains appear to lie in its pants , or blown from Porter 's head . " Keith Watson of Metro stated that Project Dawn was merely " gung @-@ ho nonsense . " 
 = Creek Turnpike = 
 The Creek Turnpike , also designated State Highway 364 ( SH @-@ 364 ) , is a 33 @.@ 22 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 53 @.@ 46 km ) freeway @-@ standard toll road that lies entirely in the U.S. state of Oklahoma . The turnpike forms a partial beltway around the south and east sides of Tulsa , Oklahoma 's second largest city . The Creek Turnpike 's western terminus is at the Turner Turnpike in Sapulpa , while its northeastern terminus is at the Will Rogers Turnpike in Fair Oaks ; both ends of the Creek Turnpike connect with Interstate 44 ( I @-@ 44 ) . Along the way , the highway passes through the cities of Sapulpa , Jenks , Tulsa , and Broken Arrow , and the counties of Creek , Tulsa , Wagoner and Rogers . The road is maintained by the Oklahoma Turnpike Authority ( OTA ) , except for a brief free section shared with U.S. Route 64 ( US @-@ 64 ) and US @-@ 169 . This free section is maintained by the Oklahoma Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) . 
 The first section of the Creek Turnpike , from US @-@ 75 in Jenks to US @-@ 64 / US @-@ 169 in Tulsa , was first authorized in 1987 , with construction beginning in 1989 . The turnpike 's construction was controversial ; homeowners along the route of the highway formed a group called Tulsans Against Turnpikes to fight the highway in both the courtroom and the media . The highway was also challenged on environmental grounds , with impacts upon wetlands and endangered species being the chief concerns . Nevertheless , the highway opened to traffic in three sections , starting from the easternmost , over the course of the first half of 1992 . 
 Further extensions to both the east and the west followed in later years after several years of false starts under the administrations of two different governors . Expansion of the highway was finally approved in 1998 . The extension to the west , linking the Creek Turnpike to the Turner Turnpike in Sapulpa , opened December 15 , 2000 . The extension to the east opened in three parts over the course of 2001 and 2002 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Creek Turnpike begins at I @-@ 44 ( Turner Turnpike ) exit 217 in the city of Sapulpa . This interchange only provides access from eastbound I @-@ 44 to the Creek Turnpike and from the Creek Turnpike to westbound I @-@ 44 . The turnpike runs in a general southeast direction from this terminus towards the Creek – Tulsa county line , crossing over Polecat Creek . Upon crossing into Tulsa County , the toll road turns to a more easterly course . The highway enters Jenks less than one mile ( approximately 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of the county line . In Jenks , the highway has a modified cloverleaf interchange at US @-@ 75 ; the westbound Turnpike to southbound US @-@ 75 ramp is a directional ramp rather than a loop ramp . The Creek Turnpike then passes through the first of three barrier toll plazas . Near the interchange with Elm Street ( signed as " Peoria – Elm " ; Elm Street is named Peoria Avenue outside of Jenks ) , the highway bridges Polecat Creek again , before crossing the Arkansas River into Tulsa . 
 In Tulsa , the Creek Turnpike has an interchange at Memorial Drive , which carries US @-@ 64 south of the toll road . At this interchange , Creek Turnpike traffic merges with northbound US @-@ 64 onto a free road , forming the Mingo Valley Expressway . US @-@ 169 also begins at this interchange , heading north from here toward its other end in Virginia , Minnesota . As the Mingo Valley Expressway ( carrying US @-@ 64 / US @-@ 169 ) turns north , the Creek Turnpike exits to continue southeast . The highway leaves Tulsa , entering Broken Arrow , where it crosses over <unk> Creek . The turnpike passes through the second toll plaza , then turns back east . 
 In southeast Broken Arrow , the Creek Turnpike crosses the county line into Wagoner County and swings towards the north @-@ northeast . It then meets SH @-@ 51 , followed by the Muskogee Turnpike ( SH @-@ 351 ) near that highway 's western terminus . The Creek Turnpike passes through the third and final barrier toll after re @-@ entering Tulsa . From the toll plaza , the turnpike proceeds north to end at the I @-@ 44 / US @-@ 412 interchange , which straddles the Wagoner – Rogers County county line . The portion of the interchange that sits in Rogers County also lies in the town of Fair Oaks . The mainline Creek Turnpike becomes the Will Rogers Turnpike as eastbound I @-@ 44 merges onto the roadway . 
 Exit numbers are absent along the Creek Turnpike until the 51st Street South interchange , which is numbered as exit 28 . Exit numbers are posted north of this interchange , continuing until the highway 's terminus ( exits 33A – B ) . The Creek Turnpike 's exit numbering is used for the final two exits on the westbound Will Rogers Turnpike — the westbound @-@ only Pine Street exit ( exit 35 ) and the westbound I @-@ 44 ramp ( exit 34 ) . 
 The entirety of the Creek Turnpike has been recognized as important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility by its inclusion in the National Highway System . In 2011 , the highest average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) count was 26 @,@ 900 vehicles eastbound and 26 @,@ 476 vehicles westbound between the Yale Avenue and Memorial Drive interchanges . The lowest AADT counts , 4 @,@ 426 vehicles eastbound and 4 @,@ 463 vehicles westbound , were recorded between the 11th Street interchange and the northeastern terminus . Law enforcement along the Creek Turnpike is provided by Oklahoma Highway Patrol Troop XE , a special troop assigned to the turnpike . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning for the first segment = = = 
 As early as the late 1950s , plans for a Tulsa freeway system included a route along 96th Street South . The 96th Street corridor was accessible to more motorists than other corridors further south ( farther away from the urban core ) , while still having low right @-@ of @-@ way costs , comparable to more southerly corridors . This made it the ideal route for a south Tulsa freeway . In 1986 , ODOT had plans to build a toll @-@ free facility called the Creek Freeway in the corridor as part of SH @-@ 117 . 
 A south Tulsa turnpike was first authorized by OTA in 1987 , the same time as three other turnpikes that would ultimately become the Cherokee , Chickasaw , and John Kilpatrick turnpikes . Eleven possible routings were researched before OTA settled on the 96th Street corridor as the site of the proposed turnpike . On February 16 , 1989 , OTA sold $ 558 @.@ 4 million in revenue bonds ( about $ 1 @.@ 36 billion in 2015 dollars ) to cover the cost of all four proposed turnpikes . 
 As originally planned , the Creek Turnpike was to begin at US @-@ 75 and end at Memorial Drive , for a total length of 6 @.@ 9 miles ( 11 @.@ 1 km ) . ODOT would then build a $ 26 million ( approximately $ 63 million in 2015 dollars ) freeway connection from the eastern terminus of the turnpike at Memorial Drive to tie in with the south end of the Mingo Valley Expressway . OTA intended the turnpike to be built on a " fast track " , with construction to be complete by the close of 1991 . The estimated cost to construct this first segment of the Creek Turnpike was $ 85 million ( about $ 207 million in 2015 dollars ) . Initially , the highway was planned to have an 18 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) median with a Jersey barrier , which would meet minimum AASHTO requirements of 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) . Later plans expanded this to a 46 @-@ foot ( 14 m ) grass median . Four toll plazas were planned , with one mainline plaza collecting a fifty @-@ cent toll no matter what distance was traveled . 
 = = = Tulsa requests changes = = = 
 Tulsa mayor Rodger Randle 's committee on the Creek Turnpike submitted a report to OTA on April 13 , 1989 , requesting that the agency make 47 changes to the turnpike . Among the changes proposed by the city was a shift in the route of 100 feet ( 30 m ) to the north between Yale Avenue and Sheridan Road to accommodate a greenway along both sides of the turnpike . The committee also recommended wider overpasses to accommodate future expansion of surface streets such as Delaware Avenue , moving the mainline toll plaza farther east to minimize impact on the surrounding area , and better compliance with local flood prevention ordinances . In addition , the report suggested better pedestrian access , including pedestrian bridges on both sides of the Arkansas River and near Hunter Park , and various sidewalks and pedestrian tunnels . 
 OTA immediately agreed that some of the more minor changes to the turnpike 's plans could be made , but expressed doubt that more major alterations would be made . Several of the proposed changes , including the greenway , were highlighted as major expenses . Nonetheless , OTA agreed to evaluate the city 's proposals . Board member ( and future Tulsa mayor ) Dewey F. Bartlett , Jr . , said " We are not set in stone , but it 's a matter of economics . " Mayor Randle stated his desire for a written agreement regarding the changes to be drawn up and signed by the city and OTA before ground was broken on the turnpike . 
 On June 18 , 1989 , OTA officials announced that the majority of the city 's proposed amendments to the Creek Turnpike would be incorporated into the design . The alterations added $ 6 million ( about $ 15 million in 2015 dollars ) to the cost of the project . However , the revised plan required the demolition of only 41 houses , six fewer than originally planned . Further alterations were negotiated throughout the latter half of 1989 , with OTA and Tulsa reaching an agreement on December 29 . The plans were adapted to include flood and noise control provisions . To meet these requirements , the highway would be lowered , with some sections below @-@ grade . In exchange , the City of Tulsa agreed to pay $ 1 @.@ 3 million in annual maintenance costs until 2020 . The deal also included a land swap , with the city giving OTA land from Hunter Park and receiving land along the right @-@ of @-@ way to construct recreational trails . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 OTA began filing condemnation suits for homes within the Creek Turnpike 's proposed right @-@ of @-@ way on June 30 , 1989 . Condemnation , the process by which a government exercises its powers of eminent domain , was required for OTA to seize properties necessary for the project when owners refused OTA buyout offers . Bids were opened for Creek Turnpike construction projects that November . Contracts for utility relocation , grading , and drainage work were awarded at OTA 's November 16 meeting . Meanwhile , work began on the condemned properties , with contractors moving or demolishing houses on the affected lots from December 1989 to January 1990 . 
 Drainage work was in progress by late February 1990 . Construction was underway on turnpike bridges by March 1990 . While federal environmental permits were being secured , the construction process was delayed ; by October 1990 , the bridge construction was only at the point that had been planned to have been completed in May , and grading and paving work had yet to begin . In December 1990 , contractors on the Creek Turnpike project were given " notice to proceed " , as the permits had been granted . By that time , construction had only progressed to the point that it was supposed to have been at in late July . Nevertheless , by April 1991 , OTA 's chief executive officer , Richard Ridings , described the project as " moving very well " and said " My own personal opinion is it 's up to the contractors . If they want to produce , it can be open by the end of the year . " 
 The first section of the Creek Turnpike to open was a 3 @.@ 6 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 8 km ) segment from Delaware Avenue to its eastern terminus at Memorial Drive , which opened to traffic at 7 p.m. on March 13 , 1992 . Tolls were waived until 12 : 01 a.m. on March 16 . The next section to the west , from Elm Street in Jenks to Delaware Avenue , including the Arkansas River bridge , opened the afternoon of April 15 . The final leg of the first segment of the turnpike , from US @-@ 75 to Elm Street , opened at noon on July 30 . The Creek Turnpike was initially posted with a 55 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 89 km / h ) speed limit , due to the National Maximum Speed Limit law then in effect . Traffic levels on the new highway were about double what was expected , with an average of 9 @,@ 000 vehicles per day using the turnpike in August 1992 ; a 1988 estimate predicted only 3 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 vehicles would use the road each day . 
 = = = Opposition = = = 
 The Creek Turnpike was opposed by area residents from its conception . Forming a group called " Tulsans Against Turnpikes " , around 220 citizens gathered at a meeting on February 16 , 1989 , to discuss the proposed toll road . Opponents to the turnpike cited detrimental effects to their community and to the environment as their concerns . " What I am concerned about is that it changes the complexion of south Tulsa . It would no longer be a residential area , " said Tom Taylor , an area resident . Some residents also complained that the proposed turnpike would mainly serve through traffic , despite OTA estimates that south Tulsa residents would make up 90 % of the road 's <unk> . 
 On March 22 , 1989 , three Will Rogers Turnpike tollbooth attendants made a surprise appearance at a Tulsans Against Turnpikes press conference to offer support to the opposition movement , expressing dissatisfaction with working conditions while manning the turnpike . The three attendants also gave examples of firsthand experience with turnpike customers that had convinced them that motorists were not as supportive of turnpikes as OTA executives believed . OTA responded to their employees ' remarks by highlighting an Occupational Safety and Health Administration study that found that the toll gate that the three attendants worked at met all safety standards . 
 In late June 1989 , opponents of the turnpike boycotted local businesses that were members of the Metropolitan Tulsa Chamber of Commerce , which was in favor of the turnpike . Some turnpike protesters removed their names from the customer list at Mazzio 's Italian <unk> on June 23 . On June 24 , about forty protesters picketed the Bank of Oklahoma , and around six closed their accounts . The chief executives of both businesses were on the board of the Chamber of Commerce . In response to the boycott , Mayor Randle issued a statement accusing Tulsans Against Turnpikes of " seeking to wage economic coercion against businesses " and described their tactics as " [ working ] as a kind of economic blackmail to silence debate " , as well as " allowing differences of opinion to degenerate into intimidation against those who have taken public stands unpopular with [ Tulsans Against Turnpikes ] " . Randle also canceled a planned meeting with the group , refusing to meet with them until they ceased the boycott . A Tulsans Against Turnpikes board member publicly replied to the mayor 's statement by denying that a boycott was taking place , stating that the group only recommended that members not do business with Mazzio 's and Bank of Oklahoma because of their support for the Creek Turnpike project via their activity with the Chamber of Commerce . He also suggested that Randle was simply looking for an excuse to avoid the meeting . 
 The environmental group Greenpeace became involved with the opposition movement in October 1989 . Holding a joint rally with Tulsans Against Turnpikes and several environmental groups at Hunter Park , a Greenpeace spokeswoman said on October 20 that the Creek Turnpike 's construction " will be setting up Oklahoma as a hazardous waste dumping ground " . Greenpeace 's regional coordinator was scheduled to speak at an area library on the same day , but his appearance was canceled when the organization 's bus ran out of fuel . A local resident at the Hunter Park forum was quoted as being concerned that the turnpike may allow eastern states such as New York to ship AIDS @-@ contaminated freight through the area . 
 In November 1989 , Jenks resident Gary Medlin and two Jenks city councilmen drafted a letter to OTA requesting that the agency cease all work on the Creek Turnpike . The letter was approved by the Jenks City Council on November 20 . The letter also included a petition in opposition to the turnpike with over 1 @,@ 000 signatures . 
 A grand jury petition , bearing over 1 @,@ 400 signatures across 134 pages , was filed with the Tulsa County election board by Medlin on November 6 , 1989 . The petition alleged that local and state officials violated the state 's open meetings , conspiracy , and conflict of interest laws while planning the turnpike . The election board certified the petition as meeting the required threshold of 1 @,@ 000 signatures on December 15 . Work on the turnpike continued despite the investigation . After meeting for seven days , on January 19 , 1990 , the grand jury determined that there was no evidence to support the allegations and no need for further investigation . 
 Some protesters resorted to illegal means to demonstrate their opposition to the project . In December 1989 , trees and shrubbery on condemned lots were destroyed in an attempt to prevent them from being transplanted by <unk> . A field office belonging to M.J. Lee Construction Co . , a contractor working on the project , was burglarized on March 4 , 1990 . The perpetrators stole or destroyed tools and poured oil on planning documents . A week later , the fuel lines on heavy equipment were slashed . On the night of April 26 , several vehicles at a Creek Turnpike worksite belonging to M.J. Lee were vandalized ; the vandals smashed windshields and headlights , stole fuel caps , and dumped mud into the fuel tanks . Messages reading " Death to OTA " , " Death to [ Governor Henry ] Bellmon " and " Death to Bartlett " ( who had recently also become a Tulsa city councilman ) were written in mud on the side of a water truck at the site . The vice president of the firm emphasized that the company alone bore the brunt of the estimated $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 17 @,@ 900 in 2015 dollars ) financial loss , not OTA , and offered a $ 1 @,@ 000 reward for information leading to the prosecution of the responsible party . Construction signage was also removed or covered up with Tulsans Against Turnpikes signs , and survey markers were relocated . Tulsans Against Turnpikes publicly condemned the vandalism , offering an additional $ 500 reward for information . A member of the group 's board stated " We deplore this kind of cowardly , illegal action . There is no reason for some sick person to take out frustrations on the contractor [ ... ] . " In response to the vandalism , Tulsa police launched an investigation , and OTA stated that Oklahoma Highway Patrol officers would be on patrol in the construction areas . On August 11 , 1990 , a contractor arriving for work discovered a vandal attempting to break the window of a crane . As the employee approached the crane , four people fled the scene . The employee was able to detain two of them , both aged eighteen , until police arrived and cited them for misdemeanor malicious mischief . 
 = = = = Lawsuit = = = = 
 The Oklahoma Turnpike Authority was exempt from requirements to have a federal environmental impact study ( EIS ) conducted on the Creek Turnpike project . As part of their opposition to the turnpike , Tulsans Against Turnpikes challenged this right . The group announced in April 1989 that if the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) , U.S. Department of Transportation ( USDOT ) , and U.S. Department of Defense ( DOD ) did not force OTA to conduct an EIS within 60 days they would sue the three federal agencies . Tulsans Against Turnpikes , joined by an area homeowners ' association , John Reidel ( a homeowner whose property was condemned by OTA and had filed previous suits as early as the 1950s to stop the turnpike 's construction ) , and several other affected individuals , filed the suit in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Oklahoma on August 10 . Defendants in the suit included the federal agencies , state transportation and environmental agencies , and the city of Tulsa . That November , Tulsans Against Turnpikes filed a motion requesting an injunction against further work on the turnpike . 
 On January 27 , 1990 , U.S. District Judge Thomas Rutherford Brett dismissed seven of the nine claims before him , and on March 24 , the plaintiffs filed a motion to drop the two remaining claims in hopes that the judge would reconsider the claims already dismissed . The plaintiffs also filed for a restraining order to halt construction activities . In support of their filings , the turnpike opponents alleged that OTA was illegally dumping material into waterways . OTA responded by producing U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ( USACE ) documentation showing that no illegal discharge had taken place , and that USACE had not issued any cease and desist orders due to unlawful activity . OTA argued that the plaintiffs ' requests for a restraining order and reconsideration of the dismissed claims were invalid because there was no change in their legal authority or the facts surrounding the case to warrant such a reconsideration . 
 At a hearing on May 22 , 1990 , Judge Brett announced his refusal to reconsider the seven dismissed claims , ending the lawsuit , and ruled all remaining pending motions moot . At the hearing , Brett said that the issue at the heart of the suit was the highway 's effect on area residents . While this was a legitimate interest , the judge said , it was not covered by the environmental laws under which the plaintiffs chose to challenge the project . Brett also pointed out that the environmental questions were at that time under review by the appropriate federal agencies . 
 = = = Environmental concerns = = = 
 Initial turnpike plans included environmental mitigation features to reduce the amount of disruption the finished road would cause to the local environment . In the Jenks area , OTA planned to replace destroyed wetlands with new wetlands of equal or greater size . <unk> were expected to plant two trees for every one removed to build the road . In March 1990 , these plans were augmented to provide wetlands mitigation at a rate of three to one , for a total of 45 acres ( 18 ha ) of new wetlands . Additionally , 25 acres ( 10 ha ) of pasture would be allowed to revert to its natural state to create " dedicated natural succession areas . " 
 On July 21 , 1989 , OTA approved a contract to transplant approximately 290 live trees in the path of the turnpike to locations along the edge of the right @-@ of @-@ way . There , the trees would serve as a barrier between the road and the surrounding properties , masking the road from view and muffling the sounds of traffic . A Norman landscaping firm performed the work , which included thirty months of maintenance , for a total cost of $ 288 @.@ 50 per tree ( $ 544 @.@ 19 in 2013 dollars ) . 
 The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) objected to the construction of the Creek Turnpike in a letter dated January 30 , 1990 . FEMA felt that documentation on how the project would affect the floodplains in the area was lacking , preventing local authorities from requesting updates to floodplain maps , which were necessary to keep their communities enrolled in flood insurance programs . OTA 's attorney stated that the requisite information had been provided to local officials , and it was not OTA 's responsibility to ensure that they forwarded the information on to FEMA . 
 A Tulsa @-@ area supervisor with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service ( FWS ) commented upon environmental issues pertaining to the Creek Turnpike in a 19 @-@ page letter to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers dated February 9 , 1990 . USACE was responsible for issuing three essential permits ( which OTA had applied for on November 6 , 1989 ) that would allow construction to continue , and was required to consider input from the service . In the letter , supervisor Stephen Forsythe recommended that the permits be denied and further studies conducted into alternate routes for the turnpike and the environmental impact on roads that connected to the turnpike . However , USACE only had the authority to review the impacts the Creek Turnpike itself made on wetland areas . Governor Bellmon publicly criticized Forsythe for focusing on concerns beyond USACE 's jurisdiction . Bellmon 's Transportation Secretary , Neal McCaleb , publicly stated " I think [ Forsythe ] is out of line [ ... ] and would say so to Mr. Forsythe . " Bellmon and McCaleb discussed the letter in a private meeting with the Secretary of the Interior , Manuel Lujan , although Lujan neither commented nor committed to any action regarding the letter . In response to Bellmon 's criticism of the letter , Tulsans Against Turnpikes issued a public statement , saying " Running behind closed political doors like that demonstrates the governor is an environmental hypocrite , " contrasting his statements with a letter he wrote assuring a constituent in Jenks that the project would be " the most aesthetically pleasing and environmentally sound facility that can be constructed " . 
 In a letter sent to OTA in March 1990 , USACE identified issues with the Creek Turnpike project , such as modifications to Polecat Creek 's channel , impacts on the Arkansas River floodplain and levee system near Jenks , and loss of 14 @.@ 8 acres ( 6 @.@ 0 ha ) of wetlands . In two other letters sent in May 1990 , USACE requested alterations to the project , detailing further concerns about destruction of a unique type of wetland near the turnpike 's planned intersection with Yale Avenue , OTA 's plan to temporarily drain Mill Creek Bridge Pond , and emergency access to homes only accessible by crossing the pond on a wooden bridge . USACE warned that , should the changes the corps requested not be made , the turnpike plans may violate federal law , which would result in USACE withholding the necessary permits . The corps also required " absolute assurance " that new wetlands constructed as part of the project 's mitigation efforts would not be built on land that was formerly the site of a landfill . On March 29 , USACE held a public hearing as part of the permit process . The hearing had around 500 attendees , with over fifty of them giving five @-@ minute speeches against the turnpike . One speaker compared the highway 's environmental impact to that of the wreck of the oil tanker Exxon Valdez . No citizens spoke out in favor of the project . 
 OTA announced plans to include sound barriers at three points along the turnpike in April 1990 . The locations were recommended by a report commissioned by OTA , using guidelines published by the Federal Highway Administration ( FHWA ) . While another thirteen locations were likely to have similar noise levels as the three sites selected to receive barriers , abatement was not considered at those locations because they did not meet other criteria , including minimum population density . Although OTA was not required to follow FHWA guidelines on the Creek Turnpike because it was not a federally funded project , it opted to do so anyway . 
 Another letter , dated June 21 , 1990 , was sent by FWS to USACE , reporting that at least eight interior least terns , an endangered species , had been found on a small island in the Arkansas River approximately 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) south of the site of the proposed turnpike bridge . Although the bridge was not yet under construction at the time , the anticipated eighteen @-@ month period of bridge construction had the possibility of interfering with the terns ' nesting period , which runs from mid @-@ May to mid @-@ August . FWS was also in favor of requiring OTA to prepare a full EIS , a process that could have taken up to three years . 
 Further delays on the Creek Turnpike project appeared inevitable in October 1990 , as a new area meeting the federal definition of a wetland was discovered in the path of the turnpike . OTA officials did not bring the area to USACE 's attention because they did not believe it met the criteria to be considered a wetland . Frustration mounted after the find ; rumors surfaced that OTA was considering canceling the Creek Turnpike and shifting the remaining funds to turnpike projects in the Oklahoma City area . In an interview after an OTA meeting , chairman John Kilpatrick was quoted as saying " God only knows when [ the Creek Turnpike will ] be completed , " describing the project as a " total disaster " and commenting " If we had it all to do over again , we wouldn 't do that project . " OTA was concerned about the financial impact of USACE 's delay in issuing the required permits ; each day after the planned opening date that the project ran late added $ 20 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 47 thousand in 2015 dollars ) to the total cost of the project . USACE finally issued the permit on November 15 , over a year after OTA applied for it . 
 One stipulation the USACE placed on the permit , however , was that no work in the Arkansas riverbed could take place after May 1 if it would interfere with the interior least tern nesting period , which was possible if the birds selected nesting sites around the bridge site . As a result , OTA worked to complete the bridge as quickly as possible to avoid the possibility of having to suspend the construction . By April 1991 , work in the riverbed was mostly complete , with the remaining work on the bridge posing no threat to the terns . 
 = = = Extensions = = = 
 The possibility of extending the Creek Turnpike beyond its original termini at US @-@ 75 and Memorial Drive was raised as early as 1993 . On May 28 , 1993 , Governor David Walters announced a proposed $ 3 @.@ 1 billion ( around $ 6 @.@ 5 billion in 2015 dollars ) turnpike package , one part of which was the extension of the Creek Turnpike to the Turner Turnpike to the west and the Will Rogers Turnpike in the east . As a result of negotiations between Walters , other lawmakers , and OTA , the package was ultimately pared down to $ 675 million ( about $ 1 @.@ 36 billion in 2015 dollars ) ; among the cuts was the eastern extension of the Creek Turnpike . This version of the package was approved by OTA on August 18 , 1994 . The package was ultimately killed almost two months later , when the Legislative Bond Oversight Commission voted 4 – 2 to stop the sale of the bonds associated with the project on October 3 . Reasons for opposition to the package were varied , including concerns over OTA 's debt level , toll increases necessary to fund the package , the state of the bond market , a federal investigation examining previous OTA bond sales , lack of details given about the package , the size of the package , and the proposed method by which the bonds would be sold . 
 Another Creek Turnpike expansion proposal , connecting it again to the Turner Turnpike in the west , but only extending it as far as the Muskogee Turnpike in the east , was put forward by Walters 's successor , Governor Frank Keating , in 1996 . This proposal , accompanied by a proposed extension to the Kilpatrick Turnpike in Oklahoma City , was to be funded by increasing tolls by 10 percent statewide in 1999 . Keating 's turnpike package , too , encountered trouble from the Legislative Bond Oversight Commission . The body unanimously voted on July 25 , 1996 , to postpone an up @-@ or @-@ down vote on the projects , which together carried a price tag of $ 525 million ( approximately $ 975 million in 2015 dollars ) , until more information was made available to its members . Keating declared the package dead in response to the commission 's action . 
 The Creek Turnpike extensions resurfaced in a 1998 turnpike expansion plan . OTA approved a $ 724 million ( about $ 1 @.@ 23 billion in 2015 dollars ) bond package at its meeting on January 9 , 1998 . This package , which carried the support of both Governor Keating and legislative leaders , included a 25 @.@ 9 @-@ mile ( 41 @.@ 7 km ) extension of the Creek Turnpike to the Turner and Will Rogers turnpikes , extension of the Kilpatrick Turnpike , and a new toll road which would become the H.E. Bailey Turnpike Norman Spur . The plan , which was to be funded by a 15 % <unk> toll increase , was approved by both the Legislative Bond Oversight Commission and Executive Bond Oversight Commission on January 29 , 1998 . 
 Construction of the portion of the highway between the eastern terminus and the Muskogee Turnpike , known as the Broken Arrow south loop , was scheduled to begin in May 1999 and be completed in January 2001 . The section from the Muskogee Turnpike north to the Will Rogers Turnpike was to begin construction in September 1999 and be completed in January 2002 . Unlike the section of the turnpike built in the early 1990s , this section was expected to displace few residents ; the city of Broken Arrow had purchased much of the right @-@ of @-@ way ahead of time to preserve the corridor for the expected turnpike . 
 While construction of the other two sections of the turnpike ran according to schedule , progress on the Broken Arrow south loop lagged behind . Cost overruns due to higher @-@ than @-@ estimated land acquisition costs caused delays as the project was revised to save money . The project was stalled further by the May 3 , 1999 , tornado outbreak , as utility contractors were pulled off the project to contribute to service restoration efforts in the Oklahoma City area . By August 1999 , the south loop was six months behind schedule . Despite the cost @-@ saving measures , the south loop remained over budget by $ 16 million ( around $ 24 @.@ 5 million in 2015 dollars ) in July 2000 . The western extension was also over budget ; OTA discovered over 100 abandoned oil wells that needed to be capped and leftover piping in the turnpike corridor . Budget overruns on the western leg of the turnpike were $ 5 million ( about $ 7 @.@ 7 million in 2015 dollars ) in July 2000 . 
 The western extension was the first to open to traffic . Following a brief dedication ceremony attended by Governor Keating , Transportation Secretary McCaleb , and OTA board member Bartlett , the highway opened on December 15 , 2000 . As with the first section of the turnpike , tolls were waived for the weekend ; the road was free until noon on December 18 . The south loop was opened in two segments . The first , from US @-@ 64 / US @-@ 169 to South Elm Place in Broken Arrow , opened at 3 p.m. August 15 , 2001 . The new segment remained toll @-@ free until 7 a.m. August 20 . A rainy September pushed back the opening of the other half of the south loop by two months . The second half of the south loop , from Elm Place to New Orleans Street , opened at 2 p.m. April 15 , 2002 . The final segment of the extension , connecting New Orleans Street and the Muskogee Turnpike to the Will Rogers Turnpike , was scheduled to open on August 16 of that year . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 A new interchange at Aspen Avenue in Broken Arrow opened on May 18 , 2012 . The project was completed three weeks ahead of schedule at a cost of $ 6 @.@ 137 million , of which $ 1 @.@ 75 million was paid by OTA , with the rest coming from the City of Broken Arrow . The new interchange was expected to attract retail , dining , and entertainment development to the area around the interchange . 
 A construction project that started in May 2012 expanded the turnpike to six lanes total , or three lanes in each direction , between US @-@ 75 and Memorial Drive . Throughout the project , speed limits along the turnpike were reduced to 55 miles per hour ( 89 km / h ) . The project was completed in October 2013 . 
 The Creek Turnpike originally bore no numbered designation . On March 10 , 2014 , the Oklahoma Transportation Commission unanimously approved a motion to apply the SH @-@ 364 designation to the turnpike . 
 = = Tolls = = 
 As of 2011 , motorists driving two @-@ axle vehicles , such as cars and motorcycles , pay tolls of $ 2 @.@ 80 in cash , or $ 2 @.@ 60 if Pikepass electronic tolling is used , to drive the entire length of the Creek Turnpike . Drivers of vehicles with more than two axles , such as truckers , pay higher tolls ; six @-@ axle vehicles are charged rates of $ 11 @.@ 50 ( $ 10 @.@ 65 with Pikepass ) . Tolls are collected at three mainline toll plazas along the road , one between the US @-@ 75 and Peoria – Elm interchanges , one west of the Olive Avenue interchange , and one ( labeled as the Creek East plaza ) south of the 31st Street South interchange . Additional fares for traveling beyond the barrier tolls are collected at toll gates located at each exit ; as at the mainline plazas , Pikepass customers receive a discounted rate at these gates . 
 The Creek Turnpike is equipped with open @-@ road tolling for Pikepass customers . The turnpike has been completely automated since early 1996 ; no human toll collectors are present . Cash customers pull to the right and deposit coins into toll baskets . Change machines capable of changing $ 1 and $ 5 bills are available , as well as machines that produce receipts for customers requiring them . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = United States v. Alvarez = 
 United States v. Alvarez , 567 U.S. _ _ _ ( 2012 ) , was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court struck down the Stolen Valor Act , a federal law that criminalized false statements about having a military medal . The law had been passed as an effort to stem instances where people falsely claimed to have won the medal in an attempt to protect the " valor " of those who really had . While a 6 @-@ 3 majority of the Supreme Court agreed that the law was unconstitutional under the First Amendment 's free speech protections , it could not agree on a single rationale . Four justices concluded that a statement 's falsity is not enough , by itself , to exclude speech from First Amendment protection . Another two justices concluded that while false statements were entitled to some protection , the Stolen Valor Act was invalid because it could have achieved its objectives in less restrictive ways . 
 Veteran organizations and politicians reacted negatively . Several months after the decision , both chambers of Congress passed new versions of the Stolen Valor Act based on the suggestions in the Court 's opinion . Despite the Supreme Court having struck down the conviction under the Act , Alvarez remained in prison for fraud on other matters . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Stolen Valor Act = = = 
 President George W. Bush signed the Stolen Valor Act of 2005 , ( 18 U.S.C. § 704 ) , into law on December 20 , 2006 . The Act broadens previous provisions addressing the unauthorized wear , manufacture , or sale of any military decorations and medals by making it a misdemeanor to falsely represent oneself as having received any U.S. military decoration or medal . If convicted , defendants may be imprisoned for up to six months , unless the decoration lied about is the Medal of Honor , in which case imprisonment could be up to one year . Proponents in Congress argued that the law was passed to prevent impostors from " stealing the valor " of soldiers returning from engagements in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
 = = = Alvarez 's statements = = = 
 In 2007 at a Three Valley Water District Board meeting in Claremont , California , new member Xavier Alvarez introduced himself by saying " I 'm a retired Marine of 25 years . I retired in the year 2001 . Back in 1987 , I was awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor . I got wounded many times by the same guy . " 
 As this statement was not true , Alvarez was indicted for violating the Stolen Valor Act . The United States District Court for the Central District of California , the place where the trial was to occur , rejected Alvarez 's claim that the Act was unconstitutional . This decision was reversed by a three @-@ judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit which held the law invalid . 
 <unk> by the entire panel of the Ninth Circuit ( instead of just the three judges ) was denied over the dissent of seven judges . Judge Smith , one of the dissenters , argued that the panel " incorrectly rested its laurels on Supreme Court rulings in defamation cases that false facts did not receive First Amendment protections . " Smith argued that this was not a defamation case , because even if the act was intended to prevent injury to military personnel , " [ t ] he right against defamation belongs to natural persons , not to governmental institutions or symbols . " 
 The government appealed the Ninth Circuit 's decision , which was subsequently granted by the Supreme Court in 2011 . 
 = = Supreme Court oral arguments = = 
 The Supreme Court heard oral argument on February 22 , 2012 . Donald Verrilli , Jr . , Solicitor General of the United States , appeared on behalf of the United States . Jonathan D. Libby , Deputy Federal Public Defender , appeared on behalf of Alvarez . 
 Verrilli spoke first ; he began by explaining that military honors touch on the core values of the armed forces , and the Stolen Valor Act simply aims to protect those core values . Almost immediately Justice Sonia Sotomayor asked Verrilli a hypothetical : 
 During the Vietnam War , a protester holds up a sign that says , " I won a Purple Heart – for killing babies . " Knowing statement . He didn 't win the Purple Heart . As a reader , I can 't be sure whether he did and is a combat veteran who opposes the war , or whether he 's a citizen protesting the war . Is that person , if he 's not a veteran , having received the medal , is he liable under this act ? 
 Verrilli responded by suggesting that such an act would be covered by the Act only if it were " reasonably understood by the audience as a statement of fact or as an exercise in political theater . " 
 The questions during Verrilli 's argument focused on the lack of injury caused by false claims of military honors . In nearly all the cases that the United States cited to support the proposition that there is no First Amendment value in falsity , the Court had addressed a false statement that harmed another , such as a defamatory statement . Relying on these cases , Verrilli stated , " [ T ] his Court has said in numerous contexts , numerous contexts , that the calculated factual falsehood has no First Amendment value for its own sake . " Justice Anthony Kennedy immediately retorted : 
 Well , I 'm – I 'm not sure that that 's quite correct . It has said it often , but always in context where it is well understood that speech can injure .... You think there 's no value to falsity . But I – I simply can 't find that in our cases , and I – I think it 's a sweeping proposition to say that there 's no value to falsity . <unk> is a way in which we contrast what is false and what is true . 
 Libby opened the defense argument by emphasizing that the First Amendment is intended to protect personal autonomy . In response to several questions , Libby played on the Court 's discontent with the apparent lack of harm by stating that there is value in falsity " so long as it doesn 't cause imminent harm to another person or imminent harm to a government function . " 
 Libby stumbled in the Court 's estimation , however , when he conceded that the Act did not chill any truthful speech . In response , Justice Kagan stated , " So , boy , I mean , that 's a big concession , Mr. Libby . Then you 're saying , you can only win this case if this Court decides that the Gertz statement was a kind of overstatement , an exaggeration , <unk> . " 
 = = Supreme Court 's decision = = 
 On June 28 , 2012 , a divided Supreme Court held that the Stolen Valor Act 's prohibition against making false statements of having been awarded a military medal violated the First Amendment . However , the six justices in the majority could not agree on a single rationale for the decision . 
 = = = Kennedy 's plurality opinion = = = 
 Justice Anthony Kennedy , writing for a plurality consisting of himself , Chief Justice John Roberts , Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg , and Justice Sonia Sotomayor , wrote that false statements are not , by the sole reason of their falsity , excluded from First Amendment protection . " The Court has never endorsed the categorical rule the Government advances , " Kennedy wrote . " Our prior decisions have not confronted a measure , like the Stolen Valor Act , that targets falsity and nothing more . " Even though there are several examples of the use of penalizing false speech ( like perjury ) , Kennedy argued that " [ t ] he Government has not demonstrated that false statements generally should constitute a new category of unprotected speech ... " 
 The plurality opinion also expressed the wide applicability of the Stolen Valor Act . " The Act by its plain terms , " Kennedy wrote , " applies to a false statement made at any time , in any place , to any person " . Such breadth means that the law is " sweeping ... [ the ] reach of the statute puts it in conflict with the First Amendment ... the statute would apply with equal force to personal , whispered conversations within a home . " 
 When balanced against the Government 's need to protect the value of the Medal , the plurality said that " the link between the Government 's interest in protecting the integrity of the military honors system and the Act 's restriction on the false claims of liars like respondent has not been shown . " Additionally , Kennedy wrote that ' counter @-@ speech ' was a sufficient solution to the problem : " It is a fair assumption that any true holders of the Medal who had heard of Alvarez 's false claims would have been fully vindicated by the community 's expression of outrage ... Truth needs neither handcuffs nor a badge for its vindication . " 
 Wrote Kennedy : " Permitting the government to decree this speech to be a criminal offense , whether shouted from the rooftops or made in a barely audible whisper , would endorse government authority to compile a list of subjects about which false statements are punishable . That governmental power has no clear limiting principal . Our constitutional tradition stands against the idea that we need Oceania ’ s Ministry of Truth , " invoking George Orwell 's novel 1984 . 
 = = = Breyer 's concurrence = = = 
 Justice Stephen Breyer , joined by Justice Elena Kagan , agreed that the Stolen Valor Act was unconstitutional , but on entirely different grounds . Breyer based his finding not on a strict scrutiny test that the plurality had used , but on a " proportionality " or " intermediate scrutiny test " . This test examines " whether the statute works speech @-@ related harm that is out of proportion to its justifications . " After holding that Congress could create a database of those who had won the Medal , among other alternatives to the existing law , Breyer said that there were lesser restrictive means to achieve the government 's interest . 
 = = = Alito 's dissent = = = 
 Justice Samuel Alito , joined by Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas , dissented from the Court 's decision striking down the Act . For Alito , the ruling had " [ broken ] sharply from a long line of cases recognizing that the right to free speech does not protect false factual statements that inflict real harm and serve no legitimate interest . " " The Stolen Valor Act , " Alito wrote , " represents the judgment of the people 's elected representatives that false statements about military awards are very different from false statements about civilian awards ... [ the Act ] is a narrow law enacted to address an important problem , and it presents no threat to freedom of expression . " 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 The decision received praise on constitutional grounds from across the political spectrum . The First Amendment Center called the decision " a victory for free speech and common sense . " The conservative Daily Caller described it as a " clear cut case " and found it disturbing that three justice who have traditionally represented themselves as constitutional originalists " had in fact dissented from protecting free speech . 
 Several veterans organizations leaders were dismayed by the decision . A spokesperson for the Veterans of Foreign Wars said " Despite the ruling , the VFW will continue to challenge far @-@ fetched stories , and to publicize these false heroes to the broadest extent possible as a deterrent to others . ” Harold A. Fritz , a recipient of the medal from the Vietnam War agreed with the VFW that " It ’ s more than just a piece of metal suspended on a piece of cloth on a pin . . . . And people who abuse that . . . need to be penalized . " Proponents of the Stolen Valor Act promised to bring forward more limited legislation in the future . 
 The American Legion expressed hope that a narrower law would survive constitutional scrutiny . " We felt good about portions of the decision which suggest that a more narrowly tailored bill which incorporates traditional fraud elements would be upheld , " says Fang Wong , national commander of the American Legion . 
 Alvarez 's attorney praised the decision , saying " The First Amendment protects a lot of what we as Americans get to say ... The government doesn 't get to decide what we can and cannot say . ” 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Alvarez remained in legal trouble due to allegations that he defrauded the government by falsely receiving health insurance benefits . He was convicted of misappropriation of public funds , grand theft , and insurance fraud in 2009 and sentenced to five years in state prison , and was discharged in March 2012 from Calipatria State Prison . 
 = = = Revised Stolen Valor Act = = = 
 In 2012 , an effort was initiated to revise the Stolen Valor Act to comply with the Supreme Court 's decision . This resulted in passage and signing of the Stolen Valor Act of 2013 . In addition to a wrongful claim of receiving one of the listed military awards , intent to gain some benefit or something of value by fraud was required . 
