 = Archie vs. Predator = 
 Archie vs. Predator is a four @-@ issue limited series comic book and intercompany crossover written by Alex de Campi , drawn by Fernando Ruiz . It was published in the United States by Dark Horse Comics and Archie Comics in 2015 . The single issues were released between April and July , and a hardcover collection went on sale in November . 
 Following in a long tradition of all @-@ American teenager Archie Andrews meeting unusual celebrities and pop culture icons , this comic shows him meeting the galaxy 's deadliest hunter , the Predator . The idea was first suggested in the Archie office and then proposed to Dark Horse , who holds the license to the Predator character . The companies paired de Campi , a horror writer at Dark Horse , with Ruiz , a regular Archie artist . When the comic was announced , many media outlets noted in their headlines that the new title was not a joke . 
 The book received positive review from critics , who enjoyed the strange matchup and dark humor . The miniseries was the bestselling book for both publishers during its release and won a Ghastly Award for Best Limited Series . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Following the success of the Archie meets Glee and Archie meets KISS , the Archie Creative Summit held in March 2014 included a brainstorming session for new crossovers . Godzilla and Friday the 13th were considered , but the Predator received the most support . Fernando Ruiz , who was later chosen to draw the comic , was present at the summit and liked the premise , but did not believe it would actually be made . 
 After Archie proposed the crossover , Dark Horse approached Alex de Campi to write based on her work on the horror comic Grindhouse . The project was originally title Archie meets Predator , but it was changed to vs. because the people involved in production kept calling it that unintentionally , and to parody the Alien vs. Predator franchise . 
 To prepare for the project , de Campi read over 4000 pages of Archie comics . She drew inspiration for the story from the 1940s era of Archie , when Betty and Veronica had " more edge . " Her scripts were subject to notes and tweaks from Archie and Fox , but de Campi described both licensors as " extremely mellow , pleasant and easy to work with . " She expected some of the notes , such as being told “ Alex , you can 't make jokes about child predation in an Archie book ” . Other times , she was surprised when she did not receive notes , like her use of <unk> for the Predator 's speech . In one case , editorial pushback led her to rewrite a story arc , and she was much happier with the final version . She was pleased when she got to add depth to Dilton <unk> , a character she feels is often overlooked in regular Archie comics . 
 Archie Comics and Dark Horse Comics jointly announced Archie vs. Predator and the creative team at the 2014 New York Comic Con. Soon after , many media outlets carrying the news used a headline indicating it was not a joke . Series editor Brendan Wright described it as his " most <unk> project , " and Jon Goldwater , Archie Comics Publisher and Co @-@ CEO , said the comic followed the tradition of other unusual crossovers like Archie Meets the Punisher . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 A promotional minicomic was released a couple months prior to the first issue . It featured eight pages from the first issue and some of Ruiz 's character designs , including some of his initial , more lifelike Predator sketches . 
 The four issues were published monthly beginning April 15 , 2015 and ending July 22 , 2015 . Each issue included a one @-@ page , humorous bonus strip written by de Campi featuring crossovers of other Archie and Dark Horse characters : Sabrina Meets Hellboy ( art by Robert Hack ) , little Mask and his pals ( art by Art Baltazar ) , Jughead Meets MIND MGMT : " S " is for Sleeper ( art by Matt Kindt ) , and Josie and the Pussycats Meet Finder ( art by Carla Speed McNeil ) . 
 A 128 @-@ page hardcover collecting the series was released November 4 , 2015 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Archie and his friends take a Spring Break trip to Los <unk> Resort , and a Predator touches down in a nearby jungle . Betty discovers an ancient Colombian shrine and attracts the attention of the Predator , who follows her home to Riverdale . 
 The Predator attacks , targeting Veronica and killing several people . Kevin Keller , a friend with military experience , organizes and protects Archie and his friends . Betty takes a picture of the creature and Kevin 's father , a US Military General , identifies it as a teenager from a race of nearly unstoppable alien hunters . Jughead is used as bait to lure the Predator , but the trap fails and the Predator kills the majority of the kids . 
 Jughead regroups with his remaining friends . Some members of the group decide to split up in hopes the Predator will continue to pursue Veronica , allowing them to escape . Dilton , Archie , Betty , Veronica , and Jughead stay behind . The Predator attacks again , killing Dilton and Jughead and critically wounding Archie . 
 Betty and Veronica take refuge at Lodge Manor , where they hook Archie to an experimental healing machine . When the Predator attempts to break their barricade , Archie is killed , Veronica is knocked unconscious , and Betty 's left hand is cut off . The Predator shows regret and reveals he was motivated by a crush on Betty . Betty uses the opportunity to wound the Predator . Veronica awakens to find Betty using the face and body reconstruction system on the healing machine to transform the wounded Predator into Archie . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The first issue was the bestselling issue for both publishers in April 2015 , and the 74th best selling comic among other release that month . Sales numbers fell just under 30 % through the fourth issue , which was the 102nd best selling issue in July . When the hardcover collection was released in November , it was the 36th best selling <unk> back . 
 The first issue garnered an average review rating of 7 @.@ 9 out of 10 according to the review aggregator <unk> . Writing for The Guardian , Graeme Virtue said the " appealingly strange " series fit with Archie Comics ' reputation for pushing comics forward and praised it for remaining true to both properties . The book 's " deeply funny dark humor " was a selling point for Robin Parrish at Tech Times , and IGN reviewer Jeff Lake described the first issue as " pretty darn great . " Comic Bastards ' Dustin <unk> described the miniseries as " a hoot . " The series won the 2015 Ghastly Award for Best Limited Series . 
 = Martin Peerson = 
 Martin Peerson ( or Pearson , Pierson ) ( born between 1571 and 1573 ; died December 1650 or January 1651 and buried 16 January 1651 ) was an English composer , organist and <unk> . Despite Roman Catholic leanings at a time when it was illegal not to subscribe to Church of England beliefs and practices , he was highly esteemed for his musical abilities and held posts at St Paul 's Cathedral and , it is believed , Westminster Abbey . His output included both sacred and secular music in forms such as consort music , keyboard pieces , madrigals and motets . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 From Peerson 's will and the March marriage registers , it appears that he was the son of Thomas and Margaret Peerson of March , Cambridgeshire , in England . It is believed that Martin Peerson was born in the town of March between 1571 and 1573 , as records show that his parents married in 1570 , but a " Margaret <unk> " was married in 1573 . It therefore seems that Thomas Peerson died a few years after 1570 and that Martin 's mother remarried . 
 In the 1580s , Peerson was a choirboy of St. Paul 's Cathedral in London under organist Thomas Mulliner . Subsequently , he came under the patronage of the poet Fulke Greville . On May Day in 1604 Peerson 's setting of the madrigal See , O See , Who is Heere Come a <unk> was performed as part of Ben Jonson 's Private Entertainment of the King and Queene at the house of Sir William Cornwallis at Highgate ( now in London ) . A letter dated 7 December 1609 states that at the time Peerson was living at Newington ( now Stoke Newington , London ) and had composed several lessons for the virginals , which was his principal instrument . It appears that he had Roman Catholic sympathies , for that year , on the same occasion as Jonson , he was convicted of recusancy – the statutory offence of not complying with the established Church of England . 
 Peerson then took up musical studies at the University of Oxford . In order to do so , he would have had to subscribe to Protestantism . In 1613 , he was conferred a Bachelor of Music ( <unk> ) and was appointed Master of the Boys of Canterbury Cathedral . It is possible that he was the " Martin Pearson " who was sacrist at Westminster Abbey from 1623 to 1630 . Between June 1624 and June 1625 he returned to St. Paul 's Cathedral as almoner and Master of the Choristers ; there is also some evidence suggesting he was later made a petty canon . Although all cathedral services ceased at the end of 1642 following the outbreak of the English Civil War , he retained the title of almoner and , along with the other petty canons and the vicars choral , had special financial provision made for him . Peerson is known to have been buried on 16 January 1651 in St. Faith 's Chapel under St. Paul 's . He therefore died in either December 1650 or , more likely , January 1651 . 
 In spite of his Roman Catholic leanings , evidenced by the use of pre @-@ Reformation Latin texts for his motets and his 1606 conviction for recusancy , Peerson 's position at the heart of the Anglican establishment confirms the overall esteem in which he was held . 
 = = Music = = 
 Peerson 's powerful patrons enabled him to print and publish a considerable quantity of his music , although little remains today . The only four extant keyboard pieces – " <unk> " , " The Fall of the <unk> " , " Piper 's <unk> " and " The <unk> " – appear in the Fitzwilliam Virginal Book ( c . 1609 – c . 1619 ) , one of the most important sources of early keyboard music containing more than 300 pieces from the late Elizabethan and early Jacobean periods . He also set to music some of William Leighton 's verses , written by the latter while in prison for debt . Together with works by other composers , these were published as The <unk> and <unk> of a <unk> Soule in 1614 . This was followed two years later by <unk> <unk> , with texts assembled by the Reverend Thomas <unk> mainly using psalm texts in the English language . 
 In 1620 Peerson 's collection Private Musicke was published . It contained secular music , including madrigals and consort songs , for one or two voices accompanied by viols or virginals . He published some metrical psalter tunes in Thomas Ravenscroft 's 1621 work The Whole Booke of Psalmes with the <unk> <unk> and Songs <unk> , and then a group of Motets or Grave Chamber Musique in 1630 with English texts and the then @-@ fashionable keyboard continuo ; the latter work contains two very fine songs of mourning . 
 Thereafter , despite changing musical trends , Peerson 's music showed significant roots in Renaissance polyphony . However , he was adept in the use of then @-@ modern compositional procedures ; this is evident in his often daring use of chromaticism , especially seen in word painting . Some of his finest music is contained in his set of 15 Latin motets , which was probably composed around the turn of the century . Existing only in a single copy , it originally consisted of five part @-@ books but the Cantus book is lost . Richard <unk> , professor of historical musicology at the University of Leeds , spent 12 years reconstructing the missing part . The complete Latin motets have been published by <unk> Edition , and a recording of their performance by Ex Cathedra entitled Peerson : Latin Motets was produced by Hyperion Records in 2005 . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Private Musicke . Or the First Booke of Ayres and Dialogues : <unk> Songs of 4 . 5 @.@ and 6 . Parts , of <unk> Sorts , and being Verse and Chorus , is Fit for <unk> and Viols . And for Want of Viols , they may be Performed to either the <unk> or Lute , where the <unk> can Play <unk> the Ground , or for a Shift to the Base <unk> alone . All Made and Composed According to the Rules of Art . By M. P. <unk> of Musicke , London : Printed by Thomas <unk> , 1620 , OCLC <unk> . 
 <unk> or Grave Chamber <unk> : Containing Songs of <unk> Parts of <unk> Sorts , some ful , and some Verse and Chorus . But all Fit for <unk> and <unk> , with an Organ Part ; which for want of Organs , may be Performed on <unk> , Base @-@ Lute , <unk> , or Irish Harpe . Also , A Mourning Song of Sixe Parts for the Death of the late Right Honorable Sir <unk> <unk> ... Composed According to the Rules of Art by M.P. , London : Printed by William <unk> , 1630 , OCLC <unk> . 
 = Lawrence Taylor = 
 Lawrence Julius Taylor ( born February 4 , 1959 ) , nicknamed " L.T. " , is a Hall of Fame former American football player . Taylor played his entire professional career as a linebacker for the New York Giants ( 1981 – 1993 ) in the National Football League ( NFL ) . He is one of the greatest players in the history of football , and has been ranked as the greatest defensive player in league history by former players , coaches , media members , and news outlets such as the NFL Network , and Sporting News . 
 After an All @-@ American career at the University of North Carolina ( UNC ) ( 1978 – 1981 ) , Taylor was drafted by the Giants as the second overall selection in the 1981 NFL Draft . Although controversy surrounded the selection due to Taylor 's contract demands , the two sides quickly resolved the issue . Taylor won several defensive awards after his rookie season . Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s , Taylor was a disruptive force at outside linebacker , and is credited with changing the pass rushing schemes , offensive line play , and offensive formations used in the NFL . Taylor produced double @-@ digit sacks each season from 1984 through 1990 , including a career high of 20 @.@ 5 in 1986 . He also won a record three Defensive Player of the Year awards and was named the league 's Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) for his performance during the 1986 season . Taylor is one of only two defensive players in the history of the NFL to have ever won the NFL MVP award . He was named First @-@ team All @-@ Pro in each of his first nine seasons and was a key member of the Giants ' defense , nicknamed " The Big Blue Wrecking Crew " , that led New York to victories in Super Bowls XXI and XXV . During the 1980s , Taylor , fellow linebackers Carl Banks , Gary Reasons , Brad Van Pelt , Brian Kelley , Pepper Johnson , and Hall of Famer Harry Carson gave the Giants linebacking corps a reputation as one of the best in the NFL . 
 Taylor has lived a controversial lifestyle , during and after his playing career . He admitted to using drugs such as cocaine as early as his second year in the NFL , and was suspended several times by the league for failing drug tests . His drug abuse escalated after his retirement , and he was jailed three times for attempted drug possession . From 1998 to 2009 , Taylor lived a sober , drug @-@ free life . He worked as a color commentator on sporting events after his retirement , and pursued a career as an actor . His personal life came under public scrutiny in 2011 when he pleaded guilty to sexual misconduct involving a 16 @-@ year @-@ old girl . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lawrence Taylor was the second of three sons born to Clarence and Iris Taylor in Williamsburg , Virginia . His father worked as a dispatcher at the Newport News shipyards , while his mother was a schoolteacher . Referred to as Lonnie by his family , Taylor was a mischievous youth . His mother said that " [ h ] e was a challenging child . Where the other two boys would ask for permission to do stuff , Lonnie ... would just do it , and when you found out about it , he would give you a big story . " Taylor concentrated on baseball as a youth , in which he played the position of catcher , and only began playing football at the advanced age of fifteen . He did not play organized high school football until the following year ( eleventh grade ) , and was not heavily recruited coming out of high school . 
 After graduating from Lafayette High School in 1977 , Taylor attended the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill where he was a team captain , and wore No. 98 . Originally recruited as a defensive lineman , Taylor switched to linebacker before the 1979 season . He had 16 sacks in his final year there ( 1980 ) , and set numerous defensive records . He was recognized as a consensus first @-@ team All @-@ American and the Atlantic Coast Conference Player of the Year in 1980 . While there the coaching staff marveled at his intense , reckless style of play . " As a freshman playing on special teams , he 'd jump a good six or seven feet in the air to block a punt , then land on the back of his neck " , said North Carolina assistant coach Bobby Cale . " He was reckless , just reckless . " UNC later retired Taylor 's jersey . 
 = = NFL career = = 
 = = = 1981 NFL Draft and training camp = = = 
 In the 1981 NFL Draft , Taylor was drafted by the NFL 's New York Giants as the 2nd pick overall . In a poll of NFL General Managers ( GMs ) taken before the draft 26 of the league 's 28 GMs said if they had the first selection they would select Taylor . One of the two GMs who said they would not take Taylor was Bum Phillips , who had just been hired as coach and general manager by the New Orleans Saints . As fate would have it for Taylor , the Saints were also the team who had the first pick in the draft . Giants GM George Young predicted before the draft that he would be better than NFL legends such as Dick Butkus : " Taylor is the best college linebacker I 've ever seen . Sure , I saw Dick Butkus play . There 's no doubt in my mind about Taylor . He 's bigger and stronger than Butkus was . On the blitz , he 's devastating . " 
 On draft day , Phillips made good on his promise not to draft Taylor and the Saints instead selected Heisman Trophy @-@ winning halfback George Rogers with the first pick , leaving the Giants with the decision of whether to select Taylor . To the raucous approval of the crowd in attendance at the draft ( which was held in New York City ) , the Giants selected him . Privately , Taylor was hesitant about playing for New York as he had hoped to be drafted by the Dallas Cowboys , and was unimpressed with a tour of Giants Stadium he was taken on , after the draft . Publicly , however , he expressed excitement about the opportunity to play in the city . Taylor changed his stance after he was drafted as Harry Carson made a point to reach out to him , and Taylor said he " talked to some players and coaches " and " got things straightened out . " One of the factors that the Giants said they considered in selecting Taylor was his solid reputation . " He was the cleanest player in the draft . By that I mean there was no rap on him " , said head coach Ray Perkins . " Great potential as a linebacker , a fine young man , free of injuries . " Taylor chose to wear number 56 because he was a fan of Cowboys linebacker Thomas Henderson . As it would turn out , Taylor would have the longer and more successful career while Rogers , although successful in his own right with several 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard rushing seasons and two Pro Bowl selections , was injury @-@ prone and forced to retire following the 1987 season with the Washington Redskins . 
 Taylor 's talent was evident from the start of training camp . Reports came out of the Giants training compound of the exploits of the new phenom . Taylor 's teammates took to calling him Superman and joked that his locker should be replaced with a phone booth . Phil Simms , the team 's quarterback , said , " on the pass rush , he 's an animal . He 's either going to run around you or over you . With his quickness , he 's full speed after two steps . " Taylor made his NFL exhibition debut on August 8 , 1981 , recording 2 sacks in the Giants ' 23 – 7 win over the Chicago Bears . Before the season word spread around the league about Taylor . Years after facing him in an exhibition game , Pittsburgh Steelers Quarterback Terry Bradshaw recalled , " [ h ] e dang @-@ near killed me , I just kept saying , ' Who is this guy ? ' He kept coming from my blind side and just ripped my ribs to pieces . " 
 Taylor developed what has been termed a " love @-@ hate relationship " with Bill Parcells who was the team 's defensive coordinator when he was drafted , and would later become their head coach . Parcells often rode players in the hopes of driving them to better performance . Taylor did not appreciate this approach , and early on told Parcells , " I 've had enough . You either cut me or trade me but get the fuck off my back . " Parcells kept on Taylor , but privately told some veterans , " I like that LT . That motherfucker 's got a mean streak . " 
 = = = Early career : 1981 – 1985 = = = 
 Taylor made his NFL regular season debut on September 6 , 1981 , in a 24 – 10 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles . Aside from incurring a penalty for a late hit on Eagles running back Perry Harrington , Taylor played a nondescript game . In a game versus the St. Louis Cardinals later in the season , Taylor rushed and sacked the passer when he was supposed to drop into coverage . When told by Parcells that was not what he was assigned to do on that play , and that what he did was not in the playbook , Taylor responded " Well , we better put it in on Monday , because that play 's a dandy . " He recorded 9 @.@ 5 sacks in 1981 , and his rookie season is considered one of the best in NFL history . He was named 1981 's NFL Defensive Rookie of the Year and Defensive Player of the Year , making him as of 2013 the only rookie to win an Offensive or Defensive Player of the Year award . Taylor 's arrival helped the Giants defense reduce their points allowed from 425 points in 1980 to 257 in 1981 . They finished the season 9 – 7 , up five games from the previous season , and advanced to the NFL divisional playoffs , where they lost 38 – 24 to the eventual Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers . The San Francisco win was due partly to a new tactic 49ers coach Bill Walsh used to slow Taylor . Walsh assigned guard John Ayers , the team 's best blocker , to block Taylor and , although Taylor still recorded a sack and three tackles , he was not as effective as normal . In contrast to his on @-@ field success Taylor was already developing a reputation for recklessness off the field ; after nearly getting killed during the season when his speeding resulted in a car crash , Young told the team 's trainer he would be surprised if the linebacker lived past the age of 30 , and the Giants insured Taylor 's life for $ 2 million . 
 The 1982 NFL season , which was shortened to nine regular season games by a players strike , included one of the more memorable plays of Taylor 's career . In the nationally televised Thanksgiving Day game against the Detroit Lions , the teams were tied 6 – 6 early in the fourth quarter , when the Lions drove deep into New York territory . Lions quarterback Gary Danielson dropped back to pass and threw the ball out to his left toward the sidelines . Taylor ran in front of the intended receiver , intercepted the pass , and returned it 97 yards for a touchdown . This play was indicative of Taylor 's unusual combination , even for a linebacker , of power with speed . He was again named Defensive Player of the Year . 
 After the 1982 season , Perkins became head coach of the University of Alabama and the Giants hired Parcells to replace him . In the coming years this change proved crucial to the Giants and Taylor . Leading up to the 1983 season , Taylor engaged in a training camp holdout that lasted three weeks and ended when he came back to the team under his old contract with three games left in the preseason . 
 Although Taylor recorded nine sacks and made the All @-@ Pro team for the third consecutive season in 1983 , the Giants struggled . The team went 3 – 12 – 1 , and Parcells received heavy criticism from fans and the media . Taylor was forced to play inside linebacker for part of the season , a position which allowed him less pass rushing opportunities , when Carson was injured . Frustrated by the losing , Taylor began acting out by arriving late for meetings , and not participating in conditioning drills in practice . After the season , Taylor was involved in a fight for his services between the Giants and the New Jersey Generals of the United States Football League . Taylor was given a $ 1 million interest @-@ free , 25 @-@ year loan by Generals owner Donald Trump on December 14 , 1983 , with the provision that he begin playing in the USFL in 1988 . Taylor regretted the decision , and less than a month later attempted to renege . His agent was able to negotiate by meeting with Trump personally and then the Giants which resulted in allowing Taylor to go with the Giants . Taylor got a 6 @-@ year $ 6 @.@ 55 @-@ million package that also included a $ 1 million interest @-@ free loan . The main results of these negotiations were threefold : 1 ) Taylor returned the $ 1 million to Trump , 2 ) the Giants paid Trump $ 750 @,@ 000 over the next five seasons , and 3 ) the Giants gave Taylor a new six @-@ year , $ 6 @.@ 2 @-@ million @-@ dollar contract . 
 The Giants ' record rebounded to 9 – 7 in 1984 , and Taylor had his fourth All @-@ Pro season . He got off to a quick start , recording four sacks in a September game . In the playoffs the Giants defeated the Los Angeles Rams 16 – 13 , but lost 21 – 10 to the eventual champion 49ers . 
 In contrast to the previous season the Giants headed into the 1985 season with a sense of optimism after their successful 1984 campaign and a 5 – 0 pre @-@ season record . The Giants went 10 – 6 , and Taylor spearheaded a defense that led the NFL in sacks with 68 . Taylor had 13 . One of the more memorable plays of his career occurred during this season . On a Monday Night Football game against the Redskins , Taylor 's sack of Redskins quarterback Joe Theismann inadvertently resulted in a compound fracture of Theismann 's right leg . After the sack , a distraught Taylor screamed for paramedics to attend to Theismann . Although this sack ended Theismann 's career , Theismann has never blamed Taylor for the injury . Taylor says he has never seen video of the play and never wants to . During the first round of the playoffs , the Giants defeated the defending champion 49ers 17 – 3 , but lost to the eventual champion Chicago Bears in the second round 21 – 0 . 
 = = = Mid @-@ career and championships : 1986 – 1990 = = = 
 In 1986 Taylor had one of the most successful seasons by a defensive player in the history of the NFL . He recorded a league @-@ leading 20 @.@ 5 sacks and became one of just two defensive players to win the NFL Most Valuable Player award and the only defensive player to be the unanimous selection for MVP . He also was named Defensive Player of the Year for the third time . The Giants finished the season 14 – 2 and outscored San Francisco and Washington by a combined score of 66 – 3 in the NFC playoffs . He appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated alone the week leading up to Super Bowl XXI with a warning from the magazine to the Denver Broncos regarding Taylor . The Giants overcame a slow start in Super Bowl XXI to defeat Denver 39 – 20 . Taylor made a key touchdown preventing tackle on a goal line play in the first half , stopping Broncos quarterback John Elway as he sprinted out on a rollout . 
 With the Super Bowl win , Taylor capped off an unprecedented start to his career . After six years , he had been named the NFL Defensive Rookie of the Year Award ( 1981 ) , NFL Defensive Player of the Year a record three times ( 1981 , 1982 , 1986 ) , First @-@ team All @-@ Pro six times , become the first defensive player in NFL history unanimously voted the league 's MVP ( 1986 ) , and led his team to a championship ( 1986 ) . After the win , however , Taylor felt let down rather than elated . Taylor said : 
 When the Super Bowl was over ... Everyone was so excited , but by then I felt deflated . I 'd won every award , had my best season , finally won the Super Bowl . I was on top of the world right ? So what could be next ? Nothing . The thrill is the chase to get to the top . Every day the excitement builds and builds and builds , and then when you 're finally there and the game is over ... 
 And then , nothing . 
 The Giants appeared to have a bright future coming off their 1986 championship season as they were one of the younger teams in the league . They struggled the next season however , falling to 6 – 9 in the strike @-@ shortened 1987 season . Taylor caused strife in the locker room when he broke the picket line after early struggles by the team . He explained his decision by saying " The Giants are losing . And I 'm losing $ 60 @,@ 000 a week . " He finished the season as the team leader in sacks with 12 in 12 games played , but missed a game due to a hamstring injury , ending his consecutive games played streak at 106 . 
 The Giants looked to rebound to their championship ways in 1988 but the start of the season was marred by controversy surrounding Taylor . He tested positive for cocaine and was suspended by the league for thirty days , as it was his second violation of the NFL 's substance abuse policy . The first result in 1987 had been kept private and was not known to the public at the time . He was kept away from the press during this period and checked himself into rehab in early September . Taylor 's over @-@ the @-@ edge lifestyle was becoming an increasing concern for fans and team officials . This was especially true given the eventual career paths of talented players like Hollywood Henderson and others whose drug problems derailed their careers . The Giants went 2 – 2 in the games Taylor missed . When Taylor returned he was his usual dominant self as he led the team in sacks again , with 15 @.@ 5 in 12 games played . The season also contained some of the more memorable moments of Taylor 's career . In a crucial late @-@ season game with playoff implications against the New Orleans Saints , Taylor played through a torn pectoral muscle to record seven tackles , three sacks , and two forced fumbles . Taylor 's presence in the lineup was important as the Giants ' offense was having trouble mounting drives , and was dominated in time of possession . Television cameras repeatedly cut to the sidelines to show him in extreme physical pain as he was being attended to by the Giants staff . Taylor had already developed a reputation for playing through pain ; in a 1983 game against the Eagles the team 's training staff had to hide his helmet to prevent the injured Taylor from returning to the field . Taylor 's shoulder was so injured that he had to wear a harness to keep it in its place . The Giants held on for a 13 – 12 win , and Parcells later called Taylor 's performance " [ t ] he greatest game I ever saw . " However , the Giants narrowly missed the playoffs in 1988 at 10 – 6 by losing tie @-@ breakers with the Eagles in their division and the Rams for the Wild card . 
 In 1989 , Taylor recorded 15 sacks . He was forced to play the latter portion of the season with a fractured tibia , suffered in a 34 – 24 loss to the 49ers in week 12 , which caused him to sit out the second half of several games . Despite his off @-@ the @-@ field problems , Taylor remained popular among his teammates and was voted defensive co @-@ captain along with Carl Banks . The two filled the defensive captain 's spot vacated by the retired Harry Carson . The retirement of the nine @-@ time Pro Bowler Carson , broke up the Giants linebacker corps of Carson , Reasons , Banks , and Taylor , which spearheaded the team 's defense nicknamed the " Big Blue Wrecking Crew " in the 1980s . The Giants went 12 – 4 , and advanced to the playoffs . In an exciting , down @-@ to @-@ the @-@ wire game , the Rams eliminated the Giants 19 – 13 in the first round , despite Taylor 's two sacks and one forced fumble . 
 Taylor held out of training camp before the 1990 season , demanding a new contract with a salary of $ 2 million per year . Talks dragged into September with neither side budging , and as the season approached Taylor received fines at the rate of $ 2 @,@ 500 dollars a day . He signed a three @-@ year $ 5 million contract ( making him the highest paid defensive player in the league ) just four days before the season opener against the Philadelphia Eagles . Despite sitting out training camp and the preseason , Taylor recorded three sacks and a forced fumble against the Eagles . He finished with 10 @.@ 5 sacks and earned his 10th Pro Bowl in as many years , although the season marked the first time in Taylor 's career that he was not selected to the All @-@ Pro team . The Giants started out 10 – 0 and finished with a 13 – 3 record . In the playoffs , the Giants defeated the Bears 31 – 3 , and faced the rival 49ers in the NFC Championship Game . They won 15 – 13 , after Taylor recovered a key fumble late in the game to set up Matt Bahr 's game @-@ winning field goal . In Super Bowl XXV , they played the Buffalo Bills and won one of the more entertaining Super Bowls in history , 20 @-@ 19 , after Buffalo 's Scott Norwood missed a potential game @-@ winning field goal as time expired . 
 = = = Final years and decline : 1991 – 1993 = = = 
 Following the 1990 season , Parcells , with whom Taylor had become very close , retired , and the team was taken over by Ray Handley . 1991 marked a steep decline in Taylor 's production . It became the first season in his career in which he failed to make the Pro Bowl squad , after setting a then record by making it in his first ten years in the league . Taylor finished with 7 sacks in 14 games and the Giants defense , while still respectable , was no longer one of the top units in the league . 
 Taylor rebounded in the early stages of what many thought would be his final season in 1992 . Through close to nine games Taylor was on pace for 10 sacks and the Giants were 5 – 4 . However , a ruptured Achilles tendon suffered in a game on November 8 , 1992 against Green Bay sidelined him for the final seven games , during which the team went 1 – 6 . Before the injury Taylor had missed only four games due to injury in his 12 @-@ year career . Throughout the 1992 season , and the ensuing offseason , Taylor was noncommittal about his future , alternately saying he might retire , then later hinting he wanted a longer @-@ term contract . 
 Taylor returned for the 1993 season enticed by the chance to play with a new coach ( Dan Reeves ) , and determined not to end his career due to an injury . The Giants had a resurgent season in 1993 . They finished 11 – 5 , and competed for the top NFC playoff seed . Taylor finished with 6 sacks , and the Giants defense led the NFL in fewest points allowed . They defeated the Vikings 17 – 10 in the opening round of the playoffs . The next week on January 15 , 1994 in what would be Taylor 's final game , the Giants were beaten 44 – 3 by the 49ers . As the game came to a conclusion , television cameras drew in close on Taylor who was crying . He announced his retirement at the post @-@ game press conference saying , " I think it 's time for me to retire . I 've done everything I can do . I 've been to Super Bowls . I 've been to playoffs . I 've done things that other people haven 't been able to do in this game before . After 13 years , it 's time for me to go . " 
 Taylor ended his career with 1 @,@ 088 tackles , 132 @.@ 5 sacks ( not counting the 9 @.@ 5 sacks he recorded as a rookie because sacks did not become an official statistic until 1982 ) , nine interceptions , 134 return yards , two touchdowns , 33 forced fumbles , 11 fumble recoveries , and 34 fumble return yards . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Taylor is considered one of the best players to ever play in the NFL , and has been ranked as the top defensive player in league history by news outlets , media members , former players and coaches . He has also been described as one of the most " feared " and " intimidating " players in NFL history . Taylor 's explosive speed and power is credited with changing the position of outside linebacker from a " read and react " type of position to a more attacking , aggressive position . 
 Washington Redskins head coach Joe Gibbs developed the two tight end offense and the position of h @-@ back to prevent Taylor from blitzing into the backfield unhindered . " We had to try in some way have a special game plan just for Lawrence Taylor . Now you didn 't do that very often in this league but I think he 's one person that we learned the lesson the hard way . We lost ball games . " His skills changed the way offensive coaches blocked linebackers . In the late ' 70s and early ' 80s , a blitzing linebacker was picked up by a running back . However , these players were no match for Taylor . The tactic employed by San Francisco 49ers head coach Bill Walsh in the 1982 playoffs , using an offensive guard to block Taylor , was copied around the league . However , this left a hole in pass protection that a blitzing middle linebacker could exploit . Later , Walsh and other coaches began using offensive tackles to block Taylor . Later it became common for offensive linemen to pick up blitzing linebackers . In addition to the changes in offensive schemes Taylor influenced , he also introduced new defensive techniques to the game such as chopping the ball out of the quarterback 's hands rather than tackling him . 
 = = Drugs and extreme measures = = 
 In contrast to his success on the football field , Taylor 's personal life has been marred by drug usage and controversy . When Taylor was once asked what he could do that no outside linebacker could , his answer was , " Drink " . However , alcohol abuse was not the largest of his substance abuse problems . After admitting to and testing positive for cocaine in 1987 , he was suspended from football for 30 days in 1988 after failing a second drug test . After his second positive test he gave up drugs for five years as a third positive test would have ended his career . As he approached retirement , however , he looked forward to picking up the habit again , saying in his second autobiography , " I saw blow as the only bright spot in my future . " After his retirement , he began abusing drugs on a regular basis . He went through drug rehab twice in 1995 , only to later be arrested twice over a three @-@ year span for attempting to buy cocaine from undercover police officers . During this period , he lived almost exclusively in his home with white sheets covering his windows and only associated with other drug users . Taylor later said , " I had gotten really bad . I mean my place was almost like a crack house . " In his second autobiography , Taylor admitted that he had begun using drugs as early as his rookie season in the NFL . He has also stated that his first wife , Linda , mother to his three children , once had to come pick him up from a crack house during his playing career . 
 In a November 2003 interview with Mike Wallace on the television news magazine 60 Minutes , Taylor claimed he hired and sent prostitutes to opponents ' hotel rooms the night before a game in an attempt to tire them out , and that at his peak , he spent thousands of dollars a day on narcotics . He also recounted several other instances of aberrant behavior , including arriving to a team meeting during his playing career in handcuffs after spending a night with some call girls . He said , " A couple of ladies that were trying out some new equipment they had . You know ? And I just happened to , and they just didn 't happen to have the key . " He also said that to beat NFL drug tests , he routinely submitted the urine of his teammates . 
 = = Post @-@ NFL life = = 
 In Taylor 's final year in the NFL he started a company called All @-@ Pro Products . The company went public at $ 5 a share , and tripled in value during its first month . The stock price reached $ 16 @.@ 50 a share , at which point Taylor 's stake had an estimated value of over $ 10 million . The company ceased production shortly thereafter however , and Taylor , who never sold his stock , lost several hundred thousand dollars . He had been defrauded by several members of the penny stock firm Hanover Sterling & Company , who had short sold the company 's stock , making it worthless . The Securities and Exchange Commission ruled that two traders had manipulated the price of the stock , which skyrocketed while the company was losing over $ 900 @,@ 000 . Taylor has also had self @-@ inflicted financial problems ; in 1997 he pleaded guilty to filing a false tax return in 1990 , and in 2000 he was " sentenced to three months of house arrest , five years of probation , and 500 hours of community service for tax evasion . " 
 After his career ended , Taylor worked in several regular television jobs . He first worked as a football analyst for the now defunct TNT Sunday Night Football . In a one @-@ off show , Taylor also appeared as a wrestler in the World Wrestling Federation , defeating Bam Bam Bigelow in the main event of WrestleMania XI . He also worked as a color commentator on an amateur fighting program entitled <unk> on the FX channel . On September 4 , 1995 , the Giants retired Phil Simms ' jersey during halftime of a game against the Cowboys ( Taylor had his number retired the year before ) . Simms celebrated the moment by throwing an impromptu ceremonial pass to Taylor . Simms recalled , " [ a ] ll of a sudden it kind of hit me , I 've put Lawrence in a really tough spot ; national TV , he 's got dress shoes and a sports jacket on , and he 's had a few beers and he 's going to run down the field and I 'm going to throw him a pass . " Simms motioned for Taylor to run a long pattern and after 30 – 40 yards threw him the pass . Taylor later said the situation made him more nervous than any play of his career , " I 'm saying to myself ( as the pass is being thrown ) , ' If I drop this pass , I got to run my black ass all the way back to Upper Saddle River because there ain 't no way I 'm going to be able to stay in that stadium ' . " Taylor caught the pass , however , and the capacity crowd in attendance cheered in approval . 
 Taylor pursued a career in acting , appearing in the Oliver Stone movie Any Given Sunday where he played a character much like himself . He appeared as himself in the HBO series The Sopranos and the film The <unk> . He also had a role in the 2000 version of Shaft . Taylor voiced the steroid @-@ riddled , possibly insane former football player B.J. Smith in the video game , Grand Theft Auto : Vice City . The character poked fun at his fearsome , drug @-@ fueled public image . He also added his voice to the video game Blitz : The League and its sequel , which were partially based on his life in the NFL . He also acted in the 2000 Christian film Mercy Streets with Eric Roberts and Stacy Keach , and the 2003 prison movie In Hell with Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme . 
 In 1999 , when Taylor became eligible for the Pro Football Hall of Fame , there were some concerns that his hard @-@ partying lifestyle and drug abuse would hurt his candidacy . These concerns proved to be ill @-@ founded , however , as he was voted in on the first ballot . His son Lawrence Taylor Jr. gave his introduction speech at the induction ceremony . Taylor 's ex @-@ wife , his three children , and his parents were in attendance and during his induction speech Taylor acknowledged them saying , " [ t ] hank you for putting up with me for all those years . " He also credited former Giants owner Wellington Mara for being supportive of him saying , " [ h ] e probably cared more about me as a person than he really should have . " 
 Taylor is currently married to his third wife and resides in Pembroke Pines , Florida . His soul @-@ wrenching admissions to Mike Wallace in 2003 reignited his popularity with the public . Taylor often spoke of his NFL years , which he played with reckless abandon , and the drug @-@ abusing stages of his life as the " L.T. " periods of his life . He described " L.T. " as an adrenaline junkie who lived life on a thrill ride . Taylor said in 2003 that " L. T. died a long time ago , and I don 't miss him at all ... all that 's left is Lawrence Taylor . " 
 Taylor re @-@ emerged into the public eye in July 2006 , after appearing on the cover of a Sports Illustrated issue dedicated to former athletes and sport figures . In the magazine , Taylor credited his hobby of golf with helping him get over his previous hard @-@ partying ways and drug filled lifestyle . He co @-@ founded <unk> , a network marketing company based in West Palm Beach , Florida . Along with former NFL players , such as Eric Dickerson and Seth Joyner , he was a spokesman for Seven + , the flagship multi @-@ botanical drink produced by the company . His son Brandon recently signed a national letter to play with the Purdue Boilermakers . Taylor was a contestant on the 8th season of Dancing with the Stars , partnered with Edyta <unk> . He was eliminated in the seventh week on the April 21 , 2009 show . 
 In 2009 , Taylor started having troubles in his personal life again . On November 8 , he was arrested in Miami @-@ Dade County , Florida for leaving the scene of an accident after striking another vehicle with his Cadillac Escalade . He had already committed the same offense in 1996 when he totaled his Lexus in a one @-@ car accident and left the scene , saying he did not think the law required the reporting of a single driver incident . He was released on a $ 500 bond , and the other driver later sued him , seeking $ 15 @,@ 000 . He was arrested six months later for having sex with a 16 @-@ year @-@ old girl at a Holiday Inn located in Montebello , New York . He was charged with felony third @-@ degree statutory rape , for allegedly engaging in sexual intercourse with someone under 17 . He was also charged with third @-@ degree patronization for allegedly paying the underage girl $ 300 to have sex with him . The girl was represented by celebrity attorney Gloria Allred when Taylor pleaded guilty on March 22 , 2011 and was sentenced to six years probation as part of a plea agreement , in which he pleaded guilty to the misdemeanors of sexual misconduct and patronizing a prostitute . He will also have to register as a low @-@ risk level one sex offender . On October 26 , 2012 , a court rejected the victim 's claims that Taylor assaulted her . 
 On June 9 , 2016 , Taylor 's wife was arrested for domestic violence in Florida after she threw " an unknown object " and struck Taylor in the back of the head . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Sources : 
 * Unofficial statistic ( sacks did not become an official statistic until 1982 ) ; however , this number is stated on Taylor 's Pro Football Hall of Fame bio and is considered to be accurate . 
 * * League leader 
 † Including the 9 @.@ 5 Taylor unofficially recorded as a rookie , his total is 142 . 
 Key to abbreviations 
 GP = games played 
 Int = interception 
 Yds = yards 
 TD = touchdowns 
 FR = fumbles recovered 
 = Shire horse = 
 The Shire horse is a breed of draught horse ( BrE ) or draft horse ( AmE ) . The breed comes in many colours , including black , bay and grey . They are a tall breed , with mares standing 16 hands ( 64 inches , 163 cm ) and over and stallions standing 17 hands ( 68 inches , 173 cm ) and over . The breed has an enormous capacity for weight pulling , and Shires have held the world records for both largest overall horse and tallest horse at various times . Throughout its history , the breed has been popular for pulling brewery wagons delivering ale to customers . This practice continues today , with the breed also being used for forestry , leisure and promotional pursuits . 
 In 1878 , the British organization now known as the Shire Horse Society was created , with the American Shire Horse Association beginning in 1885 . The breed was exported from Britain to the United States in large numbers during the late 19th and early 20th centuries , but popularity fell as mechanisation increased , reaching a low point in the 1950s and 1960s . Popularity began to increase again in the 1970s and after . However , population numbers are still considered to be at critical levels by both the UK @-@ based Rare Breeds Survival Trust and the US @-@ based American Livestock Breeds Conservancy . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Shire stallions may be black , bay or grey . They may not be roan or have large amounts of white markings . Mares and geldings may be black , bay , grey or roan . In the UK stallions may not be chestnut , but the colour is allowed by the US registry . Stallions must stand at least 17 hands ( 68 inches , 173 cm ) high when mature , and they average around 17 @.@ 2 hands ( 70 inches , 178 cm ) . Geldings stand at least 16 @.@ 2 hands ( 66 inches , 168 cm ) high and mares at least 16 hands ( 64 inches , 163 cm ) . Their average weight ranges from 900 to 1 @,@ 100 kg ( 2 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 400 lb ) The head of a Shire is long and lean , with large eyes , set on a neck that is slightly arched and long in proportion to the body . The shoulder is deep and wide , the chest wide , the back muscular and short and the hindquarters long and wide . Not too much feathering is to occur on the legs , and the hair is fine , straight , and silky . Smaller Shires , under 17 hands ( 68 inches , 173 cm ) , are generally preferred for working horses , while taller horses , especially those over 18 @.@ 2 hands ( 74 inches , 188 cm ) , are used for show and promotional purposes . The breed is known for its easy @-@ going temperament . Shires have been identified to be at risk for chronic progressive lymphedema , a chronic progressive disease that includes symptoms of progressive swelling , hyperkeratosis , and fibrosis of distal limbs . The disease is similar to chronic lymphedema in humans . 
 The Shire has an enormous capacity for pulling weight . In 1924 , at a British exhibition , a pair of horses was estimated to have pulled a starting load equal to 45 tons , although an exact number could not be determined as their pull exceeded the maximum reading on the dynamometer . Working in slippery footing , the same pair of horses pulled 16 @.@ 5 tons at a later exhibition . 
 The largest horse in recorded history was probably a Shire named Mammoth , born in 1848 . He stood 21 @.@ 2 1 ⁄ 4 hands ( 86 @.@ 25 inches , 219 cm ) high , and his peak weight was estimated at 1 @,@ 524 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 360 lb ) . At over 19 hands ( 76 inches , 193 cm ) , a Shire gelding named Goliath was the Guinness Book of World Records record holder for the world 's tallest horse until his death in 2001 . 
 = = Breed history = = 
 Though oxen were used for most farm work into the 18th century , horses ' fit for the dray , the plough , or the chariot ' were on sale at Smithfield Market in London as early as 1145 . 
 The English Great Horse was valued during the reign of Henry VIII , when stallions measuring less than ' fifteen handfuls ' could not be kept , but the increasing role of gunpowder brought an end to the use of heavy horses in battle . Oliver Cromwell 's cavalry favoured lighter , faster mounts and the big horses began to be used for draught work instead . During the 16th century , Dutch engineers brought Friesian horses with them when they came to England to drain the fens , and these horses probably had a significant influence on what became the Shire breed . 
 From this medieval horse came an animal called the Old English Black Horse in the 17th century . The Black Horse was improved by the followers of Robert Bakewell , of <unk> Grange in Leicestershire , resulting in a horse sometimes known as the " Bakewell Black " . Bakewell imported six Dutch or Flanders mares , notable since breeders tended to concentrate on improving the male line . Two different types of black horses developed : the Fen or Lincolnshire type and the Leicester or Midlands type . The Fen type tended to be larger , with more bone and extra hair , while the Midlands type tended to have more endurance while being of a finer appearance . The term " Shire horse " was first used in the mid @-@ 17th century , and incomplete records begin to appear near the end of the 18th century . The " <unk> Blind Horse " , from Leicestershire , is one of the best @-@ known horses of the era , with direct descendents being recorded from 1770 to 1832 . This horse is usually recognized as the foundation stallion for the Shire breed , and he stood at stud from 1755 to 1770 . During the 19th century , Shires were used extensively as cart horses to move goods from the docks through the cities and countryside . The rough roads created a need for large horses with extensive musculature . 
 In 1878 , the English Cart Horse Society was formed , and in 1884 changed its name to the Shire Horse Society . The Society published a stud book , with the first edition in 1878 containing 2 @,@ 381 stallions and records dating back to 1770 . Between 1901 and 1914 , 5 @,@ 000 Shires were registered each year with the British registry . The first Shires were imported to the United States in 1853 , with large numbers of horses being imported in the 1880s . The American Shire Horse Association was established in 1885 to register and promote the breed . The Shire soon became popular in the United States , and almost 4 @,@ 000 Shires were imported between 1900 and 1918 . Approximately 6 @,@ 700 Shires were registered with the US registry between 1909 and 1911 . Around the time of World War II , increasing mechanization and strict regulations on the purchase of livestock feed reduced the need for and ability to keep draft horses . Thousands of Shires were slaughtered and several large breeding studs closed . The breed fell to its lowest point in the 1950s and 1960s , and in 1955 fewer than 100 horses were shown at the annual British Spring Show . 
 In the 1970s , the breed began to be revived through increased public interest . Breed societies have been established in the United States , Canada , the Netherlands , France , and Germany , and in 1996 the first World Shire Horse Congress was held in Peterborough . The first use within the breed of artificial insemination through frozen semen was with several Australian mares in 1997 . Between the 1920s and 1930s and today , the Shire has changed in conformation . The Clydesdale was used for crossbreeding in the 1950s and 1960s , which changed the conformation of the Shire and most notably changed the feathering on the lower legs from a mass of coarse hair into the silky feathering associated with modern Shires . At the peak of their population , Shires numbered over a million . In the 1950s and 1960s , this number declined to a few thousand . In the United States , the Shire population dropped significantly in the early part of the 20th century , and continued to decline in the 1940s and 1950s . Between 1950 and 1959 , only 25 horses were registered with the US registry . However , numbers began to increase , and 121 horses were registered in the US by 1985 . 
 The National Shire Horse Spring Show is still held annually and is the largest Shire show in Great Britain . Currently , the American Livestock Breeds Conservancy considers the population of the Shire to be at " critical " levels , meaning that the estimated global population of the breed is less than 2 @,@ 000 and fewer than 200 registrations are made annually in the US . The UK Rare Breeds Survival Trust considers the breed to be " at risk " , meaning that population numbers are estimated to be under 1 @,@ 500 . The Equus Survival Trust considers the breed to be " vulnerable " , meaning that between 500 and 1500 active adult breeding mares are in existence today . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The Shire horse was originally the staple breed used to draw carts to deliver ale from the brewery to the public houses . A few breweries still maintain this tradition in the UK . These include the <unk> Brewery in Devizes , Wiltshire , the Hook Norton Brewery , the Samuel Smith Brewery in Tadcaster , and Thwaites Brewery , which made Shire @-@ drawn deliveries from the early 1800s to the 1920s , then resumed service in 1960 , with deliveries continuing to be horse @-@ drawn to the present day . Several breweries have recently withdrawn their Shire horse teams , including the Tetley brewery in Leeds . 
 Today , the breed is also used for forestry work and leisure riding . 
 = Hadspen , Tasmania = 
 Hadspen is an Australian town on the South Esk River in the north of Tasmania , 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) south west of Launceston . Hadspen has few commercial establishments and is primarily a residential suburb of nearby Launceston . Most of the town 's buildings are residential , and relatively recent . The town 's population of just over 2000 has grown rapidly from only a few hundred in the 1960s , and there are development plans that call for its doubling . 
 Settlement began in the early 19th century as a cluster of houses on the Launceston side of the river , near a frequently @-@ flooded ford . Over time various bridges were built , largely on the same site , across the river . Though it had been settled for some time Hadspen was only officially declared in 1866 . Hadspen was originally on the main road from Launceston to Devonport but the town 's centre was bypassed in the late 20th century . There have been schools , both secular and religious , in its history , though there remain none . 
 The town has heritage @-@ listed properties and some others from colonial times . The town 's historic centrepiece is Entally House , built in 1819 as a wealthy settler 's colonial estate . It was the former family home of Thomas Reibey , Premier of Tasmania from 1876 to 1877 . The Red Feather Inn was built in the 1840s and remains in use as a restaurant and for accommodation . A gaol from the same time reflects Tasmania 's convict past . The Uniting Church building dates back over 150 years , originally as a Wesleyan chapel , and the Anglican Church of the Good Shepherd is known for taking over ninety years to complete . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Hadspen lies approximately 142 metres ( 466 ft ) above sea level , 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) Southwest of Launceston , Tasmania . It is on the southern side of the South Esk River , near the confluence of the South Esk and Meander Rivers . The town is set in a rural landscape ; Surrounding countryside contains valleys , river flood plains , remnant uncleared bush and undulating pastures . The majority of the town lies between the South Esk , and a low section of land east of the town called Beams Hollow , which is named after Thomas Beams , owner of a 50 acres ( 20 ha ) lot through which the road from Launceston first ran . 
 = = History = = 
 As of 1831 there was a settlement named Hadspen near a ford of the South Esk River . A road was proposed from Launceston , crossing the river at this ford near Thomas Haydock Reibey 's property of Entally . The name may have been given by surveyor George Frankland after Hadspen house and garden , an estate in Somerset , England . By the 1840s Hadspen was a small cluster of houses near " Reibey 's ford " , and the river crossing was now on the main road from Launceston . Hadspen Post Office opened on 1 November 1849 , though the town was not declared in the government gazette until January 1866 . A bridge was constructed in the early 1840s replacing the often impassable ford , and during the next century the bridge was often repaired and sometimes replaced . 
 <unk> rural township , long marked out on the maps , is fast assuming the appearance of a village . It is situated close to and on this side of Reibey 's Bridge . Mr. <unk> lately obtained a licence to open an inn , which is a large and commodious brick building . Several cottages are erected , and a blacksmith 's forge for the convenience of surrounding settlers will soon be at work . Abundance of excellent stone is found within a few yards of the spot , and we observe one gentleman has built a remarkably neat cottage , fronting the main street , of this material . The distance from Launceston is about eight miles , and if the road were slightly repaired the drive in this direction would be the most pleasant in the neighbourhood 
 In early years there were two Hotels : Cricket Club Hotel near the river , which was partly destroyed by flood in the 1870s and subsequently demolished , and Hadspen Hotel , a convict @-@ built sandstone structure . By 1881 both had closed and there were no hotels in the town . An application to re @-@ licence a building opposite the Wesleyan church was unsuccessful . The Hadspen Hotel was a private home in the early 20th century and remains as part of the town 's heritage . None of these hotels are open in the 21st century , the Rutherglen complex on the town 's west is the only licensed premises . There was a brewery in the town for a time , though it has long closed . The postal service from Hadspen originally was handled by a licensee operating from a shop , and subsequently from one of hotels . By 1966 the post office was in a separate building on the site of the former blacksmith 's shop . 
 There was an early reference to churches in 1844 when the Examiner noted that Bishop Nixon " laid the foundation stone of a new church at Hadspen , Reibey 's ford " though it is not stated which church . This church is likely to have been a small wooden one that was the first used by the Church of England . The then Reverend Thomas Reibey had a small stone chapel built at Entally in 1850 . Though it was intended for the employees of the estate it was used by some in the town . From the 1870s Reibey himself conducted some of the services in this Chapel . The Uniting Church building in Hadspen 's main street is a small , weatherboard colonial church . There was a Wesleyan chapel in the town by at least 1852 as well as another small church . In July 1874 the current Uniting church building was completed as a Wesleyan Chapel , that by 1924 was part of the Methodist church . The grounds the church is on were owned by the Wesleyans as early as 1865 . 
 = = Schools = = 
 In 1845 , local members of the Church of England , as part of a petition calling for funding , stated that they had established a new school . By 1848 there was also a Wesleyan Sunday School with 20 students . By 1867 there was a secular state school in the town , though funding was inconstant and the school was closed for at least the next two years . This school never grew large ; as of 1903 it had an average attendance of 20 students . 
 The school was still operating in 1937 , though a public request had been made for regular transport to take children to the Hagley District School , in consequence of the Hadspen school 's impending closure . Children from the town began attending the Hagley school in March 1938 . By the middle of the same year a tender was approved by the Minister of Education for regular school transport . The transport was also for students from nearby Carrick . , whose school closed in the 1930s . The school building was finally removed ; a tender in 1944 called for it to be removed and re @-@ erected at Falmouth . Schools have also been run in other town buildings , including a hall near the Anglican church , that was used for worship before the church 's completion , in what is now the Uniting Church and also in another building that later became a private home . In the 21st century there are no schools remaining in Hadspen . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Hadspen was a small town for most of its early life ; its population in 1966 was 311 . It grew quickly from the 1970s to the 1990s after subdivisions were developed in South Esk Drive and Roebourne Avenue . Over this period the population doubled . In the 2001 census , 29 % of the town 's population was under 14 — one of the highest proportions in Tasmania — and future forecast growth means that the town is expected to require a primary school . The population grew from 1 @,@ 334 in 1991 , to 1 @,@ 848 in 2001 , 1 @,@ 926 in 2006 , and 2 @,@ 063 in the last census results in 2011 . Within the town 's current footprint its population is expected to reach 2 @,@ 155 by 2016 . The Meander Valley Council , in a March 2011 development plan , forecast Hadspen 's population doubling over the subsequent two decades . 
 The town 's population is almost entirely Australian @-@ born ; over 90 % as of 2011 compared to the average for all Australia of less than 69 % . In almost all ( 96 @.@ 9 % ) of homes only English is spoken , again a contrast to the Australian average of 76 @.@ 8 % . Median income is slightly higher than the country 's average and the unemployment rate is slightly lower . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Hadspen was an important stop on the coach route from Launceston to Deloraine from at least the 1840s . The coach service declined from when rail transport started in Tasmania in the late 1860s . The State Government began operating a school bus from town , to Hagley , in the 1930s . Meander Valley Highway , formerly known as Bass Highway , passes through the edge of the town bypassing the old main street . Bass Highway , which connects Launceston , Burnie and Devonport , branches off from this east of the town at Travellers Rest and passes south of Hadspen . 
 In the 21st century the town has three bus services : Redline Coaches runs a daily school bus service that passes through Hadspen to many of the Schools in and around Launceston ; <unk> , another private company , takes students to Hagley Farm School and onwards to Westbury Primary School ; Metro Tasmania 's public bus service connects Hadspen and the Rutherglen Holiday Village to the centre of Launceston . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Cricket has been played in Hadspen , at Entally and grounds nearer the town 's centre , since at least the 1860s . The cricket oval at Entally was one of the first in Australia and was hosting matches before Melbourne 's foundation . During his side 's 1874 tour of Australia the great English cricketer W. G. Grace played on the ground . Aside from cricket Entally 's grounds were often open for picnics and grand annual events . The Hadspen Chieftains cricket club was formed in the 1987 – 88 season and plays as part of the Northern Tasmania Cricket Association . They won the association 's A grade premiership in the 1991 – 92 and 1993 – 94 seasons , and the <unk> Cup Premiership — a combined competition with the North East Cricket Association — in the 1993 – 94 and 1994 – 95 seasons . 
 Entally house has been associated with horse racing though the activities of Thomas <unk> . For a while there was horse racing at Entally Park itself , and ninety horses were raced from Entally 's stable . Two of these won wide acclaim : Stockwell was second in the Melbourne Cup and won the Carrick plate in 1881 ; Malua , stated by the Sydney Bulletin to be the " greatest horse of all time " , won the Melbourne cup in 1884 , though this was after his time at Entally . 
 = = Heritage properties = = 
 Hadspen has buildings that are largely intact from colonial times , some of which date from the early parts of the 19th century . The Red Feather inn , an adjacent convict era gaol and four cottages form a cluster of heritage buildings in the midst of the town . The gaol is a sandstone structure that was used to overnight convicts . The inn , gaol and <unk> 's cottage , St Andrew 's church and Entally House are all listed on the Tasmanian Heritage Register , a recognition of their " historic cultural heritage significance to the whole of Tasmania " . 
 = = = Entally House = = = 
 Entally house is a heritage listed property on the western bank of the South Esk river . It , and the buildings of Rutherglen Holiday Village , are the only part of the town on this side . Entally is set on 85 acres ( 34 ha ) of grounds , and contains a large colonial house , stables , a chapel , other outbuildings and several hectares of vineyards . The buildings are filled with indicative furniture and art of their time , including carriages and coaches in the coach house . 
 Thomas Reibey had been in service with the East India Company when he met his wife Mary Haydock . He formed a trading company in Sydney and named its building " Entally House " after a suburb of Calcutta , India . Trading also brought his sons , Thomas Haydock and James , to Tasmania in the early 19th century . By 1816 James owned land near Hadspen and he purchased more in the 1820s . Thomas Haydock and Mary , his mother , purchased 2 @,@ 630 acres ( 1 @,@ 064 ha ) in 1818 in the then District of Cornwall , encompassing the present day site of Entally , and Thomas Haydock built the initial house in 1819 . The original building was apparently a single storey structure , its two square towers arrayed with defensive musket slots . It has been significantly extended and surrounded by outbuildings since . When Thomas Haydock Reibey died in October 1842 his son , Thomas Reibey , inherited it along with 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 620 ha ) of land and " The Oaks " , a property at nearby Carrick that now hosts the agricultural field days known as Agfest . 
 This latter Reibey was a leading figure in the Anglican Church in the area , and became later Premier of Tasmania . He built a private chapel at Entally , with wooden furnishings and an organ . He is remembered as having a great interest in horse racing and hunting ; deer and horses were bred at Entally . At least 90 horses were raced from Entally 's stables over time including the famous " Stockwell " and Malua . By 1883 , the library was reported as the most extensive in the colony . Entally 's lawn was used often for picnics and cricket matches . In the 1930s Rutherglen , now on the opposite side of the Meander Valley Highway , was part of Entally estate . It was home to some 300 , ninety @-@ year @-@ old hazelnut trees that were under investigation regarding the prospect of growing <unk> in Australia for Cadbury chocolate production . 
 On Reibey 's death in February 1912 the property passed to his Nephew — Thomas Reibey Arthur — as Reibey had no children , and by 1929 the property was no longer in family hands . In December 1948 , after two years of negotiation , the land and buildings were acquired by the Scenery Preservation Board . The property was reserved as a " historic site " , more for its heritage value as a colonial home than its association with Reibey . Since then the house has been restored and filled with furniture , though not to original form , but rather as a facsimile of a wealthy 19th century colonial settler 's estate . Management of the site moved to the National Parks and Wildlife Service at its formation in Nov 1971 . The State Government took over management in 2004 , due to the expense of upkeep and concern over the property 's condition . Timber company Gunns was by 2005 looking at managing the property and planting 5 – 6 hectares of premium wine grapes . They leased it from 2005 partly to showcase wine , though the property remained open for visitors . In late 2010 Gunns handed management and control of the property back to the State Government and from then it was maintained by volunteers . Youth Futures , an employment training organisation , was given the task of managing the now established vineyard . 
 = = = Church of the Good Shepherd = = = 
 An Anglican church was planned for Hadspen in the late 1850s . Thomas Reibey had WG & E Habershon of London draw up plans in 1857 . The building 's design was based on St Mary 's parish church , <unk> , England . It was designed in an early English style with blue ironstone walls , and freestone dressing and reliefs . The nave was 37 @.@ 5 feet ( 11 @.@ 4 m ) long , the chancel 17 x 15 feet and the entrance was through a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) tower with a 24 @-@ foot ( 7 m ) spire . The foundation stone of " The new Episcopalian Church " or " The Reibey Church " was laid on 23 December 1868 . Construction , estimated to cost 1000 pounds , began with locally sourced stonework by Robert <unk> , whom Reibey met on a ship from England . 
 Reibey was funding all of the construction costs . When the structure was mostly complete a scandal erupted around him . He was alleged to have indecently dealt with a married woman . Her husband raised the issue with the bishop , then in 1870 with no action by the Church again with the Church of England Synod in England . Reibey subsequently took libel action but his complaint was dismissed and the Jury largely held that the allegations against him were true . Apart from these allegations , Reibey 's wife 's health had been declining , his property had been declining in value , and he wrote that he had been considering relinquishing the <unk> for a while . After only a few years the lack of funds provided left only one person working on the site . All work ceased in 1870 , by which time the walls were unfinished and the building still lacked a roof . Though the church was incomplete both Reibey and his wife Catherine were buried in a graveyard at the building 's rear . 
 The church remained incomplete for over ninety years . By 1957 Anglican services were being held in St Stephens , a wooden church next to the apparent ruin . Around this time some in the church showed interest in completion of the old structure , partly due to the approaching centenary of construction beginning . In April of that year a gathering of people from the Parish of Carrick was held in the unfinished building , and a prayer held to bless its completion . The gathering , and associated committee , were led and chaired by W R Barrett , assistant bishop of Tasmania . 
 The original architects ' plans had been preserved — though they were close to disintegration — and were largely followed in the subsequent construction work . A Launceston builder was contracted for the work , though much , including flooring , was performed by volunteers . Work was completed at an approximate cost of 8000 pounds , and the church was finally completed on 20 May 1961 , with the first service held the following day . Some furnishings in the church came from Entally 's Chapel including the altar and coverings , a wooden cross , symbolic paintings and a bell now hung in the church 's porch . The bell , formerly in St Stephens in Smithton , carries the inscription " <unk> 1817 " and probably comes from the whaler " <unk> " which was wrecked in 1835 . A stained glass window at the rear of the church originated in Entally 's chapel , and spent time installed in another nearby Church . It shows the crucifixion of Jesus and the Good Shepherd . The Church is a Gothic Revival design and somewhat scaled down from the original plans , the nave was built 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) shorter , with some changed elements such as the entrance being built in stone on the west side rather than wood on the south . The church was consecrated in February 1973 . 
 = = = Red Feather Inn = = = 
 The Red Feather Inn is a heritage listed building in Hadspen 's main street . It was built as a coaching inn and in the 21st century has been used for a restaurant and accommodation . The building 's frontage is a substantial sandstone single @-@ storey building . Land falls away sharply from the street and the building 's rear has two @-@ storeys . Rising affluence in the 1840s had enabled growth of the coach transport industry . When built the Red Feather Inn was the first horse @-@ change point on the road from Launceston , 8 miles ( 13 km ) away , to Deloraine , and it was one of the colony 's earliest coaching inns . It was built , starting in 1842 , for local police magistrate Charles Arthur . It was built by John <unk> , also builder of Macquarie House in Launceston 's civic square , using convict hewn sandstone blocks . 
 The inn was first licensed in 1844 and was at first successful . In only a few decades its fortunes declined when a rail line was built from Launceston , reaching nearby Carrick in 1869 . The economy of rail transport took goods and passengers away , forcing wagons from the road . This reduced the demand for coaching inns , and led to a general decline in traffic through and business in the town . As of 2004 it was run as a restaurant and , after a 2008 refurbishment , has been used for accommodation and a cooking school . 
 = = Bridges = = 
 Flooding of the South Esk River and the need for a river crossing have constrained transport in the town for much of its history . The South Esk , now crossed by a bridge on the Meander Valley Highway , separates the town from settlements further west and unusually high floods can cut the highway on the town 's east , when it is submerged at Beams Hollow . The river was first crossed by a ford known as " Reibey 's Ford " near Entally House . Due to the variability in its flow this ford was frequently impassable requiring traffic to make significant detours . Thomas Haydock Reibey installed a punt at the crossing in 1828 . By a specially passed Government act he was allowed to charge a toll for its use . 
 Tenders were called for in 1836 for design and construction of a bridge at the village of Hadspen . Five years later the colony 's government passed " Reibey 's ford act " to facilitate construction of a bridge . The act specified that of the £ 1500 cost for the bridge , £ 500 was to be paid by the government , and the remainder by Thomas Haydock Reibey . To recover the costs Reibey was allowed to charge a toll , assisted by a toll house and by turnpikes at the bridge 's ends . On construction the toll was mandated as 1d per person , 1s per wagon or carriage , 4d per unladen beast and 1 / 2d per calf , sheep , pig or lamb . The elder Reibey died before the bridge was completed and his son and executor Thomas Reibey acquired his father 's rights , collecting the tolls after the bridge was completed . The toll was to run for the lesser of 30 years , or whatever time it took to pay for the original bridge construction costs plus an annual 15 % interest . The wooden bridge was completed by November 1843 , and within a little over a year the tolls had raised 453 pounds . It was known as " Reibey 's Bridge " and was narrow — fitting only a single wagon — with a single chain each side for safety , a fact that caused the loss of at least one valuable horse . 
 The bridge became noted for its insecure state , the lack of rails a particular issue , and it was referred to as " dangerous and unsightly " . A new bridge , 3 feet ( 1 m ) higher than the one it replaced , was under construction in 1878 . This new structure was 350 feet ( 107 m ) long , had a wooden frame and deck standing on stone piers . Floods continued to overflow Hadspen 's only bridge , floods in 1893 may have been 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above the bridge 's approach road 's level ; both the bridge and approach roads were extensively damaged and 250 feet ( 76 m ) of guard rails were carried away . 
 By 1911 the river was crossed , on the same site , with a steel bridge . This new structure had concrete buttresses and a wooden roadway . In March of that year floods over @-@ topped it by approximately 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) and five of the bridge 's seven spans went down , girders were broken , piers sheared through , and some swept into the river . The bridge was repaired later in the year and stood for another half century . Over time , particularly after floods , there were calls for the bridge to be raised , though the expense of the work — and the only occasional nature of flooding — was cited in defence of the bridge 's adequacy . When the river flooded the bridge , it also often flooded Beams Ford on the other side of Hadspen , temporarily cutting off all road access to the town . 
 The Minister for Land and Works had approved work on raising it in 1939 , but this was postponed indefinitely due to World War II . Raising or renewal of the bridge was again being investigated in 1946 . The river again flooded over the bridge in July 1952 , the first time since the mid @-@ 1940s , and the timber deck was still being repaired into 1953 . The last and latest bridge was constructed as part of a bypass of the centre of Hadspen . By 1978 , the Bass Highway crossed the river further upstream and the old main road was no longer a through road . This bridge is a 240 metres ( 790 ft ) long two @-@ lane single @-@ carriageway concrete structure . 
 = = Today 's town = = 
 Hadspen is a small town that functions as a " dormitory suburb " , an extension of the Launceston metropolitan area . Entally House lies on the Town 's west , across the river . The town has a small shopping centre with a post office and service station , adjacent to a large caravan and cabin park . Development has been almost entirely residential and mostly on the northern side of Meander Valley Highway . Over 13 hectares ( 32 acres ) of land was already zoned for development within the town boundary as of 2005 , and the council plans to allow further expansion on the Highway 's south . A 1978 study looked at various areas around Hadspen for development , the only area to date where this has happened is the small expansion of the town south of the Highway on the River 's east bank . . 
 The town is in the Meander Valley Council local government area , both the federal and state electoral Division of Bass , and the Tasmanian Legislative Council electoral division of Western Tiers . 
 Hadspen has grown without any area set aside for small commercial operations , a fact that has led to just a single shopping complex . There was another service station , in the main street , but it closed in 2008 after operating for approximately forty years . Rutherglen is a holiday village , conference and event centre , and retirement village on the town 's west . It is the only premises in Hadspen with a general liquor licence . Rutherglen , or a similarly named premises at the same location , has been used for accommodation since at least 1923 . The town has access to reticulated water and sewerage . The town 's sewerage has been , since the mid @-@ 1970s , processed at a plant near Carrick that also serves that town . Treated waste @-@ water from there is discharged into a tributary of the Liffey River . 
 = Job for a Cowboy = 
 Job for a Cowboy is an American death metal band from Glendale , Arizona . Formed in 2003 , the band 's debut album Genesis was released in 2007 , peaking at No. 54 on the US Billboard 200 and selling 13 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release . The second album , 2009 's Ruination , sold 10 @,@ 600 copies in the United States in its first week to debut at position No. 42 on the Billboard 200 chart . The band comprises vocalist Jonny Davy , guitarists Tony <unk> and Al Glassman , and bassist Nick Schendzielos , with Davy being the only remaining founding member . 
 The band has played in international music festivals , including Sounds of the Underground , Download Festival , Mayhem Festival , Summer Slaughter , Graspop Metal Meeting and Wacken Open Air . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and Doom ( 2003 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Job for a Cowboy was founded in Glendale , Arizona during December 2003 by vocalist Jonny Davy , guitarists Ravi Bhadriraju and Andrew <unk> , bassist Chad Staples , and drummer Andy <unk> while the band members were no older than 15 and 16 . In 2004 , they created a MySpace profile , posted songs online , and immediately began to connect with several worldwide fans . Later that year , Staples and <unk> left Job for a Cowboy and were replaced by Brent Riggs and Elliott Sellers respectively as bassist and drummer . Traffic to the band 's MySpace profile increased exponentially in late 2005 when the band released their first EP , entitled Doom . The EP attracted the attention of Arizona independent label King of the Monsters , who distributed the disc after an initial self @-@ released pressing by the band . 
 Job for a Cowboy extensively promoted their EP , including three performances on the Sounds of the Underground tour . By the end of the year , the band obtained professional management and signed a deal with Metal Blade Records , who reissued Doom with a bonus track . During the same year ( 2006 ) , <unk> left the band , and Bobby Thompson joined the group . While Job for a Cowboy was writing material for their first full @-@ length album , Sellers announced that he would be leaving the band to go back to school immediately after recording the album . In search of a permanent drummer , the band then posted a bulletin on Blabbermouth.net , which was seen by Jon " The Charn " Rice . He made a video of himself , posted it on YouTube , and sent the link to the band . Soon after , Rice was <unk> into the band . 
 = = = Genesis ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = 
 In March 2007 , Job for a Cowboy completed their debut full @-@ length album , Genesis . It was recorded at Blue Light Audio Media in Phoenix , Arizona with producer Cory Spotts . It was mixed by Sabbat guitarist Andy Sneap ; released on May 15 , the album peaked at No. 54 on the Billboard 200 , and sold nearly 13 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , which made Genesis the highest @-@ charting heavy metal debut since Slipknot 's 1999 debut album . The album received generally positive reviews , with Kerrang ! magazine saying , " an album that quite literally obliterates everyone else currently residing within the death and grind scenes " and " one of the year 's most essential metal purchases " . 
 In June 2007 , the band performed at the Download Festival in Donington Park , England . The group also played at the Sounds of the Underground festival along with Amon Amarth , Chimaira , Gwar , and Shadows Fall . In October , Job for a Cowboy co @-@ headlined the 2007 Radio Rebellion Tour , teaming up with Behemoth , Gojira and Beneath the Massacre . The band featured on the 2008 's Gigantour with headliners Megadeth , Children of Bodom , In Flames and High on Fire . In addition , they have been confirmed for a number of festivals during 2008 , including Wacken Open Air in Germany and a second appearance at England 's Download Festival . Job for a Cowboy have embarked on a U.S. headlining tour in November and December 2008 with supporting acts Hate Eternal and All Shall Perish . In late @-@ 2008 guitarist Ravi Bhadriraju left Job for a Cowboy to return to school because he wanted to pursue a more rewarding career in the medical field . ; he was replaced with former Despised Icon guitarist , Al Glassman . 
 = = = Ruination and Gloom ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = 
 On May 1 , 2009 , the band announced that they completed recording their second studio album , Ruination , at <unk> studios in Sanford , Florida with producer Jason Suecof . The album marks the debut of drummer Jon " the Charn " Rice , who has actually been with the band since the tour for Genesis , and also of guitarist Al Glassman . Ruination , was then released on July 7 , 2009 worldwide through Metal Blade Records . The album sold around 10 @,@ 600 copies in the United States in its first week of release to debut at position No. 42 on the Billboard 200 chart . Job for a Cowboy participated in the second Mayhem Festival , playing on the Hot Topic stage along with bands such as Cannibal Corpse and Whitechapel . 
 At the beginning of 2011 , the band started work on an EP which was recorded in February at the <unk> Studios in Sanford , Florida with producer Jason Suecof . Just before the recording process began , bassist Brent Riggs and guitarist Bobby Thompson departed from the band and were replaced by Nick Schendzielos of Cephalic Carnage and Tony <unk> , respectively . On April 13 , 2011 , a video appeared on the internet of drummer Jon Rice performing a new song in the studio . Job for a Cowboy issued their new EP on June 7 , 2011 , entitled Gloom , which was only made available for purchase through mail order and digital download . 
 Job for a Cowboy have entered Audio Hammer Studios to begin recording their next effort . The group is working with the production team of Jason Suecof , Eyal Levi of <unk> , and Ronn Miller on the project . 
 = = = Demonocracy and Sun Eater ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 On February 21 , 2012 , Job for a Cowboy released their first single from their new album Demonocracy , titled " <unk> Through Bloodshed " . It was released via Metal Blade Records ' YouTube channel . 
 On March 20 , Job for a Cowboy premiered the song " Black Discharge " and on April 2 , the song " Imperium Wolves " . Demonocracy was released on April 10 , 2012 and had first @-@ week sales reaching 4 @,@ 900 which had it chart at 87 on the Billboard 200 . That summer they were a part of the Summer Slaughter tour with acts such as Cannibal Corpse , Between the Buried and Me , and The Faceless . 
 On October 21 , 2013 , the band announced they are recording their fourth full @-@ length album . The band 's drummer , Jon " The Charn " Rice , announced 8 days after the announcement that he was departing the band . It was announced on February 5 , 2014 that he had joined hard rock band Scorpion Child . 
 On September 23 , 2014 , the band announced their upcoming album Sun Eater , which was scheduled for release on November 11 via Metal Blade . The band also released their first single from the album titled " Sun of Nihility " . The second single released off of Sun Eater was the song " Eating the Visions of God " . 
 On January 22 , 2016 it was announced that drummer Jon ' The Charn ' Rice had rejoined the band . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 The band originally started as a deathcore group , but changed their style to death metal with the release of their first full @-@ length album Genesis . They have been described by The New York Times as " an Arizona band with a guttural , brute @-@ force sound descended ( indirectly ) from hardcore punk " and " straightforwardly brutal act " by Rolling Stone magazine . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = EPs = = = 
 = = = Demos = = = 
 Demo ' 04 ( 2004 ) 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = = Concert tours = = 
 Sounds of the Underground 2006 ( 2006 ) 
 Job for a Cowboy Jan / Feb 2007 tour ( January 12 - February 18 , 2007 ) 
 Unearth European headlining tour ( March 21 - April 16 , 2007 ) 
 Download Festival 2007 ( June 8 – 10 , 2007 ) 
 Radio Rebellion Tour ( October 18 - November 18 , 2007 ) 
 Gigantour 3 : North America ( April 12 - May 22 , 2008 ) 
 Wacken Open Air 2008 ( July 2008 ) 
 Headlining Tour ( November 13 - December 16 , 2008 ) 
 Mayhem Festival 2009 ( July 10 - August 16 , 2009 ) 
 Lamb of God Us Tour ( September 16 - November 11 , 2009 ) 
 Lamb of God Europe Tour ( February 9 - March 12 , 2010 ) 
 Job For A Cowboy Headlining Tour ( April 21 - May 27 , 2010 ) 
 Download Festival 2010 ( June 11 , 2010 ) 
 Gods of Metal 2010 ( June 25 , 2010 ) 
 Graspop Metal Meeting 2010 ( June 27 , 2010 ) 
 With Full Force 2010 ( July 2 , 2010 ) 
 Wacken Open Air 2010 ( August 6 – 7 , 2010 ) 
 2010 South American Tour ( July 17 – 25 , 2010 ) 
 Ruination UK / Euro Tour 2010 ( November 4 – 28 , 2010 ) 
 Job for a Cowboy Fall US Headline Tour ( December 5 – 20 , 2010 ) 
 Between the Buried and Me US Tour ( April 15 - May 15 , 2011 ) 
 Destroyers Of The Faith UK ( March 3 – 11 , 2012 ) 
 Metal Alliance Tour 2012 ( March 15 - April 21 , 2012 ) 
 The Summer Slaughter Tour 2012 ( July 20 - August 25 , 2012 ) 
 The Womb to Waste Tour ( September 14 - October 14 , 2012 ) 
 The End of the World ( December 6 – 18 , 2012 ) 
 Bonecrusher Fest 2013 ( March 1 – 30 , 2013 ) 
 The Divinity of Purpose 2013 Tour ( April 9 – 21 , 2013 ) 
 Mayhem Festival 2013 ( June 29 - August 4 , 2013 ) 
 = Jean Desbouvrie = 
 Jean Desbouvrie ( <unk> – 47 – ? ) was a French amateur bird trainer who believed that swallows could be put to use for military communications . During the late 19th century Desbouvrie persuaded the government of France to conduct a study on the feasibility of using swallows as messengers . His early demonstrations showed that swallows could exhibit homing behavior and that when they did so they flew much faster than homing pigeons . Desbouvrie also succeeded in curbing the birds ' natural migratory behavior . After obtaining authorization from the government for follow @-@ up testing , Desbouvrie delayed and did not follow through with rigorous experimentation . 
 Desbouvrie received international attention in the press for two unrelated reasons : the bird experiments , and also for a proposal he made to the Paris Academy of Medicine . The Academy published his paper , which declared chronic alcoholism to be a serious public health problem and offered a solution in the form of a claimed cure for hangovers . Desbouvrie hypothesized that the consumption of food which contained an appropriate balance of fat and albumen would prevent hangovers from occurring . He sent the Academy a selection of homemade chocolates along with his manuscript , with assurances that he had tested the concoction extensively upon himself . 
 = = Youth = = 
 Jean Desbouvrie was raised in a village near Roubaix where he worked as a messenger for his father . During his youth he had an avid interest in birds and was determined to disprove general belief that swallows were impossible to tame , so from the age of eleven onward he robbed nests between his work deliveries . Over time he managed to get a dozen swallows to follow him . According to a report published in 1889 , " They would fly round his head and perch on his shoulders in the open street . " 
 = = Swallow training = = 
 Desbouvrie kept his swallows in a cage and trained them to fly in and out of the cage . Another challenge he overcame was the birds ' natural migratory behavior . Desbouvrie believed that swallows migrated southward because the supply of insects for them to feed upon dwindled in winter . Desbouvrie refused to make public disclosure of what he fed the birds in wintertime and regarded that as a trade secret . Later attempts to train homing behavior into migratory birds determined that the birds have no instinctive knowledge of where to fly when the season changes , so if the normal migratory pattern is disrupted during the first year of life the individual does not migrate afterward . 
 He spent over 30 years keeping birds and devoted two rooms of his house to swallows . One room housed a cage for the swallows . The other room was a training space with a balcony used for practice releases . He documented the age and health of each bird in a register , and marked each one by tying a colored silk to its leg . Red silk indicated a trained bird and blue silk indicated a partially trained bird . Trained swallows were allowed to roam outside their cages , while the others remained caged at all times . Untrained birds were sold as pets . 
 An 1889 report described a demonstration of Desbouvrie 's swallows : 
 Four of the little prisoners , the oldest not more than twenty days , were let loose . It was raining in torrents at the moment , a circumstance by no means favorable to the trial . The birds rose in the air , flew round the house several times , and then darted off into the country , disappearing into the country . Twenty @-@ five minutes after the youngest returned and perched on the balcony ; the other three did not come back before an hour . They all then entered the cage @-@ room , when Desbouvrie gave them some food , which they ate out of his hand . 
 = = Potential applications of swallow training = = 
 The 1955 book Bird Navigation describes efforts at training homing behavior in species other than pigeons . Bird Navigation mentions Desbouvrie as an early experimenter , and also a passage from Pliny the Elder in which " Caecina of Volterra " ( possibly Caecina Paetus ) used painted swallows to report the colors of winning horses in a race . It is uncertain whether Desbouvrie was aware of the Pliny 's report . 
 Carrier pigeons had been a significant factor in communications during the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 . An 1892 report in The American Magazine that discussed Desbouvrie 's efforts noted the importance of pigeons to that war : " Upon several occasions , indeed , the inhabitants of the beleaguered cities looked upon the successful flights of these birds as their only hope betwixt death and starvation . " 
 By the late 19th century Russia was training military falcons , possibly to carry messages or else to hunt the war pigeons . Swallows offered several advantages over pigeons if training could succeed . Swallows fly higher and faster , and are more difficult for marksmen to shoot or for birds of prey to intercept . Swallows are also able to feed during flight . 
 = = Government interest = = 
 As a demonstration , Desbouvrie brought an untamed swallow from the Roubaix area to Paris and released it . The bird returned to its home 258 kilometers away in 90 minutes . Desbouvrie promised that trained swallows would provide even better speeds . The governor of Lille oversaw testing near Roubaix and a military engineer named Captain <unk> was ordered to oversee a duplication of the Roubaix experiments . 
 Desbouvrie proposed two swallow aviaries at Montmartre and at Fort Mont @-@ <unk> . The Montmartre cote was scheduled to be constructed first , if Captain <unk> confirmed the results and recommended further training . A report from The Globe stated that <unk> believed all his birds were too young for full testing and required additional training . The American Magazine noted that Desbouvrie did not breed his birds and obtained them all as nestlings , although he promised he could breed them easily if he wanted to do so . Over half a century later P.W. Brian stated in Bird Navigation that Desbouvrie " appeared to be unwilling to demonstrate them . " 
 The Globe published a favorable report of Desbouvrie 's efforts , although noting that further testing was needed . The Zoologist republished the Globe report with a note that Zoologist editors " have no faith in the idea that the experiment will succeed in his object . " The American Magazine dismissed the project with the statement , " The idea of engaging swallows in war is a pretty one , as , in future , all European wars will have to be conducted in ' swallow time ' — when the warm winds blow from the sunny south . " 
 = = Academy of Medicine presentation = = 
 In 1888 the Bulletin de l <unk> de medicine ( Bulletin of the Academy of Medicine ) published a report that Desbouvrie had sent them a manuscript and requested verification of an invention he claimed to have made . He called it was a matter of public health to counter the effects of chronic alcoholism . According to the report , which was republished in English in summary form in the Medical Record and the Cincinnati Lancet @-@ clinic , Desbouvrie had attempted a preventive cure for hangovers . Desbouvrie asserted that the cure required eating albumen and fat in appropriate proportions one hour before alcohol consumption , and had invented a chocolate which he claimed contained both ingredients in an effective ratio . He provided samples to the Academy and assured its members he had tested the cure upon himself . 
 = 1974 UCI Road World Championships – Men 's road race = 
 The Men 's Individual Road Race of the 1974 UCI Road World Championships cycling event took place on August 25 in Montreal , Canada . The route consisted of twenty @-@ one laps around a circuit that contained two climbs within it , totaling to a length of 262 @.@ 5 km ( 163 @.@ 1 mi ) . Belgian Eddy Merckx won the race , while French riders Raymond Poulidor and Mariano Martínez finished second and third , respectively . This was Merckx 's third victory in the men 's road race at the UCI Road World Championships , equaling the record . In addition , he also completed the Triple Crown of Cycling , which consists of winning two Grand Tour races and the men 's road race at the UCI Road World Championships in a calendar year . 
 The day of racing was highlighted by two large solo efforts on the part of the French riders Francis Campaner and Bernard Thévenet . Campaner attacked during the race 's second lap and rode solo until being joined in the tenth lap by Gerard Vianen . The two were caught in the twelfth <unk> and shortly after their capture , Thévenet attacked on his own and rode on his own through most of the final lap . Merckx initiated a chase group during the seventeenth lap that managed to catch and pass Thévenet with seven kilometers remaining . The group then splintered into two groups of two , with Merckx and Poulidor riding into the finish together . Merckx took victory in the two @-@ man sprint . 
 = = Race route = = 
 The route for the race consisted of 21 laps that totaled for 262 @.@ 5 km ( 163 @.@ 1 mi ) of racing , with each lap being 12 @.@ 5 km ( 7 @.@ 8 mi ) in length . Each circuit featured two climbs within it , including a cross of Mount Royal . The route for the race navigated through the Université de Montréal campus . Several sports writers deemed the route to be difficult . The race began at 9 AM local time . 
 = = Participants and race favorites = = 
 The race began with 70 riders from fifteen different countries , of which eighteen managed to finish the race . Reigning champion , Felice Gimondi , started the race despite sustaining injuries from a fall in the <unk> Cup the week beforehand . The Belgian team featured the riders Eddy Merckx , Herman Van Springel , Freddy Maertens , Patrick <unk> , and Roger De Vlaeminck , which cycling author William Fotheringham believed to be one of the best Belgian teams to race at the World Championships . Gianni <unk> of La Stampa believed that the race would likely be won by an Italian or a Belgian rider , but stated that Dutchman Gerrie <unk> and Spaniard Luis Ocaña were dark @-@ horse candidates for the victory . In particular , young Italian Francesco Moser was expected to provide race favorite Merckx with " stiff competition . " De Telegraaf writer Charles Taylor believed that José Manuel Fuente would be the best Spanish candidate for victory since Ocaña had recently recovered from sickness and injuries from crashes in different races . Taylor stated that there was no serious Dutch contender that could challenge the favorite , Merckx . 
 = = Race summary = = 
 The whole starting peloton stayed intact for the first lap which took only 18 ' 36 " to complete . The first attack came from French rider Francis Campaner . He managed to earn a 37 " advantage as he finished the second circuit and he increased that lead to 1 ' 19 " at the conclusion of the third lap . Behind , the chasing group was led by Francesco Moser , Eddy Merckx , and Felice Gimondi . After the fourth lap , Campaner had gained thirty more seconds on the peloton . The gap between Campaner and the main field reached its maximum after the fifth lap — at 2 ' 21 " — and was reduced to 1 ' 36 " with the finishing of the sixth circuit . 
 The seventh lap saw a speed drop by the leading rider and the chasing peloton , allowing Campaner 's advantage to increase back to 2 ' 21 " . The next two laps saw the gap fluctuate a little as the margin stayed around the two @-@ minute mark . During the eleventh lap , Dutch rider Gerard Vianen attacked and managed to get within fifteen seconds of Campaner as the tenth lap ended , with the peloton 1 ' 27 " behind . Vianen joined Campaner during the eleventh circuit as Merckx attacked from behind , along with Gerrie <unk> . During the twelfth circuit , Vianen and Campaner were caught . Shortly after the re @-@ absorption of the duo back into the peloton , Bernard Thévenet attacked and established a 40 " advantage . Campaner retired from the race in the kilometers following being caught , while Vianen retired during the thirteenth lap . 
 Tino Conti and Freddy Maertens attacked on the thirteenth lap and managed to get a time gap of 25 " on the peloton , but still trailed Thévenet by 1 ' 10 " at the conclusion of the lap . Through the fifteenth lap , the duo was able to obtain over a minute lead on the peloton ; however , Thévenet was still increasing his advantage over the race as a whole , with his lead reaching three minutes over the peloton . The field began to increase its tempo in the sixteenth lap and close the gap to the Conti @-@ Maertens group , which prompted Maertens to wait up for the peloton , while Conti rode solo . On the seventeenth lap , a chase group with many race contenders – including Raymond Poulidor , Francesco Moser , Eddy Merckx , Maertens , and Herman Van Springel – formed and caught Conti . By the completion of the nineteenth lap , the chase group had <unk> to nine riders and Thévenet 's lead had dropped to 2 ' 05 " . Gimondi dropped out of the race the same lap . 
 The penultimate circuit saw the chase group , led by Merckx , shrink to five members and Thévenet 's lead dwindle to 35 " . The riders that remained in the chase group were Van Springel , Poulidor , Mariano Martínez , Merckx , and Giacinto Santambrogio . Van Springel was dropped by the Merckx group before Thévenet was caught and passed on the final climb of Mount Royal , with around 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) remaining . The chase group led by Merckx broke into two groups of two , with Poulidor and Merckx riding together and Martinez and Santambrogio behind , together . The split was caused by a move made by Merckx with close to 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) left . With two hundred meters remaining in the race , Merckx attacked and managed to open up a two @-@ second gap between himself and Poulidor as he crossed the finish line to win the race . 
 = = Result = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With his victory in the race , Eddy Merckx became the first rider to achieve the Triple Crown of Cycling , which consists of winning two Grand Tour races and the men 's road race at the UCI Road World Championships in a calendar year . Merckx had already won the Giro d 'Italia and the Tour de France , both of which are Grand Tours , before the World Championships and winning the men 's road race allowed him to complete the Triple Crown . This feat has since been matched by only one rider , Stephen Roche , who managed to complete the Triple Crown in the 1987 season . This was also Merckx 's third world title , which made him the third rider to ever be world champion three times , after Alfredo Binda and Rik Van Steenbergen . This was Merckx 's final world championship victory and also the last season that he won a Grand Tour . On February 22 , 1975 , Merckx gave the bike that he used during the race to Pope Paul VI while visiting Vatican City . 
 Following the victory , Merckx told the press that he felt lucky that Bernard Thévenet was weakened from his efforts on the road . In regards to his sprint against Raymond Poulidor , Merckx stated that he feared only an external setback because " In the sprint [ he ] could not lose . Despite Thévenet missing out on a medal , Raymond Poulidor stated that the French were content with the results and worked great together . Reflecting on the race , De Telegraaf writer Charles Taylor stated he felt this race was " one of the finest and most sensational bicycle races in recent years . " Taylor noted a poor showing by the Dutch riders , citing that only two managed to finish the race . Taylor believed that the Dutch participants competed in too many criteriums between the end of the Tour de France and the start of the World Championships , which led to them not having fresh enough legs for the race . De Telegraaf also reported that there were over a 100 @,@ 000 spectators for the men 's road race . Francesco Moser was found to have had a disappointing performance as he placed seventh on the day , in part because he was suffering from a leg cramp . 
 = St Edern 's Church , Bodedern = 
 St Edern 's Church , Bodedern ( sometimes referred to as St <unk> 's Church ) is a medieval parish church in the village of Bodedern , in Anglesey , north Wales . Although St Edern established a church in the area in the 6th century , the oldest parts of the present building date from the 14th century . Subsequent alterations include the addition of some windows in the 15th century , and a chancel , transept and porch in the 19th century , when the nave walls were largely rebuilt . Stained glass was also inserted into the windows of the chancel and transept . 
 The church contains a 6th @-@ century inscribed stone found near the village , a medieval font , and some 17th @-@ century decorated wooden panels from Jesus College , Oxford , which was formerly connected with the church . St Edern 's also owns three pieces of 19th @-@ century church silverware , but a silver chalice dated 1574 was lost some time during the 19th century . An 18th @-@ century gallery at the west end rests on two oak crossbeams , one of which was previously used to support the rood loft . 
 The church is still used for worship by the Church in Wales , one of nine in a combined parish , but as of 2013 there has not been a vicar in the parish since September 2009 . It is a Grade II * listed building , a national designation given to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , in particular because it is regarded as " a good example of a late medieval church , its character maintained in the late 19th @-@ century restoration and rebuilding work , and retaining some of the medieval fabric and windows . " 
 = = History and location = = 
 Bodedern is a village in Anglesey , Wales , about 5 miles ( 8 km ) from the port town of Holyhead . " <unk> " , known in Welsh as St Edern or sometimes in a variant spelling as " St <unk> " , is recorded in the Welsh genealogies as the son or grandson of Beli ap Rhun ( a 6th @-@ century king of Gwynedd ) . He appears as " Edern ap Nudd " , one of the knights of King Arthur , in the Mabinogion ( a collection of medieval Welsh prose tales ) . He established a church in the area in the 6th century , perhaps at Pen Eglwys Edern , a site about half a mile away ( 800 m ) from the present building ( <unk> means " church " and pen means " head " or " top " ) . Excavations there in the early 1970s revealed a cemetery from the 5th or 6th century . The village takes its name from the saint ; the Welsh prefix bod means " dwelling of " . The present building stands in a churchyard in the centre of Bodedern , on the north side of Church Street . 
 St Edern 's is medieval in origin , with later additions and alterations . The oldest part is the nave , which has been described as " essentially 14th @-@ century " , although it was rebuilt in 1871 during restoration work under Henry Kennedy , architect of the Diocese of Bangor . It was one of many churches in Anglesey to be rebuilt or restored in the 19th century – few remained untouched – and Kennedy was responsible for much of the work carried out from the 1840s to the 1890s . The north wall was rebuilt above the tops of the windows , whereas only the bottom 2 to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 to 0 @.@ 9 m ) of the south wall was left unaltered . During this work , some of the nave windows inserted in the 15th century were repositioned , and a chancel ( at the east end ) , a porch ( south @-@ west corner ) and a transept or side chapel ( north @-@ east corner of the nave ) were added . The " extensive " work cost about £ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 St Edern 's is still used for worship by the Church in Wales ( the Anglican church within Wales ) , as one of nine parish churches in the combined benefice of Bodedern with Llanfaethlu . The nine churches do not have an incumbent priest as of 2013 , and have not had one since September 2009 . The church is within the deanery of <unk> and Talybolion , the archdeaconry of Bangor , and the Diocese of Bangor . 
 The church was at one time an ecclesiastical dependency ( or " daughter church " ) of St Cybi 's , Holyhead . The right of patronage ( the power to appoint the rector of Holyhead and its associated churches and the right to receive income from the church ) was bequeathed to Jesus College , Oxford , in 1648 . The college was the patron of the parish until 1920 , when the Welsh Church Act 1914 came into force and the Church in Wales was disestablished . In 1849 , the writer Samuel Lewis noted that the college and Queen Anne 's Bounty ( a fund to support poor clergy ) had recently each paid £ 400 for a new parsonage . He also recorded that the college received a rent charge of £ 476 and 8 shillings each year from the parish instead of receiving the tithes . The college donated £ 200 towards the restoration work in 1871 . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 = = = Construction and layout = = = 
 St Edern 's is built in the Perpendicular style using local stone , with blocks of cut sandstone as the external face . The roof is made from slate with stone copings and has a bellcote at the west end , with one bell ( dating probably from the 17th century ) . There is one external buttress to the south @-@ east of the nave to help support the weight of the building , and there are crosses on the roof of the porch and at the east end of the nave and chancel roofs . 
 The church 's entrance is an arched outer doorway in the porch , with a 15th @-@ century pointed inner door set in a square frame described by one architectural guide as " boldly moulded " . The roof of the porch reuses medieval wood . The nave , which has five bays , measures 59 feet 6 inches by 16 feet 9 inches ( 18 @.@ 1 by 5 @.@ 1 m ) . A gallery at the west end is supported by two oak crossbeams , one of which has the date of 1777 inscribed . According to one 19th @-@ century writer , an old rood loft had previously rested on one of the beams supporting the gallery . The late @-@ medieval internal roof timbers are exposed . The chancel , which is 17 by 16 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 by 4 @.@ 9 m ) , is raised two steps above the nave and is separated from it by a Victorian pointed arch ; there is also a Victorian arch between the nave and the north transept . The second of the three steps leading up from the chancel to the sanctuary at the east end is decorated with encaustic tiles , with the Welsh words <unk> fy <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> o <unk> a <unk> <unk> ( " Wash my passion away with innocence at the altar of the Lord here " ) . 
 = = = Windows = = = 
 There are five windows on the south side of the nave ; the one to the west of the porch is set in a pointed frame , and the others are in square frames . The middle and easternmost of the five date originally from the 15th century but have been repositioned ; the other three are 19th @-@ century . On the north side , there is a pointed doorway from the early 14th century , with a 19th @-@ century window to the west and two repositioned 15th @-@ century windows with two lights ( sections of window separated by mullions ) to the east . The west wall has a repositioned 15th @-@ century window . The chancel 's east window is also 15th @-@ century , with three lights headed by trefoils ( a three @-@ leaf pattern ) and decorated with tracery . It has 19th @-@ century glass depicting the Ascension . The south side of the chancel and the north transept have 19th @-@ century windows ; the south chancel window has three lights with tracery headed by cinquefoils ( a five @-@ leaf pattern ) , with geometric patterns of glass . 
 The east and south chancel stained glass is in memory of the wife , son , and daughter of Hugh Wynne Jones , who died in the mid @-@ 19th century . He was the first priest to be vicar of the parish ( 1868 – 1888 ) ; his predecessors had been curates , a lower position . He is depicted as Simeon , who in Luke 's Gospel receives Jesus and his family when they visit the Temple of Jerusalem after the birth of Jesus ( an event celebrated as the Presentation of Jesus at the Temple ) . The north transept has a three @-@ light window to the north depicting St Edern , by Franz Mayer & Co . There are also windows with two lights on the east and west sides of the transept , one of which has a window from 1951 by Celtic Studios . 
 = = = <unk> and other fittings = = = 
 St Edern 's has several pieces of 17th @-@ century <unk> , possibly of Dutch origin . There is a softwood panel screen between the nave and chancel , decorated with carved flowers and fruit , with a frieze of acanthus leaf . The reredos ( the screen behind the altar ) has further carved panelling , as does the upper section of the rectangular pulpit , a reading desk , the communion rail and a table . The panels of the communion rail , set between wooden columns decorated with fruit , flowers and ribbons , are topped by a long balustrade , also decorated with acanthus leaf . The panels came from Jesus College , possibly from the college chapel which was renovated in 1864 by the architect G. E. Street , or from a disused gallery in the library ; the balustrade previously ran along the tops of the chapel 's pews . The college 's archivist has described the chancel as containing " a startling assemblage " of panels , " patched together in jigsaw fashion " and " heavily varnished " . 
 A stone dating from the 6th century and inscribed with the name " <unk> " is kept in the transept . It was discovered during excavations of the Pen Eglwys Edern site in 1972 . The font , which is medieval in date , is a plain octagonal bowl set on an octagonal column . Memorials include a " chunky Grecian memorial " to an officer of the Bengal Native Infantry who died in 1835 , a tablet in neoclassical style from 1839 , and a slate tablet to an army officer who died in 1914 . A survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire in 1937 also noted an oak communion table and two oak chairs of simple design , both from the early 18th century , and various memorials inside and outside the church from the 17th and 18th centuries . 
 A survey of church plate within the Bangor diocese in 1906 recorded three silver items : a plain chalice dated 1887 – 88 , a paten dated 1803 – 04 , and a flagon inscribed " Bodedern 1809 " . The author noted that church records from 1776 to 1831 included mention of another silver chalice , dated 1574 , with other references to a flagon and a paten made from pewter , but these were no longer to be found . 
 = = Churchyard = = 
 The churchyard contains the war grave of a Royal Field Artillery soldier of World War I. 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II * listed building – the second @-@ highest of the three grades of listing , designating " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " . It was given this status on 5 April 1971 because it was regarded as " a good example of a late medieval church , its character maintained in the late 19th @-@ century restoration and rebuilding work , and retaining some of the medieval fabric and windows " . Cadw ( the Welsh Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) also notes " some finely detailed fittings including the chancel screen , reredos , pulpit and reading desk with 17th @-@ century carved panels , and also a late 18th @-@ century gallery at the west end . " 
 There are various descriptions of the church as it stood before Kennedy 's 1871 rebuilding . In 1833 , the Anglesey antiquarian Angharad Llwyd described the church as " a small ancient structure , displaying some good architectural details " . She also noted that it contained " some fine monuments " to members of local families . The Welsh politician and church historian Sir Stephen Glynne visited the church in 1851 . He said that the church was " little superior in size or architecture to the generality of Anglesey churches " , but added that it was in " a neat and creditable state " . He also commented upon the " neat and uniform " pews . In 1862 , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones wrote that the church was " of good work , and with the details of doors and windows carefully elaborated . " He compared the east window to that at St Mary 's Church , Llanfair @-@ yng @-@ Nghornwy ( also on Anglesey ) , and noted that there was an <unk> or recess in the east wall beneath the window . 
 = Knut Arild Hareide = 
 Knut Arild Hareide ( born 23 November 1972 ) a Norwegian politician who serves as a member of parliament from Hordaland and as the current leader of the Christian Democratic Party . Hareide served as Minister of the Environment from 2004 to 2005 in the second Bondevik cabinet . In 2007 he announced he would step down from the national political scene for the time being , but he returned when he was nominated as the top candidate for the Christian Democratic Party ticket in Akershus in the 2009 election where he won the county 's leveling seat . After Dagfinn Høybråten stepped down as party leader , Hareide was unanimously elected to take his place at the 2011 party convention . In the 2013 election , Hareide was reelected to parliament , this time from his home county of Hordaland . 
 Before his tenure as government minister , Hareide had sat through one term in the municipal council of his native Bømlo , served as a deputy representative to the national parliament as well as working two years as a State Secretary . He was also second deputy leader of his party from 2003 to 2007 , having come through the ranks of the party 's youth organization . 
 Outside politics Hareide is an economist by education , and he has worked for the media conglomerate Schibsted . 
 = = Education = = 
 Hareide was born in the village <unk> in Bømlo , Hordaland . He started his higher education in 1992 , the same year he graduated from upper secondary school . Enrolled at the Norwegian School of Economics ( <unk> ) , he graduated in 1997 with a <unk> degree . During his time at <unk> , he also minored in sociology ( 1995 ) at the University of Bergen . 
 Hareide was active in student politics . His involvement included terms as a member of the student parliament at the University of Bergen , as the leader of the Student Union of the Norwegian School of Economics 1994 – 1995 , and as a board member of the national student union 1993 – 1994 . During the period in student politics , Hareide held a Christian democratic middle ground between radical ( such as later socialist politician Aslak Sira Myhre ) and conservative representatives , an experience he has described as educational . 
 = = Career = = 
 Hareide was active in the Youth of the Christian People 's Party , being a member of the national board 1999 – 2001 before joining the national board of the Christian Democratic Party . He worked as a political advisor in the Ministry of Church Affairs , Education and Research from 1998 to 2000 , during the first cabinet Bondevik . He later became State Secretary in the Ministry of Finance from 2001 to 2003 during the second cabinet Bondevik . In 2003 he became second deputy leader of the Christian Democratic Party nationwide . 
 He then joined the cabinet during a 2004 reshuffle , serving as the Norwegian Minister of the Environment from summer 2004 to fall 2005 . He was the youngest ever cabinet member from the Christian Democratic Party , and the first Christian Democratic to hold the post . The second cabinet Bondevik did not survive the 2005 elections , and as such Hareide had to step down from office that year . His successor was Helen <unk> . Until 2009 , Hareide had never been elected to the Norwegian Parliament , but served as a deputy representative during the terms 1997 – 2001 , 2001 – 2005 and 2005 – 2009 . On the local level of politics he was a member of Bømlo municipality council from 1991 to 1995 . 
 In 2007 Hareide announced that he had left politics for the time being to pursue a career in the national media conglomerate Schibsted , as an organizational director . His career in the company started with the position of trainee in 1997 . Outside politics , his only paid full @-@ time appointments have been in Schibsted . He still works behind the scenes for his party , occasionally commenting on issues in the national media . He did not rule out a return to national politics in the future , and in late 2008 he was selected by his party as the top candidate on the party 's ticket in Akershus county . The Christian Democratic Party formerly held a seat in this county , but lost it in 2005 . Hareide has never lived in Akershus . Party leader Dagfinn Høybråten hails from Akershus , but he runs on the Rogaland ticket to secure a safe seat . 
 Prior to the 2009 election , Hareide announced that he would leave national politics if he failed to win a parliament seat . Although the Christian Democrats suffered nationwide setbacks in 2009 , Hareide managed to win Akershus ' levelling seat after a close race against Dagfinn Sundsbø of the Centre Party . In parliament , Hareide became the chair of the Standing Committee on Transport and Communications . 
 After Høybråten announced that he would not seek reelection as party leader of KrF , Hareide quickly emerged as the leading candidate to succeed Høybråten , after the two other apparent candidates , <unk> Eriksen and Hans Olav <unk> , announced they would not run . Hareide is considered to belong to the socially liberal wing of the party , and conservative members of the party have demanded that at least one of the deputy leaders be from the party 's conservative wing if they are to support Hareide . Hareide supported the efforts to eliminate the rule which requires Christian Democratic party representatives to declare a Christian faith , and a vote gave a clear majority to abolish that rule two years later . Hareide was unanimously voted in as new party leader at the 2011 convention on 30 April 2011 . Hareide declined the nomination as parliamentary leader , and Hans Olav <unk> was elected to this position . 
 On November 18 , 2011 , Hareide was appointed to lead the parliamentary committee that is investigating the 2011 Norway Attacks . His nomination to that position was proposed by the red @-@ green parties . On January 23 , 2012 , Hareide denounced a speech at KrF 's local chapter in Sarpsborg that had suggested that the terrorist attacks and the Alexander Kielland disaster were divine warnings or punishments for Norway 's policy towards Israel ; Hareide said that this was far beyond normal thinking and completely out of line with the party 's values . 
 = = = Reception and issues = = = 
 Following the 11th United Nations Climate Change Convention in Buenos Aires in December 2004 , Hareide spoke out against the United States and China , whom he saw as " problems " in the international work against climate change . Hareide gained a fair level of praise for his role in the convention , from both his own party as well as political opponents . 
 Hareide received heavy criticism for the policy on large carnivores . A decision in early 2005 , to uphold the ongoing wolf hunt even though a certain alpha she @-@ wolf <unk> had mistakenly been shot in January that year , was met with protests from the national World Wildlife Fund chapter and other environment organizations , as well as the Swedish Minister of the Environment Lena <unk> and representatives from the European Union . Hareide described the event as " regrettable " , but " not against the law " . The case made headlines in BBC and New Scientist . A few weeks before , Hareide had been criticized in a parliamentary hearing session for being too wolf @-@ friendly . The environmental organizations went as far as to press charges against the Ministry of the Environment . The Ministry was acquitted when the case was finally brought up in late 2006 , some time after Hareide left office . 
 In July the same year , Hareide received further criticism as the number of licenses to kill large carnivores allegedly was not only at a record high ( 12 brown bears , 10 grey wolves , 22 wolverines and 13 lynx ) , but also contradictory to the parliamentary policy on the matter . According to Hareide , the actions were in line with the parliamentary stance on the issue . 
 In April 2005 he was criticized for an issue connected to monetary support of environmental projects and organizations . The Ministry approved a $ 90 @,@ 000 project support for the Church of Norway , while the pressure group Bellona faced a cut of the same amount . Hareide , being a devout Christian and a member of the Church of Norway , was accused of putting his own religious interests ahead of environmental considerations . The case became a curiosity in the Norwegian media as some of the money was channelled into the church internet site , which , among other things , contained a set of prayers for earthworms – described in such odd terms as " the blind subterranean workers " , " small sisters and brothers in the compost " and " members of the subterranean congregation " . Hareide responded to the criticism by describing the overall project as " exciting " . 
 One of Hareide 's last actions in office was to approve the construction of a hydroelectric power plant in the <unk> watershed in <unk> , a protected natural area . Most of the criticism went to his successor , Helen <unk> , who neglected to roll back the decision when assuming office . She eventually resigned halfway into her term . 
 During his time as Minister of the Environment , Hareide was parodied in the television comedy program Tre <unk> som <unk> er <unk> . The character Knut Arild Hareide , played by Harald Eia , was portrayed in several sketches as a physically weak person . These parodies were criticized by the authors in a 2005 book about different forms of mobbing ; this stirred a minor debate in the Norwegian media . Nonetheless , Hareide himself showed a video clip of one of the parodies when publicly announcing his <unk> from national politics at the 2007 party congress . 
 In a poll taken in December 2013 , Hareide received a 99 percent approval rating among Christian Democratic voters . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hareide comes from a middle @-@ class background , his father being a transportation manager and his mother a consultant . 
 Although reluctant to comment on the issue , Hareide was likely single during his first tenure in national politics . He has been confronted with rumours of homosexuality by segments of the media , but these have been dismissed . In 2008 he was reported as having a relationship with Solveig <unk> from Kolbotn , which ended in 2010 . In the spring of 2011 he was confirmed in a relationship with school teacher Lisa Marie Larsen . The couple married in Moi on 23 June 2012 , and had a daughter on 6 April 2013 . 
 = Stegosaurus = 
 Stegosaurus ( / <unk> / ) is a type of armored dinosaur . Their fossil bones have been found in rocks dated to the Late Jurassic period ( Kimmeridgian to early Tithonian ages ) , between 155 and 150 million years ago , in the western United States and Portugal . Several species have been classified in the upper Morrison Formation of the western U.S , though only three are universally recognized ; S. stenops , S. ungulatus and S. sulcatus . The remains of over 80 individual animals of this genus have been found . Stegosaurus would have lived alongside dinosaurs such as Apatosaurus , Diplodocus , Brachiosaurus , Allosaurus and Ceratosaurus ; the latter two may have been predators of it . 
 These were a large , heavily built , herbivorous quadrupeds with rounded backs , short fore limbs , long hind limbs , and tails held high in the air . Due to their distinctive combination of broad , upright plates and tail tipped with spikes , Stegosaurus is one of the most recognizable kinds of dinosaur . The function of this array of plates and spikes has been the subject of much speculation among scientists . Today , it is generally agreed that their spikes were most likely used for defense against predators , while their plates may have been used primarily for display , and secondarily for thermoregulatory functions . Stegosaurus had a relatively low brain @-@ to @-@ body mass ratio . It had a short neck and a small head , meaning it most likely ate low @-@ lying bushes and shrubs . One species , Stegosaurus ungulatus , is the largest known of all the stegosaurians ( bigger than related dinosaurs such as Kentrosaurus and Huayangosaurus ) . 
 Stegosaurus remains were first identified during the " Bone Wars " by Othniel Charles Marsh . The first known skeletons were fragmentary and the bones were scattered , and it would be many years before the true appearance of these animals , including their posture and plate arrangement , became well understood . The name Stegosaurus means " roof lizard " or " covered lizard " , in reference to its bony plates . Despite its popularity in books and film , mounted skeletons of Stegosaurus did not become a staple of major natural history museums until the mid @-@ 20th century , and many museums have had to assemble composite displays from several different specimens due to a lack of complete skeletons . 
 = = Description = = 
 The quadrupedal Stegosaurus is one of the most easily identifiable dinosaur genera , due to the distinctive double row of kite @-@ shaped plates rising vertically along the rounded back and the two pairs of long spikes extending horizontally near the end of the tail . Although large individuals could grow up to 9 m ( 29 @.@ 5 ft ) in length , the various species of Stegosaurus were dwarfed by their contemporaries , the giant sauropods . Some form of armor appears to have been necessary , as Stegosaurus species coexisted with large predatory theropod dinosaurs , such as Allosaurus and Ceratosaurus . 
 Most of the information known about Stegosaurus comes from the remains of mature animals ; more recently , though , juvenile remains of Stegosaurus have been found . One subadult specimen , discovered in 1994 in Wyoming , is 4 @.@ 6 m ( 15 @.@ 1 ft ) long and 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) high , and is estimated to have weighed 2 @.@ 4 metric tons ( 2 @.@ 6 short tons ) while alive . It is on display in the University of Wyoming Geological Museum . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The long and narrow skull was small in proportion to the body . It had a small antorbital fenestra , the hole between the nose and eye common to most archosaurs , including modern birds , though lost in extant crocodylians . The skull 's low position suggests that Stegosaurus may have been a browser of low @-@ growing vegetation . This interpretation is supported by the absence of front teeth and their likely replacement by a horny beak or rhamphotheca . The lower jaw of Stegosaurus had a flat upward extension that would have completely hidden the teeth when viewed from the side , and which probably supported a turtle @-@ like beak in life . Other researchers have interpreted these ridges as modified versions of similar structures in other ornithischians which might have supported fleshy cheeks , rather than beaks . <unk> teeth were small , triangular , and flat ; wear facets show that they did grind their food . The jaws of Stegosaurus had flat downward and upward extensions that would have completely hidden the teeth when viewed from the side , and these probably supported a beak in life . The presence of a beak extended along much of the jaws may have precluded the presence of cheeks in these species . Such an extensive beak was probably unique to Stegosaurus and some other advanced stegosaurids among ornithischians , which usually had beaks restricted to the jaw tips . 
 Despite the animal 's overall size , the braincase of Stegosaurus was small , being no larger than that of a dog . A well @-@ preserved Stegosaurus braincase allowed Othniel Charles Marsh to obtain , in the 1880s , a cast of the brain cavity or endocast of the animal , which gave an indication of the brain size . The endocast showed the brain was indeed very small , the smallest proportionally of all dinosaur endocasts then known . The fact that an animal weighing over 4 @.@ 5 metric tons ( 5 short tons ) could have a brain of no more than 80 g ( 2 @.@ 8 oz ) contributed to the popular old idea that all dinosaurs were unintelligent , an idea now largely rejected . Actual brain anatomy in Stegosaurus is poorly known , but the brain itself was , however , small even for a dinosaur , fitting well with a slow , herbivorous lifestyle and limited behavioural complexity . 
 = = = Skeleton = = = 
 In Stegosaurus stenops there are 27 bones in the vertebral column anterior to the sacrum , a varying number of vertebrae in the sacrum , with four in most subadults , and around 46 caudal ( tail ) vertebrae . The <unk> are divided into cervical ( neck ) and dorsal ( back ) vertebrae , with around 10 cervicals and 17 dorsals , the total number being one greater than in Hesperosaurus , two greater than Huayangosaurus , although <unk> preserves 17 cervicals and an unknown number of dorsals . The first cervical vertebra is the axis bone , which is connected and often fused to the atlas bone . Farther posteriorly , the proportionately larger the cervicals become , although they do not change greatly in anything other than size . Past the first few dorsals , the centrum of the bones become more elongate front @-@ to @-@ back , and the transverse processes become more elevated dorsal . The sacrum of S. stenops includes four sacral vertebrae , but one of the dorsals is also incorporated into the structure . In some specimens of S. stenops , a caudal is also incorporated , as a <unk> . In Hesperosaurus there are two <unk> , and only four fused sacrals , but in Kentrosaurus there may be as many as seven vertebrae in the sacrum , with both <unk> and <unk> . S. stenops preserves 46 caudal vertebrae , and up to 49 , and along the series both the <unk> and the neural spines become smaller , until the neural spines disappear at caudal 35 . Around the middle of the tail , the neural spines become bifurcated , meaning they are divided near the top . 
 With multiple well @-@ preserved skeletons , S. stenops preserves all regions of the body , including the limbs . The scapula ( shoulder blade ) is sub @-@ rectangular , with a robust blade . Though it is not always perfectly preserved , the acromion ridge is slightly larger than in Kentrosaurus . The blade is relatively straight , although it curves towards the back . There is a small bump on the back of the blade , that would have served as the base of the triceps muscle . Articulated with the scapula , the coracoid is sub @-@ circular . The hind feet each had three short toes , while each fore foot had five toes ; only the inner two toes had a blunt hoof . The phalangeal formula is 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 , meaning the innermost finger of the fore limb has two bones , the next has two , etc . All four limbs were supported by pads behind the toes . The fore limbs were much shorter than the stocky hind limbs , which resulted in an unusual posture . The tail appears to have been held well clear of the ground , while the head of Stegosaurus was positioned relatively low down , probably no higher than 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) above the ground . 
 = = = Plates = = = 
 The most recognizable features of Stegosaurus are its dermal plates , which consisted of between 17 and 22 separate plates and flat spines . These were highly modified osteoderms ( bony @-@ cored scales ) , similar to those seen in crocodiles and many lizards today . They were not directly attached to the animal 's skeleton , instead arising from the skin . The largest plates were found over the hips and could measure up to 60 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) wide and 60 cm tall . 
 In a 2010 review of Stegosaurus species , Peter Galton suggested that the arrangement of the plates on the back may have varied between species , and that the pattern of plates as viewed in profile may have been important for species recognition . Galton noted that the plated in S. stenops have been found articulated in two staggered rows , rather than paired . Fewer S. ungulatus plates have been found , and none articulated , making the arrangement in this species more difficult to determine . However , the type specimen of S. ungulatus preserves two flattened spine @-@ like plates from the tail that are nearly identical in shape and size , but are mirror images of each other , suggesting that at least these were arranged in pairs . 
 = = Discovery and history = = 
 Stegosaurus , one of the many dinosaurs first collected and described in the Bone Wars , was originally named by Othniel Charles Marsh in 1877 , from remains recovered north of Morrison , Colorado . These first bones became the holotype of Stegosaurus armatus . Marsh initially believed the remains were from an aquatic turtle @-@ like animal , and the basis for its scientific name , ' roof ( ed ) lizard ' was due to his early belief that the plates lay flat over the animal 's back , overlapping like the shingles ( tiles ) on a roof . A wealth of Stegosaurus material was recovered over the next few years , and Marsh published several papers on the genus from 1877 to 1897 . In 1878 , Edward Drinker Cope named Hypsirhophus <unk> , as another stegosaurian based on fragmentary fossils specimens from Cope ’ s Quarry 3 near the " Cope 's Nipple " site in Garden Park , Colorado . Many later researchers have considered Hypsirhophus to be a synonym of Stegosaurus , though Peter Galton ( 2010 ) suggested that it is distinct based on differences in the vertebrae . 
 Marsh named a second species , Stegosaurus ungulatus , in 1879 , and finally gave a more detailed description of all the Stegosaurus fossils collected to far the following year . In 1881 , he named a third species Stegosaurus " affinis " , based only on a hip bone . This species is generally agreed to have been inadequately described , and therefore is a nomen nudum ( a name lacking a formal description ) . The specimen was later lost . Marsh continued to collect and examine new Stegosaurus specimens , and in 1887 he named three new species : Stegosaurus stenops , S. duplex , and S. sulcatus . Though it had not yet been completely prepared , the nearly complete and articulated type specimen of Stegosaurus stenops allowed Marsh to complete the first attempt at a reconstructed Stegosaurus skeleton . This first reconstruction , of S. ungulatus with missing parts filled in from S. stenops , was published by Marsh in 1891 . ( In 1893 , Richard Lydekker mistakenly re @-@ published Marsh 's drawing under the label Hypsirhophus ) . 
 The next species of Stegosaurus to be named was S. marshi , by Frederick Lucas in 1901 . Lucas reclassified this species in the new genus <unk> later that year . Lucas also re @-@ examined the issue of the life appearance of Stegosaurus , coming to the conclusion that the plates were arranged in pairs in two rows along the back , arranged above the bases of the ribs . Lucas commissioned Charles R. Knight to produce a life restoration of S. ungulatus based on his new interpretation . However , the following year , Lucas wrote that he now believed the plates were probably attached in staggered rows . In 1910 , Richard Swann Lull wrote that the alternating pattern seen in S. stenops was probably due to shifting of the skeleton after death . He led the construction of the first ever Stegosaurus skeletal mount at the Peabody Museum of Natural History , which was depicted with paired plates . In 1914 , Charles Gilmore argued against Lull 's interpretation , noting that several specimens of S. stenops , including the now @-@ completely prepared holotype , preserved the plates in alternating rows near the peak of the back , and that there was no evidence of the plates having shifted relative to the body during fossilization . Gilmore and Lucas ' interpretation became the generally accepted standard , and Lull 's mount at the Peabody Museum was changed to reflect this in 1924 . 
 = = = Plate arrangement = = = 
 One of the major subjects of books and articles about Stegosaurus is the plate arrangement . The argument has been a major one in the history of dinosaur reconstruction . Four possible plate arrangements have been proposed over the years : 
 The plates lie flat along the back , as a shingle @-@ like armor . This was Marsh 's initial interpretation , which led to the name ' roof lizard ' . As further and complete plates were found , their form showed they stood on edge , rather than lying flat . 
 By 1891 , Marsh published a more familiar view of Stegosaurus , with a single row of plates . This was dropped fairly early on ( apparently because it was poorly understood how the plates were embedded in the skin and they were thought to overlap too much in this arrangement ) . It was revived , in somewhat modified form , in the 1980s , by Stephen Czerkas , based on the arrangement of iguana dorsal spines . 
 The plates were paired in a double row along the back . This is probably the most common arrangement in illustrations , especially earlier ones . The Stegosaurus in the 1933 film , King Kong , has this arrangement . 
 Two rows of alternating plates . By the early 1960s , this had become ( and remains ) the prevalent idea , mainly because some S. stenops fossils in which the plates are still partially articulated show this arrangement . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Stegosaurus was the first @-@ named genus of the family Stegosauridae . It is the type genus that gives its name to the family . The Stegosauridae are one of two families within the infraorder Stegosauria , with the other being the Huayangosauridae . The infraorder Stegosauria lies within the Thyreophora , or armored dinosaurs , a suborder which also includes the more diverse ankylosaurs . The stegosaurs were a clade of animals similar in appearance , posture , and shape that mainly differed in their array of spikes and plates . Among the closest relatives to Stegosaurus are Wuerhosaurus from China and Kentrosaurus from East Africa . 
 The following cladogram shows the position of Stegosaurus within the Stegosauridae according to Mateus , 2009 : 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The origin of Stegosaurus is uncertain , as few remains of basal stegosaurs and their ancestors are known . Recently , stegosaurids have been shown to be present in the lower Morrison Formation , existing several million years before the occurrence of Stegosaurus itself , with the discovery of the related Hesperosaurus from the early Kimmeridgian . The earliest stegosaurid ( the genus Lexovisaurus ) is known from the Oxford Clay Formation of England and France , giving it an age of early to middle Callovian . 
 The earlier and more basal genus Huayangosaurus from the Middle Jurassic of China ( some 165 million years ago – Mya ) <unk> Stegosaurus by 20 million years and is the only genus in the family Huayangosauridae . Earlier still is Scelidosaurus , from Early Jurassic England , which lived about 190 Mya . Interestingly , it possessed features of both stegosaurs and ankylosaurs . <unk> from Germany was another small quadruped , while Scutellosaurus from Arizona was an even earlier genus and was facultatively bipedal . These small , lightly armored dinosaurs were closely related to the direct ancestor of both stegosaurs and ankylosaurs . A trackway of a possible early armored dinosaur , from around 195 Mya , has been found in France . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 Initially , several species were described . However , many of these have since been considered to be invalid or synonymous with existing species , leaving two well @-@ known and one poorly known species . Confirmed Stegosaurus remains have been found in the Morrison Formation 's stratigraphic zones 2 – 6 , with additional remains possibly referrable to Stegosaurus recovered from stratigraphic zone 1 . 
 Stegosaurus ungulatus , meaning " hoofed roof lizard " , was named by Marsh in 1879 , from remains recovered at Como Bluff , Wyoming ( Quarry 12 , near Robber 's Roost ) . It might be synonymous with S. stenops . At 9 m ( 29 @.@ 5 ft ) , it was the longest species within the genus Stegosaurus . A fragmentary Stegosaurus specimen discovered in Portugal and dating from the upper Kimmeridgian @-@ lower Tithonian stage has been tentatively assigned to this species . Stegosaurus ungulatus can be distinguished from S. stenops by the presence of smaller , more triangular plates and by several pairs of small , flat , pointed plates just before the spikes on the tail . These spine @-@ like plates appear to have been paired , due to the presence of at least one pair that are identical but mirrored . S. ungulatus also appears to have had longer legs ( femora ) and hip bones than other species . The type specimen of S. ungulatus was discovered with eight spikes , though they were scattered away from their original positions . These have often been interpreted as indicating that the animal had four pairs of tail spikes . No specimens have been found with complete or articulated sets of tail spikes , but no additional specimens have been found that preserve eight spikes together . It is possible the extra pair of spikes came from a different individual , and though no other extra bones were found with the specimen , these may be found if more digging were done at the original site . Specimens from other quarries ( such as a tail from Quarry 13 , now forming part of the composite skeleton AMNH 650 at the American Museum of Natural History ) , referred to S. ungulatus on the basis of their notched tail vertebrae , are preserved with only four tail spikes . The type specimen of S. ungulatus ( YPM 1853 ) was incorporated into the first ever mounted skeleton of a stegosaur at the Peabody Museum of Natural History in 1910 by Richard Swann Lull . It was initially mounted with paired plates set wide , above the base of the ribs , but was remounted in 1924 with two staggered rows of plates along the midline of the back . Additional specimens recovered from the same quarry by the United States National Museum of Natural History , including tail vertebrae and an additional large plate ( USNM <unk> ) , belong to the same individual as YPM 1853 . 
 Stegosaurus stenops , meaning " narrow @-@ faced roof lizard " , was named by Marsh in 1887 , with the holotype having been collected by Marshal Felch at Garden Park , north of Cañon City , Colorado , in 1886 . This is the best @-@ known species of Stegosaurus , mainly because its remains include at least one complete articulated skeleton . It had proportionately large , broad plates and rounded tail plates . Articulated specimens show that the plates were arranged alternating in a staggered double row . S. stenops is known from at least 50 partial skeletons of adults and juveniles , one complete skull , and four partial skulls . It was shorter than other species , at 7 m ( 23 ft ) . Found in the Morrison Formation , Colorado , Wyoming , and Utah . 
 Stegosaurus sulcatus , meaning " furrowed roof lizard " , was described by Marsh in 1887 based on a partial skeleton . It has traditionally been considered a synonym of S. armatus , though more recent studies suggest it is not . S. sulcatus is distinguished mainly by its unusually large , furrowed spikes with very large bases . A spike associated with the type specimen , originally thought to be a tail spike , may in fact come from the shoulder or hip , since its base is much larger than the corresponding tail vertebrae . A review published by Maidment and colleagues in 2008 regarded it as an indeterminate species possibly not even belonging to Stegosaurus at all , but to a different genus . Peter Galton suggested it should be considered a valid species due to its unique spikes . 
 Susannah Maidment and colleagues in 2008 proposed extensive alterations to the taxonomy of Stegosaurus . They advocated synonymizing S. stenops and S. ungulatus with S. armatus , and sinking Hesperosaurus and Wuerhosaurus into Stegosaurus , with their type species becoming Stegosaurus mjosi and Stegosaurus <unk> , respectively . They regarded S. longispinus as dubious . Thus , their conception of Stegosaurus would include three valid species ( S. armatus , S. <unk> , and S. mjosi ) and would range from the Late Jurassic of North America and Europe to the Early Cretaceous of Asia . However , this classification scheme has not generally been followed by other researchers . Galton , for example , has stated that Wuerhosaurus differs enough from Stegosaurus to be retained as a distinct genus . In 2015 , Maidment et al. revised their suggestion due to the recognition by Galton of S. armatus as a nomen dubium and its replacement by S. stenops as type species . 
 = = = Doubtful species and junior synonyms = = = 
 Stegosaurus armatus , meaning " armored roof lizard " , was the first species to be found and the original type species named by O.C. Marsh in 1877 . It is known from a partial skeletons , and more than 30 fragmentary specimens have been referred to it . However , the type specimen was very fragmentary , consisting only of a partial tail , hips , and leg , parts of some back vertebrae , and a single fragmentary plate ( the presence of which was used to give the animal its name ) . No other plates or spikes were found , and the entire front half of the animal appears not to have been preserved . Because the type specimen is very fragmentary , it is extremely difficult to compare it with other species based on better specimens , and it is now generally considered to be a nomen dubium . Because of this , it was replaced by S. stenops as the type species of Stegosaurus in a ruling of the ICZN in 2013 . 
 Stegosaurus " affinis " , named by Marsh in 1881 , is only known from a pubis which has since been lost . Because Marsh did not provide an adequate description of the bone with which to distinguish a new species , this name is considered a nomen nudum . 
 <unk> laticeps was described by Marsh in 1881 , from some jawbone fragments . Bakker resurrected D. laticeps in 1986 as a senior synonym of S. stenops , although others note that the material is not diagnostic and is only referable to Stegosaurus sp . , making it a nomen dubium . 
 Stegosaurus duplex , meaning " two plexus roof lizard " ( in allusion to the greatly enlarged neural canal of the sacrum which Marsh characterized as a " posterior brain case " ) , was named by Marsh in 1887 ( including the holotype specimen ) . The disarticulated bones were actually collected in 1879 by Edward Ashley at Como Bluff . Marsh initially distinguished it from S. ungulatus based on the fact that each sacral ( hip ) vertebra bore its own rib , which he claimed was unlike the anatomy of S. ungulatus ; however , the sacrum of S. ungulatus had not actually been discovered . Marsh also suggested that S. duplex may have lacked armor , since no plates or spikes were found with the specimen , though a single spike may actually have been present nearby , and re @-@ examination of the site maps has shown that the entire specimen was found highly disarticulated and scattered . It is generally considered a synonym of S. ungulatus today , and parts of the specimen were actually incorporated into the Peabody Museum S. ungulatus skeletal mount in 1910 . 
 = = = Reassigned species = = = 
 Stegosaurus marshi , which was described by Lucas in 1901 , was renamed <unk> in 1902 . 
 Stegosaurus priscus , described by Nopcsa in 1911 , was reassigned to Lexovisaurus , and is now the type species of Loricatosaurus . 
 Stegosaurus longispinus was named by Charles W. Gilmore . It is now the type species of the genus <unk> . 
 Stegosaurus madagascariensis from Madagascar is known solely from teeth and was described by <unk> in 1926 . The teeth were variously attributed to a stegosaur , the theropod Majungasaurus , a hadrosaur or even a crocodylian , but is now considered a possible ankylosaur . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 Stegosaurus was the largest stegosaur , possibly weighing up to 5 @,@ 000 kg ( 5 @.@ 5 tons ) . Soon after its discovery , Marsh considered Stegosaurus to have been bipedal , due to its short forelimbs . He had changed his mind , however , by 1891 , after considering the heavy build of the animal . Although Stegosaurus is undoubtedly now considered to have been quadrupedal , some discussion has occurred over whether it could have reared up on its hind legs , using its tail to form a tripod with its hind limbs , and browsing for higher foliage . This has been proposed by Bakker and opposed by Carpenter . 
 Stegosaurus did have very short fore limbs , in relation to its hind legs . Furthermore , within the hind limbs , the lower section ( comprising the tibia and fibula ) was short compared with the femur . This suggests it could not walk very fast , as the stride of the back legs at speed would have overtaken the front legs , giving a maximum speed of 6 – 7 km / h ( 3 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 3 mph ) . 
 Tracks discovered by Matthew <unk> ( Morrison Natural History Museum , Colorado ) suggest that Stegosaurus lived in multiple @-@ age herds . One group of tracks is interpreted as showing four or five baby stegosaurs moving in the same direction , while another has a juvenile stegosaur track with an adult track overprinting it . Stegosaurus may have preferred drier settings than other common Morrison Formation dinosaurs , such as Allosaurus , Apatosaurus , Camarasaurus , and Diplodocus . 
 = = = Juveniles = = = 
 Juveniles of Stegosaurus have been preserved , probably showing the growth of the genus . Kentrosaurus is also known from juvenile specimens , and they can be identified as different genders . The two juveniles are both relatively small , with the smaller individual being 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) long , and the larger having a length of 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) . The specimens can be identified as not mature because they lack the fusion of the scapula and coracoid , and the lower hind limbs . Also , the pelvic region of the specimens are similar to Kentrosaurus juveniles . 
 = = = Plate function = = = 
 The function of Stegosaurus plates has been much debated . Initially thought of as some form of armor , they appear to have been too fragile and ill @-@ placed for defensive purposes , leaving the animal 's sides unprotected . The plates ' large size suggests that they may have served to increase the apparent height of the animal , either to intimidate enemies or to impress other members of the same species , in some form of sexual display , although both male and female specimens seemed to have had the same plates . More recently , researchers have proposed that they may have helped to control the body temperature of the animal , in a similar way to the sails of the pelycosaurs Dimetrodon and Edaphosaurus ( and modern elephant and rabbit ears ) . The plates had blood vessels running through grooves and air flowing around the plates would have cooled the blood . The publication of " Growth and Function of Stegosaurus Plates " by <unk> , et al. in 1986 marked a major step out of the realm of speculation and into the realm of science , with its microscopic analyses of multiple Stegosaurus plate specimens , proving unequivocally " extreme vascularization of the outer layer of bone " , which was seen by <unk> as further evidence the plates " acted as thermoregulatory devices " . Later , more comprehensive histological surveys of plate microstructure attributed the vascularization to the need to transport nutrients for rapid plate growth , asserting the plates ' physiology , if beneficial , was a side benefit secondary to their primary function , identification and display . 
 Some 2010 structural comparisons of Stegosaurus plates to Alligator osteoderms seem to support the conclusion that the potential for a thermoregulatory role in the plates of Stegosaurus definitely exists . This hypothesis has been seriously questioned , since its closest relatives , such as Kentrosaurus , had more low surface area spikes than plates , implying that cooling was not important enough to require specialized structural formations such as plates . Another possible function is that the plates may have helped the animal increase heat absorption from the sun . Since a cooling trend occurred towards the end of the Jurassic , a large ectothermic reptile might have used the increased surface area afforded by the plates to absorb radiation from the sun . 
 Another explanation for Stegosaurus plates ' heavily vascular design is that , when under threat , blood could rush into the plates , causing them to " blush " which would add a colorful , red warning , " embellishing " the visual threat display . This " blushing capacity " , instead of thermoregulatory functions , may be the plates ' purpose , though the two functions certainly could have coexisted . That Stegosaurus plates could " blush " has become the predominant interpretation of plate function since the late 20th century , and is even depicted in the popular BBC documentary Walking with Dinosaurs , with the sudden reddening of the plates used in conjunction with threatening swings of the spiked tail to intimidate and confuse an attacking Allosaurus . Also , this blushing could have been used to attract mates . A study published in 2005 supports the idea of their use in species identification . Researchers believe this may be the function of other unique anatomical features , found in various dinosaur species . 
 In the past , some palaeontologists , notably Robert Bakker , have speculated that the plates may have been mobile to some degree , although others disagree . Bakker suggested the plates were the bony cores of pointed horn @-@ covered plates that a Stegosaurus could flip from one side to another to present a predator with an array of spikes and blades that would impede it from closing sufficiently to attack the Stegosaurus effectively . The plates would naturally sag to the sides of the Stegosaurus , the length of the plates reflecting the width of the animal at that point along its spine . His reasoning for these plates to be covered in horn is that the surface fossilized plates have a resemblance to the bony cores of horns in other animals known or thought to bear horns , and his reasoning for the plates to be defensive in nature is that the plates had insufficient width for them to stand erect easily in such a manner as to be useful in display without continuous muscular effort . S. stenops also had disk @-@ shaped plates , on its hips . 
 = = = <unk> ( tail spikes ) = = = 
 Debate has been going on about whether the tail spikes were used for display only , as posited by Gilmore in 1914 or used as a weapon . Robert Bakker noted the tail was likely to have been much more flexible than that of other dinosaurs , as it lacked ossified tendons , thus lending credence to the idea of the tail as a weapon . However , as Carpenter has noted , the plates overlap so many tail vertebrae , movement would be limited . Bakker also observed that Stegosaurus could have maneuvered its rear easily , by keeping its large hind limbs stationary and pushing off with its very powerfully muscled but short fore limbs , allowing it to swivel deftly to deal with attack . More recently , a study of tail spikes by <unk> et al . , which showed a high incidence of trauma @-@ related damage , lends more weight to the position that the spikes were indeed used in combat . This study showed that 9 @.@ 8 % of Stegosaurus specimens examined had injuries to their tail spikes . Additional support for this idea was a punctured tail vertebra of an Allosaurus into which a tail spike fits perfectly . 
 S. stenops had four dermal spikes , each about 60 – 90 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 0 ft ) long . Discoveries of articulated stegosaur armor show , at least in some species , these spikes protruded horizontally from the tail , not vertically as is often depicted . Initially , Marsh described S. ungulatus as having eight spikes in its tail , unlike S. stenops . However , recent research re @-@ examined this and concluded this species also had four . 
 = = = " Second brain " = = = 
 Soon after describing Stegosaurus , Marsh noted a large canal in the hip region of the spinal cord , which could have accommodated a structure up to 20 times larger than the famously small brain . This has led to the influential idea that dinosaurs like Stegosaurus had a " second brain " in the tail , which may have been responsible for controlling reflexes in the rear portion of the body . This " brain " might have given a Stegosaurus a temporary boost when it was under threat from predators . More recently discussed , this space ( also found in sauropods ) may have been the location of a glycogen body , a structure in living birds whose function is not definitely known , but which is postulated to facilitate the supply of glycogen to the animal 's nervous system . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Stegosaurus and related genera were herbivores . However , their teeth and jaws are very different from those of other herbivorous ornithischian dinosaurs , suggesting a different feeding strategy that is not yet well understood . The other ornithischians possessed teeth capable of grinding plant material and a jaw structure capable of movements in planes other than simply <unk> ( i.e. not only the fused up @-@ down motion to which stegosaur jaws were likely limited ) . Unlike the sturdy jaws and grinding teeth common to its fellow ornithischians , Stegosaurus ( and all stegosaurians ) had small , peg @-@ shaped teeth that have been observed with horizontal wear facets associated with tooth @-@ food contact and their unusual jaws were probably capable of only <unk> ( up @-@ down ) movements . Their teeth were " not tightly pressed together in a block for efficient grinding " , and no evidence in the fossil record of stegosaurians indicates use of gastroliths — the stone ( s ) some dinosaurs ( and some present @-@ day bird species ) ingested — to aid the grinding process , so how exactly Stegosaurus obtained and processed the amount of plant material required to sustain its size remains " poorly understood " . 
 The stegosaurians were widely distributed geographically in the late Jurassic . Palaeontologists believe it would have eaten plants such as mosses , ferns , horsetails , cycads , and conifers or fruits . Grazing on grasses , seen in many modern mammalian herbivores , would not have been possible for Stegosaurus , as grasses did not evolve until late into the Cretaceous Period , long after Stegosaurus had become extinct . 
 One hypothesized feeding behavior strategy considers them to be low @-@ level browsers , eating low @-@ growing fruit of various <unk> plants , as well as foliage . This scenario has Stegosaurus foraging at most 1 m above the ground . Conversely , if Stegosaurus could have raised itself on two legs , as suggested by Bakker , then it could have browsed on vegetation and fruits quite high up , with adults being able to forage up to 6 m ( 20 ft ) above the ground . 
 A detailed computer analysis of the biomechanics of Stegosaurus 's feeding behavior was performed in 2010 , using two different three @-@ dimensional models of Stegosaurus teeth given realistic physics and properties . Bite force was also calculated using these models and the known skull proportions of the animal , as well as simulated tree branches of different size and hardness . The resultant bite forces calculated for Stegosaurus were 140 @.@ 1 Newton ( N ) , 183 @.@ 7 N , and 275 N ( for anterior , middle and posterior teeth , respectively ) , which means its bite force was less than half that of a Labrador Retriever . Stegosaurus could have easily bitten through smaller green branches , but would have had difficulty with anything over 12 mm in diameter . Stegosaurus , therefore , probably browsed primarily among smaller twigs and foliage , and would have been unable to handle larger plant parts unless the animal was capable of biting much more efficiently than predicted in this study . However , A study published on May 20 , 2016 by Stephen <unk> et al. indicates Stegosaurus ' bite strength was stronger than previously believed . Comparisons were made between it ( represented by a specimen known as " Sophie " from the United Kingdom 's Natural History Museum ) and two other herbivorous dinosaurs ; <unk> and Plateosaurus to determine if all three had similar bite forces and similar niches . Based on the results of the study , it was revealed that Stegosaurus had a bite similar in strength to that of modern herbivorous mammals , in particular , cattle and sheep . Based on this data , it is likely Stegosaurus also ate <unk> , tougher plants such as cycads , perhaps even acting as a means of spreading cycad seeds . The findings were published in the journal Scientific Reports . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 The Morrison Formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons , and flat floodplains . Vegetation varied from river @-@ lining forests of conifers , tree ferns , and ferns ( gallery forests ) , to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the Araucaria @-@ like conifer Brachyphyllum . The flora of the period has been revealed by fossils of green algae , fungi , mosses , horsetails , ferns , cycads , <unk> , and several families of conifers . Animal fossils discovered include bivalves , snails , ray @-@ finned fishes , frogs , salamanders , turtles like <unk> , sphenodonts , lizards , terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphans like <unk> , several species of pterosaurs such as <unk> and <unk> , numerous dinosaur species , and early mammals such as docodonts ( like <unk> ) , multituberculates , symmetrodonts , and triconodonts . 
 Dinosaurs that lived alongside Stegosaurus included theropods Allosaurus , Saurophaganax , Torvosaurus , Ceratosaurus , <unk> , Stokesosaurus , Ornitholestes , Coelurus and Tanycolagreus . Sauropods dominated the region , and included Brachiosaurus , Apatosaurus , Diplodocus , Camarasaurus , and Barosaurus . Other ornithischians included Camptosaurus , <unk> , Dryosaurus , Othnielosaurus and Drinker . Stegosaurus is commonly found at the same sites as Allosaurus , Apatosaurus , Camarasaurus , and Diplodocus . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 One of the most recognizable of all dinosaurs , Stegosaurus has been depicted on film , in cartoons and comics , as children 's toys , and was even declared the State Dinosaur of Colorado in 1982 . Due to the fragmentary nature of most early Stegosaurus fossil finds , it took many years before reasonably accurate restorations of these animals could be produced . The earliest popular image of Stegosaurus was an engraving produced by A. Tobin for the November 1884 issue of Scientific American , which included the dinosaur amid a speculative Morrison age landscape . Tobin restored the Stegosaurus as bipedal and long @-@ necked , with the plates arranged along the tail and the back covered in spikes . This covering of spikes might have been based on a misinterpretation of the teeth , which Marsh had noted were oddly shaped , cylindrical , and found scattered , such that he thought they might turn out to be small dermal spines . 
 Marsh published his more accurate skeletal reconstruction of Stegosaurus in 1891 , and within a decade Stegosaurus had become among the most @-@ illustrated types of dinosaur . Artist Charles R. Knight published his first illustration of Stegosaurus ungulatus based on Marsh 's skeletal reconstruction in a November 1897 issue of Century Magazine . This illustration would later go on to form the basis of the stop @-@ motion puppet used in the 1933 film King Kong . Like Marsh 's reconstruction , Knight 's first restoration had a single row of large plates , though he next used a double row for his more well @-@ known 1901 painting , produced under the direction of Frederic Lucas . Again under Lucas , Knight revised his version of Stegosaurus again two years later , producing a model with a staggered double row of plates . Knight would go on to paint a stegosaur with a staggered double plate row in 1927 for the Field Museum of Natural History , and was followed by Rudolph F. Zallinger , who painted Stegosaurus this way in his " Age of Reptiles " mural at the Peabody Museum in 1947 . 
 Stegosaurus made its major public debut as a papier mache model commissioned by the U.S. National Museum of Natural History for the 1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition . The model was based on Knight 's latest miniature with the double row of staggered plates , and was exhibited in the United States Government Building at the exposition in St. Louis before being relocated to Portland , Oregon for the Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition in 1905 . The model was moved to the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History ( now the Arts and Industries Building ) in Washington , D.C. along with other prehistory displays , and to the current National Museum of Natural History building in 1911 . Following renovations to the museum in the 2010s , the model was moved once again for display at the Museum of the Earth in Ithaca , New York . 
 The popularity of Stegosaurus is owed partly to its prominent display in natural history museums . Though considered one of the most distinctive types of dinosaur , Stegosaurus displays were missing from a majority of museums during the first half of the 20th century , due largely to the disarticulated nature of most fossil specimens . Until 1918 , the only mounted skeleton of Stegosaurus in the world was O.C. Marsh 's type specimen of S. ungulatus at the Peabody Museum of Natural History , which was put on display in 1910 . However , this mount was dismantled in 1917 when the old Peabody Museum building was demolished . This historically significant specimen was re @-@ mounted ahead of the opening of the new Peabody Museum building in 1925 . 1918 saw the completion of the second Stegosaurus mount , and the first depicting S. stenops . This mount was created under the direction of Charles Gilmore at the U.S. National Museum of Natural History . It was a composite of several skeletons , primarily USNM <unk> , with proportions designed to closely follow the S. stenops type specimen , which had been on display in relief nearby since 1918 . The aging mount was dismantled in 2003 and replaced with a cast in an updated pose in 2004 . A third mounted skeleton of Stegosaurus , referred to S. stenops , was put on display at the American Museum of Natural History in 1932 . Mounted under the direction of Charles J. Long , the American Museum mount was a composite consisting of partial remains filled in with replicas based on other specimens . In his article about the new mount for the museum 's journal , Barnum Brown described ( and disputed ) the popular misconception that the Stegosaurus had a " second brain " in its hips . Another composite mount , using specimens referred to S. ungulatus collected from Dinosaur National Monument between 1920 and 1922 , was put on display at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in 1940 . 
 = M9 Half @-@ track = 
 The M9 Half @-@ track was a half @-@ track produced by International Harvester in the United States in World War II for lend @-@ lease supply to Allies . It was designed to provide a similar vehicle to the M2 Half Track Car . It had the same body and chassis as the M5 Half @-@ track ( also built by International Harvester for lend @-@ lease ) but had the same stowage and radio fit as the M2 Half Track . 
 The M9 served for a significant amount of time . 3 @,@ 500 were produced by the end of World War II . It was used during World War II , the Arab @-@ Israeli War of 1948 , the Korean War , the Suez Crisis , the Vietnam War , the Six @-@ Day War , and the Yom Kippur War . It was used by eleven different countries by the end of its service . 
 = = Development = = 
 The United States adopted half @-@ tracks in large numbers as they could be built more quickly and cheaply by civilian vehicle producers than vehicles from the established armored vehicle manufacturers . The M2 Half Track Car had first been intended as an artillery tractor but was also used for carrying the machine gun squads of armored infantry regiments and for reconnaissance units until faster and better @-@ armed M8 Greyhound armored cars were available . 
 In order to supply U.S. allies , much more production was required than was possible through the firms producing the M2 ( and the larger M3 Half @-@ track ) . International Harvester ( IH ) could produce half @-@ tracks but some differences had to be accepted due to different manufacturing methods and components . This led to IH producing for lend @-@ lease the M5 Half @-@ track as a M3 equivalent and the M9 as the M2 equivalent . 
 = = Design = = 
 The M9 used the same chassis and mechanical components as the M5 . It was laid out to provide similar stowage , access to the radios from the inside , rear doors , and a pedestal machine gun mount as with the M2 . The M9A1 variant of the M9 matched the improvements made to the M2 , M3 , and M5 , changing to ring mount machine gun mount and three pintle machine gun mounts . 
 As with the M5 , due to the lack of face @-@ hardened armor , homogenous armor was used . Although thicker , it gave less protection and could be penetrated by armor @-@ piercing rifle bullets from 300 yards ( 270 m ) rather than 200 yards ( 180 m ) . The armor also made the vehicle heavier though the " performance was essentially similar " . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The M9 started production in August 1942 , at IH . The M9 and M9A1 were manufactured en masse and 2 @,@ 026 were produced in total . According to American military historian and defense specialist Steven <unk> , 2 @,@ 026 M9 and 1 @,@ 407 M9A1 were produced in 1943 . 
 The M9 was used in World War II , the Arab @-@ Israeli War of 1948 , the Korean War , the Suez Crisis , and many other conflicts . The production of <unk> was leased to other countries , like most other IH half @-@ tracks produced in World War II . This M9A1 was leased to both the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom , the latter providing it to other countries in the British Commonwealth . 
 = = Operators = = 
 The M9 was used by many countries but not the United States as there was sufficient M2 and M3 production for U.S. needs . Th UK leased some half @-@ tracks to Free France and other governments @-@ in @-@ exile . The Soviet Union received supplies directly . Following World War II , the second hand market was a source of supply for some countries , including Israel . M9 half @-@ tracks were provided under the Military Aid Program ( MAP ) to the following countries : 
 = Judith Quiney = 
 Judith Quiney ( baptised 2 February 1585 – 9 February 1662 ) , née Shakespeare , was the younger daughter of William Shakespeare and Anne Hathaway and the fraternal twin of Shakespeare 's only son Hamnet Shakespeare . She married Thomas Quiney , a vintner of Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon . The circumstances of the marriage , including Quiney 's misconduct , may have prompted the rewriting of Shakespeare 's will . Thomas was struck out , while Judith 's inheritance was attached with provisions to safeguard it from her husband . The bulk of Shakespeare 's estate was left , in an elaborate fee tail , to his elder daughter Susanna and her male heirs . 
 Judith and Thomas Quiney had three children . By the time of Judith Quiney 's death , she had outlived her children by many years . She has been depicted in several works of fiction as part of an attempt to piece together unknown portions of her father 's life . 
 = = Birth and early life = = 
 Judith Shakespeare was the daughter of William Shakespeare and Anne Hathaway . She was the younger sister of Susanna and the twin sister of Hamnet . Hamnet , however , died at the age of eleven . Her baptism on 2 February 1585 was recorded as “ <unk> Shakespeare ” by the vicar , Richard Barton of Coventry , in the parish register for Holy Trinity Church , Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon . The twins were named after a husband and wife , Hamnet and Judith Sadler , who were friends of the parents . Hamnet Sadler was a baker in Stratford . 
 Unlike her father and her husband , Judith Shakespeare was probably illiterate . In 1611 she witnessed the deed of sale of a house for £ 131 to William Mountford , a wheelwright of Stratford , from Elizabeth Quiney , her future mother @-@ in @-@ law , and Elizabeth 's eldest son Adrian . Judith signed twice with a mark instead of her name . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 On 10 February 1616 , Judith Shakespeare married Thomas Quiney , a vintner of Stratford , in Holy Trinity Church . The assistant vicar , Richard Watts , who later married Quiney 's sister Mary , probably officiated . The wedding took place during the pre @-@ Lenten season of <unk> , which was a prohibitive time for marriages . In 1616 , the period in which marriages were banned without dispensation from the church , including Ash Wednesday and Lent , started on 23 January , Septuagesima Sunday and ended on 7 April , the Sunday after Easter . Hence the marriage required a special licence issued by the Bishop of Worcester , which the couple had failed to obtain . Presumably they had posted the required banns in church , since Walter Wright of Stratford was cited for marrying without banns or licence : but this was not considered sufficient . The infraction was a minor one apparently caused by the minister , as three other couples were also wed that February . Quiney was nevertheless summoned by Walter Nixon to appear before the Consistory court in Worcester . ( This same Walter Nixon was later involved in a Star Chamber case and was found guilty of forging signatures and taking bribes ) . Quiney failed to appear by the required date . The register recorded the judgement , which was excommunication , on or about 12 March 1616 . It is unknown if Judith was also excommunicated , but in any case the punishment did not last long . In November of the same year they were back in church for the baptism of their firstborn child . 
 The marriage did not begin well . Quiney had recently impregnated another woman , Margaret Wheeler , who died in childbirth along with her child ; both were buried on 15 March 1616 . A few days later , on the 26 March , Quiney appeared before the Bawdy Court , which dealt , among other things , with " whoredom and uncleanliness . " Confessing in open court to " carnal copulation " with Margaret Wheeler , he submitted himself for correction and was sentenced to open penance " in a white sheet ( according to custom ) " before the Congregation on three Sundays . He also had to admit to his crime , this time wearing ordinary clothes , before the Minister of Bishopton in Warwickshire . The first part of the sentence was remitted , essentially letting him off with a five @-@ shilling fine to be given to the parish 's poor . As Bishopton had no church , but only a chapel , he was spared any public humiliation . 
 = = Chapel Lane , Atwood 's and The Cage = = 
 Where the Quineys lived after their marriage is unknown : but Judith owned her father 's cottage on Chapel Lane , Stratford ; while Thomas had held , since 1611 , the lease on a tavern called " Atwood 's " on High Street . The cottage later passed from Judith to her sister as part of the settlement in their father 's will . In July 1616 Thomas swapped houses with his brother @-@ in @-@ law , William Chandler , moving his vintner 's shop to the upper half of a house at the corner of High Street and Bridge Street . This house was known as " The Cage " and is the house traditionally associated with Judith Quiney . In the 20th century The Cage was for a time a Wimpy Bar before being turned into the Stratford Information Office . 
 The Cage provides further insight into why Shakespeare would not have trusted Judith 's husband . Around 1630 Quiney tried to sell the lease on the house but was prevented by his kinsmen . In 1633 , to protect the interests of Judith and the children , the lease was signed over to the trust of John Hall , Susanna 's husband , Thomas Nash , the husband of Judith 's niece , and Richard Watts , vicar of nearby Harbury , who was Quiney 's brother @-@ in @-@ law and who had officiated at Thomas and Judith 's wedding . Eventually , in November 1652 , the lease to The Cage ended up in the hands of Thomas ' eldest brother , Richard Quiney , a grocer in London . 
 = = William Shakespeare 's last will and testament = = 
 The inauspicious beginnings of Judith 's marriage , in spite of her husband and his family being otherwise unexceptional , has led to speculation that this was the cause for William Shakespeare 's hastily altered last will and testament . He first summoned his lawyer , Francis Collins , in January 1616 . On 25 March he made further alterations , probably because he was dying and because of his concerns about Quiney . In the first bequest of the will there had been a provision " vnto my sonne in L [ aw ] " ; but " sonne in L [ aw ] " was then struck out , with Judith 's name inserted in its stead . To this daughter he bequeathed £ 100 ( about £ 20 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) " in discharge of her marriage <unk> " ; another £ 50 if she were to relinquish the Chapel Lane cottage ; and , if she or any of her children were still alive at the end of three years following the date of the will , a further £ 150 , of which she was to receive the interest but not the principal . This money was explicitly denied to Thomas Quiney unless he were to bestow on Judith lands of equal value . In a separate bequest , Judith was given " my broad silver gilt bole . " 
 Finally , for the bulk of his estate , which included his main house , New Place , his two houses on Henley Street and various lands in and around Stratford , Shakespeare had set up an entail . His estate was bequeathed , in descending order of choice , to the following : 1 ) his daughter , Susanna Hall ; 2 ) upon Susanna 's death , " to the first sonne of her bodie lawfullie yssueing & to the <unk> Males of the bodie of the <unk> first Sonne lawfullie yssueing " ; 3 ) to Susanna 's second son and his male heirs ; 4 ) to Susanna 's third son and his male heirs ; 5 ) to Susanna 's " <unk> ... <unk> <unk> & <unk> sonnes " and their male heirs ; 6 ) to Elizabeth Hall , Susanna and John Hall 's firstborn , and her male heirs ; 7 ) to Judith and her male heirs ; or 8 ) to whatever heirs the law would normally recognise . This elaborate entail is usually taken to indicate that Thomas Quiney was not to be entrusted with Shakespeare 's inheritance , although some have speculated that it might simply indicate that Susanna was the favoured child . 
 = = Children = = 
 Judith and Thomas Quiney had three children : 
 Shakespeare ( baptised 23 November 1616 – buried 8 May 1617 ) 
 Richard ( baptised 9 February 1618 – buried 6 February 1639 ) 
 Thomas ( baptised 23 January 1620 – buried 28 January 1639 ) 
 Shakespeare was named for his grandfather . Richard 's name was common among the Quineys : his paternal grandfather and an uncle were named Richard . 
 Shakespeare Quiney died at six months of age . Richard and Thomas Quiney were buried within nine days of each other , 21 and 19 years old respectively . The deaths of all of Judith 's children resulted in new legal consequences . The entail on her father 's inheritance led Susanna , along with her daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law , to make a settlement using a rather elaborate legal device for the inheritance of her own branch of the family . Legal wrangling continued for another thirteen years , until 1652 . 
 = = Death = = 
 Judith Quiney had died by 9 February 1662 , the day of her burial and a week after her 77th birthday . She outlived her last surviving child by 23 years . She was buried in the grounds of Holy Trinity Church , but the exact location of her grave is unknown . Of her husband , the records show little of his later years . It has been speculated that he may have died in 1662 or 1663 , when the parish burial records are incomplete , or that he may have left Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon . He is known to have had a nephew , living in London , who by this time was holding the lease to The Cage . 
 = = Literary references = = 
 Judith is portrayed in William Black 's Judith Shakespeare : Her Love Affairs and Other Adventures , published serially in Harper 's Magazine in 1884 . She is one of the main characters in Edward Bond 's 1973 play Bingo , which portrays the last years of her father , in retirement in Stratford on Avon . She also appears in one of the final stories in Neil Gaiman 's graphic novel , The Sandman . Gaiman compared Judith with the character Miranda from Shakespeare 's The Tempest . She is the subject of the 2003 novel My Father Had a Daughter : Judith Shakespeare 's Tale by Grace Tiffany . The radio play Judith Shakespeare by Nan Woodhouse portrays her as " a loner , yearning to be a part of her playwright father 's life " . She travels to London to join him and has a troubling affair with a young aristocrat . " Shakespeare 's Daughter " is the title of a short story by Mary Burke that was short @-@ listed for a 2007 Hennessy / Sunday Tribune Irish Writer prize . 
 In A Room of One 's Own , Virginia Woolf created a character , " Judith Shakespeare " , although she is supposed to be Shakespeare 's sister rather than his daughter . Besides the similar names and setting , there is no other direct connection between Judith , Shakespeare 's daughter , and Woolf 's creation , and in fact Shakespeare 's sister was named Joan . In Woolf 's story Shakespeare 's sister is denied the education of her brother despite her obvious talent . When her father tries to marry her off , she runs away to join a theatre company but is ultimately rejected because of her gender . She becomes pregnant , is abandoned by her partner , and commits suicide . Woolf 's Judith was created in an attempt to fill a historical gap . Woolf intended to make a point about the struggle that a female poet and playwright would have had in the Elizabethan age . Woolf speculated as to why there were so few talented women from that time . " What I find deplorable , " she observed , " is that nothing is known about women before the eighteenth century . " 
 = Italian cruiser Vettor Pisani = 
 The Italian cruiser Vettor Pisani was the name ship of her class of two armored cruisers built for the Royal Italian Navy ( Regia Marina ) in the 1890s . She often served as a flagship during her career and frequently served overseas . On one of these deployments , the ship received a radio message from Peking , one of the first long @-@ range radio transmissions to a ship . Vettor Pisani participated in the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 and the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , during which her admiral nearly caused a diplomatic incident with the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire . During World War I , her activities were limited by the threat of Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines and she was converted into a repair ship in 1916 . Vettor Pisani was stricken from the Navy List in 1920 and scrapped later that year . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Vettor Pisani had a length between perpendiculars of 99 meters ( 324 ft 10 in ) and an overall length of 105 @.@ 7 meters ( 346 ft 9 in ) . She had a beam of 18 @.@ 04 meters ( 59 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 2 meters ( 23 ft 7 in ) . The ship displaced 6 @,@ 614 metric tons ( 6 @,@ 510 long tons ) at normal load , and 7 @,@ 128 metric tons ( 7 @,@ 015 long tons ) at deep load . The Vettor Pisani @-@ class ships had a complement of 28 officers and 472 to 476 enlisted men . 
 The ship was powered by two vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was supplied by eight Scotch marine boilers . Designed for a maximum output of 13 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 9 @,@ 700 kW ) and a speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , Vettor Pisani only reached a speed of 18 @.@ 6 knots ( 34 @.@ 4 km / h ; 21 @.@ 4 mph ) during her sea trials despite slightly exceeding her designed horsepower with 13 @,@ 259 ihp ( 9 @,@ 887 kW ) . She had a cruising radius of about 5 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 000 km ; 6 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament of the Vettor Pisani @-@ class ships consisted of twelve quick @-@ firing ( QF ) Cannone da 152 / 40 A Modello 1891 guns in single mounts . All of these guns were mounted on the broadside , eight on the upper deck and four at the corners of the central citadel in armored casemates . Single QF Cannone da 120 / 40 A Modello 1891 guns were mounted in the bow and stern and the remaining two 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns were positioned on the main deck between the 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) guns . For defense against torpedo boats , the ship carried fourteen QF 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) Hotchkiss guns and eight QF 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss guns . The ship was also equipped with four 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . 
 Vettor Pisani was protected by an armored belt that was 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick amidships and reduced to 11 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) at the bow and stern . The upper strake of armor was also 15 cm thick and protected just the middle of the ship , up to the height of the upper deck . The curved armored deck was 3 @.@ 7 cm thick . The conning tower armor was also 15 cm thick and each 15 @.@ 2 cm gun was protected by a 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) gun shield . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Vettor Pisani , named after the eponymous Venetian admiral , was laid down on 7 December 1892 at the Royal Shipyard in Castellammare di Stabia . The ship was launched on 14 August 1895 and completed on 1 April 1899 . She was the flagship of Rear Admiral Candiani , commander of the Cruising Squadron dispatched to China in 1900 during the Boxer Rebellion . Vettor Pisani arrived there on 20 August and made port visits in Japan , Korea and Vladivostock before departing the area on 29 November 1901 . She arrived at La Spezia in February 1902 , but only remained in Italian waters for a year before departing for another year @-@ long cruise to the Far East on 15 April 1903 . On 14 October , the Italian Legation in Peking successfully radioed the ship off the coast of China , one of the first long @-@ range radio transmissions to a ship . The cruiser arrived back in Italy on 13 June 1904 . Nothing is known of her activities until May – June 1908 when Vettor Pisani made a short cruise in Greek waters . 
 When the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 began on 29 September 1911 , Vettor Pisani was the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral Prince Luigi Amedeo , Duke of the Abruzzi , Inspector of Torpedo Boats . His command , the Division of the Inspector of Torpedo Boats , was deployed in the Adriatic Sea and five of his destroyers encountered two Ottoman torpedo boats in the Ionian Sea only an hour after war was declared . One of the Ottoman ships was able to take shelter under the protection of the fortifications in <unk> while the other was forced to beach itself with nine men killed by Italian gunfire . The Italians blockaded the port and the Duke requested permission to issue an ultimatum for the Ottoman authorities to surrender the ship lest he bombard the city with Vettor Pisani and the battleship Ammiraglio di Saint Bon . Protests in early October over Italian interference in Ottoman @-@ controlled Albania by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire forced the Italians to abandon operations there and permission was denied . The cruiser was based in Taranto and Brindisi for much of December . 
 In mid @-@ April 1912 , the division escorted the 1st , 2nd and 4th Divisions of the Italian fleet from Taranto to the eastern Aegean Sea where it bombarded the fortifications defending the Dardanelles to little effect before the main body departed for Italy on the 19th . Several months later , Vettor Pisani supported an unsuccessful sortie by five torpedo boats into the Dardanelles in search of the Ottoman fleet on the night of 18 / 19 July . 
 Obsolescent by the beginning of World War I , Vettor Pisani was not very active during the war . She spent the war in the Adriatic and participated in an abortive attempt in mid @-@ 1915 to bombard a rail line near Ragusa Vecchia on the Dalmatian coast . An Austro @-@ Hungarian submarine , U @-@ 4 , intercepted the Italian ships and sank the armored cruiser Giuseppe Garibaldi . The loss of Giuseppe Garibaldi and the sinking of the armored cruiser Amalfi by another submarine on 7 July severely restricted the activities of the other ships based at Venice . She subsequently became a repair ship in 1916 and was stricken from the Navy List on 2 January 1920 . Vettor Pisani was sold for scrap and broken up beginning on 13 March . 
 = Watership Down = 
 Watership Down is a classic adventure novel , written by English author Richard Adams , published by Rex Collings Ltd of London in 1972 . Set in southern England , the story features a small group of rabbits . Although they live in their natural environment , they are anthropomorphised , possessing their own culture , language , proverbs , poetry , and mythology . Evoking epic themes , the novel follows the rabbits as they escape the destruction of their warren and seek a place to establish a new home , encountering perils and temptations along the way . 
 Watership Down was Richard Adams ' first novel . Although it was rejected by several publishers before Collings accepted it , it won the annual Carnegie Medal , annual Guardian Prize , and other book awards . It was adapted into the 1978 animated film Watership Down . Later there was a television series also titled Watership Down which ran from 1999 to 2001 . 
 Adams completed a sequel almost 25 years later , Tales from Watership Down ( Random House , 1996 ; Hutchinson and Alfred A. Knopf imprints ) . It is a collection of 19 short stories about El @-@ ahrairah and the rabbits of the Watership Down warren , with " Notes on Pronunciation " and " Lapine Glossary " . 
 = = Origin and publication history = = 
 The title refers to the rabbits ' destination , Watership Down , a hill in the north of Hampshire , England , near the area where Adams grew up . The story began as tales that Richard Adams told his young daughters Juliet and Rosamond during long car journeys . As he explained in 2007 , he " began telling the story of the rabbits ... improvised off the top of my head , as we were driving along . " The daughters insisted he write it down — " they were very , very persistent " . After some delay he began writing in the evenings and completed it 18 months later . The book is dedicated to the two girls . 
 Adams 's descriptions of wild rabbit behaviour were based on The Private Life of the Rabbit ( 1964 ) , by British naturalist Ronald Lockley . The two later became friends , embarking on an Antarctic tour that became the subject of a co @-@ authored book , Voyage Through the Antarctic ( A. Lane , 1982 ) . 
 Watership Down was rejected seven times before it was accepted by Rex Collings . The one @-@ man London publisher Collings wrote to an associate , " I 've just taken on a novel about rabbits , one of them with extra @-@ sensory perception . Do you think I 'm mad ? " The associate did call it " a mad risk " in her obituary of Collings ; " a book as bizarre by an unknown writer which had been turned down by the major London publishers ; but it was also dazzlingly brave and intuitive . " Collings had little capital and could not pay an advance but " he got a review copy onto every desk in London that mattered . " Adams wrote that it was Collings who gave Watership Down its title . There was a second edition in 1973 . 
 Macmillan USA , then a media giant , published the first U.S. edition in 1974 and a Dutch edition was also published that year by Het Spectrum . According to WorldCat , participating libraries hold copies in 18 languages of translation . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 In the Sandleford warren , Fiver , a young runt rabbit who is a seer , receives a frightening vision of his warren 's imminent destruction . When he and his brother Hazel fail to convince their chief rabbit of the need to evacuate , they set out on their own with a small band of eleven rabbits to search for a new home , barely eluding the Owsla , the warren 's military caste . 
 The travelling group of rabbits finds itself following the leadership of Hazel , previously an unimportant member of the warren . They travel through dangerous territory , with Bigwig and Silver , both former Owsla , as the strongest rabbits among them . Eventually they meet a rabbit named Cowslip , who invites them to join his warren . However , when Bigwig is nearly killed in a snare , the rabbits realize that the new warren is managed by a farmer who protects the rabbits but also harvests a number of them for his own purposes , and the residents of the new warren are simply using them to increase their own odds of survival . After Fiver rescues Bigwig from the snare they continue on their journey . 
 Fiver 's visions promise a safe place in which to settle , and the group eventually finds Watership Down , an ideal location to set up their new warren . They are soon reunited with Holly and Bluebell , also from the Sandleford Warren , who reveal that Fiver 's vision was true and the entire warren was destroyed by humans . 
 Although Watership Down is a peaceful habitat , Hazel realizes there are no does ( female rabbits ) , thus making the future of the warren certain to end with the inevitable death of the rabbits present . With the help of a black @-@ headed gull named Kehaar , they locate a nearby warren , Efrafa , which is overcrowded and has many does . Hazel sends a small embassy to Efrafa to present their request for does . While waiting for the group to return , Hazel and Pipkin scout the nearby Nuthanger Farm to find two pairs of hutch rabbits there ; Hazel leads a raid on the farm the next day and rescues two does and a buck from the hutch . When the emissary returns , Hazel and his rabbits learn Efrafa is a police state led by the despotic General Woundwort , and the four rabbits dispatched there manage to return with little more than their lives intact . 
 However , the group does manage to identify an Efrafan doe named <unk> who wishes to leave the warren and can recruit other does to join in the escape . Hazel and Bigwig devise a plan to rescue the group and join them on Watership Down , after which the Efrafan escapees start their new life of freedom . 
 Shortly thereafter the Owsla of Efrafa , led by Woundwort himself arrives to attack the newly formed warren at Watership Down , but through Bigwig 's bravery and loyalty and Hazel 's ingenuity , the Watership Down rabbits seal the fate of the Efrafan general by unleashing the Nuthanger Farm watchdog . A formidable fighter by rabbit standards , Woundwort fearlessly stands his ground when the dog closes on him for the kill . His body , however , is never found , and at least one of his former followers continues to believe in his survival . Hazel is nearly killed by a cat , but is saved by the farm girl Lucy , the owner of the escaped hutch rabbits . 
 The story 's epilogue tells the reader of how Hazel , dozing in his burrow one " chilly , blustery morning in March " some years later , is visited by El @-@ <unk> , the spiritual overseer of all rabbits , and hero of many rabbit stories , who invites Hazel to join his own Owsla . Leaving his friends and no @-@ longer @-@ needed body behind , Hazel departs Watership Down with the spirit @-@ guide , " running easily down through the wood , where the first primroses were beginning to bloom . " 
 = = Characters = = 
 Hazel : The protagonist , Fiver 's brother ; he leads the rabbits from Sandleford and eventually becomes Chief Rabbit . Though Hazel is not particularly large or powerful , he is loyal , brave , and a quick thinker . He sees the good in each individual , and what they bring to the table ; in so doing , he makes sure that no one gets left behind , thus earning the respect and loyalty of his warren . He often relies on Fiver 's advice , and trusts in his brother 's instincts absolutely . 
 Fiver : A runt rabbit whose name literally means " Little Thousand " ( rabbits have a single word , " <unk> " , for all numbers greater than four ; Fiver 's name in Lapine , <unk> , indicates that he is the smallest of a litter of five or more rabbits ) and Hazel 's younger brother . As a seer , he has visions and very strong instincts . Fiver is one of the most intelligent rabbits in the group . He is quiet and intuitive , and though he does not directly act as a leader , the others listen to and follow his advice . <unk> becomes his mate . 
 Bigwig : An ex @-@ Owsla officer , and the largest and bravest rabbit of the group . His name in Lapine is <unk> , which literally means " Fur @-@ head " and refers to the shock of fur on the back of his head . Though he is powerful and fierce , he is also shown to be cunning in his own way when he devises a plan to defeat the larger and stronger General Woundwort . His final battle with Woundwort leaves him severely wounded , but he survives and becomes the leader of Hazel 's Owsla . 
 Blackberry : A clever buck rabbit with black @-@ tipped ears . He is often capable of understanding concepts that the other rabbits find incomprehensible . He realises , for instance , that wood floats , and the rabbits use this tactic twice to travel on water . He also works out how to dismantle the snare that almost kills Bigwig , saving him . He is one of Hazel 's most trusted advisors , given the task to plan a way to rescue does from Efrafa . 
 Holly : Former captain of the Sandleford Warren Owsla , escapes with Bluebell when his warren is destroyed by men . He is near death when he finds the warren at Watership Down , but is nursed back to health and becomes one of Hazel 's most trusted companions . 
 Bluebell : Buck rabbit who escapes with Holly during the destruction of Sandleford and tells jokes to cope and help Holly 
 Strawberry : Buck from Cowslip 's warren who leaves with the Watership Down rabbits after his doe is killed by a snare . Strawberry is strong and sleek but not as hardy as the other rabbits given his warren upbringing but learns quickly and gets along well with the group . It is for this reason that he is selected to represent the rabbits on an expedition to Efrafa . 
 Haystack : One of the hutch rabbits who escapes in order to live with the wild rabbits 
 Buckthorn : A strong buck who was expected to be part of the Sandleford Owsla once he reached maturity . 
 <unk> : Described in the book as a " rather stupid rabbit " but is accepted by Hazel regardless . 
 Dandelion : A buck rabbit notable for his storytelling ability and speed . He is instrumental in luring the Nuthanger Farm dog into the <unk> during the siege of Watership Down . 
 Silver : A strong buck rabbit , given his name for his silver @-@ gray fur , he fights alongside Bigwig and helps defend the rabbits during their journey . He is teased for his silver fur at the Sandleford warren which is one of the reasons he was more willing to leave . 
 Pipkin : A small and timid buck rabbit , who looks to Hazel for guidance and protection . Hazel encourages him , and Pipkin grows very loyal to Hazel . He proves to be a constant comforter , particularly for Holly after the destruction of Sandleford warren . His name is <unk> in Lapine . 
 <unk> : A doe who lives in Efrafa and assists Bigwig in arranging for the liberation of its inhabitants . General Woundwort , who suspects her of fomenting dissension , orders his guards to keep a close eye on her . She escapes Efrafa with Bigwig and becomes Hazel 's mate . Like Fiver , she has visions . Her name means literally " shine @-@ dew @-@ fur " , or " fur shining like dew " . 
 <unk> : A rabbit with very dark fur who tries to escape from Efrafa but is apprehended , mutilated , and put on display to discourage further escape attempts . When he is liberated by Bigwig , he quickly proves himself an expert tracker and ranger . 
 Kehaar : A black @-@ headed gull who is forced , by an injured wing , to take refuge on Watership Down , and befriends the rabbits when they help him . He is characterized by his frequent impatience , guttural accent and unusual phrasing . After discovering the Efrafa warren and helping the rabbits , he rejoins his colony , but promises to visit . According to Adams , Kehaar was based on a fighter from the Norwegian Resistance in World War II . 
 General Woundwort : The main antagonist : a fearless , cunning and brutally efficient rabbit who was orphaned at a young age , Woundwort founded the Efrafa warren and is its tyrannical chief . Though larger and stronger than Bigwig , he lacks mercy and kindness . He even leads an attack to destroy the Watership warren as an act of revenge against Bigwig stealing does from Efrafa , which is narrowly defeated by Hazel 's ingenuity and Bigwig 's bravery . After his apparent death fighting the Nuthanger farm dog , he lives on in rabbit legend as a bogeyman . 
 Captain Campion : Woundwort 's most trusted subordinate , Campion is a loyal , brave and clever officer . After Woundwort disappears , he becomes the Chief Rabbit of Efrafa and reforms it , making peace with the Watership rabbits . 
 <unk> : The head of the Council police in Efrafa . When Woundwort 's forces storm the Honeycomb , he is ordered by Woundwort to kill Fiver , but Fiver 's supernatural calmness and <unk> of his ( <unk> 's ) death terrify him into fleeing . 
 Frith : A god @-@ figure who created the world and promised that rabbits would always be allowed to thrive . In Lapine , his name literally means " the sun " . 
 El @-@ ahrairah : A rabbit trickster folk hero , who is the protagonist of nearly all of the rabbits ' stories . He represents what every rabbit wants to be ; smart , devious , tricky , and devoted to the well @-@ being of his warren . In Lapine , his name is a contraction of the phrase <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ rah , which means " prince with a thousand enemies " . His stories of cleverness ( and excessive hubris ) are very similar to Br 'er Rabbit and Anansi . 
 Prince Rainbow : A god @-@ figure who serves as a foil to El @-@ ahrairah . He attempts to rein in El @-@ <unk> several times , but is always outsmarted by the rabbit . 
 <unk> : Another mythical folk hero , <unk> is El @-@ ahrairah 's second in command and the Owsla leader . He participates in many of the El @-@ ahrairah 's capers . He is considered to be almost as clever as his chief . 
 Black Rabbit of Inlé : A somber phantom servant of the god Frith who appears in rabbit folklore as a kind of analog to the grim reaper , and similarly ensures all rabbits die at their predestined time . " Inlé " is the Lapine term for the moon or darkness . 
 = = Lapine language = = 
 " Lapine " is a fictional language created by author Richard Adams for the novel , where it is spoken by the rabbit characters . The fragments of language presented by Adams consist of a few dozen distinct words , and are chiefly used for the naming of rabbits , their mythological characters , and objects in their world . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Watership Down has been described as an allegory , with the labours of Hazel , Fiver , Bigwig , and Silver " mirror [ ing ] the timeless struggles between tyranny and freedom , reason and blind emotion , and the individual and the corporate state . " Adams draws on classical heroic and quest themes from Homer and Virgil , creating a story with epic motifs . 
 = = = The Hero , The Odyssey , and The Aeneid = = = 
 The book explores the themes of exile , survival , heroism , leadership , political responsibility , and the " making of a hero and a community " . Joan Bridgman 's analysis of Adams 's works in The Contemporary Review identifies the community and hero motifs : " [ T ] he hero 's journey into a realm of terrors to bring back some boon to save himself and his people " is a powerful element in Adams 's tale . This theme derives from the author 's exposure to the works of mythologist Joseph Campbell , especially his study of comparative mythology , The Hero with a Thousand Faces ( 1949 ) , and in particular , Campbell 's " monomyth " theory , also based on Carl Jung 's view of the unconscious mind , that " all the stories in the world are really one story . " 
 The concept of the hero has invited comparisons between Watership Down 's characters and those in Homer 's Odyssey and Virgil 's Aeneid . Hazel 's courage , Bigwig 's strength , Blackberry 's ingenuity and craftiness , and Dandelion 's and Bluebell 's poetry and storytelling all have parallels in the epic poem Odyssey . Kenneth <unk> declared , " Hazel stands in the tradition of Odysseus , Aeneas , and others " . Tolkien scholar John Rateliff calls Adams 's novel an Aeneid " what @-@ if " book : what if the seer Cassandra ( Fiver ) had been believed and she and a company had fled Troy ( Sandleford Warren ) before its destruction ? What if Hazel and his companions , like Odysseus , encounter a seductive home at Cowslip 's Warren ( Land of the Lotus Eaters ) ? Rateliff goes on to compare the rabbits ' battle with Woundwort 's <unk> to Aeneas 's fight with Turnus 's Latins . " By basing his story on one of the most popular books of the Middle Ages and Renaissance , Adams taps into a very old myth : the flight from disaster , the heroic refugee in search of a new home , a story that was already over a thousand years old when Virgil told it in 19 BC . " 
 = = = Religious symbolism = = = 
 It has been suggested that Watership Down contains symbolism of several religions , or that the stories of El @-@ ahrairah were meant to mimic some elements of real @-@ world religion . When asked in a 2007 BBC Radio interview about the religious symbolism in the novel , Adams stated that the story was " nothing like that at all . " Adams said that the rabbits in Watership Down did not worship , however , " they believed passionately in El @-@ ahrairah " . Adams explained that he meant the book to be , " only a made @-@ up story ... in no sense an allegory or parable or any kind of political myth . I simply wrote down a story I told to my little girls " . Instead , he explained , the " let @-@ in " religious stories of El @-@ ahrairah were meant more as legendary tales , similar to a rabbit Robin Hood , and that these stories were interspersed throughout the book as humorous interjections to the often " grim " tales of the " real story " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Economist heralded the book 's publication , saying " If there is no place for Watership Down in children ’ s bookshops , then children ’ s literature is dead . " Peter Prescott , senior book reviewer at Newsweek , gave the novel a glowing review : " Adams handles his suspenseful narrative more <unk> than most authors who claim to write adventure novels , but his true achievement lies in the consistent , comprehensible and altogether enchanting civilisation that he has created . " Kathleen J. Rothen and Beverly Langston identified the work as one that " subtly speaks to a child " , with " engaging characters and fast @-@ paced action [ that ] make it readable . " This echoed Nicholas Tucker 's praise for the story 's suspense in the New Statesman : " Adams ... has bravely and successfully resurrected the big picaresque adventure story , with moments of such tension that the helplessly involved reader finds himself checking whether things are going to work out all right on the next page before daring to finish the preceding one . " 
 The " enchanting " world Prescott admired was not as well received upon its 1974 American publication . Although again the object of general approval , reception in the United States was more mixed , unlike the predominantly positive reviews of 1972 . D. Keith Mano , a science fiction writer and conservative social commentator writing in the National Review , declared that the novel was " pleasant enough , but it has about the same intellectual firepower as Dumbo . " He pilloried it further : " Watership Down is an adventure story , no more than that : rather a swashbuckling crude one to boot . There are virtuous rabbits and bad rabbits : if that ’ s allegory , Bonanza is an allegory . " 
 John Rowe Townsend notes that the book quickly achieved such a high popularity despite the fact that it " came out at a high price and in an unattractive jacket from a publisher who had hardly been heard of . " Fred Inglis , in his book The Promise of Happiness : Value and meaning in children 's fiction , praises the author ’ s use of prose to express the strangeness of ordinary human inventions from the rabbits ' perspective . 
 Watership Down 's universal motifs of liberation and self @-@ determination have led to the tendency of minority groups to read their own narrative into the novel , despite the author 's assurance ( in 2005 ) that it " was never intended to become some sort of allegory or parable . " Rachel Kadish , reflecting on her own superimposition of the founding of Israel onto Watership Down , has remarked " Turns out plenty of other people have seen their histories in that book ... some people see it as an allegory for struggles against the Cold War , fascism , extremism ... a protest against materialism , against the corporate state . Watership Down can be Ireland after the famine , Rwanda after the massacres . " Kadish has praised both the fantasy genre and Watership Down for its " motifs [ that ] hit home in every culture ... all passersby are welcome to bring their own subplots and plug into the archetype . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Adams won the 1972 Carnegie Medal from the Library Association , recognising the year 's best children 's book by a British subject . He also won the annual Guardian Children 's Fiction Prize , a similar award that authors may not win twice . In 1977 California schoolchildren selected it for the inaugural California Young Reader Medal in the Young Adult category , which annually honours one book from the last four years . In The Big Read , a 2003 survey of the British public , it was voted the forty @-@ second greatest book of all time . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 = = = Gender roles = = = 
 The 1993 Puffin Modern Classics edition of the novel contains an afterword by Nicholas Tucker , who wrote that stories such as Watership Down " now fit rather uneasily into the modern world of consideration of both sexes " . He contrasted Hazel 's sensitivity to Fiver with the " far more mechanical " attitude of the bucks towards does , who Tucker considers are portrayed as " little more than passive baby @-@ factories " . 
 In " Male <unk> Rabbits , " an essay originally published in the New York Times Book Review , Selma G. Lanes criticized Adams 's treatment of gender . She observed that the first third of the story is a " celebration of male camaraderie , competence , bravery and loyalty as a scraggly bunch of yearling bucks ... arrive triumphant at a prospectively ideal spot " , only to realize that they have no females for mating . " Fully the last two @-@ thirds of Adams 's saga , " Lanes argued , " is devoted to what one male reviewer has blithely labelled " The Rape of the Sabine Rabbits " , a ruthless , single @-@ minded and rather mean @-@ spirited search for females – not because Watership Down 's males miss their companionship or yearn for love , but rather to perpetuate the existing band . " For Adams , Lanes continued , the does are only " instruments of reproduction " to prevent the achievement of reaching Watership Down from " becoming a hollow victory . " As evidence , Lanes pointed to Hazel and Holly 's assessment of the rescued Nuthanger does ' value : " it came naturally ... to consider the two Nuthanger does simply as breeding stock for the warren . " 
 Lanes argued that this view of the female rabbits came from Adams himself rather than his source text , Ronald Lockley 's The Private Life of the Rabbit . In Lockley 's text , by contrast , the rabbit world is matriarchal , and new warrens are always initiated by dissatisfied , young females . Hence , Lanes concluded , Adams 's novel is " marred by an attitude towards females that finds more confirmation in Hugh Hefner 's Playboy than R. M. Lockley 's The Private Life of the Rabbit . " 
 In similar vein , literary critic Jane Resh Thomas stated that Watership Down " draws upon ... an anti @-@ feminist social tradition which , removed from the usual human context and imposed upon rabbits , is eerie in its clarity . " Thomas did find much to admire about Watership Down , calling it a " splendid story " . For her , its " anti @-@ feminist bias ... damages the novel in only a minor way . " She later explained : " I wrote about Watership Down because I was angry and hurt when I read the book . ... I felt he [ Adams ] had treated me and my kind with a contempt I couldn 't be silent about . " 
 Adams ' 1996 sequel , Tales from Watership Down includes stories where the female rabbits play a more prominent role in the Watership Down warren . It has been suggested that this might have been an attempt to modernise the story , to make it more in tune with the political sensibilities of the 1990s , when it was published . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In 1978 Martin Rosen wrote and directed an animated film adaptation of Watership Down . The voice cast included John Hurt , Richard Briers , Harry Andrews , Simon Cadell , Nigel Hawthorne , and Roy Kinnear . The film featured the song " Bright Eyes " , sung by Art Garfunkel . Released as a single , the song became a UK number one hit . 
 Although the essentials of the plot remained relatively unchanged , the film omits several side plots . Though the Watership Down warren eventually grew to seventeen rabbits , with the additions of Strawberry , Holly , Bluebell , and three hutch rabbits liberated from the farm , the movie only includes a band of eight . Rosen 's adaptation was praised for " cutting through Adams ' book ... to get to the beating heart " . 
 The film has also seen some positive critical attention . In 1979 the film received a nomination for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation . Additionally , British television station Channel 4 's 2006 documentary 100 Greatest Cartoons named it the 86th greatest cartoon of all time . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 From 1999 to 2001 , the book was also adapted as an animated television series , broadcast on CITV in the UK and on YTV in Canada . It was produced by Martin Rosen and starred several well @-@ known British actors , including Stephen Fry , Rik Mayall , Dawn French , John Hurt , and Richard Briers , running for a total of 39 episodes over three seasons . Although the story was broadly based on that of the novel and most characters and events retained , some of the story lines and characters ( especially in later episodes ) were entirely new . In 2003 , the second season was nominated for a Gemini Award for Best Original Music Score for a Dramatic Series . 
 = = = Miniseries = = = 
 In July 2014 , it was confirmed that the BBC would be airing a new animated series based on the book . In April 2016 it was announced that the series would be a co @-@ production between the BBC and Netflix , and would consist of four one @-@ hour episodes . The series will have a budget of £ 20 million . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 In 2006 , Watership Down was again adapted for the stage , this time by Rona Munro . It ran at the Lyric Hammersmith in London . Directed by Melly Still , the cast included Matthew Burgess , Joseph Traynor , and Richard Simons . The tone of the production was inspired by the tension of war : in an interview with The Guardian , Still commented , " The closest humans come to feeling like rabbits is under war conditions ... We 've tried to capture that anxiety . " A reviewer at The Times called the play " an exciting , often brutal tale of survival " and said that " even when it ’ s a muddle , it ’ s a glorious one . " 
 In 2011 , Watership Down was adapted for the Lifeline Theatre in Chicago by John Hildreth . This production was directed by Katie McLean Hainsworth and the cast included Scott T. <unk> , Chris Daley , Paul S. Holmquist , and Mandy Walsh . 
 = = = Role @-@ playing game = = = 
 Watership Down inspired the creation of Bunnies & Burrows , a role @-@ playing game in which the main characters are talking rabbits , published in 1976 by Fantasy Games Unlimited . It introduced several innovations to role @-@ playing game design , being the first game to allow players to have non @-@ humanoid roles , as well as the first with detailed martial arts and skill systems . Fantasy Games Unlimited published a second edition of the game in 1982 , and the game was modified and republished by Steve Jackson Games as an official GURPS supplement in 1992 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The song " Bright Eyes " was written by Mike Batt and performed by Art Garfunkel for the 1978 film adaptation of the book Watership Down . In addition to this song , numerous bands or musicians have made reference to Watership Down in their music : 
 Italian power metal band Trick or Treat released the first of their planned two Watership Down concept albums in 2012 . The album is called Rabbits ' Hill Pt . 1 . The tracklist includes a cover of the song " Bright Eyes " originally written by Mike Batt . 
 American folk rock trio America performed a song titled " Watership Down " , released by Warner Bros. Records in April 1976 on their Hideaway album . Composed by singer / songwriter Gerry Beckley , the song 's lyrics refer obliquely to the story elements , including the phrase " you might hear them in the distance , if your ear 's to the ground . " 
 Swedish progressive rock musician Bo Hansson recorded a suite named " Rabbit Music " which was based on the book , as part of his 1975 album Attic Thoughts . Two years later , Hansson released an entire album devoted to the novel , titled Music Inspired by Watership Down . 
 The British post @-@ hardcore band Fall of Efrafa is a concept band who has recorded a trilogy of albums based loosely on the mythology of Watership Down . This trilogy is known as The Warren of <unk> and consists of the albums Owsla ( 2006 ) , <unk> ( 2007 ) and Inlé ( 2009 ) . 
 The British electronic group Ladytron shot a music video for their single " Ghosts " , off their 2008 album Velocifero , which featured many references to Watership Down . 
 American art @-@ rock band ... And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead has a song on their 1998 self @-@ titled album called " Prince with a Thousand Enemies " . 
 American hip @-@ hop group Common Market recorded a song called " Watership Down " on their 2008 EP Black Patch War . 
 New Jersey @-@ based hardcore punk band Bigwig takes its name from the character in the novel . The cover art of its first album , <unk> Melodies , features a rabbit resembling Bigwig , and the song " Best of Me " features a sample from the film Watership Down . 
 American rapper Sole , on his album Selling Live Water , references the story of El <unk> in the tunnel in the chorus of his song " Tokyo " . 
 American singer @-@ songwriter Vanessa Carlton 's 2011 album Rabbits on the Run was inspired by Watership Down and A Brief History of Time . 
 The song " Honey and the Bee " by Owl City contains the lyrics " The crow and the <unk> " , referencing the title of chapter 9 . 
 American electronic dance music dj and producer Skrillex named his record label OWSLA . 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 In 2002 , a two @-@ part , two @-@ hour dramatization of Watership Down by Neville Teller was broadcast by BBC Radio 4 . 
 = = = Audiobooks = = = 
 In the 1970s , the book was read by Roy Dotrice , with musical background — music by George Butterworth performed by Academy of St Martin in the Fields under the direction of Neville Marriner . 
 In 1984 , Watership Down was adapted into a 4 @-@ cassette audiobook by John Maher in association with the Australian Broadcasting Company 's Renaissance Players . Produced by John Hannaford and narrated by Kerry Francis , the audiobook was distributed by The Mind 's Eye . 
 In 1990 , a 16 @-@ hour , 11 @-@ cassette recording read by John MacDonald was published by Books on Tape , Inc. of Santa Ana , CA . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1700 @-@ 0 
 Andrew Sachs recorded a 5 and a half hour abridged version of the story for Puffin Audiobooks . 
 In 2010 , Audible.com released an unabridged digital download of the book , narrated by the multiple award @-@ winning Ralph <unk> . 
 = = Parodies = = 
 In an episode of the British comedy show The Goodies , entitled Animals , nature presenters from the BBC are forced to escape in rabbit suits from the fury of animals now granted equal rights with humans . It features the music and animation in the style of the movies . 
 In the American TV show Robot Chicken , a parody of the book is done with the <unk> , the main characters of the show Fraggle Rock , in place of the rabbits . 
 = Lana Lang ( Smallville ) = 
 Lana Lang is a fictional character on the television series Smallville . She has been a series regular since the pilot episode , and has been played continuously by Kristin Kreuk , with two other actresses having portrayed Lana Lang as a child and as an elderly woman . The character of Lana Lang , first created for comic books by Bill Finger and John <unk> in the 1950s as a romantic interest for Superboy , was adapted to television in 2001 by Alfred Gough and Miles Millar . The character has also appeared in various literature based on the Smallville television series , none of which directly continues from or into the television episodes . 
 In Smallville , Lana is the love interest for Clark Kent , though , in the first season she is dating Whitney Fordman . By season two , with Whitney 's departure , Lana and Clark begin to grow closer . Clark 's dishonesty over the secrets he is hiding causes their relationship to end . Lana then grew closer to Lex Luthor . Eventually , Lana learns the truth about Clark and they get back together . After stealing a kryptonite @-@ powered suit from Lex , Lana absorbs an enormous amount of kryptonite radiation , which prohibits her from getting too close to Clark , and she leaves Smallville for good , but vowed to continue to use her powers to preserve life . 
 Initially , Lana is characterized as the intelligent " girl next door " . She eventually becomes a tragic figure in Smallville , as the decisions made by Clark and Lex change the character over the course of the show . As Gough explains , by the end of the sixth season , Lana has shown that she can beat Lex at his own game . Over the course of the show , Lana transitions from the girl next door to a more " self @-@ reliant young woman " . Kreuk has been nominated for various awards for her portrayal of Lana Lang . 
 = = Role in Smallville = = 
 In the first season , Lana and Clark Kent ( Tom Welling ) are just beginning their friendship , as she is a popular cheerleader dating star quarterback Whitney Fordman ( Eric Johnson ) , and Clark cannot get near her without getting sick from the kryptonite necklace she wears . In the pilot episode , when her parents are killed in the first meteor shower , Lana is adopted by her aunt Nell ( Sarah @-@ Jane Redmond ) . As the first season progresses , Lana grows closer to Clark , while Whitney begins to distance himself because of his father 's medical ailments . In season two 's episode " Heat " Lana sends Whitney , who left Smallville for the Marines in the season one finale , a video message breaking up with him . Lana 's aunt Nell moves to Metropolis with her fiancé in the season two episode " Ryan " , but Lana opts to move in with her friend Chloe Sullivan ( Allison Mack ) so that she may finish high school in Smallville . 
 By the end of season two , Lana and Clark slowly try and start a romantic relationship , but fear backlash from Chloe because of her personal feelings for Clark . Just as the two give in to their feelings fully , Clark unexpectedly runs away from Smallville in the season two finale . At the start of season three , it is shown that Lana , alongside the Kents , has been spending her time searching for Clark ; she ultimately finds him in Metropolis thanks to Chloe 's help . Clark 's actions in Metropolis force the two to rethink their relationship in the season three episode " Phoenix " , and Lana eventually begins a new relationship with Adam Knight ( Ian Somerhalder ) , a guy she met while in physical therapy after being trampled by a horse in season three 's " Asylum " . By the season three episode " Crisis " , it is discovered that the relationship Adam attempted to form with Lana was just a ploy so that Adam could investigate Clark . 
 Season three 's " Forsaken " reveals that Lana , in order to move on with her life , applies and is admitted into a program to study in Paris , France . Season four shows that Lana , while in Paris , began a romantic relationship with Jason Teague ( Jensen Ackles ) . At the beginning of season four , Lana returns to Smallville after receiving a mysterious tattoo on her lower back , which resembles a symbol on the local Kawatche cave walls , when she touched the tomb of Countess Margaret Isobel Theroux . In season four 's " Spell " and " Sacred " , the tattoo acts as a doorway for the spirit of Isobel to inhabit Lana 's body ; each time Isobel takes over Lana 's body she sets out to find the three stones of knowledge , which are also being searched for by Clark and Lex Luthor ( Michael Rosenbaum ) . In the season four finale " Commencement " , Lana is confronted by Jason 's mother Genevieve ( Jane Seymour ) , who is also after the three stones of knowledge , and during a struggle Isobel comes forward and kills Genevieve . The resulting death of Genevieve , who was revealed to have been the cause for Isobel 's death centuries prior in the episode " Bound " , releases Isobel 's control over Lana . 
 During the second meteor shower , Lana witnesses the landing of an alien spacecraft , and two alien beings emerging and killing everyone in sight in the season five premiere . The spaceship becomes Lana 's primary focus in season five , officially teaming up with Lex Luthor to discover the mystery behind the ship in the episode " Splinter " . When her relationship with Clark hits a breaking point in season five 's " Hypnotic " , she begins to grow closer to Lex . The relationship with Lex eventually leads to marriage in the season six episode " Promise " , but not before Lana discovers Clark 's secret and realizes why he has been lying to her all these years . When she learns that Lex set up a fake pregnancy in order to get her to marry him in the season six finale " Phantom " , Lana effectively ends the marriage and fakes her own death to escape Lex after he threatens her . She also frames Lex for her murder , to punish him for his betrayal . It is revealed at the start of season seven that her effort fails , but as part of the " settlement " of their divorce , Lex makes sure that Lana does not go to jail for her actions . 
 With Clark 's secret no longer an issue , the two begin a real relationship in the season seven episode " Fierce " . Lana becomes obsessed with making Lex pay for all his crimes against humanity , which causes her to develop the Isis Foundation , using $ 10 million she stole from Lex . The Isis Foundation is a counseling center for kryptonite @-@ infected people , but it doubles as a front for Lana 's surveillance on Lex . Her obsessions also begin to affect her relationship with Clark by the episode " Wrath " . Eventually , Lana realizes that , even though she loves him , the only way for Clark to help the world to the best of his ability would be if she left Clark and Smallville for good , which she does in the season seven finale . 
 In the season eight episode " Bride " , Oliver Queen ( Justin Hartley ) , believing he is tracking Lex Luthor who has been missing since the season seven finale , discovers Lana instead . Oliver convinces her to return to Smallville so that she can attend Chloe 's wedding . In the season eight episode " Power " , it is revealed that Lana really returned so that she could steal Lex 's " Prometheus " technology , which harnesses alien DNA to give the wearer of a " super @-@ suit " superhuman abilities , for herself . By the end of the episode , the procedure is complete , and Lana becomes just as strong and invulnerable as Clark . In the episode " Requiem " , Lana discovers that her suit absorbs kryptonite , but also emits the radiation making her a potential danger to Clark . When Winslow Schott puts a kryptonite bomb on the roof of the Daily Planet , Lana is forced to absorb all of the kryptonite to deactivate the bomb . As a result , she leaves Smallville to go on her own quest as Clark can no longer get near her without the kryptonite radiation hurting him . 
 = = Portrayal = = 
 Creators Alfred Gough and Miles Millar were initially trying to find someone for the role of Clark Kent , but Kristin Kreuk was the first to be cast , as Lana Lang . Casting director Coreen Mayrs sent David Nutter , the director of the pilot episode , a tape of sixty @-@ nine people and the second person on the tape was Kreuk . They loved her audition tape so much they immediately showed her to the network . For one of her auditions , she read the graveyard scene with Tom Welling ; the network thought they had " great chemistry " . Jade <unk> and Louise Grant portrayed the character as a child and an elderly woman , respectively . 
 At the time she was cast as Lana , Kreuk had no idea who the character was in Superman lore . Her uncle , who owned a comic book shop , filled her in on the details and she learned more from the producers . Kreuk realized that the character in the comics and her character on the show were two different people . As a result , Kreuk learns about the development of Lana as Lana is learning in the show , just as Welling does with Clark Kent . When asked if her being cast as a traditionally red haired character caused outcry from fans , Kreuk believes that whoever did " got over it pretty fast " . By season three , Kreuk had decided to " invest " herself less in her character , as she felt that her character 's ultimate development was entirely in the hands of the producers . She no longer became frustrated when the producers had Lana doing things that Kreuk felt were out of character , instead trusting that they would find the right direction for the character . 
 Kreuk enjoyed the fourth season because it gave her the chance to stretch her acting abilities with Lana 's storyline involving the spirit of Countess Margaret Isobel <unk> . According to the actress , " That was a lot of fun ; I thought it was funny as well [ … ] It really was wonderful to be able to stretch and play this driven woman who has a goal and is going to reach it , and in the meantime she 's going to be sexy doing it . That was a lot of fun for me because the show [ sometimes ] isn 't realistic so , as actors , we get to play with different types of things . " Kreuk says her strangest moment on the show was playing a vampire in season five 's " Thirst " , an experience she remembers as " uncomfortable " due to the fake blood they covered her in . Kreuk left the series at the end of the seventh season , but appeared in five episodes in season eight as a guest star . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Storyline progression = = = 
 One of the early turning points for the character came in season one 's " X @-@ Ray " , when Lana discovers information about her parents that changes her perspective on them . It began with her mother 's graduation speech , which showed that her mother was not as happy as her aunt had led her to believe . Lana 's perception of her mother drove the way she led her own life , which was based on the idea of everyone perceiving her in a good light . In season two , Lana discovers that her mother had had an affair with a man named Henry Small , and that he was her biological father . This continued the idea established in season one that Lana 's perception that her parents were this perfect couple was wrong . According to Kreuk , meeting her biological father allowed the character to realize that she had to create her own life , as the one she had envisioned did not actually exist . 
 Season two also showed Lana 's transition from the " girl next door " to a more " self @-@ reliant young woman " . At the beginning of the season Lana is forced to come to terms with her diminished feelings for Whitney , as well as her growing feelings for Clark . It takes time before Lana is strong enough to finally tell Whitney the truth , in a video message , about the way she feels . The Talon , a local coffee shop co @-@ owned by Lana , becomes her new grounding force as Whitney and her aunt have left Smallville . Kreuk thinks that it can be hard to believe that a sixteen @-@ year @-@ old girl could become co @-@ owner of a coffee shop , but she believes that it helps to provide more independence for the character and establish her more within the show . Eventually , in order to really get to know herself , and find her role in life , Lana leaves Smallville for Paris . In season four , Kristin Kreuk felt like Lana is " going a little crazy and is uncertain about her direction , and feels people aren 't validating her beliefs " . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 At the start of the show , Lana Lang is characterized as the girl next door . As Kreuk describes her , she is the " beautiful , popular girl who is really lonely " . She has a " hole in her heart " , because of the loss of her parents , and feels empathy for everyone . Kristin feels that deep down the character is a " tough girl " , and that Lex manages to bring that side of her out more . For instance , he convinces her to fight back against a rival coffee shop that is spreading rumors about The Talon – the coffee shop that she joint owns with Lex . Unfortunately , that tough side is not seen in the first season . According to Kreuk , the character was never placed in situations where she could show her outgoing side , because she was left to communicate primarily with Whitney and Clark . Kreuk thinks that Lana " lived in her head a little bit " ; she was intelligent enough to read classical books , but would also read romantic novels " on the sly " . 
 As Alfred Gough sees it , Lana is a by @-@ product of Clark and Lex 's decisions . She will always love Clark , and Clark will always love her , but it was Clark 's bad decisions , and Lex 's " basest instincts " that make Lana the " receptacle of all of these bad decisions " , marking her as a tragic figure on the show . While Lana was with Clark , Kreuk characterizes her as a " wimpy , whiny kind of girl " ; with Lex , Lana is " strong , powerful , and doesn 't have to question , ' What is going on ? What does he think ? Does he love me ? I don 't know where I stand . ' " To clarify , Lana 's relationship with Lex brings out a darkness that had not been seen in the character . This is evident in " Nemesis " when Lana manipulates her way into seeing Lionel , only to interrogate him about why he forced her to marry Lex , as well as leaving Lex to die in the underground tunnels . As Gough explains , by the end of the sixth season , Lana has shown that she can beat Lex at his own games . 
 Reviewer Jennifer Malkowski feels that Lana is one of the most gullible characters on television . According to Malkowski , Lana 's strong feminist stance , and her request that people should stop protecting her and start telling her the truth , are diluted by her willingness to believe whatever pieces of information she gets , even if they are lies . After the series ended , Gough and Millar expressed regret with Lana 's characterization throughout the course of the show , which they felt damaged Lana in the audiences ' mind . Gough and Millar believed that Lana 's behavior toward Clark ( for refusing to reveal his secret ) made her come across as cold and unsympathetic . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 When Smallville first began , Lana was in a romantic relationship with Whitney Fordman , the star quarterback of the football team . Kreuk believes that Lana truly was in love with Whitney when they first started dating , but by the time the audience first sees her in the pilot she is no longer in that same state of mind . Kreuk believes that by the time of the pilot Lana had grown “ comfortable ” with Whitney , and that was where their relationship ended . Though Lana had growing feelings for Clark , Kreuk feels that the producers rushed the coupling of Clark and Lana at the end of the second season . She believes that with everything that had happened throughout the season between the two characters , it seemed a bit of a stretch for Lana to just quickly fall into Clark 's arms . The next season began to develop more of the relationship between Lex and Lana . Kreuk believes that Lana cares for Lex as a friend , and that she recognizes the " undertones " that Lex may be placing on their relationship , but that Lana tends to ignore them . Kreuk recognizes that Lex is a big part of Lana 's life , and that Lana tries to pay more attention to the good that Lex does and focus less on the darker aspects of his life . 
 The friendship that Lana shares with Chloe was deeply damaged at the start of season three , so much so that not even Kreuk realized how badly until the episode " Truth " . Lana is aware that Chloe still has romantic feelings for Clark , but their friendship suffered the most when Chloe revealed that she had known where Clark had been hiding for months . The feelings of distrust for Chloe remained hidden until " Truth " — where Chloe gained the ability to have others speak the truth no matter what — when Lana finally revealed how much she cannot trust Chloe . This developing friendship between Lex and Lana puts a strain on Lana 's relationship with Clark . Just as Clark is beginning to realize the truth about Lex and his lies , Lana is starting to trust Lex more . Ultimately , it is Clark 's own lack of honesty that forces Lana to leave Smallville and go to Paris at the end of season three . In the end , Kreuk believes that Clark is Lana 's only true friend , as Lex is more focused on bringing his father to justice and she and Chloe have a tense relationship based on their mutual feelings for Clark . 
 While in Paris , Lana begins a new romantic relationship with Jason Teague . Kreuk believes that Lana did love Jason Teague , but she also still loved Clark at the same time . With Clark , it was the " first love " that she never had the chance to discover , and that lingered with her while she was in Paris during the space between seasons three and four . According to Kreuk , before Lana can experience successful relationships with other people she will need to know what it is like to truly be in a relationship with Clark , because of the " intense connection between [ the ] two " . Allison Mack shares her insight into the relationship between Clark and Lana , believing that the pair should have remained apart until they could finally be honest with each other : " There 's no honesty in their relationship , and there 's no way that they could have a healthy relationship without that honesty [ … ] You can 't be with someone if you 're not honest with them . " Kreuk echoes Mack 's sentiments , acknowledging that Lana is not stupid , and if Clark wants a real relationship then he is going to have to be honest with her . 
 The beginning of season five saw , for the first time , Clark and Lana in a happy relationship together , one that was void of dishonesty and secrets . The return of Clark 's powers in " Hidden " , as well as the secrets and lies that accompany them , caused stress on their relationship . In the series ' 100th episode , Clark finally took a chance and told Lana the truth . When it resulted , indirectly , in her death and he was allowed to live the day over again Clark chose not to tell her his secret . In " Hypnotic " , in an effort to stop hurting Lana emotionally , Clark told her that he no longer loved her . This drove Lana into Lex 's arms . Writer Darren Swimmer explains that this was not something that just happened in the series , but something that had been hinted at for many seasons . Swimmer believes that Lana started dating Lex as a way of making Clark mad , but the relationship " turned into much more " . Kreuk contends that Lana went to Lex because " she knows she will never really love him . " Kreuk believes that Lana 's relationship with the men in her life has been motivated by a desire to fill a void in her life that was left after her parents were killed . This need to fill that emptiness was fulfilled in " Void " , when Lana took a drug to induce death so that she could see her parents in the afterlife . Upon meeting her parents , Kreuk believes that Lana realized that she no longer needed someone else to fill that hole in her . Kreuk sees this filled void as the reason why Lana would gravitate toward Lex . Although she did not truly love Lex , Kreuk argues that Lex was not a rebound guy and that Lana did have feelings for him . " 
 Even though Lana eventually marries Lex in season six , Al Gough argues that Lana still loved Clark and Clark still loved her . The only reason Lana was with Lex was because Clark forced her in that direction and she ended up getting in over her head . By contrast , writer Caroline Dries feels that Lana did love Lex , and that she did not make any hasty decisions when she agreed to marry him . Dries believes that the progression of the show demonstrates that Lex earned Lana 's love . To answer viewers that hated to see Lana marry Lex , Dries contends that as viewers we are seeing all of Lex , including how evil he truly is , while Lana only sees the portion of Lex that appears good . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2001 , Kristin Kreuk was nominated for a Saturn Award for Best Actress , as well as Female Cinescape Genre Face of the Future . The following year , alongside co @-@ star Tom Welling , Kreuk was nominated for a Best Actress Saturn Award again . She would receive two more nominations in that category , one in 2004 and one in 2006 , before she departed from the show . In the 2003 Teen Choice Awards , Kristin Kreuk was nominated for Choice TV Actress : Drama / Action Adventure . She was nominated again in 2004 , 2006 , 2008 for the revised category Choice TV Actress : Action Adventure , and finally in 2009 . Kreuk was also co @-@ nominated with Welling at the 2006 Teen Choice Awards for Most Beautiful Couple ( TV - Choice Chemistry ) . 
 DVD Verdict 's Brian Byun felt that the casting of the series was " pitch @-@ perfect " ; noting that Kreuk is " painfully luminous " as Lana Lang , which makes it obvious why she is the object of Clark 's obsession . 
 = = Other media appearances = = 
 = = = Young adult novels = = = 
 Lana makes her first literary appearance in Smallville : Strange Visitors , published by Aspect . In Strange Visitors , Lana attempts to organize a fund raiser for the family of a school mate , Stewart , who was diagnosed with terminal cancer . Her effort is rendered moot when Lex Luthor and Dr. Donald Jacobi , a con artist that comes to Smallville , pick up Stewart 's medical bills after a meteor rock removes all of the malignant cancer cells in his brain . In Smallville : Dragon , Lana visits an antiques dealer , Mrs. <unk> , looking for a gift for her boyfriend , Whitney . When she leaves she breaks up with Whitney and starts dating Clark . It is eventually discovered that she was hypnotized by Mrs. <unk> , whose homegrown herbal tea is fertilized by meteor rocks . 
 = = = Comic books = = = 
 Lana made a non @-@ speaking cameo appearance in the ninth issue of the show 's comic book continuation Smallville : Season Eleven , written by executive story editor Bryan Q. Miller . Though Clark and Bart Allen do not notice her , she watches them race over the coast of Cameroon . Lana returns in a parallel storyarc Valkyrie , in which she uses the superhero alias " Angel of the Plateau " and battles terrorists in Africa . Lana also saves Lois from one of their attacks . Lana reveals that she has been using her abilities to help and protect children from people who would exploit them after Lana had settled in Africa . However , Lois tries not to reveal her relationship with Clark to Lana . Elsewhere , the terrorists seek John Corben 's aid in defeating Angel of the Plateau . Corben 's new kryptonite heart ( installed by Winslow Schott ) has absorbed the nanites embedded in Lana 's skin , rendering her powerless and no longer emitting the kryptonite radiation once more . After Lois helps Lana defeat Corben , Lana reveals that she had seen Lois 's engagement ring , thus she already knows about Clark 's relationship with Lois . Lana gives her blessing to Lois , and decides to remain in Africa as the Angel . 
 = Sarek ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " Sarek " is the 23rd episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , and the 71st episode overall . It was originally released on May 14 , 1990 , in broadcast syndication . The story for the episode was created by Marc Cushman and Jake Jacobs , with the teleplay written by Peter S. Beagle . " Sarek " was directed by Les Landau . Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Federation starship Enterprise . In this episode , Sarek ( Mark Lenard ) , the father of Spock and a highly regarded but elderly ambassador , is ferried by the Enterprise on his final mission for the Federation . While he is aboard the ship , the crew experiences an outbreak of irrational anger amongst themselves . It is revealed that Sarek has <unk> syndrome , which is telepathically causing the problems among the crew . It is only resolved after the Vulcan mind melds with Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) . 
 The appearance of Lenard was originally suggested by Gene Roddenberry as an alternative to an appearance by Leonard Nimoy , as it was suspected that it would be too expensive to have the latter actor reprise the role of Spock on television . Roddenberry had previously barred references to Star Trek : The Original Series in The Next Generation ; the inclusion of Sarek in his namesake episode , along with a mention of Spock , was seen by the crew of The Next Generation as a breakthrough , allowing them to reference The Original Series more freely in the future . Sarek 's failing health was intended to be a reference to the declining health of Roddenberry . " Sarek " received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 6 percent ; it was praised by critics , who lauded the performances of both Lenard and Stewart . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Federation Ambassador Sarek ( Mark Lenard ) of Vulcan has arrived on board the Enterprise with his human wife , Perrin ( Joanna Miles ) . His mission is to attend a conference to lay the foundation for trade relations between the Federation and an alien race called the <unk> , after which time he will retire due to old age . Though Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) and his crew attempt to provide for Sarek and have arranged for a chamber music concert for him , the ambassador expresses apprehension and annoyance . Picard is surprised when Sarek starts crying in the middle of the performance , an emotional trait Vulcans normally suppress . 
 Across the ship , the crew members start to act with uncharacteristic hostility towards one another , leading to a large brawl in the Ten Forward lounge . The onset of the events is tied to Sarek 's arrival . Ship 's Counselor Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) and Chief Medical Officer Dr. Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) believe Sarek may be suffering from <unk> syndrome , a degenerative neurological disease that only affects aged Vulcans . This condition causes individuals to lose control of their emotions and emit " broadcast empathy " , destabilizing the emotions of others around them . Picard attempts to approach Sarek about this , but Sarek 's aides deny that there are any problems . Picard asks Lt. Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) to speak with <unk> ( Rocco Sisto ) , Sarek 's second assistant , who has mutual respect with Data ; Data confirms that <unk> has been attempting to channel his emotional strength into Sarek , but has been overwhelmed by the pressures of the conference . Picard directly confronts Sarek on the matter , who attempts to deny the problem . When Sarek breaks down emotionally in front of Picard , Picard realizes they may need to cancel the conference . 
 As Picard prepares to cancel with the <unk> , Perrin arrives and suggests an alternative option : Sarek could mind meld with another , allowing him to temporarily transfer his emotions onto someone else . This would leave Sarek able to successfully complete the conference and maintain his dignity , reputation and honor . Perrin , however , warns of the possible dangers to the receiver 's mind from Sarek 's strong emotions . Picard willingly agrees to be the host . Sarek performs the mind meld with Picard , and is able to retain full control of his emotions for the duration of the conference . However , Picard , monitored closely by Dr. Crusher , suffers through the numerous emotions that Sarek has pent @-@ up for years , including his regrets of not being able to show his love for his wife Amanda , their son Spock , or his current wife Perrin . With the conference successfully completed , Sarek prepares to take his leave . Picard lets Perrin know of Sarek 's love for her , and Perrin says she has always known it . Sarek thanks Picard for his kindness , and with deep respect states " We will always retain the best part of the other , inside us . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Following creator Gene Roddenberry 's suggestion that The Next Generation would be unable to afford an appearance by Leonard Nimoy as Spock , it was suggested in a memo that Mark Lenard could appear as Spock 's on @-@ screen father , Sarek . Lenard had made his first appearance as Sarek in the Star Trek : The Original Series episode " Journey to Babel " . Trent Christopher Ganino and Eric A. Stillwell began to work on a script involving both Lenard as Sarek and Denise Crosby as Tasha Yar . This was because Crosby told Stillwell that she wanted to return to the show after her character was killed off in " Skin of Evil " in the first season of The Next Generation . This script would change over time to become " Yesterday 's Enterprise " . 
 Ganino and Stillwell 's original pitch for " Yesterday 's Enterprise " featured a team of Vulcan scientists , led by Sarek . They accidentally travel to the past using the Guardian of Forever ( a time portal seen in The Original Series episode " The City on the Edge of Forever " ) and kill Surak , the founder of modern Vulcan logic . When they return to the present , they find that the Vulcans are allied with the Romulans and at war with the Federation . Only Sarek and his Vulcan scientists are unaffected by the change , and so he elects to return to the past and replace Surak , allowing the timeline to be restored . Michael Piller was not happy with this script as he wanted the episode to be more centered on The Next Generation cast ; as such , Sarek and the Guardian were dropped from the story . 
 When it was pitched by Marc Cushman and Jake Jacobs , the idea which formed the basis for " Sarek " featured an original character instead of Sarek . The staff writers felt the degenerative disease conceit would be a subject that viewers could relate to , as it could be a metaphor for dementia in the elderly . The element of the plot wherein the disease would cause telepathic problems for the rest of the crew was then developed , with Sarek added to the plot at a late stage in order to ensure an emotional impact on the audience . Piller said that " it brings home the idea that even the greatest of men is subject to illness " . He also said that the plot was a direct reference to the declining health of Roddenberry . The script was written by Peter S. Beagle , better known for the 1968 novel The Last Unicorn . 
 Because of the chronological differences between the settings of The Original Series and The Next Generation , it was decided that Sarek 's first wife , Amanda Grayson , would have died by the time of the events of " Sarek " . As such , the character of Perrin was created as a second human wife for Sarek . Perrin was played by Miles in her first Star Trek appearance . Both Miles and Lenard would return in the same roles for the first part of the fifth season episode " Unification " . The writers and producers were nervous about mentioning Spock in " Sarek " , with an early version of the script only calling for a reference by Picard to Sarek 's son 's wedding . The third season had seen a relaxation in Roddenberry 's previous direction that The Next Generation could not touch on aspects of The Original Series . This was especially seen at the end of " Sarek " , in which Picard mentions Spock by name during the mind meld . Piller later described this one act as " the breakthrough which allowed us to open the doors , that allowed us to begin to embrace our past " . 
 The episode features several works of classical music at a concert meant to feature music by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart . While the first is Mozart 's String Quartet <unk> in C @-@ Major , the second piece is String Sextet No.1 by Johannes Brahms . The rest of the episode was scored by Dennis McCarthy ; " Sarek " was one of several episodes on which he worked . Story editor Ronald D. Moore thought that " Sarek " was better than " Journey to Babel " , and it allowed Lenard to do some " solid acting " . Director Les Landau also praised Lenard 's performance , saying that a moment when a tear rolls down Sarek 's face was portrayed as " something special " . He added that the dynamics in the mind meld scene reached " a level that I think is classic in Star Trek history " , describing Stewart 's performance as " truly spectacular " . The mind meld scene was shot in a single take . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 " Sarek " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing May 12 , 1990 . It received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 6 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was the highest ratings received by the series since " Captain 's Holiday " six weeks earlier . No episodes of The Next Generation received higher ratings until the second part of " The Best of Both Worlds " which opened the fourth season . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Mark Jones and Lance Parkin , in their book Beyond the Final Frontier : An Unauthorised Review of Star Trek , wrote that " Sarek " " could have simply pressed fanboy buttons " , but was actually " a moving story of a great man brought low by old age and illness " . They praised Lenard , but thought that Stewart " steals the show with an extraordinary performance " . Chris Gregory , in his book Star Trek : Parallel Narratives , suggested that <unk> syndrome as seen in this episode " has echoes of Alzheimer 's disease " . James Van Hise and Hal Schumer , in The Complete Trek : The Next Generation , compared the plot of " Sarek " to that of the The Original Series episode " Day of the Dove " . They described " Sarek " as " excellent " and said that it was " exciting and emotional , with real conflicts overcome by real people " . They added that " TV doesn 't get much better than this . " 
 Zack Handlen reviewed the episode in 2010 , for The A.V. Club , giving it a rating of an A. He praised the fact that there was no mystery to the episode , and that it was instead explained immediately that Sarek was the cause of the crewmembers ' problems . He added that there was a " beautiful simplicity to this concept , an elegance that makes the tragedy at the heart of the episode all the more powerful " . Handlen said that the scene in which Picard deals with the emotions of Sarek after the mind meld was a " remarkable work , a level of naked , raw intensity that we rarely get on [ The Next Generation ] , and in the hands of a lesser actor ( basically anyone else in the ensemble ) , this could 've been ridiculous " . 
 Keith DeCandido , in a 2012 review for Tor.com , gave the episode a score of 7 out of 10 . He said that the majority of the guest cast were " pretty nowhere " , but that the backbone of the episode was Lenard portraying Sarek , " one of the most beloved recurring roles in the franchise 's history , and this episode is a beautiful illustration of why " . He called the telepathy plot " dopey sci @-@ fi stuff " , but praised the direction of Landau in — among others — the concert scene , which he called a " tour de force " . He said , however , that the standout part of the episode was the interaction of Stewart and Lenard , who he referred to as " two great actors at the absolute top of their game " . He said that " Stewart simply owns the mind @-@ meld , a turbulent , raw scene that leaves the character of Sarek completely exposed , and Stewart sells it amazingly . At that point , the plot contrivances are forgotten , as you realize that the whole episode was worth it to watch this amazing scene " . 
 James Hunt , reviewing " Sarek " for Den of Geek in 2014 , appreciated the episode 's metaphor for the declining health of Gene Roddenberry . He felt that there was no follow @-@ up to the emotional disturbances suffered by the crew , but said that despite this the episode worked because of the presence of Lenard as Sarek . He said that " they cunningly build up [ Sarek 's ] respect for Picard throughout the episode so that the proposed solution to his problem doesn 't seem too far @-@ fetched , and the rapport between Lenard and Stewart is so immediate that you can believe a literal mind @-@ meld makes sense for the characters . It 's not a perfect episode in terms of its writing , but the acting sells it far better than it could 've . " In 2014 , the episode was ranked as the 70th best out of the over 700 episodes in the Star Trek franchise by Charlie Jane Anders for io9 . 
 = = = Home media release = = = 
 The first home media release of " Sarek " was on VHS cassette , appearing on October 3 , 1995 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season three DVD box set , released in the United States on September 3 , 2002 . The first Blu Ray release was in the United States on April 30 , 2013 . 
 = Great Mosque of Gaza = 
 The Great Mosque of Gaza ( Arabic : جامع <unk> الكبير , transliteration : <unk> Ghazza al @-@ Kabīr ) also known as the Great Omari Mosque ( Arabic : المسجد <unk> الكبير , transliteration : <unk> al @-@ <unk> al @-@ Kabīr ) is the largest and oldest mosque in the Gaza Strip , located in Gaza 's old city . 
 Believed to stand on the site of an ancient Philistine temple , the site was used by the Byzantines to erect a church in the 5th century , but after the Muslim conquest in the 7th century , it was transformed into a mosque . Described as " beautiful " by an Arab geographer in the 10th century , the Great Mosque 's minaret was toppled in an earthquake in 1033 . In 1149 , the Crusaders built a cathedral dedicated to John the Baptist , but it was mostly destroyed by the Ayyubids in 1187 , and then rebuilt as a mosque by the Mamluks in the early 13th century . It was destroyed by the Mongols in 1260 , then soon restored only for it to be destroyed by an earthquake at the end of the century . The Great Mosque was restored again by the Ottomans roughly 300 years later . Severely damaged after British bombardment during World War I , the mosque was restored in 1925 by the Supreme Muslim Council . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Great Mosque is situated in the Daraj Quarter of the Old City in Downtown Gaza at the eastern end of Omar Mukhtar Street , southeast of Palestine Square . Gaza 's Gold Market is located adjacent to it on the south side , while to the northeast is the Katib al @-@ Wilaya Mosque and to the east , on Wehda Street , is a girls ' school . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Philistine and Byzantine era = = = 
 According to tradition , the mosque stands on the site of the Philistine temple dedicated to Dagon — the god of fertility — which Samson toppled in the Book of Judges . Later , a temple dedicated to Marnas — god of rain and grain — was erected . Local legend today claims that Samson is buried under the present mosque . 
 The building was constructed in 406 CE as a large Byzantine church by Empress Aelia Eudocia , although it is also a possible that the church was built by Emperor Marcian . Based on a Jewish inscription carved on the upper tier of one of the building 's columns , it was suggested in the late 19th century that the upper pillars of the building were brought from a 3rd @-@ century Jewish synagogue in Caesarea Maritima . The discovery of a 6th @-@ century synagogue at the port of Gaza ( <unk> ) in the 1960s , however , make local re @-@ use of this column much likelier . In addition to the inscription , the column depicted a menorah , a shofar , a <unk> and <unk> surrounded by a decorative wreath ; the inscription read " <unk> son of Jacob " in both Hebrew and Greek . The church appeared in the Map of Madaba mosaic , created in 600 CE . 
 = = = Islamic era = = = 
 The Byzantine church was transformed into a mosque in the 7th @-@ century by Omar ibn al @-@ Khattab 's generals , in the early period of Rashidun rule . The mosque is alternatively named " al @-@ Omari " in honor of Omar ibn al @-@ Khattab who was caliph during the Muslim conquest of Palestine . In 985 , during Abbasid rule , Arab geographer al @-@ Muqaddasi wrote that the Great Mosque was a " beautiful mosque . " On 5 December 1033 , an earthquake caused the pinnacle of the mosque 's minaret to collapse . 
 In 1149 the Crusaders , who had conquered Gaza in 1100 , built a cathedral dedicated to John the Baptist atop the ruins of the church upon a decree by Baldwin III of Jerusalem . However , in William of Tyre 's descriptions of grand Crusader churches , it is not mentioned . Of the Great Mosque 's three aisles today , it is believed that portions of two of them had formed part of the Cathedral of John the Baptist . 
 In 1187 the Ayyubids under Saladin wrested control of Gaza from the Crusaders and destroyed the cathedral . The Mamluks reconstructed the mosque in the 13th @-@ century , but in 1260 , the Mongols destroyed it . It was rebuilt thereafter , but in 1294 , an earthquake caused its collapse . Extensive renovations centered on the iwan were undertaken by the governor Sunqur al @-@ Ala 'i during the sultanate of Husam ad @-@ Din <unk> between 1297 @-@ 99 . A later Mamluk governor of the city , Sanjar al @-@ Jawli , commissioned the restoration of the Great Mosque sometime between 1311 and 1319 . The Mamluks finally rebuilt the mosque completely in 1340 . In 1355 Muslim geographer Ibn Battuta noted the mosque 's former existence as " a fine Friday mosque , " but also says that al @-@ Jawli 's mosque was " well @-@ built . " Inscriptions on the mosque bear the signatures of the Mamluk sultans al @-@ Nasir Muhammad ( dated 1340 ) , Qaitbay ( dated May 1498 ) , Qansuh al @-@ <unk> ( dated 1516 ) , and the Abbasid caliph al @-@ Musta 'in Billah ( dated 1412 ) . 
 In the 16th @-@ century the mosque was restored after apparent damage in the previous century ; the Ottomans commissioned its restoration and also built six other mosques in the city . They had been in control of Palestine since 1517 . The interior bears an inscription of the name of the Ottoman governor of Gaza , Musa Pasha , brother of deposed Husayn Pasha , dating from 1663 . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 Some Western travelers in the late 19th @-@ century reported that the Great Mosque was the only structure in Gaza worthy of historical or architectural note . The Great Mosque was severely damaged by Allied forces while attacking the Ottoman positions in Gaza during World War I. The British claimed that there were Ottoman munitions stored in the mosque and its destruction was caused when the munitions were ignited by the bombardment . Under the supervision of former Gaza mayor Said al @-@ Shawa , it was restored by the Supreme Muslim Council in 1926 @-@ 27 . 
 In 1928 , the Supreme Muslim Council held a mass demonstration involving both local Muslims and Christians at the Great Mosque in order to rally support for boycotting elections and participation in the Legislative Assembly of the British Mandate of Palestine government . To increase the number of people in the rally , they ordered all the mosques in one of Gaza 's quarters to temporarily close . 
 The ancient bas @-@ relief inscriptions of Jewish religious symbols were allegedly chiseled away intentionally at some stage between 1987 and 1993 . During the Battle of Gaza between the Palestinian organizations of Hamas and Fatah , the mosque 's pro @-@ Hamas imam Mohammed al @-@ <unk> was shot dead by Fatah gunmen on June 12 , 2007 , in retaliation for the killing of an official of Mahmoud Abbas 's presidential guard by Hamas earlier that day . The mosque is still active and serves as an emotional and physical support base for Gaza 's residents and a focal point of Palestinian pride . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Great Mosque has an area of 4 @,@ 100 square metres ( 44 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . Most of the general structure is constructed from local marine sandstone known as <unk> . The mosque forms a large sahn ( " courtyard " ) surrounded by rounded arches . The Mamluks , and later the Ottomans , had the south and southeastern sides of the building expanded . 
 Over the door of the mosque is an inscription containing the name of Mamluk sultan Qalawun and there are also inscriptions containing the names of the sultans <unk> and Barquq . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 When the building was transformed into a mosque from a cathedral , most of the previous Crusader construction was completely replaced , but the mosque 's facade with its arched entrance is a typical piece of Crusader ecclesiastical architecture , and columns within the mosque compound still retain their Italian Gothic style . Some of the columns have been identified as elements of an ancient synagogue , reused as construction material in the Crusader era and still forming part of the mosque . Internally , the wall surfaces are plastered and painted . Marble is used for the western door and the dome 's oculus . The floors are covered with glazed tiles . The columns are also marble and their capitals are built in Corinthian style . 
 The central nave is groin @-@ vaulted , each bay being separated from one another by pointed transverse arches with rectangular profiles . The nave arcades are carried on cruciform piers with an engaged column on each face , sitting on a raised plinth . The two aisles of the mosque are also groin @-@ vaulted . Ibn Battuta noted that the Great Mosque had a white marble minbar ( " pulpit " ) ; it still exists today . There is a small mihrab in the mosque with an inscription dating from 1663 , containing the name of Musa Pasha , a governor of Gaza during Ottoman rule . 
 = = = Minaret = = = 
 The mosque is well known for its minaret , which is square @-@ shaped in its lower half and octagonal in its upper half , typical of Mamluk architectural style . The minaret is constructed of stone from the base to the upper , hanging balcony , including the four @-@ tiered upper half . The pinnacle is mostly made of woodwork and tiles , and is frequently renewed . A simple cupola springs from the octagonal stone drum and is of light construction similar to most mosques in the Levant . The minaret stands on what was the end of the eastern bay of the Crusader church . Its three semicircular apses were transformed into the base of the minaret . 
 = Ooh La La ( Goldfrapp song ) = 
 " Ooh La La " is a song performed by English group Goldfrapp . The song was written and produced by Alison Goldfrapp and Will Gregory for the duo 's third album Supernature ( 2005 ) . The song consists largely of a synthesizer and guitar arrangement and was inspired by the disco era . 
 The song was released as the album 's lead single in August 2005 to positive reviews from music critics . It was a commercial success , reaching the top forty on the majority of the charts it entered , and topped the United States dance chart . The song has been remixed a number of times and was nominated for Best Dance Recording at the 49th Grammy Awards in 2007 . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Goldfrapp began work on " Ooh La La " in late 2004 in a small rented house in the countryside of Bath , England . The song was composed as a collaborative effort between Alison Goldfrapp and Will Gregory while jamming in the recording studio , bouncing song ideas off each other . Goldfrapp contributed the song 's lyrics , and has described the song as being " sulky , sexual and a bit ambiguous " . In " Ooh La La " , she confesses to wanting only a sexual relationship without romance . 
 " Ooh La La " was Goldfrapp 's first song to feature the electric guitar , an instrument that they had avoided due to its overly recognisable rhythm . When they recorded the song , Gregory played the keyboard bass as Goldfrapp sang . Her microphone picked up the " clattering " of Gregory 's pressing the keys , which they added to the chorus . The song is written in the common verse @-@ chorus form and features additional instrumentation from synthesizers and a bass guitar . 
 The song has been compared to Norman Greenbaum 's 1969 glam rock song " Spirit in the Sky " , Juana Molina 's 2003 song " <unk> " and Rachel Stevens ' 2004 song " Some Girls " ( itself heavily influenced by Goldfrapp 's own " Strict Machine " ) . Gregory noted that comparisons to Greenbaum were made when the duo released the song " Train " in 2003 , adding that the two tracks share the same glam swing . Goldfrapp rejected comparisons to Stevens , stating that " Some Girls " was " very bland " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Ooh La La " was directed by Dawn Shadforth . Inspired by " glam rock 70 's TV " , the video features Goldfrapp and a backing band ( not portrayed by her regular live musicians ) performing in a large green room . Scenes of Alison Goldfrapp riding on a digital sparkling horse are intercut toward the end of the video . Alison Goldfrapp has described the video as " harking back to Eno era Roxy Music and old Top of the Pops " . The complete version of " Ooh La La " featured in the music video has been released commercially through CD singles and digital downloads , and some include remixes by Benny Benassi , <unk> , and Andy Bell . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Ooh La La " received positive reviews from music critics . MusicOMH.com reviewer Michael Hubbard described the song as " sensational " , writing that " Ooh La La " " will spawn a million remixes , and deservedly so " . Heather Phares of Allmusic named " Ooh La La " as the best song from Supernature . Jessica Suarez of Spin magazine compared " Ooh La La " with Black Cherry 's " Strict Machine " , saying that the song sounds " so simplistic that [ its ] minimalist repetition occasionally teeters over into redundancy " . PopMatters also compared the two songs , but wrote that the " gimmick remains something they do incredibly well , and when the chorus kicks in , Alison <unk> @-@ ing away , it 's impossible not to give in " . 
 Rolling Stone magazine included the song in its list of the top hundred songs of 2006 , ranking it at number ten . At the 2007 Grammy Awards , the song was nominated for Best Dance Recording , losing out to Justin Timberlake 's " SexyBack " . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 " Ooh La La " was chosen as the album 's lead single " because it was up and in your face and it carried on the theme of the glammy , <unk> beat from the last album " . 
 " Ooh La La " was released as a various formats throughout the world . While most territories received a CD and download release , in the UK the single was additionally released on DVD and limited edition 12 " vinyl . The DVD single included the music video for " Ooh La La " and a short documentary titled " Little Pictures " . 
 In 2006 , the song appeared on several television programmes in the United States including the crime drama series NCIS , CSI , and Bones . In addition to this , the song was also used in the romantic comedy film She 's the Man and was featured in the opening scene of the 2011 satirical horror @-@ comedy Detention . Additionally , in 2008 , the song was included on the soundtrack for Grand Theft Auto IV . 
