 The track was also covered in a joint cover with " Hot Love " by Scottish indie rock group The Fratellis in 2007 . 
 In 2010 , the song appeared on the soundtrack for the movie The Other Guys starring Will Ferrell and Mark Wahlberg . 
 In 2013 , the song was used for Apple 's iPhone 5s ad " Metal Mastered " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Ooh La La " entered the UK Singles Chart on 14 August 2005 at number four , remaining on the chart for thirteen weeks . It finished as the 91st best @-@ selling single of 2005 in the UK , with sales of 61 @,@ 400 . The song was also successful outside the UK . It reached number one in Spain , number sixteen in Ireland , and the top forty in Australia . In North America , " Ooh La La " was released as the album 's second single in February 2006 . In the United States , the song became Goldfrapp 's third consecutive release to reach the top of the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart . The song also reached number three on the Hot Dance Airplay chart . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following people contributed to " Ooh La La " : 
 Alison Goldfrapp – lead vocals , backing vocals , synthesizer 
 Nick Batt – synthesizer , programming 
 Will Gregory – synthesizer 
 Adrian Utley – guitar 
 Charlie Jones – bass 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – mixing 
 Ted Jensen – mastering 
 = Royal touch = 
 The royal touch ( also known as the king 's touch ) was a form of laying on of hands , whereby French and English monarchs would touch their subjects , regardless of social classes , with the intent to cure them of various diseases and conditions . The <unk> touch was most commonly applied to people suffering from tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis ( better known as scrofula or the King 's Evil ) , and exclusively to them from 16th century onwards . The disease rarely resulted in death and often went into remission on its own , giving the impression that the monarch 's touch cured it . The claimed power was most notably exercised by monarchs who sought to demonstrate the legitimacy of their reign and of their newly founded dynasties . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The kings and queens regnant of England and the kings of France were the only Christian rulers who claimed the divine gift ( <unk> ) to cure by touching or stroking the diseased . This special aptitude was thought to be evidence of God 's high esteem of the two monarchies , though they never agreed upon whose predecessors the ability was first conferred . In England , Saint Edward the Confessor ( r . 1042 – 1066 ) was said to be the first monarch to possess the healing power of the royal touch . The French , who normally traced the origins of their monarchs ' divine gift back to Philip I ( r . 1059 – 1108 ) or even Robert II ( r . 987 – 1031 ) , denied that Saint Edward used the royal touch . They insisted that the first English monarch to claim the ability was Henry I ( r . 1100 – 1135 ) , and that his touching was a politically influenced imitation of the gift granted exclusively to French monarchs . 
 The physician André du Laurens ( 1558 – 1609 ) claimed that Clovis I ( r . 481 – 511 ) was the first king who touched for scrofula , but the medievalist Marc Bloch ( 1886 – 1944 ) argued that it was probably Philip I. Modern scholars , most notably Frank Barlow ( 1911 – 2009 ) , agree that the French practice most likely originated from Saint Louis IX ( r . 1226 – 1270 ) . The earliest direct evidence of the royal touch in England are the financial records dating from the reign of Edward I ( r . 1272 – 1307 ) . The crusading Edward I did not arrive in England until 1274 but the custom of giving one penny to each patient had become well established by 1276 , suggesting that the practice dated at least from the reign of his father , Henry III ( r . 1216 – 1272 ) . Henry III , known for insisting on his arbitrary decisions , loved public displays and was as pious as his beloved brother @-@ in @-@ law , Saint Louis IX , all of which makes it likely that he introduced the practice in England . 
 = = England = = 
 Henry I 's successors did not consider the royal touch fundamental , reducing its application . The ritual remained a marginal aspect of kingship until the 17th century , when its appeal grew to unprecedented proportions and when it suddenly became an object of scrutiny in literature . 
 Since the reign of Edward IV ( r . 1461 – 1470 , 1471 – 1483 ) , monarchs presented the diseased with a gold medal known as touch piece and hung it around the subject 's neck . The reverse of the medal depicted a ship , while the obverse showed the archangel Michael slaying a dragon , which led to the medal being popularly referred to as an Angel . The diseased were instructed to wear the medal constantly to ensure the success of the treatment . Not all people embraced the notion of the royal touch and miraculous medals ; many were simply eager to obtain the medal , which was then sold on the market . 
 = = = Procedure = = = 
 Henry VII ( r . 1485 – 1509 ) , the first Tudor on the English throne , was preoccupied with legitimizing his reign . It was he who firmly established the procedure , relying heavily on precedent set by his predecessors . It consisted of four distinct elements : 
 The monarch touched ( or , alternatively , stroked ) the face or neck of the infected person . 
 The monarch hung the medal around the person 's neck . 
 Passages from the Gospel of Mark ( 16 : 14 – 20 ) and the Gospel of John ( 1 : 1 – 14 ) were read . Mark 16 contains themes that confirm monarchs ' immunity to infectious diseases : " They shall take up serpents ; and if they drink any deadly thing , it shall not hurt them ; they shall lay hands on the sick , and they shall recover . " Mark 16 : 18 
 Prayers were offered . Until the English Reformation , the prayers were addressed not only to God but also to Virgin Mary and the saints . 
 The touch was originally meant to cure tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis ( commonly referred to as scrofula or the King 's Evil ) , rheumatism , convulsions , fevers , blindness , goitre and other ailments . Since the reign of Elizabeth I ( r . 1558 – 1603 ) , however , the touch was applied only to people suffering from scrofula . The Henrician practice was rarely modified , and the changes were minor ; Elizabeth I made the sign of the cross above the infected person 's head , while her squeamish successor , James I ( r . 1603 – 1625 ) , made stroking motions above the abscesses instead of actually touching them . 
 = = = Frequency = = = 
 The ritual was normally performed between Michaelmas and Easter , when cold weather made it less likely to contract a disease from the infected subject . It was believed that the treatment was more likely to be successful if performed on a holy day . English monarchs generally touched less frequently than their French counterparts . Edward I touched up to 1 @,@ 736 people annually , but did not touch during his frequent military campaigns abroad . His immediate successors followed a similar pattern . 
 Henry VII touched seven or eight infected people annually , and there were intervals lasting several years during which he did not perform the ritual at all . Henry VIII ( r . 1509 – 1547 ) touched 59 people between early January 1530 and late December 1532 . The Protestant Edward VI ( r . 1547 – 1553 ) apparently did not perform the ritual , but the Catholic Mary I ( r . 1553 – 1558 ) took it somewhat more seriously . Early in her reign , the Protestant Elizabeth I was reluctant to participate in a ritual whose efficacy she probably doubted . Although she resumed the practice in 1570 , after the Roman Catholic Church excommunicated her and alleged that she had lost her healing power , Elizabeth decisively downplayed her own role in the miraculous healing . The Elizabethan surgeon William Clowes , who asserted that the royal touch proved her legitimacy , claimed that Elizabeth could also heal foreigners , citing a Dutchman as an example . 
 Although the strictly Protestant James I wished to end the practice , he found himself having to touch an increasing number of people . The practice spread to Scotland , where James reigned as well as resided before the Union of the Crowns ; the Scots started believing that their king , now also king of England , possessed the ability to heal them . Charles I ( r . 1625 – 1649 ) issued plenty of edicts in an attempt to restrain the growing public demand . On 27 December 1633 , he touched 100 people at Holyrood Palace . 
 The frequency of the ritual reached its climax during the reign of Charles II ( r . 1660 – 1685 ) , the only English monarch who applied royal touch more than French kings . Over 92 @,@ 000 scrofulous people were touched by him – over 4 @,@ 500 annually . James II ( r . 1685 – 1688 ) was very skeptical about the ritual but nevertheless indulged in it . He was deposed by William III ( r . 1689 – 1702 ) and Mary II ( r . 1689 – 1694 ) , who refused to take part in what they considered a superstition . When a subject asked him for a touch , William reputedly said : " God grant you better health and better sense . " Anne ( r . 1702 – 1714 ) reintroduced the practice almost as soon as she ascended , touching 30 people on 6 October and 20 on 19 December 1702 . She took it very seriously , even fasting the day before . On 30 March 1712 , she performed the ritual for the last time ; Samuel Johnson ( 1709 – 1784 ) was the last of the 300 scrofulous people Anne touched that day . George I ( r . 1714 – 1727 ) permanently discontinued the practice , but the exiled James II 's Jacobite heirs claimed the ability until the 1780s . 
 The physician Sir Richard Blackmore praised William III and George I for abandoning " that superstitious and insignificant ceremony " , which he believed was a " Popish " plot . The Glorious Revolution and subsequent abandonment of the idea of the divine right of kings rendered the royal touch unnecessary as means of proving monarch 's legitimacy . Reports of Jacobite claimants curing scrofula by touch were rebuffed by a contributor to the General Evening Post : " The illustrious Royal Family now on the Throne despise such childish Delusions , such little pious Frauds , to prove their Divine Right to the Crown . They act upon noble Principles ; they want no chicanery to support their Throne . " The ceremony finally disappeared from the Book of Common Prayer in 1732 . 
 = = France = = 
 By the Late Middle Ages , the royal touch had become an integral part of the coronation of the French monarch at Reims Cathedral . The rite included the anointing of the king 's hands , which was believed to confer on him the ability to cure . The coronation and anointing were immediately followed by a journey to <unk> , the site of the shrine of Saint Marcouf ( d . 558 ) , patron saint of scrofulous people . After the pilgrimage was completed , the newly crowned king was deemed to possess the sacred power of touch . On his deathbed , Philip IV ( r . 1285 – 1314 ) reportedly instructed his son and heir , Louis X ( r . 1314 – 1316 ) , about healing scrofula by touch . Philip VI ( r . 1328 – 1350 ) , the first Valois king , sought to demonstrate that he shared the <unk> powers of his sovereign cousins and ancestors , thus proving himself as their rightful heir . He touched 35 people between 1 January and 30 June 1337 ; some of them had come from Brittany , Brabant and <unk> . 
 The <unk> Pierre de Lancre ( 1553 – 1631 ) boasted that even dead French monarchs could heal ; it was , indeed , still believed in the 16th century that the healing power was retained by Saint Louis IX 's arm , preserved in Poblet Monastery in Catalonia . In order to be touched by the French king , people traveled from as far off as the present @-@ day Italy and Spain already in the 13th century . The foreigners were ranked in a specific order , with the Spanish taking precedence over all others and the king 's own subjects coming last . 
 = = = Wars of Religion = = = 
 The idea of the royal touch promoted the power of the monarchy , but the ceremony was seldom performed in the 16th century . During the French Wars of Religion ( 1562 – 1598 ) , the worsening conditions helped scrofula spread more than ever and the interest in the disease steadily increased . The Catholic League started a propaganda claiming that Henry III ( r . 1574 – 1589 ) was unable to heal by touch due to his immorality . After the assassination of Henry III and accession of the Protestant Henry IV ( r . 1589 – 1610 ) , the League warned that God would revoke his gift if the French accepted a Protestant as their sovereign and that the scrofulous would never be cured again . 
 After converting to Catholicism and establishing his authority , Henry IV was hailed not only as the healer of the scrofulous , but also as the healer of the kingdom . The first Bourbon on the French throne , he decided to take advantage of the ability attributed to his predecessors and use it to confirm the legitimacy of his reign . He was , however , in an inconvenient situation : he was crowned at Chartres Cathedral rather than Reims , and thus made no visit to the shrine of Saint Marcouf . He maintained that the royal touch was something he was handed down by his predecessors and by God 's grace , rather than an ability conferred by the rite of coronation . Henry decided not to exhibit his " divine gift " immediately after his coronation at Chartres in February 1594 ; instead , he decided to save the mystique element of his kingship for his entry in Paris in March . Two weeks after the event , on Easter , Henry exercised his healing power for the first time . He was determined not to show any skepticism about the ritual , fearing that it might cast doubt on the sincerity of his conversion . 
 Henry IV 's decision to indulge in the practice served as visual evidence to his subjects that God approved of his reign . Royal physicians and others who witnessed these ceremonies insisted that at least half of all the diseased people he touched were healed within days . The ceremonies took place in other cities and at least four times a year : on Easter , on Pentecost , on All Saints Day and on Christmas . On Easter 1608 , Henry IV touched 1 @,@ 250 scrofulous persons . He complained that the hours @-@ long ceremony exhausted him , but continued the practice and consistently gave the impression that he was doing it only out of concern for the well @-@ being of his subjects . The ceremony was performed in the presence of the princes of the blood , <unk> , bodyguards , and physicians . The latter presented Henry with patients , and he proceeded to make the sign of the cross on his scrofulous subject 's cheeks , touched the subject 's sores , and exclaimed : " The King touches you , God cures you . " ( French : " Le Roy te touche et Dieu te <unk> . " ) 
 = = = Decline of practice = = = 
 Louis XIII ( r . 1610 – 1643 ) and Louis XIV ( r . 1643 – 1715 ) both actively took part in touching ceremonies . The latter touched 1 @,@ 600 people on Easter 1680 . Voltaire ( 1694 – 1778 ) scornfully wrote that he had lost confidence in the royal touch upon hearing that a mistress of Louis XIV died of scrofula " despite being very well touched by the king " . After 1722 , the sentence exclaimed by the king upon touching the infected changed to the more hopeful : " The King touches you , may God heal you . " ( French : " Le Roy te touche et Dieu te <unk> . " ) The new formula , rather than implying that God would inevitably grant the monarch 's wish , was a prayer that may or may not result in a cure . Louis XV ( r . 1715 – 1774 ) was skeptical about the royal touch . He performed it early in his reign , but caused a scandal when he failed to summon the scrofulous at <unk> in 1739 and never again touched the diseased . The custom was thus suspended for 36 years , until Louis XVI ( r . 1774 – 1792 ) revived it at his coronation on 11 June 1775 by touching 2 @,@ 400 people . That was probably the only time he touched the scrofulous . At his coronation on 29 May 1825 , Charles X ( r . 1824 – 1830 ) touched 121 of his subjects ; the royal touch was never again employed . 
 = = Legacy and comparisons = = 
 The royal touch was not the only " miraculous " healing power attributed to European rulers . Members of the House of Habsburg were believed to be able to cure stuttering by a mouth @-@ kiss . The medieval monarchs of Castile were reputed to possess the ability to exorcise demons by making the sign of the cross and calling on God , while their Hungarian counterparts supposedly cured jaundice . Similarly , English monarchs distributed cramp @-@ rings , which were said to be a cure for " diabolical " sicknesses such as cramps and epilepsy . 
 Inoculation , an early form of immunization , was introduced into England during the reign of George I , who had put a definite end to the royal touch in his kingdom . The royal family strongly supported it , but it was controversial medically as well as politically and theologically . The medicine historian Adrian Wilson described it as " the Whig and Hanoverian equivalent of the Stuart practice of touching for scrofula ... But whereas the Royal Touch mobilised divine powers , based on hereditary right , inoculation deployed natural powers harnessed by man , with the monarch as the benevolent onlooker rather than indispensable participant . " 
 Scholars have held different opinions about the royal touch , ranging from deprecation in the 19th and early 20th century to more sympathetic treatment . The Whig politician Lord Macaulay ( 1800 – 1859 ) ridiculed it as an " absurd superstition of a pre @-@ enlightened age " . The University of London medicine professor Sir Raymund Crawfurd published a study in 1911 , revealing his fascination with the " dubious if exotic " practice . A study by the French historian Marc Bloch followed in 1924 . Bloch was baffled by the tenacity of the esoteric practice and agreed with Lord Macaulay 's assessment that it was grounded in a form of mass hysteria . Recently , however , historians have avoided attributing the popularity of the royal touch to naivety of the masses . The British historian Keith Thomas discussed the royal touch in the context of religion and magic , while his colleague and compatriot J. C. D. Clark attributes the survival of the practice into the 18th century to the persisting notion of the divine right of kings . 
 = John B. Cobb = 
 John B. Cobb , Jr . ( born February 9 , 1925 ) is an American theologian , philosopher , and environmentalist . Gary Dorrien has described Cobb as one of the two most important North American theologians of the twentieth century ( the other being Rosemary Radford Ruether ) . Cobb is often regarded as the preeminent scholar in the field of process philosophy and process theology — the school of thought associated with the philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead . Cobb is the author of more than fifty books . In 2014 , Cobb was elected to the prestigious American Academy of Arts and Sciences . 
 A unifying theme of Cobb 's work is his emphasis on ecological interdependence — the idea that every part of the ecosystem is reliant on all the other parts . Cobb has argued that humanity 's most urgent task is to preserve the world on which it lives and depends , an idea which his primary influence — philosopher and mathematician Alfred North Whitehead — describes as " world @-@ loyalty . " 
 Cobb is well known for his transdisciplinary approach , integrating insights from many different areas of study and bringing different specialized disciplines into fruitful communication . Because of his broad @-@ minded interest and approach , Cobb has been influential in a wide range of disciplines , including theology , ecology , economics , biology and social ethics . 
 In 1971 , he wrote the first single @-@ author book in environmental ethics — Is It Too Late ? A Theology of Ecology — which argued for the relevance of religious thought in approaching the ecological crisis . In 1989 , he co @-@ authored the book For the Common Good : Redirecting the Economy Toward Community , Environment , and a Sustainable Future , which critiqued current global economic practice and advocated for a sustainable , ecology @-@ based economics . He has written extensively on religious pluralism and interfaith dialogue , particularly between Buddhism and Christianity , as well as the need to reconcile religion and science . 
 Cobb is the co @-@ founder and current co @-@ director of the Center for Process Studies in Claremont , California . The Center for Process Studies remains the leading Whitehead @-@ related institute , and has witnessed the launch of more than thirty related centers at academic institutions throughout the world , including twenty @-@ three centers in China . Cobb is also founder and president of the Institute for the Postmodern Development of China , which uses Whiteheadian ideas in order to move toward a sustainable economy and address practical problems associated with social change and globalization . 
 Recently , Cobb co @-@ founded the organization Pando Populus . Pando Populus aims to create an " ecological civilization , " and is co @-@ organizing a major conference on " Seizing An Alternative " with the Center for Process Studies in June 2015 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 John Cobb was born in Kobe , Japan in 1925 to parents who were Methodist missionaries . Until age 15 , he lived primarily in Kobe and Hiroshima and received most of his early education in a multi @-@ ethnic Canadian academy in Kobe , to which he attributes the beginnings of his pluralistic outlook . 
 In 1940 , Cobb moved to Georgia , USA to finish high school . He found himself both bewildered and disgusted by the pervasive racism in the region , particularly the demonization of the Japanese . Seeing how the same events could be presented in such different ways based on the country in which he was living , Cobb became ever @-@ more counter @-@ cultural and critical of the dominant views in churches , media , universities , and government . 
 After his graduation from high school , Cobb attended Emory College in Oxford , Georgia before joining the U.S. Army in 1943 . He was chosen for the Japanese language program , which was filled mainly with Jewish and Catholic intellectuals who helped make him aware of the narrow , parochial nature of his Georgia Protestantism . 
 Cobb served in the occupation of Japan , then returned to the United States and left the army soon afterward . He then entered an interdepartmental program at the University of Chicago in 1947 . There , he set out to test his faith by learning the modern world 's objections to Christianity . His faith did not come out intact . 
 " I was determined to expose my faith to the worst the world could offer . Within six months of such exposure my faith was shattered … God , who had been my constant companion and Lord up to that point , simply evaporated , and my prayers bounced back from the ceiling unheard . " 
 Hoping to reconstruct a Christian faith more compatible with scientific and historical knowledge , Cobb entered the University of Chicago Divinity School . He was successful in restoring his personal faith primarily with the help of Richard McKeon , Daniel Day Williams , and Charles Hartshorne . McKeon introduced Cobb to philosophical relativism , while Hartshorne and Williams taught him Whiteheadian process philosophy and process theology . Alfred North Whitehead 's thought became the central theme of Cobb 's own work . 
 After receiving his PhD from the University of Chicago in 1952 , he spent three years teaching at Young Harris College in north Georgia , while also serving as part @-@ time pastor to a six @-@ church circuit and establishing a seventh congregation in the area . Ernest Cadman Colwell , formerly president of the University of Chicago , brought Cobb to Emory University in Georgia to teach in the new graduate institute for liberal arts . In 1958 , Cobb followed Colwell to Claremont , California , where he was named Ingraham Professor of Theology at Claremont School of Theology and Avery Professor of Religion at Claremont Graduate University . He established the Process Studies journal with Lewis S. Ford in 1971 and co @-@ founded the Center for Process Studies with David Ray Griffin in 1973 , making Claremont the center of Whiteheadian process thought . Twenty @-@ five years later , together with Herman Greene , he organized the International Process Network . This organization holds biennial conferences , the tenth of which will be taking place in Claremont in 2015 . 
 During his career , Cobb has also served as Visiting Professor at Harvard Divinity School , Chicago Divinity School , Vanderbilt Divinity School , Iliff School of Theology , Rikkyo University in Japan , and the University of Mainz in Germany . He has received six honorary doctorates . 
 = = <unk> work = = 
 Although Cobb is most often described as a theologian , the overarching tendency of his thought has been toward the integration of many different areas of knowledge , employing Alfred North Whitehead 's transdisciplinary philosophical framework as his guiding insight . As a result , Cobb has done work in a broad range of fields . 
 = = = Philosophy of education = = = 
 Cobb has consistently opposed the splitting of education and knowledge into discrete and insulated disciplines and departments . He believes that the current university model encourages excessive abstraction because each specialized area of study defines its own frame of reference and then tends to ignore the others , discouraging interdisciplinary dialogue and inhibiting a broad understanding of the world . 
 To combat these problems , Cobb argues that discrete “ disciplines ” in general — and theology in particular — need to re @-@ emerge from their mutual academic isolation . Theology should once again be tied to ethical questions and practical , everyday concerns , as well as a theoretical understanding of the world . In service to this vision , Cobb has consistently sought to integrate knowledge from biology , physics , economics , and other disciplines into his theological and philosophical work . 
 = = = Constructive postmodern philosophy = = = 
 Cobb was convinced that Alfred North Whitehead was right in viewing both nature and human beings as more than just purposeless machines . Rather than seeing nature as purely mechanical and human consciousness as a strange exception which must be explained away , Whiteheadian naturalism went in the opposite direction by arguing that subjective experience of the world should inform a view of the rest of nature as more than just mechanical . In short , nature should be seen as having a subjective and purposive aspect that deserves attention . 
 Speaking to this need of moving beyond classically " modern " ideas , in the 1960s Cobb was the first to label Whiteheadian thought as “ postmodern . ” Later , when deconstructionists began to describe their thought as “ postmodern , ” <unk> changed their own label to “ constructive postmodernism . ” 
 Like its deconstructionist counterpart , constructive postmodernism arose partly in response to dissatisfaction with Cartesian mind @-@ matter dualism , which viewed matter as an inert machine and the human mind as wholly different in nature . While modern science has uncovered voluminous evidence against this idea , Cobb argues that dualistic assumptions continue to persist : 
 " On the whole , dualism was accepted by the general culture . To this day it shapes the structure of the university , with its division between the sciences and the humanities . Most people , whether they articulate it or not , view the world given to them in sight and touch as material , while they consider themselves to transcend that purely material status . " 
 While deconstructionists have concluded that we must abandon any further attempts to create a comprehensive vision of the world , Cobb and other constructive <unk> believe that metaphysics and comprehensive world @-@ models are possible and still needed . In particular , they have argued for a new Whiteheadian metaphysics based on events rather than substances . In this formulation , it is incorrect to say that a person or thing ( " substance " ) has a fundamental identity that remains constant , and that any changes to the person or thing are secondary to what it is . Instead , each moment in a person 's life ( " event " ) is seen as a new actuality , thus asserting that continual change and transformation are fundamental , while static identities are far less important . This view more easily reconciles itself with certain findings of modern science , such as evolution and wave @-@ particle duality . 
 = = = Environmental ethics = = = 
 Ecological themes have been pervasive in Cobb 's work since 1969 , when he turned his attention to the ecological crisis . He became convinced that environmental issues constituted humanity 's most pressing problem . Cobb writes : 
 " During the seventies my sense of the theological vocation changed . I did not lose interest in developing the Christian tradition so as to render it intelligible , convincing , and illuminating in a changing context . But I did reject the compartmentalization of my discipline of ' constructive theology , ' especially in its separation from ethics , and more generally in its isolation from other academic disciplines ... I was persuaded that no problem could be more critical than that of a decent survival of a humanity that threatened to destroy itself by exhausting and polluting its natural context . " 
 Cobb went on to write the first single @-@ author book in environmental ethics , Is It Too Late ? A Theology of Ecology , in 1971 . In the book , he argued for an ecological worldview that acknowledges the continuity between human beings and other living things , as well as their mutual dependence . He also proposed that Christianity specifically needed to appropriate knowledge from the biological sciences in order to undercut its <unk> ( human @-@ centeredness ) and devaluation of the non @-@ human world . 
 = = = Critique of growth @-@ oriented economics = = = 
 Cobb 's economic critiques arose as a natural extension of his interest in ecological issues . He recognized that he could not write about an ecological , sustainable , and just society without including discussion of economics . 
 As part of his investigation into why economic policies so frequently worsened the ecological situation , in the 1980s Cobb decided to re @-@ evaluate Gross National Product ( GNP ) and Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) as measures of economic progress . Together with his son , Clifford Cobb , he developed an alternative model , the Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare ( <unk> ) , which sought to " consolidate economic , environmental , and social elements into a common framework to show net progress . " The name of the metric would later change to Genuine Progress Indicator ( GPI ) . A recent ( 2013 ) article has shown that global GPI per capita peaked in 1978 , meaning that the social and environmental costs of economic growth have outweighed the benefits since that time . 
 Cobb also co @-@ authored a book with Herman Daly in 1989 entitled For the Common Good : Redirecting the Economy Toward Community , Environment , and a Sustainable Future , which outlined policy changes intended to create a society based on community and ecological balance . In 1992 , For the Common Good earned Cobb and Daly the Grawemeyer Award for Ideas Improving World Order . 
 In recent years , Cobb has described current growth @-@ oriented economic systems as the " prime example of corruption " in American culture and religion : 
 " Since the rise of modern economics , Christians have been forced to give up their criticism of greed , because the economists said " greed is good , and if you really want to help people , be as greedy as possible . " ” 
 Cobb sees such values as being in direct opposition with the message of Jesus , which in many places explicitly criticizes the accumulation of wealth . Because of Christianity 's widespread acceptance of such economic values , Cobb sees Christians as far less confident in proclaiming the values of Jesus . 
 = = = Biology and religion = = = 
 Along with Whitehead , Cobb has sought to reconcile science and religion in places where they appear to conflict , as well as to encourage religion to make use of scientific insights and vice versa . 
 In the area of religion and biology , he co @-@ wrote The Liberation of Life : From the Cell to the Community with Australian geneticist Charles Birch in 1981 . The book critiqued the dominant biological model of mechanism , arguing that it leads to the study of organisms in abstraction from their environments . Cobb and Birch argue instead for an " ecological model " which draws no sharp lines between the living and non @-@ living , or between an organism and its environment . The book also argues for an idea of evolution in which adaptive behavior can lead to genetic changes . Cobb and Birch stress that a species " co @-@ evolves with its environment , " and that in this way intelligent purpose plays a role in evolution : 
 " Evolution is not a process of ruthless competition directed to some goal of ever @-@ increasing power or complexity . Such an attitude , by failing to be adaptive , is , in fact , not conducive to evolutionary success . A species co @-@ evolves with its environment . Equally , there is no stable , harmonious nature to whose wisdom humanity should simply submit . Intelligent purpose plays a role in adaptive behaviour , and as environments change its role is increased . " 
 The Liberation of Life stresses that all life ( not just human life ) is purposeful and that it aims for the realization of richer experience . Cobb and Birch develop the idea of " trusting life " as a religious impulse , rather than attempting to achieve a settled , perfected social structure that does not allow for change and evolution . 
 = = = Religious pluralism and interreligious dialogue = = = 
 Cobb has participated in extensive interreligious and interfaith dialogue , most notably with Masao Abe , a Japanese Buddhist of the Kyoto School of philosophy . Cobb 's explicit aim was to gain ideas and insights from other religions with an eye toward augmenting and " universalizing " Christianity . Cobb writes : 
 " ... it is the mission of Christianity to become a universal faith in the sense of taking into itself the alien truths that others have realized . This is no mere matter of addition . It is instead a matter of creative transformation . An <unk> Christianity , that is , a Christianity limited to its own parochial traditions , cannot fulfill its mission of realizing the universal meaning of Jesus Christ . " 
 In short , Cobb does not conceive of dialogue as useful primarily to convert or be converted , but rather as useful in order to transform both parties mutually , allowing for a broadening of ideas and a reimagining of each faith in order that they might better face the challenges of the modern world . 
 Cobb has also been active in formulating his own theories of religious pluralism , partly in response to another Claremont Graduate University professor , John Hick . Cobb 's pluralism has sometimes been identified as a kind of " deep " pluralism or , alternately , as a " complementary " pluralism . He believes that there are actually three distinct religious <unk> : 1 ) God , 2 ) Creativity / Emptiness / Nothingness / Being @-@ itself , and 3 ) the cosmos / universe . Cobb believes that all of these elements are necessary and present in some form in every religion but that different faiths tend to stress one ultimate over the others . Viewed in this way , different religions may be seen to complement each other by providing insight into different religious <unk> . Cobb 's pluralism thus avoids the criticism of conflating religions that are actually very different ( for instance , Buddhism and Christianity ) while still affirming the possible truths of both . 
 = = = Revitalizing Christianity in a pluralistic world = = = 
 Cobb believed that through at least the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth century , American Protestant theology had been largely derivative from European ( specifically German ) theology . In the late 1950s , Cobb and Claremont professor James Robinson decided that the time had come to end this one @-@ sidedness and move to authentic dialogue between American and European theologians . To establish real mutuality , they organized a series of conferences of leading theologians in Germany and the United States and published a series of volumes called " New Frontiers in Theology . " 
 After writing several books surveying contemporary forms of Christian Protestantism , Cobb turned in the mid @-@ 1960s to more original work which sought to bring Alfred North Whitehead 's ideas into the contemporary American Protestant scene . Cobb aimed to reconstruct a Christian vision that was more compatible with modern knowledge and more ready to engage with today ’ s pluralistic world . He did this in a number of ways . 
 For one , Cobb has stressed the problems inherent in what he calls the “ substantialist ” worldview — ultimately derived from Classical Greek philosophy — that still dominates Christian theology , as well as most of western thought . This " substantialist " way of thinking necessitates a mind @-@ matter dualism , in which matter and mind are two fundamentally different kinds of entities . It also encourages seeing relations between entities as being unimportant to what the entity is " in itself . " In contrast to this view , Cobb follows Whitehead in attributing primacy to events and processes rather than substances . In this Whiteheadian view , nothing is contained within its own sharp boundaries . In fact , the way in which a thing relates to other things is what makes it " what it is . " Cobb writes : 
 “ If the substantialist view is abandoned , a quite different picture emerges . Each occasion of human experience is constituted not only by its incorporation of the cellular occasions of its body but also by its incorporation of aspects of other people . That is , people internally relate to one another . Hence , the character of one 's being , moment by moment , is affected by the health and happiness of one 's neighbors . ” 
 For Cobb , this metaphysics of process is better @-@ aligned with the Bible , which stresses history , community , and the importance of one ’ s neighbors . 
 Also , instead of turning further inward to preserve a cohesive Christian community , Cobb turned outward in order to discover truths that Christianity may not yet possess . This is in direct opposition to those who feel that Christianity as a religious system is absolutely final , complete , and free of error . Cobb has not only turned to other religions ( most notably Buddhism ) in order to supplement Christian ideas and systems , but also to other disciplines , including biology , physics , and economics . 
 In fact , Cobb has not shied away even from re @-@ imaging what is now regarded as the “ traditional ” Christian notion of God . He does not believe that God is omnipotent in the sense of having unilateral control over all events , since Cobb sees reconciling total coercive power with love and goodness to be an impossible task . Instead , all creatures are viewed as having some degree of freedom that God cannot override . Cobb solves the problem of evil by denying God ’ s omnipotence , stressing instead that God ’ s power is persuasive rather than coercive , that God can influence creatures but not determine what they become or do . For Cobb , God ’ s role is to liberate and empower . 
 Against traditional theism , Cobb has also denied the idea that God is immutable ( unchanging ) and impassible ( unfeeling ) . Instead , he stresses that God is affected and changed by the actions of creatures , both human and otherwise . For Cobb , the idea that God experiences and changes does not mean that God is imperfect — quite the contrary . Instead , God is seen as experiencing with all beings , and hence understanding and empathizing with all beings , becoming " the fellow sufferer who understands . " Cobb argues that this idea of God is more compatible with the Bible , in which Jesus suffers and dies . 
 Additionally , Cobb 's theology has argued against the idea of salvation as a singular , binary event in which one is either saved or not saved for all time . Rather than seeing one 's time in the world as a test of one 's morality in order to enter a heavenly realm , Cobb sees salvation as the continual striving to transform and perfect our experience in this world . Cobb 's idea of salvation focuses less on moral categories and more on aesthetic categories — such as a preference for intense experience over dull experience , or beauty rather than ugliness . Cobb writes : 
 " If morality is bound up with contributing to others , the crucial question is : What is to be contributed ? One contribution might be making them more moral , and that is fine . But finally , true morality cannot aim simply at the spread of morality . It must aim at the wellbeing of those it tries to help in some broader sense . For process thought that must be the perfection of their experience inclusively . " 
 Cobb admits that the idea of morality being subservient to aesthetics is " shocking to many Christians , " yet he argues that there must be more to life than simply being morally good or morally bad and that aesthetic categories fulfill this function specifically because they are defined as goods in themselves . 
 Within the last twenty years , Cobb has become increasingly distressed by the popular identification of Christianity with the religious right and the weak response of mainstream Protestants . To encourage a stronger response , he organized Progressive Christians Uniting with the noted Episcopal priest George <unk> in 1996 , chaired its reflection committee , and edited a number of its books . As the perceived gap between the policies of the American government and Christian teaching grew wider , these books moved beyond simply reformist proposals . The last of these was entitled Resistance : The New Role of Progressive Christians . 
 Cobb 's most recent book is entitled Spiritual Bankruptcy : A Prophetic Call to Action . It argues against both religiousness and secularism , claiming that what is needed is the secularization of the wisdom traditions . 
 = = The influence of Cobb 's thought in China = = 
 Process philosophy in the tradition of Alfred North Whitehead is often considered a primarily American philosophical movement , but it has spread globally and has been of particular interest to Chinese thinkers . As one of process philosophy 's leading figures , Cobb has taken a leadership role in bringing process thought to the East , most specifically to help China develop a more ecological civilization — a goal which the current Chinese government has written into its constitution . 
 With <unk> Wang , Cobb founded the Institute for Postmodern Development of China ( <unk> ) in 2005 , and he is currently the president of its board of directors . Through the <unk> , Cobb helps to coordinate the work of twenty @-@ three collaborative centers in China , as well as to organize annual conferences on ecological civilization . 
 = = = Books written = = = 
 Varieties of Protestantism , 1960 
 Living Options in Protestant Theology , 1962 ( online edition ) 
 A Christian Natural Theology , 1965 ( online edition ) 
 The Structure of Christian Existence , 1967 ( online edition ) 
 God and the World , 1969 
 Is It Too Late ? A Theology of Ecology , 1971 ( revised edition , 1995 ) 
 Liberal Christianity at the Crossroads , 1973 ( online edition ) 
 Christ in a <unk> Age , 1975 
 with David Ray Griffin , Process Theology : An Introductory Exposition , 1976 , ISBN 0 @-@ 664 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Theology and Pastoral Care , 1977 
 with Charles Birch , The Liberation of Life : from the Cell to the Community , 1981 
 Process Theology as Political Theology , 1982 ( online edition ) 
 Beyond Dialogue : Toward a Mutual Transformation of Christianity and Buddhism , 1982 
 with David Tracy , Talking About God , 1983 ( online edition ) 
 Praying for Jennifer , 1985 
 with Joseph Hough , Christian Identity and Theological Education , 1985 
 with Beardslee , Lull , <unk> , Weeden , and Woodbridge , Biblical Preaching on the Death of Jesus , 1989 
 with Herman Daly , For the Common Good : Redirecting the Economy Toward Community , Environment , and a Sustainable Future , 1989 ( revised edition , 1994 ) which won the 1992 University of Louisville Grawemeyer Award for Ideas Improving World Order . 
 Doubting Thomas , 1990 , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1033 @-@ X ( online edition ) 
 with Leonard Swidler , Paul <unk> , and Monika Helwig , Death or Dialogue , 1990 
 Matters of Life and Death , 1991 
 Can Christ Become Good News Again ? , 1991 
 Sustainability , 1992 
 Becoming a Thinking Christian , 1993 
 Lay Theology , 1994 , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Sustaining the Common Good , 1994 , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1010 @-@ 2 
 Grace and Responsibility , 1995 
 Reclaiming the Church , 1997 , ISBN 0 @-@ 664 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 The <unk> Challenge to <unk> : A Theological Critique of the World Bank , 1999 , ISBN 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Transforming Christianity and the World : A Way Beyond Absolutism and Relativism , 1999 , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 271 @-@ 0 
 Postmodernism and Public Policy : <unk> Religion , Culture , Education , Sexuality , Class , Race , Politics , and the Economy , 2002 , ISBN 0 @-@ 7914 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 The Process Perspective : Frequently Asked Questions About Process Theology ( edited by <unk> B. <unk> ) , 2003 , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2999 @-@ 2 
 Romans ( with David J. Lull ) , 2005 
 with Bruce <unk> and Paul <unk> , The Call of the Spirit : Process Spirituality in a Relational World , 2005 
 A Christian Natural Theology , Second Edition , 2007 
 Whitehead Word Book : A Glossary with Alphabetical Index to Technical Terms in Process and Reality , 2008 ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 @-@ 6 
 Spiritual Bankruptcy : A Prophetic Call to Action , 2010 
 The Process Perspective II ( edited by <unk> B. <unk> ) , 2011 
 Theological Reminiscences , 2014 
 = = = Books edited = = = 
 with James Robinson , The Later Heidegger and Theology , 1963 
 with James Robinson , The New Hermeneutic , 1964 
 with James Robinson , Theology as History , 1967 
 The Theology of Altizer : Critique and Response , 1971 
 with David Ray Griffin , Mind in Nature , 1977 ( online edition ) 
 with <unk> Schroeder , Process Philosophy and Social Thought , 1981 
 with Franklin <unk> , Existence and Actuality : Conversations with Charles Hartshorne , 1984 ( online edition ) 
 Christian Faith and Religious Diversity : Mobilization for the Human Family , 2002 , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 with Christopher Ives , The <unk> God : A Buddhist @-@ Jewish @-@ Christian Conversation , <unk> & Stock Publishers , 2005 , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 421 @-@ 2 
 with Kevin Barrett and Sandra <unk> , 9 / 11 & American Empire : Christians , Jews , and Muslims Speak Out , 2006 , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 660 @-@ 6 
 Back to Darwin , 2008 
 Resistance : The New Role of Progressive Christians , 2008 
 Dialogue Comes of Age , 2010 
 Religions in the Making : Whitehead and the Wisdom Traditions of the World , 2012 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 For a list of Cobb 's published articles through 2010 , see the list at The Center for Process Studies . 
 = Saving Private Ryan ( soundtrack ) = 
 Saving Private Ryan : Music from the Original Motion Picture Soundtrack is the soundtrack album for the 1998 film Saving Private Ryan , directed by Steven Spielberg . The album was produced by composer John Williams and distributed by DreamWorks Records . Recorded in Symphony Hall , Boston , Massachusetts , the scores were performed by the Boston Symphony Orchestra , with two of the ten compositions featuring vocals from the Tanglewood Festival Chorus . The soundtrack runs for almost an hour , while the film itself lasts over two hours . 
 Throughout the compositions , brass , string , and horn instruments were used to evoke a variety of emotions and tones . The soundtrack received mixed reviews from critics , but was still nominated for several major awards , of which it won the Grammy Award for Best Instrumental Composition Written for a Motion Picture or for Television . Soundtrack opener " Hymn to the Fallen " received some radio play , in particular on the United States holidays Veterans Day and Memorial Day . 
 = = Background = = 
 Steven Spielberg and John Williams had worked together on fifteen films before Saving Private Ryan ( 1998 ) . The score was recorded at Symphony Hall in Boston , Massachusetts with the assistance of the Boston Symphony Orchestra . After having recorded the re @-@ edited version Close Encounters of the Third Kind ( 1977 ) and some Schindler 's List ( 1993 ) at Symphony Hall previously , this was the third time Spielberg and Williams worked on a soundtrack at this location . Spielberg chose Symphony Hall as the site for the recording because the hall gives " rich , warm sound off the walls and ceiling " and allows you to " hear the air , " which some soundstages do not allow you to do . Spielberg stated he chose to work with the Boston Symphony Orchestra because the film deals with a " company of soldiers " and the orchestra was an " experienced company of musicians . " Over the course of a three @-@ day period in February 1998 , the score for the film was recorded at a rate of around $ 100 @,@ 000 an hour . 
 Spielberg and Williams both watched a rough cut of the film to determine what scenes would have music . The two decided to leave music out of the fighting sequences , in favor of playing it over long sequences of eight to nine minutes that lack action . The playing of music between fighting sequences gives a moment of reflection for what happened . Tom Hanks came to a portion of the recording session and read the Bixby letter – which appears in the movie – to the orchestra at the behest of Williams . This caused the musicians to shuffle their feet in appreciation . 
 Williams chose to use different families and types of instruments to convey and evoke certain tones within the score . String instruments were chosen to provide a warm sound , brass instruments were utilized for " solemn " sections of the pieces , and horn instruments were used to give off a pensive tone . Military drums were used largely in the piece entitled " Hymn to the Fallen . " The Tanglewood Festival Chorus provided a vocal chorus for " Hymn to the Fallen " that served as a memory to those who have fallen in combat . " Hymn to the Fallen " and its reprise are the only two tracks that feature any sort of vocals and bookend the album . Spielberg chose to place " Hymn to the Fallen " on the closing credits because it will " stand the test of time and honor forever the fallen of this war and possibly all wars " and felt it showed Williams ' " sensitivity and brilliance . " The album was released on July 21 , 1998 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Author Emilio <unk> felt that the music offered no " perspective " like Williams ' scores normally do , but were instead rooted in emotion . Classic FM believed that despite the restrictions placed on Williams , he still managed to create a " moving theme . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic agreed , stating Williams added " sentiment wherever he could nonetheless . " Hillel <unk> of the Associated Press found the soundtrack to be " bland " and " out of place . " Richard Harrington of The Washington Post found the soundtrack created by Williams to be " quietly heroic , full of survivalist determination and pragmatic melancholy . " In regard to all of Williams ' soundtracks for Spielberg films , Harrington believed that this soundtrack was the most " subtle . " Calgary Herald writers felt Williams ' created a " reflective score " that " is sensitive without sensationalizing the subject . " 
 The Sun 's Ian Black compared the music for Flags of Our Fathers ( 2006 ) with that of Saving Private Ryan stating that it was " nowhere close " to the latter . Barbera <unk> of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette wrote that " John Williams ' symphonic score soars in the background like church music . " Edmonton Journal writer Ted Shaw found the " meditative quality " of Williams ' score to be a surprise when compared to the intensity of the fighting sequences . He added that the music was an " elevating " component of the film . Thomas Doherty also noted that the music " lacks the bombast of the incoming shells , " stating that it was " quietly martial " with its use of trumpets and mild percussion . 
 In addition to the film itself , the soundtrack received several nominations for various awards . The score won the Best Instrumental Composition Written for a Motion Picture or for Television . In addition , the score was nominated for Academy Award for Best Original Dramatic Score , the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score , and the BAFTA Award for Best Film Music , but failed to win the awards . 
 In 2003 , the Cleveland Institute of Music published a list of uplifting classical music pieces that featured " Hymn to the Fallen " and " Omaha Beach . " Within the United States , " Hymn to the Fallen " received minor radio airplay on Veterans Day and Memorial Day . Classic FM voted the soundtrack to its " Movie Music Hall of Fame " that consists of the top 100 movie soundtracks chosen by fan votes . The soundtrack placed sixteenth on the list , two places lower than the previous year . Portions of the score were used in the " No Casino Gettysburg " videos that were created in opposition of building a casino on the grounds of Gettysburg , Pennsylvania where the Battle of Gettysburg was fought . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Source : 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Singapore strategy = 
 The Singapore strategy was a naval defence policy of the British Empire that evolved in a series of war plans from 1919 to 1941 . It aimed to deter aggression by the Empire of Japan by providing for a base for a fleet of the Royal Navy in the Far East , able to intercept and defeat a Japanese force heading south towards India or Australia . To be effective it required a well @-@ equipped base ; Singapore , at the eastern end of the Strait of Malacca , was chosen in 1919 as the location of this base ; work continued on this naval base and its defences over the next two decades . 
 The planners envisaged that a war with Japan would have three phases : while the garrison of Singapore defended the fortress , the fleet would make its way from home waters to Singapore , sally to relieve or recapture Hong Kong , and blockade the Japanese home islands to force Japan to accept terms . The idea of invading Japan was rejected as impractical , but British planners did not expect that the Japanese would willingly fight a decisive naval battle against the odds . Aware of the impact of a blockade on an island nation at the heart of a maritime empire , they felt that economic pressure would suffice . 
 The Singapore strategy was the cornerstone of British Imperial defence policy in the Far East during the 1920s and 1930s . By 1937 , according to Captain Stephen Roskill , " the concept of the ' Main Fleet to Singapore ' had , perhaps through constant repetition , assumed something of the inviolability of Holy Writ " . A combination of financial , political and practical difficulties ensured that it could not be successfully implemented . During the 1930s , the strategy came under sustained criticism in Britain and abroad , particularly in Australia , where the Singapore strategy was used as an excuse for parsimonious defence policies . The strategy ultimately led to the despatch of Force Z to Singapore and the sinking of the Prince of Wales and Repulse by Japanese air attack on 10 December 1941 . The subsequent ignominious fall of Singapore was described by Winston Churchill as " the worst disaster and largest capitulation in British history " . 
 = = Origins = = 
 After the First World War , the Imperial German Navy 's High Seas Fleet that had challenged the Royal Navy for supremacy was scuttled in Scapa Flow , but the Royal Navy was already facing serious challenges to its position as the world 's most powerful fleet from the United States Navy and the Imperial Japanese Navy . The United States ' determination to create what Admiral of the Navy George Dewey called " a navy second to none " presaged a new maritime arms race . 
 The U.S. Navy was smaller than the Royal Navy in 1919 , but ships laid down under its wartime construction program were still being launched , and their more recent construction gave the American ships a technological edge . The " two @-@ power standard " of 1889 called for a Royal Navy strong enough to take on any two other powers . In 1909 , this was scaled back to a policy of 60 % superiority in dreadnoughts . Rising tensions over the U.S. Navy 's building program led to heated arguments between the First Sea Lord , Admiral Sir Rosslyn Wemyss , and the Chief of Naval Operations Admiral William S. Benson in March and April 1919 , although , as far back as 1909 , the government directed that the United States was not to be regarded as a potential enemy . This decision was reaffirmed by Cabinet in August 1919 in order to preclude the U.S. Navy 's building program from becoming a justification for the Admiralty initiating one of its own . In 1920 , the First Lord of the Admiralty Sir Walter Long announced a " one @-@ power standard " , under which the policy was to maintain a navy " not ... inferior in strength to the Navy of any other power " . The one @-@ power standard became official when it was publicly announced at the 1921 Imperial Conference . The Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 reinforced this policy . 
 The Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom and the Dominions met at the 1921 Imperial Conference to determine a unified international policy , particularly the relationship with the United States and Japan . The most urgent issue was that of whether or not to renew the Anglo @-@ Japanese Alliance , which was due to expire on 13 July 1921 . On one side were the Prime Minister of Australia Billy Hughes and the Prime Minister of New Zealand Bill Massey , who strongly favoured its renewal . Neither wanted their countries to be caught up in a war between the United States and Japan , and contrasted the generous assistance that Japan rendered during First World War with the United States ' disengagement from international affairs in its aftermath . " The British Empire " , declared Hughes , " must have a reliable friend in the Pacific " . They were opposed by the Prime Minister of Canada , Arthur Meighen , on the grounds that the alliance would adversely affect the relationship with the United States , which Canada depended upon for its security . As a result , no decision to renew was reached , and the alliance was allowed to expire . 
 The Washington Naval Treaty in 1922 provided for a 5 : 5 : 3 ratio of capital ships of the British , United States and Japanese navies . Throughout the 1920s , the Royal Navy remained the world 's largest navy , with a comfortable margin of superiority over Japan , which was regarded as the most likely adversary . The Washington Naval Treaty also prohibited the fortification of islands in the Pacific , but Singapore was specifically excluded . The provisions of the London Naval Treaty of 1930 , however , restricted naval construction , resulting in a serious decline in the British shipbuilding industry . Germany 's willingness to limit the size of its navy led to the Anglo @-@ German Naval Agreement of 1935 . This was seen as signalling a sincere desire to avoid conflict with Britain . In 1934 , the First Sea Lord , Admiral Sir Ernle Chatfield , began to press for a new naval build @-@ up sufficient to fight both Japan and the strongest European power . He intended to accelerate construction to the maximum capacity of the shipyards , but the Treasury soon became alarmed at the potential cost of the program , which was costed at between £ 88 and £ 104 million . By 1938 , the Treasury was losing its fight to stop rearmament ; politicians and the public were more afraid of being caught unprepared for war with Germany and Japan than of a major financial crisis in the more distant future . 
 = = Plans = = 
 The Singapore strategy was a series of war plans that evolved over a twenty @-@ year period in which the basing of a fleet at Singapore was a common but not a defining aspect . Plans were crafted for different contingencies , both defensive and offensive . Some were designed to defeat Japan , while others were merely to deter aggression . 
 In November 1918 , the Australian Minister for the Navy , Sir Joseph Cook , had asked Admiral Lord Jellicoe to draw up a scheme for the Empire 's naval defence . Jellicoe set out on a tour of the Empire in the battlecruiser HMS New Zealand in February 1919 . He presented his report to the Australian government in August 1919 . In a section of the report classified as secret , he advised that the interests of the British Empire and Japan would inevitably clash . He called for the creation of a British Pacific Fleet strong enough to counter the Imperial Japanese Navy , which he believed would require 8 battleships , 8 battlecruisers , 4 aircraft carriers , 10 cruisers , 40 destroyers , 36 submarines and supporting auxiliaries . 
 Although he did not specify a location , Jellicoe noted that the fleet would require a major dockyard somewhere in the Far East . A paper entitled " The Naval Situation in the Far East " was considered by the Committee of Imperial Defence in October 1919 . In this paper the naval staff pointed out that maintaining the Anglo @-@ Japanese Alliance might lead to war between the British Empire and the United States . In 1920 , the Admiralty issued War Memorandum ( Eastern ) 1920 , a series of instructions in the event of a war with Japan . In it , the defence of Singapore was described as " absolutely essential " . The strategy was presented to the Dominions at the 1923 Imperial Conference . 
 The authors of War Memorandum ( Eastern ) 1920 divided a war with Japan into three phases . In the first phase , the garrison of Singapore would defend the fortress while the fleet made its way from home waters to Singapore . Next , the fleet would sail from Singapore and relieve or recapture Hong Kong . The final phase would see the fleet blockade Japan and force it to accept terms . 
 Most planning focused on the first phase , which was seen as the most critical . This phase involved construction of defence works for Singapore . For the second phase , a naval base capable of supporting a fleet was required . While the United States had constructed a graving dock capable of taking battleships at Pearl Harbor between 1909 and 1919 , the Royal Navy had no such base east of Malta . In April 1919 , the Plans Division of the Admiralty produced a paper which examined possible locations for a naval base in the Pacific in case of a war with the United States or Japan . Hong Kong was considered but regarded as too vulnerable , while Sydney was regarded as secure but too far from Japan . Singapore emerged as the best compromise location . 
 The estimate of how long it would take for the fleet to reach Singapore after the outbreak of hostilities varied . It had to include the time required to assemble the fleet , prepare and provision its ships , and then sally to Singapore . Initially , the estimate was 42 days , assuming reasonable advance warning . In 1938 , it was increased to 70 days , with 14 more for reprovisioning . It was further increased in June 1939 to 90 days plus 15 for reprovisioning , and finally , in September 1939 , to 180 days . 
 To facilitate this movement , a series of oil storage facilities were constructed at Gibraltar , Malta , Port Said , Port Sudan , Aden , Colombo , Trincomalee , Rangoon , Singapore , and Hong Kong . A complicating factor was that the battleships could not traverse the Suez Canal fully laden , so they would have to refuel on the other side . Singapore was to have storage for 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 270 @,@ 000 t ) of oil . Secret bases were established at <unk> Bay , Addu Atoll and <unk> . It was estimated that the fleet would require 110 @,@ 000 long tons ( 110 @,@ 000 t ) of oil per month , which would be transported in 60 tankers . Oil would be shipped in from the refineries at Abadan and Rangoon , supplemented by buying up the entire output of the Netherlands East Indies . 
 The third phase received the least consideration , but naval planners were aware that Singapore was too far from Japan to provide an adequate base for operations close to Japan . Moreover , the further the fleet proceeded from Singapore , the weaker it would become . If American assistance was forthcoming , there was the prospect of Manila being used as a forward base . The idea of invading Japan and fighting its armies on its own soil was rejected as impractical , but the British planners did not expect that the Japanese would willingly fight a decisive naval battle against the odds . They were therefore drawn to the concept of a blockade . From personal experience they were aware of the impact it could have on an island nation at the heart of a maritime empire , and felt that economic pressure would suffice . 
 Japan 's vulnerability to blockade was studied . Using information supplied by the Board of Trade and the naval attaché in Tokyo , the planners estimated that the British Empire accounted for around 27 per cent of Japan 's imports . In most cases these imports could be replaced from sources in China and the United States . However , certain critical materials for which Japan relied heavily on imports were identified , including metals , machinery , chemicals , oil and rubber , and many of the best sources of these were under British control . Japan 's access to neutral shipping could be restricted by refusing insurance to ships trading with Japan , and chartering ships to reduce the number available . 
 The problem with enforcing a close blockade with ships was that warships loitering off the coast of Japan would be vulnerable to attack by aircraft and submarines . Blockading Japanese ports with small ships was a possibility , but this would first require the destruction or neutralisation of the Japanese fleet , and it was far from certain that the Japanese fleet would place itself in a position where it could be destroyed . A plan was adopted for a more distant blockade , whereby ships bound for Japan would be intercepted as they passed through the East Indies or the Panama Canal . This would not cut off Japan 's trade with China or Korea , and probably not with the United States either . The effectiveness of such a blockade was therefore questionable . 
 Rear Admiral Sir Herbert Richmond , the Commander in Chief , East Indies Station , noted that the logic was suspiciously circular : 
 We are going to force Japan to surrender by cutting off her essential supplies . 
 We cannot cut off her essential supplies until we defeat her fleet . 
 We cannot defeat her fleet if it will not come out to fight . 
 We shall force it to come out to fight by cutting off her essential supplies . 
 The 1919 plans incorporated a Mobile Naval Base Defence Organisation ( MNBDO ) which could develop and defend a forward base . The MNBDO had a strength of 7 @,@ 000 and included a brigade of antiaircraft artillery , a brigade of coastal artillery and a battalion of infantry , all drawn from the Royal Marines . In one paper exercise , the Royal Marines occupied Nakagusuku Bay unopposed and the MNBDO developed a major base there from which the fleet blockaded Japan . Actual fleet exercises were conducted in the Mediterranean in the 1920s to test the MNBDO concept . However , the Royal Marines were not greatly interested in amphibious warfare , and lacking organisational backing , the techniques and tactics of amphibious warfare began to atrophy . By the 1930s the Admiralty was concerned that the United States and Japan were well ahead of Britain in this field and persuaded the Army and RAF to join with it in establishing the Inter @-@ Service Training and Development Centre , which opened in July 1938 . Under its first commandant , Captain Loben Edward Harold Maund , it began investigating the problems of amphibious warfare , including the design of landing craft . 
 Nor was this the only field in which the Royal Navy was lagging in the 1930s . In the 1920s , Colonel the Master of Sempill led the semi @-@ official Sempill Mission to Japan to help the Imperial Japanese Navy establish an air arm . At the time the Royal Navy was the world leader in naval aviation . The Sempill mission taught advanced techniques such as carrier deck landing , conducted training with modern aircraft , and provided engines , ordnance and technical equipment . Within a decade , Japan had overtaken Britain . The Royal Navy pioneered the armoured flight deck , which enabled carriers to absorb damage , but resulted in limiting the number of aircraft that a carrier could operate . The Royal Navy had great faith in the ability of ships ' antiaircraft batteries , and so saw little need for high performance fighters . To maximise the benefit of the small numbers of aircraft that could be carried , the Royal Navy developed multi @-@ role aircraft such as the Blackburn Roc , Fairey Fulmar , Fairey Barracuda , Blackburn Skua and Fairey Swordfish . As a result , the Royal Navy 's aircraft were no match for their Japanese counterparts . 
 The possibility of Japan taking advantage of a war in Europe was foreseen . In June 1939 , the Tientsin Incident demonstrated another possibility : that Germany might attempt to take advantage of a war in the Far East . In the event of a worst @-@ case scenario of simultaneous war with Germany , Italy and Japan , two approaches were considered . The first was to reduce the war to one against Germany and Japan only by knocking Italy out of the conflict as quickly as possible . The former First Sea Lord , Sir Reginald Drax , who was brought out of retirement to advise on strategy , called for a " flying squadron " of four or five battleships , along with an aircraft carrier , some cruisers and destroyers , to be sent to Singapore . Such a force would be too small to fight the Japanese main fleet , but could protect British trade in the Indian Ocean against commerce raiders . Drax argued that a small , fast force would be better in this role than a large , slow one . When more ships became available , it could become the nucleus of a full @-@ sized battle fleet . Chatfield , now Minister for Coordination of Defence , disagreed with this concept . He felt that the flying squadron would become nothing more than a target for the Japanese fleet . Instead , he put forward a second approach , namely that the Mediterranean be abandoned and the fleet sent to Singapore . 
 = = Base development = = 
 Following surveys , a site at Sembawang was chosen for a naval base . The Straits Settlements made a free gift of 2 @,@ 845 acres ( 1 @,@ 151 ha ) of land for the site , and a sum of £ 250 @,@ 000 for construction of the base was donated by Hong Kong in 1925 . That exceeded the United Kingdom 's contribution that year of £ 204 @,@ 000 towards the floating dock . Another £ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 was paid by the Federated Malay States , while New Zealand donated another £ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . The contract for construction of the naval dockyard was awarded to the lowest bidder , Sir John Jackson Limited , for £ 3 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 . Some 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 4 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 m3 ) of earth were moved to level the ground , and 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 6 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 m3 ) of marsh was filled in . The floating dock was constructed in England and towed to Singapore by Dutch tugboats . It was 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) long and 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) wide , making it one of the largest in the world . There would be 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) of deep water quays , and supporting infrastructure including warehouses , workshops and hospitals . 
 To defend the naval base , heavy 15 @-@ inch naval guns ( 381 @.@ 0 mm ) were stationed at Johore battery , Changi , and at Buona Vista to deal with battleships . Medium BL 9 @.@ 2 inch guns ( 233 @.@ 7 mm ) were provided for dealing with smaller attackers . Batteries of smaller calibre anti @-@ aircraft guns and guns for dealing with raids were located at Fort Siloso , Fort Canning and Labrador . The five 15 @-@ inch guns were all surplus Navy guns , manufactured between 1903 and 1919 . Part of their cost was met from a gift of £ 500 @,@ 000 from Sultan Ibrahim of Johor for the Silver Jubilee of the coronation King George V. Three of the guns were given an all @-@ round ( 360 ° ) traverse and subterranean magazines . 
 Aviation was not neglected . Plans called for an air force of 18 flying boats , 18 reconnaissance fighters , 18 torpedo bombers and 18 single @-@ seat fighters to protect them . Royal Air Force airfields were established at RAF Tengah and RAF Sembawang . The Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal Lord Trenchard , argued that 30 torpedo bombers could replace the 15 @-@ inch guns . The First Sea Lord , Admiral of the Fleet Lord Beatty , did not agree . A compromise was reached whereby the guns would be installed , but the issue was reconsidered when better torpedo planes became available . Test firings of 15 @-@ inch and 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns at Malta and Portsmouth in 1926 indicated that greatly improved shells were required if the guns were to have a chance of hitting a battleship . 
 The King George VI dry dock was formally opened by the Governor of the Straits Settlements , Sir Shenton Thomas , on 14 February 1938 . Two squadrons of the Fleet Air Arm provided a flypast . The 42 vessels in attendance included three US Navy cruisers . The presence of this fleet gave an opportunity to conduct a series of naval , air and military exercises . The aircraft carrier HMS Eagle was able to sail undetected to within 135 miles ( 217 km ) of Singapore and launch a series of surprise raids on the RAF airfields . The local air commander , Air Vice @-@ Marshal Arthur Tedder , was greatly embarrassed . The local land commander , Major @-@ General Sir William Dobbie , was no less disappointed by the performance of the anti @-@ aircraft defences . Reports recommended the installation of radar on the island , but this was not done until 1941 . The naval defences worked better , but a landing party from HMS Norfolk was still able to capture the Raffles Hotel . What most concerned Dobbie and Tedder was the possibility of the fleet being bypassed entirely by an overland invasion of Malaya from Thailand . Dobbie conducted an exercise in southern Malaya which demonstrated that the jungle was far from impassable . The Chiefs of Staff Committee concluded that the Japanese would most likely land on the east coast of Malaya and advance on Singapore from the north . 
 = = Australia = = 
 In Australia the conservative Nationalist Party government of Stanley Bruce latched onto the Singapore strategy , which called for reliance on the British navy , supported by a naval squadron as strong as Australia could afford . Between 1923 and 1929 , £ 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 was spent on the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) , while the Australian Army and the munitions industry received only £ 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and the fledgling Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) just £ 2 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 . The policy had the advantage of pushing responsibility for Australian defence onto Britain . Unlike New Zealand , Australia declined to contribute to the cost of the base at Singapore . In petitioning a parsimonious government for more funds , the Australian Army had to refute the Singapore strategy , " an apparently well @-@ argued and well @-@ founded strategic doctrine that had been endorsed at the highest levels of imperial decision @-@ making " . 
 An alternative policy was put forward in 1923 by the Australian Labor Party , which was in opposition for all but two years of the 1920s and 1930s . It called for Australia 's first line of defence to be a powerful air arm , supported by a well @-@ equipped Australian Army that could be rapidly expanded to meet an invasion threat . This , in turn , required a strong munitions industry . Labor politicians cited critics like Rear Admiral William Freeland Fullam , who drew attention to the vulnerability of warships to aircraft , naval mines and submarines . The Labor Party 's Albert Green noted in 1923 that when a battleship of the day cost £ 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 while an aircraft cost £ 2 @,@ 500 , there was a genuine cause for concern as to whether the battleship was a better investment than hundreds of aircraft , if the aircraft could sink battleships . The Labor Party 's policy became indistinguishable from the Army 's position . 
 In September 1926 , Lieutenant Colonel Henry Wynter gave a lecture to the United Services Institute of Victoria entitled " The <unk> Inter @-@ relationship of the Navy , the Army and the Air Force : an Australian View " , which was published in the April 1927 edition of British Army Quarterly . In this article Wynter argued that war was most likely to break out in the Pacific at a time when Britain was involved in a crisis in Europe , which would prevent Britain from sending sufficient resources to Singapore . He contended that Singapore was vulnerable , especially to attack from the land and the air , and argued for a more balanced policy of building up the Army and RAAF rather than relying on the RAN . " <unk> " , wrote Australian official historian Lionel Wigmore , " the attitude of the leading thinkers in the Australian Army towards British assurances that an adequate fleet would be sent to Singapore at the critical time was ( bluntly stated ) : ' We do not doubt that you are sincere in your beliefs but , frankly , we do not think you will be able to do it . ' " 
 Frederick Shedden wrote a paper putting the case for the Singapore strategy as a means of defending Australia . He argued that since Australia was also an island nation , it followed that it would also be vulnerable to a naval blockade . If Australia could be defeated without an invasion , the defence of Australia had to be a naval one . Colonel John Lavarack , who had attended the Imperial Defence College class of 1928 with Shedden , disagreed . Lavarack responded that the vast coastline of Australia would make a naval blockade very difficult , and its considerable internal resources meant that it could resist economic pressure . When Richmond attacked the Labor Party 's position in an article in British Army Quarterly in 1933 , Lavarack wrote a rebuttal . In 1936 , the leader of the opposition John Curtin read an article by Wynter in the House of Representatives . Wynter 's outspoken criticism of the Singapore strategy led to his transfer to a junior post . Soon after the outbreak of war with Germany on 3 September 1939 , Prime Minister Robert Menzies appointed a British officer , Lieutenant General Ernest Squires , to replace Lavarack as Chief of the General Staff . Within months , the Chief of the Air Staff was replaced with a British officer as well . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 With war with Germany now a reality , Menzies sent Richard Casey to London to seek reassurances about the defence of Australia in the event that Australian forces were sent to Europe or the Middle East . In November , Australia and New Zealand were given reassurances that Singapore would not be allowed to fall , and that in the event of war with Japan , the defence of the Far East would take priority over the Mediterranean . This seemed possible as the Kriegsmarine , the German navy , was relatively small and France was an ally . Bruce , now Australian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom , and Casey met with British Cabinet ministers on 20 November and left with the impression that , despite the reassurances , the Royal Navy was not strong enough to deal with simultaneous crises in Europe , the Mediterranean and the Far East . 
 During 1940 , the situation slowly but inexorably slid towards a worst @-@ case scenario . In June , Italy joined the war on Germany 's side and France was knocked out . The Chiefs of Staff Committee now reported : 
 The security of our imperial interests in the Far East lies ultimately in our ability to control sea communications in the south @-@ western Pacific , for which purpose adequate fleet must be based at Singapore . Since our previous assurances in this respect , however , the whole strategic situation has been radically altered by the French defeat . The result of this has been to alter the whole of the balance of naval strength in home waters . Formerly we were prepared to abandon the Eastern Mediterranean and dispatch a fleet to the Far East , relying on the French fleet in the Western Mediterranean to contain the Italian fleet . Now if we move the Mediterranean fleet to the Far East there is nothing to contain the Italian fleet , which will be free to operate in the Atlantic or reinforce the German fleet in home waters , using bases in north @-@ west France . We must therefore retain in European waters sufficient naval forces to watch both the German and Italian fleets , and we cannot do this and send a fleet to the Far East . In the meantime the strategic importance to us of the Far East both for Empire security and to enable us to defeat the enemy by control of essential commodities at the source has been increased . 
 There remained the prospect of American assistance . In secret talks in Washington , D.C. , in June 1939 , Chief of Naval Operations Admiral William D. Leahy raised the possibility of an American fleet being sent to Singapore . In April 1940 , the American naval attaché in London , Captain Alan Kirk , approached the Vice Chief of the Naval Staff , Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Thomas Phillips , to ask if , in the event of the United States Fleet being sent to the Far East , the docking facilities at Singapore could be made available , as those at Subic Bay were inadequate . He received full assurances that they would be . Hopes for American assistance were dashed at the staff conference in Washington , D.C. , in February 1941 . The U.S. Navy was primarily focused on the Atlantic . The American chiefs envisaged relieving British warships in the Atlantic and Mediterranean so a British fleet could be sent to the Far East . 
 In July 1941 , the Japanese occupied Cam Ranh Bay , which the British fleet had hoped to use on its northward drive . This put the Japanese uncomfortably close to Singapore . As diplomatic relations with Japan worsened , in August 1941 , the Admiralty and the Chiefs of Staff began considering what ships could be sent . The Chiefs of Staff decided to recommend sending HMS Barham to the Far East from the Mediterranean , followed by four Revenge @-@ class battleships that were refitting at home and in the United States , but Barham was sunk by a German U @-@ boat in November 1941 . Three weeks later the remaining two battleships at Alexandria , HMS Queen Elizabeth and Valiant were seriously damaged by Italian human torpedoes . While no more destroyers or cruisers were available , the Admiralty decided that an aircraft carrier , the small HMS Eagle could be sent . 
 Winston Churchill , now the Prime Minister , noted that since the German battleship Tirpitz was tying up a superior British fleet , a small British fleet at Singapore might have a similar disproportionate effect on the Japanese . The Foreign Office expressed the opinion that the presence of modern battleships at Singapore might deter Japan from entering the war . In October 1941 , the Admiralty therefore ordered HMS Prince of Wales to depart for Singapore , where it would be joined by HMS Repulse . The carrier HMS Indomitable was to join them , but it ran aground off Jamaica on 3 November , and no other carrier was available . 
 In August 1940 , the Chiefs of Staff Committee reported that the force necessary to hold Malaya and Singapore in the absence of a fleet was 336 first @-@ line aircraft and a garrison of nine brigades . Churchill then sent reassurances to the prime ministers of Australia and New Zealand that , if they were attacked , their defence would be a priority second only to that of the British Isles . A defence conference was held in Singapore in October 1940 . Representatives from all three services attended , including Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Geoffrey Layton ( Commander in Chief , China Station ) ; the General Officer Commanding Malaya Command , Lieutenant General Lionel Bond ; and Air Officer Commanding the RAF in the Far East , Air Marshal John Tremayne Babington . Australia was represented by its three deputy service chiefs , Captain Joseph Burnett , Major General John Northcott and Air Commodore William Bostock . Over ten days , they discussed the situation in the Far East . They estimated that the air defence of Burma and Malaya would require a minimum of 582 aircraft . By 7 December 1941 , there were only 164 first @-@ line aircraft on hand in Malaya and Singapore , and all the fighters were the obsolete Brewster F2A Buffalo . The land forces situation was not much better . There were only 31 battalions of infantry of the 48 required , and instead of two tank regiments , there were no tanks at all . Moreover , many of the units on hand were poorly trained and equipped . Yet during 1941 Britain had sent 676 aircraft and 446 tanks to the Soviet Union . 
 The Japanese were aware of the state of the Singapore defences . There were spies in Singapore , such as Captain Patrick Heenan , and a copy of the Chiefs of Staff 's August 1940 appreciation was among the secret documents captured by the German surface raider Atlantis from the SS Automedon on 11 November 1940 . The report was handed over to the Japanese , and the detailed knowledge of Singapore 's defences thus obtained may have encouraged the Japanese to attack . 
 On 8 December 1941 , the Japanese occupied the Shanghai International Settlement . A couple of hours later , landings began at Kota Bharu in Malaya . An hour after that , the Imperial Japanese Navy attacked Pearl Harbor . On 10 December , Prince of Wales and Repulse , sailing to meet the Malaya invasion force , were sunk by Japanese air attack . After the disastrous Malayan Campaign , Singapore surrendered on 15 February 1942 . During the final stages of the campaign , the 15 @-@ inch and 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns had bombarded targets at Johore Bahru , RAF Tengah and Bukit Timah . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Fall of Singapore = = = 
 The fall of Singapore was described by Winston Churchill as " the worst disaster and largest capitulation in British history " . It was a profound blow to the prestige and morale of the British Empire . The promised fleet had not been sent , and the fortress that had been declared " impregnable " had been quickly captured . Nearly 139 @,@ 000 troops were lost , of whom about 130 @,@ 000 were captured . The 38 @,@ 000 British casualties included most of the British 18th Infantry Division , which had been ordered to Malaya in January . There were also 18 @,@ 000 Australian casualties , including most of the Australian 8th Division , and 14 @,@ 000 local troops ; but the majority of the defenders — some 67 @,@ 000 of them — were from British India . About 40 @,@ 000 of the Indian prisoners of war subsequently joined the Japanese @-@ sponsored Indian National Army . 
 Richmond , in a 1942 article in The Fortnightly Review , charged that the loss of Singapore illustrated " the folly of not providing adequately for the command of the sea in a two @-@ ocean war " . He now argued that the Singapore strategy had been totally unrealistic . Privately he blamed politicians who had allowed Britain 's sea power to be run down . The resources provided for the defence of Malaya were inadequate to hold Singapore , and the manner in which those resources were employed was frequently wasteful , inefficient and ineffective . 
 The disaster had both political and military dimensions . In Parliament , Churchill suggested that an official inquiry into the disaster should be held after the war . When this wartime speech was published in 1946 , the Australian government asked if the British government still intended to conduct the inquiry . The Joint Planning Staff considered the matter , and recommended that no inquiry be held , as it would not be possible to restrict its focus to the events surrounding the fall of Singapore , and it would inevitably have to examine the political , diplomatic and military circumstances of the Singapore strategy over a period of many years . Prime Minister Clement Attlee accepted this advice , and no inquiry was ever held . 
 In Australia and New Zealand , after years of reassurances , there was a sense of betrayal . According to one historian , " In the end , no matter how you cut it , the British let them down " . The defeat would affect politics for decades . In a speech in the Australian House of Representatives in 1992 , Prime Minister Paul Keating cited the sense of betrayal : 
 I was told that I did not learn respect at school . I learned one thing : I learned about self @-@ respect and self @-@ regard for Australia — not about some cultural cringe to a country which decided not to defend the Malayan peninsula , not to worry about Singapore and not to give us our troops back to keep ourselves free from Japanese domination . This was the country that you people wedded yourself to , and even as it walked out on you and joined the Common Market , you were still looking for your MBEs and your knighthoods , and all the rest of the regalia that comes with it . 
 A fleet was necessary for the defeat of Japan , and eventually a sizeable one , the British Pacific Fleet , did go to the Far East , where it fought alongside the United States Pacific Fleet . The closer relations that developed between the two navies prior to the outbreak of war with Japan , and the alliance that developed from it afterwards , became the most positive and enduring strategic legacy of the Singapore strategy . 
 The Singapore Naval Base suffered little damage in the fighting and became the Imperial Japanese Navy 's most important facility outside of the Japanese home islands . The 15 @-@ inch guns were sabotaged by the British before the fall of Singapore , and four of them were deemed beyond repair and scrapped by the Japanese . The floating dry dock was scuttled by the British , but raised by the Japanese . It was damaged beyond repair by a raid by Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortresses in February 1945 , and ultimately towed out to sea and dumped in 1946 . The Royal Navy took repossession of the Singapore base in 1945 . 
 = = = Operation Mastodon = = = 
 In 1958 , the Singapore strategy was revived in the form of Operation Mastodon , a plan to deploy V bombers of RAF Bomber Command equipped with nuclear weapons to Singapore as part of Britain 's contribution to the defence of the region under Southeast Asia Treaty Organization ( SEATO ) . Once again , there were formidable logistical problems . As the V bombers could not fly all the way to Singapore , a new staging base was developed at RAF Gan in the Maldives . RAF Tengah 's runway was too short for V bombers , so RAF Butterworth had to be used until it could be lengthened . The basing of nuclear armed aircraft , and the stockpiling of nuclear weapons without consultation with the local authorities soon ran into political complications . 
 Mastodon called for the deployment of two squadrons of eight Handley Page Victors to Tengah and one of eight Avro Vulcans to Butterworth . The British nuclear stockpile consisted of only 53 nuclear weapons in 1958 , most of which were of the old Blue Danube type , but plans called for 48 of the new , lighter Red Beard tactical nuclear weapons to be stored at Tengah when they became available , so each V bomber could carry two . Up to 48 Red Beards were secretly stowed in a highly secured weapons storage facility at RAF Tengah , between 1962 and 1971 , for possible use by the V bomber force detachment and for Britain 's military commitment to SEATO . 
 In the meantime , the Royal Navy deployed the aircraft carrier HMS Victorious with Red Beards and nuclear @-@ capable Supermarine <unk> to the Far East in 1960 . As with the original Singapore strategy , there were doubts as to whether 24 V bombers could be spared in the event of a crisis dire enough to require them , especially after China 's acquisition of nuclear weapons in 1964 . As the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation heated up in 1963 , Bomber Command sent detachments of Victors and Vulcans to the Far East . Over the next three years , four V bombers were permanently stationed there , with squadrons in the United Kingdom rotating detachments . In April 1965 , No. 35 Squadron RAF carried out a rapid deployment of its eight Vulcans to RAAF Butterworth and RAF Tengah . Air Chief Marshal Sir John Grandy reported that the V bombers " provided a valuable deterrent to confrontation being conducted on a large scale " . 
 In 1965 , racial , political , and personal tensions led to Singapore seceding from Malaysia and becoming an independent country . With the end of the confrontation , the last V bombers were withdrawn in 1966 . The following year , the British government announced its intention to withdraw its forces from East of Suez . The Singapore Naval Base was handed over to the government of Singapore on 8 December 1968 , and Sembawang Shipyard subsequently became the basis of a successful ship repair industry . The Red Beards were returned to the UK via the US in 1971 . 
 = Otto of Greece = 
 Otto , also spelled Otho ( Greek : O <unk> , Βασιλεύς της <unk> , O <unk> , <unk> tis <unk> ; 1 June 1815 – 26 July 1867 ) , was a Bavarian prince who became the first modern King of Greece in 1832 under the Convention of London . He reigned until he was deposed in 1862 . 
 The second son of King Ludwig I of Bavaria , Otto ascended the newly created throne of Greece while still a minor . His government was initially run by a three @-@ man regency council made up of Bavarian court officials . Upon reaching his majority , Otto removed the regents when they proved unpopular with the people and he ruled as an absolute monarch . Eventually his subjects ' demands for a Constitution proved overwhelming , and in the face of an armed but peaceful insurrection Otto in 1843 granted a constitution . However he rigged elections using fraud and terror . 
 Throughout his reign Otto was unable to resolve Greece 's poverty and prevent economic meddling from outside . Greek politics in this era was based on affiliations with the three Great Powers , and Otto 's ability to maintain the support of the powers was key to his remaining in power . To remain strong , Otto had to play the interests of each of the Great Powers ' Greek adherents against the others , while not aggravating the Great Powers . When Greece was blockaded by the British Royal Navy in 1850 and again in 1854 , to stop Greece from attacking the Ottoman Empire during the Crimean War , Otto 's standing amongst Greeks suffered . As a result , there was an assassination attempt on the Queen , and finally in 1862 Otto was deposed while in the countryside . He died in exile in Bavaria in 1867 . 
 = = Early life and reign = = 
 Otto was born as Prince Otto Friedrich Ludwig of Bavaria at Schloss <unk> in Salzburg ( when it belonged for a short time to the Kingdom of Bavaria ) , as second son of Crown Prince Ludwig I of Bavaria and Therese of Saxe @-@ <unk> . His father served there as Bavarian governor @-@ general . Through his ancestor the Bavarian Duke John II , Otto was a descendant of the Greek imperial dynasties of Komnenos and Laskaris . 
 When he was elected king , the Great Powers extracted a pledge from Otto 's father to restrain him from hostile actions against the Ottoman Empire . Also they insisted that his title be " King of Greece " instead of " King of the Hellenes " , because the latter would imply a claim over the millions of Greeks then still under Turkish rule . Aged not quite 18 , the young prince arrived in Greece with 3 @,@ 500 Bavarian troops and three Bavarian advisors aboard the British frigate HMS Madagascar . Although he did not speak Greek , he immediately endeared himself to his adopted country by adopting the Greek national costume and <unk> his name to " Othon " ( some English sources , such as Encyclopaedia Britannica , call him " Otho " ) . 
 Otto 's reign is usually divided into three periods : 
 a . The years of Regency : 1832 – 1835 
 b . The years of Absolute Monarchy : 1835 – 1843 
 c . The years of Constitutional Monarchy : 1843 – 1862 
 The Bavarian advisors were arrayed in a Regency Council headed by Count Josef Ludwig von Armansperg , who in Bavaria as minister of finance , had recently succeeded in restoring Bavarian credit at the cost of his <unk> von Armansperg was the President of the Privy Council and the 1st representative ( or Prime Minister ) of the new Greek government . The other members of the Regency Council were Karl von Abel and Georg Ludwig von Maurer with whom von Armansperg clashed often . After the King reached his majority in 1835 , von Armansperg was made Arch @-@ Secretary but was called Arch @-@ Chancellor by the Greek press . 
 Britain and the Rothschild bank , who were underwriting the Greek loans , insisted on financial stringency from Armansperg . The Greeks were soon more heavily taxed than under Turkish rule ; as the people saw it , they had exchanged a hated Ottoman tyranny , which they understood , for government by a foreign bureaucracy , the " <unk> " ( <unk> ) , which they despised . ( Ottoman rule had been called in Greek <unk> – <unk> , " Turkish rule " ) . 
 In addition , the regency showed little respect for local customs . Also , as a Roman Catholic , Otto himself was viewed as a heretic by many pious Greeks , however , his heirs would have to be Orthodox according to the terms of the 1843 Constitution . 
 Popular heroes and leaders of the Greek Revolution , like the Generals Theodoros Kolokotronis and Yiannis <unk> , who opposed the Bavarian @-@ dominated regency , were charged with treason , put in jail and sentenced to death . However , they were pardoned later , under popular pressure , while the Greek judges , who resisted the Bavarian pressure and refused to sign the death penalties ( like Anastasios <unk> and Georgios <unk> ) , were saluted as heroes . 
 King Otto 's early reign was notable for one more reason : He moved the capital of Greece from Nafplion to Athens . His first task as king was to make a detailed archaeological and topographical survey of Athens . He assigned Gustav Eduard <unk> and <unk> <unk> to complete this task . At that time Athens had a population of roughly 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 people , located mainly in what today covers the district of Plaka in Athens . 
 Athens was chosen as the Greek capital for historical and sentimental reasons , not because it was a large city . At the time , it was a town consisting of only 400 houses on the foot of the Acropolis . A modern city plan was laid out and public buildings erected . The finest legacy of this period are the buildings of the University of Athens ( 1837 , under the name Othonian University ) , the Athens Polytechnic University ( 1837 , under the name Royal School of Arts ) , the National Gardens of Athens ( 1840 ) , the National Library of Greece ( 1842 ) , the Old Royal Palace ( now the Greek Parliament Building , 1843 ) , and the Old Parliament Building ( 1858 ) . Schools and hospitals were established all over the ( still small ) Greek dominion ; but the negative feelings of the people were rather neglecting this side of his reign . 
 In 1836 – 37 , Otto visited Germany and married the beautiful and talented 17 @-@ year @-@ old , Duchess Amalia ( Amelie ) of Oldenburg ( 21 December 1818 – 20 May 1875 ) . The wedding took place not in Greece , but in Oldenburg , on 22 November 1836 ; the marriage did not produce an heir and the new queen made herself unpopular by interfering in the government . Besides , she remained Lutheran . Otto was unfaithful to his wife , and had a liaison with Jane Digby , a notorious woman his father had previously taken as a lover . 
 Meanwhile , due to his overtly undermining the king , Armansperg was dismissed from his duties by King Otto immediately on his return . However , despite high hopes by the Greeks , the Bavarian <unk> was appointed chief minister and the granting of a constitution was again postponed . The attempts of Otto to conciliate Greek sentiment by efforts to enlarge the frontiers of his kingdom , for example , by the suggested acquisition of Crete in 1841 , failed in their objective and only succeeded in embroiling him with the Great Powers . 
 = = Parties , finances and the church = = 
 Throughout his reign , King Otto found himself confronted by a recurring series of issues : partisanship of the Greeks , financial uncertainty , and ecclesiastical issues . 
 Greek parties in the Othonian era were based on two factors : the political activities of the diplomatic representatives of the Great Powers : Russia , United Kingdom and France and the affiliation of Greek political figures with these diplomats . 
 Financial uncertainty of the Othonian monarchy was the result of 
 1 ) Greece 's poverty , 
 2 ) the concentration of land in the hands of a small number of wealthy " primates " like the Mavromichalis family of Mani , 
 and 
 3 ) the promise of 60 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 francs in loans from the Great Powers , which kept these nations involved in Greek internal affairs and the Crown constantly seeking to please one or the other power to ensure the flow of funds . 
 The political machinations of the Great Powers were personified in their three legates in Athens : the French Theobald <unk> , the Russian Gabriel <unk> , and the English Edmund Lyons . They informed their home governments on the activities of the Greeks , while serving as advisers to their respective allied parties within Greece . 
 Otto pursued policies , such as balancing power among all the parties and sharing offices among the parties , ostensibly to reduce the power of the parties while trying to bring a pro @-@ Othon party into being . The parties , however , became the entree into government power and financial stability . 
 The effect of his ( and his advisors ' ) policies was to make the Great Powers ' parties more powerful , not less . The Great Powers did not support curtailing Otto 's increasing absolutism , however , which resulted in a near permanent conflict between Otto 's absolute monarchy and the power bases of his Greek subjects . 
 Otto found himself confronted by a number of intractable ecclesiastical issues : 1 ) monasticism , 2 ) Autocephaly , 3 ) the king as head of the Church and 4 ) toleration of other churches . 
 His regents , Armansperg and <unk> , established a controversial policy of suppressing the monasteries . This was very upsetting to the Church hierarchy . Russia was self @-@ considered as stalwart defender of Orthodoxy but Orthodox believers were found in all three parties . Once he rid himself of his Bavarian advisers , Otto allowed the statutory dissolution of the monasteries to lapse . 
 By tradition dated back to the Byzantine era , the king was regarded by the Church as part of her head . On the issue of Church 's Autocephaly and his role as king within the Church , Otto was overwhelmed by the <unk> of Orthodox Church doctrine and popular discontent with his Roman Catholicism ( while the Queen was Protestant ) . 
 In 1833 , the regents had unilaterally declared the Autocephaly of the Church of Greece . This was a recognition of the de facto political situation , as the Patriarch of Constantinople was partially under the political control of the Ottoman Empire . However , faithful people — concerned that having a Catholic as the head of the Church of Greece would weaken the Orthodox Church — criticised the unilateral declaration of Autocephaly as non @-@ canonical . For the same reason , they likewise resisted the foreign , mostly Protestant , missionaries who established schools throughout Greece . 
 Tolerance of other religions was over @-@ supported by some in the English Party and others educated in the West as a symbol of Greece 's progress as a liberal European state . In the end , power over the Church and education was ceded to the Russian Party , while the King maintained a veto over the decision of the Synod of Bishops . This was to keep balance and avoid discrediting Greece in the eyes of Western Europe as a backward , religiously intolerant society . 
 Greek society was in reality very tolerant of other religions . But after 400 years of religious oppression by the Ottomans , Greeks were very suspicious of imposed " Liberal European progress " . Such forced " progress " was viewed as one more attempt against their faith and against their own understanding of freedom , as the main motto of the Greek Revolution was " for the holy faith of Christ and the freedom of the homeland " ; home and faith were inseparable , given also that the Church was the main contributor to the survival of the Greek language and Greek consciousness during Turkish occupation . 
 Catholic communities were already established in Greece since the 13th century ( Athens , Cyclades , Chios , Crete ) . Jewish communities also existed in the country , those arriving after the Expulsion of the Jews from Spain ( 1492 ) joining the earlier Romaniotes , Jews who had been living there since the times of Apostle Paul . Muslim families were still living in Greece during Otto 's reign , since hostility was mainly against the Ottoman state and its depressive mechanisms and not against Muslim people . 
 = = 3 September 1843 Revolution and later reign = = 
 Although King Otto tried to function as an absolute monarch , as Thomas Gallant writes , he " was neither ruthless enough to be feared , nor compassionate enough to be loved , nor competent enough to be respected . " 
 By 1843 , public dissatisfaction with him had reached crisis proportions and there were demands for a Constitution . Initially Otto refused to grant a Constitution , but as soon as Bavarian troops were withdrawn from the kingdom , a popular revolt was launched . 
 On 3 September 1843 , the infantry led by Colonel Dimitris Kallergis and the respected Revolutionary captain and former President of the Athens City Council General Yiannis <unk> assembled in Palace Square in front of the Palace in Athens . 
 Eventually joined by much of the population of the small capital , the rebellion refused to disperse until the King agreed to grant a Constitution , which would require that there be Greeks in the Council , that he convene a permanent National Assembly and that Otto personally thank the leaders of the uprising . 
 Left with little recourse , now that his German troops were gone , King Otto gave in to the pressure and agreed to the demands of the crowd over the objections of his opinionated Queen . This square was renamed Constitution Square ( <unk> <unk> ) to commemorate ( through to the present ) the events of September 1843 — and to feature many later tumultuous events of Greek history . Now for the first time , the king had Greeks in his Council and the French Party , the English Party and the Russian Party ( according to which of the Great Powers ' culture they most esteemed ) vied for rank and power . 
 The King 's prestige , which was based in large part on his support by the combined Great Powers , but mostly the support of the British , suffered in the Pacifico incident of 1850 , when British Foreign Secretary Palmerston sent the British fleet to blockade the port of Piraeus with warships , to exact reparation for injustice done to a British subject . 
 The Great Idea ( <unk> <unk> ) , the dream of uniting all Greek populations of the Ottoman Empire , thereby restoring the Byzantine Empire under Christian rule , led him to contemplate entering the Crimean War on the side of Russia against Turkey and its British and French allies in 1853 ; the enterprise was unsuccessful , and resulted in renewed intervention by the two Great Powers and a second blockade of Piraeus port , forcing Greece to neutrality . 
 In 1861 , a student named Aristeidis <unk> ( son of politician Konstantinos <unk> ) attempted to murder Queen Amalia , and was openly hailed as a hero . His attempt , however , also prompted spontaneous feelings of monarchism and sympathy towards the royal couple among the Greek population . 
 = = Succession = = 
 It is well known that Otto was a great admirer of the rural <unk> , a nomadic group of Greek mountain shepherds thought by some scholars to be descended from the Dorians . It is believed that at an early age he fathered an illegitimate child in the <unk> clan named " <unk> " . This child was named Manoli <unk> , was brought to Athens and remained there after Otto 's 1862 departure , living as a merchant trader with children of his own . The descendants of Manoli still reside in Athens today . However , since Otto had no legitimate issue , he chose his brother as Crown Prince of Greece . 
 With the removal of the Wittelsbach dynasty from the Greek throne in 1863 and the election of Prince William of Denmark as King George I of the Hellenes in 1863 , the rule of the Wittelsbachs was over . 
 = = Exile and death = = 
 While on a visit to the Peloponnese in 1862 a new coup was launched and this time a Provisional Government was set up and summoned a National Convention . Ambassadors of the Great Powers urged King Otto not to resist , and the king and queen took refuge on a British warship and returned to Bavaria aboard ( the same way they had come to Greece ) taking with them the Greek royal regalia which they had brought from Bavaria in 1832 . It has been suggested that had Otto and Amalia borne an heir , then the King would not have been overthrown , as succession was also a major unresolved question at the time . It is also true , however , that the Constitution of 1843 made provision for his succession by his two younger brothers and their descendants . 
 He died in the palace of the former bishops of Bamberg , Germany , and was buried in the <unk> Church in Munich . During his retirement , he would still wear the Greek traditional uniform , nowadays worn only by the <unk> ( Presidential Guards ) . 
 It is generally accepted by historians that , although Otto failed , he deeply loved Greece as his own new homeland . His failure was mainly a result of the continuous intrigues and competition among the three Great Powers . Before his death , Otto asked to be buried in his own Greek traditional uniform . <unk> to witnesses , Otto 's last words were " Greece , my Greece , my beloved Greece " . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = Farm to Market Road 1957 = 
 Farm to Market Road 1957 ( FM 1957 ) , is a Farm to Market Road in the U.S. state of Texas . Located in Medina and Bexar counties , the 15 @.@ 983 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 25 @.@ 722 km ) highway serves as an arterial street through the growing western suburbs of San Antonio . FM 1957 is known as Potranco Road within Bexar County , and is legislatively defined as Urban Road 1957 ( UR 1957 ) east of Loop 1604 . 
 The modern routing of this highway was originally defined in 1954 . Since then , FM 1957 's western terminus has been extended to FM 471 near Rio Medina , and the entire routing along Culebra Road was transferred to FM 3487 . Before the current routing was established , FM 1957 was also the designation for a highway in Borden County from 1951 to 1954 , now part of FM 1610 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 FM 1957 begins at FM 471 near Rio Medina , as a two @-@ lane country road . It then traverses mostly rural , undeveloped land , before reaching the Bexar – Medina county line , where it becomes Potranco Road . In far western Bexar County , Potranco Road travels through recently built , patchy , residential developments . Development becomes somewhat heavier after the highway passes State Highway 211 ( SH 211 ) , but FM 1957 still displays mostly rural characteristics until the highway reaches Loop 1604 , at which point it enters the San Antonio city limits . Now five lanes wide , with two lanes in each direction and a center turn lane , the legislative definition of FM 1957 becomes UR 1957 ; however , Potranco Road remains signed as FM 1957 . 
 The highway continues eastward , serving residential developments , commercial outlets , and John Paul Stevens High School . It intersects with SH 151 , where development once again becomes patchy . The most notable development along this stretch of Potranco is a National Security Agency data center . State maintenance ends at an intersection with FM 3487 ( Culebra Road ) , slightly west of Interstate 410 ( I @-@ 410 ) . Potranco Road continues as a city street until Ingram Road . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designation = = = 
 FM 1957 was formerly designated as a highway in Borden County , defined in 1951 . This road traveled from U.S. Highway 180 near Gail to a nearby school , a distance of 8 @.@ 5 miles ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) . The former FM 1957 was combined with FM 1610 in 1954 . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 The present @-@ day FM 1957 was defined in 1954 . The original routing was along Culebra Road from its intersection with Grissom Road ( FM 471 ) to Potranco Road , which it followed to the Medina County line , a distance of 13 @.@ 8 miles ( 22 @.@ 2 km ) . The highway gained a 0 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 16 km ) spur connection to Loop 13 ( present @-@ day I @-@ 410 ) in 1956 . The following year , FM 1957 was extended to its present western terminus , at FM 471 near Rio Medina . This added 5 @.@ 3 miles ( 8 @.@ 5 km ) to the highway . In 1988 , the entire routing along Culebra Road was transferred to the newly created FM 3487 . The Texas Department of Transportation ( TxDOT ) started defining urban roads in 1995 , at which time the segment of FM 1957 east of Loop 1604 , measuring 5 @.@ 4 miles ( 8 @.@ 7 km ) , was transferred to the newly defined UR 1957 . Despite the change in legal definition , UR 1957 continues to be signed as FM 1957 . FM 3487 was removed from the state highway system on December 18 , 2014 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = Fagernes Airport , Leirin = 
 Fagernes Airport , Leirin ( Norwegian : Fagernes lufthavn , Leirin ; IATA : VDB , ICAO : <unk> ) serves Fagernes , in the municipality of Nord @-@ Aurdal , Oppland county , Norway . It also serves the surrounding valleys of Valdres , Hallingdal and Gudbrandsdal in Southern Norway , 190 kilometres ( 120 mi ) from Oslo . Opened in 1987 , it is owned and operated by state @-@ owned Avinor . The airport is 822 metres ( 2 @,@ 697 ft ) above sea level , and has a 2 @,@ 049 @-@ metre ( 6 @,@ 722 ft ) runway . It provides a regional service for the local population to Oslo , subsidized by the Ministry of Transport , as well as charter services during winter serving the nearby ski resorts . In 2014 , the airport had 6 @,@ 393 passengers . 
 The airport was originally planned as a conventional regional airport , but during its construction it was redesigned to accommodate larger jet aircraft . Originally owned by six local municipalities , it was taken over by the state in 1996 . Norsk Air started operations in 1987 , but terminated them the following year . Coast Air introduced state @-@ subsidized services in 1990 , and continued until the contract was won by Teddy Air in 1996 . From 2000 the airport was served by Guard Air , but following their bankruptcy in 2001 , services were taken over by Widerøe for six months , when Arctic Air won a one @-@ year contract . Coast Air resumed the service from 2003 to 2008 , when they went bankrupt . Air Norway then operated services for one year , pending DOT LT 's take over in 2009 . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Charter services are provided during the winter season , serving the wide range of ski resorts in the area . During the winter of 2010 / 11 and 2011 / 12 , weekly services are provided by Thomas Cook Airlines using an Airbus A320 , on behalf of the British tour operator Neilson , serving Gatwick - Fagernes on Sundays in the period of December 19 until April 24 . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Fagernes is an international airport with a 1 @,@ 800 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 19 @,@ 000 sq ft ) terminal building which includes immigration and customs clearing facilities , a self @-@ serve cafeteria , duty @-@ free store and several car rentals . Parking is free , and there is a shuttle service to Fagernes town center which coordinates with all scheduled services to Oslo . The bus leaves the town center 50 minutes before each departure . The airport is closed on Saturdays . The asphalt paved runway is 2 @,@ 049 by 45 metres ( 6 @,@ 722 ft × 148 ft ) , without a taxiway . The apron has standings for three A320 / 737 @-@ size jets , which allows charter aircraft up to the size of Airbus A321 and Boeing 757 to use the airport . 
 = = History = = 
 Plans for an airport at Fagernes were initiated in 1975 , and approved by Parliament in 1984 , along with three other regional airports , at Rørvik , Mosjøen and Førde Airport , Bringeland . Construction started in 1985 , but plans were changed in 1986 , when local authorities decided to build a longer runway to allow charter flights . The nearby Geilo Airport , Dagali , a two @-@ hour drive away , had already made a similar decision , and was in the process of extending its own runway . The airport opened on 31 October 1987 . The state had initially paid 60 % of the NOK 29 @.@ 3 million investments for the 800 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) version of the airport , and the rest was financed by municipal and county grants . The increased cost of building a longer runway was estimated at NOK 59 million , financed by loans and municipal grants , plus a NOK 10 million investment from Dansk <unk> . The airport was owned by Valdres Lufthavn A / S , a privately held limited company with six municipalities as its principal shareholders . Following the airport 's establishment , the Norwegian State Railways ' Valdres Line was closed in 1989 . 
 By 1988 , building costs had increased from NOK 88 to 131 million . The municipalities had co @-@ signed for a foreign loan , and were forced to pay NOK 3 @.@ 5 million annually just in interest , in addition to the operating cost of the airport ; these were aggravated by not only the loss of the sole scheduled service , but also considerably less charter traffic than estimated . In 1990 , the airport company was forced to refinance , and NOK 61 of 85 million in <unk> was refinanced , and the obligations transferred from the airport company to the municipalities and the county . However , by 1991 , passenger numbers were above 20 @,@ 000 , three quarters coming from charter traffic . On 1 January 1996 , Fagernes Airport was nationalized , along with 25 other regional airports , and put under the control of the Norwegian Airport Authority ( now Avinor ) . Following the closure of Geilo Airport , Dagali in 2003 , Fagernes experienced an increase in charter traffic . 
 = = = Operators = = = 
 Norsk Air started a route from Fagernes to Oslo Airport , Fornebu , and Bergen Airport , Flesland , on 4 November 1987 , using Embraer EMB 120 Brasilia aircraft . The route turned out to be unprofitable , and was terminated on 1 June 1988 , after the company had lost NOK 5 million . About 4 @,@ 500 passengers were using the airport each year , compared to the 120 @,@ 000 carried annually by the <unk> coach service on the 190 kilometres ( 120 mi ) to Oslo . Local politicians contacted Widerøe to discuss the possibility of introducing scheduled services , but the airline stated that it would only fly if it was granted subsidies . 
 An agreement for the provision of subsidies on services to Oslo and Bergen was not reached with the Ministry of Transport until 1990 . The state agreed to provide NOK 4 @.@ 5 million , with the municipalities providing another NOK 2 @.@ 6 million , and Oppland County Municipality NOK 2 million . The county and municipalities were allowed to reduce their subsidies in the event that passenger numbers increased . Although initially planned to be introduced in January 1990 , Widerøe later dropped out , and the contract was awarded to Coast Air , who began operating on 3 September 1990 , using a de Havilland Canada Twin Otter aircraft . The deal was the most expensive subsidy for regional aviation in the country ; while the national average was NOK 156 , the Fagernes route cost the authorities NOK 2 @,@ 000 per passenger . 
 Coast Air continued to provide a service until 1 August 1996 , when Fagernes became a trial for the use of public service obligations for regional aviation in Norway . The first contract was won by Teddy Air , to serve both Oslo and Bergen . The contract agreed a subsidy of NOK 23 @.@ 7 million for three years , 15 % less than Coast Air had been receiving . Teddy Air operated until 1 August 1999 , when Widerøe took over using de Havilland Canada Dash 8 @-@ 100 aircraft . At the same time , the route from Fagernes to Bergen was dropped from the schedule . Widerøe 's contract lasted only eight months , until 1 April 2000 , when Guard Air , who bid NOK 6 @.@ 93 million per year , won the tender , and started flying with Dornier 228 aircraft . On 8 October 2001 , Guard Air filed for bankruptcy , and the ministry signed an intermediate contract with Widerøe to fly the route . The subsequent tender was won by Arctic Air , who continued operation until 31 March 2003 , using Dornier 228 aircraft . 
 From 1 April 2003 , the contract was taken over by Coast Air , who put Jetstream 31 aircraft into use . The same company won the contract again in 2006 . Following Coast Air 's bankruptcy on 23 January 2008 , the route was taken over by Air Norway on 4 February , after an extraordinary tender , using Fairchild Metroliner aircraft . From 1 April 2009 , the service wil be provided by DOT LT , who operate Saab 340 aircraft . The services are subsidized by the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications , based on three @-@ year public service obligation tenders . 
 In March 2016 the route to Oslo was closed down . The operator was Air Norway at this time . This leaves charter flights as the only traffic , and big uncertainty whether the airport should be closed down or not . The road travel time to Oslo Airport is around 2 hours 30 minutes , which is planned to be shortened by 15 minutes by 2025 . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 = Ken Barnes ( footballer ) = 
 Kenneth Herbert Barnes ( 16 March 1929 – 13 July 2010 ) was an English footballer . He played as a half back for Manchester City and Wrexham . On the books of Birmingham City as a youth , Barnes began his football career at amateur level . Upon completion of his national service in 1947 he joined semi @-@ pro Stafford Rangers . 
 A transfer to Manchester City in 1950 meant Barnes turned professional , but his pro career had a slow start , making only one first team appearance in four years . He broke into the first team in 1954 , flourishing as part of the tactical system known as the Revie Plan . During this period he played in two consecutive FA Cup finals , as a loser in 1955 and a winner in 1956 . After making 283 appearances for Manchester City he joined Wrexham as player @-@ manager in 1961 , guiding them to promotion in his first season . Barnes returned to Manchester City in 1970 , and over more than two decades filled a variety of coaching roles , including overseeing the development of the youth team which won the 1986 FA Youth Cup . 
 He died on 13 July 2010 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Barnes was born in the Small Heath area of Birmingham , in the shadow of St Andrew 's , the home stadium of Birmingham City . Support for Birmingham City ran in the family ; his uncle played for the club in the 1920s . In 1943 , aged 14 , he began work at the Post Office . He played football for the works team , and quickly received an invitation to play for Moor Green , one of the strongest amateur teams in the area . His performances for Moor Green resulted in interest from Birmingham City , and Barnes became part of their junior team , Birmingham City Colts . Barnes worked at the Post Office during the day , trained with Moor Green in the evening , and played for Birmingham City Colts at the weekend . However , the Colts stopped selecting Barnes after a clash of matches , in which Barnes chose to play for a local team instead of the Colts . Barnes then resumed playing for Moor Green . 
 After a few months Barnes gained a second opportunity with a professional club , joining the youth ranks at Bolton Wanderers . As with when he played for Birmingham , he trained with Moor Green and played for Bolton 's youth team at the weekend . Upon turning 18 , Barnes was called up for national service , and was based with the RAF at Stafford . He continued to play for Bolton when circumstances permitted it , but when the club made a formal request for his services the RAF refused . Upon completion of his national service Barnes joined semi @-@ pro Stafford Rangers . He made his debut against Newport County on 14 June 1947 , and continued to play for the club for the next three years . 
 = = Manchester City = = 
 Barnes joined Manchester City after a £ 750 move from non @-@ League Stafford Rangers on 6 May 1950 . He did not feature in the first team on a regular basis for several years – his debut , against Derby County on 5 January 1952 was the only appearance he made in his first four years at the club . 
 In the 1953 – 54 season Barnes was playing for the Manchester City reserve team . Inspired by the Hungary team which had beaten England 6 – 3 the previous year , the reserves began using a tactical system in which Johnny Williamson was used as a deep @-@ lying centre @-@ forward . Barnes played as an attacking half @-@ back in a similar vein to József Bozsik . Using the system the reserves achieved a lengthy unbeaten run . At the start of the following season Manchester City manager Les McDowall decided to try the system at first team level , using Don Revie in the centre @-@ forward role . Henceforth the system became known as The Revie Plan . The opening match of the season resulted in a 5 – 0 defeat at the hands of Preston North End . Revie opined that the system required attacking half @-@ backs to be successful , and that City 's half backs , John McTavish in particular , were too defensive . To that end Barnes was picked for the following match in place of McTavish . City beat Sheffield United 5 – 2 , and Barnes became an integral part of the team , playing all but one of the matches in the remainder of the season . However , he was not enamoured by the attention given to the Revie Plan by the press , describing it as " bollocks " . 
 During Barnes ' first full season in the first team Manchester City enjoyed a successful run in the FA Cup . As a top @-@ flight team Manchester City entered the competition in the third round , facing Derby County . Barnes scored the opening goal in a 3 – 1 win , his first goal in professional football . A derby victory against Manchester United and a win against Luton Town followed , setting up a quarter @-@ final against his boyhood heroes Birmingham City . Single goal victories against Birmingham and Sunderland gave City a place in the final , where they faced Newcastle United . However , hampered by the loss of Jimmy Meadows to injury after 18 minutes , City were beaten 3 – 1 . 
 Manchester City reached the cup final again the following season , Barnes playing every match of the cup run . Manchester City beat Birmingham City 3 – 1 , Barnes having a hand in the second goal . The final is most well known for being the match where goalkeeper Bert Trautmann continued play after breaking his neck . 
 By the late 1950s Barnes was one of the senior players in the side , and succeeded Roy Paul as captain when Paul retired in 1957 . During the 1957 – 58 season Barnes became the third player to score a hat @-@ trick of penalties in an English top @-@ flight match , as part of a 6 – 2 defeat of Everton . At this time Barnes was the club 's primary penalty taker , helping him to score 11 goals over the course of the season . In his later years at Manchester City , Barnes role as captain meant he had become a strong influence on younger players . A particularly notable example was Denis Law , who joined the club in 1960 , the pair becoming lifelong friends . 
 Barnes never played international football , but was described by Denis Law as " the best uncapped wing @-@ half ever to have played in English football " . The closest he came to an international cap was being named as a reserve for a match against Wales in October 1957 . 
 In the dressing room Barnes had a reputation as a practical joker , with Bert Trautmann a particular target for teasing . Known as " Beaky " to his teammates , Barnes was one of the chief organisers of social activities on away trips , along with Roy Paul . In eleven years at Manchester City Barnes made 283 appearances in all competitions , scoring 19 goals . 
 = = Management and coaching = = 
 By 1961 , age meant Barnes was no longer an automatic first team selection , so he sought a move into management . An opportunity arose at Wrexham in May 1961 , and Barnes was appointed player @-@ manager . In his first season the club gained promotion to the Third Division . During his tenure he oversaw the club 's record victory , a 10 – 1 defeat of Hartlepool United . The club finished ninth in 1962 – 63 , but were relegated to the Fourth Division the following season . Barnes remained at the club until 1965 , when he resigned his post . By the time of his departure from the club he had made 132 appearances , scoring 24 goals . 
 After leaving Wrexham Barnes took a job outside football , working in sales for <unk> <unk> by future Blackburn Rovers Benefactor Jack Walker . However , before long he received an offer to become manager of Witton Albion on a part @-@ time basis . At Witton he created a team from a mixture of promising youngsters and ageing veterans . Players he signed included future European Cup winner Chris Nicholl and former greats Dennis Viollet and Bobby Johnstone . 
 On 27 August 1970 , Barnes curtailed a brief spell as manager of Bangor City to return to Manchester City as a member of the coaching staff . When Malcolm Allison departed the club in 1973 , Barnes was offered the role of caretaker manager , but , soured by his experiences at Wrexham , he turned it down . Instead he became assistant to the eventual managerial appointee Johnny Hart . Seven months later ill health forced Hart to step down . In the reorganisation that followed the appointment of Hart 's replacement Ron Saunders , Barnes became chief scout , a role he retained for two decades until he was sacked by Peter Reid in 1991 . In his role he oversaw the development of a large number of successful young players , including Paul Lake , David White and Steve Redmond , the stars of the Manchester City youth team which won the 1986 FA Youth Cup . In 1994 he returned to the club at the invitation of Francis Lee , who had recently become chairman . Barnes served in a part @-@ time scouting position for a further six years . 
 Since 2000 , Barnes had been involved in a youth football initiative in Malaysia ; Ken Barnes Soccer Skills . In 2004 , Barnes was elected to Manchester City 's Hall of Fame , and in 2005 to Wrexham Supporters ' Association 's Hall of Fame . Married with six children , he died in July 2010 from pneumonia aged 81 . One of his sons , Peter Barnes , was also a professional footballer , who played for England , both Manchester clubs , West Bromwich Albion and Leeds United . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Manchester City 
 FA Cup : 1955 – 56 
 = = Managerial statistics = = 
 = The Sound of Girls Aloud : The Greatest Hits = 
 The Sound of Girls Aloud : The Greatest Hits is the first greatest hits album of British girl group Girls Aloud . It was first released in the United Kingdom through a limited edition on 23 October 2006 , while the standard version was released on 30 October 2006 . The Sound of Girls Aloud features twelve of the group 's singles , two of which reached number one in the UK . The album features three new tracks , with " Something Kinda Ooooh " and " I Think We 're Alone Now " being released as singles and peaking inside the top five on the UK Singles Chart . 
 The Sound of Girls Aloud received positive reviews from critics , who praised it as a reflection of the group 's success . The album entered the UK Albums Chart at number one , making it Girls Aloud 's first album to do so . It also peaked at number nine on the Irish Albums Chart . In 2009 , the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) recognised The Sound of Girls Aloud as one of the nine albums that year to sell at least 1 million units in Europe . 
 = = Release and content = = 
 On 6 October 2006 , Girls Aloud announced that they would release their first compilation album , following rumours that they would split after Chemistry ( 2005 ) . A limited edition of The Sound of Girls Aloud was released in the United Kingdom on 23 October . The limited edition included a bonus disc with alternate edits of the group 's previous singles " No Good Advice " and " Wake Me Up " , and unreleased tracks , including a cover of " Sacred Trust " , originally recorded by fellow Popstars : The Rivals contestants One True Voice . The bonus disc was also going to include a cover of Chris Isaak 's " Wicked Game " , however , the track did not make onto the final track listing . 
 The standard version of the compilation album was released the following week , on 30 October . The regular track listing includes three new tracks : " Something Kinda Ooooh " , " Money " and a cover of Tommy James and the Shondells 's 1967 single " I Think We 're Alone Now " . Originally , a cover of " What A Feeling " from the film Flashdance was included on the tracklist instead of " I Think We 're Alone Now " , but Girls Aloud contacted the record label three days before the album was manufactured to say they would rather record the Tommy James and the Shondells song . The group recorded the song the following morning and the album was mastered three days later . Apart from the new tracks , the album contains twelve of the group 's previous singles , two of which reached number one in the UK : " Sound of the Underground " and " I 'll Stand by You " . 
 According to Irish bandmate Nadine Coyle , the first draft of the artwork included only the Union Jack , but she demanded the addition of the flag of Ireland . However , the flag appears upside @-@ down on the cover . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Sound of Girls Aloud received positive reviews from critics . Talia Kraines of BBC Music called the album " a journey through the most exciting and daring pop music of recent times " and went on to add that " this reality band has surpassed all expectations , " while Paul Scott of Stylus Magazine described it as " an irreverent party through the last 30 odd years of pop , taking inspiration from the most unexpected of places " and hailed Girls Aloud as " the finest singles band Britain [ sic ] has produced this decade . " Allmusic reviewer Andy Kellman noted the album for making " an ideal introduction " to the group , and said that the three new songs would most likely " keep the group 's remarkable streak of dominance afloat . " Dan Cairns of The Times gave the album 4 out of 5 stars , stating that Girls Aloud 's personality flows " through unimpeachable , sugar @-@ rush pop singles " such as " Something Kinda Ooooh " , " The Show " and " Sound of the Underground " . 
 Pitchfork Media critic Tim Finney described the album as " a whirlwind trip through bizarre but lovable pop gadgetry that may leave the uninitiated reeling . " He complimented the songs ' " deathless hooks and multi @-@ genre pyrotechnics " and noted that they are diverse , varying from different genres while embracing " elements of electroclash , big beat , and even skiffle . " Leonie Cooper of The Guardian characterised the album as " slick ... near @-@ faultless high @-@ octane pop all the way " ; however , she felt that the ballads were not really necessary , as " Girls Aloud sound far more exciting when they 're simply having fun " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 The Sound of Girls Aloud became Girls Aloud 's first album to debut at number one in the United Kingdom , and stayed on the UK Albums Chart for a total of 38 weeks . On 24 November 2007 , Mark Sutherland of Billboard reported that the album had already sold a total of 767 @,@ 000 units in the country . On the week ending 2 November 2006 , the album debuted at number 13 on the Irish Albums Chart , rising to a new peak of number nine the following week . It was certified Platinum by the Irish Recorded Music Association , denoting shipments of 15 @,@ 000 units in the country alone . On 29 January 2009 , the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) recognised The Sound of Girls Aloud as one of the nine albums that year to sell at least 1 million units in Europe . As of 21 March 2013 , the album has sold over 1 @,@ 2 million units in Europe . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Something Kinda Ooooh " was released on 16 October 2006 as the lead single from The Sound of Girls Aloud , one week prior to the album 's release . The track debuted at number five on the UK Singles Chart on download sales alone , before reaching its peak position at number three on the week ending 4 November 2006 . The accompanying music video was directed by Stuart Gosling and produced by Jon Adams , and features the group " singing and dancing glamorously " . " I Think We 're Alone Now " was chosen as the second and final single from the album , being released on 18 December . The song peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart during Christmas week . The music video was directed by Alex Hemming and Nick Collett , and portrays Girls Aloud in an attempt to rob a Las Vegas casino . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 In 2007 , Girls Aloud went on a tour of the same name to further promote the album . The announcement of the tour and the recording of their fourth studio album helped to stop rumours that the band were splitting up , which had surfaced due to the release of their greatest hits album . The show received mixed reviews from music critics , with Dave Simpson of The Guardian saying that the group " fare best when they are playing their own songs , " while a critic for Daily Mail deemed it the group 's " raunchiest tour ever [ ... ] there was singing and dancing , but the stand out element of Girls Aloud 's latest tour : sex appeal a @-@ go @-@ go . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks were produced by Xenomania . Credits adapted from the liner notes of The Sound of Girls Aloud : The Greatest Hits . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Ronnie Rocket = 
 Ronnie Rocket is an unfinished film project written by David Lynch , who also intended to direct it . Begun after the success of Lynch 's 1977 film Eraserhead , Ronnie Rocket was shelved after Lynch felt he would be unable to find financial backing for the project . He instead sought out an existing script on which to base his next film , settling on what would become 1980 's The Elephant Man . 
 Ronnie Rocket was to feature many of the elements which have since come to be seen as Lynch 's hallmarks ; including industrial art direction , 1950s popular culture and physical deformity . The script featured a three @-@ foot tall man with control over electricity ; Lynch first met Michael J. Anderson when tentatively casting for this role , and later cast him in Twin Peaks and Mulholland Drive as a result . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Ronnie Rocket concerned the story of a detective seeking to enter a mysterious second dimension , aided by his ability to stand on one leg . He is being obstructed on this quest by a strange landscape of odd rooms and a threatening train ; while being stalked by the " Donut Men " , who wield electricity as a weapon . In addition to the detective 's story , the film was to show the tale of Ronald d <unk> , a teenage dwarf , who suffers a surgical mishap which leaves him dependent on being plugged into an electrical supply at regular intervals ; this dependence grants him an affinity over electricity which he can use to produce music or cause destruction . The boy names himself Ronnie Rocket and becomes a rock star , befriending a tap @-@ dancer named Electra @-@ Cute . 
 The film was to make use of several themes that have since become recurring elements within David Lynch 's works , with a write @-@ up for The A.V. Club describing its contents as " idealized 1950s culture , industrial design , midgets , [ and ] physical deformity " . In addition , the film features two separate but connected worlds , another hallmark of Lynch 's writings . The film 's art direction would have featured a heavily industrial backdrop , setting the action against an " oil slick , smokestack , steel @-@ steam @-@ soot , fire @-@ sparks and electrical arcs realm " , similar to the direction ultimately taken in the depiction of Victorian England in The Elephant Man and the planet <unk> Prime in Dune . Although Lynch 's first two feature @-@ length films were shot in black @-@ and @-@ white , he had hoped to film Ronnie Rocket in color , inspired by the works of French film @-@ maker Jacques Tati . Lynch planned to experiment for some time in order to find the right balance and application of color for the film . 
 = = Background = = 
 After releasing 1977 's Eraserhead , a black @-@ and @-@ white surrealist film and his début feature @-@ length production , Lynch began work on the screenplay for Ronnie Rocket . Lynch and his agent Marty Michaelson , of William Morris Endeavor , initially attempted to find financial backing for the project . They met with one film studio on the matter , with Lynch describing the film to them as being " about electricity and a three @-@ foot guy with red hair " ; the studio never got in touch again . 
 Lynch also met Stuart Cornfeld during this time . Cornfeld had enjoyed Eraserhead and was interested in producing Ronnie Rocket ; Cornfeld was working for Mel Brooks and Brooksfilms at the time , and when the two realized that Ronnie Rocket was unlikely to find sufficient financing to be produced , Lynch asked to see some already @-@ written scripts to work from for his next film instead . Cornfeld found four scripts he felt Lynch would be interested in , but on hearing the name of the first , the director decided his next project would be The Elephant Man . 
 Lynch would return to Ronnie Rocket after each of his films , intending it at different stages as the follow @-@ up not only to Eraserhead or The Elephant Man , but also Dune , Blue Velvet and Twin Peaks : Fire Walk With Me . After producing The Elephant Man , Lynch had planned to cast Dexter Fletcher in the title role . 
 In 1987 , after having released Blue Velvet , Lynch once again attempted to pursue Ronnie Rocket . While scouting actors for the eponymous role , Lynch met Michael J. Anderson , whose work in short films the director had previously seen . As a direct result of meeting Anderson during this time , Lynch would cast the actor in a recurring role in the television series Twin Peaks , with his first appearance coming in 1990 's " Episode 2 " . Anderson would also appear in Lynch 's 1990 short film Industrial Symphony No. 1 , and the 2001 film Mulholland Drive . Lynch also visited northern England to scout a possible filming location ; however , he found that the industrial cities he had hoped to use had become too modernized to fit his intended vision . 
 The project has also suffered setbacks due to the bankruptcy of several potential backers ; both Dino De Laurentiis 's De Laurentiis Entertainment Group and Francis Ford Coppola 's American Zoetrope were attached to the project at different times ; both production companies went bankrupt before work could begin . Lynch had stayed with Coppola in the latter 's home in Napa County , California , while Coppola and musician Sting read the script several times ; however the failure of 1982 's One from the Heart forced Zoetrope to file for bankruptcy . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Having been temporarily unable to begin production on the film for some time , due to De Laurentiis owning the rights , Lynch stopped actively pursuing Ronnie Rocket as a viability in the early 1990s . However , he has never officially abandoned the project ; frequently referring to it in interviews as " hibernating " . The director has expressed interest in filming the project in the same manner as Eraserhead , using a small crew , building the sets himself and living on them during the length of the production . He has also claimed that he will revisit the film when he is at the stage in his career " when I don 't really care what happens , except that the film is finished " . 
 Speaking of the film 's difficulty in attracting financing , Fletcher has said " I should imagine that the big money heads at whatever studio it was couldn 't get their brains round it at all . It 's fine for the artist to read and enjoy , but for accountants it was probably a very different proposition . But that 's David Lynch all over in a lot of ways " . The Guardian 's Danny Leigh has compared the script 's reputation among film fans to those of Sergei Eisenstein 's unproduced adaptation of An American Tragedy and Michael Powell 's unmade adaptation of The Tempest . Leigh recalled having read a photocopied version of the script in the early 1990s , and felt that it " might have aged far better than Wild at Heart " . Film @-@ maker Jonathan <unk> has expressed interest in reviving the project , though he believes Lynch will " do it someday " . 
 = The Wedding Dance = 
 The Wedding Dance ( sometimes known as The Dance Village ) is a 1566 oil @-@ on @-@ panel painting by the Flemish artist Pieter Bruegel the Elder . Owned by the museum of the Detroit Institute of Arts in Detroit , Michigan , the work was discovered by its director in England in 1930 , and brought to Detroit . It is believed to be one of a set of three Bruegel works from around the same time , The Wedding Dance , The Peasant Wedding ( 1567 ) and The Peasant Dance ( 1569 ) . 
 The painting depicts 125 wedding guests . As was customary in the Renaissance period , the brides wore black and men wore codpieces . Voyeurism is depicted throughout the entire art work ; dancing was <unk> at the time by the authorities and the church , and the painting can be seen as both a critique and comic depiction of a stereotypical oversexed , overindulgent , peasant class of the times . 
 = = Background = = 
 Pieter Bruegel the Elder completed The Wedding Dance in 1566 . It is believed to have been lost for many years , until discovered at a sale in London in 1930 by William R. Valentiner , the director of the Museum Detroit Institute of Arts at the time . Valentiner paid $ 35 @,@ 075 for The Wedding Dance through a city appropriation . It is still owned by the museum . 
 The Peasant Wedding ( 1567 ) and The Peasant Dance ( 1569 ) are also by Bruegel which share the same wedding theme and elements and were painted in the same period in Bruegel 's later years . They are considered to be a trilogy of works by Bruegel . In all three of the paintings , there are pipers playing the pijpzak ( bagpipes ) , they also exude pride and vanity , for example in The Peasant Dance the man seated next to the pijpzak player is wearing a peacock feather in his hat . 
 Robert L. Bonn , an author , described these trilogy of works as " superb examples " of anthropological paintings , and states that " in three genre paintings Bruegel stands in marked contrast both to painters of his day and many others who followed . " Thomas Craven summarises The Wedding Dance as " One of several celebrations of the joys of gluttony painted by Brueghel with bursting vitality " . Walter S. Gibson , an art historian , also views the paintings as a " sermon condemning gluttony " and " an allegory of the Church abandoned by Christ . " 
 = = Description and themes = = 
 The popular painting shows a group of 125 wedding guests wearing clothing from the times , presented in the canvas in an apparently chaotic way in an outdoor party surrounded by trees . The brides wore black as it was the Renaissance period and the men wore codpieces , which were an important part of their clothing at the time . Voyeurism ( spying on people engaged in intimate behaviours ) is shown throughout the entire work amongst almost all of the people . 
 Each guest 's positioning in the painting has its own meaning . In the foreground there is a dancer wearing the colours of that time period and there are many peasants in that area . In the middle there is the bride dancing with an older man , her father . On the right of the work , there is a musician playing on a pijpzak , who is watching the dance from the side . Judging by the writing utensils hanging on his belt , he is a writer or possibly a middle @-@ class painter . Behind him is a hanging tablecloth decorated with a crown and beneath it is the bride 's table . Before her table , money collectors can be seen digging trenches while the wedding guests sit down and eat . 
 The movements of the people show that their behaviour is inappropriate or a caricature of rustic buffoonery , but its representation of fertility and reproduction is presented in a joyful manner . Indeed , the painting reflects a degree of ambiguity in that it can both be seen as an attack on the stereotypical oversexed behaviour of the lower orders as well as evoking a comical picture . In the sixteenth century , when this was painted , dance was subject to a strict code and regarded by the authorities and church as a social evil . People could not swing their arms or legs or laugh too loud , as that would be considered a type of rudeness to many people . The painting therefore " expresses the peasants ' liberation from the stricter limits of upper classes " by failing to adhere to the expected social standards of the times . 
 The author of The Theme of Music in Northern Renaissance Banquet Scenes , Robert Quist , has said that the painting was part of a series of Seven Deadly Sins and Virtues and that the paintings " attest to [ Bruegel 's ] moral devotions " . He says " While dancing may appear innocuous or natural for peasants , it poses a palpable threat to the human soul . Its [ dancing ] usefulness in characterizing the peasantry as wild and unruly undoubtedly derives from the moral opprobrium in which dancing was held by religious and civil <unk> alike . Ray Brock , on the contrary , has described Bruegel as a " hard @-@ drinking , hard @-@ living Flemish pleasant who packed his forty @-@ four years of life bursting with merrymaking and furious painting — which he regarded as sheer joy " . This indicates that Bruegel , despite having a moral compass and being acutely aware of the expected standards imposed by the church state at the time , was likely to have enjoyed similar festivities in his own life . 
 = Europa and the Pirate Twins = 
 " Europa and the Pirate Twins " is a song by English artist Thomas Dolby , featured on his 1982 album The Golden Age of Wireless . Written by Dolby , who produced it alongside Tim Friese @-@ Greene , the song was released as a single on 3 October 1981 . 
 The song , described as a " synth pop classic " , was inspired by the atmosphere of World War II , and features a guest appearance by XTC 's Andy Partridge . The single reached a peak position of 48 in the United Kingdom , Dolby 's home country , as well as charting in the United States and Canada . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Taken from the album The Golden Age of Wireless , " Europa and the Pirate Twins " was written by Thomas Dolby , who produced it in collaboration with Tim Friese @-@ Greene . The song opens with a " bluesy " harmonica solo , performed by Andy Partridge of the band XTC . The song makes use of electronic drums , and features a " high @-@ register " synthesiser line throughout . The song 's main musical hook is a " Bo Diddley beat " , a repetitive rhythm common in several musical genres . 
 Drowned in Sound 's Joseph Stannard has noted that " Europa and the Pirate Twins " is written with World War II as a strong influence , and that the song " emphasises the short distance between [ Dolby 's ] generation and the one which endured the last global conflict " . Dolby has described the song , along with the tone of the album , as reflecting " a sense of [ a ] relationship that 's going on as being overwhelmed by something on a grander level " , adding that " there 's a very strong wartime atmosphere to it " . The song was described as " a semi @-@ autobiographical romp " in the liner notes for Dolby 's 2009 greatest hits album The Singular Thomas Dolby , the release of which was overseen by the singer . " Europa and the Pirate Twins " received a " sequel " on Dolby 's 1992 album Astronauts & Heretics , in the song " Eastern Bloc " ; which has been described by Audio magazine as " appealingly faithful " to the original . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Europa and the Pirate Twins " was released as a single in the United Kingdom on 3 October , 1981 . It was Dolby 's first major label release , taken from his EMI @-@ released début album The Golden Age of Wireless . The song spent three weeks in the UK Singles Chart , reaching a peak position of 48 . The song first appeared in RPM magazine 's Canadian singles chart on 18 June , 1983 , debuting at number 50 . It eventually reached a peak position of 45 in that chart . The song debuted in the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 singles chart on 2 July 1983 , spending five weeks there and peaking at number 67 . It also reached a peak position of 37 in the Billboard Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks charts in 1982 . 
 The song 's release was accompanied by a music video , blending together several elements of footage . These included footage of the Ziegfeld Follies , Dolby interacting with a futuristic " <unk> " , and black @-@ and @-@ white shots of a Dolby and a shrouded female figure by the coast . The video was written and directed by Dolby . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Europa and the Pirate Twins " has been described by Peter Buckley , in his book The Rough Guide to Rock , as " <unk> [ ing ] Dolby 's trademark combination of the charming and the gimmicky " . Writing for Allrovi , Stewart Mason described the song as " a hyperactive synth pop classic " , whose " every nook and cranny is stuffed with some sort of ear @-@ grabbing hook " . Mason added that the song " pack [ s ] a remarkable amount of detail into two short verses and a bridge " and " resolves with a soaring , bittersweet chorus " . Writing about the song 's music video , Dennis Shin of PopMatters described Dolby as being on the " leading edge " in the medium , highlighting the videos for " She Blinded Me with Science " and " <unk> ! " in addition to describing that for " Europa and the Pirate Twins " as being " one of his lesser @-@ known and unsung videos " . 
 = J. D. Salinger = 
 Jerome David Salinger ( / <unk> / ; January 1 , 1919 – January 27 , 2010 ) was an American writer who won acclaim early in life . He led a very private life for more than a half @-@ century . He published his final original work in 1965 and gave his last interview in 1980 . 
 Salinger was raised in Manhattan and began writing short stories while in secondary school . Several were published in Story magazine in the early 1940s before he began serving in World War II . In 1948 , his critically acclaimed story " A Perfect Day for Bananafish " appeared in The New Yorker magazine , which became home to much of his later work . In 1951 , his novel The Catcher in the Rye was an immediate popular success . His depiction of adolescent alienation and loss of innocence in the protagonist Holden Caulfield was influential , especially among adolescent readers . The novel remains widely read and controversial , selling around 250 @,@ 000 copies a year . 
 The success of The Catcher in the Rye led to public attention and scrutiny . Salinger became reclusive , publishing new work less frequently . He followed Catcher with a short story collection , Nine Stories ( 1953 ) ; a volume containing a novella and a short story , Franny and Zooey ( 1961 ) ; and a volume containing two novellas , Raise High the Roof Beam , Carpenters and Seymour : An Introduction ( 1963 ) . His last published work , a novella entitled " Hapworth 16 , 1924 " , appeared in The New Yorker on June 19 , 1965 . 
 Afterward , Salinger struggled with unwanted attention , including a legal battle in the 1980s with biographer Ian Hamilton and the release in the late 1990s of memoirs written by two people close to him : Joyce Maynard , an ex @-@ lover ; and Margaret Salinger , his daughter . In 1996 , a small publisher announced a deal with Salinger to publish " Hapworth 16 , 1924 " in book form , but amid the ensuing publicity the release was indefinitely delayed . He made headlines around the globe in June 2009 when he filed a lawsuit against another writer for copyright infringement resulting from that writer 's use of one of the characters from The Catcher in the Rye . Salinger died of natural causes on January 27 , 2010 , at his home in Cornish , New Hampshire . In November 2013 , three unpublished stories by Salinger were briefly posted online . One of the stories , " The Ocean Full of Bowling Balls " , is said to be a prequel to The Catcher in the Rye . 
 = = Early life and experiences = = 
 Jerome David Salinger was born in New York City , on New Year 's Day , 1919 . His father , Sol Salinger , sold kosher cheese , and was from a Jewish family of Lithuanian descent , his father having been the rabbi for the Adath Jeshurun congregation in Louisville , Kentucky . Salinger 's mother , Marie ( née <unk> ) , was born in Atlantic , Iowa , of Scottish , German , and Irish descent , but changed her name to Miriam and considered herself Jewish after marrying Salinger 's father . Salinger did not learn that his mother was not of Jewish ancestry until just after he celebrated becoming a bar mitzvah . His only sibling was his older sister Doris ( 1911 – 2001 ) . 
 In youth , Salinger attended public schools on the West Side of Manhattan . Then in 1932 , the family moved to Park Avenue , and Salinger was enrolled at the McBurney School , a nearby private school . At McBurney , he managed the fencing team , wrote for the school newspaper and appeared in plays . He " showed an innate talent for drama " , though his father opposed the idea of J.D. ' s becoming an actor . 
 Salinger had trouble fitting in at his new school and took measures to conform , such as calling himself Jerry . ( His family called him Sonny . ) 
 His parents then enrolled him at Valley Forge Military Academy in Wayne , Pennsylvania . Salinger began writing stories " under the covers [ at night ] , with the aid of a flashlight " . Salinger was the literary editor of the class yearbook , Cross Sabres . He also participated in the Glee Club , Aviation Club , French Club , and the Non @-@ Commissioned Officers Club . Salinger 's Valley Forge 201 file reveals that he was a " mediocre " student , and unlike the overachievement enjoyed by members of the Glass family he would go on to write about , his recorded IQ was far from that of a genius . He graduated in 1936 . 
 Salinger started his freshman year at New York University in 1936 . He considered studying special education but dropped out the following spring . That fall , his father urged him to learn about the meat @-@ importing business , and he went to work at a company in Vienna , Austria . He left Austria one month before it was annexed by Nazi Germany on March 12 , 1938 . 
 In the fall of 1938 , Salinger attended Ursinus College in <unk> , Pennsylvania , and wrote a column called " skipped diploma " , which included movie reviews . He dropped out after one semester . 
 In 1939 , Salinger attended a Columbia University School of General Studies evening writing class taught by Whit Burnett , longtime editor of Story magazine . According to Burnett , Salinger did not distinguish himself until a few weeks before the end of the second semester , at which point " he suddenly came to life " and completed three stories . Burnett told Salinger that his stories were skillful and accomplished , accepting " The Young Folks " , a vignette about several aimless youths , for publication in Story . Salinger 's debut short story was published in the magazine 's March – April 1940 issue . Burnett became Salinger 's mentor , and they corresponded for several years . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In 1942 , Salinger started dating Oona O 'Neill , daughter of the playwright Eugene O 'Neill . Despite finding the debutante self @-@ absorbed ( he confided to a friend that " Little Oona 's hopelessly in love with little Oona " ) , he called her often and wrote her long letters . Their relationship ended when Oona began seeing Charlie Chaplin , whom she eventually married . In late 1941 , Salinger briefly worked on a Caribbean cruise ship , serving as an activity director and possibly as a performer . 
 The same year , Salinger began submitting short stories to The New Yorker . Seven of Salinger 's stories were rejected by the magazine that year , including " Lunch for Three " , " Monologue for a Watery Highball " , and " I Went to School with Adolf Hitler " . In December 1941 , however , the publication accepted " Slight Rebellion off Madison " , a Manhattan @-@ set story about a disaffected teenager named Holden Caulfield with " pre @-@ war jitters " . When Japan carried out the attack on Pearl Harbor that month , the story was rendered " unpublishable " ; it did not appear in the magazine until 1946 . In the spring of 1942 , several months after the United States entered World War II , Salinger was drafted into the army , wherein he saw combat with the 12th Infantry Regiment , 4th Infantry Division . He was present at Utah Beach on D @-@ Day , in the Battle of the Bulge , and the Battle of Hürtgen Forest . 
 During the campaign from Normandy into Germany , Salinger arranged to meet with Ernest Hemingway , a writer who had influenced him and was then working as a war correspondent in Paris . Salinger was impressed with Hemingway 's friendliness and modesty , finding him more " soft " than his gruff public persona . Hemingway was impressed by Salinger 's writing and remarked : " Jesus , he has a helluva talent . " The two writers began corresponding ; Salinger wrote Hemingway in July 1946 that their talks were among his few positive memories of the war . Salinger added that he was working on a play about Holden Caulfield , the protagonist of his story " Slight Rebellion off Madison " , and hoped to play the part himself . 
 Salinger was assigned to a counter @-@ intelligence division , for which he used his proficiency in French and German to interrogate prisoners of war . In April 1945 he entered a liberated concentration camp , probably one of Dachau 's sub @-@ camps . Salinger earned the rank of Staff Sergeant and served in five campaigns . Salinger 's experiences in the war affected him emotionally . He was hospitalized for a few weeks for combat stress reaction after Germany was defeated , and he later told his daughter : " You never really get the smell of burning flesh out of your nose entirely , no matter how long you live . " Both of his biographers speculate that Salinger drew upon his wartime experiences in several stories , such as " For Esmé — with Love and Squalor " , which is narrated by a traumatized soldier . Salinger continued to write while serving in the army , publishing several stories in slick magazines such as Collier 's and The Saturday Evening Post . He also continued to submit stories to The New Yorker , but with little success ; it rejected all of his submissions from 1944 to 1946 , a group of 15 poems in 1945 alone . 
 = = Post @-@ war years = = 
 After Germany 's defeat , Salinger signed up for a six @-@ month period of " Denazification " duty in Germany for the Counterintelligence Corps . He lived in Weissenburg and , soon after , married Sylvia Welter . He brought her to the United States in April 1946 , but the marriage fell apart after eight months and Sylvia returned to Germany . In 1972 , Salinger 's daughter Margaret was with him when he received a letter from Sylvia . He looked at the envelope , and without reading it , tore it apart . It was the first time he had heard from her since the breakup , but as Margaret put it , " when he was finished with a person , he was through with them . " 
 In 1946 , Whit Burnett agreed to help Salinger publish a collection of his short stories through Story Press 's Lippincott Imprint . Titled The Young Folks , the collection was to consist of twenty stories — ten , like the title story and " Slight Rebellion off Madison " , were already in print ; ten were previously unpublished . Though Burnett implied the book would be published and even negotiated Salinger a $ 1 @,@ 000 advance on its sale , Lippincott overruled Burnett and rejected the book . Salinger blamed Burnett for the book 's failure to see print , and the two became estranged . 
 By the late 1940s , Salinger had become an avid follower of Zen Buddhism , to the point that he " gave reading lists on the subject to his dates " and arranged a meeting with Buddhist scholar D. T. Suzuki . 
 In 1947 , the author submitted a short story titled simply " The Bananafish " to The New Yorker . William Maxwell , the magazine 's fiction editor , was impressed enough with " the singular quality of the story " that the magazine asked Salinger to continue revising it . He spent a year reworking it with New Yorker editors and the magazine accepted the story , now titled " A Perfect Day for Bananafish " , and published it in the January 31 , 1948 issue . The magazine thereon offered Salinger a " first @-@ look " contract that allowed them right of first refusal on any future stories . The critical acclaim accorded " Bananafish " , coupled with problems Salinger had with stories being altered by the " slicks " , led him to publish almost exclusively in The New Yorker . " Bananafish " was also the first of Salinger 's published stories to feature the Glasses , a fictional family consisting of two retired vaudeville performers and their seven precocious children : Seymour , Buddy , Boo Boo , Walt , Waker , Zooey , and Franny . Salinger eventually published seven stories about the Glasses , developing a detailed family history and focusing particularly on Seymour , the brilliant but troubled eldest child . 
 In the early 1940s , Salinger had confided in a letter to Whit Burnett that he was eager to sell the film rights to some of his stories in order to achieve financial security . According to Ian Hamilton , Salinger was disappointed when " rumblings from Hollywood " over his 1943 short story " The <unk> Brothers " came to nothing . Therefore , he immediately agreed when , in mid @-@ 1948 , independent film producer Samuel Goldwyn offered to buy the film rights to his short story " Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut " . Though Salinger sold his story with the hope — in the words of his agent Dorothy <unk> — that it " would make a good movie " , the film version of " Wiggily " was lambasted by critics upon its release in 1949 . Renamed My Foolish Heart and starring Dana Andrews and Susan Hayward , the melodramatic film departed to such an extent from Salinger 's story that Goldwyn biographer A. Scott Berg referred to it as a " bastardization " . As a result of this experience , Salinger never again permitted film adaptations to be made from his work . When Brigitte Bardot wanted to buy the rights to " A Perfect Day for Bananafish " , Salinger refused the request , but told his friend , Lillian Ross , longtime staff writer for The New Yorker , " She 's a cute , talented , lost <unk> , and I 'm tempted to accommodate her , pour le sport . " 
 = = The Catcher in the Rye = = 
 In the 1940s , Salinger confided to several people that he was working on a novel featuring Holden Caulfield , the teenage protagonist of his short story " Slight Rebellion off Madison " , and The Catcher in the Rye was published on July 16 , 1951 , by Little , Brown and Company . The novel 's plot is simple , detailing 16 @-@ year @-@ old Holden 's experiences in New York City following his expulsion and departure from an elite college preparatory school . Not only was he expelled from his current school , he had also been expelled from three previous schools . The book is more notable for the persona and testimonial voice of its first @-@ person narrator , Holden . He serves as an insightful but unreliable narrator who expounds on the importance of loyalty , the " phoniness " of adulthood , and his own duplicity . In a 1953 interview with a high school newspaper , Salinger admitted that the novel was " sort of " autobiographical , explaining , " My boyhood was very much the same as that of the boy in the book ... [ I ] t was a great relief telling people about it . " 
 Initial reactions to the book were mixed , ranging from The New York Times hailing Catcher as " an unusually brilliant first novel " to <unk> of the book 's monotonous language and the " immorality and perversion " of Holden , who uses religious slurs and freely discusses casual sex and prostitution . The novel was a popular success ; within two months of its publication , The Catcher in the Rye had been reprinted eight times . It spent 30 weeks on the New York Times Bestseller list . 
 The book 's initial success was followed by a brief lull in popularity , but by the late 1950s , according to Ian Hamilton , it had " become the book all brooding adolescents had to buy , the indispensable manual from which cool styles of <unk> could be borrowed . " It has been compared to Mark Twain 's The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn . Newspapers began publishing articles about the " Catcher Cult " , and the novel was banned in several countries — as well as some U.S. schools — because of its subject matter and what Catholic World reviewer Riley Hughes called an " excessive use of amateur swearing and coarse language " . According to one angry parent 's tabulation , 237 instances of " goddamn , " 58 uses of the synonym for a person of illegitimate birth , 31 " <unk> , " and one incident of flatulence constituted what was wrong with Salinger 's book . 
 In the 1970s , several U.S. high school teachers who assigned the book were fired or forced to resign . A 1979 study of censorship noted that The Catcher in the Rye " had the dubious distinction of being at once the most frequently censored book across the nation and the second @-@ most frequently taught novel in public high schools " ( after John Steinbeck 's Of Mice and Men ) . The book remains widely read ; in 2004 , the novel was selling about 250 @,@ 000 copies per year , " with total worldwide sales over 10 million copies " . 
 In the wake of its 1950s success , Salinger received ( and rejected ) numerous offers to adapt The Catcher in the Rye for the screen , including one from Samuel Goldwyn . Since its publication , there has been sustained interest in the novel among filmmakers , with Billy Wilder , Harvey Weinstein , and Steven Spielberg among those seeking to secure the rights . Salinger stated in the 1970s that " Jerry Lewis tried for years to get his hands on the part of Holden . " Salinger repeatedly refused , though , and in 1999 , Joyce Maynard definitively concluded : " The only person who might ever have played Holden Caulfield would have been J. D. Salinger . " 
 = = Writing in the 1950s and move to Cornish = = 
 In a July 1951 profile in Book of the Month Club News , Salinger 's friend and New Yorker editor William Maxwell asked Salinger about his literary influences . Salinger responded : " A writer , when he 's asked to discuss his craft , ought to get up and call out in a loud voice just the names of the writers he loves . I love Kafka , Flaubert , Tolstoy , Chekhov , Dostoevsky , Proust , O 'Casey , Rilke , Lorca , Keats , Rimbaud , Burns , E. Brontë , Jane Austen , Henry James , Blake , Coleridge . I won 't name any living writers . I don 't think it 's right . " In letters written in the 1940s , Salinger had expressed his admiration of three living , or recently deceased , writers : Sherwood Anderson , Ring Lardner , and F. Scott Fitzgerald ; Ian Hamilton wrote that Salinger even saw himself for some time as " Fitzgerald 's successor " . Salinger 's " A Perfect Day for Bananafish " has an ending similar to that of Fitzgerald 's earlier published short story " May Day " . 
 Salinger wrote friends of a momentous change in his life in 1952 , after several years of practicing Zen Buddhism , while reading The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna about Hindu religious teacher Sri Ramakrishna . He became an adherent of Ramakrishna 's Advaita Vedanta Hinduism , which advocated celibacy for those seeking enlightenment , and detachment from human responsibilities such as family . Salinger 's religious studies were reflected in some of his writing . The story " Teddy " features a ten @-@ year @-@ old child who expresses <unk> insights . He also studied the writings of Ramakrishna 's disciple Vivekananda ; in the story " Hapworth 16 , 1924 " , the character of Seymour Glass describes him as " one of the most exciting , original and best @-@ equipped giants of this century . " 
 In 1953 , Salinger published a collection of seven stories from The New Yorker ( " Bananafish " among them ) , as well as two that the magazine had rejected . The collection was published as Nine Stories in the United States , and " For Esmé — with Love and Squalor " in the UK , after one of Salinger 's best @-@ known stories . The book received grudgingly positive reviews , and was a financial success — " remarkably so for a volume of short stories " , according to Hamilton . Nine Stories spent three months on the New York Times Bestseller list . Already tightening his grip on publicity , though , Salinger refused to allow publishers of the collection to depict his characters in dust jacket illustrations , lest readers form preconceived notions of them . 
 As the notoriety of The Catcher in the Rye grew , Salinger gradually withdrew from public view . In 1953 , he moved from an apartment at 300 East 57th Street , New York , to Cornish , New Hampshire . Early in his time at Cornish he was relatively sociable , particularly with students at Windsor High School . Salinger invited them to his house frequently to play records and talk about problems at school . One such student , Shirley Blaney , persuaded Salinger to be interviewed for the high school page of The Daily Eagle , the city paper . Nonetheless , after Blaney 's interview appeared prominently in the newspaper 's editorial section , Salinger cut off all contact with the high schoolers without explanation . He was also seen less frequently around town , meeting only one close friend — jurist Learned Hand — with any regularity . He also began to publish with less frequency . After the 1953 publication of Nine Stories , he published only four stories through the rest of the decade ; two in 1955 and one each in 1957 and 1959 . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 In February 1955 , at the age of 36 , Salinger married Claire Douglas , a Radcliffe student ( her father was the art critic Robert Langton Douglas ) . They had two children , Margaret ( b . December 10 , 1955 ) and Matthew ( b . February 13 , 1960 ) . Margaret Salinger wrote in her memoir Dream Catcher that she believes her parents would not have married , nor would she have been born , had her father not read the teachings of Lahiri Mahasaya , a guru of Paramahansa Yogananda , which brought the possibility of enlightenment to those following the path of the " householder " ( a married person with children ) . After their marriage , J.D. and Claire were initiated into the path of Kriya yoga in a small store @-@ front Hindu temple in Washington , D.C. , during the summer of 1955 . They received a mantra and breathing exercises to practice for ten minutes twice a day . 
 Salinger also insisted that Claire drop out of school and live with him , only four months shy of graduation , which she did . Certain elements of the story " Franny " , published in January 1955 , are based on his relationship with Claire , including her ownership of the book The Way of the Pilgrim . Because of their isolated location and Salinger 's proclivities , they hardly saw other people for long stretches of time . Claire was also frustrated by Salinger 's ever @-@ changing religious beliefs . Though she committed herself to Kriya yoga , she remembered that Salinger would chronically leave Cornish to work on a story " for several weeks only to return with the piece he was supposed to be finishing all undone or destroyed and some new ' ism ' we had to follow . " Claire believed " it was to cover the fact that Jerry had just destroyed or junked or couldn 't face the quality of , or couldn 't face publishing , what he had created . " 
 After abandoning Kriya yoga , Salinger tried Dianetics ( the forerunner of Scientology ) , even meeting its founder L. Ron Hubbard , but according to Claire he was quickly disenchanted with it . This was followed by an adherence to a number of spiritual , medical , and nutritional belief systems including an interest in Christian Science , Edgar Cayce , homeopathy , acupuncture , and <unk> . 
 Salinger 's family life was further marked by discord after the first child was born ; according to Margaret 's book , Claire felt that her daughter had replaced her in Salinger 's affections . The infant Margaret was sick much of the time , but Salinger , having embraced the tenets of Christian Science , refused to take her to a doctor . According to Margaret , her mother admitted to her years later that she went " over the edge " in the winter of 1957 and had made plans to murder her and then commit suicide . Claire had supposedly intended to do it during a trip to New York City with Salinger , but she instead acted on a sudden impulse to take Margaret from the hotel and run away . After a few months , Salinger persuaded her to return to Cornish . 
 = = Last publications and Maynard relationship = = 
 Salinger published Franny and Zooey in 1961 , and Raise High the Roof Beam , Carpenters and Seymour : An Introduction in 1963 . Each book contained two short stories or novellas , previously published in The New Yorker , about members of the Glass family . These four stories were originally published between 1955 and 1959 , and were the only ones Salinger had published since Nine Stories . On the dust jacket of Franny and Zooey , Salinger wrote , in reference to his interest in privacy : " It is my rather subversive opinion that a writer 's feelings of anonymity @-@ obscurity are the second most valuable property on loan to him during his working years . " 
 On September 15 , 1961 , Time magazine devoted its cover to Salinger . In an article that profiled his " life of recluse " , the magazine reported that the Glass family series " is nowhere near completion ... Salinger intends to write a Glass trilogy . " Nonetheless , Salinger published only one other story after that : " Hapworth 16 , 1924 " , a novella in the form of a long letter from seven @-@ year @-@ old Seymour Glass while at summer camp . His first new work in six years , the novella took up most of the June 19 , 1965 , issue of The New Yorker , and was universally critically panned . Around this time , Salinger had isolated Claire from friends and relatives and made her — in the words of Margaret Salinger — " a virtual prisoner " . Claire separated from him in September 1966 ; their divorce was finalized on October 3 , 1967 . 
 In 1972 , at the age of 53 , Salinger had a relationship with 18 @-@ year @-@ old Joyce Maynard that lasted for nine months . Maynard , at this time , was already an experienced writer for Seventeen magazine . The New York Times had asked Maynard to write an article for them which , when published as " An Eighteen @-@ Year @-@ Old Looks Back On Life " on April 23 , 1972 , made her a celebrity . Salinger wrote a letter to her warning about living with fame . After exchanging 25 letters , Maynard moved in with Salinger the summer after her freshman year at Yale University . Maynard did not return to Yale that fall , and spent ten months as a guest in Salinger 's Cornish home . The relationship ended , he told his daughter Margaret at a family outing , because Maynard wanted children , and he felt he was too old . Nevertheless , in her own autobiography , Maynard paints a different picture , saying Salinger abruptly ended the relationship and refused to take her back . She had dropped out of Yale to be with him , even forgoing a scholarship . Maynard later writes in her own memoir how she came to find out that Salinger had begun relationships with young women by exchanging letters . One of those letter recipients included Salinger 's last wife , a nurse who was already engaged to be married to someone else when she met the author . 
 While he was living with Maynard , Salinger continued to write in a disciplined fashion , a few hours every morning . According to Maynard , by 1972 he had completed two new novels . In a rare 1974 interview with The New York Times , he explained : " There is a marvelous peace in not publishing ... I like to write . I love to write . But I write just for myself and my own pleasure . " According to Maynard , he saw publication as " a damned interruption " . In her memoir , Margaret Salinger describes the detailed filing system her father had for his unpublished manuscripts : " A red mark meant , if I die before I finish my work , publish this ' as is , ' blue meant publish but edit first , and so on . " A neighbor said that Salinger told him that he had written 15 unpublished novels . 
 Salinger 's final interview was in June 1980 with Betty Eppes of The Baton Rouge Advocate , which has been represented somewhat differently , depending on the secondary source . By one account , Eppes was an attractive young woman who misrepresented herself as an aspiring novelist , and managed to record audio of the interview as well as take several photographs of Salinger , both without his knowledge or consent . In a separate account , emphasis is placed on her contact by letter writing from the local Post Office , and Salinger 's personal initiative to cross the bridge to meet with the woman , who in the course of the interview made clear she was a reporter ( and who did indeed , at the close , take pictures of Salinger as he departed ) . According to the first account , the interview ended " disastrously " when a local passer @-@ by from Cornish attempted to shake the famous author 's hand , at which point Salinger became enraged . A further account of the interview published later in The Paris Review , purportedly by Eppes as author , has been disowned by Eppes and separately ascribed as a derived work of Review Editor George Plimpton . 
 = = Legal conflicts = = 
 Although Salinger tried to escape public exposure as much as possible , he continued to struggle with unwanted attention from both the media and the public . Readers of his work and students from nearby Dartmouth College often came to Cornish in groups , hoping to catch a glimpse of him . In May 1986 Salinger learned that the British writer Ian Hamilton intended to publish a biography that made extensive use of letters Salinger had written to other authors and friends . Salinger sued to stop the book 's publication . The court in Salinger v. Random House ruled that Hamilton 's extensive use of the letters , including quotation and paraphrasing , was not acceptable since the author 's right to control publication overrode the right of fair use . The book was not published . Later , Hamilton published In Search of J.D. Salinger : A Writing Life ( 1935 – 65 ) , but this book was more about his experience in tracking down information and the copyright fights over the planned biography than about Salinger himself . 
 An unintended consequence of the lawsuit was that many details of Salinger 's private life , including that he had spent the last twenty years writing , in his words , " Just a work of fiction ... That 's all " , became public in the form of court transcripts . Excerpts from his letters were also widely disseminated , most notably a bitter remark written in response to Oona O 'Neill 's marriage to Charlie Chaplin : 
 I can see them at home evenings . Chaplin squatting grey and nude , atop his <unk> , swinging his thyroid around his head by his bamboo cane , like a dead rat . Oona in an aquamarine gown , applauding madly from the bathroom . 
 Salinger was romantically involved with television actress Elaine Joyce for several years in the 1980s . The relationship ended when he met Colleen O 'Neill ( b . June 11 , 1959 ) , a nurse and <unk> , whom he married around 1988 . O 'Neill , forty years his junior , once told Margaret Salinger that she and Salinger were trying to have a child . 
 In 1995 , Iranian director Dariush Mehrjui released the film Pari , an unauthorized and loose adaptation of Salinger 's Franny and Zooey . Though the film could be distributed legally in Iran since the country has no official copyright relations with the United States , Salinger had his lawyers block a planned screening of the film at the Lincoln Center in 1998 . Mehrjui called Salinger 's action " bewildering " , explaining that he saw his film as " a kind of cultural exchange " . 
 In 1996 , Salinger gave a small publisher , <unk> Press , permission to publish " Hapworth 16 , 1924 " , the previously uncollected novella . It was to be published that year , and listings for it appeared at Amazon.com and other book @-@ sellers . After a flurry of articles and critical reviews of the story appeared in the press , the publication date was pushed back repeatedly before apparently being cancelled altogether . Amazon anticipated that <unk> would publish the story in January 2009 , but at the time of his death it was still listed as " currently unavailable " . 
 In June 2009 , Salinger consulted lawyers about the upcoming publication in the US of an unauthorized sequel to The Catcher in the Rye written by Swedish book publisher Fredrik Colting under the pseudonym ' J. D. California ' . California 's book is called 60 Years Later : Coming Through the Rye , and appears to pick up the story of Salinger 's protagonist Holden Caulfield . In Salinger 's novel , Caulfield is 17 years old , wandering the streets of New York after being expelled from his private school ; the California book features a 76 @-@ year @-@ old man , " Mr. C " , musing on having escaped his nursing home . Salinger 's New York literary agent Phyllis Westberg told Britain 's Sunday Telegraph : " The matter has been turned over to a lawyer " . The fact that little was known about Colting and the book was set to be published by a new publishing imprint called ' <unk> Publishing ' gave rise to speculation in literary circles that the whole thing might be a stunt . District court judge Deborah A. Batts issued an injunction which prevents the book from being published within the U.S. The book 's author filed an appeal on July 23 , 2009 ; it was heard in the Second Circuit Court of Appeals on September 3 , 2009 . The case was settled in 2011 when Colting agreed not to publish or otherwise distribute the book , e @-@ book , or any other editions of 60 Years Later in the U.S. or Canada until The Catcher in the Rye enters the public domain , while also refraining from using the title " Coming through the Rye " , dedicating the book to Salinger or referring to the title " The Catcher in the Rye " , while Colting remains free to sell the book in other international territories without fear of interference . 
 = = Later publicity = = 
 On October 23 , 1992 , The New York Times reported ] , " Not even a fire that consumed at least half his home on Tuesday could smoke out the reclusive J. D. Salinger , author of the classic novel of adolescent rebellion , ' The Catcher in the Rye . ' Mr. Salinger is almost equally famous for having elevated privacy to an art form . " 
 In 1999 , 25 years after the end of their relationship , Joyce Maynard auctioned a series of letters Salinger had written her . Maynard 's memoir of her life and her relationship with Salinger , At Home in the World : A Memoir , was published the same year . Among other topics , the book described how Maynard 's mother had consulted with her on how to appeal to the aging author ( who was dressing like a child ) , and described Joyce 's relationship with him at length . In the ensuing controversy over both the memoir and the letters , Maynard claimed that she was forced to auction the letters for financial reasons ; she would have preferred to donate them to the Beinecke Library . Software developer Peter Norton bought the letters for US $ 156 @,@ 500 and announced his intention to return them to Salinger . 
 A year later , Salinger 's daughter Margaret , by his second wife Claire Douglas , published Dream Catcher : A Memoir . In her book , she described the harrowing control that Salinger had over her mother and dispelled many of the Salinger myths established by Ian Hamilton 's book . One of Hamilton 's arguments was that Salinger 's experience with post @-@ traumatic stress disorder left him psychologically scarred , and that he was unable to deal with the traumatic nature of his war service . Salinger allowed that " the few men who lived through Bloody Mortain , a battle in which her father fought , were left with much to sicken them , body and soul " , but she also painted a picture of her father as a man immensely proud of his service record , maintaining his military haircut and service jacket , and moving about his compound ( and town ) in an old Jeep . 
 Both Margaret Salinger and Maynard characterized the author as a devoted film buff . According to Margaret , his favorite movies include Gigi ( 1958 ) , The Lady Vanishes ( 1938 ) , The 39 Steps ( 1935 ; Phoebe 's favorite movie in The Catcher in the Rye ) , and the comedies of W.C. Fields , Laurel and Hardy , and the Marx Bros .. Predating VCRs , Salinger had an extensive collection of classic movies from the 1940s in 16 mm prints . Maynard wrote that " he loves movies , not films " , and Salinger argued that her father 's " worldview is , essentially , a product of the movies of his day . To my father , all Spanish speakers are Puerto Rican washerwomen , or the toothless , grinning @-@ gypsy types in a Marx Brothers movie " . Lillian Ross , a staff writer for The New Yorker and longtime friend of Salinger 's , wrote following his death , " Salinger loved movies , and he was more fun than anyone to discuss them with . He enjoyed watching actors work , and he enjoyed knowing them . ( He loved Anne Bancroft , hated Audrey Hepburn , and said that he had seen Grand Illusion ten times . ) " 
 Margaret also offered many insights into other Salinger myths , including her father 's supposed long @-@ time interest in <unk> , and involvement with " alternative medicine " and Eastern philosophies . A few weeks after Dream Catcher was published , Margaret 's brother Matt discredited the memoir in a letter to The New York Observer . He disparaged his sister 's " gothic tales of our supposed childhood " and stated : " I can 't say with any authority that she is consciously making anything up . I just know that I grew up in a very different house , with two very different parents from those my sister describes . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Salinger died of natural causes at his home in New Hampshire on January 27 , 2010 . He was 91 . Salinger 's literary representative told The New York Times that the writer had broken his hip in May 2009 , but that " his health had been excellent until a rather sudden decline after the new year . " The representative believed that Salinger 's death was not a painful one . His third wife and widow , Colleen O 'Neill <unk> Salinger , and Salinger 's son Matt became the executors of his estate . 
 = = Literary style and themes = = 
 In a contributor 's note Salinger gave to Harper 's Magazine in 1946 , he wrote : " I almost always write about very young people " , a statement that has been referred to as his credo . Adolescents are featured or appear in all of Salinger 's work , from his first published short story , " The Young Folks " ( 1940 ) , to The Catcher in the Rye and his Glass family stories . In 1961 , the critic Alfred Kazin explained that Salinger 's choice of teenagers as a subject matter was one reason for his appeal to young readers , but another was " a consciousness [ among youths ] that he speaks for them and virtually to them , in a language that is peculiarly honest and their own , with a vision of things that capture their most secret judgments of the world . " For this reason , Norman Mailer once remarked that Salinger was " the greatest mind ever to stay in prep school " . Salinger 's language , especially his energetic , realistically sparse dialogue , was revolutionary at the time his first stories were published and was seen by several critics as " the most distinguishing thing " about his work . 
 Salinger identified closely with his characters , and used techniques such as interior monologue , letters , and extended telephone calls to display his gift for dialogue . Such style elements also " [ gave ] him the illusion of having , as it were , delivered his characters ' destinies into their own keeping . " Recurring themes in Salinger 's stories also connect to the ideas of innocence and adolescence , including the " corrupting influence of Hollywood and the world at large " , the disconnect between teenagers and " phony " adults , and the perceptive , precocious intelligence of children . 
 Contemporary critics discuss a clear progression over the course of Salinger 's published work , as evidenced by the increasingly negative reviews received by each of his three post @-@ Catcher story collections . Ian Hamilton adheres to this view , arguing that while Salinger 's early stories for the " slicks " boasted " tight , energetic " dialogue , they had also been formulaic and sentimental . It took the standards of The New Yorker editors , among them William Shawn , to refine his writing into the " spare , teasingly mysterious , withheld " qualities of " A Perfect Day for Bananafish " ( 1948 ) , The Catcher in the Rye , and his stories of the early 1950s . By the late 1950s , as Salinger became more reclusive and involved in religious study , Hamilton notes that his stories became longer , less plot @-@ driven , and increasingly filled with digression and parenthetical remarks . Louis Menand agrees , writing in The New Yorker that Salinger " stopped writing stories , in the conventional sense ... He seemed to lose interest in fiction as an art form — perhaps he thought there was something manipulative or inauthentic about literary device and authorial control . " In recent years , some critics have defended certain post @-@ Nine Stories works by Salinger ; in 2001 , Janet Malcolm wrote in The New York Review of Books that " Zooey " " is arguably Salinger 's masterpiece ... <unk> it and its companion piece " Franny " is no less rewarding than rereading The Great Gatsby . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 Salinger 's writing has influenced several prominent writers , prompting Harold <unk> ( himself an O. Henry Award @-@ winning author ) to state in 1991 : " His is the most influential body of work in English prose by anyone since Hemingway . " Of the writers in Salinger 's generation , Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning novelist John Updike attested that " the short stories of J. D. Salinger really opened my eyes as to how you can weave fiction out of a set of events that seem almost unconnected , or very lightly connected ... [ Reading Salinger ] stick [ s ] in my mind as really having moved me a step up , as it were , toward knowing how to handle my own material . " The critic Louis Menand has observed that the early stories of Pulitzer Prize @-@ winner Philip Roth were affected by " Salinger 's voice and comic timing " . 
 National Book Award finalist Richard Yates told The New York Times in 1977 that reading Salinger 's stories for the first time was a landmark experience , and that " nothing quite like it has happened to me since " . Yates describes Salinger as " a man who used language as if it were pure energy beautifully controlled , and who knew exactly what he was doing in every silence as well as in every word . " Gordon <unk> 's O. Henry Award @-@ winning short story " For <unk> — With Love and Kisses " ( 1977 , collected in What I Know So Far , 1984 ) , is a parody of Salinger 's " For Esmé — with Love and Squalor " . 
 In 2001 , Louis Menand wrote in The New Yorker that " Catcher in the Rye rewrites " among each new generation had become " a literary genre all its own " . He classed among them Sylvia Plath 's The Bell Jar ( 1963 ) , Hunter S. Thompson 's Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas ( 1971 ) , Jay McInerney 's Bright Lights , Big City ( 1984 ) , and Dave Eggers 's A <unk> Work of Staggering Genius ( 2000 ) . Writer Aimee Bender was struggling with her first short stories when a friend gave her a copy of Nine Stories ; inspired , she later described Salinger 's effect on writers , explaining : " [ I ] t feels like Salinger wrote The Catcher in the Rye in a day , and that incredible feeling of ease inspires writing . <unk> the pursuit of voice . Not his voice . My voice . Your voice . " Authors such as Stephen Chbosky , Jonathan Safran Foer , Carl Hiaasen , Susan Minot , Haruki Murakami , Gwendoline Riley , Tom Robbins , Louis Sachar , Joel Stein and John Green have cited Salinger as an influence . Musician Tomas <unk> of Streetlight Manifesto also cites Salinger as an influence , referencing him and Holden Caulfield , the main character of Catcher in the Rye , in the song " Here 's To Life " . Biographer Paul Alexander called Salinger " the Greta Garbo of literature " . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , J. D. Salinger was himself drawn to Sufi mysticism through the writer and thinker Idries Shah 's seminal work The Sufis , as were others writers such as Doris Lessing and Geoffrey Grigson , and the poets Robert Graves and Ted Hughes . As well as Idries Shah , Salinger also read the Taoist philosopher Lao Tse and the Hindu Swami Vivekananda who introduced the Indian philosophies of Vedanta and Yoga to the Western world . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In an oral biography titled Salinger , authors David Shields and Shane Salerno assert that the author had left specific instructions authorizing a timetable , to start between 2015 and 2020 , for the release of several unpublished works . According to the authors and their sources , these include five new Glass @-@ family stories ; a novel based on Salinger 's relationship with his first wife , Sylvia ; a novella in the form of a WWII counterintelligence officer ’ s diary ; a " manual " of stories about Vedanta ; and other new or retooled stories that illuminate the life of Holden Caulfield . 
 The Salinger biography is also described as a companion volume to a film documentary of the same title . The directorial debut of writer Shane Salerno , Salinger was made over nine years and received a limited theatrical release on September 6 , 2013 . 
 = = List of works = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 The Catcher in the Rye ( 1951 ) 
 Nine Stories ( 1953 ) 
 " A Perfect Day for Bananafish " ( 1948 ) 
 " Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut " ( 1948 ) 
 " Just Before the War with the Eskimos " ( 1948 ) 
 " The Laughing Man " ( 1949 ) 
 " Down at the Dinghy " ( 1949 ) 
 " For Esmé — with Love and Squalor " ( 1950 ) 
 " Pretty Mouth and Green My Eyes " ( 1951 ) 
 " De Daumier @-@ Smith 's Blue Period " ( 1952 ) 
 " Teddy " ( 1953 ) 
 Franny and Zooey ( 1961 ) 
 " Franny " ( 1955 ) 
 " Zooey " ( 1957 ) 
 Raise High the Roof Beam , Carpenters and Seymour : An Introduction ( 1963 ) 
 " Raise High the Roof @-@ Beam , Carpenters " ( 1955 ) 
 " Seymour : An Introduction " ( 1959 ) 
 Three Early Stories ( 2014 ) 
 " The Young Folks " ( 1940 ) 
 " Go See Eddie " ( 1940 ) 
 " Once a Week Won 't Kill You " ( 1944 ) 
 = = = Published and anthologized stories = = = 
 " Go See Eddie " ( 1940 , republished in Fiction : Form & Experience , ed . William M. Jones , 1969 and in Three Early Stories , 2014 ) 
 " The Young Folks " ( 1940 , republished in Three Early Stories , 2014 ) 
 " The Hang of It " ( 1941 , republished in The Kit Book for Soldiers , Sailors and Marines , 1943 ) 
 " The Long Debut of Lois <unk> " ( 1942 , republished in Stories : The Fiction of the Forties , ed . Whit Burnett , 1949 ) 
 " Once a Week Won 't Kill You " ( 1944 , republished in Three Early Stories , 2014 ) 
 " A Boy in France " ( 1945 , republished in Post Stories 1942 – 45 , ed . Ben Hibbs , 1946 and July / August 2010 issue of Saturday Evening Post magazine ) 
 " This Sandwich Has No <unk> " ( 1945 , republished in The Armchair Esquire , ed . L. Rust Hills , 1959 ) 
 " Slight Rebellion off Madison " ( 1946 , republished in Wonderful Town : New York Stories from The New Yorker , ed . David Remnick , 2000 ) 
 " A Girl I Knew " ( 1948 , republished in Best American Short Stories 1949 , ed . Martha Foley , 1949 ) 
 = = = Published and <unk> stories = = = 
 " The Heart of a Broken Story " ( 1941 ) 
 " Personal Notes of an Infantryman " ( 1942 ) 
 " The <unk> Brothers " ( 1943 ) 
 " Both Parties Concerned " ( 1944 ) 
 " Soft @-@ Boiled Sergeant " ( 1944 ) 
 " Last Day of the Last <unk> " ( 1944 ) 
 " Elaine " ( 1945 ) 
 " The Stranger " ( 1945 ) 
 " I 'm Crazy " ( 1945 ) 
 " A Young Girl in 1941 with No Waist at All " ( 1947 ) 
 " The Inverted Forest " ( 1947 ) 
 " Blue Melody " ( 1948 ) 
 " Hapworth 16 , 1924 " ( 1965 ) 
 = = = Unpublished stories = = = 
 " Mrs. <unk> " ( 1942 ) 
 " The Last and Best of the Peter Pans " ( 1942 ) 
 " The Children 's Echelon " ( 1944 ) 
 " Two Lonely Men " ( 1944 ) 
 " The Magic <unk> " ( 1944 ) 
 " Birthday Boy " ( 1946 ) 
 " The Ocean Full of Bowling Balls " ( 1947 ) 
 " Paula " ( 1948 ) 
 = = Media portrayals and references = = 
 J.D. Salinger appears as a character ( voiced by Alan Arkin ) in several episodes of <unk> Horseman ( season 2 episodes 6 , 7 , 8 , and 10 ) , where he is said to have faked his own death to escape public attention ( A Netflix Original Series , July 7 , 2015 ) . 
 = Typhoon Thad ( 1981 ) = 
 Typhoon Thad was considered the worst storm to affect Japan in two years . Originating from a monsoon trough , Typhoon Thad was first classified on August 15 , 1981 and was upgraded into a tropical storm the next day . Meanwhile , Thad moved north and northeast and attained typhoon intensity midday on August 18 . The next day , the storm reached its peak intensity of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . On August 22 , Thad accelerated northward , striking eastern Japan the next day just before weakening to a tropical storm . After passing through the country , the cyclone transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on August 23 . 
 Thirty @-@ one persons perished in Japan due to the typhoon and 82 others were hurt . Thad flooded 22 @,@ 433 houses and demolished 112 others . Roughly 27 @,@ 000 people were left homeless because of Thad . Moreover , 111 @,@ 500 homeowners were without power during the height of the storm . Furthermore , the storm also destroyed 449 roads , and was responsible for 499 landslides . The cyclone inundated 417 @,@ 400 acres ( 168 @,@ 900 hectares ) of farm land . Train service was interrupted in 22 lines . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Thad originated from an active monsoon trough several hundred miles east of the Philippines in mid @-@ August 1981 . On August 10 , a weak surface circulation was first noted on satellite imagery . At that time , the center was embedded within the monsoon trough . Within five days , the system developed outflow . Midday on August 15 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) first classified the system . Based on data from Hurricane Hunters , a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was issued by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) at 1800 UTC on August 15 . Situated south of a subtropical ridge , the cyclone was located within a favorable environment for further development . Early on August 16 , the JMA upgraded the system into a tropical storm . Following an increase in organization , the JTWC upgraded the system into Tropical Depression 15 that day . 
 Initially , the depression was expected by the JTWC to move north before accelerating towards the northwest . On August 17 , the JTWC upgraded the depression into a tropical storm . At this time , the agency anticipated Thad to re @-@ curve well east of Japan . By 0000 UTC on August 18 , the JTWC upgraded Thad to typhoon status as the cyclone developed a ragged eye . Six hours later , the JMA followed suit . During the evening of August 18 , the agency estimated that Thad reached its peak intensity of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 955 mbar ( 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) . Early the next day , the JTWC estimated peak winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . According to the JMA , Thad would maintain its peak wind speed until August 21 , when the storm weakened slightly . However , the JTWC suggested that Thad began to deteriorate on August 20 . The next day , forecasts from the JTWC indicated that the typhoon was expected to re @-@ curve and accelerate due to a trough located south of Japan . However , since the trough moved into the Sea of Japan instead , a subtropical ridge developed east of Typhoon Thad . On August 22 , however , Thad accelerated northward in the general direction of Japan . At 0000 UTC on August 23 , the JTWC downgraded Thad into a tropical storm while moving onshore in central Japan . Several hours later , the JMA followed suit , even though Thad had moved well inland by that time . By this time , cooler air had taken toll on the storm , and that afternoon , data from both agencies indicated that Thad finished its transition into an extratropical cyclone . By that time , Thad merged with a trough over the Tatar Strait . However , the JMA continued monitoring the system until the morning of August 25 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 While moving across northern Japan , Thad affected 21 of Japan 's 47 provinces while becoming the first storm to directly strike Kanto in 16 years . A peak rainfall total of 590 mm ( 23 in ) was recorded in Oku @-@ Nikko in Tochigi , including 571 mm ( 22 @.@ 5 in ) in a day . A peak hourly storm total of 571 mm ( 22 @.@ 5 in ) was measured at <unk> in Gunma . Thad was responsible for strong winds , including a 76 km / h ( 47 mph ) wind speed at <unk> on Hokkaido . 
 In all , 31 people perished and 82 were injured . Overall , the typhoon flooded 22 @,@ 433 houses and demolished 112 dwellings . Furthermore , the storm also blocked roads in 850 spots , destroyed 449 others , collapsed 80 bridges , broke dikes at 173 places , and generated 499 landslides . Approximately 27 @,@ 000 people were left homeless because of Thad . About 115 @,@ 000 households were left without electricity . Furthermore , Thad inundated 417 @,@ 400 acres ( 168 @,@ 915 ha ) of farm land . Train service was interrupted in 22 lines , including 18 " bullet " trains . Four flights were also cancelled ; however , by August 24 , air traffic had returned to normal . 
 Along the Kanto Plain near Tokyo , Thad wrecked 22 houses , damaged 31 bridges , damaged roads in 145 places , and flooded 27 rivers . According to police reports , five individuals drowned and six others were initially reported missing in <unk> , because of flooding from the nearby Ayu River that crushed houses along the bank . In Akita , a fishing boat with nine people aboard was capsized by strong winds ; all nine were rendered as missing by police . Elsewhere , one person was killed by a falling tree and a fisherman drowned when his boat overturned . In the Ibaraki Province , just north of Tokyo , officials ordered the evacuation of 5 @,@ 000 dwellings in the city of <unk> , 2 @,@ 500 of which were flooded . After the nearby <unk> River threatened to overflow their banks , over 1 @,@ 000 families were evacuated . Another 4 @,@ 000 families were evacuated in Fujishiro , though by August 25 , the majority of the evacuated had returned to their homes . In the island of Hokkaido , air service was suspended ; damage was severe in the area . However , the capital city of Tokyo avoided the worst of the storm . In all , Thad was considered the worst storm to strike the nation in two years . 
 = Dolph Ziggler = 
 Nicholas Theodore " Nick " Nemeth ( born July 27 , 1980 ) , best known by the ring name Dolph Ziggler , is an American professional wrestler , stand @-@ up comedian , and actor . He is signed to WWE on the SmackDown brand . 
 Nemeth signed a development contract with WWE in 2004 , and was sent to Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) . He was brought up to the Raw brand in 2005 as Kerwin White 's sidekick . He was , however , sent back to OVW shortly afterwards , where he joined The Spirit Squad as Nicky . They debuted on Raw in January 2006 , and won the World Tag Team Championship once before returning to OVW that November . In September 2007 , Nemeth was assigned to Florida Championship Wrestling ( FCW ) , where he won the FCW Florida Tag Team Championship twice , with Brad Allen and later Gavin Spears . 
 Nemeth returned to the WWE main roster under his current ring name in September 2008 . Since then , Ziggler has held the World Heavyweight Championship twice , the Intercontinental Championship four times , the United States Championship once , and was the 2012 Money in the Bank winner . He has also been the sole survivor of two Survivor Series elimination matches at the 2012 and 2014 events . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nemeth was born in Cleveland , Ohio . He has said that he has Hungarian ancestry . He attended St. Edward High School in Lakewood , Ohio , where he was an amateur wrestler , and holds the school record for most pins in a career with 82 . At St. Edward , he was teammates with Gray Maynard and Andy <unk> . During his time at St. Edward , the wrestling team won the National Championships on two occasions . 
 Nemeth was a collegiate wrestler at Kent State University , eventually setting what was then the record for most career wins in the team 's history . His record was passed in 2006 ; as of 2010 , he stands second all @-@ time in career victories at Kent State . He had 121 career wins between 2000 and 2003 . 
 Nemeth won championships in three consecutive years . He was a three @-@ time All @-@ Mid @-@ American Conference champion , winning the 165 lb ( 75 kg ) tournament in 2000 , 2002 , and 2003 ; as of 2010 , he is the last wrestler from Kent State University to have won three amateur wrestling championships . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 Nemeth signed a contract with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) in 2004 . He was assigned to their developmental territory Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) , debuting as " Nick Nemeth " . He feuded with Paul Burchill and challenged unsuccessfully for the OVW Television Championship , losing a championship match against then @-@ champion Ken Doane on August 12 , 2005 . 
 Nemeth was called up to the Raw roster shortly afterwards , making his television debut on the September 19 , 2005 episode of Sunday Night Heat . He was made the enforcer and sidekick for Chavo Guerrero , Jr . , who was using a golfer in @-@ ring persona and going by the ring name of " Kerwin White " . As such , Nemeth became White 's caddy . His wrestling debut came on an episode of Sunday Night Heat , teaming up with White in a tag team match against Shelton Benjamin and Matt Striker . After the death of Eddie Guerrero , Chavo Guerrero dropped the " Kerwin White " character , and Nemeth no longer played the role of his caddy and tag partner . After a few months of wrestling in dark matches and at house shows , he was sent back to OVW . 
 = = = = The Spirit Squad ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 Nemeth became a part of " The Spirit Squad " faction , a group of five wrestlers who used the in @-@ ring personas of male cheerleaders , and adopted the name Nicky in OVW during late 2005 . The Spirit Squad members trained with real cheerleaders and gymnasts to ensure their characters were believable . On January 23 , 2006 , they had their WWE television debut as a group , appearing on Raw and helping Jonathan Coachman win a Royal Rumble qualifying match against Jerry " The King " Lawler by performing cheers for Coachman and distracting Lawler . They later became a part of the ongoing scripted feud between WWE chairman Vince McMahon and Shawn Michaels . The heel McMahon brought in the Squad to attack Michaels on numerous occasions , including placing them in multiple handicap matches . 
 They also wrestled in the tag team division , and on April 3 , on Raw , won the World Tag Team Championship when Kenny and Mikey , with outside help from the other three Squad members , defeated Big Show and Kane . After winning the championship , all five members of the Spirit Squad were recognized as the champions , allowing any combination of them to defend the championship under the Freebird Rule . 
 In May , McMahon signed another Handicap match , with the Spirit Squad facing Michaels . The match never started , however ; instead the Spirit Squad attacked Michaels , and , as part of the storyline , shattered his knee with a steel chair . McMahon brought Triple H to the ring to attack Michaels with a sledgehammer ; however , after Triple H felt that the Squad had disrespected him , he attacked the group . This led to Triple H and Michaels reforming D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) and they began a feud with the Spirit Squad . DX played various sophomoric jokes on the Squad and the McMahons , as well as defeating the Spirit Squad in handicap tag team matches at Vengeance and a clean sweep in an elimination handicap match at Saturday Night 's Main Event . 
 At the same time as their feud with DX and their alignment with McMahon , the Squad also wrestled other teams in Raw 's tag division over their World Tag Team Championship , successfully defending the championship against the teams of Jim Duggan and Eugene , Charlie Haas and Viscera , and Snitsky and Val Venis . They then entered a lengthy feud with The Highlanders , whom they eventually defeated to retain the championship at the Unforgiven pay @-@ per @-@ view in September . The Squad as a whole later began a losing streak with separate members losing singles matches to Ric Flair on consecutive episodes of Raw , until Kenny managed to defeat him on the October 23 episode . It was then announced that Flair and a WWE legend , selected by interactive voting , would wrestle the team for the World Tag Team Championship at the Cyber Sunday pay @-@ per @-@ view in early November . The fans chose Roddy Piper , and he and Flair defeated Kenny and Mikey to win the championship . 
 The group disbanded on the November 27 episode of Raw , when they were defeated in a five @-@ on @-@ three handicap match by DX and Flair . In a backstage segment later that night , DX placed all members into a crate stamped " OVW , Louisville , Kentucky " , a reference to the developmental territory from which the Squad had come . 
 = = = = Return to OVW ( 2007 ) = = = = 
 Nemeth returned to OVW on January 17 , 2007 , at the television tapings , again using his Nick Nemeth ring name , along with Mike Mondo , formerly Mikey in the Spirit Squad , as the " Frat Pack " . The pair teamed with Mike Kruel in a match against Seth Skyfire , Shawn Spears , and Cody Runnels . The team disbanded in the early parts of 2007 . Nemeth then competed in several dark matches before the OVW television tapings , competing against several wrestlers including Chris Cage , Bradley Jay and Jake Hager , before he began teaming with Mondo again in August . 
 = = = = Florida Championship Wrestling ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 At the end of August , Nemeth and Mike Mondo were moved to the Florida Championship Wrestling ( FCW ) developmental territory and in his debut there , Nemeth gained the nickname " The Natural " and defeated Hade Vansen . In November 2007 , Nemeth gained Big Rob as his manager , but their alliance was short @-@ lived . At the start of 2008 , he tweaked his name to " Nic Nemeth " and began teaming with Brad Allen , with the pair gaining Taryn Terrell as their valet . Nemeth and Allen started a frat boy type ring character with Terrell as a sorority girl . On March 22 , Nemeth and Allen won the FCW Florida Tag Team Championship by defeating defending champions Eddie Colón and Eric Pérez , but lost the championship to Colón and Pérez on April 15 . Throughout April and May 2008 , Nemeth wrestled in several dark matches prior to Raw , losing to Kofi Kingston and Ron Killings on several occasions . Soon after , he returned to the name " Nic Nemeth " , and began teaming with Gavin Spears . The pair defeated Colón and Pérez to win the FCW Florida Tag Team Championship on August 16 , but lost it to Heath Miller and Joe Hennig less than a month later . 
 = = = = <unk> ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 On September 15 , 2008 , Nemeth re @-@ debuted on Raw , introducing himself in a backstage segment under the name " Dolph Ziggler " . On October 10 , Nemeth was suspended for 30 days for a violation of WWE 's Wellness Program policy . He returned to Raw on November 17 in a backstage segment with Rey Mysterio and Shawn Michaels . In his first match on Raw under the Ziggler name , he lost to Batista on the December 1 episode . The following week he got his first victory as Ziggler , by countout , against R @-@ Truth . The next week on Raw , he picked up his first televised pinfall victory , when he defeated Charlie Haas . Ziggler competed in the 2009 Royal Rumble match , in which he was eliminated by Kane after 21 seconds . 
 On April 15 , 2009 , Ziggler was drafted to the SmackDown brand as part of the 2009 Supplemental Draft . He made his debut on the April 17 episode of SmackDown , defeating the United States Champion , Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) in a non @-@ title match , and , as a result , the following week he demanded a match for the championship . On the May 1 episode of SmackDown , however , he failed to win the championship , after he was pinned by MVP . Ziggler then started a rivalry with The Great Khali , losing to him by disqualification after attacking Khali with a steel chair . As a result , Khali began coming out to the ring during and after Ziggler 's matches , in attempt to gain revenge and to stop Ziggler from cheating . Over the next few weeks , Ziggler defeated Khali by countout and disqualification after making it look like Khali had struck him with a steel chair . At The Bash pay @-@ per @-@ view , Ziggler defeated Khali by pinfall , after Kane interfered and attacked Khali . 
 = = = = Championship reigns ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 Ziggler then entered an on @-@ screen relationship with WWE Diva Maria and she became his valet . He simultaneously started a scripted rivalry with Intercontinental Champion Rey Mysterio , who defeated Ziggler at the Night of Champions and SummerSlam pay @-@ per @-@ views to retain the championship . In September , Mysterio lost the Intercontinental Championship to John Morrison , and Ziggler entered a feud with Morrison , losing to him at the Hell in a Cell pay @-@ per @-@ view . On the episode of SmackDown , following Hell in a Cell , Ziggler ended his on @-@ screen relationship with Maria after she cost him a match against Morrison . On the February 26 , 2010 episode of SmackDown , Ziggler defeated John Morrison and R @-@ Truth in a triple threat qualifying match to compete in the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania XXVI , but was ultimately unsuccessful . 
 In June 2010 he began a romantic storyline with Vickie Guerrero , who began accompanying him to the ring . On the July 9 episode of SmackDown , Ziggler defeated Chavo Guerrero and Montel Vontavious Porter in a triple threat match to qualify for the SmackDown Money in the Bank ladder match at the Money in the Bank pay @-@ per @-@ view , where he once again failed to win the match . On July 28 at the tapings of the August 6 episode of SmackDown Ziggler defeated Kofi Kingston to win the WWE Intercontinental Championship for the first time . In his first title defense at SummerSlam , he retained the championship against Kingston when the match ended in a no contest due to interference from The Nexus . Ziggler was able to make a successful title defense against Kingston at the Night of Champions pay @-@ per @-@ view , and against Kaval at Survivor Series . 
 In November 2010 , Ziggler was announced as a Pro for the fourth season of NXT , with Jacob Novak as his Rookie . At TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs , Ziggler successfully retained the Intercontinental Championship in a three @-@ way ladder match against Kingston and Jack Swagger . On the January 4 , 2011 episode of NXT , Ziggler won a battle royal to earn the right to choose a new rookie , and chose Byron Saxton . His original rookie , Novak , was the first rookie eliminated later that night . 
 At the SmackDown tapings on January 4 , Ziggler lost the Intercontinental Championship to Kingston after a five @-@ month reign at 160 days . That same night , Ziggler won a four @-@ way match against Cody Rhodes , Drew McIntyre , and The Big Show to become the number one contender to the World Heavyweight Championship . Ziggler received his match for the championship at the Royal Rumble pay @-@ per @-@ view against Edge , but was unsuccessful . On February 4 , Ziggler 's girlfriend Vickie Guerrero , who was the acting General Manager of SmackDown , announced that she had banned the spear – Edge 's finishing move – and if Edge used it during the rematch between the two , Ziggler would be automatically awarded the championship . In the interim , Ziggler 's second rookie , Byron Saxton , was also voted off of NXT . On the February 11 episode of SmackDown , Ziggler received a rematch for the championship , only to lose after being speared . On the February 14 episode of Raw , Guerrero announced that Edge had lost the championship due to using the spear and that Ziggler would be crowned the new champion . On SmackDown on February 18 , Guerrero fired Edge , claiming that he had attacked SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long several weeks prior , and awarded Ziggler the championship during a coronation ceremony later that night . Long returned during the ceremony however , and Guerrero revealed Ziggler as the attacker after being accused of orchestrating the attack by Long . Long rehired Edge and gave him his rematch , in which Edge regained the championship . Ziggler 's first World Championship reign lasted only 11 minutes and 23 seconds . After the match , Long fired Ziggler in storyline . 
 = = = = United States Champion ( 2011 – 2012 ) = = = = 
 On the March 7 episode of Raw , Ziggler was introduced as the newest member of the Raw roster , and defeated John Morrison in a singles match . Ziggler was accompanied by Guerrero , who had also been fired from SmackDown , but she was forced to earn her spot on the Raw roster . Ziggler , along with Guerrero , and LayCool then feuded with Morrison , Trish Stratus and Jersey Shore guest star Snooki , culminating in a mixed tag team match at WrestleMania XXVII which Ziggler and his team lost . On the April 18 episode of Raw , Vickie introduced the " new and improved " Dolph Ziggler . Ziggler came out with his hair cut short and brown and went on to defeat Evan Bourne in a singles match . He had re @-@ bleached his hair by the May 23 episode of Raw . 
 Ziggler beat United States Champion Kofi Kingston in a non @-@ title match on the May 30 episode of Raw , leading to a championship match at WWE Capitol Punishment which Ziggler won to earn his first United States Championship . The next night on Raw , Kingston invoked his rematch clause in a two out of three falls match and won via disqualification , allowing Ziggler to retain . After Jack Swagger suggested to Guerrero that she should manage him in addition to Ziggler , a jealous Ziggler teased tension with Swagger . This , coupled with Ziggler 's concurrent feud with Alex Riley , led to Ziggler to defend and retain his United States Championship in a fatal four @-@ way match against Swagger , Riley , and John Morrison at Night of Champions . On the September 19 episode of Raw , Ziggler lost a non @-@ title match to Zack Ryder when guest star Hugh Jackman helped Ryder by punching Ziggler in the face . Although Ziggler later claimed to have a broken jaw due to Jackman 's punch , it was reported that the supposed injury was fake . Later that night , Guerrero officially began managing Swagger , and Swagger began interfering in Ziggler 's matches to help him win . Ziggler and Swagger unsuccessfully challenged Air Boom for the WWE Tag Team Championship at Hell in a Cell and at Vengeance , where Ziggler also successfully defended the United States Championship against Ryder . He went on to successfully defend the championship against Morrison at Survivor Series . At TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs , Ziggler lost the United States Championship to Ryder . 
 On the December 26 episode of Raw , Ziggler defeated WWE Champion CM Punk in a gauntlet match for a championship opportunity following interference from John Laurinaitis . The following Raw , Ziggler defeated Punk by countout after Laurinaitis interfered again ; as a result , Ziggler did not win the championship . At the 2012 Royal Rumble pay @-@ per @-@ view , Ziggler failed to capture the WWE Championship from CM Punk . At the Elimination Chamber , Ziggler failed again to capture the WWE Championship after being eliminated second by Chris Jericho . Nemeth noted to Arda <unk> in an interview for The Score Television Network that the Elimination Chamber left him with multiple minor injuries and it is a match he least looks forward to working . 
 On the February 27 Raw , Ziggler and Swagger unsuccessfully challenged Primo & Epico for the WWE Tag Team Championship in a Triple Threat tag team match , also involving Kofi Kingston and R @-@ Truth . On the March 19 Raw , Ziggler and Swagger were announced as the newest members of Team Johnny for the 12 man tag team match at WrestleMania XXVIII . On the April 2 Raw , Ziggler and Swagger unsuccessfully challenged Santino Marella for the United States Championship in a triple threat match . After the match , Ziggler began a feud with Brodus Clay , who headbutted Ziggler after he and Swagger tried to attack Marella . On the following episode of Raw , Ziggler and Swagger were defeated by Clay and Marella in a tag team match . In the following weeks , Ziggler and Swagger lost to Clay and Hornswoggle in singles and tag matches . At Extreme Rules , Ziggler was again defeated by Clay . In May , Ziggler and Swagger unsuccessfully challenged Kofi Kingston and R @-@ Truth for WWE Tag Team Championship , first at Over the Limit and second on the May 28 episode of Raw , resulting in Ziggler showing signs of wanting to break away from Guerrero and Swagger . 
 On the June 11 episode of Raw , Ziggler pinned The Great Khali , Swagger and Christian in a fatal four way elimination match to become the number one contender to the World Heavyweight Championship , but at No Way Out , Ziggler lost the title match to champion Sheamus . On the following Raw , Guerrero , finally tired of the bickering between Ziggler and Swagger , arranged for a match between them ; Ziggler won the match and Guerrero 's affections . Ziggler received another shot at the World title on the June 29 SmackDown , but was again defeated by Sheamus in a triple threat match , also involving Alberto Del Rio . 
 = = = = World Heavyweight Champion ( 2012 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 On the July 3 SmackDown , Ziggler defeated Alex Riley to qualify for a spot in the World Heavyweight Championship Money in the Bank ladder match . On July 13 , Ziggler , Zack Ryder and Justin Roberts were involved in a car accident in San Diego while driving from Comic @-@ Con ; none of them suffered severe injuries . Two days later at the Money in the Bank pay @-@ per @-@ view , Ziggler won the Money in The Bank ladder match to guarantee him the opportunity to challenge for the World Heavyweight Championship at a time of his choosing within the next year . Later that night , Ziggler attempted to cash in the briefcase on Sheamus after Alberto Del Rio attacked him after their match , but Del Rio stopped Ziggler from cashing in . On the following episode of SmackDown , Ziggler again attempted to cash in the briefcase on Sheamus following a tag team match with Alberto Del Rio , but was laid out by Rey Mysterio and Sheamus before he could do so . During this time , Ziggler began a feud with Chris Jericho after claiming he had lost his touch , which resulted in Jericho attacking him on two occasions , and defeating him in a singles match at SummerSlam . The night after SummerSlam , Ziggler defeated Jericho in a rematch ; as a result Ziggler retained his Money in the Bank contract and Jericho 's WWE contract was terminated . Following this , Ziggler began feuding with Randy Orton on SmackDown four days later , after Orton <unk> him when trying to cash his Money in the Bank contract on a vulnerable Sheamus . The following week on SmackDown , Ziggler faced Orton in a match that was won by Orton . Three days later on Raw , Ziggler defeated Orton in a rematch , pinning him while holding his tights . Ziggler faced Orton again at Night of Champions where he lost again , ending the feud . On November 18 at Survivor Series , Ziggler captained the traditional 5 @-@ on @-@ 5 elimination tag team match opposite Mick Foley . Ziggler won the match by last pinning Orton , making him the sole survivor of the match . 
 Ziggler then began feuding with John Cena after he sided with Vickie Guerrero to help defame Cena and AJ Lee by alleging they had a romantic relationship . On December 16 at TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs , Ziggler retained his Money in the Bank briefcase in a ladder match after AJ interfered and turned on Cena . The following night on Raw , while trying to diffuse an argument between Vickie and AJ , AJ unexpectedly kissed Ziggler , leaving him confused . Ziggler then attempted to cash in his Money in the Bank briefcase on Big Show after Show was assaulted by Sheamus , but he was attacked by Cena before the match could start . Later , Ziggler teamed with AJ to face Cena and Vickie Guerrero , however , the match ended in a disqualification after the debuting Big E Langston attacked Cena , also starting an on @-@ screen relationship between Dolph and AJ . Ziggler ended 2012 having wrestled the second most TV / PPV matches that year with 90 ; however , he had the most TV / PPV losses with 57 . Ziggler ended his feud with Cena after losing to him on the January 7 , 2013 , episode of Raw , in a singles match and in steel cage match the following week , despite outside interference from AJ and Langston in both matches . On the January 21 episode of Raw , Ziggler won a Beat the Clock Challenge to earn the right to choose what number he can enter in the Royal Rumble match , first or second . Six days later at the Royal Rumble , Ziggler entered at number one and lasted nearly fifty minutes before being eliminated by Sheamus . During the match , Ziggler resumed his feud with the returning Chris Jericho , who Ziggler managed to eliminate . The following night on Raw , Ziggler and Jericho were placed in a " Strange Bedfellows " match against WWE Tag Team Champions Team Hell No ( Daniel Bryan and Kane ) . The match ended with Ziggler being chokeslammed and pinned by Kane after Jericho framed him for pushing Kane . On the February 18 episode of Raw , Ziggler was defeated by World <unk> Champion Alberto Del Rio via submission in a non @-@ title match . Afterwards , Langston attacked Del Rio and then Ziggler made a failed attempt to cash in his Money in the Bank briefcase after Del Rio 's ring announcer Ricardo Rodriguez ran off with it . After defeating WWE Tag Team Champions Daniel Bryan and Kane in singles matches due interference from Langston , Ziggler and Langston were given a shot at their titles . The title match took place on April 7 at WrestleMania 29 , where Ziggler and Langston unsuccessfully challenged Bryan and Kane for the WWE Tag Team Championship . 
 The following night on Raw , Ziggler cashed in his Money in the Bank contract on an injured Alberto Del Rio to win his second World Heavyweight Championship . After gaining the World Heavyweight Championship , Ziggler began feuding with Del Rio and Jack Swagger over the title . Ziggler was originally booked to face Del Rio and Swagger in a three @-@ way ladder match at Extreme Rules , however , Ziggler suffered a legitimate concussion at a SmackDown taping , thus removing their match from the pay @-@ per @-@ view and resulting in Ziggler being absent from television for a month . On June 16 at Payback , Ziggler faced Del Rio in his first title defense of the World Heavyweight Championship and during the match , a double turn took place ; Ziggler turned face by displaying a never @-@ say @-@ die attitude while Del Rio turned heel by repeatedly and ruthlessly targeting his head to take advantage of his concussion , win the match , and end Ziggler 's reign at 69 days . On July 14 at Money in the Bank , AJ cost Ziggler his title rematch against Alberto Del Rio , after she prematurely snuck into the ring and hit Del Rio with her own title , prompting a disqualification . On the following Raw , Ziggler ended his relationship with AJ due to her actions the previous night . AJ exacted revenge by costing Ziggler a non @-@ title match against Del Rio , then she attacked Ziggler and unleashed Langston on him . 
 On the July 29 , 2013 episode of Raw , Ziggler defeated Big Langston via disqualification after AJ Lee attacked Ziggler . In a rematch on the following week , Ziggler was defeated by Langston after a distraction by AJ and Kaitlyn . This led to a mixed tag team match at SummerSlam , where Ziggler and Kaitlyn defeated Big E and AJ . 
 = = = = Intercontinental Champion ( 2013 – 2015 ) = = = = 
 Ziggler started to become wildly popular with the fans . Following the conclusion of SummerSlam , he and other Superstars were being interviewed and spoke out against Triple H when Triple H cost Daniel Bryan the championship . This led to him , alongside other superstars who spoke out against Triple H to feud against Triple H 's newly formed Authority . Ziggler was later unsuccessful in capturing the United States Championship , when he lost to Dean Ambrose , at Night of Champions and on the October 16 episode of Main Event . Ziggler also failed to win the Intercontinental Championship from Curtis Axel on the November 11 episode of Raw . In December , Ziggler lost two number one contender matches for the Intercontinental Championship , first to Damien Sandow and later to Fandango . On the January 9 , 2014 episode of Superstars , Ziggler sustained another concussion during his match with Ryback . 
 He returned at Royal Rumble , competing in the Royal Rumble match , but was eliminated by Roman Reigns . The following night on Raw , Ziggler defeated The Miz in a Battle of Cleveland match where Dolph was acknowledged as being from Cleveland and was billed from there ahead of the match . Ziggler later earned a shot at Big E 's Intercontinental Championship , but was unsuccessful in capturing the title . On April 6 at WrestleMania XXX , Ziggler competed in the 31 @-@ man Andre the Giant Memorial Battle Royal , but was eliminated by Alberto Del Rio . On June 29 at Money in the Bank , Ziggler competed in the Money in the Bank ladder match for a WWE World Heavyweight Championship contract , but the match was won by Seth Rollins . 
 Ziggler later competed in a Battle Royal for the vacant Intercontinental Championship on July 20 at Battleground , however , he was abruptly eliminated from behind by The Miz . After Ziggler defeated Miz in a non @-@ title match the following night on Raw , he received a rematch at SummerSlam , where he defeated Miz to win the championship for a second time . The following night on Raw , Ziggler successfully retained his title against Miz , after he was counted out . At Night of Champions , Ziggler dropped the title to Miz , only for Ziggler to win it back the following night on Raw . Ziggler then retained the championship against Cesaro on September 26 episode of SmackDown , in a triple threat match against Cesaro and Miz the following week on Raw and at Hell in a Cell against Cesaro in a 2 @-@ out @-@ of @-@ 3 falls match . On the October 28 , 2014 episode of Raw , Ziggler and John Cena shook hands together backstage , which The Authority interpreted as a deal to plot against them . As a result , Ziggler was put in a match against Kane , which Ziggler won . Ziggler then announced that he would be part of Team Cena at Survivor Series . On the November 10 episode of Raw , Ziggler was brutally attacked by the returning Luke Harper . The following week , Harper was awarded a title match against Ziggler , which Harper won with assistance from The Authority , ending Ziggler 's reign at 56 days . 
 The 2014 Survivor Series event saw Ziggler emerging as the sole survivor for a second time . Ziggler contributed to Rusev being counted out , then after all his team @-@ mates were eliminated , he pinned Kane and Luke Harper . Triple H twice prevented Ziggler from pinning final opponent Seth Rollins , but the debuting Sting provided an assist to help Ziggler win the match , thus ousting the Authority from power . At TLC on December 14 , Ziggler defeated Harper in a ladder match to capture his fourth Intercontinental Championship . On the December 16 episode of SmackDown , Ziggler finally defeated Seth Rollins in a singles match after failing numerous times previously . Three days later , Rolling Stone named Ziggler as the 2014 WWE Wrestler of the Year . On the first Raw of 2015 ( dated Jan. 5 ) , the recently reinstated Authority forced Ziggler to defend his Intercontinental Championship against Bad News Barrett and he initially won . After Barrett then attacked and injured Ziggler 's shoulder , Kane declared the match as a 2 @-@ out @-@ of @-@ 3 falls match , Barrett proceeded to defeat Ziggler for the title after Kane distracted him . Later that night , Ziggler alongside Ryback and Erick Rowan received a storyline firing by the Authority . 
 On the January 19 episode of Raw , Sting provided another assist , as John Cena won Ziggler , Ryback and Rowan 's jobs back . Ziggler returned to television on the next SmackDown and qualified for the Royal Rumble match by beating Barrett in a non @-@ title match . In the 2015 Royal Rumble match , Ziggler entered as the last entrant , scored two eliminations but was quickly eliminated by Big Show and Kane . At Fastlane , Ziggler competed together with Rowan and Ryback in a six @-@ man tag team match against Rollins , Big Show and Kane , which they lost . On the March 5 episode of SmackDown , Ziggler was announced as a participant in the 7 @-@ man ladder match for the Intercontinental Championship at WrestleMania 31 , which was won by Daniel Bryan . 
 After losing an Intercontinental Championship match against Daniel Bryan on the Raw following WrestleMania 31 , Ziggler was attacked and Brogue kicked by the returning Sheamus . Claiming that " the era of underdogs ( like Ziggler ) is over " , Sheamus and Ziggler started a feud , with Sheamus challenging Ziggler in a Kiss Me Arse match at Extreme Rules , which Ziggler won . However , Sheamus refused to follow the stipulation , and instead made Ziggler kiss his arse . Ziggler lost the rematch against Sheamus at Payback . Ziggler participated in the Elimination Chamber for the vacated Intercontinental Championship ; other participants were winner Ryback , King Barrett , R @-@ Truth , Sheamus , who eliminated Ziggler , and Mark Henry , at Elimination Chamber . At Money In The Bank , Ziggler competed in the Money in the Bank ladder match , which was won by Sheamus . On July 4 , at The Beast in the East live event in Japan , Ziggler and John Cena defeated King Barrett and Kane in the main event . 
 = = = = The Love Quadrangle ( 2015 – 2016 ) = = = = 
 Ziggler became involved in an on – screen love affair with Lana , the former manager of Rusev , when she kissed him at Raw on May 25 , with Lana serving as Ziggler 's valet during his matches . During this time , Ziggler started incorporating elements of 80 's glam rock fashion into his entrance and ring attire ; typical of 80 's bands like Motley Crue and Poison . In June , after Ziggler and Lana confirmed their storyline relationship , Summer Rae allied with Rusev to even the odds . After an attack by Rusev , Ziggler suffered a bruised trachea in storyline , which was to give him some time off to film a new WWE Studios movie , titled 6 : 42 . Ziggler returned on the August 17 episode of Raw , aiding Lana during a confrontation against Rusev and Summer Rae . This altercation prompted a match between Ziggler and Rusev , six days later , at SummerSlam , which ended in a double count – out due to interference from Lana and Rae . In a rematch , on September 20 , at Night of Champions Ziggler emerged victorious . On October 11 , when TMZ reported the real – life engagement of Rusev and Lana , this officially ended their feud . The following night on Raw , Ziggler unsuccessfully challenged John Cena for the WWE United States Championship . 
 On the October 22 episode of SmackDown , Ziggler started a feud with the debuting Tyler Breeze , who aligned with Summer Rae and attacked Ziggler . Ziggler entered a tournament for the vacant WWE World Heavyweight Championship , defeating The Miz in the first round match before being eliminated by Dean Ambrose . Ziggler and Breeze continued their feud , which culminated in a match between the two at Survivor Series , which Ziggler lost . The next night on RAW Ziggler teamed with Dean Ambrose to defeat the team of Tyler Breeze and Kevin Owens . On the November 30 episode of RAW Ziggler defeated Breeze in a singles match to end the feud . Breeze and Summer Rae would later split up in December 2015 to put the love quadrangle to rest once and for all . 
 On the December 18 episode of SmackDown Ziggler defeated Kevin Owens via a countout victory . Kevin Owens interrupted Ziggler at the 2015 Slammy Awards when Dolph was presenting award , the two ended up getting into a brawl and a match was later made for that evening with Owens picking up the victory . The two would later trade victories into the new year . Ziggler defeated Bo Dallas on the New Year 's Eve SmackDown special . 
 = = = = Various feuds ( 2016 – present ) = = = = 
 Ziggler entered the 2016 Royal Rumble as the 28th entrant , lasting 7 minutes , but was eliminated by the eventual winner , Triple H. The next night on Raw , Dolph Ziggler faced Kevin Owens in a losing effort , but defeated him the following two weeks in a row . On the February 15 Raw , Ziggler was involved in a Fatal 5 @-@ Way Match for the Intercontinental Championship , where Kevin Owens regained the title after pinning Tyler Breeze . At Fastlane , Ziggler challenged Owens to a match for the Intercontinental Championship , which he lost . In the following weeks , Ziggler began to re @-@ ignite his feud with The Authority , and on the March 14 episode of Raw , confronted Triple H and Stephanie McMahon . This resulted in Ziggler being granted a match against Triple H where if he won , he could pick his match at WrestleMania ( excluding the WWE World Heavyweight Title match ) ; however , Ziggler lost . At WrestleMania 32 , Ziggler would compete against Kevin Owens , Sami Zayn , The Miz , Stardust , Sin Cara and Zack Ryder in a ladder match for the Intercontinental Championship , which was won by Ryder . 
 Following Wrestlemania 32 , on the April 4 , 2016 edition of Raw , Ziggler went to a double countout with Baron Corbin , leading to Corbin hitting an ' End of Days ' outside of the ring to Ziggler , igniting a feud in the process . At the Payback pre @-@ show , Ziggler faced Baron Corbin in a winning effort . The two then had a No Disqualification match at Extreme Rules where Corbin won after hitting a low blow on Ziggler . 
 Following Extreme Rules , on the May 23 edition of Raw , Ziggler had a confrontation backstage with Corbin with Ziggler challenging him to a technical wrestling match the next week . Later , Ziggler would lose to Dean Ambrose in a Money in the Bank qualifying match . On the May 30 Raw , Ziggler intentionally disqualified himself when he kicked Corbin in the groin immediately after the match began . This led to a rubber match at Money In The Bank , which Corbin won , ending their feud . On July 19 , at the 2016 WWE Draft , Ziggler was drafted to SmackDown . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Nemeth appeared on the November 3 , 2009 , episode of Deal or No Deal with Maria Kanellis and Eve Torres . He then appeared on Lopez Tonight on August 9 , 2010 . Nemeth appears in a 2011 episode of Silent Library alongside Chris Masters , Trent Baretta , JTG , <unk> Croft , and Curt Hawkins . Nemeth made regular appearances on fellow WWE wrestler Zack Ryder 's YouTube web series , Z ! True Long Island Story , via his own segment named ' Ask Z Heel ' . The series ended on January 11 , 2013 . 
 On February 1 , 2012 , Nemeth debuted <unk> 's WWE Download and was the host of the YouTube series . The official WWE Download playlist on YouTube described the series as " Dolph Ziggler 's sarcastic wit vs. your videos " and each episode consisted of Ziggler reviewing both viral and WWE videos . A new episode of WWE Download was uploaded every Monday until the show ended on January 28 , 2013 , after 53 episodes but returned for one time only on September 30 , 2014 . In August 2013 , Nemeth was cast by Max Landis to appear in the 2015 film Me Him Her . 
 Ziggler has appeared in seven video games . He made his video game debut in WWE Smackdown vs Raw 2010 and appears in WWE Smackdown vs Raw 2011 , WWE ' 12 , WWE ' 13 , WWE 2K14 , WWE 2K15 , and WWE 2K16 . 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nemeth has been a fan of professional wrestling since he was five years old , when he attended a wrestling event at the Richfield Coliseum and decided to become a professional wrestler at age 12 . His younger brother , Ryan , is also a professional wrestler who previously worked with WWE and wrestled in NXT under the ring name Briley Pierce . He and Ryan also have a younger brother named Donald ( nicknamed " Donny " ) , who is a suspect in a 2016 murder . 
 Nemeth dated comedian Amy Schumer . 
 Nemeth is a graduate of Kent State University , where he majored in political science with a pre @-@ law minor . Prior to his WWE tryout , he was living in Phoenix , Arizona , and had been accepted to the law school at Arizona State University , where he was due to start his first semester . 
 Nemeth is good friends with his former Spirit Squad teammates , particularly Michael Brendli , with whom he lived in Florida until 2008 . Since then , he has returned to residing in Phoenix . 
 Nemeth is fluent in American Sign Language . 
 He revealed on Colt Cabana 's Art of Wrestling Podcast that he chose the name " Dolph " because that was his great @-@ grandfather 's name , and his friend suggested the surname " Ziggler " . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Blonde Ambition ( Leaping reverse STO ) – FCW 
 Sleeper hold , sometimes with bodyscissors – 2010 – 2012 ; used as a signature move thereafter 
 Superkick with theatrics ; often used as a signature move 
 Zig Zag ( Jumping reverse bulldog ) 
 Signature moves 
 Dropkick , sometimes from the top rope 
 <unk> ( Leg drop bulldog ) 
 Headlock , sometimes while performing a <unk> 
 Heart Stopper ( Jumping elbow drop with theatrics , sometimes preceded by multiple elbow drops ) 
 Jumping DDT 
 Multiple neckbreaker variations 
 Snap 
 Standing 
 Swinging 
 Scoop powerslam , sometimes inverted 
 Shoulder jawbreaker 
 Sitout facebuster , sometimes from the top rope 
 Stinger splash , sometimes followed by multiple punches to a cornered opponent , or a swinging neckbreaker 
 Managers 
 Taryn Terrell 
 Big Rob 
 Maria 
 Vickie Guerrero 
 Kaitlyn 
 AJ Lee 
 Big E Langston 
 Lana 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Kerwin White 
 Nicknames 
 " The Natural " 
 " The <unk> " 
 " Perfection " 
 " The # Heel " 
 " Mr. Money in the Bank " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Never Thought My Life Could Be This Good " by Jim Johnston ( September 19 , 2005 – November 2005 ; used while teaming with Kerwin White ) 
 " I Am Perfection " performed by Cage 9 and composed by Jim Johnston ( June 26 , 2009 – July 18 , 2011 ) 
 " I Am Perfection ( V2 ) " performed by Downstait and composed by Jim Johnston ( July 25 , 2011 – November 20 , 2011 ) 
 " Here to Show the World " performed by Downstait and composed by Jim Johnston ( November 21 , 2011 – present ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Florida Championship Wrestling 
 FCW Florida Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Brad Allen ( 1 ) and Gavin Spears ( 1 ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him 9 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2013 
 Rolling Stone 
 Worst Storyline ( 2015 ) With Lana vs. Rusev / Summer Rae 
 WWE Wrestler of the Year ( 2014 ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 World Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 WWE Intercontinental Championship ( 4 times ) 
 WWE United States Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) 1 – with The Spirit Squad 
 Money in the Bank ( 2012 – World Heavyweight Championship contract ) 
 Slammy Awards ( 2 times ) 
 Best Twitter Handle or Social Champion ( 2014 ) – @ <unk> 
 Match of the Year ( 2014 ) – Team Cena vs. Team Authority at Survivor Series 
 22nd Triple Crown Champion 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Most Improved ( 2011 ) 
 Most Underrated ( 2011 ) 
 1 Ziggler , as Nicky , defended the championship with either Kenny , Johnny , Mitch or Mikey under the Freebird Rule . 
 = Percy Statton = 
 Percy Clyde Statton , VC , MM ( 21 October 1890 – 5 December 1959 ) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . Serving as a sergeant during the First World War , Statton was awarded the Victoria Cross in 1918 following his assault on four German machine guns . With three men , Statton rushed the posts armed with only a revolver and succeeded in capturing the first gun . Moving to the second , he killed the crew of five himself before the two remaining gun crews were forced to retreat . 
 Born in Tasmania , Statton was married and working as a farmer when he enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force during 1916 . Posted to the 40th Battalion , he was shipped to England where he spent three months training . Arriving on the Western Front in 1917 , Statton was awarded the Military Medal during the Battle of Messines while leading carrying parties to the frontline under heavy artillery and machine gun fire . Wounded twice during the war , Statton returned to Australia in 1919 and was discharged the following year . In 1934 , he took part in rescue work aiding families isolated by severe bushfires in the Derwent Valley . Following a period of service during the Second World War , Statton died of stomach cancer in 1959 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Statton was born in Beaconsfield , Tasmania , on 21 October 1890 to Edward Statton , a miner , and his wife Maggie Lavinia ( née Hoskins ) . He was educated at <unk> State School , before gaining employment as a farmer in <unk> . Giving his age as twenty @-@ one , Statton married Elsie May Pearce in a Methodist ceremony on 12 September 1907 ; the couple later had a son and two daughters . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Despite his wife 's disapproval , Statton enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force on 29 February 1916 , and was allotted to the newly raised 40th Battalion as a private . Appointed lance corporal on 22 May , Statton embarked from Hobart aboard HMAT Berrima on 1 July , bound for England . The troopship disembarked at Devonport a little over seven weeks later , where the 40th Battalion spent the next three months training . 
 Promoted to corporal on 19 November 1916 , Statton embarked along with the rest of the 40th Battalion for France and the Western Front four days later . Initially posted to Le Havre , the battalion was transferred to Flanders in Belgium during early 1917 . Statton was promoted to temporary sergeant on 16 January 1917 , which was made substantive from 26 April . In June , the 40th Battalion took part in the Battle of Messines . 
 Over a three @-@ day period during the engagement at Messines from 7 – 9 June , Statton was placed in charge of supervising and leading carrying parties to the frontline . Throughout this work , he was subject to heavy German artillery and machine gun fire , and on several occasions the party was decimated by shellfire . Despite this , the parties managed to reach the frontline on every occasion . For his actions throughout this time , Statton was later awarded the Military Medal , the recommendation of which cited his " exceptional fine work and gallant conduct " . The notification of the award was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 16 August 1917 . 
 On 12 October 1917 , Statton was involved in operations during the First Battle of Passchendaele when he suffered a gunshot wound to his right shoulder . First admitted to the 22nd General Hospital , <unk> , Statton was then transferred to the VAD Hospital , Tonbridge , as the wound required treatment in England . Having sufficiently recovered after a period of hospitalisation at the Fort Pitt Military Hospital , Chatham , and 3rd Auxiliary Hospital , Dartford , Statton was granted two weeks leave from 28 January 1918 . Returning to duty , he was attached to the Overseas Training Brigade at Longbridge <unk> prior to re @-@ embarking on 1 May for France , where he rejoined the 40th Battalion twelve days later . 
 While in action around the village of Villers @-@ Bretonneux on 10 June , Statton was wounded in a gas attack on his position . Initially admitted to the 10th Australian Field Ambulance , he was transferred to the 40th Casualty Clearing Station six days later , before returning to the 40th Battalion on 24 June . Beginning on 8 July , Statton was placed on a five @-@ day attachment to a demonstration platoon at the 10th Brigade Headquarters . Returning to his battalion , he was attached to the American 3rd Battalion , 130th Regiment , for service over a seven @-@ day period later that month . He rejoined the 40th Battalion on 27 July . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 Between 10 – 12 August 1918 , the 3rd Australian Division — of which the 40th Battalion was part — was ordered to attack from an easterly direction against the southern bank of the Somme River , and advance along the road past Proyart . On 12 August , the 40th Battalion was tasked with the objective of seizing and holding a valley to the south of the Proyart – Chuignes road . The advance entailed moving the battalion across approximately 1 @,@ 300 metres ( 1 @,@ 400 yd ) of open ground , while under the direct observation of German forces on high ground to the east of Proyart . At the same time , the 37th Battalion was to move through the village of Proyart itself , and proceed to a line just beyond the railway to the north of the Proyart – Chuignes road . It was during this action that Statton was to earn the Victoria Cross . 
