 The 40th Battalion began its attack at approximately 07 : 30 , and by 08 : 30 had successfully advanced 800 metres ( 870 yd ) . It was at this point , however , that the unit came under an intense barrage from German artillery , and were prevented from moving further forward . With assistance from a Lewis Gun team under Statton 's command , the battalion 's A Company managed to reach the centre of Proyart village an hour later . The remainder of the 40th Battalion attempted to follow , but soon became subject to heavy machine gun fire . With his Lewis Gun , Statton engaged two German machine gun posts and thus enabled the remainder of his battalion to continue its advance . The battalion was later able to reach its objectives . 
 At 18 : 00 , the 40th Battalion received a message that the 37th Battalion was about to attempt to advance from the village to its own objective . From his position , Statton observed a line of German machine gunners firing on the 37th Battalion and preventing its advance . He turned his Lewis Guns on them in an attempt to assist a party of men from the 37th as they attacked . Having failed , a party of thirteen men were assembled and rushed the position soon after , but the group was wiped out before they reached the first gun . Gathering Corporal Upchurch and Privates Styles and Beard , Statton worked his way along under the cover of the Chuignes road embankment . Reaching within 75 metres ( 82 yd ) of the machine gunners and armed with only a revolver , Statton led the three men as they rushed across the open ground towards the German strongpoint . Reaching the position , the party was able to dispose of the first gun and its crew before moving onto the second , where Statton personally shot four of the five crew members and bayoneted the fifth with his own rifle . Seeing this , the two remaining gun teams began to retreat but were killed by Statton 's Lewis Gunners . 
 Soon after , another German machine gun opened up , killing Private Styles and wounding Corporal Upchurch . With Private Beard , Statton began to crawl back to his own lines , while the inspired 37th Battalion continued its advance and cheered the pair as they went past . Later that evening , Statton , while under heavy machine gun fire , went out and retrieved the badly @-@ wounded Upchurch and the body of Styles . By 20 : 00 , both battalions had reached and consolidated their positions , and were relieved by the British 17th Division the following day . 
 At 09 : 00 on 27 September 1918 , the 40th Battalion was ordered onto parade by the unit 's Commanding Officer , Lieutenant Colonel John Lord . Addressing the assembled crowd , Lord announced that that same day , the name of Sergeant Percy Statton would appear in the London Gazette announcing that he had been awarded the Victoria Cross . Described by the battalion 's history as a " reluctant hero " , Statton was granted three cheers before he was carried shoulder high through the ranks while the battalion band played . The full citation for Statton 's Victoria Cross appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette later that day , reading : 
 War Office , 27th September 1918 . 
 His Majesty the KING has been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officers , N.C.O. ' s and Man : — 
 No. 506 Sjt . Percy Clyde Statton , M.M. , A.I.F. 
 For most conspicuous bravery and initiative in action when in command of a platoon which reached its objective , the remainder of the battalion being held up by heavy machine @-@ gun fire . He skilfully engaged two machine @-@ gun posts with Lewis gun fire , enabling the remainder of his battalion to advance . 
 The advance of the battalion on his left had been brought to a standstill by heavy enemy machine @-@ gun fire , and the first of our assaulting detachments to reach the machine @-@ gun posts were put out of action in taking the first gun . Armed only with a revolver , in broad daylight , Sjt . Statton at once rushed four enemy machine @-@ gun posts in succession , disposing of two of them , and killing five of the enemy . The remaining two posts retired and were wiped out by Lewis @-@ gun fire . 
 Later in the evening , under heavy machine @-@ gun fire , he went out again and brought in two badly wounded men . 
 Sjt . Station set a magnificent example of quick decision , and the success of the attacking troops was largely due to his determined gallantry . 
 = = = Later war service = = = 
 From 20 October 1918 , Statton was granted ten days leave to Paris . Returning to the 40th Battalion , he was sent to Amiens the following day and attached to 4th Army Guard for special duties over a three @-@ day period . Briefly re @-@ joining his battalion , Statton was shipped to England on 5 November for special duties . During this time , the Armistice was signed officially declaring the war 's end , and Statton was granted two weeks leave in December . 
 Returning to France on 27 January 1919 , Statton was attached to the Headquarters of the Australian Base Depot from 25 March . Shipped to England in June , Statton attended an investiture ceremony in the Quadrangle of Buckingham Palace , where he was presented with his Victoria Cross by King George V. During his time in England , Statton undertook a course at the Motor Training Institute in preparation for non @-@ military employment , before he was granted a month 's leave . Returning to duty on 24 September , Statton boarded HT <unk> twelve days later and departed for Australia . The troopship arrived in Tasmania on 26 November and Statton was discharged from the Australian Imperial Force on 19 January 1920 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following his discharge , Statton settled in Fitzgerald , Tasmania , where he gained employment in the timber industry . True to her word that she would leave him if he went off to war , Statton 's wife divorced him on 1 October 1920 . Five years later , on 21 December 1925 , he married Eliza Grace Hudson ( née Parker ) at the Registrar General 's Office , Hobart . In 1934 , severe bushfires broke out in the Derwent Valley , and Statton took a prominent role in rescue work aiding families isolated by the fire . 
 During the Second World War , Statton enlisted for service with the Volunteer Defence Corps of the Australian Military Forces . Commissioned as a lieutenant on 18 June 1942 , he served throughout the war with the 5th Battalion , Volunteer Defence Corps , until his discharge on 9 January 1946 . Statton 's wife died in 1945 , and on 16 December 1947 , he married Monica Enid Effie Kingston ; the pair later had a son . The couple lived at Ouse , where Statton worked as a commercial agent and was a member of the local council . 
 In 1956 , Statton joined the Australian contingent of Victoria Cross recipients who attended the parade in London 's Hyde Park to commemorate the centenary of the institution of the award . At the Repatriation General Hospital , Hobart , on 5 December 1959 , Statton died of stomach cancer . <unk> a full military funeral , Statton was cremated and his ashes interred at the Cornelian Bay Cemetery . His Victoria Cross is currently on display at the Australian War Memorial . 
 = Henry Fielding 's early plays = 
 The early plays of Henry Fielding mark the beginning of Fielding 's literary career . His early plays span the time period from his first production in 1728 to the beginning of the Actor 's Rebellion of 1733 , a strife within the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane that divided the theatrical community and threatened to disrupt London stage performances . These plays introduce Fielding 's take on politics , gender , and morality and serve as an early basis for how Fielding develops his ideas on these matters throughout his career . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fielding first produced a play in February 1728 . Although his first production , Love in Several Masques , lasted only a few nights , it was the start of his career in theatre . On 16 March 1728 , Fielding enrolled at the University of Leyden , but he did not abandon the theatre . His early plays were those of an amateur hobby , but he later returned to London to earn a living . Arthur Murphy , in his 1762 biographical introduction to Fielding 's works , believed that Fielding returned to London and treated the theatre as a career because his father stopped an allowance of 200 pounds a year . 
 However , there is little evidence that Fielding lacked funds , or that such a lack of funds would cause him to leave Leyden to return to writing plays ; Fielding eventually returned to Leyden on 22 February 1729 . It is not know when or why Fielding left the school , but he produced The Temple Beau on 26 January 1730 , which suggests that he returned to London by November 1729 . By the time of his return , he had three plays , either still in draft form or complete : Don Quixote in England , The Wedding @-@ Day and The Temple Beau . Of these , only The Temple Beau was accepted for the stage . 
 When Fielding returned to working with the Royal Theatre , his piece The Lottery became an immediate success and lasted for decades after . Combined with The Modern Husband , Fielding could have received up to 1 @,@ 000 pounds from the plays ' first run . This placed Fielding at the position of being the main contributor of plays to the Royal Theatre . Currently , Fielding is primarily viewed as a novelist , but his plays suggest that he wished to be a playwright and that his career would be in theatre . Although Fielding wrote twenty @-@ six plays , only a handful of them were ever published in critical editions before 1990 . 
 = = Early plays = = 
 The early plays include Love in Several Masques , The Temple Beau , The Author 's Farce , Tom Thumb , Rape upon Rape , The Tragedy of Tragedies , The Letter Writers , The Welsh Opera , The Grub @-@ Street Opera , The Lottery , The Modern Husband , The Old Debauchees , The Covent @-@ Garden Tragedy , and The Mock Doctor . These plays start in 1727 , when Fielding first worked on Love in Several Masques , until the disruption of the winter 1732 – 1733 theatre season at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane . This disruption , caused by illness , management problems , and other incidents , started the Actor Rebellion of 1733 . 
 = = = 1727 – 1728 = = = 
 Love in Several Masques was Fielding 's first play , and was first released on 16 February 1728 . Though the play was never revived and only ran for four nights , it still did moderately well especially when compared with the competing plays at that time . In the play , three respectable males each meet a female counterpart three times , and share a parallel incident with letters and an unmasking . Fielding focuses on men and how he believes they should prove their worth before marriage . It also highlights Fielding 's belief in the relationship of morality and libertine beliefs and introduces character types that Fielding would use throughout his plays and novels . 
 Don Quixote in England was started as Fielding 's second play , but it was not finished and produced until the later part of his career . After Fielding returned to London from the University of Leyden during the end of 1729 , he brought with him a version of Don Quixote in England . It was refused by the Theatre Royal and it was not produced or printed until 1734 . The only information on the origins of this play come from Fielding 's 1734 preface . It was his second play , and Fielding attributes it to being written at Leyden during 1728 . It was intended more as amusement than as a serious production and was an imitation of Cervantes 's Don Quixote . After the prompting of Barton Booth and Colley Cibber , Fielding put away the play until 1733 , when the Drury @-@ Lane actors asked him for a new play . Soon after , Fielding rewrote parts of the play . 
 The Wedding Day was started as his third play , but it was not finished until years later and finally brought out on both the stage and in print after his theatrical career ended . After Fielding returned to London from the University of Leyden during the end of 1729 , he brought with him a version of The Wedding @-@ Day . It was refused by John Rich to be staged , and it was not produced until 1743 by David Garrick . The only information on the origins of this play come from Fielding 's preface to the play in his Miscellanies ( 1743 ) . In it , Fielding says that he intended the leads , <unk> and Charlotte , for Robert Wilks and Anne Oldfield . However , Oldfield died before the play could be produced , and Fielding and Wilks got into a fight , which made it impossible for Fielding to convince him to join the production . 
 = = = 1729 – 1730 = = = 
 Fielding started work on his fourth play , The Temple Beau , in April 1729 , but did not finish until the end of the year . Rejected by his first theatre , the play had to be performed at another one , where it had 13 shows its first year and few revivals thereafter . The play is about Wilding , a young law student who gives up his studies to seek pleasure , and his attempts to marry a woman for her money . Fielding focuses on hypocrisy and gender equality in marriage with characters ' interaction with Wilding . 
 Fielding 's fifth play , The Author 's Farce and the Pleasures of the Town , first opened on 30 March 1730 at the Little Theatre , Haymarket , and initially ran for 41 nights , which marked it as a major success . The play incorporates Fielding 's response to Drury Lane and their previous rejection of his works . It also contains a third act , a puppet show , that pokes fun at theatre and the literary community as a whole . The play was revived many times in its original format and later in the medium of puppet show for its entire format . The plot focuses on Harry Luckless , an author , as he attempts to have a successful writing career , pursue women , dodge his landlady , and eventually put on a show within the show . To emphasise the literary satire , Fielding introduced his persona " Scriblerus Secundus " and adopts the tradition of the Scriblerus Club . 
 Tom Thumb , Fielding 's sixth play , was added to the ninth showing of The Author 's Farce , 24 April 1730 . Together , the shows lasted at the Haymarket until they were replaced by Fielding 's next production , Rape upon Rape . Tom Thumb was later included with other productions , including Rape upon Rape , and later transformed into the Tragedy of Tragedies . In the print edition , Fielding added footnotes , prefaces , and prologues , which introduced the narratorial style found in Fielding 's later works . The plot deals with the English hero , Tom Thumb , who is of only tiny proportions . After defeating a group of giants , Tom Thumb is handsomely rewarded by King Arthur , which later erupts in a comical love triangle between Tom , Arthur 's wife Queen <unk> , and Princess <unk> . Tom is eventually swallowed by a cow and killed . Soon after , his ghost appears but meets an untimely death . This scene reportedly provoked Jonathan Swift to laughter , a rare feat . The farcical nature of Tom Thumb pokes fun at 17th and 18th @-@ century tragedy , gender roles and gender politics . 
 Fielding 's seventh play , Rape upon Rape ; or , The Justice Caught in His Own Trap , was a five @-@ act comedic play that first ran on 23 June 1730 at the Little Theatre for eight nights . The play enjoyed some success until it was renamed The Coffee @-@ House Politician and was altered to possibly update the play as it focused on mocking current news events . The play is a love comedy that incorporates a corrupt judge that stands in the lovers ' way . Eventually , various characters attempt to stop the judge , but he prevails albeit in a comedic fashion . Fielding 's focus in the play is to point out corruption in government and to attack those who abuse their power . 
 = = = 1731 = = = 
 Fielding 's expanded version of Tom Thumb , The Tragedy of Tragedies , first ran on 24 March 1731 . Its printed edition was " edited " and " commented " on by Fielding 's pseudonym H. Scriblerus Secundus who pretends not to be the original author , and it contains a frontispiece by Hogarth , which serves as the earliest proof of a relationship between Fielding and Hogarth . There are few major changes to the plot 's outline except that Grizzle became Tom 's rival for <unk> 's heart , and Tom is not killed by Grizzle . Instead , Tom is able to defeat Grizzle , which changes the outcome of the play . Furthermore , there is an emphasis on faulty language and Fielding emphasises the problems within poorly written tragedies . 
 Fielding 's ninth play , the unsuccessful The Letter Writers Or , a New Way to Keep a Wife at Home , ran for four nights as a companion piece to The Tragedy of Tragedies but was soon after replaced by The Welsh Opera on 22 April 1731 . The play followed two characters whose wives are busy having affairs and how they attempt to keep their wives faithful . The immoral characters are forgiven within the play and there is a lack of moral commentary within the plot . 
 The tenth play and new companion piece to The Tragedy of Tragedies , The Welsh Opera , ran many times until it was expanded into The Grub @-@ Street Opera . The expanded version of the play , The Grub @-@ Street Opera , was not put on for an audience , which provoked E. Rayner to print The Welsh Opera without Fielding 's consent . The play serves both as a tribute to the <unk> , especially Gay and Gay 's The Beggar 's Opera , and to put forth a political allegory that satirises Walpole 's government and the British monarchy . In particular , it mocked the feud between Walpole and Pulteney , a Privy Councillor . 
 The expanded and altered version of The Welsh Opera , The Grub @-@ Street Opera , was first rehearsed in May 1731 , but it never ran on stage . It was printed and exists in a complete printed format , and it is possible that it was not performed because of government intervention . Its original printing was done without Fielding 's consent , and it is uncertain as to when Fielding 's official version of the play was printed . The plot focuses on a standard love story but with characters that exhibit less than virtuous characteristics . The title pokes fun at the Grub Street Journal and also links to the theme within the plot of attacking theatre in general . 
 = = = 1732 = = = 
 After Fielding returned to working with the Royal Theatre , Drury Lane , he wrote The Lottery , which first ran on 1 January 1732 alongside Addison 's Cato . The play was successful and was performed 15 times during January . He altered the play in February , and the revised form ran for 14 more nights during that season and was put on each year until 1740 and occasionally thereafter until 1783 . The story deals with Chloe 's desire to play the lottery and pokes fun at the London lottery system and those who support it . 
 Fielding 's thirteenth play , The Modern Husband , first ran on 14 February 1732 . The play ran for 13 nights at Drury Lane , rivalling the run of the Provok 'd Husband and Zara for production length . Although early @-@ 20th @-@ century critics believed that the play could not be popular , it did make money and even put on a benefit show on 2 March 1732 . The play was not revived later , possibly because the principal actors of the play died soon after and the plot of the play discouraged new actors from wanting to play the parts . The plot deals with a man selling his wife for money and the attempted abuse of the adultery laws . 
 The Old Debauchees , originally titled The Despairing <unk> , appeared with The Covent @-@ Garden Tragedy on 1 June 1732 . The play ran for six nights and was later paired with The Mock Doctor . The play was later revived to attack Catholics during the disputes with the Stuarts between 1745 and 1746 . The play alludes to the 1731 trial of Father Girard , a Jesuit tried for using magic during an attempted seduction / rape of a young girl . The nature of the attacks against Catholicism within the play undermines the overall humour of the play . 
 Although The Covent @-@ Garden Tragedy appeared with The Old Debauchees , it was not a success like the other play and quickly dropped . The Covent Garden Tragedy was immediately ended after its first night because , according to Fielding , of the play 's use of a brothel as a setting . After all , the plot focuses on a love triangle between characters in a brothel . Even though the first night fell apart , the play was later performed ; it eventually appeared again for four nights with Don Quixote in England , once on its own in 1734 , and a few later times during the 18th century , including as a puppet show . 
 Fielding 's sixteenth play , The Mock Doctor : or The Dumb Lady <unk> 'd , replaced The Covent Garden Tragedy as the companion play to The Old Debauchees . The play is an Anglicised adaptation of Molière 's Le <unk> <unk> Lui . It first ran on 23 June 1732 and was later revised in 1732 ; both versions were very successful . The plot deals with a young girl pretending to be mute to avoid having to marry a man she does not like while her doctor is really a man pretending to be a doctor to con the other characters . 
 = = Structure and concern = = 
 In 1728 , John Gay 's The Beggar 's Opera was extremely successful and ran for 62 times during the season , an unprecedented length of time . The play began to change London theatre through the introduction of political themes and experimentation in form . Following this trend , Fielding pushed politics into the forefront of his plays . This provoked criticism from all sides , including from the playwright Colley Cibber . However , The Beggar 's Opera is not Fielding 's only influence ; Fielding is part of the theatrical tradition surrounding him , and , as Harold Pagliaro points out , " Fielding 's first play , like all those to follow , is among other things an accommodation to the world of theatre in which he worked . " 
 Fielding was concerned with the audience 's reaction to his various scenes . This is internally reflected in the actions of the character Merital in Love in Several Masques in controlling the behaviour of Helen and that many of his characters believe that they are either actors or are performing on a stage . Also , this is a primary concern of Fielding 's when he crafted his <unk> plays . 
 Reading and how reading defines characters is a focus within many plays and in Fielding 's later works . In Love in Several Masques , the character Wisemore focuses on classics but ignores contemporary society . Similarly , the character Wilding , in The Temple Beau , practices law but doesn 't read at all . Reading is an outlet to understanding humanity , and Fielding uses his plays to inform an audience how to better understand humanity . 
 Morality and moral characters was an important concern within Fielding 's works , and his first play serves as a representation for Fielding 's believes surrounding the relationship between morality and libertine beliefs that is found throughout his work . The plays also introduces most of the character types that Fielding would reuse throughout his plays and novels . However , his use of libertine themes and characters served as a way for those like Pat Rogers to believe that Fielding lacked an orthodox understanding of Christianity ; he believes that Fielding was harsh towards hypocrisy but not against other actions . In particular , Rogers claims , " Fielding was generous enough in that sphere of morality , however implacable he might be in his larger political and religious attachment . Provided that soldiers were brave and loyal he did not require their lives to be models of absolute purity . " Tiffany Potter follows this idea by claiming , " Eliminating a moral imperative to drama ( and to life in general ) gives Fielding the liberty to create unconventional characters and to set plays anywhere from ballrooms to brothels without having to defend anything more than his own stance on issues . The necessity of even that defence , however , is usually negated by his libertine belief in privilege . 
 = = = Gender = = = 
 Gender plays a large role within Fielding 's moral critique , and effeminacy is a means to emphasise a male character 's moral shortcomings or problematic deviations from social and cultural traditions . Starting with Love in Several Masques , the stock characters that he relies on emphasise the deviations by recalling traditional behavioural stereotypes and in their commentary on the masculinity or femininity of other characters . The political implications for gender extend to a criticism of powerful female within the domestic and public domains . Many of the problems portrayed within the plays are the results of the domestic sphere extended into politics , especially within Tom Thumb . As Jill Campbell points out , not only does Fielding critique women in power , but the reversals of gender and power serve as a way to say that private concerns are taking priority over public concerns . In his plays and his novels , women are used as a way to discuss the internal aspects of humans , which includes both emotions and morality . Although Fielding sometimes uses females to express ideal ways to act , he does mock women who abuse their relationship with the internal , emotions , and morality to dominate and assume power . This theme appears as early as Love in Several Masques and continues throughout , especially in prose parody Shamela where Shamela <unk> claims to virtue to control and get ahead in life . 
 Fielding does not limit his analysis of gender roles to just the living ; the image of the ghost plays a significant part in many of Fielding 's plays , including The Author 's Farce , the Tom Thumb plays , and The Covent Garden Tragedy . Even though Fielding fails to explain what the existence of ghosts means , the image of the ghost can serve as a metaphor for Fielding 's expectation of women who are supposed to be publicly virtuous . According to Campbell , 
 woman bears the representational burden for Fielding of his disappointment about the relation between internal and external selves , as , culturally , she must sustain the realm of private life , interior feeling , and personal identity apart from the public and commercial world of the male ; inevitably , then , she must fail Fielding through her reliance on the ' harlotry ' of pomp , ostentation , or the drama of self @-@ display if she is to be a part of this world . And yet , he fears her alternative fate as a ghost as well , though he may seem to wish it on her . 
 Not every critic sees that Fielding sets up an inevitable fall for women . Potter argues that : 
 Women are neither victims of deceitful men nor <unk> virgins , but individuals who can choose to ' bestow ' their favours on a man who will ' enjoy ' them . In the earliest examples of the redefinition that develops throughout Fielding 's works , virtue is no longer simply virginity , but something malleable and powerful in the hands of a woman granted the agency and intelligence to determine her own sexuality . 
 Counter to Campbell , Potter seems to emphasise how gender is removed and emphasises that Fielding sees gender as a social construct . There is a balancing of the genders and neither is favoured over the other . To Potter , " Only the weakening of humanity through cross @-@ adoption of the most ridiculous qualities of either gender is attacked in Fielding 's plays . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The reception of Fielding 's plays received early recognition ; his early plays placed him in a position of popularity alongside Gay . George Bernard Shaw believed that Fielding was " the greatest practising dramatist , with the single exception of Shakespeare , produced in England between the Middle Ages and the nineteenth century . " However , modern critics rarely agree with Shaw , as Robert Hume points out , " Few scholars have been much interested in Fielding 's highly successful career as a dramatist . To most it has seemed a false start . Readers tend to find the conventional plays derivative and sentimental , the topical ones scrappy and superficial . " In particular , only one book until 1988 was published on the topic , which was <unk> 's Le theatre de Fielding , 1728 – 1737 , et ses <unk> dans l 'oeuvre romanesque . This critical approach is not limited to just Fielding , but to the whole field ; the reputation of Colley Cibber was ruined by Pope 's characterising him as the Arch Dunce and " Since the plays of Cibber 's only serious rival , Henry Fielding , are hardly even read these days , let alone performed , the earlier eighteenth @-@ century theater tends to be passed over with ( at best ) a polite cough . " 
 J. Paul Hunter believes that : 
 Fielding 's plays do not prophesy that he will become a major novelist , but the direction of his theatrical career does suggest concerns that increasingly led him away from pure representation [ ... ] Fielding 's separation from the theatre was a forced one , but the expulsion was fortunate , freeing him from a relationship and commitment that had always been in some sense against the grain [ ... ] Fielding 's way is not really very dramatic , either in novels or in plays ; he never developed stage @-@ likely objective correlatives , having reserved his artistic energy for the examining process in which the action is rerun again and again , reviewed , considered , nearly <unk> . 
 To Albert Rivero , ten of the plays " mark significant moments in [ Fielding 's ] theatrical life " : Love in Several Masques , The Temple Beau , The Author 's Farce , Tom Thumb , The Tragedy of Tragedies , Rape upon Rape , The Grub Street Opera , The Modern Husband , Pasquin , and The Historical Register . Similarly , Potter organised the plays by a general theme of developing libertine characters and believed that " Fielding 's most successful group of plays followed Love in Several Masques both chronologically and thematically . Comedies and burlesques such as The Author 's Farce , The Tragedy of Tragedies , The Old Debauchees , and Pasquin made Fielding the most popular playwright of the 1730s , and all of these plays contain characters , situations , and dialogues that invoke libertine philosophy in some way , thought they vary in the explicitness of the depiction . " In his biography of Fielding , Pagliaro declares that " Between 1727 and 1737 , by which time he was only 30 years old , Fielding became England 's most successful living playwright . " 
 = Hurricane Faith = 
 Hurricane Faith reached the northernmost latitude and had the longest track of any Atlantic tropical cyclone . The sixth named storm and fifth hurricane of the 1966 Atlantic hurricane season , Faith developed from an area of disturbed weather between Cape Verde and the west coast of Africa on August 21 . Tracking westward , the depression gradually intensified and became Tropical Storm Faith on the following day . Moving westward across the Atlantic Ocean , it continued to slowly strengthen , reaching hurricane status early on August 23 . About 42 hours later , Faith reached an initial peak with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , before weakening slightly on August 26 . Located near the Lesser Antilles , the outer bands of Faith produced gale force winds in the region , especially Puerto Rico , the Virgin Islands , and Antigua . Minor coastal damage occurred as far south as Trinidad and Tobago . 
 By August 28 , the storm began to re @-@ intensify , after curving north @-@ northwestward near The Bahamas . At 0000 UTC on the following day , Faith peaked as a 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) Category 3 hurricane Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale . Eventually , the storm weakened back to a Category 2 hurricane and re @-@ curved to the northeast . One person drowned in the western Atlantic after his ship sank . Heavy rainfall and strong winds pelted Bermuda , though no damage occurred . The storm maintained nearly the same intensity as a Category 2 hurricane for several days , while tracking northeastward into the far North Atlantic Ocean . Faith finally weakened while north of Scotland and became extratropical near the Faroe Islands on September 6 . Three other drowning deaths occurred in the North Sea near Denmark . A fifth death occurred after a man succumbed to injuries sustained during a boating incident related to the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Television Infrared Observation Satellite XI ( TIROS XI ) imagery indicated the presence of an area of disturbed weather over Ivory Coast on August 18 . The system moved slowly westward and eventually reached the Atlantic Ocean . It is estimated that a tropical depression developed at 0000 UTC on August 21 , while located about 240 miles ( 390 km ) southeast of Cape Verde . Continuing westward , the depression intensified , and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Faith on the following day . Gradual intensification persisted as Tropical Storm Faith headed nearly due westward at 17 to 23 mph ( 27 to 37 km / h ) . By August 23 , Faith was upgraded to a Category 1 hurricane . Curving slightly west @-@ northwestward , the storm reached Category 2 intensity and briefly peaked at sustained winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Hurricane Faith curved to the northwest and weakened back to a Category 1 hurricane while approaching the northeastern Leeward Islands on August 25 . Initially , Faith was scheduled to be seeded as part of Project Stormfury . However , the scheduled seeding was cancelled as Faith was approaching The Bahamas . Bypassing the Leeward Islands , Faith remained at nearly the same intensity , until re @-@ strengthening into Category 2 hurricane on August 28 , near Turks and Caicos Islands . The storm quickly intensified further into a Category 3 hurricane only six hours later . 
 At 0000 UTC on August 29 , Faith attained its maximum sustained winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . After reaching maximum sustained winds late on August 29 , Faith began to gradually weaken and decreased to Category 2 hurricane intensity early on August 30 . By that time , the storm turned to the northeast around the periphery of an Atlantic subtropical anticyclone while located about midway between Bermuda and Florida . Faith remained well offshore of the East Coast of the United States and Atlantic Canada , after veering eastward on September 1 . Thereafter , it began to accelerate and eventually curved northeastward . While approaching Europe , Faith 's forward speed increased to as much as 50 mph ( 75 km / h ) . At 0600 UTC on September 3 , a minimum barometric pressure of 950 mbar ( 28 inHg ) was recorded – the lowest in relation to the storm . After remaining a Category 2 hurricane since August 29 , Faith weakened slightly to a Category 1 hurricane early on September 6 , as it neared the Faroe Islands . Crossing the North Sea , Faith finally transitioned into an extratropical storm at 1200 UTC later that day , while centered about 125 miles ( 200 km ) east @-@ northeast of Tórshavn . The extratropical remnants of Faith headed eastward and affected Norway with winds as high as 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Tracking over Scandinavia , the extratropical storm weakened to the equivalency of a tropical depression before entering the Soviet Union ( present day Russia ) . Eventually , the storm degenerated into an extratropical low pressure area , curved northward , and retained its identity until September 15 , when it was over Franz Josef Land , which is roughly 600 miles ( 965 km ) from the North Pole . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 In the Leeward Islands , the approach of Faith caused the tracking station on Antigua – which was monitoring an unmanned rocket launched by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) – to shut down 45 minutes after the rocket lifted off . Faith also produced gale force winds across Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands , though only minor damage and no fatalities or injuries were reported . Further south , Faith brought rough seas to Trinidad and Tobago , with waves ranging from 10 to 15 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) . These conditions inflicted minor damage to small boats and jetties . In the Turks and Caicos Islands , sea defenses suffered some damage as Faith passed about 65 miles ( 105 km ) to the east @-@ northeast . Along the East Coast of the United States , the storm produced rough seas and high tides from Cape Canaveral ( then Cape Kennedy ) , Florida , to the Virginia Capes . Additionally , the Weather Bureau warned of possible gale force winds in The Carolinas and Virginia , but also noted that the area would only experience fringe effects from the storm . In Bermuda , the outer rainbands of Hurricane Faith produced heavy rainfall and wind gusts up to 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) . 
 Five people died as a result of the storm , though only one of them on land . Rough seas in the western Atlantic battered the Alberto <unk> , pitching one man overboard . Two others drowned near Denmark while attempting to cross the Atlantic Ocean in a rowboat . Another man was missing and presumed dead after heavy seas forced him and his shipmates to abandon their boat off the northern coast of Denmark . Property damage was minimal , mainly because the areas impacted by Faith were sparsely populated . A 2 @,@ 726 ton Norwegian car ferry known as <unk> began to sink as it headed for Hirtshals in Region Nordjylland of Denmark . Waves pounded the side hatches , which flooded in the engine room , causing the ship to become disabled . A large @-@ scale search operation was conducted to rescue the 144 passengers aboard . All passengers were rescued and treated for their injuries in Hjørring , Denmark . However , one person later died in the hospital . In Norway , the remnants of Faith impacted areas between <unk> and Sunnfjord . The storm brought heavy rainfall and resulted in glacier melting , which in turn caused rampant flooding in some locations . Discharge from the Folgefonna , <unk> , and Sunnfjord glaciers reached a record high melt due to the remnants of Faith . 
 Throughout its duration , Faith traveled for 6 @,@ 850 miles ( 11 @,@ 020 km ) , making it the longest track of an Atlantic hurricane and the second longest worldwide , after Hurricane John in 1994 in the Eastern Pacific Ocean . Faith also traveled to the northernmost latitude of any Atlantic tropical cyclone , reaching as far north as 61 @.@ 1 ° N. 
 = <unk> whipray = 
 The reticulate whipray or honeycomb stingray ( Himantura uarnak ) is a species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae . It inhabits coastal and brackish waters across the Indo @-@ Pacific region from South Africa to Taiwan to Australia , favoring sandy habitats . A large species reaching 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) in width , the reticulate whipray has a diamond @-@ shaped pectoral fin disc and an extremely long tail without fin folds . Both its common and scientific names refer to its ornate dorsal color pattern of many small , close @-@ set dark spots or reticulations on a lighter background . However , the reticulate whipray is only one of several large spotted stingrays in the Indo @-@ Pacific which , coupled with the variability of its coloration with age and locality , has resulted in a great deal of taxonomic confusion . 
 Often encountered resting on the bottom during daytime , the reticulate whipray is a predator of bottom @-@ dwelling invertebrates and bony fishes . Like other stingrays , it is aplacental viviparous , with the developing embryos nourished at first by yolk and later by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) . Females bear litters of up to five pups in summer , following a gestation period of a year . The reticulate whipray is fished in Southeast Asia and parts of the Indian Ocean for meat , skin , cartilage , and other purposes . It is highly susceptible to population depletion because of its large size , inshore habits , and low reproductive rate , and is additionally threatened by extensive habitat degradation . Consequently , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Vulnerable . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 In 1775 , Carsten Niebuhr published <unk> animalium – avium , amphibiorum , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> : <unk> in <unk> <unk> <unk> , the work of his late friend , the Swedish naturalist Peter Forsskål . Within Forsskål had described Raja <unk> , now commonly known as the <unk> stingray , with a spotted variant he called uarnak , derived from an Arabic word that describes the color pattern . No type specimen was designated . Forsskål 's account formed the basis for two subsequent writings that named the spotted ray as a distinct species : Pierre Joseph Bonnaterre 's Raia <unk> in 1788 , and Johann Friedrich Gmelin 's Raja uarnak in 1789 . Although Bonnaterre 's name was published first and thus would have had precedence , later authorities have regarded Forsskål 's uarnak as the earliest available name even though it was not initially part of a binomial . Consequently , modern sources give uarnak as the valid specific epithet and either Gmelin or Forsskål as the species authority . In 1837 , Johannes Peter Müller and Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle included the reticulate whipray in the newly created genus Himantura ; David Starr Jordan and Barton Warren <unk> made it the type species in 1896 . 
 The reticulate whipray is closely related to H. undulata and H. leoparda , which share much of its range . All three species are very similar in size , shape , and color pattern , resulting in a long history of taxonomic confusion that only recently is starting to be untangled . In 2004 , Mabel Manjaji described the ' uarnak ' species complex , containing H. fai , H. <unk> , H. jenkinsii , H. leoparda , H. toshi , H. uarnak , and H. undulata , plus three more undescribed species . The reticulate whipray itself varies in appearance throughout its range , and further taxonomic comparisons are required to determine whether its spotted and reticulated color morphs in fact represent different species . Alternate common names for this ray include coachwhip ray , leopard stingray , longtail stingray , and marbled stingray ; some of these names are shared by other , similar species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pectoral fin disc of the reticulate whipray is diamond @-@ shaped and wider than long , with the leading margins almost straight and the snout and outer corners angular . In juveniles , the disc is about as wide as long , with a more obtuse snout and rounded corners . The eyes are small and immediately followed by the spiracles ( paired respiratory openings ) . A short and wide curtain of skin with a minutely fringed rear margin is present between the long , thin nostrils . The mouth is relatively small , with a deep concavity at the center of the lower jaw and shallow furrows at the corners extending onto the lower jaw . A row of 4 – 5 papillae ( nipple @-@ like structures ) is found across the floor of the mouth . There are 26 – 40 upper tooth rows and 27 – 44 lower tooth rows . The pelvic fins are small and triangular . The tail is whip @-@ like and extremely thin , measuring 3 – 3 @.@ 5 times as long as the disc when intact , and lacks fin folds . Usually one serrated stinging spine is located on the upper surface on the tail , some distance from the base . 
 Adult rays have a wide band of flattened , heart @-@ shaped dermal denticles that extend from between the eyes to the tail spine , increasing in density with age , along with two large pearl thorns at the center of the back . The tail behind the spine is covered by small thorns . The dorsal band of denticles is largely developed by the time the juveniles are 50 cm ( 20 in ) across . The coloration of the reticulate whipray varies substantially with age and locality . Adults generally have a dorsal pattern of numerous closely spaced dark brown spots or reticulations on a beige to yellow @-@ brown background , which becomes blackish past the spine with lighter bands on the sides . The underside is pale , without markings . Juveniles are yellowish above with tiny , densely packed dark spots , around seven spots in a line between the spiracles , and three rows of spots in front of the sting . This large species has been reported to reach a disc width of 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) , a total length of 6 m ( 20 ft ) , and a weight of 120 kg ( 260 lb ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The reticulate whipray occurs widely in the Indo @-@ Pacific , with a range extending from off eastern South Africa to the Arabian Peninsula , westward along the coast of the Indian subcontinent to Southeast Asia , and reaching as far as Taiwan and the Ryukyu Islands to the north , and New Guinea and northern Australia to the southeast . It has also colonized the eastern Mediterranean Sea through the Suez Canal . This species seems to be common only in Australian waters , where it occurs from Shark Bay to Brisbane . 
 Bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , the reticulate whipray is generally encountered over sandy flats near beaches , in lagoons , and around coral reefs , from the intertidal zone to offshore waters 50 m ( 160 ft ) deep or more . In Shark Bay , it frequents intertidal sand flats during the warm season , and shifts to slightly deeper seagrass patches in the cold season . This species is tolerant of low salinities and has been known to enter estuaries and mangrove swamps , though records from fresh water in Southeast Asia are unverified and may represent misidentifications . Its preferred water temperatures are 23 – 26 ° C ( 73 – 79 ° F ) . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 During the day , the reticulate whipray is generally inactive and spends much time resting motionless on the sea floor , sometimes buried in sand . In Shark Bay , Western Australia , this ray can be found resting singly or in small groups in very shallow water during high tide . Its lateral line extends to the tip of its extremely long tail , giving it advance warning of approaching predators such as bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops aduncus ) and hammerhead sharks ( Sphyrna ) . The <unk> stingray ( <unk> <unk> ) prefers to rest with the reticulate whipray over others of its own species , because the whiprays ' longer tails grant them superior predator detection . These mixed @-@ species groups often settle into a " rosette " with their tails pointing radially outward for maximum predator awareness . 
 The reticulate whipray preys on a variety of benthic and neritic organisms , including crabs , shrimps , mantis shrimps , bivalves , gastropods , worms , jellyfish , and bony fishes . In the western Indian Ocean , about two @-@ thirds of its diet consists of fishes , in particular <unk> and anchovies , with shrimps and other crustaceans making up most of the remainder . By contrast , rays in Australian waters are apparently not piscivorous , and are known to consume penaeid prawns . Known parasites of this species include <unk> <unk> , Dendromonocotyle <unk> , <unk> macrocephalus , Monocotyle <unk> , M. multiparous , and M. <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Tylocephalum <unk> . 
 Like other stingrays , the reticulate whipray is aplacental viviparous : the developing embryos are initially sustained by yolk , which is later supplanted by histotroph ( " uterine milk " , enriched with proteins and lipids ) produced by the mother . Females give birth to up to five pups in the summer , after a year @-@ long gestation period . Off South Africa , the newborns measure 28 – 30 cm ( 11 – 12 in ) across and sexual maturation is attained at a disc width of approximately 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) , which corresponds to an age of 4 @-@ 5 . Off Australia , the newborns measure 21 – 28 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 – 11 @.@ 0 in ) across , with males reported to mature at 82 – 84 cm ( 32 – 33 in ) across . The juveniles of this species , H. leoparda , and H. undulata differ in birth size , disc shape , denticle development , and amount of spotting , and are in fact more distinct from each other than are adults of the three species . Shark Bay may serve as a nursery area for young rays . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The reticulate whipray fights strongly on hook @-@ and @-@ line and is thus popular with recreational anglers , who usually release it alive . This species is caught by intensive artisanal and commercial fisheries operating in Southeast Asia and parts of the Indian Ocean , using bottom trawls , gillnets and tangle nets , beach seines , and longlines . In particular , it is caught in substantial numbers by an Indonesian trawl fishery targeting wedgefishes in the Arafura Sea . The meat , skin , and cartilage are utilized , though this species is not a highly valued food fish . It also has applications in Chinese medicine , and its tail may be sold as a curio . 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed the reticulate whipray as Vulnerable . Its large size , inshore habitat preferences , and slow reproductive rate render it susceptible to overfishing . Although specific data is lacking , significant declines in overall ray catches have been documented within its range , including in the Gulf of Thailand , the Arafura Sea , and off Pakistan . Habitat degradation also threatens this species : over 30 % of the mangroves in Indonesia and Malaysia have been cleared since 1980 , while pollution and destructive fishing practices may have also taken their toll . Australian waters offer the reticulate whipray a refuge from fishing pressure , as there it is not targeted commercially and the installation of Turtle Exclusion Devices ( TEDs ) have reduced bycatch mortality . However , there are indications of increasing illegal fishing in Australian territory by Indonesian vessels . 
 = Rodrigues starling = 
 The Rodrigues starling ( Necropsar rodericanus ) is an extinct species of starling that was endemic to the Mascarene island of Rodrigues . Its closest relatives were the Mauritius starling and the hoopoe starling from nearby islands ; all three appear to be of Southeast Asian origin . The bird was only reported by French sailor Julien Tafforet , who was marooned on the island from 1725 to 1726 . Tafforet observed it on the offshore islet of Île Gombrani . Subfossil remains found on the mainland were described in 1879 , and were suggested to belong to the bird mentioned by Tafforet . There was much confusion about the bird and its taxonomic relations throughout the 20th century . 
 The Rodrigues starling was 25 – 30 centimetres ( 10 – 12 inches ) long , and had a stout beak . It was described as having a white body , partially black wings and tail , and a yellow bill and legs . Little is known about its behaviour . Its diet included eggs and dead tortoises , which it processed with its strong bill . Predation by rats introduced to the area was probably responsible for the bird 's extinction some time in the 18th century . It first became extinct on mainland Rodrigues , then on Île Gombrani , its last refuge . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1725 , the French sailor Julien Tafforet was marooned on the Mascarene island of Rodrigues for nine months , and his report of his time there was later published as Relation d 'île Rodrigue . In the report , he described encounters with various indigenous species , including a white and black bird which fed on eggs and dead tortoises . He stated that it was confined to the offshore islet of Île Gombrani , which was then called au <unk> . François Leguat , a Frenchman who was also marooned on Rodrigues from 1691 to 1693 and had written about several species there ( his account was published in 1708 ) , did not have a boat , and therefore could not explore the various islets as Tafforet did . No people who later traveled to the island mentioned the bird . In an article written in 1875 , the British ornithologist Alfred Newton attempted to identify the bird from Tafforet 's description , and hypothesised that it was related to the extinct hoopoe starling ( Fregilupus varius ) , which formerly inhabited nearby Réunion . 
 Subfossil bones of a starling @-@ like bird were first discovered on Rodrigues by the police magistrate George Jenner In 1866 and 1871 , and by the reverend Henry Horrocks Slater in 1874 . They were found in caves on the Plaine Coral , a limestone plain in south @-@ west Rodrigues . These bones included the cranium , mandible , sternum , coracoid , humerus , metacarpus , ulna , femur , tibia , and metatarsus of several birds ; the bones were deposited in the British Museum and the Cambridge Museum . In 1879 , the bones became the basis of a scientific description of the bird by ornithologists Albert Günther and Edward Newton ( the brother of Alfred ) . They named the bird Necropsar rodericanus ; <unk> and <unk> are Greek for " dead " and " starling " , while rodericanus refers to the island of Rodrigues . This binomial was originally proposed by Slater in an 1874 manuscript he sent to Günther and Newton . Slater had prepared the manuscript for an 1879 publication , which was never released , but Günther and Newton quoted Slater 's unpublished notes in their own 1879 article , and credited him for the name . BirdLife International credits Slater rather than Günther and Newton for the name . Günther and Newton determined that the Rodrigues starling was closely related to the hoopoe starling , and they only kept it in a separate genus due to what they termed " present ornithological practice " . Due to the strongly built bill , they considered the new species likely the same as the bird mentioned in Tafforet 's account . 
 In 1900 , the English scientist George Ernest Shelley used the spelling <unk> in a book , thereby creating a junior synonym ; however , he attributed the name to zoologist Philip Sclater . In 1967 , the American ornithologist James Greenway suggested that the Rodrigues starling should belong in the same genus as the hoopoe starling , Fregilupus , due to the similarity of the species . More subfossils found in 1974 added support to the claim that the Rodrigues bird was a distinct genus of starling . The stouter bill is mainly what warrants generic separation from Fregilupus . In 2014 , the British palaeontologist Julian P. Hume described a new extinct species , the Mauritius starling ( <unk> <unk> ) , based on subfossils from Mauritius . It was shown to be closer to the Rodrigues starling than to the hoopoe starling , due to the features of its skull , sternum and humerus . Until then , the Rodrigues starling was the only Mascarene passerine bird named from fossil material . 
 In 1898 , the British naturalist Henry Ogg Forbes described a second species of Necropsar , N. leguati , based on a skin in the World Museum Liverpool , specimen <unk> , which was labelled as coming from Madagascar . He suggested that this was actually the bird mentioned by Tafforet , instead of N. rodericanus from mainland Rodrigues . Walter Rothschild , however , believed the Liverpool specimen to be an albinistic specimen of a Necropsar species supposedly from Mauritius . In 1953 , Japanese writer Masauji Hachisuka suggested that N. leguati was distinct enough to warrant its own genus , <unk> . In a 2005 DNA analysis , the specimen was eventually identified as an albinistic specimen of the grey trembler ( <unk> gutturalis ) from Martinique . 
 Hachisuka believed the carnivorous habits described by Tafforet to be unlikely for a starling , and thought the lack of a crest suggested that it was not closely related to Fregilupus . He was reminded of corvids because of the black @-@ and @-@ white plumage , and assumed the bird seen by Tafforet was a sort of chough . In 1937 , he named it <unk> bicolor , and coined the common name " bi @-@ coloured chough " . Hachisuka 's assumptions are disregarded today , and modern ornithologists find Tafforet 's bird to be identical to the one described from subfossil remains . 
 In 1987 , the British ornithologist Graham S. Cowles prepared a manuscript that described a new species of Old World babbler , <unk> <unk> , based on an incomplete sternum found in a cave on Rodrigues . In 1989 , the name was mistakenly published before the description , making it a nomen nudum . Later examination of the sternum by Hume showed that <unk> <unk> was identical to the Rodrigues starling . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 In 1943 , the American ornithologist Dean Amadon suggested that Sturnus @-@ like species could have arrived in Africa , and given rise to the wattled starling ( <unk> cinerea ) and the Mascarene starlings . According to Amadon , the Rodrigues and hoopoe starlings were related to Asiatic starlings , such as some species of Sturnus , rather than the glossy starlings ( <unk> ) of Africa and the Madagascan starling ( <unk> aurata ) ; he concluded this based on the colouration of the birds . A 2008 study , which analysed the DNA of various starlings , confirmed that the hoopoe starling was a starling , but with no close relatives among the sampled species . 
 Extant East Asian starlings , such as the Bali myna ( <unk> rothschildi ) and the white @-@ headed starling ( <unk> <unk> ) , have similarities with these extinct species in colouration and other features . As the Rodrigues and Mauritius starlings seem to be more closely related to each other than to the hoopoe starling , which appears to be closer to Southeast Asian starlings , there may have been two separate colonisations of starlings in the Mascarenes from Asia , with the hoopoe starling being the latest arrival . Apart from Madagascar , the Mascarenes were the only islands in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean that contained native starlings . This is probably due to the isolation , varied topography and vegetation of these islands . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Rodrigues starling was large for a starling , being 25 – 30 cm ( 10 – 12 in ) in length . Its body was white or greyish white , with blackish @-@ brown wings , and a yellow bill and legs . Tafforet 's complete description of the bird reads as follows : 
 A little bird is found which is not common , for it is not found on the mainland . One sees it on the islet au <unk> [ Ile Gombrani ] , which is to the south of the main island , and I believe it keeps to that islet on account of the birds of prey which are on the mainland , as also to feed with more facility on the eggs of the fishing birds which feed there , for they feed on nothing else but eggs or turtles dead of hunger , which they well know how to tear out of their shells . These birds are a little larger than a blackbird [ Réunion bulbul ( Hypsipetes borbonicus ) ] , and have white plumage , part of the wings and tail black , the beak yellow as well as the feet , and make a wonderful warbling . I say a warbling , since they have many and altogether different notes . We brought up some with cooked meat , cut up very small , which they eat in preference to seed . 
 Tafforet was familiar with the fauna of Réunion , where the related hoopoe starling lived . He made several comparisons between the faunas of different locations , so the fact that he did not mention a crest on the Rodrigues starling indicates that it was absent . His description of their colouration is similar . 
 Hume notes that the skull of the Rodrigues starling was about the same size as that of the hoopoe starling , but the skeleton was smaller . Though the Rodrigues starling was clearly able to fly , its sternum was smaller compared to that of other starlings ; however , it may not have required powerful flight , due to the small area and topography of Rodrigues . The two starlings differed mainly in details of the skull , jaws , and sternum . The maxilla of the Rodrigues starling was shorter , less curved , had a less slender tip , and had a stouter mandible . Not enough remains of the Rodrigues starling have been found to assess whether it was sexually dimorphic . Subfossils show a disparity in size between specimens , but this may be due to individual variation , as the differences are gradual , with no distinct size classes . There is a difference in bill length and shape between two Rodrigues starling specimens , which could indicate dimorphism . 
 Günther and Newton noted that the skull of the Rodrigues starling was shaped somewhat differently and longer than that of the hoopoe starling , being about 29 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) long from the occipital condyle ; it was also narrower , being 21 – 22 mm ( 0 @.@ 83 – 0 @.@ 87 in ) wide . The eyes were set slightly lower , and the upper rims of the eye sockets were about 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) apart . The interorbital septum was more delicate , with a larger hole in its centre . The bill was about 36 – 39 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 5 in ) long , less curved and proportionally a little deeper than in the hoopoe starling . It also seems to have had larger nostrils , with the nostril openings in the bone being 12 – 13 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 – 0 @.@ 51 in ) in length . The mandible was about 52 – 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) long and 4 – 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 20 in ) deep proximally . The skull had an attachment scar above the temporal fossa . The supraoccipital ridge on the skull was quite strongly developed , and a <unk> muscle attachment in the parietal region below it was conspicuous . This indicates that the starling had strong neck and jaw muscles . 
 According to Günther and Newton , the ulna of the Rodrigues starling was somewhat shorter than that of the hoopoe starling , measuring 37 – 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) ; the humerus measured 32 – 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 4 in ) , and the keel on its sternum was a bit lower . It had strong quill knobs on the ulna , indicating that the secondary remiges were well developed . One coracoid measured 27 @.@ 5 mm ( 1 @.@ 08 in ) in length , and one carpometacarpus was 22 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 89 in ) long . The leg and feet had the same proportions . The femur measured around 33 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) , the tibiotarsus 52 – 59 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 3 in ) , and the tarsometatarsus 36 – 41 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Little is known about the behaviour of the Rodrigues starling , apart from Tafforet 's description , from which various inferences can be made . The robustness of its limbs and the strong jaws with the ability to gape indicates that it foraged on the ground . Its diet may have consisted of the various snails and invertebrates of Rodrigues , as well as scavenged items . Rodrigues had large colonies of seabirds and now @-@ extinct Cylindraspis land tortoises , as well as marine turtles , which would have provided a large amount of food for the starling , particularly during the breeding seasons . Tafforet reported that the pigeons and parrots on the offshore southern islets only came to the mainland to drink water , and Leguat noted that the pigeons only bred on the islets due to persecution from rats on the mainland ; the starling may have also done this . Originally , the Rodrigues starling may have been widely distributed on Rodrigues , with seasonal visits to the islets . Tafforet 's description also indicates that it had a complex song . 
 The stouter build and more bent shape of the mandible shows that the Rodrigues starling used greater force than the hoopoe starling when searching and perhaps digging for food . It probably also had the ability to remove objects and forcefully open entrances when searching for food ; it did this by inserting its wedge @-@ shaped bill and opening its mandibles , as other starlings and crows do . This ability supports Tafforet 's claim that the bird fed on eggs and dead tortoises . It could have torn dead , presumably juvenile , turtles and tortoises out of their shells . Tafforet did not see any Rodrigues starlings on the mainland , but he stated that they could easily be reared by feeding them meat , which indicates that he brought young birds from a breeding population on Île Gombrani . Tafforet was marooned on Rodrigues during the summer and was apparently able to procure juvenile individuals ; some other Rodrigues birds are known to breed at this time , so it is likely that the starling did the same . 
 Many other species endemic to Rodrigues became extinct after humans arrived , and the island 's ecosystem is heavily damaged . Before humans arrived , forests completely covered the island , but very little remains today . The Rodrigues starling lived alongside other recently extinct birds , such as the Rodrigues solitaire , the Rodrigues parrot , Newton 's parakeet , the Rodrigues rail , the Rodrigues owl , the Rodrigues night heron , and the Rodrigues pigeon . Extinct reptiles include the domed Rodrigues giant tortoise , the saddle @-@ backed Rodrigues giant tortoise , and the Rodrigues day gecko . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Leguat mentioned that pigeons only bred on islets off Rodrigues , due to predation from rats on the mainland . This may be the reason why Tafforet only observed the Rodrigues starling on an islet . By Tafforet 's visit in 1726 , the bird must have either been absent or very rare on mainland Rodrigues . Rats could have arrived in 1601 , when a Dutch fleet surveyed Rodrigues . The islets would have been the last refuge for the bird , until the rats colonised them , too . The Rodrigues starling was extinct by the time French scientist Alexandre Guy Pingré visited Rodrigues during the French 1761 Transit of Venus expedition . 
 The large populations of tortoises and marine turtles on Rodrigues resulted in the export of thousands of animals , and cats were introduced to control the rats , but the cats attacked the native birds and tortoises as well . The Rodrigues starling was already extinct on the mainland by this time . Rats are adept at crossing water , and inhabit almost all islets off Rodrigues today . At least five species of <unk> starlings have become extinct in islands of the Pacific Ocean , and rats also contributed to their demise . 
 = Joe Aiello = 
 Giuseppe " Joe " Aiello ( 1891 – October 23 , 1930 ) was a Chicago bootlegger and organized crime leader during the Prohibition era . The leader of his own Sicilian Mafia family , he was best known for his long and bloody feud with Chicago Outfit boss Al Capone . 
 Aiello masterminded several unsuccessful attempts to assassinate Capone , and fought against his former business partner Antonio Lombardo , a Capone ally , for control of the Chicago branch of the Unione Siciliana benevolent society . Aiello and his ally Bugs Moran are believed to have arranged the murder of Lombardo , which directly led Capone to organize the St. Valentine 's Day Massacre in retaliation . 
 Despite being forced to flee Chicago multiple times throughout the gang war , Aiello eventually took control of the Unione Siciliana in 1929 , and ranked seventh among the Chicago Crime Commission 's list of top " public enemies " . Aiello was killed after Capone gunmen ambushed him as he exited a Chicago apartment building where he had been hiding out , shooting him 59 times . After his death the Chicago Tribune described Aiello as " the toughest gangster in Chicago , and one of the toughest in the country " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Bagheria , Sicily , to father Carlo Sr. , Aiello was part of a large and impoverished family of at least nine other brothers and multiple cousins . His mother died when he was a child . In July 1907 , at age 17 , Aiello emigrated to the United States to join family members already residing there . After arriving in New York City by boat , he worked a series of menial jobs in Buffalo and Utica , New York , before connecting with his father , brothers and cousins in Chicago . The family set up several businesses in both New York and Chicago , including the financially successful Aiello Brothers Bakery , and they become importers of such groceries as olive oil , cheeses and sugar . 
 Aiello was the co @-@ owner of a cheese importing business with a fellow Sicilian , Antonio " Tony the Scourge " Lombardo , an ally of organized crime figure Al Capone . Aiello was president of the company , which was called Antonio Lombardo & Co . , and Capone was said to have loaned both men $ 100 @,@ 000 to start the enterprise . With the enactment of Prohibition and the start of bootlegging , the sugar import business brought Aiello into contact with organized crime , along with his brothers Dominick , Antonio , Andrew and Carlo . In Chicago they made a small fortune selling sugar and other home @-@ cooked alcohol components to the Genna crime family , and Aiello earned enough money to buy a three @-@ story mansion in Rogers Park . However , he craved recognition and prestige in addition to money , something he was gaining as he was becoming known as the top organized crime boss of Chicago . When the Genna family lost power in Chicago following gang wars , the <unk> believed themselves the successors of their territory . 
 = = Feud begins with Al Capone = = 
 In November 1925 Lombardo was named head of the Unione Siciliana , a Sicilian @-@ American benevolent society that had been corrupted by gangsters . An infuriated Aiello , who had wanted the position himself , believed Capone was responsible for Lombardo 's ascension and he resented the non @-@ Sicilian 's attempts to manipulate affairs within the Unione . Aiello severed all personal and business ties with Lombardo and entered into a feud with him and Capone , essentially ending a Chicago gang peace treaty that had had been in force since the 1926 murder of Capone rival Hymie Weiss . Aiello allied himself with several other Capone enemies , including Dean O 'Banion , and the trio of Billy Skidmore , Barney <unk> and Jack <unk> , who ran vice and gambling houses together , although they became less receptive to Aiello after Capone personally approached and threatened Skidmore . While newspapers falsely reported that Aiello had also entered into an active alliance with George " Bugs " Moran and his North Side Gang at this time , Moran in fact pledged no specific support to Aiello until later , and instead privately supported Aiello from the sidelines without actively participating . 
 Aiello plotted to eliminate both Lombardo and Capone , and starting in the spring of 1927 made several attempts to assassinate Capone . On one occasion he offered money to the chef of Diamond Joe Esposito 's Bella Napoli Café , Capone 's favorite restaurant , to put prussic acid in Capone 's and Lombardo 's soup ; reports indicated he offered between $ <unk> $ 35 @,@ 000 . Instead , the chef exposed the plot to Capone , who responded by dispatching men to destroy one of Aiello 's stores on West Division Street with machine @-@ gun fire . More than 200 bullets were fired into the Aiello Brothers Bakery on May 28 , 1927 , wounding Joe 's brother Antonio . During the summer and autumn of 1927 a number of hitmen Aiello hired to kill Capone were themselves slain . Among them were Anthony Russo and Vincent <unk> , who Aiello had offered $ 25 @,@ 000 each to kill Capone and Lombardo . Aiello eventually offered a $ 50 @,@ 000 reward to anyone who eliminated Capone . At least 10 gunman tried to collect on Aiello 's bounty , but ended up dead . Capone ally Ralph Sheldon attempted to kill both Capone and Lombardo for Aiello 's reward , but Capone henchman Frank Nitti 's intelligence network learned of the transaction and had Sheldon shot in front of a West Side hotel , although he didn 't die . 
 = = Gang war with Capone escalates = = 
 In November 1927 Aiello organized machine @-@ gun ambushes across from Lombardo 's home and a cigar store frequented by Capone , but those plans were foiled after an anonymous tip led police to raid several addresses and arrest Milwaukee gunman Angelo La <unk> and four other Aiello gunmen . After the police discovered receipts for the apartments in La <unk> 's pockets , he confessed that Aiello had hired him to kill Capone and Lombardo , leading the police to arrest Aiello himself and bring him to the South Clark Street police station . Upon learning of the arrest , Capone dispatched nearly two dozen gunmen to stand guard outside the station and await Aiello 's release . The men made no attempt to publicly conceal their purpose there , and reporters and photographers rushed to the scene to observe Aiello 's expected murder . Capone gunmen Frank Perry , Sam Marcus and Louis " Little New York " Campagna were arrested as they tried to enter the front of the station and placed in the cell next to Aiello , who Campagna told , " You 're dead , friend , dead . You won 't get up to the end of the street still walking " . Aiello pleaded for mercy and promised to sell his possessions and leave Chicago with his family if they let him go , but Campagna refused the request . When released , Aiello was given a police escort out of the station to safety . He later failed to make a court appearance after his attorney claimed he suffered a nervous breakdown . Aiello disappeared with some of family members to Trenton , NJ , where he continued his campaign against Capone and Lombardo . 
 Aiello 's brother Dominick returned to Chicago in January 1928 to attend to family matters while his brother remained in New Jersey . One day he received a telephone call warning him to leave town , after which the Aiello Brothers Bakery was shot up by gunmen . Aiello briefly allied himself with former Capone employer and friend Frankie Yale , meeting with him regularly in New York City and plotting Capone 's overthrow , until Yale himself was murdered . Aiello was said to have fled to Wisconsin under the protection of the Milwaukee crime family , and also briefly took refuge in Buffalo with his ally there , crime family boss Stefano Magaddino . With Aiello still in hiding , Capone started targeting Aiello 's men and killed several over the next few years , including his brother Dominick . Aiello returned to Chicago in the summer of 1928 and once again approached Moran , whose relationship with Capone had degenerated even further , making him much more receptive to an active alliance with Aiello . They conspired to eliminate Lombardo , a task they assigned to hitmen Frank " Tight Lips " and Peter Gusenberg . Lombardo was shot to death on a busy Chicago street on September 7 , 1928 , and although never arrested , at least one of the Gusenberg brothers is believed to have been among the shooters . After Lombardo 's death , Aiello attempted to elevate his ally Peter <unk> to the Unione Siciliana position , but <unk> was killed by shotgun blasts outside his home . 
 = = Rise to Unione Siciliana leader = = 
 Aiello was also believed to have masterminded the murder of Pasqualino " Patsy " Lolordo , Lombardo 's successor as head of the Unione , who was killed in his home on January 8 , 1929 . Police alleged that Aiello suggested a truce with Lolordo , and when Lolordo invited Aiello into his home for a toast of friendship , Aiello and two others shot him to death . When police later questioned Lolordo 's widow , she screamed when she was shown a photo of Aiello , but refused to explain why she was afraid and would not answer questions about him . Capone focused his retaliation against Moran by organizing the St. Valentine 's Day Massacre , a hit that wiped out the Gusenberg brothers , decimated Moran 's forces and resulted in the loss of a significant amount of Aiello 's support . Shortly afterward Aiello persuaded Capone killers Albert Anselmi and John Scalise to betray their employer and convinced Joseph " Hop Toad " Giunta , the new head of the Unione Siciliana , to support Aiello in eliminating Capone and taking control of the North Side of Chicago following the departure of Bugs Moran . However , Capone learned of Aiello 's plot in April 1929 and killed all three men . 
 The violent retaliation against Aiello indirectly led him to finally become head of the Unione . During a conference in Atlantic City , numerous mob bosses supported Aiello 's promotion with the hopes of restoring order in Chicago , and Capone apparently accepted the decision , at least temporarily . Retired Chicago mob boss Johnny Torrio was said to have mediated a peace agreement among Capone , Aiello and Moran , in which they agreed to end the gang warfare and murders . However , Aiello 's accession coincided with Capone serving a year in prison for carrying a concealed weapon , which Aiello saw as an opportunity to take control of some of Capone 's territory and scheme yet again for his assassination . Aiello gained a measure of nationwide notoriety around this time after ranking seventh on Chicago Crime Commission Chairman Frank J. Loesch 's " public enemies " list , released in April 1930 , which identified the top 28 people he saw as corrupting Chicago . 
 Through his Mafia boss allies Magaddino and Gaspar Milazzo , Aiello arranged a meeting with Joe Masseria , the capo di tutti <unk> based in New York City , seeking support in Aiello 's efforts against Capone . During the meeting Masseria offered to support Aiello in exchange for control of the east side of Chicago , which would allow Aiello to keep the city 's west side . The offer infuriated Aiello , who threatened Masseria and ordered him to leave the city . In turn , Masseria spread false rumors that Aiello attempted to kill Masseria , giving him a pretext to support Capone in retaliation . Mafioso Joseph Bonanno later described as a key incident in starting the Castellammarese War in New York City . Masseria openly supported Capone , requiring a strong alliance with him following the death of Masseria ally Giuseppe Morello . He also offered territory to Milazzo if he betrayed Aiello , an offer Milazzo rebuffed and considered insulting . As a result , Aiello backed Salvatore <unk> in the Castellammarese War , providing the <unk> forces with $ 5 @,@ 000 a week for their war chest . 
 During the early months of 1930 Aiello arranged several unsuccessful assassination attempts against Capone bodyguards , including Jack <unk> , Phil D 'Andrea and Rocco De Grazia . Aiello hoped to leave Capone vulnerable by depleting his security , and Capone began to suspect Aiello had spies within the Chicago Outfit because he seemed to have inside knowledge about where his targets would be and when . In August 1930 , two months before Aiello 's death , the state 's attorney conducted a raid on Aiello 's home , obtaining records as part of a series of raids by the United States government to fight against gangland activities in Chicago . 
 = = Death = = 
 In 1930 , upon learning of Aiello 's continued plotting against him , Capone resolved to finally eliminate him . In the weeks before Aiello 's death Capone 's men tracked him to Rochester , New York , where he had connections through Magaddino , and plotted to kill him there , but Aiello returned to Chicago before the plot could be executed . Aiello , angst @-@ ridden from the constant need to hide out and the killings of several of his men , set up residence in the Chicago apartment of Unione Siciliana treasurer Pasquale " Patsy Presto " Prestogiacomo at 205 N. <unk> Ave . He moved in on October 13 , 1930 , and rarely left the apartment . However , his wife and child occasionally visited him , and Frank Nitti biographer Mars <unk> Jr. theorized that Capone 's forces located Aiello by tracking his family members . Men who gave the names Morris Friend and Henry Jacobson rented rooms in an apartment across the street overlooking Prestogiacomo 's apartment building and began observing Aiello . On October 23 , Aiello made plans to permanently leave Chicago and apparently move to Mexico , although Prestogiacomo later told police Aiello was simply leaving the house for a barber 's appointment . Upon exiting Prestogiacomo 's building to enter a taxicab , a gunman in a second @-@ floor window across the street started firing at Aiello with a submachine gun . Aiello was said to have been shot at least 13 times before he toppled off the building steps and moved around the corner , out of the line of fire . Instead , he moved directly into the range of a second submachine gun positioned on the third floor of another apartment block , and was subsequently gunned down . 
 After the ambush the two apparent shooters ran from the buildings and fled in a Ford sedan ; the car was later discovered to have been set on fire and destroyed . Aiello 's body was loaded into the taxicab and taken to Garfield Park Hospital , where he was pronounced dead . The coroner eventually removed 59 bullets , weighing over a pound , from the body . He was shot more times than any single victim of the St. Valentine 's Day Massacre . A third machine gun position , which was ultimately not used , was later discovered by police in another nearby building , which had been rented a week before the murder by a man who gave the name Lon <unk> . Police , prosecutors and federal agents immediately and publicly speculated that Capone was behind the assassination , noting that the precision machine @-@ gun ambush was typical of his attacks . However , at least one press story at the time speculated Moran could have been behind the hit . Prestogiacomo , fearful for his life , went into hiding for three days after Aiello 's death before turning himself in to police . He was charged as an accessory before the fact of Aiello 's murder , a charge also filed against John <unk> , an employee of Aiello 's importing company . Detectives questioned whether Prestogiacomo provided Aiello 's enemies with information about his whereabouts , something he vehemently denied . Police claimed Prestogiacomo was not cooperative and lied about his relationship with Aiello . The charges against Prestogiacomo went to a grand jury but were ultimately dropped . Frank Nitti was also wanted by police for questioning in connection with the murder . 
 Some historians later suggested Mafia forces outside of Chicago may have been behind the hit as part of the Castellammarese War , but Virgil Peterson , an expert on Chicago organized crime , believed the murder was strictly related to city gang warfare . Aiello 's family ordered an $ 11 @,@ 000 coffin for him . Before eventually being placed in Riverside Cemetery in Rochester , New York , Aiello was originally buried in Mount Carmel Cemetery in Chicago on October 29 , 1930 , close to former friend @-@ turned @-@ rival Lombardo . Capone continued to hunt down Aiello 's allies even after his death . One month after Aiello was killed , police discovered an abandoned machine gun nest , manned by alleged Capone gangsters , in a house opposite the home of four of Aiello 's former henchmen . Aiello 's nephew , Frank Aiello Jr . , was fatally shot through a window while he was playing cards in his Milwaukee home on May 23 , 1931 . Authorities believed the killing was related to the Chicago feud , despite Frank 's apparent lack of ties to organized crime . Aiello 's death left Capone effectively unchallenged in his control over Chicago , and brought 70 years of peace to the city in terms of the Chicago Outfit leadership . Aiello was believed to be responsible for the deaths of at least 24 people throughout his life , according to the Chicago Tribune , which described Aiello as " the toughest gangster in Chicago , and one of the toughest in the country " . 
 = Annunciation ( Memling ) = 
 The Annunciation is an oil @-@ on @-@ oak panel painting attributed to the Early Netherlandish master Hans Memling . Completed c . 1482 , it was partially transferred to canvas in the 1920s and is today held in the Robert Lehman collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York . It shows the Virgin in a domestic interior , two attendant angels , the archangel Gabriel dressed in rich ecclesiastical robes , and a hovering dove . The painting is based and expands upon the Annunciation wing of Rogier van der Weyden 's c . 1455 Saint Columba altarpiece . The Virgin simultaneously swoons and foreshadows the crucifixion . According to art historian Maryan Ainsworth , the work presents a " startlingly original image , rich in connotations for the viewer or worshiper . " The simple iconography centers on the Virgin 's purity ; the Incarnation , the Virgin as mother and her role as bride and Queen of Heaven . 
 The original frame survived until the 19th century and was inscribed with a date believed to be 1482 ; 20th @-@ century art historians suggested the number 's final digit was a nine , which would give a date of 1489 . In 1847 Gustav Friedrich Waagen described it as one of Memling 's " finest and most original works " . In 1902 it was exhibited in Bruges at the Exposition des primitifs flamands à Bruges , after which it underwent cleaning and restoration . Philip Lehman bought it in 1920 from the Radziwill family who may have had it in their family since the 16th century ; Antoni Radziwill discovered it on a family estate in the early 19th century . At that time it had been pierced through with an arrow and required restoration . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Annunciation = = = 
 The Annunciation was a popular theme in European art , although a difficult scene to paint , because it depicts Mary 's union with Christ as she becomes the tabernacle for the Word made flesh . Mary as Theotokos , the God @-@ bearer , was affirmed in 431 at the Council of Ephesus ; two decades later the Council of Chalcedon affirmed the doctrine of Incarnation – that Christ was of two natures ( God and Man ) – and her perpetual virginity was affirmed at the Lateran Council of 631 . In Byzantine art , Annunciation scenes depict the Virgin enthroned and dressed in royal regalia . In later centuries she was shown in enclosed spaces : the temple , the church , the garden . 
 The Annunciation is typically set in domestic interiors in Early Netherlandish art , a style Robert Campin established , and Jan van Eyck and Rogier van der Weyden followed . Neither Campin nor van Eyck went so far as to set the scene in a bedchamber , although the motif is found in van der Weyden 's c . 1435 Louvre Annunciation and c . 1455 Saint Columba altarpiece in which the Virgin kneels by the nuptial bed , rendered in red made from costly pigments . Memling 's depiction is nearly identical to van der Weyden 's Columba Altarpiece . 
 = = = Figures = = = 
 The archangel Gabriel appears to Mary to inform her that she shall bear the Son of God . He is shown standing in a three @-@ quarter view wearing a small jeweled diadem and dressed in vestments . He has a richly embroidered red @-@ and @-@ gold brocade cope , edged with a pattern of gray seraphim and wheels , over a white alb and <unk> . He holds his staff of office in one hand , and raises the other towards the Virgin . He bends his knees , honoring and acknowledging her as Mother of Christ and Queen of Heaven , and his feet are bare and positioned slightly behind hers . 
 The Virgin is in a frontal view ; directly behind her the red @-@ curtained bed acts as a framing device , similar to the traditional canopy @-@ of @-@ honor or baldachin . Unlike Memling 's predecessors whose Virgins are garbed in heavily jeweled and costly robes , the plain white shift she wears beneath a blue mantle is minimally jeweled at the hem and at the open neckline . A purple underdress peeks out at her neck and wrists , indicating her royal status . Mary seems neither surprised nor fearful at the announcement ; according to Blum the scene is rendered with a great sense of naturalism and successfully depicts " the transformation of Mary from girl to God @-@ bearer . " 
 The Virgin holds an innovative and unusual position . She seems to be either rising or swooning as if having lost her balance , a divergence from her conventional seated or kneeling pose . Blum believes " one may search in vain in other Netherlandish Annunciation panels of the fifteenth century of a Virgin positioned as she is here " . Art historian Penny Jolly suggests the painting shows a birthing position , a motif van der Weyden experimented with in the Seven Sacraments Altarpiece , where the Virgin 's collapse results in a childbirth @-@ like posture , and with the Descent from the Cross , in which Mary Magdalen bends and crouches – similar to the position Memling 's Magdalen assumes in his Lamentation . Flanking the Virgin , and holding her , are two attendant angels . The one to the left lifts the Virgin 's robe while the other gazes at the viewer , " soliciting our response " , according to Ainsworth . Both are small @-@ <unk> , solemn , and according to Blum , in mood " comparable to that of Gabriel . " Other than the presence of the angels , Memling shows a typical upper @-@ merchant @-@ class 15th @-@ century Flemish bedchamber . 
 = = = Objects = = = 
 The dove of the Holy Spirit hovers inside a rainbow @-@ hued circle of light directly above the Virgin 's head . Its placement and size is unusual for art of the period . It is unlike anything found in van der Weyden , and never repeated in Memling 's work , but reminiscent of van Eyck 's dove in the Ghent Altarpiece 's Annunciation panel . Its shape is found in medallions hung above beds at that time , and thus seems in keeping with the domestic interior . 
 Mary 's left hand is on an open prayer @-@ book , propped on a prie @-@ dieu ; the letter " D " visible on the page – perhaps for Deus <unk> ( " the Lord be with you " ) , according to Ainsworth . Blum speculates the passage is from Isaiah 7 : 14 , " Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son . " A vase containing white lilies and a single blue iris is next to it on the floor . 
 A curtain sack , commonly found on beds of the period , hangs in the central axis between Gabriel and the attendant angel . A sideboard beside the bed contains two types of candles and a flask of water standing in bright light falling from the window to the left . The floor is multi @-@ colored tile @-@ work , similar to van der Weyden 's Columba altarpiece ; Memling truncates the ceiling rafters in the mid @-@ ground , at the end of the bed , with the floor extending into the foreground . Blum describes the effect as acting " like an open stage for the holy figures " . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 The iconography is not overly labored , and Memling avoids extraneous symbolism . Many elements emphasize Mary 's role as the Mother of God ; the chamber is furnished with simple everyday objects that indicate her purity . The vase of lilies and the items on the sideboard are objects 15th @-@ century viewers would have associated with her . White lilies were often used to signify her purity , while irises or sword lilies were used as metaphors for her suffering . Memling emphasizes symbols associated with her womb and virginity , and " introduces two additional angelic priests , and floods the room with natural light , thereby rearranging the anecdotal to emphasize the doctrinal meaning . " Charles Sterling describes the work as " one of the finest examples of Memling 's ability to take a pictorial convention inherited from his predecessors and infuse it with a heightened sense of emotion and narrative complexity . " 
 = = = Light = = = 
 Light was associated with Mary and the Incarnation from the 9th century . Millard Meiss notes that , from the 12th century a common way to convey the conception was to compare light passing through glass to the passage of the Holy Spirit through the body of the Virgin . St. Bernard likened it to sunshine explaining in this passage : " Just as the brilliance of the sun fills and penetrates a glass window without damaging it , and pierces its solid form with imperceptible subtlety , neither hurting when entering nor destroying when emerging ; thus the word of God , the splendor of the Father , entered the virgin chamber and then came forth from the closed womb . " 
 The three objects on the bedside cabinet represent the Virgin 's purity : the water flask , the <unk> , and the <unk> light . The light passing through the glass of the womb @-@ shaped flask symbolizes her flesh , pierced by divine light , its clear and undisturbed water represents her purity at the moment of conception , a device also found in the earlier paintings as a metaphor of the Virgin 's sanctity . The flask shows a reflection of the window 's crossbar as a cross , a symbol of the Crucifixion , another small detail in which Memling " lays one translucent symbolic form upon another " . 
 Light represented by candles is a common symbol for the Virgin and Christ ; both Campin and van Eyck placed hearths or candles in their annunciation scenes . The <unk> without a candle and the <unk> without flame symbolize the world before Christ 's Nativity and the presence of his divine light , according to Ainsworth . 
 The challenge for painters of the Annunciation was how to visually represent the Incarnation , the Word made flesh , or Logos . They often showed rays of light emanating from Gabriel or a nearby window entering Mary 's body to depict the concept of Christ " who inhabited and passed through her body " . The light rays might sometimes include an inscription , and were sometimes shown entering her ear , in the belief that it was thus the Word became flesh . 
 Memling left out the rays of light , as did Dieric Bouts in his Getty Annunciation , yet the room is bright , filled with sunlight , a fenestra <unk> , which would have been an adequate symbol for the contemporary viewer . By the mid @-@ 15th century the Virgin is found depicted in a room or chamber near an open window to permit the passage of light . Memling 's room , with its window through which light streams , is a most " decorous sign of Mary 's chastity " , according to Blum . There are no word scrolls or banderoles to indicate the Virgin 's acceptance , yet her consent is obvious through her pose , which seems , according to Sterling , both submissive and active . 
 = = = Mother of Christ = = = 
 The Virgin birth is indicated by the red bed and red womb @-@ shaped curtain @-@ sack . During the early @-@ 15th century hanging beds or curtain @-@ sacks became symbols of the Incarnation , and " served to affirm [ Christ 's ] humanity " . Blum notes that at a time " when artists did not hesitate to depict the breast of the Virgin , Memling did not shun her womb " . Christ 's humanity was a source of fascination , and it was only in Netherlandish art that a solution was found for visualizing his embryonic state with curtain @-@ sacks draped to suggest the shape of a womb . 
 Mary 's body becomes the tabernacle holding the Host made flesh . She becomes an object of devotion , a " monstrance containing the Host " . Her full belly and the presence of the dove indicate the moment of Incarnation has occurred . Viewers would have been reminded of the Crucifixion and Lamentation with the swoon , " thus anticipating Christ 's sacrifice for the salvation of mankind at the moment of his conception . " According to theologians , Mary stood with dignity at the Crucifixion of Jesus , but in 15th @-@ century art she is depicted swooning , according to Jolly , " in agony at the sight of her dying son … assuming the pose of a mother in the throes of the pain of childbirth " . At the cross she felt the pain of his death ; pain which at his birth she had not experienced . 
 The painting 's domestic setting belies its liturgical meaning . The dove is a reminder of the Eucharist and Mass . Lotte Brand Philip observes how throughout the 15th century " eucharistic vessels made in the form of doves and suspended over altars … were lowered at the moment of transubstantiation " ; here it suggests that in the same way the Holy Spirit gives life to the bread and wine , it gave life to the Virgin 's womb . She carries the Body and Blood of Christ , and is attended by three priestly angels . Mary 's function is to bear " the Savior of the World " ; the angels ' role is to " support , present and protect her sacred being " . With the birth of Christ her " miraculous womb passed its final test " to become an object of veneration . 
 = = = Bride of Christ = = = 
 Memling presents the Virgin as the Bride of Christ about to assume her role as Queen of Heaven . The attendant angels indicate her royal status . Such angels typically float above the Virgin , holding her crown , and some German painters showed them hovering close in Annunciation scenes , but angels rarely approach or touch the Virgin . Only a single previous version of such attendant angels has been found : in the <unk> Master 's early 15th @-@ century illuminated manuscript version of the " Visitation " , the pregnant Virgin 's long mantle is held by attendant angels , about which Blum says , " her queenly appearance surely commemorates the moment when Mary is first addressed as Theotokos , the Mother of the Lord . " Memling frequently featured a pair of angels dressed in vestments attending the Virgin in his work , but these two , dressed in simple <unk> and <unk> , were never repeated in his art . Their dual function is to " present the eucharistic offering and proclaim the Virgin bride and queen " . 
 = = Style and influence = = 
 The Annunciation draws heavily on van der Weyden 's 1430s Louvre Annunciation , his c . 1455 Saint Columba altarpiece , and the <unk> Annunciation ( c . 1465 – 75 ) , which is attributed to either van der Weyden or Memling . Memling almost certainly was apprenticed to van der Weyden in Brussels until setting up his own workshop in Bruges sometime after 1465 . Memling 's Annunciation is more innovative , with motifs such as the attendant angels that were absent in the earlier paintings . According to Till @-@ Holger Borchert , not only was Memling familiar with van der Weyden 's motifs and compositions , but he might have assisted with the underdrawing in van der Weyden 's workshop . The shutters on the right are copied from the Louvre panel , the knotted curtain appears in the Columba triptych 's " Annunciation " . 
 A sense of movement is conveyed throughout . The trailing edges of Gabriel 's garment fall outside the pictorial space , indicating his arrival . The Virgin 's " serpentine " pose , with attendant angels supporting her , adds to the sense of flow . Memling 's use of color achieves a startling effect . The traditional rays of light are replaced with light color indicators ; the white clothes rendered in " icy " blue , the angel to the right in yellow patches seems " bleached by light " , the left @-@ hand angel appears to be steeped in shadow , dressed in clothes of lavender and bearing deep green wings . The effect is iridescent , according to Blum , who writes , " this shimmering surface gives [ the figures ] an unearthly quality , separating them from the more believable world of the bedchamber . " The effect deviates from the pure naturalism and realism which typifies Early Netherlandish art , causing a " startling " juxtaposition , an effect that is " <unk> " and contradictory . 
 Scholars have not established if the panel was meant to be a single devotional work , or part of a larger , and now broken up , polyptych . According to Ainsworth , its size and " the sacramental nature of its subject would have been appropriate for a family chapel in a church or monastery for the chapel of a guild corporation . " An intact , inscribed frame is unusual for a wing panel , indicating that it was probably intended as a single piece , but scholars are unsure because the slight left @-@ to @-@ right axis of the tiles tend to suggest it could have been the left @-@ hand wing of a larger piece . There is no information about the panel 's reverse , which has not survived . 
 Technical analysis shows extensive underdrawing , typical for Memling . They were completed in a dry medium except for the dove and the flask and candles on the sideboard . Revisions during the final painting included the enlargement of the Virgin 's sleeves and the repositioning of Gabriel 's staff . <unk> were made to indicate the floor tiles and the dove 's position . 
 The only person to question Gustav Friedrich Waagen 's 1847 attribution to Memling is W. H. J. Weale , who in 1903 declared Memling " would never have dreamt of introducing into the representation of this mystery these two sentimental and affected angels . " 
 = = Provenance and condition = = 
 The painting 's known provenance begins in the 1830s when it was in the possession of the Radziwill family . According to art historian <unk> Boisserée , who saw the painting in 1832 , Antoni Radziwill found the painting in an estate his father owned . Waagen speculated that may have belonged to <unk> Radziwill ( 1549 – 1616 ) who might have inherited it from his brother Jerzy Radziwill , ( 1556 – 1600 ) , who was a cardinal . The family kept it until 1920 when Princess Radziwill sold it to the Duveen Brothers in Paris . Philip Lehman bought it in October 1920 ; it is now held in the Robert Lehman collection at the Metropolitan Museum of Art , in New York . 
 Generally the condition is good . Memling painted the work on two panels of about 28 cm each . The dated and inscribed frame , probably the original , was discarded in 1830 . There have been three documented restorations . The painting had been pierced by an arrow when Anton Radziwill found it ; he had it restored and the damage repaired . At that time the Virgin 's mantle and the flesh tones sustained heavy overpainting . The original frame was discarded , but its inscription was inserted into the new frame . A description of the original frame suggests it carried a coat @-@ of @-@ arms , perhaps belonging to Jerzy Radziwill . The second restoration was after its exhibition in Bruges in 1902 ; and the third when Lehman had it restored and transferred to canvas sometime after 1928 . The painting survived the transfer without significant damage . A late @-@ 19th century photograph shows wood on all four sides of the painted surface , which suggests the edges may have been extended during the transfer . Areas that suffered paint loss and overpainting are Gabriel 's cope and the vase holding the flowers . 
 When Boisserée saw the painting he recorded the inscription 's date as 1480 . The last digit of the inscription was faded and difficult to read and had become illegible by 1899 . Waagen suggested the date could have been 1482 , and art historian Dirk de Vos suggested 1489 . Memling 's style does not lend itself well to assigning dates , making a determination difficult . According to Stirling , an earlier date is easily accepted , especially because of stylistic similarities to Memling 's 1479 St John Altarpiece , whereas Ainsworth leans toward the later date as more in keeping with the mature style of the late 1480s . 
 = Ninth Doctor = 
 The Ninth Doctor is an incarnation of the Doctor , the protagonist of the BBC science fiction television programme Doctor Who . He is portrayed by Christopher Eccleston during the first series of the show 's revival in 2005 . Within the programme 's narrative , the Doctor is a time travelling , humanoid alien from a race known as the Time Lords . When the Doctor is critically injured , he can regenerate his body but in doing so gains a new physical appearance and with it , a distinct new personality . 
 The production team 's approach to the character and Eccleston 's portrayal were highlighted as being intentionally different from his predecessors , with Eccleston stating that his character would be less eccentric . To fit in with a 21st @-@ century audience , the Doctor was given a primary companion , Rose Tyler , who was designed to be as independent and courageous as himself . He also briefly travels with Adam Mitchell , a self @-@ serving boy genius who acts as a foil to the companions and ultimately proves unworthy , and Jack Harkness , a reformed con man from the 51st century . The Doctor , Rose and Jack form a close team but are separated in the series finale in which each character has to make difficult choices and face sacrifice . 
 In 2006 , readers of Doctor Who Magazine voted Eccleston 's Doctor the third most popular Doctor . Both mainstream press and science fiction reviewers generally credit the character and Eccleston as helping to re @-@ establish the show following its hiatus between 1996 and 2005 . The character 's interactions with his archenemies , the Daleks , were particularly praised . Eccleston won several awards for his single series including the 2005 National Television Award for best actor . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 The Ninth Doctor first appears in the episode " Rose " where he rescues 19 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) from an Auton attack in the department store where she works . After Rose helps the Doctor defeat the Nestene Consciousness ( living plastic ) , he invites her to travel with him in the TARDIS . On their first trip he takes her to witness the destruction of planet Earth in the year five billion . It is revealed that the Doctor 's own species , the Time Lords , have been destroyed and the Doctor is the last of his kind . Following from this they visit Cardiff in 1869 where they encounter author Charles Dickens , of whom the Doctor claims to be a big fan . When faced with a near death situation , the Doctor tells Rose that he was glad to have met her . In taking Rose home the Doctor accidentally returns to earth 12 months after they left . Because of his actions he is treated like an Internet predator by Rose 's mother Jackie ( Camille Coduri ) and Rose 's boyfriend Mickey ( Noel Clarke ) has become Rose 's murder suspect . After Mickey helps the Doctor and Rose defeat the Slitheen by firing a missile at their base at 10 Downing Street , the Doctor offers Mickey a place in the TARDIS with them but he refuses . In the episode " Dalek " the Doctor encounters a Dalek , though he had believed the race to be extinct as the " Time War " between the Time Lords and Daleks concluded with the mutual annihilation of both races — an event for which the Doctor himself was responsible . The Doctor tortures the surviving Dalek and at the end of the episode attempts to kill it in cold blood . He refrains once Rose calls him out on this . 
 Adam Mitchell ( Bruno Langley ) joins the Doctor and Rose as companion at the end of " Dalek " . However , when he tries to smuggle future knowledge from Satellite Five in the year 200 @,@ 000 back to his own time in " The Long Game " the Doctor expels him from the TARDIS . The Doctor is angry at Rose after he takes her to the event of father Pete Tyler ( Shaun Dingwall ) ' s death and she saves his life , causing a paradox . However , when Pete dies to restore the timeline he shows compassion and encourages her to sit by his side as he passes away . After encountering Captain Jack Harkness ( John Barrowman ) ( a con artist and former Time Agent from the 51st century ) in 1941 , the Doctor realises Harkness had caused a deadly nanotechnological plague to sweep through the human race , turning humans into gas @-@ mask zombies . Following the resolution of the situation , Jack prepares to sacrifice himself , but the Doctor saves him and invites him on board the TARDIS . When the Doctor encounters Blon ( Annette Badland ) , the only Slitheen to survive the Downing Street explosion in present @-@ day Cardiff he has doubts over whether or not to send her home to be executed . During this episode the Doctor first notices that he and Rose had kept coming across the words " Bad Wolf " . In the episode " Bad Wolf " the Doctor , Rose and Jack find themselves at the mercy of the Bad Wolf Corporation based on Satellite Five . However , the true enemy is revealed to be the Daleks , the Dalek Emperor having also survived the Time War and had rebuilt the Dalek race . The Doctor sends Rose back to the 21st century to protect her before attempting to destroy the Dalek army . When he realises that doing this would destroy most of planet Earth he is unable to do so , proclaiming he would rather be a coward than a killer . Having absorbed the energies of the time vortex , Rose is able to return to the Doctor and destroy the Daleks . To save Rose from being killed by harbouring the time vortex , the Doctor removes the harmful effects by kissing her . However , the damage to his cells causes him to regenerate and the Tenth Doctor ( David Tennant ) takes his place . 
 The Ninth Doctor 's origins were originally not explored in 2005 , but were given in the show 's fiftieth anniversary special , " The Day of the Doctor " , in 2013 . In the aftermath of the Time War , the War Doctor ( John Hurt ) succumbs to old age . The regeneration scene is cut short before Eccleston 's likeness can be fully seen , as the actor declined to return for the episode and showrunner Steven Moffat wished to honour Eccleston 's decision . Eccleston does , however , appear in stock footage and stills alongside the first eight Doctors . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 In the essay " Flood Barriers " in the 2007 Panini Books reprint collection of Eighth Doctor comic strips from Doctor Who Magazine strip editor Clayton Hickman reveals that Russell T Davies had authorised the comic strip to depict the Eighth Doctor 's regeneration into the Ninth at the end of the story arc , The Flood . The regeneration would have been witnessed by the Eighth Doctor 's companion , Destrii , and Hickman writes that the intent was to continue with a Ninth Doctor : Year One story arc with the Ninth Doctor and Destrii . However , when this arc was vetoed by both Russell T Davies and series producer Julie Gardner the creative team felt unable to regenerate the Doctor without Destrii 's presence and the decision was made not to depict the regeneration in the comic strip . The reprint collection includes a specially @-@ drawn panel showing how the Ninth Doctor might have looked in the comic strip immediately after his regeneration , wearing the Eighth Doctor 's costume and being tended to by Destrii . 
 The Ninth Doctor appears in the first six of the Doctor Who hardback New Series Adventures novels which tie in with the first series of the revamped show . The first three of these novels — The Clockwise Man , The Monsters Inside and Winner Takes All — were published on 19 May 2005 and feature solely the Doctor and Rose . The Monsters Inside depicts the Doctor taking Rose to her first alien planet , Justicia . Rose mentions the visit to Justicia in the first series episode " Boom Town " which aired 4 June 2005 in an example of the television series referencing the novels . The second batch of Ninth Doctor novels — comprising The Deviant Strain , Only Human and The Stealers of Dreams — were released 8 September 2005 and feature the Doctor , Rose and later companion Captain Jack . All of the Ninth Doctor novels except Only Human make reference to the " Bad Wolf " story arc of the first series although in keeping with the TV series , the Doctor does not acknowledge these as significant . [ a ] The Ninth Doctor appeared in the Penguin Fiftieth Anniversary eBook novella The Beast of Babylon by Charlie Higson . Here it is shown that he had adventures between <unk> near the end of " Rose " and re @-@ materializing to tell Rose the TARDIS travels in time . 
 The character featured in comic strips in Doctor Who Magazine between 2005 and 2006 as well as in several short stories in the Doctor Who Annual 2006 . In Steven Moffat 's Ninth Doctor short story " ' What I Did on My Christmas Holidays ' by Sally Sparrow " the Doctor and the TARDIS are inadvertently separated twenty years in time by a fault in the time machine and the Doctor is able to instruct Sally how to bring it back to him in the past . This short story later became the basis of the third series episode " Blink " . The Ninth Doctor has appeared in IDW Comics Doctor Who : The Forgotten and Doctor Who : Prisoners of Time . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The Ninth Doctor made his first official , original audio story appearance in Big Finish / AudioGo 's Destiny of the Doctor : Night of the Whisper , released in September 2013 for 50th anniversary of Doctor Who . He is joined by companions Rose and Captain Jack , and Nicholas Briggs reads the story and provides his voice . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The Doctor had been played by eight actors between when the series began in 1963 and the casting of Christopher Eccleston ; the concept of regeneration — a process in which the title character takes on a new body and identity — having been introduced in 1966 to allow the production team to change lead actors . Between 1963 and 1989 seven different actors played the part . An Eighth Doctor , played by Paul McGann , appeared in a BBC / Fox co @-@ produced television film in 1996 , however this did not lead to a full series . Over six weeks in 2003 , the BBC posted an animated serial called Scream of the Shalka on their official website . This was originally developed as an official continuation to series , and featured Richard E Grant in the role of the Doctor . In promoting the online serial , Grant was referred to as the official Ninth Doctor by the BBC . However , following the September 2003 announcement that the series would return to television with a new actor in the title role , the canonical status of the so @-@ called " Shalka Doctor " was left in doubt . 
 Christopher Eccleston 's casting as the Ninth Doctor was announced on 22 March 2004 . He was the production team 's first choice for the character . Other actors linked to the role included Bill Nighy , Richard E Grant , Anthony Head , Eddie Izzard , Hugh Grant and Alan Davies . Jane Tranter , BBC Controller of Drama Commissioning , stated in the announcement of his casting that casting an actor of Eccleston 's reputation signalled " our intention to take Doctor Who into the 21st century , as well as retaining its core traditional values – to be surprising , edgy and eccentric " . Executive Producer Russell T Davies remarked that casting Eccleston " raises the bar for all of us " . Eccleston cited the quality of the scripts as a reason for joining the cast , stating in an interview on BBC 's Breakfast programme that he was " excited " about working with Davies . In the press @-@ pack for the series he states that he had emailed the writer to declare his interest in the role . Eccleston enjoyed having the chance to work on a series aimed at a different demographic than his previous work , noting that " it 's aimed at families , so I 'm kind of acting for children and I feel very lucky to be able to do that " . He felt that being cast by Davies in the series was a " risk " because as an actor he is not known for " charm or comedy " and anticipated a potential backlash due to being built up as " an actor of stature " and the difference between his own interpretation of the character and past doctors . 
 On 30 March 2005 the BBC confirmed that Eccleston would not be staying in the role for a second series , claiming that he was scared of being typecast . On 4 April they admitted that this statement had been made without consulting the actor , and were forced to apologise . Speaking to the Yorkshire Evening Post in 2010 , Eccleston denied that he left due to fear of being typecast . He stated that he " didn 't enjoy the environment and the culture that we , the cast and crew , had to work in " and that he did not want to do any more based on the experience . He said , " I wasn 't comfortable . I thought ' If I stay in this job , I 'm going to have to blind myself to certain things that I thought were wrong . ' And I think it 's more important to be your own man than be successful , so I left . But the most important thing is that I did it , not that I left . I really feel that , because it kind of broke the mould and it helped to reinvent it . I 'm very proud of it . " According to the Sunday Mirror , an interview for BBC 's Doctor Who website that was taken down after his departure revealed that Eccleston had planned to stay for two or three more years . In March 2013 a source for the BBC indicated that Eccleston had discussed plans for Doctor Who 's 50th anniversary special , which aired in November 2013 , with Davies ' successor as executive producer , Steven Moffat . After consideration , he decided not to return to the series . Had he returned , his incarnation would have played the role that ultimately became the War Doctor , portrayed by John Hurt . 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Eccleston stated in April 2004 that he did not believe his Doctor would be " as eccentric and as foppish as he was in some of his incarnations " . Russell T Davies characterised the character as a " stripped down " version of previous Doctors . Regarding the Ninth Doctor 's less eccentric character , Davies stated : " He travels in time and space , he 's got two hearts , he 's a Time Lord — that 's eccentric enough to be getting on with " . In contrast with previous Doctors , the Ninth Doctor speaks with a distinct Northern accent . Remarking on this aspect of his characterisation Eccleston states that the character " is a scientist and an intellectual , and a lot of people seem to think you can only be those things if you speak with received pronunciation which , of course , is rubbish . " In regards to the Doctor 's costume , consisting of a black leather jacket and jeans , the actor states , " I didn 't want the costume to be my performance " and that " I wanted any flamboyance and colour to come out of my acting . " Eccleston thought that as the Doctor he should show a " slight dark side " but also bring out a lighter side . Executive producer Julie Gardner observed that the Ninth Doctor gave Eccleston the chance to be " very intense but also frivolous as well . " 
 Eccleston felt that as a character his Doctor lives solely for the present . He avoids thinking about his past because " there 's some pain there " – and his only concern regarding the future is that " it 's there " . Eccleston felt that the character ultimately provides a life @-@ affirming message stating that " In everything the Doctor does , he is saying ' it 's great to be alive ' . " In an interview with Newsround he stated that the Doctor accepts individuals regardless of colour and creed and expressed hope that the Doctor would encourage young children to appreciate life . However , he also drew out differences between the Doctor and traditional children 's heroes . The actor described the character as " brutal at times " and " confrontational " and " inflexible " stating that he " sometimes creates carnage " and that " there 's nobody like him in Disney " . Matthew Sweet of The Evening Standard highlighted the dichotomy of the character being " brave and wise and brilliant " but also " rough and ready " and " down @-@ to @-@ earth " . 
 A loose story arc that informed the Doctor 's characterisation during the 2005 series is his feelings regarding the destruction of his own race , the Time Lords , which occurred offscreen before episode one . Eccleston felt that the episode " Dalek " showed the audience why his Doctor is the way he is and " how he feels about his past " . Russell T Davies remarked that the Ninth Doctor carries a lot of survival guilt ; this is why he " strides through the universe wearing a dark leather jacket saying " Don 't touch me " " . Davies felt that " Dalek " provided a " bit of therapy " and after this he " starts to rebuild himself " . In the episode " The Parting of the Ways " the Doctor sacrifices his ninth life to save Rose . Davies felt it was important to take the Doctor away from mythological off stage concepts such as the Time War and provide a conclusion that focused on the relationship between the character and Rose . John Barrowman , who played Captain Jack , felt that the Doctor 's decision to save Rose enabled a catharsis ; as he sacrifices himself to save her he is " letting go of the burden of the Time Lords being destroyed " . 
 = = = Companions = = = 
 Since 1963 , the Doctor has travelled with various companions who generally serve to remind him of his " moral duty " . The casting of Billie Piper as the Ninth Doctor 's primary female companion Rose Tyler was announced in May 2004 . Julie Gardner felt that the young actress and former pop star was perfect as a " unique " and " dynamic " companion for the Doctor . Press for the series focused heavily on the fact that Rose was to be more independent and courageous than previous companions . Prior to the casting of Piper , Eccleston had joked that " I 'll be doing the running around screaming . " He later opined that Rose is not as " vulnerable " as previous companions and that " she 's as brave and courageous and intelligent as he is " citing the fact that she saves the Doctor 's life . Piper remarked that the Doctor challenges Rose more than anyone else in her life and that he in turn sees in her " she has huge potential , to be someone really , really great . " Eccleston felt that Rose is a " heroine " who " teaches [ the Doctor ] huge emotional lessons " . He felt that the relationship between the two characters was " love at first sight " although in a more mysterious fashion than a conventional love affair . Commentators on the series noted the romantic tension between the two characters . In their book Who is the Doctor ? , Graeme Burk and Robert Smith described the climactic kiss between the Ninth Doctor and Rose in " The Parting of the Ways " as being something " we all secretly wanted , even though it ultimately killed him " . 
 Adam Mitchell joins the Doctor and Rose in the episode " Dalek " . The character was first conceived during Russell T Davies ' 2003 pitch to the BBC : it was always the intention for Adam to join the TARDIS team after Rose developed a liking for him . Contrasting against Rose , Adam was created to show that not everybody is suited to be a companion . Davies stated that he " always wanted to do a show with someone who was a rubbish companion " and dubbed Adam " the companion that couldn 't " . Upon returning Adam home , the Doctor informs him that " I only take the best . I 've got Rose " . Fraser McAlpine , reviewing Adam 's appearances as companion for BBC America 's <unk> blog , described Adam as fulfilling a role as " the companion that proves the worth of all of the other companions " . From episodes nine through thirteen , Rose and the Doctor are joined by the con man Jack Harkness . Jack 's appearances were conceived with the intention of forming a character arc in which Jack is transformed from a coward to a hero . John Barrowman , reflecting on the interrelationships between The Doctor , Jack and Rose , felt that " the subtle sexual chemistry between all three characters ... was always in play " with the caveat that " the relationships were by no means driven by desire " . SFX magazine also commented on the " intoxicatingly flirtatious dynamic " and compared the trio to " a Buffy @-@ style Scooby gang who can quip in the face of danger " . Jack parts from the Ninth Doctor with a kiss which Barrowman felt to be " full of <unk> and respect " and both " a significant moment in the annals of the series " and " a moment full of melancholy and loss for the characters " . 
 = = Analysis and reception = = 
 James Delingpole of The Spectator noted that subsequent to Fourth Doctor Tom Baker 's departure and prior to Eccleston actors who portrayed the Doctor had a tendency to play the role " too camp , knowing , lovable or twee " . He felt that the " brusque , <unk> and virile " Ninth Doctor " transports us back to the golden era of Jon Pertwee when the series still had that edge of darkness . " Marena <unk> , head of ABC programming , commented after picking up the series that Eccleston " has brought a new dynamic energy to the role " and the show would appeal to both long time viewers and new fans . She cited the high viewing figures of Eccleston 's debut episode — over 10 million — as proof that audiences were ready to welcome in a new era of the show . Looking back on David Tennant 's era and forward to Matt Smith , The Herald 's Edd McCracken comments that casting Tennant had been a risk after " the show 's reputation and ratings " had been " restored under Eccleston " . However he notes that due to the brevity of the Ninth Doctor 's era Tennant subsequently had time to make his character more established . Richard Henley Davis of The Economic Voice also notes that Tennant " had big boots to fill after Christopher Eccleston 's Doctor Who , which many believe to be the greatest incarnation of the lunatic time lord . " In a 2005 interview Tennant himself stated " there 's an awful lot to live up to " after taking on the role from Eccleston , having admired his performances as a viewer . 
 Like Delingpole , Andrew Blair found similarities between the Ninth Doctor era and the Third Doctor era , summarising Eccleston 's single series as " a modern day season seven " . In his retrospective of the character , he states that Eccleston 's casting proved that the revival of the show " was not a light entertainment concern " . He comments that in online fandom there was a sense " of a ship being steered in a different direction " and praises the plot device of the Time War as allowing the character to become mysterious again by providing him a " blank slate " . He compares the Ninth Doctor to the First Doctor ( William Hartnell ) in that both characters are " an unknown who remains aggressively weird until his new @-@ found human friends soften him up " . Blair also felt that the Ninth Doctor 's relationship with the Doctor 's arch enemies the Daleks was more successful than in other incarnations giving particular praise to Eccleston 's " spittle @-@ enhanced and terrifyingly furious reaction " to the monsters in " Dalek " . Blair ends his retrospective by noting that without the foundations laid by Eccleston the show " wouldn 't have been able to move onwards towards the even more popular David Tennant era " . Steven Moffat , who wrote " The Empty Child " / " The Doctor Dances " for Eccleston 's Doctor and would become Doctor Who executive producer in 2010 , observed that in 2005 there was a distinct lack of science fiction and fantasy drama in the UK . He felt that the first series had to establish itself as " a bit Hollyoaks " and " a bit tough detective " to prove itself as a " proper , sensible drama series " . Moffat notes that the 2005 series " changed the landscape into which it once tried to fit " and that now Doctor Who " has to be the most fantastical of the fantasy shows . " 
 Ahead of the series premiere on Australian Network ABC the Sydney Morning Herald 's Robin Oliver predicted that older viewers " will find Eccleston easily the best time lord since Tom Baker . " However Harry Venning of The Stage , whilst enthusiastic about the revival of the show , labelled Eccleston as the " show 's biggest disappointment " following the premiere episode , stating he looked uncomfortable in a fantasy role . The Guardian 's Stephen Kelly felt that Eccleston 's Ninth Doctor had many faults , two of which he felt to be " looking like an EastEnders extra and bellowing " fantastic " at every opportunity " . However , he felt that he " brought warmth , wit and promise " and a " formidable presence " . Kelly believed that Eccleston was believable as a man who had destroyed two civilisations and was dealing with the repercussions and could have brought more to the show had Eccleston stayed for a second series . Seventh Doctor actor Sylvester McCoy praised Eccleston as being " quite alien " as the Doctor and that " we were not sure if he was on the edge of insanity or not , which was rather good . " Peter Davison , who played the Fifth Doctor , criticised Eccleston 's decision to quit after a single series stating " I don 't think you can engage with the new Doctor in the way you should be able to . " 
 In 2005 Christopher Eccleston won " Most Popular Actor " at the National Television Awards and the TV Quick and TV Choice award for Best Actor . He was also voted Best Actor by readers of SFX magazine . Eccleston was named Best Actor with 59 @.@ 42 % of the vote in <unk> 's online " Best of Drama " poll in 2005 . In a Doctor Who Magazine poll in 2006 Eccleston was voted the third greatest Doctor behind those portrayed by Tom Baker and David Tennant . In April 2011 IGN also listed Eccleston 's Doctor as the third best Doctor , opining that he " gave us a tough @-@ as @-@ nails Doctor damaged by war and guilt , but still possessing the same spark of fun and adventure as his previous selves . " The entertainment website stated that in introducing a new generation to the show he " became an icon for a new millennium . " Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph named him the ninth best Doctor , noting that Eccleston was " a serious actor " and " his attempts at a lighter style could seem a tad forced " , though this was " offset by his showdowns against the Daleks " . Fuller also was disappointed that his " time was over all too swiftly " . A 2012 poll conducted by the United States media news magazine Entertainment Weekly resulted in Eccleston being voted the fourth most popular Doctor , behind David Tennant , Matt Smith ( the Eleventh Doctor ) and Tom Baker . 
 = Tonga at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Tonga competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics , that celebrated in Beijing , China , from August 8 to August 24 , 2008 . Tonga was represented by the Tonga Sports Association and National Olympic Committee , and was one of 117 nations that won no medals at the Games . Tonga was represented by three athletes competing in two sports – Aisea Tohi and Ana Po 'uhila in track and field events , and Maamaloa Lolohea in weightlifting . The delegation 's appearance at the Olympics marked its seventh consecutive appearance at the Olympics since its debut at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles . The flag bearer for Tonga in Beijing was field athlete Ana Po 'uhila . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Kingdom of Tonga is an archipelago of 169 islands ( 36 are inhabited by about 100 @,@ 000 people ) that is located in the South Pacific Ocean to the far east of Australia . Initially known as the " Friendly Islands " by explorers , The islands of Tonga united under a single monarchy in 1845 , and devised a constitution to restrain the monarchy in 1875 . It is the only nation in the South Pacific that has neither been formally colonized nor had its original government dissolved , although it became a protectorate of the United Kingdom on 1900 . Tonga renounced British protection in 1970 and , as of 2012 , was the only monarchy in the Pacific Ocean . 
 Some 14 years after becoming a sovereign nation in both foreign and domestic affairs , Tonga submitted its first delegation to the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , California , its largest Olympic team ever as of the Beijing Olympics . The first female Tongan athlete participated in the Olympics at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul , South Korea . Between 1984 and 2008 , Tongan athletes have participated at all of the seven summer Olympics . From 1988 to 2008 , however , there had not been a Tongan Olympic team greater than five athletes in size . There had been a single Tongan medalist during this time period : <unk> <unk> won a silver medal in boxing at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta , Georgia . 
 Three athletes went to the 2008 Beijing Summer Games to participate on Tonga 's behalf . Aisea Tohi was its sole track athlete , Ana Po 'uhila was its sole field and only female athlete , and Maamaloa Lolohea was its only weightlifter . At 21 years old , Tohi was the youngest member of the delegation ; Lolohea , at 40 , was the oldest . Po 'uhila was the nation 's flag bearer at the ceremonies . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Aisea Tohi represented Tonga at the Beijing Olympics in track and field . Born on Tonga 's main island of Tongatapu in the settlement of Tofua , attended the Beijing Olympics at 21 years old , participating in the men 's 100 meters dash . Tohi had not previously competed in any Olympic games . During the course of his event 's qualification round , which took place on August 14 , Tohi was placed in the second heat against seven other athletes . He finished the race in 11 @.@ 17 seconds , placing seventh in his heat ahead of Roman William Cress from the Marshall Islands ( 11 @.@ 18 seconds ) and behind Béranger Bosse of the Central African Republic ( 10 @.@ 51 seconds ) . The leaders of Tohi 's heat included Jamaica 's Asafa Powell ( 10 @.@ 16 seconds ) as well as Kim Collins of Saint Kitts and Nevis ( 10 @.@ 17 seconds ) . Of the 80 athletes participating in the qualification round , Tohi placed 71st . He did not advance to later rounds . 
 Ana Po 'uhila participated in the women 's shot put on the behalf of Tonga at the Beijing Olympics , and was the only female athlete competing for Tonga at the 2008 Olympic games . She was born in Nuku 'alofa , the national capital , which lies on the primary Tongan island of Tongatapu . Po 'uhila first participated in the Olympics at age 24 , when she represented Tonga in shot put at the 2004 Athens games . She represented Tonga again in Beijing at the age of 32 . During the qualifying heat of her event , which took place on August 15 , the Tongan field athlete was placed in the seventeen @-@ person second heat . Po 'uhila was given three attempts to put the shot as far as she could . During the first attempt , she lobbed the shot 16 @.@ 21 meters , ranking 12th in her heat . She bested this ranking on her second attempt when she lobbed it 16 @.@ 42 meters , ranking seventh amongst those who threw during the second try . Her third and final attempt , 16 @.@ 35 meters , did not beat her second attempt . Using her best mark , 16 @.@ 42 meters , Po 'uhila placed 12th out of the 16 athletes who finished the event . She ranked ahead of Taiwan 's Lin Chia @-@ Ying ( 16 @.@ 32 meters ) and behind Russia 's Irina <unk> ( 16 @.@ 84 meters ) in a heat led by China 's Gong <unk> ( 19 @.@ 46 meters ) and Belarus ' <unk> Ostapchuk ( 19 @.@ 08 meters ) . Of the 33 athletes who finished the event , Ana Po 'uhila ranked 27th . She did not advance to the final round . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Weightlifting = = 
 Maamaloa Lolohea participated in the Beijing Olympics on Tonga 's behalf , competing in weightlifting . Lolohea was born in <unk> 'ou , a district of the capital city Nuku 'alofa , and competed in Beijing as a 40 @-@ year @-@ old in the men 's super @-@ heavyweight class division , which encompasses athletes who weigh more than 105 kilograms . Lolohea had not previously competed at any Olympic games . The Tongan athlete competed in his event on August 19 , where he faced 14 other athletes . During the snatch phase of the event , Lolohea was given three attempts . He successfully lifted 127 kilograms on his first attempt , 135 kilograms on his second attempt , and 140 kilograms on his third and final attempt . During the clean and jerk phase of the event , he successfully lifted 173 kilograms on his first try , but unsuccessfully attempted to lift 185 kilograms on his second and third attempts . Because his highest scores were 140 in snatch and 173 in clean and jerk , Lolohea 's final and total score was 313 kilograms . Of the 13 competitors who finished the event , Maamaloa Lolohea finished last behind Sam Pera , Jr. of the Cook Islands ( 350 kilograms ) , who in turn finished behind Finland 's Antti <unk> ( 366 kilograms ) . Gold medalist Matthias Steiner of Germany , in contrast , lifted a total of 461 kilograms . 
 = Samsung Galaxy S III = 
 The Samsung Galaxy S III is a multi @-@ touch , slate @-@ format smartphone model designed , developed , and marketed by Samsung Electronics that runs the Android OS by Google . It has additional software features , expanded hardware , and a redesigned physique from its predecessor , the Samsung Galaxy S II . The S III employs an intelligent personal assistant ( S Voice ) , eye @-@ tracking ability , and increased storage . Although a wireless charging option was announced , it never came to fruition . Depending on country , the 4 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) smartphone comes with different processors and RAM capacity , and 4G LTE support . The device was launched with Android 4 @.@ 0 @.@ 4 " Ice Cream Sandwich " , was updated to Android 4 @.@ 3 " Jelly Bean " , and can be updated to Android 4 @.@ 4 " KitKat " on variants with 2 GB of RAM . The phone 's successor , the Samsung Galaxy S4 , was announced on 14 March 2013 and was released the following month . 
 Following an 18 @-@ month development phase , Samsung unveiled the S III on 3 May 2012 . The device was released in 28 European and Middle Eastern countries on 29 May 2012 , before being progressively released in other major markets in June 2012 . Prior to release , 9 million pre @-@ orders were placed by more than 100 carriers globally . The S III was released by approximately 300 carriers in nearly 150 countries at the end of July 2012 . More than 20 million units of the S III were sold within the first 100 days of release . Samsung has since sold more than 50 million units . 
 Because of overwhelming demand and a manufacturing problem with the blue variant of the phone , there was an extensive shortage of the S III , especially in the United States . Nevertheless , the S III was well @-@ received commercially and critically , with some technology commentators touting it as the " iPhone killer " . In September 2012 , TechRadar ranked it as the No. 1 handset in its constantly updated list of the 20 best mobile phones , while Stuff magazine likewise ranked it at No. 1 in its list of 10 best smartphones in May 2012 . The handset also won the " European Mobile Phone of 2012 – 13 " award from the European Imaging and Sound Association , as well as T3 magazine 's " Phone of the Year " award for 2012 . It played a major role in boosting Samsung 's record operating profit during the second quarter of 2012 . As of November 2012 , the S III is part of a high @-@ profile lawsuit between Samsung and Apple . In November 2012 , research firm Strategy Analytics announced that the S III had overtaken Apple 's iPhone 4S to become the world 's best @-@ selling smartphone model in Q3 2012 . 
 In April 2014 , following the release of its former flagship , the Galaxy S5 . Samsung released a refreshed version called the " Galaxy S3 Neo " which has a quad @-@ core Snapdragon 400 processor clocked either at 1 @.@ 2 or 1 @.@ 4 GHz . It has 1 @.@ 5 GB of RAM , 16 GB of internal storage and ships with Android 4 @.@ 4 @.@ 4 " KitKat " . 
 = = History = = 
 Design work on the S III started in late 2010 under the supervision of Chang Dong @-@ hoon , Samsung 's Vice President and Head of the Design Group of Samsung Electronics . From the start , the design group concentrated on a trend which Samsung dubs " organic " , which suggests that a prospective design should reflect natural elements such as the flow of water and wind . Some of the results of this design were the curved outline of the phone and its home screen 's " Water Lux " effect , where taps and slides produce water ripples . 
 Throughout the eighteen @-@ month design process , Samsung implemented stringent security measures and procedures to maintain secrecy of the eventual design until its launch . Designers worked on three prototypes concurrently while regarding each of them as the final product . Doing so required a constant duplication of effort as they had to repeat the same process for all three prototypes . The prototypes , which taking photos of was forbidden , were locked in a separate lab accessible only by core designers . They were transported by trusted company 's employees instead of third @-@ party couriers . " Because we were only permitted to see the products and others weren 't , " explained Principal Engineer Lee Byung @-@ Joon , " we couldn 't send pictures or drawings . We had to explain the Galaxy S III with all sorts of words . " Despite such security measures , specifications of one of the three units were leaked by Vietnamese website <unk> , although it was not the selected design . 
 Speculation in the general public and media outlets regarding the handset 's specifications began gathering momentum several months before its formal unveiling in May 2012 . In February 2012 , prior to the Mobile World Congress ( MWC ) in Barcelona , Spain , there were rumors that the handset would incorporate a 1 @.@ 5 GHz quad @-@ core processor , a display of 1080p ( 1080 × 1920 pixels ) resolution , a 12 @-@ megapixel rear camera and a HD Super AMOLED Plus touchscreen . More accurate rumored specifications included 2 GB of RAM , 64 GB of internal storage , 4G LTE , a 4 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) screen , an 8 @-@ megapixel rear camera , and a 9 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 35 in ) thick chassis . Samsung confirmed the existence of the Galaxy S II 's successor on 5 March 2012 , but it was not until late April 2012 that Samsung 's Senior Vice @-@ President Robert Yi confirmed the phone to be called " Samsung Galaxy S III " . 
 After inviting reporters in mid @-@ April , Samsung launched the Galaxy S III during the Samsung Mobile <unk> 2012 event at Earls Court Exhibition Centre , London , United Kingdom , on 3 May 2012 , instead of unveiling their products earlier in the year during either the World Mobile Congress or Consumer Electronics Show ( CES ) . One explanation for this decision is that Samsung wanted to minimize the time between its launch and availability . The keynote address of the hour @-@ long event was delivered by <unk> De <unk> , Marketing Director of Samsung Belgium . 
 Following the launch of the Galaxy S4 in June 2013 , Samsung was reportedly retiring the phone earlier than planned because of low sales numbers and to streamline manufacturing operations . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Hardware and design = = = 
 The S III has a plastic chassis measuring 136 @.@ 6 mm ( 5 @.@ 38 in ) long , 70 @.@ 7 mm ( 2 @.@ 78 in ) wide , and 8 @.@ 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 34 in ) thick , with the device weighing 133 grams ( 4 @.@ 7 oz ) . Samsung abandoned the rectangular design of the Galaxy S and Galaxy S II , and instead incorporated round corners and curved edges , reminiscent of the Galaxy Nexus . The device has been available in several color options : white , black , grey , blue @-@ grey , red , and brown . A " Garnet Red " model was made available exclusively to US carrier AT & T on 15 July 2012 . 
 The S III comes in two distinct variations that differ primarily in the internal hardware . The international S III version has Samsung 's Exynos 4 Quad system on a chip ( SoC ) containing a 1 @.@ 4 GHz quad @-@ core ARM Cortex @-@ A9 central processing unit ( CPU ) and an ARM Mali @-@ 400 MP graphics processing unit ( GPU ) . According to Samsung , the Exynos 4 Quad doubles the performance of the Exynos 4 Dual used on the S II , while using 20 percent less power . Samsung had also released several 4G LTE versions — 4G facilitates higher @-@ speed mobile connection compared to 3G — in selected countries to exploit the corresponding communications infrastructures that exist in those markets . Most of these versions use Qualcomm 's Snapdragon S4 SoC featuring a dual @-@ core 1 @.@ 5 GHz Krait CPU and an Adreno 225 GPU . The South Korean and Australian versions are a hybrid of the international and 4G @-@ capable versions . 
 The S III has a maximum of 2 GB of RAM , depending on model . The phone comes with either 16 or 32 GB of internal storage , with a 64 GB version to be available internationally ; additionally , <unk> storage offers a further 64 GB for a potential total of 128 GB . Moreover , 50 GB of space is offered for two years on Dropbox — a cloud storage service — for purchasers of the device , doubling rival HTC 's 25 GB storage for the same duration . 
 The S III 's HD Super AMOLED display measures 4 @.@ 8 inches ( 120 mm ) on the diagonal . With a 720 × 1280 @-@ pixel ( 720p ) resolution , its 306 pixel per inch ( PPI , a measure of pixel density ) is a relatively high , which is accommodated by the removal one of the three <unk> — red , green and blue — in each pixel to create a <unk> matrix @-@ display ; consequently , it does not share the " Plus " suffix found on the S II 's Super AMOLED Plus display . The glass used for the display is the damage @-@ resistant <unk> Gorilla Glass 2 , except for S3 Neo variant . The device 's software includes a feature known as " Smart Stay " , which uses the device 's front camera to detect whether the user 's eyes are looking at the screen , and prevents the screen from automatically turning off while the user is still looking at it . 
 The S III has an 8 @-@ megapixel camera similar to that of the Galaxy S II . It can take <unk> × 2448 @-@ pixel resolution photos and record videos in 1920 × 1080 @-@ pixel ( 1080p ) resolution . Samsung improved the camera 's software over that of its predecessor to include zero shutter lag , and Burst Mode and Best Shot , which work together to quickly take numerous photos before the best @-@ judged frame is selected . The phone can also take pictures while recording videos . The rear @-@ facing camera is complemented by a 1 @.@ 9 @-@ megapixel front @-@ facing camera that can record 720p videos . The phone has LED flash and autofocus . 
 In addition to the 4 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) touchscreen , the S III has several physical user inputs , including a home button located below the screen , a volume key on the left side and a power / lock key on the right . At the top there is a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 14 in ) headphone jack and one of the two microphones on the S III ; the other is located below the home button . The S III is advertised as having an MHL port that can be used both as a micro @-@ USB On @-@ The @-@ Go port , and for connecting the phone to HDMI devices . However , a retailer later discovered that Samsung had made a modification to the electronics of the port such that only the adapter made specifically for this model by Samsung could be used . 
 The S III 's Li @-@ ion 2 @,@ 100 mAh battery is said to have a 790 @-@ hour standby time or 11 hours of talk time on 3G , compared to 900 hours in standby and 21 hours of talk time on 2G . Built into the battery is near field communication ( NFC ) connectivity , which allows users to share map directions and YouTube videos quickly using Wi @-@ Fi Direct ( through Android Beam ) , and perform non @-@ touch payments at shops that employ specially equipped NFC cash registers . The battery can be wirelessly charged using a special charging pad ( sold separately ) that utilizes magnetic resonance to produce a magnetic field through which electricity could be transferred . 
 CNET TV torture @-@ tested an S III by cooling it to 24 ° F ( − 4 ° C ) , placing it in a heat @-@ proof box and heating it to 190 ° F ( 88 ° C ) , and submerging it in water — the S III survived all three tests . The phone also did not exhibit any scratches when a key was repeatedly scraped against the display . However , Android Authority later carried out a drop test with the purpose of comparing the S III and the iPhone 5 . The screen on the S III shattered on the second drop test , while the iPhone received only minor scuffs and scratches on the metal composite frame after three drop tests . 
 = = = Software and services = = = 
 The S III is powered by Android , a Linux @-@ based , open source mobile operating system developed by Google and introduced commercially in 2008 . Among other features , the software allows users to maintain customized home screens which can contain shortcuts to applications and widgets for displaying information . Four shortcuts to frequently used applications can be stored on a dock at the bottom of the screen ; the button in the center of the dock opens the application drawer , which displays a menu containing all of the apps installed on the device . A tray accessed by dragging from the top of the screen allows users to view notifications received from other apps , and contains toggle switches for commonly used functions . Pre @-@ loaded apps also provide access to Google 's various services . The S III uses Samsung 's proprietary TouchWiz graphical user interface ( GUI ) . The " Nature " version used by the S III has a more " organic " feel than previous versions , and contains more interactive elements such as a water ripple effect on the lock screen . To complement the TouchWiz interface , and as a response to Apple 's Siri , the phone introduces S Voice , Samsung 's intelligent personal assistant . S Voice can recognize eight languages including English , Korean , Italian and French . Based on <unk> , S Voice enables the user to verbally control 20 functions such as playing a song , setting the alarm , or activating driving mode ; it relies on Wolfram Alpha for online searches . 
 The S III initially shipped with Android version 4 @.@ 0 @.@ 4 , named " Ice Cream Sandwich " , which became commercially available in March 2012 with the Nexus S and Galaxy Nexus . Ice Cream Sandwich has a refined user interface , and expanded camera capabilities , security features and connectivity . In mid @-@ June 2012 , Google unveiled Android 4 @.@ 1 " Jelly Bean " , which employs Google Now , a voice @-@ assistant similar to S Voice , and incorporates other software changes . Samsung accommodated Jelly Bean in the S III by making last @-@ minute hardware changes to the phone in some markets . Jelly Bean updates began rolling out to S IIIs in selected European countries , and to the T @-@ Mobile in the United States in November 2012 . Samsung started pushing Android 4 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 Jelly Bean to the international version of the S III in December 2012 . In December 2013 , Samsung began rolling out Android 4 @.@ 3 for the S III , adding user interface features back ported from the Galaxy S4 , and support for the Samsung Galaxy Gear <unk> . In March 2014 , Samsung started the rollout of 4 @.@ 4 @.@ 2 KitKat for the 2 GB variant of the S III . 
 The S III comes with a multitude of pre @-@ installed applications , including Google Apps like Google Play , YouTube , Google + , Gmail , Google Maps , Voice Search and Calendar , in addition to Samsung @-@ specific apps such as <unk> , Game Hub , Music Hub , Video Hub , Social Hub and Navigation . To address the fact that iPhone users are reluctant to switch to Android because the OS is not compatible with iTunes , from June 2012 Samsung offered customers of its Galaxy series the Easy Phone Sync app to enable the transfer of music , photos , videos , podcasts , and text messages from an iPhone to a Galaxy device . The user is able to access Google Play , a digital @-@ distribution multimedia @-@ content service exclusive to Android , to download applications , games , music , movies , books , magazines , and TV programs . 
 Apart from S Voice , Samsung has directed the bulk of the S III 's marketing campaign towards the device 's " smart " features , which facilitate improved human @-@ device interactivity . These features include : " Direct Call " , or the handset 's ability to recognise when a user wants to talk to somebody instead of messaging them , if they bring the phone to their head ; " Social Tag " , a function that identifies and tags people in a photo and shares photos with them ; and " Pop Up Play " , which allows a video and other applications to occupy the screen at the same time . In addition , the S III can beam its screen to a monitor or be used as a remote controller ( <unk> Cast and Play ) and share photos with people who are tagged in them ( Buddy Photo Share ) . 
 The S III can access and play traditional media formats such as music , movies , TV programs , audiobooks , and podcasts , and can sort its media library alphabetically by song title , artist , album , playlist , folder , and genre . One notable feature of the S III 's music player is Music Square , which analyses a song 's intensity and ranks the song by mood so that the user can play songs according to their current emotional state . The device also introduced Music Hub , an online music store powered by 7digital with a catalogue of over 19 million songs . 
 The S III was the first smartphone to support Voice Over LTE with the introduction of HD Voice service in South Korea . The phone enables video calling with its 1 @.@ 9 MP front @-@ facing camera , and with support for the <unk> codec , improves Bluetooth @-@ headset connectivity . <unk> on the S III does not embody any new significant features from the S II . Speech @-@ to @-@ text is aided by the <unk> and Google 's voice @-@ recognition assistant . Not unlike other Android devices , there are a multitude of third @-@ party typing applications available that could complement the S III 's stock keyboard . 
 On 18 June 2012 , Samsung announced that the S III would have a version with enterprise software under the company 's Samsung Approved For Enterprise ( SAFE ) program , an initiative facilitating the use of its devices for " bring your own device " scenarios in workplace environments . The enterprise S III version would support AES @-@ 256 bit encryption , VPN and Mobile Device Management functionality , and Microsoft Exchange ActiveSync . It was scheduled to be released in the United States in July 2012 . The enterprise version was expected to penetrate the business market dominated by Research in Motion 's BlackBerry , following the release of similar enterprise versions of the Galaxy Note , Galaxy S II and the Galaxy Tab line of tablet computers . 
 A separate " Developer Edition " of the S III was made available from Samsung 's Developer Portal . It came with an unlockable bootloader to allow the user to modify the phone 's software . 
 = = Model variants = = 
 = = = Issues = = = 
 On 19 September 2012 , security researchers demonstrated during <unk> , a computer hacking contest held in Amsterdam , Netherlands , that the S III can be hacked via NFC , allowing attackers to download all data from the phone . 
 In December 2012 , two hardware issues were reported by users of the S III : A vulnerability of the Exynos SoC allowed malicious apps to gain root privileges even on <unk> devices , and a spontaneous bricking of the unit , called the " sudden death vulnerability " , that occurs about six months after activation . Samsung has been replacing the <unk> of affected units under warranty . In January 2013 , Samsung released a firmware update that corrected both issues . 
 As of mid @-@ 2013 , two S III explosions were reported . The first involved a man from Ireland , while the more recent incident occurred when a Swiss teenager was left with second and third degree burns in her thigh caused by her phone 's explosion . 
 In October 2013 , Samsung acknowledged swelling and overheating issues with the Li @-@ ion batteries in many S III phones , and offered replacement batteries for affected devices . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 According to an anonymous Samsung official speaking to the Korea Economic Daily , the S III received more than 9 million pre @-@ orders from 100 carriers during the two weeks following its London unveiling , making it the fastest @-@ selling gadget in history . In comparison , the iPhone 4S received 4 million pre @-@ orders prior to its launch , while Samsung 's previous flagship phone , the S II , had 10 million handsets shipped within five months . Within a month of the London unveiling , auction and shopping website eBay noted a 119 @-@ percent increase in second @-@ hand Android phone sales . According to an eBay spokesperson , this was " the first time anything other than an Apple product has sparked such a selling frenzy . " 
 The S III was released in 28 countries in Europe and the Middle East on 29 May 2012 . To showcase its flagship device , Samsung afterwards embarked on a global month @-@ long tour of the S III to nine cities , including Sydney , New Delhi , and cities in China , Japan , South Korea and the United States . 
 The S III has helped Samsung consolidate its market share in several countries including India , where Samsung expected to capture 60 percent of the country 's smartphone market , improving on its previous 46 percent . Within a month of release , Samsung had a 60 @-@ percent market share in France , while the company controlled over 50 percent of the German and Italian smartphone markets . Over a similar period the S III helped increase Samsung 's market share in the United Kingdom to over 40 percent , while eroding the iPhone 4S 's 25 percent to 20 percent in the country . The S III was scheduled to be released in North America on 20 June 2012 , but because of high demand , some US and Canadian carriers delayed the release by several days , while some other carriers limited the market at launch . The S III 's US launch event took place in New York City , hosted by Twilight actress Ashley Greene and attended by dubstep artist Skrillex , who performed at Skylight Studios . 
 Samsung estimated that by the end of July 2012 , the S III would have been released by 296 carriers in 145 countries , and that more than 10 million handsets would have been sold . Shin Jong @-@ <unk> , president of Samsung 's mobile communications sector , announced on 22 July that sales had exceeded 10 million . According to an assessment by Swiss financial services company UBS , Samsung had shipped 5 – 6 million units of the phone in the second quarter of 2012 and would ship 10 – 12 million handsets per quarter throughout the rest of the year . An even more aggressive prediction by Paris @-@ based banking group BNP Paribas said 15 million units will be shipped in the third quarter of 2012 , while Japanese financial consultant company Nomura placed the figure for this quarter as high as 18 million . Sales of the S III were estimated to top 40 million by the end of the year . To meet demand , Samsung had hired 75 @,@ 000 workers , and its South Korean factory was running at its peak capacity of 5 million smartphone units per month . 
 A manufacturing flaw resulted in a large portion of the new smartphones having irregularities with the " hyper @-@ glazing " process . The mistake caused an undesirable finish on the blue back covers and resulted in the disposal of up to 600 @,@ 000 plastic casings and a shortage of the blue model . The issue was later resolved ; however , Reuters estimated that the shortage had cost Samsung two million S III sales during its first month of release . 
 On 6 September 2012 , Samsung revealed that sales of the S III had reached 20 million in 100 days , making it three and six times faster @-@ selling than the Galaxy S II and the Galaxy S , respectively . Europe accounted for more than 25 percent of this figure with 6 million units , followed by Asia ( 4 @.@ 5 million ) and the US ( 4 million ) ; sales in South Korea , the S III 's home market , numbered 2 @.@ 5 million . Around the same time of Samsung 's announcement , sales of the S III surpassed that of the iPhone 4S in the US . 
 In the third quarter of 2012 , more than 18 million S III units were shipped , making it the most popular smartphone at the time , ahead of the iPhone 4S 's 16 @.@ 2 million units . Analysts deduced that the slump in iPhone sales was due to customers ' anticipation of the iPhone 5 . 
 As of May 2014 , the S III has sold approximately 60 million units since its 2012 release . 
 On 11 October 2012 Samsung unveiled the Galaxy S III Mini , a 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) smartphone with lower specifications compared to the S III . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The reception of the S III has been particularly positive . Critics noted the phone 's blend of features , such as its S Voice application , display , processing speed , and dimensions as having an edge over its competition , the Apple iPhone 4S and HTC One X. Vlad Savov of The Verge declared it a " technological triumph " , while Natasha Lomas of CNET UK lauded the phone 's " impossibly slim and light casing and a quad @-@ core engine " , calling it the " Ferrari of Android phones " , a sentiment affirmed ( " a prince among Android phones " ) by Dave Oliver of Wired UK and ( " king of Android " ) Esat <unk> of Stuff magazine . Gareth Beavis of TechRadar noted that the S III is " all about faster , smarter and being more minimal than ever before while keeping the spec list at the bleeding edge of technology . " Matt Warman of The Daily Telegraph said , " On spending just a short time with the S3 , I 'm confident in saying that it 's a worthy successor to the globally popular S2 " . 
 Upon release , a number of critics and publications have made references to the S III , Samsung 's 2012 flagship phone , as an " iPhone killer " , responding perhaps to Apple 's favourable customer perception . The label owes itself to the S III 's use of the Android OS — the chief rival of Apple 's iOS — as well as its design and features that rival the iPhone 4S such as Smart Stay , a large display , a quad @-@ core processor , Android customizability , and a multitude of connectivity options . 
 The S III was the first Android phone to have a higher launch price than the iPhone 4S when the Apple product was released in 2011 . With the S III , Tim Weber , business editor of the BBC , observed , " With the new Galaxy S3 they [ Samsung ] have clearly managed to move to the front of the smartphone field , ahead of mighty Apple itself . " 
 Conversely , reviewers have opined on the design and feel of phone , calling its polycarbonate shell " cheap " and having a " slippery feel " . The S Voice was described as " not optimised " and " more rigid than Siri " with its poor voice @-@ recognition accuracy , with instances when it would not respond at all . Another usage problem was a microphone malfunction that resulted in difficulty communicating during a call . Reviewers have noted the somewhat abrupt auto @-@ adjustment of display brightness , which tends to under @-@ illuminate the screen ; however , it has twice the battery life compared to the HTC handset , achieved partly through the dim display . Others say the numerous pre @-@ installed apps make the S III feel " bloated " . 
 In late @-@ September 2012 TechRadar ranked it as the No. 1 handset in its constantly updated list of the 20 best mobile phones ; Stuff magazine also ranked it at No. 1 in its list of 10 best smartphones in May 2012 . The S III won an award from the European Imaging and Sound Association under the category of " European Mobile Phone " of 2012 – 2013 . In 2012 , the S III won T3 's " Phone of the Year " award , beating the iPhone 4S , the Nokia Lumia 900 , the Sony Xperia S and others and was voted Phone of the Year by readers of tech website S21 . In February 2013 , the S III won the " Best Smartphone " award from the <unk> at Mobile World Congress . 
 = = Litigation = = 
 On 5 June 2012 , Apple filed for preliminary injunctions in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California against Samsung Electronics , claiming the S III had violated at least two of the company 's patents . Apple requested that the court include the phone in its existing legal battle against Samsung ( see Apple Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co . , Ltd . ) , and ban sales of the S III prior to its scheduled 21 June 2012 US launch . Apple claimed the alleged infringements would " cause immediate and irreparable harm " to its commercial interest . Samsung responded by declaring it would " vigorously oppose the request and demonstrate to the court that the Galaxy S3 [ sic ] is innovative and distinctive " , and reassured the public that 21 June release would proceed as planned . On 11 June , Judge Lucy Koh said that Apple 's claim would overload her work schedule , as she would also be overseeing the trial of Samsung 's other devices ; consequently , Apple dropped its request to block 21 June release of the S III . 
 In mid @-@ July 2012 , Samsung removed the universal search feature on Sprint and AT & T S III phones with over @-@ the @-@ air ( OTA ) software updates to disable the local search function as a " precautionary measure " prior to its patent court trial with Apple , which began on 30 July 2012 . Although Apple won the trial , the S III experienced a sales spike because of the public 's belief that the phone would be banned . On 31 August 2012 , Apple asked the same federal court to add the S III into its existing complaint , believing the device has violated its patents . Samsung countered with the statement : " Apple continues to resort to litigation over market competition in an effort to limit consumer choice . " 
 = Tropical Storm Alma ( 1974 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Alma , the first named storm to develop in the 1974 Atlantic hurricane season , was a short lived tropical cyclone that made a rare Venezuelan landfall . The storm formed from the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) on August 12 well to the east of the Windward Islands , but advisories were not issued until the next day when Alma was at peak intensity . Subsequently , Alma moved at an unusually brisk pace of between 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) to 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) through the southeastern Caribbean Sea , causing numerous watches and gale warnings to be issued throughout the Caribbean . Alma moved quickly over Trinidad and continued westward , becoming one of only four storms to cross the Paria Peninsula of northeastern Venezuela . The storm dissipated on August 15 over the high terrain of Venezuela . 
 The storm left heavy damage on Trinidad , amounting to about $ 5 million ( 1974 USD ) , making it the most destructive cyclone of the 20th century on the island at the time . Alma damaged about 5 @,@ 000 buildings , leaving 500 people homeless . The storm also wrecked about 17 @,@ 750 acres ( 7 @,@ 180 ha ) of crop fields . There were two deaths on Trinidad , including one who was struck by flying debris . Alma was also responsible a plane crash on Isla Margarita offshore Venezuela , killing 49 people on board due to heavy rainfall . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A disturbance associated with the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) left the coast of Africa on August 9 , with Dakar , Senegal reporting mid @-@ level winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . A weak circulation formed on August 10 within an area of thunderstorms . The disturbance moved slowly westward over the Atlantic Ocean , developing into a tropical depression at 18 : 00 UTC on August 12 around 10 ° north latitude , a latitude it would remain around throughout its lifetime . On August 13 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Alma about 375 mi ( 605 km ) east of Trinidad and Tobago , as indicated by a Hurricane Hunters flight reporting winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . This same flight also reported a circular eye with a diameter of 36 mi ( 58 km ) , the only report of an eye from this storm . 
 The center of Alma was elongated , causing gale @-@ force winds to extend 75 mi ( 120 km ) to the north while extending only 25 miles ( 40 km ) to the south . On August 14 the Hurricane Hunters reported gusts of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) ; however , the storm weakened after its initial peak . Alma continued westward at 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) , which National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) Director Neil Frank noted was unusually rapid for a tropical cyclone at this time and location . Alma was able to maintain its low latitude movement to the west due to a strong subtropical ridge , which was at an unusually lower latitude than expected in August . 
 On August 14 , the storm made landfall on Trinidad with winds of 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) , becoming the southernmost landfall on that island since a storm in 1933 . The storm moved across Trinidad in only three hours , although the circulation was disrupted . The storm crossed the Gulf of Paria and made its second and final landfall on the Paria Peninsula of Venezuela , one of only four storms on record to do so ; the others were in 1605 , 1725 , and 1933 . The high mountains in Venezuela took a toll on the storm , ripping the circulation and causing Alma to be downgraded to a tropical depression on August 15 . At around 02 : 00 UTC that day , the circulation passed near Caracas . The convection rapidly diminished , and the presence on satellite imagery faded , although the NHC noted the potential for redevelopment once it reached open waters . Late on August 15 , the NHC issued the final advisory after the circulation dissipated near the border of Venezuela and Colombia . The remnants of Alma continued westward , reaching the Pacific Ocean where they would re @-@ intensify , becoming Hurricane Joyce . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 Before Alma made landfall , gale warnings and a hurricane watch was issued for Trinidad , Tobago , Grenada , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , and Barbados . As Alma progressed westward , gale warnings were also issued for the Paria and <unk> peninsulas of Venezuela , the Guajira Peninsula , and the ABC islands . Initially , the Trinidad and Tobago weather service anticipated Alma would strike Tobago , but as the storm approached , the trajectory over Trinidad became apparent . 
 While moving across Trinidad , Alma produced sustained winds of only 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) at <unk> . However , gusts reached 91 mph ( 147 km / h ) at <unk> . Rainfall at <unk> reached about 1 inch ( 25 mm ) during the storm 's passage . Strong winds downed trees and power lines , and damaged about 5 @,@ 000 buildings , including hundreds of households , wrecking everything inside ; this left about 500 people homeless . There was also widespread damage to agriculture , mostly to sugar , amounting to 17 @,@ 750 acres ( 7 @,@ 180 ha ) of damaged fields . The storm damaged several highways in the country , along with damaged schools and hospitals . The winds flung debris from a roof of a house and struck a woman , killing her . There was also an indirect death on the island , along with several injuries . Damage on the island was estimated at $ 5 million ( 1974 USD ) , and Alma was considered the most destructive storm in Trinidad during the 20th century , according to the American embassy in the country . After the storm , the local Red Cross chapter provided meals and clothing to thousands of storm victims . The government allocated $ 5 @.@ 1 million ( Trinidad and Tobago dollars ) for relief work , to be coordinated by the National Emergency Relief Organization of Trinidad and Tobago , which was established following the damaging Hurricane Flora in 1963 . This helped rebuild damage houses , clear roads , and assist affected farmers . The United States Agency for International Development sent about $ 5 @,@ 000 ( USD ) in assistance , after the country 's ambassador sent a formal request to Washington , D.C. The Amoco oil company also sent a $ 500 ( USD ) donation to the country 's Red Cross . 
 While moving through the Windward Islands , Alma also produced strong wind gusts on Grenada . The outer rainbands of Alma spread over Venezuela while the center was still over Trinidad . At about 13 : 00 UTC on August 14 , the rains caused a Linea Aeropostal Venezolana Vickers Viscount 749 turboprop airliner to crash while circling the airport on Isla Margarita . The aircraft struck the side of La Gloria , 26 ft ( 8 m ) below the summit . All but one of the 49 people aboard died on impact ; the co @-@ pilot survived for 17 more days before dying from severe and irreversible brain damage . Also in Venezuela , Alma produced landslides due to heavy rainfall . 
 = Aldfrith of Northumbria = 
 Aldfrith ( Early Modern Irish : Flann Fína mac Ossu ; Latin : <unk> , <unk> ; died 14 December 704 or 705 ) was king of Northumbria from 685 until his death . He is described by early writers such as Bede , Alcuin and Stephen of Ripon as a man of great learning . Some of his works and some letters written to him survive . His reign was relatively peaceful , marred only by disputes with Bishop Wilfrid , a major figure in the early Northumbrian church . 
 Aldfrith was born on an uncertain date to Oswiu of Northumbria and an Irish princess named Fín . Oswiu later became King of Northumbria ; he died in 670 and was succeeded by his son Ecgfrith . Aldfrith was educated for a career in the church and became a scholar . However , in 685 , when Ecgfrith was killed at the battle of Nechtansmere , Aldfrith was recalled to Northumbria , reportedly from the Hebridean island of Iona , and became king . 
 In his early @-@ 8th @-@ century account of Aldfrith 's reign , Bede states that he " ably restored the shattered fortunes of the kingdom , though within smaller boundaries " . His reign saw the creation of works of Hiberno @-@ Saxon art such as the Lindisfarne Gospels and the Codex Amiatinus , and is often seen as the start of Northumbria 's golden age . 
 = = Background and accession = = 
 By the year 600 , most of what is now England had been conquered by invaders from the continent , including Angles , Saxons , and Jutes . Bernicia and Deira , the two Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms in the north of England , were first united under a single ruler in about 605 when Æthelfrith , king of Bernicia , extended his rule over Deira . Over the course of the 7th century , the two kingdoms were sometimes ruled by a single king , and sometimes separately . The combined kingdom became known as the kingdom of Northumbria : it stretched from the River Humber in the south to the River Forth in the north . 
 In 616 , Æthelfrith was succeeded by Edwin of Northumbria , a Deiran . Edwin banished Æthelfrith 's sons , including both Oswald and Oswiu of Northumbria . Both spent their exile in Dál Riata , a kingdom spanning parts of northeastern Ireland and western Scotland . Oswiu was a child when he came to Dál Riata , and grew up in an Irish milieu . He became a fluent speaker of Old Irish , and may have married a princess of the Uí Néill dynasty , probably Fín the daughter ( or possibly granddaughter ) of Colmán <unk> . Aldfrith was a child of this marriage , but his date of birth is unrecorded . He was probably thus a cousin or nephew of the noted scholar Cenn <unk> mac <unk> , and perhaps a nephew of Bishop Finan of Lindisfarne . Irish law made Fín 's kin , the Cenél nEógain of the northern Uí Néill , responsible for his upbringing . The relationship between Aldfrith 's father and mother was not considered a lawful marriage by Northumbrian churchmen of his day , and he is described as the son of a concubine in early sources . 
 Oswald and Oswiu returned to Northumbria after Edwin 's death in 633 , and between them they ruled for much of the middle of the 7th century . The 8th @-@ century monk and chronicler Bede lists both Oswald and Oswiu as having held imperium , or overlordship , over the other Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms ; in Oswiu 's case his dominance extended beyond the Anglo @-@ Saxons to the Picts , the Gaels of Dál Riata , and the many obscure and nameless native British kingdoms in what are now North West England and southern Scotland . Oswiu 's overlordship was ended in 658 by the rise of Wulfhere of Mercia , but his reign continued until his death in 670 , when Ecgfrith , one of his sons by his second wife , Eanflæd , succeeded him . Ecgfrith was unable to recover Oswiu 's position in Mercia and the southern kingdoms , and was defeated by Wulfhere 's brother Æthelred in a battle on the River Trent in 679 . 
 Ecgfrith sent an army under his general , Berht , to Ireland in 684 where he ravaged the plain of Brega , destroying churches and taking hostages . The raid may have been intended to discourage support for any claim Aldfrith might have to the throne , though other motives are possible . 
 Ecgfrith 's two marriages — the first to the saintly virgin Æthelthryth ( Saint Audrey ) , the second to Eormenburh — produced no children . He had two full brothers : Alhfrith , who is not mentioned after 664 , and Ælfwine , who was killed at the battle on the Trent in 679 . Hence the succession in Northumbria was unclear for some years before Ecgfrith 's death . Bede 's Life of Cuthbert recounts a conversation between Cuthbert and Abbess Ælfflæd of Whitby , daughter of Oswiu , in which Cuthbert foresaw Ecgfrith 's death . When Ælfflæd asked about his successor , she was told she would love him as a brother : 
 " But , " said she , " I beseech you to tell me where he may be found . " He answered , " You behold this great and spacious sea , how it <unk> in islands . It is easy for God out of some of these to provide a person to reign over England . " She therefore understood him to speak of [ Aldfrith ] , who was said to be the son of her father , and was then , on account of his love of literature , exiled to the Scottish islands . 
 Cuthbert , later considered a saint , was a second cousin of Aldfrith ( according to Irish genealogies ) , which may have been the reason for his proposal as monarch . 
 Ecgfrith was killed during a campaign against his cousin , the King of the Picts Bridei map Beli , at a battle known as Nechtansmere to the Northumbrians , in Pictish territory north of the Firth of Forth . Bede recounts that Queen Eormenburh and Cuthbert were visiting Carlisle that day , and that Cuthbert had a premonition of the defeat . Ecgfrith 's death threatened to break the hold of the descendants of Æthelfrith on Northumbria , but the scholar Aldfrith became king and the thrones of Bernicia and Deira remained united . 
 Although rival claimants of royal descent must have existed , there is no recorded resistance to Aldfrith 's accession . It has also been suggested that Aldfrith 's ascent was eased by support from Dál Riata , the Uí Néill , and the Picts , all of whom might have preferred the mature , known quantity of Aldfrith to an unknown and more warlike monarch , such as Ecgfrith or Oswiu had been . The historian Herman <unk> , for example , wrote that " Aldfrith was in Iona in the year preceding the battle [ of Nechtansmere ] ; immediately afterwards , he was king of Northumbria . It is quite obvious that he must have been installed by the Pictish @-@ Dál Riatan alliance " . Subsequently a battle between the Northumbrians and the Picts in which Berht was killed is recorded by Bede and the Irish annals in 697 or 698 . Overall , Aldfrith appears to have abandoned his predecessors ' attempts to dominate Northumbria 's neighbours . 
 = = Aldfrith 's Northumbria = = 
 Bede , paraphrasing Virgil , wrote that following Ecgfrith 's death , " the hopes and strengths of the English realm began ' to waver and slip backward ever lower ' " . The Northumbrians never regained the dominance of central Britain lost in 679 , or of northern Britain lost in 685 . Nonetheless , Northumbria remained one of the most powerful states of Britain and Ireland well into the Viking Age . 
 Aldfrith ruled both Bernicia and Deira throughout his reign , but the two parts remained distinct , and would again be divided by the Vikings in the late 9th century . The centre of Bernicia lay in the region around the later Anglo @-@ Scottish border , with Lindisfarne , Hexham , Bamburgh , and Yeavering being important religious and royal centres . Even after Ecgfrith 's death , Bernicia included much of modern southeast Scotland , with a presumed royal centre at Dunbar , and religious centres at Coldingham and Melrose . The details of the early Middle Ages in northwest England and southwest Scotland are more obscure , but a Bishop of Whithorn is known from shortly after Aldfrith 's reign . York , Catterick , Ripon , and Whitby appear to have been important sites in Deira . 
 Northumbria 's southern frontier with Mercia ran across England , from the Humber in the east , following the River Ouse and the River Don , to the Mersey in the west . Some archaeological evidence , the Roman Rig dyke , near modern Sheffield , appears to show that it was a defended border , with large earthworks set back from the frontier . The Nico Ditch , to the south of modern Manchester , has been cited in this context , though it has also been argued that it was simply a boundary marker without fortifications . In the far north , the evidence is less clear , and it appears that authority lay with sub @-@ kings , perhaps including native British rulers . The family of Ecgfrith 's general Berht may have been one such dynasty of under @-@ kings . 
 = = Relations with the Church = = 
 Along with the king , royal family , and chief noblemen , the church was a major force in Northumbria . Churchmen were not only figures of spiritual authority , they were major landowners , who also controlled trade , centred at major churches and monasteries in a land without cities and towns . The bishopric of Lindisfarne was held by Cuthbert at Aldfrith 's accession ; Cuthbert was succeeded by the Irish @-@ educated Eadberht , who would later be Abbot of Iona and bring the Easter controversy to an end , and then by Eadfrith , creator of the Lindisfarne Gospels . The bishops of Lindisfarne sometimes held the see of Hexham , but during Aldfrith 's reign it was held by John of Beverley , a pupil and protégé of Theodore , the Archbishop of Canterbury . The bishopric of York was held by Bosa in 685 . Wilfrid was given the see in 687 , but removed in 691 with Bosa returning to York . The short @-@ lived see at Abercorn , created in 681 for Bishop Trumwine , collapsed in the period after Ecgfrith 's death and the first known Bishop of Whithorn was appointed in the reign of King Ceolwulf . Important monasteries existed at Whitby , where the known abbesses tended to be members of the Deiran royal family , at Monkwearmouth @-@ Jarrow , where Bede was a monk , and at Ripon . 
 Aldfrith appears to have had the support of leading ecclesiastics , most notably his half @-@ sister Ælfflæd and the highly respected Bishop Cuthbert . He is known to have received confirmation at the hands of Aldhelm , later the Bishop of Sherborne in the south @-@ western Anglo @-@ Saxon Kingdom of Wessex . Aldhelm too had received an Irish education , but in Britain , at Malmesbury . Correspondence between the two survives , and Aldhelm sent Aldfrith his treatise on the numerology of the number seven , the Epistola ad <unk> . Aldfrith also owned a manuscript on cosmography , which ( according to Bede ) he purchased from Abbot Ceolfrith of Monkwearmouth @-@ Jarrow in exchange for an estate valued at eight hides . Aldfrith was a close friend of Adomnán , Abbot of Iona from 679 , and may have studied with him . In the 680s Aldfrith twice met with Adomnán , who came to seek the release of the Irish captives taken in Berht 's expedition of 684 . These were released and Adomnán presented Aldfrith with a copy of his treatise De <unk> Sanctis ( " On the Holy Places " ) , a description of the places of pilgrimage in the Holy Land , and at Alexandria and Constantinople . Bede reports that Aldfrith circulated Adomnán 's work for others to read . 
 Bede described Aldfrith as a scholar , and his interest in learning distinguishes him from the earlier Anglo @-@ Saxon warrior kings , such as Penda . Irish sources describe him as a sapiens , a term from the Latin for wise that refers to a scholar not usually associated with a particular church . It implies a degree of learning and wisdom that led historian Peter Hunter Blair to compare Aldfrith to the Platonic ideal of the philosopher king . Bede also makes it clear that the church in Aldfrith 's day was less subject to lay control of monasteries , a practice he dated from the time of Aldfrith 's death . 
 Aldfrith 's relations with the Church were , however , not always smooth . He inherited from Ecgfrith a troubled relationship with Wilfrid , a major ecclesiastical figure of the time . Wilfrid , the bishop of York , had been exiled by Ecgfrith for his role in persuading Ecgfrith 's wife , Æthelthryth , to remain a saintly celibate . In 686 , at the urging of Archbishop Theodore , Aldfrith allowed Wilfrid to return . Aldfrith 's relations with Wilfrid were stormy ; the hostility between the two was partly caused by Aldfrith 's allegiances with the Celtic Church , a consequence of his upbringing in exile . A more significant cause of strife was Wilfrid 's opposition to Theodore 's division , in 677 , of his huge Northumbrian diocese . When Wilfrid returned from exile the reconciliation with Aldfrith did not include Aldfrith 's support for Wilfrid 's attempts to recover his episcopal authority over the whole of the north . By 691 or 692 their differences were beyond repair . Wilfrid 's hagiographer writes : 
 For a while all would be peace between the wise King Aldfrith and our holy bishop , and a happier state of affairs could hardly be imagined . Then spite would boil up again and the situation would be reversed . And so they continued for years , in and out of friendship with each other , till finally their quarrels came to a head and the king banished Wilfrid from Northumbria . 
 Wilfrid spent his exile in Mercia , where he enjoyed the staunch support of King Æthelred . In 702 or 703 , Aldfrith convened a council at Austerfield , on the southern border of Northumbria , which was attended by Berhtwald , Archbishop of Canterbury , and many bishops . The question of Wilfrid 's return to Northumbria was hotly debated and then rejected by the bishops . According to Stephen of Ripon , King Aldfrith offered to use his army to pressure Wilfrid into accepting the decision , but the bishops reminded him that he had promised Wilfrid safe @-@ conduct . After returning to Mercia , Wilfrid was excommunicated by his enemies among the bishops . He responded by journeying to Rome , where he appealed in person to Pope John VI . The Pope provided him with letters to Aldfrith ordering that Wilfrid be restored to his offices . Aldfrith refused to receive the letters , and Wilfrid remained in disfavour . 
 = = Northumbria 's Golden Age = = 
 Aldfrith 's reign is considered the beginning of Northumbria 's Golden Age , which lasted until the end of the 8th century . The period saw the flowering of Insular art in Northumbria and produced the Lindisfarne Gospels , perhaps begun in Aldfrith 's time , the scholarship of Bede , and the beginnings of the Anglo @-@ Saxon missions to the continent . 
 The Lindisfarne Gospels are believed to be the work of Eadfrith of Lindisfarne , bishop of Lindisfarne from 698 . They are not the only surviving Northumbrian illuminated manuscripts from Aldfrith 's time . Also active at Lindisfarne in the late 7th century was the scribe known as the " Durham @-@ Echternach calligrapher " , who produced the Durham Gospels and the Echternach Gospels . The Codex Amiatinus was a product of Monkwearmouth @-@ Jarrow , made on the orders of Abbot <unk> , probably in the decade after Aldfrith 's death . 
 Two significant items of jewellery from Northumbria in this period have survived . The Ripon Jewel , discovered in the precincts of Ripon Cathedral in 1977 , is difficult to date but its grandeur and the location of the find have suggested a link with Bishop Wilfrid , whose rich furnishings of the church at Ripon are on record . Bishop Cuthbert 's pectoral cross was buried with him during Aldfrith 's reign , either at his death in 687 or his reburial in 698 and is now at Durham Cathedral . There are few surviving architectural or monumental remains from the period . The Bewcastle Cross , the Ruthwell Cross and the Hexham Cross are probably to be dated to one or two generations after Aldfrith 's time . <unk> Church is the best preserved Northumbrian church of the period , dated to the late 7th century . The ruined chapel at <unk> , overlooking Morecambe Bay , may be somewhat later in date . 
 The Northumbrian coinage is thought to have begun during Aldfrith 's reign . Early silver coins , known as sceattas , appeared , replacing the impractical gold <unk> as a medium of exchange . Exceptionally for the period , Aldfrith 's coins bear his name , rather than that of a moneyer , in an Irish uncial script . Most show a lion , with upraised tail . 
 = = Heirs , death , and succession = = 
 Aldfrith was married to Cuthburh , sister of King Ine of Wessex ; the marriage thus allied Aldfrith with one of the most powerful kings in Anglo @-@ Saxon England . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records that Aldfrith and Cuthburh separated , and Cuthburh established an abbey at Wimborne Minster where she was abbess . At least two sons were born to Aldfrith , but whether Cuthburh was their mother is unrecorded . Osred , born around 696 or 697 , succeeded to the throne after a civil war following Aldfrith 's death . Little is known of Offa , who is presumed to have been killed after being taken from Lindisfarne in 750 on the orders of King Eadberht of Northumbria . Osric , who was later king , may have been Aldfrith 's son , or alternatively the son of Aldfrith 's half @-@ brother Alhfrith . The 13th @-@ century discovery of a tomb thought to be that of St <unk> has led to the suggestion that <unk> was the daughter of Aldfrith , although this view is not widely held by modern historians . 
 Aldfrith was said to have been ill for some time before his death , dying on 14 December 704 or 705 . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle adds that he died at Driffield in the East Riding of Yorkshire . The succession was disputed by Eadwulf , supported initially by Bishop Wilfrid , and supporters of Aldfrith 's young son Osred , apparently led by Berht 's kinsman <unk> . 
 The reports of Aldfrith 's death in the Irish annals call him Aldfrith son of Oswiu , but some of these are glossed by later scribes with the name Flann Fína mac Ossu . A collection of wisdom literature attributed to Flann Fína , the <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> Ossu , has survived , though the text is not contemporary with Aldfrith as it is in Middle Irish , a form of Irish not in use until the 10th century . 
 Learning merits respect . 
 Intelligence overcomes fury . 
 Truth should be supported . 
 Falsehood should be rebuked . 
 Iniquity should be corrected . 
 A quarrel merits mediation . 
 <unk> should be spurned . 
 Arrogance deserves oblivion . 
 Good should be exalted . 
 = Arthur Schultz = 
 Arthur " Art " Schultz ( July 4 , 1933 – November 26 , 2011 ) was an American Republican politician . He was a five @-@ term mayor of Joliet , Illinois , the fourth largest municipality in the state after Chicago , Aurora , and Rockford . He was last elected in April 2007 . Prior to his first election , he served in the United States Navy and in the Joliet Police Department . 
 He finished as the first runner @-@ up in the Joliet City Council election of 1989 , but when a sitting councilwoman died a few months after the election he was passed over several times for the nomination . This was controversial as the nomination is customarily given to the runner @-@ up in the most recent election . He returned to elective politics to defeat the mayor , who did not nominate him in the subsequent election in 1991 . 
 In his time in office , Joliet changed from an economy of a prison town with declining population to a fast @-@ growing entertainment and tourism economy , focused on riverboat casinos . Residential and commercial construction increased and racing tracks , a baseball stadium , and several civic works developed as a result of the booming economy . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Schultz was born on July 4 , 1933 and raised in Joliet . He attended parochial schools in the city , and was an altar boy . Schultz was a graduate of Joliet Catholic High School . After high school , he served four years in the United States Navy during the Korean War . He then worked for the Joliet Police Department for 29 years before being elected mayor in 1991 . 
 Schultz and his wife were married on November 6 , 1954 at the Cathedral of St. Raymond in Joliet . As of his 50th wedding anniversary in 2004 , Schultz had five children and eight grandchildren . 
 On November 16 , 1993 Schultz had a laryngectomy after having had vocal chord tumors removed the previous May . He lost his voice for a period before regaining it after several months of home recuperation with the aid of a voice prosthesis that was inserted into a neck valve . Schultz suffered congestive heart failure on November 14 , 2011 , which required hospital care . He died on November 26 , 2011 , aged 78 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Election history = = = 
 = = = = City Council = = = = 
 Schultz ran for the election to the Joliet City Council in the spring 1989 municipal elections . He advanced from the February 28 , 1989 primary election to the general election in what the Chicago Tribune described as a surprisingly strong showing , but finished fourth in the six @-@ way April 4 general election for three seats . 
 In August 1989 , Joliet Councilwoman Margaret Short died with two years remaining in her term and Joliet Mayor Charles Connor had the responsibility of nominating a replacement for consideration by the remaining councilmen . Rather than following the custom of nominating the first runner @-@ up in the most recent council election ( Schultz in this case ) , Connor nominated a political ally . The council did not support the nomination and after some delay she withdrew on September 19 . When Connor 's second nomination was again not one of the runners @-@ up , it was again defeated , which led to the council enacting legislation to strip the mayor of his power to nominate councilmen . On October 17 , Connor became the first Joliet mayor since the mid @-@ 1970s to refuse to sign legislation passed by the Joliet City Council . On November 21 , there was unanimous agreement on a compromise candidate who was also not one of the runners @-@ up . 
 = = = = Mayor = = = = 
 At the time of the non @-@ partisan February 26 , 1991 mayoral primary election , the Chicago Tribune described Joliet as suffering from a stagnant economy and sagging population . Between 1980 and 1990 the population had declined to 76 @,@ 836 from 77 @,@ 956 , according to the United States Census Bureau . Connor was challenged by three candidates , including Schultz . Schultz narrowly won the primary election by a 2 @,@ 709 – 2 @,@ 545 ( 38 % – 36 % ) margin over Connor , but both candidates advanced to the April general election since they finished first and second in the primary . On April 2 , Schultz defeated Connor by a 6 @,@ 081 – 5 @,@ 534 margin . 
 Schultz was approved in his re @-@ election bids . In 1995 , he earned 67 percent of the vote in the primary election and 68 percent in the general election . He was unopposed in 1999 . In 2003 , he became the first four @-@ term mayor for Joliet , which was incorporated in 1852 , by taking 83 % of the vote in a four @-@ way contest . In 2007 , he earned 73 % of the vote in a three @-@ way contest . He did not run in the 2011 election , and was succeeded by Thomas <unk> . 
 = = = Service = = = 
 In January 1990 , the Illinois legislature passed two bills that permitted gambling along the Mississippi , Illinois , and Des Plaines <unk> but gambling did not commence in Joliet until June 17 , 1992 . In January 1993 Schultz described Joliet as " the riverboat @-@ gambling capital of the world " . In 1995 Joliet officials expected the town to be debt free by 2001 with Schultz described the sizable gambling industry revenues as " manna from Heaven " and encouraged other cities to try legalized gambling . Between 1993 and 1997 Schultz received US $ 1 @,@ 500 in gambling @-@ related political contributions . 
 During the 1990s , Joliet was one of the fastest @-@ growing cities in the state , and in 2000 its residential and commercial construction were at record @-@ setting levels , according to Schultz . Schultz also credited gambling revenues with having enabled the city to halt tax increases for a decade and to build a new police station and three new firehouses . In 1999 , the Joliet City Council approved the construction of the Chicagoland Speedway on 930 acres ( 3 @.@ 76 km2 ) of land next to the Route 66 Raceway . Between 2000 and 2002 Joliet was the tenth fastest @-@ growing city in the United States . Under Schultz , the city ended nearly 150 years as a prison town with the closure of the Joliet Correctional Center and focused its economy on entertainment and tourism . 
 In the early 1990s the city annexed 55 acres ( 0 @.@ 22 km2 ) for the construction of the Empress Riverboat Casino complex . In 1999 , the city annexed 923 acres ( 3 @.@ 74 km2 ) for the construction of the Chicagoland Speedway , which when combined with the Route 66 Raceway made Joliet the only racing facility host in the United States capable of hosting races from each major category in professional auto racing . In 2001 , the city acquired 12 parcels totaling 8 acres ( 32 @,@ 000 m2 ) through expedited condemnations to build Silver Cross Field . In 2005 , the city annexed 988 acres ( 4 @.@ 00 km2 ) to provide a corridor for commercial and residential growth . As of the July 1 , 2007 United States Census Bureau population estimates , Joliet had a population of 144 @,@ 316 . Thus , Schultz served as mayor for a city that ranked as the 162nd largest incorporated municipality in the United States and the fourth largest in the state of Illinois . 
 Silver Cross Field , which was built in 2002 to host the Joliet <unk> of the Northern League is located at 1 Mayor Art Schultz Drive . By 2007 , prospects of continued growth necessitated that Joliet agree on borders with the neighboring municipality of Oswego and that it consider future borders with others . 
 = U.S. Route 22 in New Jersey = 
 U.S. Route 22 ( US 22 ) is a U.S. highway stretching from Cincinnati , Ohio in the west to Newark , New Jersey in the east . In New Jersey , the route runs for 60 @.@ 53 mi ( 97 @.@ 41 km ) from the Easton @-@ Phillipsburg Toll Bridge over the Delaware River in Phillipsburg , Warren County to Interstate 78 ( I @-@ 78 ) , US 1 / 9 , and Route 21 at the Newark Airport Interchange in Newark , Essex County . The road first heads through the Phillipsburg @-@ Alpha area as a surface divided highway before running concurrent with I @-@ 78 through mountainous and agricultural sections of western New Jersey between Alpha and east of Clinton in Hunterdon County . For the remainder of the route , US 22 runs to the south of I @-@ 78 through mostly suburban areas as a four- to six @-@ lane surface divided highway , passing through Hunterdon , Somerset , Union , and Essex counties . Along this portion , it intersects US 202 and US 206 in Somerville , I @-@ 287 in Bridgewater Township , and the Garden State Parkway in Union . 
 What became US 22 in 1926 was first designated as pre @-@ 1927 Route 9 in 1916 , a route running from Phillipsburg to Elizabeth . In 1927 , pre @-@ 1927 Route 9 west of Elizabeth became Route 28 while the portion within Elizabeth became Route 27 @-@ 28 Link . By 1941 , US 22 was moved to its current alignment in the Phillipsburg area , following Route 24 and Route 24 @-@ 28 Link ; Route 28 in Phillipsburg became US 22 Alternate ( now Route 122 ) . Also , US 22 was moved off Route 28 east of Bridgewater Township to follow Route 28 @-@ 29 Link and Route 29 to Newark . In 1953 , the long concurrencies with the state highways were removed . In the 1960s , I @-@ 78 was constructed close to the US 22 corridor throughout New Jersey . US 22 was moved onto the new interstate between Alpha and Clinton in 1969 with most of the old route becoming Route 173 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Phillipsburg @-@ Alpha area = = = 
 US 22 enters New Jersey from Easton , Pennsylvania on the Easton @-@ Phillipsburg Toll Bridge over the Delaware River . It heads into Phillipsburg , Warren County as a four @-@ lane undivided road maintained by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission , eventually becoming a divided highway . East of the bridge , the westbound lanes pass through the bridge toll plaza , and the route has an eastbound exit and westbound entrance for Broad and Main Streets . From the previous exit , US 22 runs eastward as a brief limited @-@ access road maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation that ends in an interchange with Morris Street and Hillcrest Boulevard . At this point , the route becomes at @-@ grade Memorial Boulevard ; a commercial four to six @-@ lane divided thoroughfare with a wide median consisting of U @-@ turn ramps and jughandles . The median narrows as the road forms the border between Lopatcong Township to the north and Phillipsburg to the south . The route fully enters Lopatcong Township and comes to an interchange with Route 57 , with an eastbound exit and a westbound entrance . After passing the Route 57 junction , US 22 takes a southeasterly turn and passes over Norfolk Southern 's Washington Secondary before entering an agricultural area . The route forms the border between Pohatcong Township to the west and Greenwich Township to the east as it passes to the east of the Phillipsburg Mall . A short distance later , US 22 intersects CR 519 before heading back into a business district and meeting CR 638 . East of Alpha , the route intersects Route 122 , which is the final junction of the at @-@ grade section of US 22 . 
 = = = I @-@ 78 / US 22 concurrency = = = 
 Past the Route 122 intersection , US 22 has an interchange with exit 3 of I @-@ 78 and the western endpoint of Route 173 . From there , US 22 is concurrent with I @-@ 78 through a mountainous and rural area of western New Jersey . I @-@ 78 / US 22 follow a six @-@ lane freeway east through Greenwich Township , coming to a westbound exit and eastbound entrance with CR 637 . The road turns southeast and has an eastbound exit and westbound entrance with CR 632 in Franklin Township . Within the ramps for this interchange , there are weigh stations in both directions . A short distance after this interchange , I @-@ 78 / US 22 crosses the Musconetcong River into Bloomsbury , Hunterdon County . In Bloomsbury , the road has an interchange with Route 173 . After this interchange , the freeway enters Bethlehem Township , with Route 173 closely running to the north of I @-@ 78 / US 22 . The road has rest areas in both directions before it passes over Norfolk Southern 's Lehigh Line and turns southeast to cross the Musconetcong Mountains . 
 The freeway turns east again and enters Union Township , coming to an interchange with CR 614 and Route 173 . From here , I @-@ 78 / US 22 continue east directly to the south of Route 173 , coming to another interchange with that route as well as CR 625 . Entering more commercial areas , Route 173 merges onto I @-@ 78 / US 22 at exit 13 . At exit 15 , the highway meets an interchange with CR 513 , and Route 173 splits from I @-@ 78 / US 22 by heading north on CR 513 . At this point , the freeway runs along the border of Franklin Township to the south and Clinton to the north before entirely entering Clinton and crossing the South Branch Raritan River . I @-@ 78 / US 22 turns northeast and leaves Clinton for Clinton Township , where it has an eastbound exit and westbound entrance for Route 173 that also provides access to Route 31 . Immediately after is the interchange with Route 31 . At the next interchange near the community of Annandale , US 22 splits from I @-@ 78 , heading closely to the south of that route . 
 = = = Annandale to Somerville = = = 
 Upon splitting from I @-@ 78 , US 22 becomes a four @-@ lane at @-@ grade divided highway that runs through rural areas with some development and crosses New Jersey Transit ’ s Raritan Valley Line . It enters Lebanon , passing to the north of the town center . Upon leaving Lebanon , the route heads back into Clinton Township . In the community of <unk> , US 22 enters Readington Township and takes a southeasterly turn away from I @-@ 78 . Here , the road passes to the southwest of the Merck Headquarters Building before reaching the community of Whitehouse Station , where it has a short concurrency with CR 523 . Past Whitehouse Station , US 22 continues through a mix of residential and commercial areas . 
 US 22 continues into <unk> Township , Somerset County , where development near the road increases but remains mostly rural . CR 614 parallels US 22 to the north to pass through the community of North Branch before US 22 intersects CR 637 and crosses the North Branch Raritan River into Bridgewater Township . In Bridgewater Township , the route comes to an interchange with the eastern terminus of CR 614 and the western terminus of Route 28 . Past this interchange , US 22 passes business parks and the Raritan Valley Country Club , widening to six lanes in the process . Afterwards , it comes to an interchange with US 202 and US 206 . Past this interchange , US 22 quickly transitions from a rural to a more suburban setting and heads east along the border of Somerville to the south and Bridgewater Township to the north , passing near the Bridgewater Commons shopping mall . The median of the route widens as it runs immediately to the south of I @-@ 287 , fully entering Bridgewater Township again as it comes to an interchange with I @-@ 287 at exits 14A and 14B . 
 = = = I @-@ 287 to Garden State Parkway = = = 
 East of I @-@ 287 , US 22 continues east as a four @-@ lane divided highway passing to the south of the Watchung Mountains . The route then has an interchange with CR 525 , where the wide grassy median narrows to a Jersey barrier . The road continues through wooded surroundings and passes through a portion of Bound Brook , widening back to six lanes before meeting CR 527 at an interchange . From here , the route takes a northeasterly course , entering Bridgewater Township again and narrowing to four lanes before crossing into Green Brook Township while designated a short distance north of the Middlesex @-@ Somerset County border . US 22 continues through business areas as a highway with jughandles , crossing CR 529 . In North Plainfield , the route widens to six lanes and has an interchange with CR 531 . Past this interchange , the road continues along the border of Watchung to the west and North Plainfield to the southeast before crossing Green Brook . 
 At this crossing , US 22 heads north @-@ northeast into Scotch Plains , Union County , coming to an interchange with CR 655 . The route continues northeast as a four- to five @-@ lane highway , passing near <unk> Amusement Park . The road continues east through Mountainside , turning northeast before entering Springfield , where it has an interchange with CR 509 Spur ( signed as CR 577 ) . Past this interchange , for 1 @.@ 8 miles US 22 has an unusual wide median that contains commercial businesses and numerous U @-@ turn ramps . In this area , the road comes to a level crossing with the abandoned Rahway Valley Railroad . It crosses the Rahway River into Union , where the wide median continues . The route briefly forms the northern border of Kenilworth before the median narrows back into a Jersey barrier . US 22 splits into two carriageways at the intersection with exits 140 and 140A of the Garden State Parkway and Route 82 , site of the Union <unk> . 
 = = = Hillside to Newark Airport Interchange = = = 
 Past this interchange , the route comes to an exit for CR 630 before crossing the Elizabeth River into Hillside , where it heads east through more urban areas . The road has an interchange at <unk> Street before passing over CR 509 . After an interchange with Broad Street , US 22 turns northeast as a limited @-@ access roadway . It heads into Newark in Essex County , where the highway passes through wooded Weequahic Park . Past the park , US 22 turns to the east into urban areas and closely runs to the south of I @-@ 78 , where it comes to an eastbound exit and westbound entrance for Empire Street , which provides access to Route 27 . A short distance later , the freeway has a direct westbound exit and eastbound entrance with Route 27 . Past this interchange , US 22 continues parallel to I @-@ 78 , passing over Amtrak ’ s Northeast Corridor before reaching the Newark Airport Interchange ; south of downtown Newark and northwest of Newark Liberty International Airport . US 22 eastbound merges with US 1 @-@ 9 , with one southbound ramp and two northbound ramps ( one for local and another for express lanes ) . The main line follows the US 1 @-@ 9 local northbound ramp for another 0 @.@ 4 miles ( 0 @.@ 64 km ) , with an intermediate exit for Route 21 . The official eastern terminus of US 22 is at the ramp split for I @-@ 78 and northbound US 1 @-@ 9 . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of US 22 between Phillipsburg and Somerville roughly follows the alignment of the Jersey Turnpike , which was chartered in 1806 . What became US 22 across New Jersey was originally designated as pre @-@ 1927 Route 9 in 1916 , a route that ran from Phillipsburg east to Elizabeth . When the U.S. Highway System was established in 1926 , US 22 was designated through New Jersey from the Northampton Street Bridge in <unk> and followed Route 9 east to US 1 / 9 in Elizabeth . A year later , in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 9 was replaced by Route 28 , which itself was rerouted to continue to the Goethals Bridge . As a result , the alignment of US 22 in Elizabeth was designated Route 27 @-@ 28 Link . By 1941 , US 22 underwent two significant realignments within the state . In Phillipsburg , the route was moved from Route 28 to follow its current alignment on what was Route 24 between the Easton @-@ Phillipsburg Toll Bridge and present @-@ day Route 57 ( then a part of Route 24 ) and Route 24 @-@ 28 Link between there and Route 28 . The approach to the Easton @-@ Phillipsburg Toll Bridge , which opened in 1938 , had been planned to be designated Route 24N , but instead became a part of Route 24 . With the realignment of US 22 in Phillipsburg , the old alignment was designated as US 22 Alternate ( now Route 122 ) . In addition , US 22 was moved off from Route 28 east of Bridgewater Township to follow Route 28 @-@ 29 Link and Route 29 to Newark ; Route 29 had been legislated in the 1927 renumbering while Route 28 @-@ 29 Link was legislated in 1938 . 
 In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the state highways running concurrent with US 22 were removed . With the planning of the Interstate Highway System in the 1950s , an Interstate Highway connecting the Harrisburg , Pennsylvania area to New York City was planned to run roughly along the US 22 corridor in New Jersey . This interstate was designated as I @-@ 78 in the final plans in 1958 . The new interstate roughly followed the alignment of the unconstructed Route 11 , which had been legislated in 1927 to run from US 22 between White House and <unk> . Between the Alpha area and Annandale , I @-@ 78 was to directly follow US 22 ; the portion between exits 11 and 13 involved the creation of new eastbound lanes for I @-@ 78 and conversion of the eastbound lanes of US 22 into the westbound lanes of I @-@ 78 . The westbound lanes of US 22 were turned into a two @-@ lane frontage road . This construction took place during the 1960s . US 22 was moved to the I @-@ 78 alignment between these two points in 1969 . The former alignment between Alpha and Clinton became Route 173 while the portion east of there became county @-@ maintained Beaver Avenue ( currently designated CR 626 ) . Originally , I @-@ 78 had been planned to use the Easton @-@ Phillipsburg Toll Bridge across the Delaware River and follow US 22 through Phillipsburg and along the Lehigh Valley Thruway west through the Lehigh Valley of Pennsylvania . However , opposition within Phillipsburg led to the cancellation of this routing , and I @-@ 78 was rerouted to head to the south of the Lehigh Valley . In addition to the construction of I @-@ 78 along the US 22 corridor , US 22 itself evolved into a multilane divided highway from a two @-@ lane road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest = 
 The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest ( also known as Jonny Quest : The Real Adventures ) is an American animated action @-@ adventure television series produced by Hanna @-@ Barbera and broadcast on Cartoon Network from August 26 , 1996 to April 16 , 1997 . A continuation of the Jonny Quest ( 1964 ) and The New Adventures of Jonny Quest ( 1986 ) series , it features teenage adventurers Jonny Quest , Hadji Singh , and Jessie Bannon as they accompany Dr. Benton Quest and bodyguard Race Bannon to investigate strange phenomena , legends , and mysteries in exotic locales . Action also takes place in the virtual realm of QuestWorld , a three @-@ dimensional cyberspace domain rendered with computer animation . Conceived in the early 1990s , Real Adventures suffered a long and troubled development . 
 Hanna @-@ Barbera dismissed creator Peter Lawrence in 1996 and hired new producers to finish the show . John Eng and Cosmo Anzilotti completed Lawrence 's work ; David Lipman , Davis Doi , and Larry Houston wrote new episodes with reworked character designs akin to those of classic Quest . Each team produced half of the show 's fifty @-@ two episodes . While Lawrence 's team crafted stories of real @-@ world mystery and exploration , later writers used science fiction and paranormal plots . Turner supported the show through a massive marketing campaign with thirty @-@ three licensees . Real Adventures debuted with an unprecedented wide release on Cartoon Network , TBS , and TNT , airing twenty @-@ one times per week . Critics have debated the merits of the show 's animation , writing , and spirit compared to classic Quest , but it has also received praise in those categories . 
 Real Adventures failed to gain high ratings with its targeted demographics and its merchandise performed poorly , leading to cancellation after fifty @-@ two episodes . Turner Home Entertainment and Warner Home Video have released eight VHS tapes , two <unk> , and twenty @-@ six DVD episodes ; reruns have appeared on Toonami , CNX , and other Turner networks . All 52 episodes were made available for digital purchase on the iTunes Store in 2013 . 
 = = Development and history = = 
 Hanna @-@ Barbera created The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest in the early 1990s after being acquired by Turner Entertainment Co . Turner planned a series of year @-@ long " Turner @-@ wide initiatives " to capitalize on old characters and create new franchises . Turner received copious fan mail and phone inquiries about Quest , and observed " incredibly high " marketing Q Scores . The show was also Hanna @-@ Barbera 's most popular venture in the action @-@ adventure genre ; no other contemporary series featured realistic children enjoying lifelike adventures . With William Hanna and Joseph Barbera 's blessings , the company planned a new series , live action film , and two telefilms — Jonny 's Golden Quest and Jonny Quest vs. The Cyber Insects . Combined with a substantial marketing campaign , the project would be their largest initiative since Turner acquired H @-@ B. Turner Home Entertainment President Philip Kent claimed Quest would be a " consumer @-@ products bonanza " , and the company considered Real Adventures the linchpin of the Quest revival . Real Adventures , the live @-@ action film , and release of classic episodes on VHS would constitute a " Year of Jonny Quest " marketing blitz . Delayed until 1996 , the project echoed 1994 's " Year of the Flintstones " and 1995 's " Year of Yogi Bear " . Production on Real Adventures commenced in 1993 . Turner hired a team led by director Dick Sebast , writer Peter Lawrence , and art director Takashi <unk> . The firm appointed Stephanie Sperber head of the Quest task force in 1994 . 
 Hanna @-@ Barbera President Fred Seibert allowed Lawrence to create a new team of companions for Jonny , but Lawrence chose to revive the original group . Sebast and Lawrence decided to make the series as realistic as possible through accurate physics and depictions of machinery . Lawrence emphasized believability , eschewing " ridiculous ... laser guns " for real sidearms . The creative team researched child psychology , ensuring they could depict realistic action and consequences without fueling nightmares . Seibert described the show 's theme as " The X @-@ Files for kids " , citing difficult questions and mysteries to be posed in each episode . Departures from the classic series included new character designs and the introduction of a new character to the Quest family . Takashi designed Jonny to be " edgy and handsome " , and rendered characters in the style of Japanese animation to differentiate from American superhero cartoons . The team used a new character — Race 's daughter , Jessie Bannon — to create conflict with Jonny . She was introduced in Jonny 's Golden Quest as Race 's daughter by Jezebel Jade . Lawrence initially titled the show Jonny Quest 's Extraordinary Adventures , but the title changed in 1995 to its final name . Intended for a 1995 release with sixty @-@ five episodes , Real Adventures fell into development hell ; roughly thirty scripts and only eight reels were in progress by March 1995 . Both Lawrence and Takashi were removed in 1996 , hiring John Eng and Cosmo Anzilotti to finish the first twenty @-@ six episodes . Certain sequences necessitated exhaustive work and heavy revision . 
 A new team led by David Lipman , Davis Doi , and Larry Houston finished twenty @-@ six more for broadcast as a separate series named The New Jonny Quest . Time Warner 's acquisition of Turner negated this plan , leading to the episodes ' release as the second season of Real Adventures . Fred Seibert touted Quest as the " Home Alone of adventure " , with " high @-@ tech , multicultural themes " that would appeal to contemporary youth . Promoters promised the new Quest would avoid " mindless violence , chauvinism , xenophobia and insensitivity " , addressing historical criticisms of the classic series . Turner also claimed that Quest would appeal to any gender , stating , " Traditionally , action adventure animation may be stronger with boys , but in this case , storylines are being developed to draw girls in ... we 're really hoping for a wide berth of viewership . " 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Peter Lawrence aimed to " go beyond cartooning and into animated film @-@ making " for the show 's storytelling . Producers contracted seven studios to animate the first season , including Pacific Animation Co. in Japan and Toon 's Factory in France . Japanese and Korean animators drew traditional cel sequences and added color ; an international team handled digital post @-@ production and QuestWorld scenes . Teva , a subsidiary of Total Group , organized a post @-@ production team in Paris , led by Eric <unk> , Gilles <unk> , and Pascal <unk> . Using video post @-@ production high @-@ end specialized tools , including Henry , Spirit , Flame , and others , the team strove to deliver a high @-@ speed computer editing and post @-@ production process . The majority of the first season 's footage was digitally inked and painted to enhance background elements . Producers applied the process in excess of twenty hours per episode , adding light effects , rain , snow , glitter , reflections , and fog . 
 Hanna @-@ Barbera implemented a new computer system to combine manual animation with digital paint , and to provide camera movement flexibility , which created a partial three @-@ dimensional effect . Takashi felt the system made the creative team " honest filmmakers " through hands @-@ on production . Lawrence described the system in 1995 : 
 We almost have a fine cut before we start animating . The pencil test is imported into the computer ... By having camera mounts on multiple levels , it enables us to review the whole show without the animation . We see the writing and see where there 's a stupid line . We can re @-@ cut the show — effectively ADR the show — and not only send the tape , but print it as well . The tape goes to the compositor and the whole thing is laid together way upfront . 
 The " pencil test [ is ] imported into the computer " referred to by Lawrence was an animatic . This process was implemented by a specialized graphics IT group within the Turner organization called the Production Technology Group ( <unk> ) . 
 This is the same group that set up and maintained the in @-@ house digital ink and paint systems for Hanna Barbera as well as the Avid and Pro Tools systems used in Post Production . The group was founded and managed by Stephen Toback . Real Adventures maintained the classic show 's realistic violence , featuring off @-@ screen deaths of villains and allies . Japan @-@ based Mook Studios exclusively animated the second season without digital post @-@ processing . The show 's format dictated that title sequences be aired first , followed by a short introduction , the first act , and the second act , with commercial breaks between . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Bodie Chandler directed music for Quest , and Gary <unk> , Thomas Chase , Stephen Rucker , Lawrence H. Brown , Guy Moon , Kevin Kiner , Christophe Beck , and Mark Koval wrote incidental music and cues . <unk> conceived a new main theme based on the original 1960s Jonny Quest theme by Hoyt Curtin . Composer Guy Moon considered working for the show the " hardest thing I 've done in my life " due to the producers ' demands for epic music : " They want a big orchestra with a good synth rig ... It 's great because they push me so much I 'll probably replace my whole demo reel with ' Jonny Quest ' music ... It 's hip and it 's current . " Stephen Rucker and Thomas Chase ( who later composed in The Powerpuff Girls ) used MIDI to facilitate composing . Chase appreciated the producers ' commitment to scoring , noting , " For many kids , animation music is their first exposure to orchestral music . " 
 = = = QuestWorld = = = 
 Producers cultivated an element of virtual reality through QuestWorld , a cyberspace simulation rendered with three @-@ dimensional computer animation and motion capture . QuestWorld was designed as a futuristic application of contemporary technology , similar to the classic series ' high @-@ tech lasers , satellites , and robots . Seibert traced its origin to " the same problem that James Bond has ... When you look at even his newest gadgets , they 're somewhat quaint . " H @-@ B marketers polled children on their familiarity with virtual reality , discovering that each child was aware of the concept . Planners took inspiration from cyberpunk novels written by Neal Stephenson and William Gibson , including Snow Crash . Short , independent QuestWorld segments called " Quest Bytes " concluded certain episodes . 
 QuestWorld characters were created as wire frame models , augmented with faces scanned from clay busts , then digitally painted and inked . Animation company Buzz F / X , based in Montreal and Santa Monica , created first season sequences . Work began in April 1996 with the opening titles — a gliding journey through a canyon of green , cartographic lines with scenes illuminated upon the walls . Buzz F / X used mostly inexperienced animators , as budgetary constraints would not permit hiring seasoned employees . 
 Work followed on " Escape to Questworld " and " Trouble on the Colorado " as animators worked twelve hours a day , six days a week in a small garage with inadequate computers . Buzz F / X augmented the small team in July with ten recruits , but only two were experienced . Amateur employees struggled with lighting , and with synchronizing jerky motion capture from the House of Moves in Venice Beach ; Quest was their first capture production order . By August , the team was working fourteen hours a day , seven days a week , including full nights and mornings . 
 After two more episodes , Buzz F / X terminated its unprofitable contract with H @-@ B , later filing for bankruptcy in 1997 due to $ 3 @.@ 6 million of debt created by work on Quest . H @-@ B hired Blur Studio to finish the second season 's scenes on a ten @-@ week production schedule . Blur used Intergraph hardware , and its sharp performance attracted press attention and sealed an amicable relationship with H @-@ B. Both companies produced in total roughly one hundred minutes of computer animation for QuestWorld . 
 = = = International promotion and network run = = = 
 Turner Entertainment promoted the series in forty countries and fourteen languages to establish international markets . Broadcasters included Antena 3 in Spain , TF1 in France , Channel One in Russia , RAI in Italy , Taurus Film in Germany , the BBC in the United Kingdom and Asia Television in ten Asian countries , representing ATL 's first animated series to be broadcast in both English and Cantonese . Turner planned to introduce US @-@ style animation to the Asian market through Quest . The show was launched in Singapore on TCS Channel 5 ( now known as MediaCorp Channel 5 ) to take advantage of Singapore 's " sophisticated retail sector and well @-@ developed licensing industry " . Brandweek reported in 1995 that the show 's budget , including merchandising and promotional costs , topped $ 40 million . 
 Director Richard Donner , producer Lauren Shuler Donner , and Jane Rosenthal purchased rights for a live @-@ action film , having expressed interest in the property after Turner acquired H @-@ B. Peter Segal was attached to direct . Slated to begin production in mid @-@ 1995 , filming was delayed until 1996 and ultimately never began . Turner advertised Real Adventures as the " next evolution in children 's programming ... [ redefining ] television animation for the next generation . " The company hosted a 1995 discussion with Peter Lawrence and Takashi at <unk> , and later aired previews at United States waterpark events . Staged in major US cities , these " dive @-@ in theaters " featured previews of new series and local celebrities , including Jennifer Love Hewitt , Lacey Chabert , Cameron Finley , and Ashley Johnson for the UCLA event . Turner announced all the debut countries and TV stations as of May 1 , 1996 : 
 Turner aired Real Adventures seven nights a week on TBS , TNT , and Cartoon Network for an unprecedented twenty @-@ one weekly showings . Turner aired several commercial spots featuring the Quest logo and show introductions to build viral support . Turner 's marketers surmised that juvenile groups watching TNT in the morning , TBS in the afternoon , or Cartoon Network in prime time and late night were mutually exclusive . Real Adventures premiered August 26 , 1996 , three months after a twenty @-@ hour " Farewell Marathon " of original Quest . 
 The show averaged a 2 @.@ 0 Nielsen rating over August and September 1996 , considered a strong start for an animated series . Though Cartoon Network suffered declining viewership in 1996 , Quest was consistently one of the highest @-@ rated programs ; later season @-@ one episodes drew around 650 @,@ 000 viewers . Real Adventures 's merchandise performed poorly , and it failed to build consistent ratings in its targeted demographics ( though it did attract adult audiences ) . Turner tried to revive interest in February 1997 with a contest for an adventurous trip to Jamaica called Quest World Adventure . 
 Cartoon Network did not order new episodes beyond the fifty @-@ second . Reruns aired for two years on Toonami until September 24 , 1999 on Cartoon Network in other formats until January 3 , 2003 ; and on CNX until 2003 . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The show 's premise is that Dr. Quest , a famous <unk> , investigates mysterious occurrences and exotic locales with his son , Jonny Quest , adopted son Hadji Singh , bodyguard Race Bannon , Race 's daughter Jessie , and pet bulldog Bandit . Real Adventures is set a few years after the classic series , making Jonny and his friends teenagers . Lawrence aimed to use " existing , real phenomenon " — such as the " <unk> of Nazca , the Ruins of Teotihuacan or the possible existence of Giant Squid " — to capture audiences ' curiosity . Stressing plausibility , he suggested writers cover real @-@ world enigmas , cryptozoology , unique locales , an alien posing as the vice president , and fictional but " believable " mysteries . The Quests would frequently visit the virtual environment of QuestWorld , and encounter the villainous Jeremiah Surd and Ezekiel Rage . Paralyzed years prior by Race 's SWAT team , Surd would try to exact revenge through technology ; Rage — a former government agent left for dead on a botched mission — would try to destroy the world with nuclear terrorism . 
 The Quests would sparingly fight " monsters of the week " , instead battling antagonists whose conflicts lay in " personal objective or ambition ... opposed by Dr. Quest " . Lawrence stationed the family at a new compound on the coast of Maine , replete with houses , barns , and workshops . Rooms suited for each character included a library for Dr. Quest , workshop for Jonny , computer @-@ equipped den for Jessie , dojo and gym for Race , and lighthouse lookout for Hadji 's meditation . Lawrence equipped Dr. Quest with a fleet of air , land , and sea vehicles , including a 1940s biplane and state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art catamaran named <unk> with diving bells and smaller research vessels stored in the hulls . Peter Lawrence prided Real Adventures on the strength of its writing , opining that " very few writers in this or any other field actually write visually , " and contesting that each episode would have " enough material or potential to develop into a movie " . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Peter Lawrence described Jonny as a " hero in training " on the cusp of adulthood . He remarked that Jonny possessed " a straight @-@ ahead , right @-@ on attitude " free of introspection or self @-@ doubt . At age 14 , Jonny was a confident problem @-@ solver prone to getting in trouble . Writers framed him as more an intuitive thinker than an intellectual , and created tension by contrasting his father 's academic leanings with Jonny 's affinity for Race 's daring lifestyle . Jonny inherited his father 's driving curiosity ( rendering him a " walking query " ) , as well as his mother 's " restless , adventurous spirit " . Takashi designed Jonny to be lean , wiry , athletic , and coordinated . Creative directors centered episodes around Jonny ; Seibert summarized the shift : 
 We decided to make the show more Jonny @-@ centric . If you analyze the original show , you 'll see it 's really the Dr. Quest and Race show . Jonny was just hanging out — after all , what can a 10 @-@ year @-@ old do ? He can 't even ride his bike out of the neighborhood . 
 Hadji , age 16 , became Dr. Quest 's personal assistant , lacking his mentor 's formal education but sharing his burning interest in archaeology , anthropology and the paranormal . A Hindu , as mentioned in the original series episode " Riddle Of The Gold , " and a yogi , he held a fatalistic attitude towards the show 's drama , reacting to situations " from the philosophical point of view that everything is as it 's supposed to be " . Hadji often used wise aphorisms , taken from diverse cultures and sources and sometimes baffling Jonny . Lawrence cut Hadji 's classic telekinesis to align his abilities with realistic yogi practices . " He doesn 't say things like ' Sim , Sim Sala Bim ' anymore , " season one voice actor Michael Benyaer explained . " The writers and producers actually researched the actual yogic powers . He can do more plausible stuff . There is an episode where Hadji pretends to stop his breathing so that the bad guys think he is dead . " Takashi drew Hadji taller and thinner than his classic counterpart . 
 Jessie Bannon , age 15 , was characterized to be just as tough , smarter , and more thoughtful than Jonny . Written as " more of an egghead " , she elected to spend time with Dr. Quest as Jonny did with Race , and was " more in tune with Hadji " . Turner conceived Jessie as cool , independent , and a strong role model for contemporary girls . Peter Lawrence took pains to ensure Jessie would not be written as " a guy in a skirt " , and made her more mature than Jonny . Race Bannon ( Jessie 's father ) age 38 , retained his classic , laconic sense of humor and fearless , dependable nature . He retired from government work over ethical scruples with his former intelligence agency . Writers noted that Race was helplessly overprotective of Jessie , and Jonny was " the boy Race never had " . Race was also given a western @-@ US accent and a knack for crafting elaborate , colorful similes . Peter Lawrence sculpted Race to be a " cowboy philosopher or philosopher @-@ warrior " . Writers tasked Race with physical and self @-@ defense training for the Quest team . 
 Dr. Benton Quest , age 55 , retired from government research and operated from the " Quest Compound " on the coast of Maine . Driven by curiosity , he was " consulted by individuals , governments and corporations " to investigate enigmatic events . Described as " single @-@ minded — almost to the point of obsession — in his pursuit of knowledge " , he often encountered trouble as " his drive to learn blanks out more basic instincts like self @-@ preservation . " Jessie appreciated his ponderous sense of humor . The show 's promoters summarized him as the " benevolent king " archetype . Bandit the family dog also appeared in the series . Lawrence removed Bandit 's clownish origins , stressing that Bandit could not understand English , nor reliably save the family from perilous situations . Summarizing the group 's behavior , Lawrence wrote , " Jonny 's response to danger will be close to Race 's . Jessie 's intrigue with mysterious , unexplained phenomena will be close to Dr. Quest 's and Hadji , with his roots in a different culture and a more spiritual approach to life , is different again . " 
 Takashi designed each character as physically fit and well @-@ sculpted to reflect " a more exercise @-@ oriented society " . Fred Seibert downplayed worries that the new characters would disappoint cult fans of the classic series . He hoped Real Adventures would find success as new interpretations of comic book heroes had done . 
 = = = Second season changes = = = 
 Season two directors Larry Houston and Davis Doi changed the show to resemble the classic franchise . Writer Glenn Leopold revived Hadji 's latent psionic powers — including spoon @-@ bending and rope tricks — as he felt the first season 's realism was " not that interesting to watch " . All characters lost a year in age ; Jonny became 13 . Writer Lance Falk returned Race to governmental guard duty , sealed by an episodic visit with classic Quest spymaster Phil <unk> . Race lost his western accent ( with Falk even comparing Race 's western accent to Batman having a French accent ) , and Dr. Quest regained his classic red hair and exhibited rudimentary combat skills . Falk regarded Jessie as the " missing piece needed to complete the Quest family " , and Leopold added slight romantic overtones to episodes . Some fans complained about changes to Jessie , criticized as a damsel in distress with stereotypically female pink clothes . Jonny saved Jessie from danger several times . Falk defended his portrayal as giving her realistic , human fears , such as claustrophobia . Censors asked the second season team to replace firearms with dart guns , notably in the episode " General Winter " . 
 Second season writers took greater creative liberties with Real Adventures , invoking ghosts , other dimensions , and megalomaniacal schemes . Leopold and Falk sought to create a " slam @-@ bang adventure show with real monsters " and heightened narrative emphasis on Jonny and his friends . Falk explained that cool contrivances took precedence over accuracy , stating that " Jonny Quest is a show with one foot in the fantastic , and one foot solidly based in reality . " Opposed to QuestWorld , the new team was nonetheless contractually obligated to use it in their episodes . 
 Falk felt that virtual reality undermined the show 's " strong connection to reality " , and suggested that after so many dangerous incidents Dr. Quest would have turned the system off . Writers brought back several classic characters , including Pasha the Peddler , Jezebel Jade , and Dr. Zin . Falk honored Quest creator Doug <unk> by creating an eponymous grandfather for Jonny in the episode " Nuclear Netherworld " , as well as homage to William Hanna 's <unk> of New Mexico where Jonny 's grandfather resides . The team created Estella Velasquez as Jessie 's mother to retcon the telefilms , feeling that Jade would never get married . Writers eventually killed off villains Ezekiel Rage and Dr. Jeremiah Surd in favor of new adversaries . Comparing Quest without Zin to " James Bond without <unk> " , Falk penned a season finale featuring classic robot spies and a visceral fight between Dr. Quest and Zin . Falk planned to resuscitate Palm Key as the Quest home in new episodes . Cartoon Network did not renew Real Adventures , despite a pledge to explore the history of Jonny 's mother Rachel in the season premiere . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The first season of Real Adventures featured J. D. Roth as Jonny , George Segal as Dr. Quest , Robert Patrick as Race , Jesse Douglas as Jessie , Michael Benyaer as Hadji , and veteran voice actor Frank Welker as Dr. Jeremiah Surd . A childhood fan of the original series , J.D. Roth was inspired by Turner 's vision for the new series and swiftly accepted the role of Jonny . Roth was attracted by Jonny 's " star quality " , and approved of his characterization as a real kid without superpowers . He enjoyed Jonny 's infectious enthusiasm and impulsive alacrity . Roth also admired the show 's educational quality , something he had tried to integrate in his personal television pilots . When asked about how he played the relationship with Jonny 's father , he commented , " Jonny is crazy about his dad . He looks up to him and thinks he is the smartest man ever to walk to face of the earth . He has the typical teenage relationship with his father , but his father definitely sees something in him . Dr. Quest knows that Jonny is going to be something really special . " Michael Benyaer also enjoyed playing Hadji : " [ he ] is one of the few roles for an ethnic actor that is not a bad guy . I mean , how many East Indian heroes have been on television ? Hadji is for the sensitive kids out there . He is the outsider in all of us . " A Star Wars fan , Benyaer was happy to work with Mark Hamill for " In the Realm of the Condor " . Peter Lawrence 's request for an Indian @-@ descended voice actor was seen as an " unusual case of multi @-@ ethnic casting " . 
 The producers struggled to cast Jessie Bannon . Peter Lawrence ultimately chose Jesse Douglas , whom he felt reflected Jessie 's energy and intelligence — " [ Jesse Douglas ] has immense energy , huge energy , and is the kind of woman who could do all the kind of things Jessie could do — you know , athletic , smart , so and so forth [ sic ] . " Douglas impressed Lawrence with her active lifestyle , including ballet , equestrianism , and tennis . When asked about the character 's inclusion , Douglas stated , " I 'd be bummed if I upset anybody . Jessie is pretty cool . It is not like she is a girl who is whining all the time . If anything , she is a really good springboard for the rest of the storyline . " Roth supported her , claiming that " Jonny hasn 't discovered girls yet but when he does Jessie would be the type of girl he 'd like to be with ... I think something will happen between them but right now Jess is his best friend . " H @-@ B Chief Fred Seibert agreed , hinting that as adults " there might be a Tracy / Hepburn thing going on . " Turner approached George Segal to audition for the part of Dr. Quest . Segal described the show as having " a real family feeling about it ... I 'd never seen this stuff before . That was quite remarkable . " 
 Hanna @-@ Barbera bought out the first cast 's contracts and hired new actors for the second season . This cast featured Quinton Flynn as Jonny , John de Lancie as Dr. Quest , Granville Van Dusen ( for the first two episodes ) and Robert Foxworth as Race , Jennifer Hale as Jessie , and Rob Paulsen as Hadji . Paulsen previously voiced Hadji in the two Quest telefilms . Don Messick attempted to reprise his classic role as Dr. Quest , but was forced into retirement by a stroke during early sessions . Van Dusen voiced Bannon in the 1986 Quest series , and Foxworth took over the part after auditioning for Dr. Quest . Frank Welker reprised his role as Surd in the second season . Several notable guest stars included Kevin Conroy , Earl Boen , Clancy Brown , Robert Ito , James <unk> , Irene <unk> , Lucy Liu , Brock Peters , Tristan Rogers , Edward Asner , Julian Sands , Helene <unk> , Mayim Bialik , Mark Hamill , Andreas Katsulas , Jeffrey Tambor , Dorian Harewood , Clive Revill , Kenneth Mars , Nick Chinlund , Clyde Kusatsu , Dean Jones , Thomas Gibson , Sarah Douglas and Carl Lumbly . Season two writer Lance Falk has also regretted not thinking about veteran voice actor John Stephenson , who was the very first voice of Dr. Quest , for a guest role . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Turner launched a massive marketing campaign to promote Real Adventures , intending to reach 80 % of American children aged six to eleven . Each Turner network spent $ 5 to $ 7 million for a total $ 20 million invested in promotion ; the company contracted thirty @-@ three licensees . Other reports pegged the budget at $ 40 million , and Marketing Week estimated that the series launched with $ 300 million of merchandising support . The Wall Street Journal called Quest a " property to watch " in 1995 ; People and Good Housekeeping considered it a surefire blockbuster . Turner provided digital and bound style guides featuring collections of Quest artwork , coloring instructions , and product ideas . 
 Produced for $ 100 @,@ 000 and believed to be the first of its kind , the digital style guide included fonts , logos , character art , merchandising mock @-@ ups , voice clips , and other interactive content . Hanna @-@ Barbera launched <unk> as the show 's internet hub , presenting it as if written by members of the Quest team . Complementing the show 's educational , real @-@ world premise , the site hosted links to academic , archaeological , and exploratory websites . Turner announced 32 licensees as of summer 1996 : 
 Turner marketed Real Adventures through a substantial diversity of products , considering its Quest campaign a role model for future shows . Galoob acquired figurine licensing rights in 1995 and created a product line of vehicles , figures , and Micro Machines for fall 1996 release . Turner felt that Galoob 's commitment legitimized the Quest marketing plan , and next secured partnership with Pizza Hut and food retailers . Pillsbury included $ 3 mail @-@ in rebates for future Quest videos , display contests , and instant coupon offers on over 20 million packages . Campbell Soup Company released six holographic miniature posters on the same number of <unk> cans ; the posters were awarded in Converting in 1997 . General Mills outfitted boxes of Honey Nut Cheerios and Cinnamon Toast Crunch with offers for T @-@ shirts and other items . Over five thousand Pizza Hut restaurants held a two @-@ month @-@ long give @-@ away of figurines with meals during the show 's launch . Galoob failed to build popularity for its toys outside the United States , and discontinued the line in 1997 . 
 Upper Deck Company used art , sketches , and plots from the first season to create a sixty @-@ piece card collection . Turner also marketed <unk> fishing poles bearing the Quest logo . Kid Rhino produced a cassette audio adventure based on the episode " Return of the Anasazi " . The show 's credits advertised a soundtrack available from Rhino , never sold or otherwise promoted . Turner listed several products in a " Quest Adventure Value Pack " coupon catalogue . 
 Marketers tied in classic Quest merchandise , launching a classic H @-@ B promotion with Days Inn hotels , Planet Hollywood restaurants , and Little Debbie snack cakes and offering rebates for Cyber Insects and classic episodes . The marketing campaign culminated with the release of eight VHS Real Adventures season one episodes . Turner also released two episodes on laserdisc . Metropolitan newspapers worked with Turner to promote the videos through grab @-@ bag give @-@ aways . Turner sold merchandise through several international distributors , and expected to make a $ 60 million profit per year in the Asia @-@ Pacific region alone . 
 Savoy Brands International handled South American distribution , involving 750 @,@ 000 retail outlets in Argentina , Chile , Peru , Guatemala , Honduras , Panama , Venezuela , Ecuador and Columbia . Turner debuted Quest at a cocktail party for the European Licensing Fair in late 1996 , and released merchandise in Europe through 90 @,@ 000 retail outlets over the next six months . Copyright Promotions Licensing Group handled <unk> in the United Kingdom . Turner ensured that the license agreements forbade retailers from discounting Quest items . The size of the marketing initiative left one newspaper reviewer wondering , " are [ the Quests ] back because they 're too cool to die , or because they 're too well known to be squandered as a licensing product ? " Turner worried that the promotion might over @-@ hype the brand , and timed commercial roll @-@ outs over the life of the show . H @-@ B chief Fred Seibert expected high sales and success : 
 The new series is the beginning of what will be a multi @-@ faceted global programming , marketing and merchandising effort ... The property still has great recognition and we think this will work because of the production values , because it 's a real person solving real problems , and because it 's the property that started the genre . 
 Dark Horse Comics composed a twelve issue series released over the show 's first run , expecting higher store patronage and cross @-@ selling . Editor Phil Amara assured fans that the comics would contain tributes to the classic Jonny Quest . Kate Worley wrote the Real Adventures series and Francisco Lopez illustrated ; guest writers and artists regularly contributed . A lifetime fan of Quest , Eisner Award @-@ winner Paul Chadwick drew the cover of the final issue , depicting Jonny 's descent into a cave on Easter Island . Dark Horse worked with Galoob to ship comic shop @-@ locator phone numbers and preview @-@ URLs with figurines . The company also advertised and released a special three @-@ issue series through mail offers with over 8 million boxes of Honey Nut Cheerios . Three two @-@ page " mini @-@ adventures " packaged with existing Dark Horse products preceded the series ' release . Dark Horse also worked with Converse to stage a promotion in early 1997 for a fan to appear in a Quest comic . 
 Terry Bisson and others working under the alias " Brad Quentin " produced eleven original novellas featuring adventure and virtual reality themes . Critics appreciated that the books may have drawn kids to reading , especially those interested in technology . Only certain comics and coloring books used season two 's designs , such as Dark Horse 's Countdown to Chaos , featuring General Vostok . Turner stopped marketing the show until April 2004 , when Warner Home Video released episodes " Escape to Questworld " and " Trouble on the Colorado " as TV Premiere DVD : The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest on MiniDVD . 
 = = = Cover @-@ up at Roswell = = = 
 Virgin Interactive produced an adventure game for the series named Cover @-@ Up At Roswell , released in August 1996 . Known as Escape from Quest World in development , Roswell cost $ 1 million to make . Virgin handled all marketing , sales , and distribution ; Turner cross @-@ promoted . Developers recycled fifty minutes of footage and art from six season one episodes to construct a new story about the Quest family gathering alien artifacts and saving an extraterrestrial from autopsy at The Pentagon . Jeremiah Surd and the Men in Black of General Tyler plan to misuse the technology and try to hinder the Quests . Gameplay consists of clicking areas on images of locations to navigate paths . Players sometimes encounter minigames , such as guiding a diving bell away from rocks or shooting rats with a slingshot . Virgin designed certain segments to be viewed with packaged <unk> <unk> plastic glasses . 
 Virgin estimated the game would provide 20 – 25 hours of game play for adults and 80 – 100 hours for children . The season two cast provided all voices except for Michael Benyaer as Hadji and Charles Howerton as Dr. Quest . The game 's music featured a " high @-@ intensity orchestral sound " prone to monotony . One reviewer praised Roswell for " good entertainment and variety " , but regretted low replay value and no modes of difficulty . Critics were divided over the puzzles , naming them both " ingenious " and " elementary " . Peter Scisco of <unk> and <unk> 's testers criticized some of the puzzles for relying on " reflexes , not logical thinking " . 
 Entertainment Weekly rated the game B + , naming the puzzles " unimaginative ... Pac @-@ Man rip @-@ offs and dopey <unk> " . Scisco appreciated the nonviolent content and the inclusion of Jessie as a strong female character , but considered the extraterrestrial story too familiar . A writer from the Sydney Morning Herald warned against buying the game for easily frightened children , but recommended it for those who enjoy mental challenges . 
 = = = Other promotions = = = 
 Turner , TBS , and Holiday Inn partnered to hold an essay contest as part of the Safe America Foundation 's " Quest for Safety " drive . From October 9 to November 4 , 1996 , spots encouraged children to write essays about important safety issues and personal safety . A panel of public safety and community leaders selected the winner , dubbing them the " <unk> Kid in America " . TBS posted the winner 's essay to the kids section of its website and awarded them a position on the Real Adventures float for the 1997 Tournament of Roses Parade in Pasadena . Second @-@ prize winners received bicycle helmets , T @-@ shirts , and Jonny Quest lapel pins . Turner staged an international contest in February 1997 called " Quest World Adventure " , featuring the grand prize of a trip to a " secret island " ( Jamaica ) in July to take part in a staged dramatic scenario . 
 Commercials instructed fans to mail in episodes ' geographical destinations during sweeps week . Advertisements appeared through Time Warner 's television channels , Sports Illustrated for Kids , DC Comics publications , radio stations , and Warner Brothers stores . The contest marked the first time that Cartoon Network U.S. , TNT Europe , Cartoon Network Europe , Cartoon Network Asia , and Cartoon Network Latin America united for a single promotion . Turner encouraged local cable operators to submit their own spots , generating 34 @,@ 000 ads among 174 cable systems for a total of $ 3 @.@ 4 million cross @-@ channel media support . 50 @,@ 000 children with a median age of ten entered the competition , and 20 @,@ 000 answered correctly . Turner selected ten viewers from the United States and nine from Latin America and Asia as grand @-@ prize winners . They and two @-@ hundred others received Quest @-@ themed adventure packs , including a backpack , flashlight and siren , travel journal , pen , T @-@ shirt , and glow sticks . Cartoon Network aired the names of winning children on a special feature in which Jeremiah Surd issued personal threats . 
 Winners received all @-@ expenses @-@ paid trips to Ocho Rios , Jamaica , with up to three family members . Planners kept the destination secret until shortly before travel . In Jamaica , kids combated Surd 's " environmental terrorism " by preventing him from finding the Jamaican " Irie " stones . Children received clues on the mission through e @-@ mails seemingly written by Jonny Quest . Posing as allies , network employees prepared clues , buried treasure , and hosted barbecues , reggae concerts , and rafting trips . Participants searched for the stones at the White River , Dunn 's River Falls , and Prospect Plantation ; hosts filmed the proceedings for possible future promotions . The quest centered on cerebral challenges and puzzles . Attendees also learned about the history and ecology of Jamaica . The adventure doubled the show 's ratings for February sweeps and tripled <unk> 's hits . Brandweek awarded it the year 's top honors for a global marketing promotion . 
 = = Home media releases = = 
 Warner Home Video released episodes " Escape to Questworld " and " Trouble on the Colorado " on MiniDVD in April 2004 , then released the first thirteen episodes on February 17 , 2009 as Season 1 , Volume 1 of The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest on DVD in Region 1 . On March 27 , 2012 , Warner Archive released The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest : Season 1 , Volume 2 on DVD in Region 1 as part of their Hanna – Barbera Classics Collection . This is a Manufacture @-@ on @-@ Demand ( MOD ) release , available exclusively through Warner 's online store and Amazon.com. The complete second ( and final ) season was released to DVD on November 10 , 2015 from Warner Archive . All 52 episodes were made available for digital purchase in 2013 on the iTunes Store . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Announcement of Jessie Bannon 's inclusion caused backlash among Quest fans . TV Guide 's editors feared that Jonny and Jessie would become romantically entangled , declaring her an " icky female " . H @-@ B Chief Fred Seibert responded , " Jessie is a little older and smarter than Jonny ... We 're not doing Moonlighting here . " Seibert also denied that Jessie had been created solely to appeal to little girls , citing extant support for Jonny and the classic team . A Miami Herald columnist called Jessie an " effort to rewrite the past to conform to the sociopolitical mandates of the present " and political correctness " run amok " . Billboard conversely welcomed the change over an all @-@ male cast . The fiasco subsided after the Cyber Insects telefilm aired ; the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution rebuffed the " icky girl " label , as Jessie saved Jonny 's life and taught him patience . A test screening of Cyber Insects to 30- to 35 @-@ year @-@ old males revealed that though some questioned her addition , most understood that like certain elements criticized in the original series , it was a reflection of the times . 
 Some fans still took issue with the series ' distance from classic Quest , which suffered accusations of cultural insensitivity and " racial and sexual stereotypes " . Real Adventures evoked critical comparisons to the original series . Cinefantastique felt Real Adventures remained true to the classic show 's formula , and praised the " impressive " cast . Another critic recommended the show to " die @-@ hard adult fans " , affirming that Real Adventures maintained the violence and off @-@ screen deaths of the old series , as even the opening titles featured " explosions , murder and mayhem " . The Washington Post judged the first season as " grittier and more lifelike " than the original Quest . Chicago Tribune critic Allan Johnson agreed that Real Adventures was less " way @-@ out " and contrasted the shows in detail . TV Guide applauded the writing as " miles deeper and darker than on the old show " ; Hadji 's quotations impressed the magazine 's reviewer . Chicago 's Daily Herald called the first episode " vintage Quest " , and The Panama City Times @-@ Herald echoed this position : 
 The new series takes the best elements of the old — global adventures , cutting @-@ edge technology and good @-@ spirited teamwork — and updates it for the 1990s . The now @-@ teen @-@ age heroes are caught up in extraordinary dangers both in the " real " world and in virtual reality . 
 Critics debated the success of the show 's premise . Peter Scisco of <unk> appreciated that the team " rely on their brains , not mutant superpowers " . People praised Turner 's shift from the " politically correct claptrap " of Captain Planet and the <unk> , giving Real Adventures a B grade as " children 's programming the way it oughta be " . The authors of 1998 's Saturday Morning Fever contrarily felt the show lacked " the sense of why the original was so successful " . They disliked H @-@ B 's packaging of disparate seasons as one series , preferring the second for its characters and classic references . Greg Aaron of <unk> praised the franchise 's return but warned against QuestWorld hype , arguing that " it will take more than visual sophistication to hook today 's viewers " . 
 Hanna @-@ Barbera founder and chairman Joseph Barbera considered Real Adventures a " disaster " because of changes to the characters and stories . He conceded , " that 's their business . Everybody needs to do their own thing . " Critics generally enjoyed the characters and voice acting . People liked the cast , particularly George Segal . Saturday Morning Fever praised Jessie Bannon for her resemblance to Dr. Quest . Allan Johnson approved of the age jump , as Jonny and Hadji were now old enough to be part of the action . He considered Jessie " cool ... she gives Jonny grief just because she can , and she 's not afraid of the action . " He did not enjoy the " toned down " portrayal of Race Bannon . Some fans objected to Race 's Western accent in the first season . Peter Lawrence defended the portrayal of Race as a " man of action , not thought — though perfectly capable of deep thought " , noting that his accent and mannerisms encouraged variety , surprise , and originality . 
 The quality of Quest 's traditional and computer animation split critics . The Toronto Star scathingly criticized the show for " facile plots heavily laced with jarring science fiction and incongruous computer animation " , naming QuestWorld a " poorly explained techno @-@ gimmick . " Le Figaro concurred , but praised QuestWorld for capturing the attention of young viewers . The Star praised QuestWorld , but regarded traditional sequences as " flat and textureless , with minimal characterization , unnaturally stiff movement , and poor execution of shading and shadow " . Ted Cox of the Chicago Daily Herald agreed that animated motion was sometimes " remarkably uneven " , but lauded realistic imagery like " the play of light on the ocean " . TV Guide also found the animation somewhat flat , but considered the sound effects and backgrounds to be state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art . 
 The show 's sound was warmly received by the industry . Episodes " Nuclear Netherworld " and " Alien in Washington " were nominated respectively for music and sound editing Golden Reel Awards in 1997 , and the entire series was nominated for an animated sound editing Golden Reel Award in 1998 . Real Adventures was also nominated for a 1997 Daytime Emmy Award for music direction and composition . Special effects director Alberto Menache criticized QuestWorld in Understanding Motion Capture for Computer Animation and Video Games , considering it a mistake @-@ laden failure . He explained that the size difference between the motion <unk> and the characters caused unsteady animation and shaking , consequently mismatching interaction with props and uneven terrain . 
 Menache blamed the show 's budget , which did not allow for digital post @-@ production and review ; producers instead expected " plug @-@ and @-@ play " results straight from the capture studio . Menache concluded that the QuestWorld sequences suffered from a " pipeline set up for mass production " with little testing or planning . Quest 's Senior Vice President of Production Sherry Gunther admitted that the motion capture technology was " a little crude " and best suited for broad movements . Menache was less critical of the facial capture , considering it " medium @-@ quality " but still unacceptable given H @-@ B 's resources . These criticisms mirrored the comments of Buzz F / X animator Francois Lord , who cited inexperienced Montreal animators and rushed production schedules . He pointed out that Blur Studios had more time , money , and experience for season two 's sequences . 
 = U.S. Route 30 in Iowa = 
 U.S. Highway 30 ( US 30 ) is a major east – west U.S. Highway which spans 330 miles ( 530 km ) across the state of Iowa . It is the longest primary highway in the state and is maintained by the Iowa Department of Transportation ( Iowa DOT ) . The route in Iowa begins at the Missouri River crossing at Blair , Nebraska , and ends at the Mississippi River crossing at Clinton . Along the way , it serves Denison and Carroll in western Iowa , Boone , Ames , and Marshalltown in central Iowa , and Tama , Cedar Rapids , and DeWitt in eastern Iowa . Cutting across the central portion of the state , US 30 runs within close proximity of the Union Pacific Railroad 's Overland Route for its entire length . 
 US 30 was originally conceived as a part of the Lincoln Highway , the first transcontinental highway in the United States . A route through Iowa was chosen because of the important link between Omaha , Nebraska , and Chicago , Illinois . As the U.S. Highway System came into being in the 1920s , and the Lincoln Highway became US 30 , federal money started to pay for paving Iowa 's dirt roads . By 1931 , it had been paved across the entire state . 
 The route of the Lincoln Highway and US 30 has accommodated the changing needs of the traveling public . Early Lincoln Highway travelers were directed into many small towns as the route traveled 358 miles ( 576 km ) across the state . Towards the middle of the 20th century , the route was straightened , bypassing most downtown areas and several towns altogether . More recently , long sections of US 30 have been upgraded to a four @-@ lane expressway to meet the needs of increasing traffic . Since 2006 , the highway has been designated an Iowa Heritage Byway by Iowa DOT , the first highway in the state with that distinction . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 30 extends from west to east across the central portion of Iowa , with much of the highway traveling through rolling farmland . Small towns dot the entire route , which connects the larger cities of Denison , Ames , Cedar Rapids , and Clinton . Between Ogden and Mount Vernon , significant portions of the highway have been upgraded to a four @-@ lane freeway . 
 = = = Western Iowa = = = 
 US 30 enters the western end of Iowa by crossing the Missouri River on the Blair Bridge , located east of the Nebraska town of the same name . Adjacent to the highway bridge is the Union Pacific Railroad 's river crossing for the Overland Route . The highway runs roughly parallel to the rail line for its entire run across Iowa . For nine miles ( 14 km ) , traffic moves through the flat Missouri River bottoms , passing DeSoto National Wildlife Refuge on the way to Missouri Valley . At Missouri Valley , it intersects Interstate 29 ( I @-@ 29 ) at a partial cloverleaf interchange . It enters the Boyer River valley through the Loess Hills , a region of wind @-@ deposited silt extending from north of Sioux City to extreme northwestern Missouri . The rolling Loess Hills rise 50 – 100 feet ( 15 – 30 m ) above the roadway while the land in the valley stays relatively flat . US 30 enters Logan and intersects the eastern end of Iowa Highway 127 ( Iowa 127 ) . The highway runs parallel to the Boyer River as well as the Overland Route in a general northeast direction from Logan . Four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) east of Logan is the western end of Iowa 44 , which extends 105 miles ( 169 km ) east to Des Moines . 
 The highway enters Crawford County north of Dunlap in Harrison County . For seventeen miles ( 27 km ) , US 30 passes through farmland and the small communities of Dow City and Arion . For one @-@ half mile ( 800 m ) through Denison , it overlaps US 59 and Iowa 141 , which run concurrently through the town . The Iowa DOT refers to routes which overlap other routes as duplicate routes . It follows the East Boyer River through Denison as the Boyer River forks west of the northern intersection with US 59 / Iowa 141 . US 30 travels north @-@ northeasterly towards Vail . Between Vail and Westside , the highway ceases following the East Boyer River and heads due east towards Arcadia and Carroll in Carroll County . 
 At Carroll it intersects US 71 on the western side of the city . Continuing east , the highway goes through the town of Glidden and passes to the north of Ralston , west of the Greene County line . North of Scranton it meets the northern end of Iowa 25 . Between Scranton and Jefferson , US 30 crosses the Raccoon River . US 30 crosses Iowa 4 and Iowa 144 on the northern edge of Jefferson and Grand Junction , the latter of the cities named for its location at the junction of the historic Chicago & Northwestern and Chicago , Rock Island and Pacific Railroads , now both owned by Union Pacific , respectively . East of Grand Junction , the highway passes over the Overland Route where it stays south of the railroad until Le Grand . 
 = = = Central Iowa = = = 
 Four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) west of Ogden , US 30 is joined by US 169 from the north . The two highways run concurrently until reaching Ogden , where the road becomes a four @-@ lane expressway . US 169 exits to the south at a partial cloverleaf interchange , while US 30 continues east through Boone County and descends into the Des Moines River valley . It ascends from the valley and travels another two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to a four @-@ way stop in Boone , which is the last stop along the route until Iowa 1 in Mt . Vernon . Three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of Boone , it meets Iowa 17 at a diamond interchange . One mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of that interchange is a shortcut to northbound Iowa 17 . 
 Traffic is filtered into Ames and Iowa State University ( ISU ) from US 30 through five interchanges . On the outskirts of Ames are the Lincoln Way interchanges , access to and from Lincoln Way is handled by two half interchanges three @-@ quarters mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) apart . From the interchanges to the Story County line one and three @-@ quarters miles ( 2 @.@ 8 km ) away , Lincoln Way is designated as Iowa 930 , but is never signed as such . The South Dakota Avenue interchange primarily serves the southwestern part of Ames . The University Boulevard ( formerly Elwood Drive ) exit provides access to the Iowa State University campus and Iowa State Center , ISU 's cultural and athletics complex . The Duff Avenue interchange provides access to Ames 's east side . US 69 and Interstate 35 Business Loop are designated along Duff Avenue . From Duff to I @-@ 35 , US 30 is overlapped by the I @-@ 35 Business Loop . Between the Duff and Dayton Avenue interchanges , it crosses the South Skunk River . The Dayton Avenue interchange serves hotels and restaurants and is a travel stop for I @-@ 35 travelers . 
 East of the Dayton Avenue interchange is I @-@ 35 , which connects US 30 to Minneapolis , Minnesota , to the north , and Des Moines to the south . Continuing east , the expressway travels six and a half miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) to Nevada , six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) more to the US 65 interchange at Colo , and seven and a half miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) to where the four @-@ lane expressway ends at State Center . Just before the Iowa 330 interchange seven and a half miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) later , the road becomes a four @-@ lane expressway again . One mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the east are two half @-@ interchanges with U.S. Highway 30 Business ( US 30 Business ) . 
 US 30 bypasses Marshalltown approximately one @-@ quarter mile ( 400 m ) south of its business loop . Near Marshalltown Community College , it intersects Iowa 14 at a diamond interchange . The 18th Avenue interchange on the southeastern side of <unk> is the eastern end of the business loop . From Marshalltown , it travels five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) to Le Grand , crossing over the Overland Route rail corridor on the west side . It bypasses Le Grand to the north , where it intersects the northern end of Iowa 146 at a diamond interchange . Continuing east , the highway enters Tama County . It rises over a large hill north of Montour and then descends into the Iowa River valley . 
 East of the Iowa River is the Meskwaki Settlement , which is home to about 800 Meskwaki Indians and the Meskwaki Casino and Resort . As it heads into the Tama – Toledo area , the expressway bisects the two communities . Between the two cities , it meets US 63 at a partial cloverleaf interchange . From US 63 it turns to the southeast to skirt Tama 's east side . It rejoins the former alignment of the highway east of Tama and heads due east , along section lines in Tama and Benton Counties , and does not enter another town for 40 miles ( 64 km ) . 
 = = = Eastern Iowa = = = 
 US 30 enters Benton County nine miles ( 14 km ) north of Belle Plaine at an intersection with Iowa 21 . It continues east along a section line , passing the communities of Keystone , Van Horne , and Blairstown . Three and a half miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) southwest of Newhall , or four and a quarter miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) southeast of Van Horne , it meets US 218 and becomes a four @-@ lane road . US 30 and US 218 travel together due east towards Cedar Rapids , passing Norway and Atkins . 
 On the west end of Cedar Rapids , US 30 / US 218 turn to the southeast at the 16th Avenue SW interchange . Two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the southeast is the Williams Boulevard interchange , where US 151 joins US 30 and US 218 . For four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , US 30 / US 151 / US 218 is a wrong @-@ way concurrency ; that is , where two or more routes heading in opposite directions share the same highway . In this instance , US 30 is the main east – west road while US 151 and US 218 are duplicate routes , nominally heading north and south , respectively . At the I @-@ 380 interchange , US 218 leaves US 30 / US 151 and joins the Avenue of the Saints highway . East of I @-@ 380 , US 30 / US 151 serve as a divider between the <unk> Village neighborhood to the south and a light industrial district to the north . 
 South of Bertram , the two routes cross the Cedar River before US 151 splits away from US 30 to the north at a trumpet interchange . This interchange is the southern end of Iowa 13 . It continues east towards Mount Vernon , two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of which , the four @-@ lane highway becomes a two @-@ lane road . In Mount Vernon , it intersects Iowa 1 at a roundabout . One mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Iowa 1 , it enters Lisbon . 
 Over the next 45 miles ( 72 km ) , US 30 passes through a small town every four to seven miles ( 6 to 11 km ) . In Cedar County it passes through Mechanicsville , Stanwood , Clarence and Lowden . In Stanwood , it is overlapped by Iowa 38 for one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . In Clinton County , it passes through Wheatland , Calamus , and Grand Mound before reaching a full cloverleaf interchange with US 61 at DeWitt . US 30 overlaps US 61 for one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , crossing the Union Pacific Overland Route in the process , and leaves US 61 via a trumpet interchange . 
 US 30 continues east as an expressway , passing DeWitt to the south . Five miles ( 8 km ) east of DeWitt , it crosses back over to the north side of the Overland Route . West of the Clinton city limits is an interchange with Clinton County Road Z36 ( CR Z36 ) , which serves Low Moor and as a shortcut to southbound US 67 . East of CR Z36 , it passes the Clinton Municipal Airport and a large chemical plant . As it approaches Mill Creek Parkway , it descends over 100 feet ( 30 m ) in elevation into the flat Mississippi River valley , where it meets US 67 . 
 US 30 / US 67 head east along Lincoln Way and ascend 50 feet ( 15 m ) onto a plateau , atop which reside stores and restaurants . As they continue east , the two routes split into one @-@ way streets , eastbound Liberty Avenue and westbound Camanche Avenue . The one @-@ way street alignment ends at 11th Avenue South , but quickly begins again as US 30 / US 67 turn to the north onto northbound South Third Street and southbound South Fourth Street . At Eighth Avenue South , US 30 splits away from US 67 and onto the Gateway Bridge and crosses into Illinois . 
 = = History = = 
 The path which US 30 follows has changed since it was originally planned as the Lincoln Highway in the early 1910s . The first path connected as many downtown areas as possible , in order to create awareness about the Good Roads Movement and the Lincoln Highway . As the primary highway system of Iowa matured , and the Lincoln Highway yielded to US 30 , the highway was gradually straightened , leaving many towns off the route . More recently , new construction has routed traffic away from the straighter roads and onto sections of freeway and expressway . 
 = = = Lincoln Highway = = = 
 US 30 was created with the U.S. Highway System in 1926 , but the route it takes dates back to 1913 , when the Lincoln Highway Association ( LHA ) designated the route across the country . The brainchild of Carl Fisher , the Lincoln Highway was the first highway to cross the United States , connecting New York City to San Francisco . In Iowa , it was uncertain exactly where the Lincoln Highway would run . As of August 1913 , no definite route had been planned ; the only certainty was the route would pass through Iowa . Iowans raised over $ 5 million ( equivalent to $ 120 million in 2016 dollars ) for the construction of the road . On September 14 , 1913 , the Lincoln Highway Association announced the route . It was 358 miles ( 576 km ) of dirt roads , connecting Clinton , DeWitt , Cedar Rapids , Tama , Marshalltown , Ames , Jefferson , Denison , Logan , and Council Bluffs . The route was marked by a red , white , and blue tricolor emblazoned with an L. The route markers were painted upon telephone poles , bridges , and nearby buildings to show travelers the way . 
 While not ideal for transcontinental travel , Iowa 's dirt roads were of high quality . Foreigners even compared them to the best roads in France . However , the same could not be said when they were wet . The mud was so thick and viscous it was nicknamed " gumbo " . To show travelers the obvious benefits of paved roads , the Lincoln Highway Association began the process of creating seedling miles of paved roads . The idea , according to Henry B. Joy , then @-@ president of the Lincoln Highway Association , was to show travelers , for one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , how fast and smooth their trip could be , only to bring them back to reality at the end of the mile . Seedling miles were placed at least six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from the nearest town and in areas where the terrain was rough . Between August 1918 and June 1919 , Iowa 's first seedling mile was built in Linn County , west of Mount Vernon . The ribbon of concrete , which was 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) wide , 7 1 ⁄ 2 inches ( 19 cm ) thick , and crowned for drainage 1 1 ⁄ 2 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 cm ) , cost nearly $ 35 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 478 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) to build . 
 Despite the success of the seedling miles across the country , Iowa lagged behind other states in improving its roads . Before 1924 , Iowa 's 99 counties , not the state highway commission , were responsible for the construction and maintenance of the state 's roads . In the 1920s , road paving cost $ 30 @,@ 000 per mile ( $ 19 @,@ 000 / km ) , equivalent to $ 718 @,@ 000 per mile ( $ 446 @,@ 000 / km ) in 2016 dollars ; a major obstacle for county boards of supervisors that wanted to pave its roads . When counties could afford to build roads , the Iowa State Highway Commission required extensive grading to be done before paving . In 1922 , only five percent of Iowa 's roads , 334 miles ( 538 km ) , were paved . By 1924 , twenty percent of the Lincoln Highway in Iowa had been paved , and by 1931 , it was paved continuously from New York City to Missouri Valley , Iowa . 
 = = = 1930s – 1950s = = = 
 When the Lincoln Highway became U.S. Highway 30 in 1926 , the route was 358 miles ( 576 km ) long and passed through every town along the way . Starting in the 1930s , the route 's alignment began to be straightened . By the mid @-@ 1930s , it was routed west of Missouri Valley on old Iowa 130 . The US 30 alignment south of Missouri Valley became U.S. Highway 30 Alternate . By 1952 , it had moved south of Marshalltown and was replaced by Iowa 330 and a seventeen @-@ mile ( 27 km ) southern jaunt through Belle Plaine had been replaced by a straight road . In 1955 , a couple of routing changes occurred . In Cedar Rapids , it began its move to the south , avoiding the downtown area , and in Clinton , it was rerouted over the Gateway Bridge , allowing Iowa 136 to cross the Lyons @-@ Fulton Bridge . However , by 1957 , the old alignment through Clinton and across the Lyons @-@ Fulton Bridge was numbered U.S. Highway 30 Alternate . 
 = = = 1960s – 1980s = = = 
 In the 1960 – 1970s , Iowa DOT started to build freeway segments along US 30 . In 1965 , it was straightened and rerouted to the south of Ogden and Boone along an eleven @-@ mile ( 18 km ) , four @-@ lane stretch of road . By the end of the 1960s , both of the alternate routes had been turned over to local jurisdictions . The western route became Iowa 183 , and the eastern route reverted to Iowa 136 . By 1973 , that new stretch of road had been extended fourteen miles ( 23 km ) along a four @-@ lane bypass around Ames . The old alignment became Iowa 930 . In eastern Iowa , a new , twenty @-@ mile @-@ long ( 32 km ) freeway connected DeWitt and Clinton by 1976 . By 1985 , the bypass of Cedar Rapids had been completed from 16th Avenue SW to Iowa 13 near Bertram . The bypass was extended five miles ( 8 km ) further west in 1989 . Between 1996 and 2000 , an $ 8 @.@ 2 @-@ million extension ( equivalent to $ 12 @.@ 4 million in 2016 dollars ) was built to connect the bypass to the western intersection of US 218 . 
 Since the Cedar Rapids bypass was completed in 1985 , on occasion , traffic has had to be rerouted off of US 30 . The bypass 's proximity to the Union Pacific Railroad mainline resulted in an elevated roadway between Edgewood Road and Sixth Street SW . When strong winds come from the south , fog produced by an Archer Daniels Midland plant adjacent to the highway billows over the road making driving dangerous . The Iowa DOT set up an emergency detour from Edgewood Road SW north to 16th Avenue SW east to 6th Street SW back to US 30 . The frequency of fog @-@ related detours has decreased in recent years due to improved technology and the plant 's expansion and relocation of cooling towers away from the highway . 
 = = = 1990s to the present = = = 
 The 1990s saw more construction of four @-@ lane roads along US 30 . Stretches of four @-@ lane roads that had already been constructed were extended towards other communities . In Story County , it was widened to four lanes from the I @-@ 35 interchange to US 65 at Colo . The original 1950s @-@ era bypass of Marshalltown was itself bypassed in 1997 by a freeway three @-@ quarters mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) south of the original bypass . That road , Iowa Avenue in Marshalltown , was designated as U.S. Highway 30 Business , the first business route along US 30 in Iowa . The four @-@ lane stretch southeast of Cedar Rapids was extended another five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) to a point two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Mount Vernon , costing $ 5 @.@ 6 million ( equivalent to $ 8 @.@ 45 million in 2016 dollars ) to build . 
 Since the beginning of the 21st century , Iowa DOT has continued to widen US 30 to four lanes . In 2004 , an $ 18 @.@ 6 @-@ million ( equivalent to $ 28 @.@ 1 million in 2016 dollars ) , four @-@ lane section opened from east of Marshalltown to the Meskwaki Settlement west of Tama , bypassing Le Grand . In 2010 , two sections of expressway were completed . A seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ mile @-@ long ( 12 km ) section from Colo to State Center opened to westbound travelers on November 29 , while the eastbound lanes opened a week later . The seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ mile @-@ long ( 12 km ) section , which bypasses the Tama / Toledo area , opened in two segments . The first of which opened on November 1 , and the second on November 25 . On July 7 , 2011 , a section from State Center to Iowa 330 opened in Marshall County . This created a four @-@ lane expressway from Ogden to Tama , covering 75 miles ( 121 km ) . 
 = = = Legacy of the Lincoln Highway = = = 
 While the Lincoln Highway has not been an official route for 90 years , it is still a source of pride in the communities and regions through which it passed . Nearly 85 percent of the original Lincoln Highway is still drivable , although much is gravel . Most of what is drivable is either along US 30 or within one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . The Lincoln Highway bridge in Tama was built in 1915 . It was restored in the 1980s after local officials feared losing the then @-@ deteriorating bridge . Preston 's Service Station , a landmark of Belle Plaine , has become a Lincoln Highway museum . Monuments were built along the route to honor not only Abraham Lincoln , but to honor Iowans who were influential for planning its route . 
 In 1992 , the Lincoln Highway Association was reformed with a chapter in each state through which the highway passed . The new LHA is a historical preservation group that wants to preserve the remaining sections of the highway . The Iowa chapter of the LHA has , since 2008 , sponsored a tour of the Lincoln Highway . To keep friendly to classic cars , the tour does not travel upon the sections of the road which are gravel . After years of lobbying by the LHA , the Iowa Department of Transportation , in 2006 , designated the Lincoln Highway the first Iowa Heritage Byway . The 2010 Transportation Map of Iowa showed the path designated as the Iowa Heritage Byway for the first time . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Regina Martínez Pérez = 
 Regina Martínez Pérez ( 7 September 1963 – 28 April 2012 ) was a Mexican journalist and veteran crime reporter for Proceso , a center @-@ left Mexican news magazine known for its critical reporting of the social and political establishment . 
 Born in a small town in the state of Veracruz , Martínez Pérez left her hometown to study journalism at Universidad <unk> . After graduating from university , she went to work at a state @-@ owned television company in Chiapas in the early 1980s , but she encountered various forms of censorship that convinced her to pursue a career in print media . After five years in Chiapas , Martínez Pérez relocated to Veracruz and worked for several local newspapers . In Veracruz , Martínez Pérez faced several challenges of censorship by the political establishment for her direct reporting , and particularly for being an outspoken critic of human rights violations , government corruption , abuse of authority , and for her in @-@ depth coverage of the drug trafficking organizations that operate in Veracruz . 
 Early in the morning of 28 April 2012 , Martínez Pérez was murdered inside her home in Xalapa after being severely beaten . A suspect was arrested in October 2012 and publicly confessed to the murder , while the Mexican authorities concluded that the motive of the murder was theft . But the suspect later retracted his confession and stated that he had been tortured and threatened by officials to lie and admit to the murder . Investigators have relied solely on the suspect 's confession to incriminate him ; the DNA and fingerprint samples collected at the murder scene did not match the suspect 's according to sources close to Committee to Protect Journalists . 
 The Committee to Protect Journalists , Proceso magazine , and several journalists and press freedom organizations have complained about irregularities in the investigation and question the legitimacy of the whole case . They believe that their colleague 's murder was part of a campaign of intimidation against those who investigate alleged links between drug traffickers and politicians in the state of Veracruz . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Regina Martínez Pérez was born in the small town of Rafael Lucio , Veracruz on 7 September 1963 . Her parents , María Lorenza Pérez Vázquez and Florencio Martínez Romero , had 11 children . From a young age , Martínez Pérez wanted to be a journalist ; after graduating from high school , she left her hometown to study journalism at Universidad <unk> ( UV ) . Shortly after graduating , she moved to the state of Chiapas to work as a reporter for Mexican Rural Television ( Televisión Rural Mexicana – TRM ) , a state @-@ owned television company , in the early 1980s . Martínez Pérez was part of a group of former students from the UV who were hired by the government to work at the television company . But after demanding better working conditions and facing censorship from the company , she left the company to pursue a career in print media . 
 = = Career = = 
 Martínez Pérez worked for several newspapers in Chiapas , like El Sol de Chiapas and <unk> Uno , for five years before she returned to her home state of Veracruz , where she became the editorial assistant of the news channel Cuatro Más . The journalist then left to work for the daily <unk> , where she covered topics on security and social justice . Martínez Pérez was also a journalist and investigative crime reporter for the Diario de Xalapa newspaper . Her journalistic career in Veracruz , however , faced several challenges from the political elite ; governors and government secretaries wanted to censor Martínez Pérez for criticizing their administration . Instead of self @-@ censoring like other media outlets in the state , she became known for her direct reporting style , which frequently angered the authorities . She wrote over 63 reports covering political assassinations , natural disasters , authority abuses , human right violations , corruption , and government mismanagement . 
 After working for the Diario de Xalapa , Martínez Pérez became a local correspondent for the newspaper La Jornada in the state and later joined the news magazine Proceso , where she worked for more than ten years . The news magazine is well known for having an " anti @-@ establishment publication " style , and often runs articles that criticize politicians across the country . Many of its reporters have been threatened in the past for their journalistic coverage . 
 In Proceso , Martínez Pérez was an open critic of government corruption and abuse of authority , and wrote extensively on the local drug trade and organized crime . She was particularly known in Mexico for her in @-@ depth reporting on the Mexican drug cartels and how they corrupted government officials in Veracruz . Among her last publications before her murder was a political profile about Reynaldo Escobar Pérez and Alejandro Montano , two politicians of the Institutional Revolutionary Party ( PRI ) who were running for office in Congress . A week before her murder she had also written about an incident in which the Mexican Navy arrested nine policemen in the state who were allegedly working for a drug trafficking organization , the arrest of a high @-@ profile leader of Los Zetas drug cartel known as Comandante <unk> , and a story involving mayor Martín Padua Zúñiga from the National Action Party ( PAN ) who was arrested with drug traffickers following a gunfight with the Mexican Army . 
 = = Death = = 
 Martínez Pérez was murdered early in the morning of 28 April 2012 in her home in the Felipe Carrillo Puerto neighborhood in Xalapa , the capital of Veracruz . When police went to her home to investigate in response to a neighbor 's call about her door being open all day , Martínez Pérez 's corpse was found on the bathroom floor . According to official reports , she had been severely beaten around her face and ribs , and then strangled to death . The cause of death was asphyxia by strangulation . At the time of her death , the Mexican authorities said they were investigating all the possible motives behind her assassination , including personal motives and theft , and that they would investigate whether the killing was work @-@ related . 
 In October 2012 , new details emerged in her murder investigation . Charges were brought against Jorge Antonio Hernández Silva ( alias El Silva ) and José Adrián Hernández Domínguez ( alias El <unk> ) , two men who were alleged to have murdered Martínez Pérez . Silva , who had already been arrested , confessed to the murder . According to Silva 's confession , the reporter knew Domínguez and therefore allowed both of them into her house on the night of her murder . After some conversation , Domínguez grew angry and started beating Martínez Pérez with the intention of forcing her to reveal where she hid her money and other valuable possessions . Silva then joined his accomplice in the beating until they killed her . Investigators said that the attackers had plunged the journalist 's head into a toilet bowl , hit her on the head several times with brass knuckles , and threw her against a tub , where she cracked her skull . Martínez Pérez unsuccessfully tried to defend herself by grabbing a kitchen knife and stabbing one of the attackers in the forearm , but they managed to outweigh her because she only weighed 108 lbs ( 48 @.@ 9 kg ) . Both men then stole a plasma TV , two cellphones , a laptop computer , a camera and a small box , and the journalist 's wristband from her home before leaving the crime scene . 
 = = = Investigation = = = 
 When Silva was arrested in October 2012 , he confessed to the murder of Martínez Pérez . Investigators and authorities in Veracruz concluded that the journalist was killed during a robbery . But when placed before a judge , Silva retracted his confession and stated that he had been tortured , held hostage for over a week , and threatened by Veracruz authorities in order to make him confess to the assassination . Silva said that officials had threatened to kill his mother , his last remaining family member . During a press conference , the Veracruz authorities relied solely on the confession of Silva as evidence against him . None of them made references to DNA , fingerprint , or blood samples from the murder scene . Sources close to the Committee to Protect Journalists stated that the samples collected at the crime scene do not match those of any of the criminals listed on the national database . This should rule out both Silva and Domínguez ( who is still at large ) from the murder , because both of them have extensive criminal records . Proceso news magazine immediately took a critical stance toward the investigation and said that they did not believe that the Veracruz authorities were capable of completing a clean investigation . The Committee to Protect Journalists believes that the murder case was possibly fabricated , and that Silva was likely used as a scapegoat by the authorities . Just a few items were stolen from Martínez Pérez 's house while valuable goods were left behind , so they allege that theft was not the real motive behind her murder . According to Mexican law , Proceso was allowed to participate in the investigation , so they appointed a top journalist to cover every detail of it . Proceso has complained that the Veracruz authorities have lied to them regarding possible developments in the investigation . 
 Six months after Martínez Pérez 's slaying , the Veracruz authorities stated that her murder was also a crime of passion . According to the reports , Domínguez was the alleged boyfriend of the journalist . On April 2013 , Proceso stated that it had received classified information that its senior editor who was covering the investigation , Jorge Carrasco , was a possible target by corrupt Veracruz officials . Reportedly , members of the administration of Governor Javier Duarte de Ochoa were allowed to carry out " hostile actions against the reporter in response to his most recent publication on the Regina Martínez case . " Sources close to the news magazine alleged that officials were plotting to kill the reporter while he was in the nation 's capital , Mexico City . The Veracruz authorities responded by stating that the accusations were false and asked Proceso to provide evidence for its claims . The governor promised that he would investigate the threats , and the journalist went into hiding with several armed bodyguards . That same month , Silva was sentenced to 38 years and 2 months in prison for the murder . The judge also ordered the murderer to pay roughly $ 8 @,@ 000 USD in reparations for her death and the stolen possessions . Proceso , however , expressed its doubt on the murder case and trial once again , stating that they did not believe the court was sentencing the right man . 
 Some journalists continue to dispute the facts in the case , believing that the murder was retribution for reports by Martínez Pérez on drug trafficking and political corruption ; they have questioned the investigation by the state of Veracruz . Proceso magazine 's reporter said the investigators never explored the possibility that her journalism may have been the motive behind her murder . Press freedom organizations across the world have complained that the case was designed to cover up the crime instead of clarifying what actually happened . " We don 't believe them [ the authorities ] " , said Proceso reporter Jorge Carrasco on behalf of the whole newspaper magazine . 
 = = Context = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Veracruz is the most dangerous place in Mexico for journalists ; at least nine journalists have been killed since Governor Javier Duarte de Ochoa took office in 2010 , many of them by the Los Zetas drug cartel . Most of these reporters were killed under unclear circumstances , and few arrests have been made in their respective investigations . Given the high levels of corruption , criminal impunity , and drug @-@ related attacks against the press all across Veracruz , many local journalists have decided to leave the state and relocate in other parts of Mexico . The atmosphere in Veracruz has also forced many media outlets to self @-@ censor and stop reporting on the drug violence . With traditional reporting being too dangerous and intimidating , social media and blogs are often the only outlets for reporting serious crimes . 
 The state of Veracruz used to be controlled by the Gulf Cartel before business was handed over to Los Zetas , their former allies , when they went to war across northeastern Mexico in early 2010 . Since 2011 , much of the drug @-@ related violence is a result of the turf wars between Los Zetas and the Sinaloa Cartel , a drug trafficking organization based in western Mexico and headed by Joaquín El Chapo Guzmán , Mexico 's most @-@ wanted drug lord . These criminal groups are fighting for Veracruz because of its lucrative smuggling routes for contraband , drug trafficking , and illegal migrants heading to the United States . It has one of Mexico 's busiest ports , and officials say that there is no way they can inspect all of the containers that come in by ship . Corruption is also widespread in Veracruz ; investigators have been slow and reluctant to link the Martínez Pérez murder to organized crime . According to the Committee to Protect Journalists , Veracruz is by " general consensus one of the most politically corrupt [ states in Mexico ] " . Mexico was ruled by the Institutional Revolutionary Party ( PRI ) for 71 years until it lost the presidential seat to the conservative National Action Party ( PAN ) in 2000 . The PRI has long been criticized for being corrupt and allowing the drug trafficking organizations in the country to operate freely if they maintained relative peace . Although the PRI lost the national presidency in 2000 , some states remained under the rule of PRI politicians . " Democratic transition never quite reached Veracruz , " a state of 8 million people . PRI governors in Veracruz continued to rule with the state with tactics largely abandoned by the PRI at a national level . 
 = = = Journalists assassinated = = = 
 Martínez Pérez was the fifth journalist killed in Veracruz during the <unk> of Governor Javier Duarte de Ochoa , which started in 2010 . The first journalist assassinated was Noel López <unk> ( March 2011 ) , followed by Miguel Ángel López Velasco and his son <unk> ( June 2011 ) . Then Yolanda Ordaz de la Cruz was killed ( July 2011 ) , followed by Martínez Pérez ( April 2012 ) . Just a few days after her death , the mutilated bodies of four media professionals were discovered . There would be still another journalist murdered in Veracruz : Víctor Manuel Báez ( June 2012 ) . Although not officially counted in the death toll of journalists , at least three journalists have been kidnapped and have remained in captivity since 2010 : Manuel Gabriel Fonseca Hernández ( September 2011 ) , Miguel Morales Estrada ( July 2012 ) , and Sergio Landa Rosales ( November 2012 ) . 
 Nearly 100 journalists , bloggers and writers have been kidnapped or killed in Mexico since 2000 , making the country one of the most dangerous places on the planet in which to be a journalist . Most of these crimes , too , have remained unsolved , and only a few perpetrators have been brought to justice . 
 On 22 June 2012 , former President Felipe Calderón signed the " Law for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and Journalists " ( Spanish : Ley Para la Protección de Personas <unk> de Derechos Humanos y <unk> ) , which makes attacks against journalists a federal crime and establishes a fund for investigating these crimes . The law also establishes several preventative measures to protect journalists , such as providing them bodyguards , armored vehicles , bullet @-@ proof vests , security cameras , wireless equipment and satellite cellphones to communicate in case of any danger , and temporary relocation if deemed necessary . Congress passed a law on 7 June 2012 that allowed the federal government to investigate attacks against journalists , crimes which used to be under the jurisdiction of state and municipal forces . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 Irina <unk> , who is the Director @-@ General of UNESCO , said , " News of the murders of Gabriel Huge and Guillermo Luna Varela – tortured and killed less than one week after the murder of Regina Martínez Pérez – is deeply disturbing , and reflects an alarming state of affairs in the state of Veracruz . That these gruesome crimes have been committed on the eve of World Press Freedom Day – a day on which we honour the vital role played by journalists in upholding democratic values , protecting citizens ’ rights to be informed and calling those in power to account – makes the situation all the more intolerable . I condemn these three murders in the strongest possible terms and urge the Mexican authorities to act quickly and decisively to find those responsible . <unk> is not an option . " 
 Proceso magazine wrote , in reaction to its colleague 's murder , " The murder of journalist Regina Martinez Perez , on Saturday April 28 , is the result of a broken country , a situation of daily violence in which extreme acts are not the exception but the rule daily . " 
 On 29 April 2013 , the Chamber of Deputies of Mexico observed a moment of silence to remember Regina Martínez , after a proposal made by Manuel Rafael Huerta from the Labor Party ( PT ) . Huerta mentioned in his petition that a year after the murder the circumstances were still unclear and the official version from the government of Veracruz was not to be believed . The president of the chamber left those comments out , but found the proposal relevant and invited deputies to join in the minute of silence . 
 = Battle of Barrosa = 
 The Battle of Barrosa ( Chiclana , 5 March 1811 ) was part of an unsuccessful manoeuvre to break the siege of Cádiz in Spain during the Peninsular War . During the battle , a single British division defeated two French divisions and captured a regimental eagle . 
 Cádiz had been invested by the French in early 1810 , leaving it accessible from the sea , but in March of the following year a reduction in the besieging army gave its garrison of British and Spanish troops an opportunity to lift the siege . A large Allied strike force was shipped south from Cádiz to Tarifa , and moved to engage the siege lines from the rear . The French , under the command of Marshal Victor , were aware of the Allied movement and redeployed to prepare a trap . Victor placed one division on the road to Cádiz , blocking the Allied line of march , while his two remaining divisions fell on the single Anglo @-@ Portuguese rearguard division under the command of Sir Thomas Graham . 
 Following a fierce battle on two fronts , the British succeeded in routing the attacking French forces . A lack of support from the larger Spanish contingent prevented an absolute victory , and the French were able to regroup and reoccupy their siege lines . Graham 's tactical victory proved to have little strategic effect on the continuing war , to the extent that Victor was able to claim the battle as a French victory since the siege remained in force until finally being lifted on 24 August 1812 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In January 1810 , the city of Cádiz , a major Allied harbour and the effective seat of Spanish government since the occupation of Madrid , was besieged by French troops of Marshal Soult 's I Corps under the command of Marshal Victor . The city 's garrison initially comprised only four battalions of volunteers and recruits , but the Duke of Alburquerque ignored orders from the Spanish Junta and instead of attacking Victor 's superior force , he brought his 10 @,@ 000 men to reinforce the city . This allowed the city 's defences to be fully manned . 
 Under pressure from widespread protests and mob violence the ruling Spanish Junta resigned , and a five @-@ man Regency was established to govern in its place . The Regency , recognising that Spain could only be saved with Allied aid , immediately asked the newly ennobled Arthur Wellesley , Viscount Wellington , to send reinforcements to Cádiz ; by mid @-@ February , five Anglo @-@ Portuguese battalions had landed , bringing the garrison up to 17 @,@ 000 men and making the city effectively impregnable . Additional troops continued to arrive , and by May , the garrison was 26 @,@ 000 strong , while the besieging French forces had risen to 25 @,@ 000 . 
 Although the siege tied up a large number of Spanish , British and Portuguese troops , Wellington accepted this as part of his strategy since a similar number of French troops were also engaged . However , in January 1811 , Victor 's position began to deteriorate . Soult ordered Victor to send almost a third of his troops to support Soult 's assault on Badajoz , reducing the besieging French army to around 15 @,@ 000 men . Victor had little chance of making progress against the fortress city with a force of this strength , nor could he withdraw — the garrison of Cádiz , if let loose , was large enough to overrun the whole of Andalusia . 
 = = Prelude to battle = = 
 Following Soult 's appropriation of many of Victor 's troops , the Allies sensed an opportunity to engage Marshal Victor in open battle and raise the siege of Cádiz . To that end , an Anglo @-@ Spanish expedition was sent by sea from Cádiz south to Tarifa , with the intention of marching north to engage the French rear . This force comprised some 8 @,@ 000 Spanish and 4 @,@ 000 British troops , with the overall command ceded to the Spanish General Manuel la Peña , a political accommodation since he was widely regarded as incompetent . To coincide with la Peña 's assault , it was arranged that General José Pascual de Zayas y Chacón would lead a force of 4 @,@ 000 Spanish troops in a sally from Cádiz , via a pontoon bridge from the Isla de León . 
 The Anglo @-@ Portuguese contingent — a division commanded by Lieutenant @-@ General Sir Thomas Graham — sailed from Cádiz on 21 February 1811 , somewhat later than planned . Graham 's forces were unable to land at Tarifa due to bad weather and were forced to sail on to Algeciras , where they disembarked on 23 February . Joined by a composite battalion of flank companies under Colonel Browne , the troops marched to Tarifa on 24 February , where they received a further reinforcement from the fortress garrison there . By 27 February , they were joined by la Peña 's Spanish troops , who had left Cádiz three days after Graham and , despite encountering similar weather difficulties , had succeeded in landing at Tarifa . 
 To further strengthen the Allied ranks , a force of Spanish irregulars under General Antonio <unk> de los Ríos had been ordered to come down from the Ronda mountains by 23 February and join the main Anglo @-@ Portuguese and Spanish force . Unaware of the delays in sailing , <unk> had advanced as far as Medina @-@ Sidonia in search of the Allied army ; unsupported , and embroiled in skirmishes with Victor 's right flank , he returned to the mountains . General Cassagne , Victor 's flank commander , informed the Marshal of the developing threat . Victor responded by sending three infantry battalions and a cavalry regiment to reinforce Cassagne , and ordering the fortification of Medina @-@ Sidonia . 
 Having concentrated , the combined Allied force began marching north towards Medina @-@ Sidonia on 28 February , and la Peña now ordered Beguines 's irregulars to join them at Casas Viejas . Once there , however , Beguines 's scouts reported that Medina @-@ Sidonia was held more strongly than had been anticipated . Rather than engaging the French and forcing Victor to weaken his siege by committing more of his troops to the town 's defence , la Peña decided that the Allied army should march across country and join the road that ran from Tarifa , through Vejer and Chiclana , to Cádiz . 
 This change of plan , combined with further bad weather and la Peña 's insistence on marching only at night , meant the Allied force was now two days behind schedule . La Peña sent a message to Cádiz informing Zayas of the delay , but the dispatch was not received and on 3 March , Zayas launched his sally as arranged . A pontoon bridge was floated across the Santi Petri creek and a battalion sent across to establish a bridgehead prior to the arrival of the main force . Victor could not allow the Cádiz garrison , which still numbered about 13 @,@ 000 men , to make a sortie against his lines while he was threatened from outside , so on the night of 3 – 4 March he sent six companies of voltigeurs to storm the bridgehead entrenchments and prevent a breakout . Zayas 's battalion was ejected from its positions , with 300 Spanish casualties , and Zayas was forced to float the pontoon bridge back to the island for future use . 
 Marshal Victor had , by now , received intelligence from a squadron of dragoons that had been driven out of Vejer , informing him of the strong Anglo @-@ Portuguese and Spanish force making its way up the western road from Tarifa . In conjunction with the aggressive action of the Cádiz garrison , this led him to conclude that the approaching troops were heading for Cádiz ; their line of march was therefore predictable , so he prepared a trap . General Eugène @-@ Casimir Villatte 's division was sent to block the neck of the peninsula on which the western road ran , preventing access to the Santi Petri creek and the Isla de Léon . Two other divisions , under the commands of Generals François Amable Ruffin and Jean François Leval , were ordered to conceal themselves in the thick Chiclana forest in position to attack the flank of the Allies as they engaged Villatte 's division . 
 After another night march , on 5 March the Allies reached a hill to the south east of Barrosa , the Cerro del Puerco ( also referred to as the Barrosa Ridge ) . Scouts reported the presence of Villatte 's force , and la Peña ordered his vanguard division to advance . With the aid of a fresh sortie of Zayas 's troops from Cádiz , and reinforced by a brigade of the Prince of <unk> 's division , the Spanish drove Villatte 's force across the Almanza Creek . La Peña refused his vanguard permission to pursue the retreating French , who were consequently able to regroup on the far side of the creek . Graham 's Anglo @-@ Portuguese division had remained behind on the Cerro del Puerco to defend the rear and right flank of la Peña 's main force . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Having opened up the route to Cádiz , la Peña instructed Graham to move his troops forward to Bermeja . However , on Graham 's strenuous objections to vacating a position that would result in both an exposed flank and rear , a force of five Spanish battalions and Browne 's battalion was left to hold the Barrosa Ridge . In addition , three Spanish and two King 's German Legion ( KGL ) squadrons of cavalry , under the command of Colonel Samuel Whittingham , were sent to flank this rearguard force on the coast track . Graham 's division then moved north as ordered — instead of descending from the heights on the coast road , they followed a path through a pine wood to the west of the ridge . This route was shorter and more practical for artillery , but the trees restricted visibility in all directions , meaning that they were effectively marching blind . 
 = = = French attack = = = 
 Victor was disappointed that Villatte had failed to block the Cádiz road for longer , but he was still confident that his main force could drive the Allies into the sea . He could see that the bulk of the Spanish troops had taken station opposite Villatte and , on hearing reports that Barrosa Ridge was deserted , realised that here was an opportunity to take this commanding position . Ruffin was ordered to occupy the heights while Leval struck at Graham 's troops in the woods , and three squadrons of dragoons were sent around the Cerro to take the coastal track . 
 Victor 's plan rapidly developed momentum . Ruffin 's advance sufficed to send the five rearguard Spanish battalions running , leaving only Browne 's battalion defending the ridge and , confronted by the French dragoons , Whittingham 's cavalry decided to retire . Whittingham lent a single squadron of KGL hussars to Browne to cover his retreat ; Browne initially positioned his battalion in the ruins of a chapel at the summit but , seeing Whittingham 's retreat and spotting six French battalions advancing on his position , he had little choice but to give way and seek Graham 's force in the woods . Barrosa Ridge fell unopposed as Victor had intended , and Ruffin emplaced a battery of artillery on the heights . 
 = = = Graham 's response = = = 
 Meanwhile , midway through his march to join la Peña 's Spaniards , Graham received news from Spanish <unk> that French soldiers had emerged from the Chiclana forest . Riding to the rear of his marching columns , he witnessed the Spanish battalions retreating from the ridge , Ruffin 's division climbing its slopes , and Leval 's division approaching from the east . Realizing that the Allied force was in danger of being swamped , Graham disregarded his orders and turned his division to deal with the threats to his flank and rear . He ordered General Dilkes 's brigade to retake the ridge while Colonel Wheatley 's brigade was sent to see off Leval 's force to the east . 
 Because of the time it took to deploy a full brigade into battle formation , Graham knew he needed to delay the French . He therefore ordered Browne , who had rejoined the division , to turn his single " Flankers " battalion of 536 men around and advance up the slope of the Barrosa Ridge against the 4 @,@ 000 men and artillery of Ruffin 's division . Colonel Barnard , who led the light battalion of Wheatley 's brigade , and Colonel Bushe , leading two light companies of Portuguese skirmishers , were ordered to attack through the woods to hold up Leval 's advance . 
 = = = Barrosa Ridge = = = 
 Advancing up the ridge they had just abandoned , Browne 's battalion came under intense fire from Ruffin 's emplaced infantry and artillery . Within a few salvoes , half the battalion was gone and , unable to continue , Browne 's men scattered amongst the cover provided by the slope and returned fire . Despite his success , Ruffin could not descend the hill to brush away the remnants of Browne 's battalion , as Dilkes 's brigade had by now emerged from the wood and was forming up at the base of the slope . 
 Dilkes , instead of following Browne 's route up the slope , advanced to the right where there was more cover and ground not visible to the French . As a result , the French artillery could not be brought to bear , and Dilkes 's brigade managed to get near the top of the ridge without suffering serious loss . By this time , though , its formation had become disorganised , so Ruffin deployed four battalion columns in an attempt to sweep both Dilkes and the remaining " Flankers " back down the slope . Contrary to French expectations , the crude British line stopped the attacking columns in their tracks , and the two forces exchanged fire . Marshal Victor , by then himself on the crest of the ridge , brought up his reserve in two battalion columns of grenadiers . These columns were , as with the previous four , subjected to intense musket fire and were brought to a halt just metres from the British line . The first four columns had started to give ground , so Victor tried to disengage his reserves and bring them to their support . However , as the two grenadier columns attempted to move off from their stalled positions , they came under additional fire from the remnants of Browne 's battalion , which had renewed its own advance . Prevented from rallying , the entire French force broke and fled to the valley below . 
 = = = Leval 's advance = = = 
 While Dilkes was moving on Ruffin 's position on Barrosa Ridge , Barnard and the light companies advanced through the woods towards Leval 's division . Unaware of the impending British assault , the French had taken no precautions and were advancing in two columns of march , with no forward line of voltigeurs . The unexpected appearance of British skirmishers caused such confusion that some French regiments , thinking there were cavalry present , formed square . These were prime targets for shrapnel rounds fired by the ten cannon under Major Duncan which , having made rapid progress through the woods , arrived in time to support the skirmish line . As the situation became clearer , the French organised themselves into their customary attacking formation — the ' column of divisions ' — all the time under fire from Barnard 's light companies and Duncan 's artillery . Finally , with the French now in their fighting columns and beginning their advance , Barnard was forced to draw back . Leval 's men then encountered Bushe 's companies of the 20th Portuguese , who supported the light battalion 's retreat and kept the French engaged until Wheatley 's brigade had formed up in line on the edge of the woods . The retreating light companies joined Wheatley 's troops ; Leval 's division of 3 @,@ 800 men was now marching on an Anglo @-@ Portuguese line of 1 @,@ 400 men supported by cannon . 
 Although they had the advantage in numbers , the French were under the impression that they were facing a superior force . Having been mauled by Barnard 's and Bushe 's light companies , and now facing the rolling volleys of the main British line , the French needed time to form from column into line themselves . However , Wheatley attacked as soon as the light companies cleared the field , and only one of Leval 's battalions was able to even partially redeploy . The first French column Wheatley engaged broke after a single British volley . The 8th Ligne , part of this column , suffered about 50 percent casualties and lost its eagle . The capture of the eagle — the first to be won in battle by British forces in the Peninsular wars — cost Ensign Keogh of the 87th his life and was finally secured by Sergeant Patrick Masterson ( or Masterman , depending on source ) . As Wheatley 's brigade moved forward , it encountered the only French battalion , from the 54th Ligne , that had begun to form line . It took three charges to break this battalion , which eventually fled towards the right where it encountered the remainder of Leval 's fleeing division . 
 = = = French retreat = = = 
 Ruffin 's and Leval 's divisions fled towards the Laguna del Puerco , where Victor succeeded in halting their disorganised rout . The Marshal deployed two or three relatively unscathed battalions to cover the reorganisation of his forces and secure their retreat , but Graham had also managed to call his exhausted men to order and he brought them , with Duncan 's artillery , against Victor 's new position . Morale in the re @-@ formed French ranks was fragile ; when a squadron of KGL hussars rounded the Cerro and drove a squadron of French dragoons onto their infantry , the shock was too much to bear for the demoralised soldiers , who retreated in a sudden rush . 
 Throughout the battle , la Peña steadfastly refused to support his Anglo @-@ Portuguese allies . He learnt of the French advance at about the same time as Graham , and decided to entrench his full force on the isthmus defending the approach to the Isla de Léon . Learning of Graham 's decision to engage the two French divisions , the Spanish commander was convinced that the French would win the day and so stayed in place ; Zayas repeatedly asked for leave to go to Graham 's support , but le Peña denied permission each time . On hearing that the British had prevailed , la Peña further declined to pursue the retreating French , again over @-@ riding the continued protestations of Zayas . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 Furious at la Peña , the following morning Graham collected his wounded , gathered trophies from the field and marched into Cádiz ; snubbed , la Peña would later accuse Graham of losing the campaign for the Allies . It is almost certain that , had the Allies pushed the French positions either immediately after the battle or on the morning of 6 March , the siege would have been broken . Even though Victor had managed to rally his troops at Chiclana , panic was rife in the French lines . Fully expecting a renewed offensive , Victor had made plans to stall any Allied advance just long enough to blow up most of the besieging forts and to allow I Corps to retreat to Seville . Such was the French <unk> that , despite the Allied inactivity , one battery was destroyed without any signal being given . 
 La Peña had determined not to heed plans from Graham and Admiral Keats to make a cautious advance against the French at Chiclana , and he even refused to send out cavalry scouts to find out what Victor was doing . After remaining entrenched at Bermeja during 5 – 6 March , the Spanish army crossed to the Isla de León the following day , leaving only Beguines 's irregulars on the mainland . This force did manage to briefly secure Medina @-@ Sidonia , but then returned to the Ronda mountains . By 8 March , just three days after the battle , Victor had reoccupied even the evacuated southern section of his lines and the siege was back in place . It would remain so for another eighteen months , until finally being abandoned on 24 August 1812 , when Soult ordered a general French retreat following the Allied victory at Salamanca . 
 Despite the conduct of their commanding general , both the Spanish success at Almanza Creek and Graham 's actions at Barrosa Ridge gave a much needed boost to Spanish morale . La Peña was subsequently arraigned for court @-@ martial , mainly for his refusal to pursue the retreating French , where he was acquitted but relieved of command . At a time when Anglo @-@ Spanish relations were already strained , Graham 's criticism of his Spanish allies meant that it was no longer politic for him to remain in Cádiz , so he was transferred to Wellington 's main army . 
 Both tactically and in terms of the casualties inflicted , the battle was a British victory . Graham 's troops had beaten a French force approaching twice their number despite having marched through the previous night and part of that day . The British lost approximately 1 @,@ 240 men , including Portuguese and German contingents under Graham 's command , while Victor lost around 2 @,@ 380 . The Spanish suffered 300 – 400 casualties . Strategically , however , the failure of the Allies to follow up their victory allowed Victor to reoccupy his siege lines ; Cádiz was not relieved and the campaign effectively failed to achieve anything . Victor even claimed the battle as a French victory , since the positions of the opposing sides remained unchanged following the action . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In November 1811 , the British Prince Regent commanded that a medal be struck to commemorate the " brilliant Victory obtained over the Enemy " ; this was awarded to the senior British officers present at the battle . 
 Four Royal Navy ships have taken their names from the battle , as has the Sea Cadet Corps Unit , TS Barrosa . 
 A young officer in the 4th Dragoons , Lieutenant William Light who later served on Graham 's staff and was a great admirer of the general , subsequently became the Surveyor General of South Australia in the 1830s . Light decided to name one of the valleys in the new colony Barossa Valley ( now a famous wine making region ) in memory of the victory , albeit misspelled due to a clerical error . It is often incorrectly stated that Light fought at the Battle of Barrosa but he was actually hundreds of miles to the north , his diary of 6 March 1811 recording he was with Wellington 's cavalry travelling through Santarem to Pernes . 
 Unofficially , the training area at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst is also known as Barossa . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 Cornwell , Bernard , Sharpe 's Fury : Richard Sharpe and the Battle of Barrosa , March 1811 , HarperCollins , 2006 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 = 1851 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1851 Atlantic hurricane season was the first Atlantic hurricane season to be included in the official Atlantic tropical cyclone record . Six known tropical cyclones occurred during the season , the earliest of which formed on June 25 and the latest of which dissipated on October 19 . These dates fall within the range of most Atlantic tropical cyclone activity . None of the cyclones existed simultaneously with another . Of the six storms , two only have a single point in their track known . 
 Two other hurricanes were reported during the season , one near Tampico and the other near Jamaica ; however , they are not in the official hurricane database . There may have been other unconfirmed tropical cyclones during the season . Meteorologist Christopher Landsea estimates that between zero and six storms were missed from the official database , due to small tropical cyclone size , sparse ship reports , and relatively unpopulated coastlines . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Five of the six tropical cyclones affected land , including three making landfall with winds of over 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) . The first struck Texas as a hurricane , which caused moderate to heavy damage , particularly to shipping in Matagorda Bay . One death was indirectly related to the hurricane , as well as at least two injuries . 
 The strongest and deadliest hurricane of the season tracked from east of the Lesser Antilles , through the Greater Antilles , and across the southeastern United States before last being observed near Newfoundland ; it was tied for having the longest duration for a hurricane prior to 1870 . When it hit near Panama City , Florida with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , it caused at least 23 deaths , including five when a lighthouse was destroyed . Many houses were destroyed along its path , primarily along the Florida Panhandle . 
 The other landfalling hurricane was one that struck near Tampico , where it caused heavy damage . The last tropical storm of the season made landfall on Rhode Island , though associated damage is unknown . A tropical storm affected the Lesser Antilles in early July , and another tropical storm remained nearly stationary for three days to the southeast of North Carolina . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 A small 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) hurricane was first observed on June 25 , about 75 miles ( 120 km / h ) southeast of Freeport , Texas . It tracked westward , moving ashore near Matagorda Bay later that night near peak intensity , with an estimated minimum barometric central pressure of 977 mbar ; due to lack of observations , it is possible the hurricane struck as the equivalent of a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . The cyclone slowly weakened as it turned northwestward , with hurricane force wind gusts reported 24 hours after landfall in current @-@ day Medina County . It is estimated that the storm dissipated early on June 28 over central Texas . 
 The hurricane produced heavy damage near where it moved ashore , having been described as the most disastrous experienced there to date . The winds destroyed every wharf and several houses in Port Lavaca . On Matagorda Island , the saltwater contaminated the fresh water supply , and in Matagorda Bay , heavy shipping losses were reported . As the cyclone progressed inland , it dropped light to moderate rainfall , peaking at around 3 inches ( 75 mm ) in Corpus Christi . A fort near current day Laredo reported 2 @.@ 48 inches ( 63 mm ) of precipitation . Across its path , the winds downed several trees and houses , leaving two people injured and contributing to a death when a sick person was exposed to the storm . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A moderate hurricane made landfall near Tampico , which was described as having moved ashore before July 7 ; the Hurricane Research Division assessed the date as July 5 . Heavy damage was reported in Tampico . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 A tropical storm passed through the southern Lesser Antilles on July 10 . Overall documentation on the storm was weak , and its track elsewhere is unknown . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 The fourth known tropical cyclone of the season , also known as the San <unk> Hurricane and the Great Middle Florida Hurricane of August 1851 , the storm was first observed on August 16 about 775 miles ( 1250 km ) east of Barbados . It tracked west @-@ northwestward , attaining hurricane status on August 17 as it approached the Lesser Antilles . Shortly thereafter , the hurricane passed between Antigua and Saint Kitts and later south of Saint Croix . On August 18 it brushed the southern coast of Puerto Rico , though it affected the entire island due to a large size of the storm . The next day it made landfall on the southern coast of the Dominican Republic . The cyclone rapidly weakened to tropical storm status over Hispaniola , though it regained hurricane status as it paralleled the southern coast of Cuba just offshore . Late on August 20 , the cyclone crossed western Cuba , briefly weakening to tropical storm status before again regaining hurricane status in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico . It quickly strengthened and reached peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) early on August 23 about 215 miles ( 345 km ) south @-@ southeast of Pensacola , Florida . Turning northeastward , the hurricane moved ashore near Panama City , Florida at peak intensity , with an estimated barometric pressure of 960 mbar . It accelerated across the Southeastern United States , weakening to a tropical storm before exiting North Carolina into the Atlantic Ocean on August 25 . On August 27 , it was last observed over Newfoundland as a weak tropical storm . 
 The hurricane passed near Saint Lucia on August 17 , where high tides and rough seas were reported . Flooding was reported in northern Puerto Rico during its passage . Impact is unknown in Hispaniola and Cuba . The hurricane produced an estimated storm tide of 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) at Saint Marks ; the combination of waves and the storm tide flooded coastal areas , destroying 50 % of the cotton crops in some areas . Rough seas destroyed a brig , killing 17 people , and another person drowned due to a shipwreck . Many ships were expected to have been lost in the storm , resulting in fear of potentially hundreds of deaths . The storm caused heavy damage along the coastline , and in Apalachicola the winds destroyed the roofs of all but two or three buildings . Dog Island Light was destroyed , resulting in five deaths . Further inland , many houses were blown over in Tallahassee , totaling $ 60 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1851 USD ) . Heavy damage was reported in Alabama , including destroyed crops and damaged houses ; damage in the state was less than in Florida . Hurricane force winds extended into southwestern Georgia , while tropical storm force winds were reported along the coastline . In Savannah , the winds damaged many houses and downed many trees . In North Carolina and Virginia , winds from the storm destroyed crop fields and small buildings ; in the region , it was described as the worst storm in 30 years . Storm damage was reported as far north as Cambridge , Massachusetts . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 On September 13 , a tropical storm was first observed about 225 miles ( 360 km ) southeast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . A nearby ship with the call sign <unk> reported estimated winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , which was judged to be the peak intensity of the tropical storm . Another ship on September 16 reported similar winds in the same location ; Thus , it was estimated to have remained nearly stationary for three days . Its complete track is unknown . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Six = = = 
 A tropical storm developed on October 16 about 155 miles ( 250 km ) east of Cape Canaveral , Florida . It tracked northeastward , gradually strengthening to attain peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) early on October 17 . On October 18 , the storm turned more to the north @-@ northeast as its forward motion increased . Gradually weakening , the storm dissipated late on October 19 after making landfall on Rhode Island . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 On August 2 , a hurricane was reported in the vicinity of Tampico . However , it was not listed as a tropical cyclone in the official hurricane database . 
 An assessment by scholar Michael Chenoweth indicated the presence of a hurricane in the vicinity of western Jamaica around November 7 . It is not currently listed in the official hurricane database . 
 = Embankment tube station = 
 Embankment is a London Underground station in the City of Westminster , known by various names during its history . It is served by the Circle , District , Northern and Bakerloo lines . On the Northern and Bakerloo lines , the station is between Waterloo and Charing Cross stations ; on the Circle and District lines , it is between Westminster and Temple and is in Travelcard Zone 1 . The station has two entrances , one on Victoria Embankment and the other on Villiers Street . The station is adjacent to Victoria Embankment Gardens and is close to Charing Cross station , Embankment Pier , Hungerford Bridge , Cleopatra 's Needle , the Royal Air Force Memorial , the Savoy Chapel and Savoy Hotel and the Playhouse and New Players Theatres . 
 The station is in two parts : sub @-@ surface platforms opened in 1870 by the District Railway ( DR ) as part of the company 's extension of the Inner Circle eastwards from Westminster to Blackfriars and deep @-@ level platforms opened in 1906 by the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway ( BS & WR ) and 1914 by the Charing Cross , Euston and Hampstead Railway ( CCE & HR ) . A variety of underground and main line services have operated over the sub @-@ surface tracks and the CCE & HR part of the station was reconstructed in the 1920s . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Sub @-@ surface station = = = 
 The station was opened on 30 May 1870 by the DR ( now the District line ) when the railway extended its line from Westminster to Blackfriars . The construction of the new section of the DR was planned in conjunction with the building of the Victoria Embankment and was achieved by the cut and cover method of roofing over a trench . Due to its proximity to the South Eastern Railway 's Charing Cross station , the station was originally called Charing Cross . 
 The DR connected to the MR ( now the Metropolitan line ) at South Kensington and , although the two companies were rivals , each company operated its trains over the other 's tracks in a joint service known as the Inner Circle . On 1 February 1872 , the DR opened a northbound branch from its station at Earl 's Court to connect to the West London Extension Joint Railway ( WLEJR , now the West London Line ) at Addison Road ( now Kensington ( Olympia ) ) . From that date the Outer Circle service began running over the DR 's tracks . The service was run by the North London Railway ( NLR ) from its terminus at Broad Street ( now demolished ) in the City of London via the North London Line to Willesden Junction , then the West London Line to Addison Road and the DR to Mansion House – at that time the eastern terminus of the DR. 
 From 1 August 1872 , the Middle Circle service also began operations through South Kensington , running from Moorgate along the MR 's tracks on the north side of the Inner Circle to Paddington , then over the Hammersmith & City Railway ( H & CR ) track to Latimer Road , then , via a now demolished link , on the WLEJR to Addison Road and the DR to Mansion House . The service was operated jointly by the H & CR and the DR. 
 On 30 June 1900 , the Middle Circle service was shortened to terminate at Earl 's Court , and , on 31 December 1908 , the Outer Circle service was withdrawn from the DR tracks . In 1949 , the Metropolitan line @-@ operated Inner Circle route was given its own identity on the tube map as the Circle line . 
 = = = Deep @-@ level station = = = 
 In 1897 the DR obtained parliamentary permission to construct a deep @-@ level tube railway running between Gloucester Road and Mansion House beneath the sub @-@ surface line . The new line was to be an express route using electric trains to relieve congestion on the sub @-@ surface tracks . Only one intermediate station was planned , at Charing Cross , 63 feet ( 19 m ) below the sub @-@ surface platforms . No immediate work was carried out on the deep @-@ level line , and the subsequent take over of the DR by the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) and the resignalling and electrification of the DR 's routes between 1903 and 1905 meant that congestion was relieved without needing to construct the deep @-@ level line . The plan was dropped in 1908 . 
 On 10 March 1906 , the BS & WR ( now the Bakerloo line ) opened with its deep @-@ level platforms beneath and at ninety degrees to the platforms of the DR. Although an interchange was provided between the two separate railways , the BS & WR named its station differently as Embankment . 
 On 6 April 1914 , the CCE & HR ( now a part of the Northern line ) opened a one stop extension south from its terminus at Charing Cross . The extension was constructed to facilitate a better interchange between the BS & WR and CCE & HR . Both lines were owned by the UERL which operated two separate and unconnected stations at the northern end of main line station – Trafalgar Square on the BS & WR and Charing Cross on the CCE & HR ( both now part of a combined Charing Cross station ) . The CCE & HR extension was constructed as a single track tunnel running south from Charing Cross as a loop under the River Thames and back . A single platform was constructed on the northbound return section of the loop , and escalators were installed between both sets of deep @-@ level platforms and the sub @-@ surface station . The interchange time was reduced from three minutes fifteen seconds to one minute and forty @-@ five seconds . 
 A new station building was constructed that Sir John Betjeman described as " the most charming of all the Edwardian and neo @-@ Georgian Renaissance stations . " For the opening of the CCE & HR extension , the deep @-@ level parts of the station were named Charing Cross ( Embankment ) although the sub @-@ surface platforms remained as Charing Cross . In 1915 , this was rectified by changing the name of the whole station to Charing Cross . The CCE & HR station to the north was renamed Strand at the same time ( causing a nearby station of the GNP & BR to change its name from Strand to Aldwych ) . 
 In the 1920s , as part of the construction of what is now the Northern line , the CCE & HR was extended south to Waterloo and Kennington where it was connected to the City & South London Railway . The loop tunnel under the river was abandoned ( although the present northbound Northern line platform follows its course ) and two new tunnels were bored south . To this day the southbound Northern line platform is the only one of the four deep level platforms that is not connected to any of the others by deep level walkways . The new extension was opened on 13 September 1926 . 
 The loop itself still exists , although it was penetrated by a bomb and flooded during the Blitz in the Second World War . Fortunately , the loop had been sealed off years before . In September 1938 , during the Sudeten Crisis , when war appeared imminent , the Bakerloo and Northern line tunnels at Embankment were temporarily sealed with concrete to protect against flooding through bombing . The blockage was removed after little more than a week once the crisis had passed . At the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , the tunnels were blocked again until electrically powered emergency doors could be installed in the tunnel mouths . The tunnels reopened in December 1939 . 
 On 4 August 1974 , the station was once again renamed Charing Cross Embankment . Then , on 12 September 1976 , it became Embankment , so that the merged Strand and Trafalgar Square stations could be named Charing Cross . 
 = = = Fatal accident = = = 
 At about 09 : 55 on 17 May 1938 , an eastbound Inner Circle train collided with an eastbound Ealing Broadway – Barking District line train to the east of the station . The Barking train had been stopped at an automatic signal on its way to Temple station . Six passengers were killed and 43 injured . The cause of the accident was a faulty signal , which showed a green " proceed " aspect to the second train even though the line ahead was not clear . This was a result of a wrong connection made during the previous night when some minor alterations to wiring were made . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is in London fare zone 1 . On the District and Circle lines , the station is between Westminster and Temple , and , on the Northern and Bakerloo lines , it is between Charing Cross and Waterloo . Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally District line trains operate every 2 – 6 minutes from approximately 05 : 27 to 00 : 40 eastbound and 05 : 47 to 00 : 35 westbound ; they are supplemented by Circle line trains every 8 – 12 minutes from approximately 05 : 39 to 00 : 18 clockwise and 05 : 51 to 00 : 23 anticlockwise . Northern line trains operate every 2 – 5 minutes from approximately 05 : 57 to 00 : 35 southbound and 05 : 42 to 00 : 37 northbound . Bakerloo line trains operate every 2 – 5 minutes from approximately 05 : 58 to 00 : 35 southbound and 05 : 42 to 00 : 28 northbound . 
 = = Connections = = 
 London Buses night route <unk> serve the station . 
 = Pavle Đurišić = 
 Pavle Đurišić ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> d ͡ <unk> ͡ ɕ ] ; 9 July 1909 – April 1945 ) was a Montenegrin Serb regular officer of the Royal Yugoslav Army who became a Chetnik commander ( vojvoda ) and led a significant proportion of the Chetniks in Montenegro during World War II . He distinguished himself and became one of the main commanders during the popular uprising against the Italians in Montenegro in July 1941 , and later collaborated with the Italians in actions against the Yugoslav Partisans . In 1943 , his troops carried out several massacres against the Muslim population of Bosnia , Herzegovina and the Sandžak , and participated in the anti @-@ Partisan Case White offensive alongside Italian forces . Đurišić was captured by the Germans in May 1943 , escaped and was recaptured . 
 After the capitulation of Italy , the Germans released Đurišić and he began collaborating with them and the Serbian puppet government . In 1944 , he created the Montenegrin Volunteer Corps with assistance from the Germans , Milan Nedić , and Dimitrije Ljotić . In late 1944 , the German commander in Montenegro decorated him with the Iron Cross 2nd Class . Đurišić was killed following the Battle of Lijevče Field , after being captured by elements of the Armed Forces of the Independent State of Croatia near Banja Luka in an apparent trap set by them and Montenegrin separatist Sekula Drljević . Some of Đurišić 's troops were killed either in this battle or in later attacks by the Partisans as they then continued their withdrawal west . Others attempted to withdraw to Austria ; they were forced to surrender to the Partisans and were killed in the Kočevski Rog area of southern Slovenia in May and June 1945 . Đurišić was a very able Chetnik leader ; his fighting skills were respected by his allies and opponents alike . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Pavle Đurišić was born on 9 July 1909 in Podgorica , Principality of Montenegro , where he was raised until the death of his father Ilija . According to some sources he was born in 1907 . Đurišić was educated up to lower secondary school . Following his father 's death , he moved to Berane , where he lived with his uncle Petar Radović , a judge and former Chetnik who had been a member of the band of Vuk Popović during the Macedonian Struggle . Đurišić attended a teacher training college in Berane for almost two years . 
 In 1927 , Đurišić entered the 55th class of the Military Academy ; he was commissioned as an infantry <unk> ( second lieutenant ) in the Royal Yugoslav Army ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Vojska Kraljevine Jugoslavije , VKJ ) in 1930 . He began his service in Sarajevo with the 10th Infantry Regiment <unk> and attended infantry officers ' school . Đurišić remained in Sarajevo until 1934 when , upon his own request , he was transferred to Berane where he served first as a platoon commander and later as a commander of the 1st Company of the 48th Infantry Regiment . On 7 April 1939 , after the Italian invasion of Albania , Đurišić 's company was sent to <unk> near the Albanian border to gather intelligence . He established contact with individuals in Albania and obtained intelligence , but the information he obtained was not very useful for the defense of Yugoslavia and he returned to Berane with his company . Contacts Đurišić made during this period would become important a few years later . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Axis invasion and Italian occupation of Montenegro = = = 
 In April 1941 , Germany , Italy and Hungary invaded and occupied Yugoslavia . Montenegro was captured by the Germans , who soon withdrew , leaving the Italians to occupy it . The Montenegrins quickly developed grievances against the Italians related to the expulsion of Montenegrins from Kosovo and Vojvodina , the influx of refugees from other parts of Yugoslavia , and those fleeing Ustaše terror in the regions along the borders with Bosnia and Herzegovina . The Montenegrins also had grievances against the Italian annexation of important food producing territory in Kosovo and a salt producing facility at Ulcinj to Albania , and the economic damage inflicted on many Montenegrins by the temporary removal of Yugoslav banknotes of 500 dinars and above from circulation . By the time of the invasion , Đurišić had been promoted to the rank of <unk> <unk> <unk> ( captain first class ) . 
 = = = = Uprising in Montenegro = = = = 
 In mid @-@ July 1941 , the Communist Party of Yugoslavia ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Komunistička <unk> Jugoslavije , KPJ ) initiated a general uprising against the Italian occupiers . The uprising was triggered by the proclamation of a restored Kingdom of Montenegro headed by an Italian regent and led by the Montenegrin separatist Sekula Drljević and his supporters , known as " Greens " ( zelenaši ) . The insurgents also included large numbers of Montenegrin Serb nationalists known as " Whites " ( <unk> ) , who " stood for close ties to Serbia " . About 400 former VKJ officers , many of whom were willing to work with the communists , also took part . Some of the officers had recently been released from prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps by the Germans and Italians , having been captured during the invasion . The VKJ officers assumed command , while the KPJ organised the revolt and provided political commissars . When the uprising commenced , Đurišić joined the committee that had been organised to lead military operations in the Berane district . 
 In the early phase of the uprising the rebels seized control of small towns and villages . Đurišić fought alongside communist insurgents and led a successful attack on Berane . During the heaviest fighting he distinguished himself and emerged as one of the main commanders of the uprising . After nearly two days of house @-@ to @-@ house fighting to capture Berane , he was involved in negotiating the surrender of the surviving Italian troops . Following the Italian surrender , he objected to the instructions he received from the communists regarding the handling of Italian prisoners . During the uprising , Đurišić also fought against Drljević 's forces . Following the Italians ' removal from the Lim valley , Đurišić urged rebels to march on <unk> and Kosovska Mitrovica and attack the Muslims and Albanians there , whom he considered " <unk> " . The leaders of the uprising made it clear they considered such an action unacceptable . 
 The other main commanders of the uprising included the former VKJ officers Colonel Bajo Stanišić and Major <unk> Lašić . Within six weeks , a force of 67 @,@ 000 Italian troops , assisted by Muslim and Albanian irregulars from border areas who provided flank security , regained control of all towns and communication routes in Montenegro . General Alessandro <unk> Biroli , the Italian military governor of Montenegro , issued orders to crush the revolt but directed his forces to avoid " acts of revenge and useless cruelty " . Nevertheless , dozens of villages were burned , hundreds were killed , and between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 inhabitants were interned in the revolt 's suppression . For a while , the Muslim and Albanian irregulars were permitted to pillage and torch villages . As soon as the Italians launched their offensive , politicians in Berane abandoned their support for the uprising and began criticising it . Former VKJ officers deserted their units and Đurišić left the military committee organising the uprising in the Berane district . The politicians and officers formed their own committees and approached the Italians to express their loyalty and denounce the communists . 
 A division developed between the uprising 's communist leadership and the nationalists participating . The nationalists recognised the uprising had been crushed and wanted to stop fighting , while the Partisans were determined to continue the struggle . In late 1941 , the nationalists contacted the Italians and offered to help them fight the communists , who had since been renamed Partisans . The nationalists — including Đurišić , who was popular in his own <unk> clan of northern Montenegro — subsequently withdrew into the hinterland . They sought to avoid provoking the Italians and protect the mountain villages if they were attacked . In northern Montenegro , there was a marked distinction between the communists and nationalists . The nationalists had closer ties with Serbia and possessed a frontier mentality towards Muslims . The communists wished to continue the uprising by turning against their class enemies . Ustaše manipulation of the Muslims in the Sandžak and the expulsion of Serbs from areas annexed by Albania made Đurišić and his Chetniks impatient to continue fighting the Italians . They subsequently turned on the Muslims and Albanians in the region . The uprising continued with reduced intensity until December 1941 . In 1941 , Đurišić was awarded the Order of Karađorđe 's Star by the Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile on the recommendation of Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović . 
 = = = = Mihailović 's instructions = = = = 
 In October 1941 , Mihailović appointed Đurišić as his commander for all regular and reserve troops in central and eastern Montenegro and parts of the Sandžak . In early November , the nationalist leaders in Montenegro quickly became aware of the split between the Chetniks and Partisans in Serbia ; later that month they sent Đurišić to visit Mihailović . During this visit , Đurišić received verbal orders from Mihailović and was appointed as the commander of all Chetnik detachments in the Sandžak . Lašić was appointed commander of all Chetnik forces in Old Montenegro . Đurišić 's appointment was also included as part of instructions dated 20 December 1941 that were received from Mihailović . The instructions included the following objectives : 
 the struggle for the liberty of our whole nation under the sceptre of His Majesty King Peter II ; 
 the creation of a Great Yugoslavia and within it of a Great Serbia which is to be ethnically pure and is to include Serbia [ meaning also Macedonia ] , Montenegro , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Srijem , the Banat , and Bačka ; 
 the struggle for the inclusion into Yugoslavia of all still un @-@ liberated Slovene territories under the Italians and Germans ( Trieste , Gorizia , Istria and Carinthia ) as well as [ of areas now under Bulgaria ] , and northern Albania with Scutari ; 
 the cleansing of the state territory of all national minorities and <unk> elements ; 
 the creation of contiguous frontiers between Serbia and Montenegro , as well as between Serbia and Slovenia by cleansing the Muslim population from the Sandžak and the Muslim and Croat populations from Bosnia and Herzegovina . 
