 These instructions stated that the objectives of the Partisans meant that there could be no cooperation between them and the Chetniks . They also appointed Đurišić as a Chetnik vojvoda . Some historians have challenged the authenticity of these instructions ; they say the document was a forgery made by Đurišić after he failed to reach Mihailović . Other historians either do not mention any controversy about the provenance of the instructions , mention evidence supporting their authenticity , or explicitly state they consider them to be authentic . 
 = = = = Collaboration with the Italians against the Partisans in Montenegro = = = = 
 In January 1942 , Đurišić met with representatives of Generale di <unk> ( Brigadier ) Silvio Bonini , the commander of the Italian 19th Infantry Division Venezia . Đurišić 's brother Vaso was responsible for liaising with the Italian division and was stationed at their headquarters in Berane . At this meeting , Đurišić was granted freedom of action against the Partisans in the division 's area of responsibility ; an agreement between Đurišić and the Italian representatives was signed by Vaso on Đurišić 's behalf . That March , Đurišić again met with the staff of the division . In the same month , he assembled a group of former VKJ officers , politicians and other non @-@ communists , and passed on Mihailović 's instructions . Mihailović codenamed Đurišić 's headquarters " Mountain Staff No. 15 " ; Đurišić selected the village of <unk> for its location . In January , a Chetnik force led by Lašić conducted successful operations against the Partisans in the Andrijevica district , but Lašić suffered a severe head wound during the fighting . Lašić 's wounding meant Đurišić soon became the most prominent and important Chetnik commander in Montenegro . By 5 January , Đurišić assumed command over the Berane district and established seven Chetnik detachments in the area . Soon after , a district political committee with responsibility for organising propaganda and finding recruits was formed . Đurišić soon gained control of all anti @-@ communist militia groups of 500 members in the Berane district and two smaller groups from Kolašin and Bijelo Polje totalling 120 men . On 13 January , after a week of preparation , he launched attacks on two Partisan battalions operating in the Berane district . After four days of fighting , Đurišić succeeded in almost completely clearing the district of Partisans with the help of Italian troops and Muslim militias . By 24 January , Đurišić 's forces captured the remaining Partisan @-@ held village in the district , killing 15 Partisans and executing 27 who had been captured . This effectively erased the remaining Partisan presence in Berane . 
 By March , Đurišić had demonstrated to the Italians that he was uncompromising towards the Partisans and his detachments were expanding beyond the division 's area of responsibility . An agreement was negotiated between Đurišić and General Biroli , the military governor and commander of Italian troops in Montenegro . This agreement , signed by Đurišić , also related to the area of operations of the 19th Infantry Division Venezia . The Italians agreed to supply Đurišić and his troops with arms , food , and wages . The agreement obliged Đurišić to : 
 lead the fight against the communists and their supporters ; 
 maintain contact with the Italian military authorities , so that his actions were carried out in accordance with Italian instructions . North of <unk> Rijeka , Đurišić agreed to clear his actions with Bonini , and south of <unk> Rijeka he was to coordinate with Biroli ; 
 maintain order and guarantee the safety of roads in his area of operations ; 
 never attack Italian troops and limit his activities to fighting against the communists ; 
 return all arms provided by the Italians , except for those needed to maintain order , after the destruction of the communists . 
 Despite his possession of Mihailović 's instructions , Đurišić initially had minimal influence on the non @-@ communist elements of the Montenegrin resistance and was unable to develop an effective strategy against the Italians or Partisans in the months after his return to Montenegro . In early 1942 , his Chetnik detachment became more active against local Muslims , especially in eastern Montenegro and the Sandžak . The Partisans occupied Kolašin in January and February 1942 , and turned against all real and potential opposition ; they killed about 300 people and threw their corpses into pits they called the " dogs ' cemetery " . Because of this and other examples of communist terror , some Montenegrins turned against the Partisans . On 23 February , Đurišić captured Kolašin and held it as a Chetnik bastion until May 1943 . Chetnik terror against political opponents intensified following the town 's capture and manifested in show trials and mass executions that lasted until late June . 
 In May 1942 , Đurišić attacked and defeated the last significant Partisan detachment in Montenegro . In June 1942 , Đurišić collaborated with the Ustaše in Foča in south @-@ eastern Bosnia . After being forced out of Serbia by the Germans , Mihailović arrived in Montenegro as the Italians and Chetniks were fighting the Partisans . Mihailović was accompanied by his staff and a British Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) liaison officer . He eventually established his base in the village of Gornje <unk> , a few miles from Đurišić 's headquarters at Kolašin . Mihailović and his staff had few troops and relied on Đurišić for protection . Soon after Mihailović arrived in Montenegro , Đurišić told Mihailović 's SOE liaison officer that he was available to act independently and in defiance of Mihailović . Đurišić and the other Chetnik commanders in Montenegro nominally recognised Mihailović as their supreme commander but they rarely obeyed him . 
 On 24 July 1942 , <unk> Đukanović , senior commander of all Chetnik forces in Montenegro , signed a comprehensive agreement with Biroli which officially organised and recognised three Chetnik " flying detachments " as Italian auxiliary troops for use against the Partisans . These detachments were supplied , armed , and paid by the Italians ; they included 4 @,@ 500 Chetniks , 1 @,@ 500 of whom were under the command of Đurišić . The Chetniks became an important part of the Italian occupation regime in Montenegro . The existing " Montenegrin Chetnik committee " , which was led by the Brigadier General Đukanović and to which Đurišić was aligned , was recognised by the Italians as the " Nationalist Committee of Montenegro " , whose only political aims were to combat the communists and others opposed to the Italian occupation , and " maintain law and order " . Arrangements were to be made by mutual understanding for pay , rations , weaponry , and aid to the families of Chetniks . 
 During the rest of 1942 , Italian operations in conjunction with their Chetnik auxiliaries forced the remaining Partisans out of Montenegro , after which the Italians used the Chetnik auxiliaries to police the countryside . For most of this time , Đurišić operated fairly independently in northern Montenegro ; he was described as " a law unto himself " . In December 1942 , Chetniks from Montenegro and the Sandžak met at a conference in the village of Šahovići near Bijelo Polje . The conference was dominated by Đurišić ; its resolutions expressed extremism and intolerance , and its agenda focused on restoring the pre @-@ war status quo in Yugoslavia implemented in its initial stages by a Chetnik dictatorship . It also laid claim to parts of the territory of Yugoslavia 's neighbours . At this conference , Mihailović was represented by Major Zaharije Ostojić , his chief of staff , who had previously been encouraged by Mihailović to wage a campaign of terror against the Muslim population living along the borders of Montenegro and the Sandžak . One outcome of the conference was the decision to destroy the Muslim villages in the Čajniče district of Bosnia . 
 = = = Case White and cleansing actions = = = 
 In December 1942 , concerned about the possibility of Allied forces landing in the Balkans , the Germans began planning an anti @-@ Partisan offensive in Bosnia and Herzegovina codenamed " Case White " . The size of the planned offensive required the involvement of both the Croatian Home Guard and the Italians . Late in the planning , the Italians began to prepare and equip Chetnik detachments , including that of Đurišić , for involvement in the operation . In early January 1943 , the Chetnik Supreme Command ordered Montenegrin Chetnik units to carry out " cleansing actions " against Muslims in Bijelo Polje county in north @-@ eastern Montenegro . On 10 January 1943 , Đurišić reported that Chetniks under his command had burned down 33 Muslim villages , killed 400 Muslim fighters — members of the Muslim self @-@ protection militia also supported by the Italians — and had also killed about 1 @,@ 000 Muslim women and children . 
 As Italian auxiliaries , Đurišić 's detachment was so dependent on the Italians for arms and transport that it had not left Montenegro until 18 January 1943 , two days before the first phase of Case White was to begin . On 3 January 1943 , Ostojić issued orders to " cleanse " the Čajniče district of Ustaše – Muslim organisations . According to the historian Radoje Pajović , Ostojić produced a detailed plan that avoided specifying what was to be done with the district 's Muslim population . Instead , these instructions were to be given orally to the responsible commanders . Delays in the movement of Chetnik forces into Bosnia to participate in Case White alongside the Italians enabled the Chetnik Supreme Command to expand the planned " cleansing " operation to include the Pljevlja district in the Sandžak and the Foča district of Bosnia . A combined Chetnik force of 6 @,@ 000 divided into four detachments and commanded by Vojislav Lukačević , Andrija <unk> , Zdravko <unk> and Bajo <unk> was assembled . Mihailović ordered all four detachments to be placed under the overall command of Đurišić . 
 In early February 1943 , during their advance north @-@ west into Herzegovina in preparation for their involvement in Case White , the combined Chetnik force killed large numbers of Muslims in the targeted areas . In a report to Mihailović dated 13 February 1943 , Đurišić wrote that his Chetniks had killed about 1 @,@ 200 Muslim combatants and about 8 @,@ 000 women , children and the elderly , and destroyed all property except livestock , grain and hay , which they seized . Đurišić reported that : 
 The operations were executed exactly according to orders . [ ... ] All the commanders and units carried out their tasks satisfactorily . [ ... ] All Muslim villages in the three above mentioned districts are entirely burnt , so that not one of the houses remained undamaged . All property has been destroyed except cattle , corn and hay . In certain places the collection of fodder and food has been ordered so that we can set up warehouses for reserved food for the units which have remained on the terrain in order to purge it and to search the wooded areas as well as establish and strengthen the organization on the liberated territory . During operations complete annihilation of the Muslim population was undertaken , regardless of sex and age . 
 About 500 Muslims , mostly women , children and the elderly , were killed in Goražde in March , and several women were raped . An estimated 10 @,@ 000 people were killed in the anti @-@ Muslim operations commanded by Đurišić between January and February 1943 . The casualty rate would have been higher if many Muslims had not already fled the area — most to Sarajevo — when the February action began . Chetnik casualties during the operations were reported as 36 killed and 58 wounded . The orders for the " cleansing " operation stated that the Chetniks should kill all Muslim fighters , communists and Ustaše , but that they should not kill women and children . According to Pajović , these instructions were included to ensure there was no written evidence for the killing of non @-@ combatants . On 8 February , one Chetnik commander made a notation on his copy of written orders issued by Đurišić that the detachments had received additional orders to kill all Muslims they encountered . On 10 February , the commander of the Pljevlja Chetnik Brigade told one of his battalion commanders that he was to kill everyone in accordance with the orders of their highest commanders . According to Tomasevich , despite Chetnik claims that this and previous " cleansing actions " were countermeasures against aggressive Muslim activities , all circumstances point to it being Đurišić 's partial achievement of Mihailović 's previous directive to clear the Sandžak of Muslims . 
 By the end of February 1943 , Đurišić 's Chetniks were resisting Partisan attempts to move east from the Neretva river . After the Battle of Neretva , during which the Partisans forced a crossing of the river against faltering Chetnik opposition , Đurišić 's detachment of about 2 @,@ 000 fighters fell back to Kalinovik , where they were almost defeated by the Partisan 2nd Proletarian Division in late March . Falling back further towards the Drina river , Đurišić had assembled about 4 @,@ 500 Bosnian and Montenegrin Chetniks around Foča by April but was in desperate need of supplies . Shortly after this , the Italians withdrew most of their troops from Foča and abandoned most of the Sandžak . For the rest of April 1943 , Đurišić fought a holding action against the Partisans along the Drina river with his 3 @,@ 000 remaining fighters . 
 = = = Capture = = = 
 The Germans followed up Case White with a further offensive , codenamed " Case Black " , whose objectives were the " disarming of all Chetniks and the destruction of all Partisans in Montenegro and Sandžak " , to secure important bauxite , lead , and chromium mines . According to Tomasevich , the main reasons for the offensive were the threat of an Allied landing in the Balkans and the need to eliminate resistance groups that could assist the Allies . In early May 1943 , the Germans entered the Sandžak and eastern Montenegro area . Đurišić withdrew to Kolašin with about 500 fighters and joined forces with Serbian Chetniks commanded by Dragutin <unk> . 
 On 10 May 1943 , Oberstleutnant ( Lieutenant Colonel ) Heinz , commander of the 4th Regiment of the Brandenburg Division , met Đurišić at Kolašin with the intent of engaging him to help the Germans against the Partisans . Đurišić said he was willing to do this , and once the Partisans were defeated he said he would be ready to fight alongside the Germans on the Russian Front . During the meeting , Đurišić told Heinz that Mihailović had left Kolašin at the end of 1942 and that he refused to accept Mihailović 's current policy . Đurišić said Mihailović had been distracted by propaganda and was over @-@ rated , and described him as " an unsteady visionary wandering through the land " . Đurišić also said Josip Broz Tito and his Partisans were the only serious enemy . On 11 May 1943 , Heinz submitted a proposal to General der Infanterie ( Lieutenant General ) Rudolf Lüters , the German Commanding General in Croatia , regarding the Chetniks who had been " legalised " by the Italians . He suggested the Germans also " legalise " Đurišić 's Chetniks and use them to disarm " non @-@ legalised " Chetniks groups . Heinz also proposed that after the Partisans had been destroyed , the Germans " legalise " only weak detachments of Đurišić 's Chetniks . Subsequent events indicate Heinz 's approach to Đurišić may not have been authorised by his superiors and that his suggestions were not acted upon . 
 On 14 May 1943 , a forward detachment of the German 1st Mountain Division entered Kolašin and seized Đurišić by deceiving the Italian troops who were guarding his headquarters . Đurišić and the Chetniks did not resist their capture and there were no casualties . The Italians vigorously protested Đurišić 's capture but the Germans overruled them . With the capture of Đurišić 's Chetniks and another Chetnik group west of Kolašin a few days later , Case Black became an almost entirely anti @-@ Partisan operation . Đurišić was driven away in a vehicle carrying Red Cross markings ; he was then flown from Berane to a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp at <unk> in the Lviv region of Galicia which formed part of the German occupation area of the General Government . He escaped three months later and was recaptured by the authorities of the Serbian puppet government in October 1943 while attempting to cross the Danube near Pančevo in southern Banat . He was handed over to the Germans and held in the Gestapo prison in Belgrade . 
 = = = Release and return to Montenegro = = = 
 In September 1943 , the Italians capitulated and the Germans occupied Montenegro , establishing an area command ( German : <unk> 1040 ) under Generalmajor ( Brigadier ) Wilhem <unk> . Soon after , the German Special Envoy in Belgrade Hermann Neubacher , Milan Nedić , and the German Military Commander in south @-@ east Europe General Hans Felber arranged for Đurišić to be released . Neubacher had developed a plan to establish a union between Serbia and Montenegro and submitted it to Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop in October 1943 . Đurišić was an important part of this plan . He was well regarded by the Chetniks and pro @-@ Chetnik populace in Montenegro , and Stanišić and Đukanović had been killed . Neubacher , Nedić and Felber believed Đurišić could be used to fight the Partisans in Montenegro and help form closer relations between Serbia and Montenegro . Although Neubacher 's plan did not gain Hitler 's approval , Đurišić received supplies including arms and ammunition from the Germans and in November 1943 he returned to Montenegro to fight against the Partisans . At this time he established closer ties with Dimitrije Ljotić , whose Serbian Volunteer Corps ( SDK ) provided him with weapons , food , typewriters , and other supplies . He also worked with Nedić , who promoted him to the rank of lieutenant colonel , and appointed him assistant to the commander of the SDK . According to Pajović , Đurišić was promoted in early to mid @-@ 1944 by the Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile on the advice of Mihailović . 
 = = = Collaboration with the Germans against the Partisans in Montenegro = = = 
 = = = = Winter and spring of 1944 = = = = 
 In February 1944 , Nedić sent the 2nd Battalion of the 5th Regiment of the SDK to Montenegro to supplement Đurišić 's forces . In the first half of 1944 , the Germans in Montenegro and the Sandžak organised offensives against the Partisans , largely relying on forces under the command of Lašić and Đurišić . Because of the weakness of their own forces , the Germans contributed by commanding and supplying the troops involved , and providing smaller mobile armoured units with heavy weapons . The Chetnik leaders provided most of the troops . In February and March , the Germans and numerous Chetnik units undertook a series of operations codenamed Bora , <unk> and <unk> around Podgorica . 
 When the Partisans advanced into Serbia in March 1944 , Partisan forces in northern Montenegro and the Sandžak were reduced to one division . To exploit this weakness , Đurišić proposed to the Germans that they launch an offensive operation . Operation Frühlingserwachen was planned for the northern parts of Montenegro and the Sandžak ; its primary objective was the capture of Kolašin through concentric attacks launched from Pljevlja , Prijepolje and <unk> . This would permit them to link up with forces advancing from Podgorica in the south and to drive a wedge through the middle of the Partisan lines . Operation Frühlingserwachen involved an Axis force of about 5 @,@ 000 men comprising some of Đurišić 's forces , the SS Polizei @-@ Selbstschutz @-@ Regiment <unk> , the 2nd Battalion of the 5th Regiment of the SDK , and two reinforced German motorised companies . The operation began on 9 April ; Đurišić 's forces briefly seized Berane and Bijelo Polje but were soon beaten back by the Partisans . This reversal consolidated the poor German – Chetnik position in Montenegro ; their forces in the south were completely isolated from those in the north . Chetnik forces and their allies suffered heavy casualties ; the 2nd Battalion of the 5th Regiment of the SDK was reduced from 893 men to 350 . 
 = = = = Summer 1944 = = = = 
 In mid @-@ May 1944 , Đurišić visited Belgrade and asked Nedić , Neubacher , and Generalfeldmarschall ( Field Marshal ) Maximilian von Weichs , German Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Southeast , to urgently send arms and other supplies to his unit , which was authorised to a strength of 5 @,@ 000 men . Đurišić — with help from the Germans , Nedić , and Ljotić — then established the Montenegrin Volunteer Corps ( Serbian : <unk> dobrovoljački korpus , CDK ) , which was formally part of the SDK . The CDK consisted of some of Đurišić 's former soldiers who had been released from German captivity , but most were Chetniks who had remained in Montenegro and were gathered under the umbrella term " national forces " . By this time , although he still formally owed allegiance to Yugoslavia through Mihailović , he also owed some allegiance to the Germans and to Nedić , who had released , promoted , and supported him . The German 2nd Panzer Army organised Đurišić 's troops into three regiments numbered 6th , 7th , and 8th , following the five regiments of the SDK . The CDK was subordinated to the headquarters of 2nd Panzer Army . Đurišić was appointed commander ; his corps headquarters were in Prijepolje . Each regiment was planned to consist of two " corps " of 800 men each . The CDK comprised between 7 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 men . Leutnant <unk> , a former German liaison officer for Lukačević , was assigned to watch Đurišić . On 30 May 1944 , <unk> sent a detailed briefing to Đurišić instructing him to ensure that joint operations were progressing smoothly . In mid @-@ June , with German consent , Đurišić moved to the Podgorica area with a group of associates to personally direct the formation of the 8th Regiment of the CDK . He reorganised the Chetnik forces under his command , dividing them into two territorial structures ( one under a command staff for Montenegro and Boka Kotorska and the other under a command staff for Stari Ras ) . 
 Collaboration between Đurišić 's forces and the Germans continued into late 1944 . On 13 July 1944 , Radio Belgrade praised Đurišić " for his services to the Axis cause " . The 8th Regiment of the CDK was nearly destroyed in August by the 7th Montenegro Youth Brigade " Budo <unk> " during Operation Rübezahl . The CDK suffered heavy losses in fighting , and the Germans ordered its re @-@ formation on 21 September 1944 . Đurišić and his forces conducted reprisals against the population in Pljevlja , Prijepolje , Priboj , and Nova Varoš . The Chetniks also raided villages to intimidate and eradicate Partisan sympathisers , notably at Bjelopavlići , where 48 communists were executed . Đurišić remained in Montenegro until the end of Operation Rübezahl in late August 1944 , after which he returned to the Sandžak . Following Operation Rübezahl , the presence of Partisan and German forces in northern Montenegro and the Sandžak was reduced and the focus of operations shifted to Serbia . Remaining Partisan units quickly re @-@ established domination over temporarily lost territories and the German 181st Infantry Division ordered its three battalions that remained isolated in the Pljevlja area to break through Partisan @-@ held territory and reunite with the rest of the division at <unk> . This plan , codenamed <unk> , relied on the substantial participation of Đurišić 's units . It fitted well with Đurišić 's general orientation to move towards the coast , where an Allied landing was expected . <unk> began on 31 August . Đurišić and the Germans made progress at first , capturing Kolašin and Berane , but the towns were quickly retaken by the Partisans , who went on the counterattack and proceeded to capture a string of towns in northern and western Montenegro and eastern Herzegovina . 
 Đurišić maintained contact with Lukačević , who at that time had begun to attack the Germans in Herzegovina with his own forces . Đurišić considered the possibility of joining Lukačević in fighting the Germans in anticipation of an Allied landing . However , because Lukačević was quickly defeated and no Allied landing occurred , Đurišić remained tied to the Germans . German intelligence closely tracked Đurišić 's communications and movements , and German commands continued to make use of his forces . The Germans counted Đurišić 's Chetniks as part of Army Group E in a survey of available forces dated 16 November 1944 . In the survey , German forces in Montenegro at that time were estimated at 47 @,@ 000 soldiers , including Đurišić 's 10 @,@ 000 Chetniks . On 21 October 1944 , the Partisans took the Grahovo garrison after a five @-@ day battle . On 6 November , the Partisans surrounded Cetinje , which was defended by the Germans , Black Shirts , and about 600 Chetniks . On 8 November , the Germans and Chetniks in Cetinje were reinforced with a formation of 800 – 1 @,@ 000 Chetniks led by Đurišić , which eventually succeeded in breaking through the Partisan blockade . 
 On 11 October 1944 , at the suggestion of von Weichs , <unk> , the German Plenipotentiary General in Montenegro , awarded Đurišić the Iron Cross ( 2nd Class ) in the name of the Führer and the German High Command for fighting against the Partisans . 
 = = = Withdrawal from Montenegro and death = = = 
 On 14 November , the Germans launched an assault from Podgorica towards Nikšić to clear a corridor through which the German forces in Montenegro could withdraw towards the Reich . This operation was supported by the Italian 86th National Republican Guard ( GNR ) Battalion . Around 1 @,@ 200 of Đurišić 's Chetniks were deployed on the flanks of the attack . Twelve days of fierce fighting resulted in significant casualties , and the Germans made no progress , losing Boka in the meantime . On 25 November , the Germans decided to abandon this line of attack and attack Kolašin . Chetniks under Đurišić 's command continued to fight alongside the Germans . After reaching Kolašin , Đurišić 's force separated from the Germans to relieve pressure on the German route of march and headed towards Bosnia , marching to the west of the Germans and bypassing Pljevlja . During the breakout and subsequent withdrawal , both the Germans and Chetniks were subjected to frequent attacks by the Allies . 
 Đurišić 's forces proceeded to north @-@ eastern Bosnia to join Mihailović . Đurišić had wanted to withdraw through Albania to Greece but Mihailović told him to prepare for an Allied landing , the return of the king , and the establishment of a national government . After Đurišić joined Mihailović in north @-@ eastern Bosnia , he was critical of Mihailović 's leadership and argued strongly for all remaining Chetnik troops to move to Slovenia . Mihailović was not persuaded ; Đurišić decided to move to Slovenia independently of Mihailović and arranged for Ljotić 's forces , which were already there , to meet him near Bihać in western Bosnia to assist his movement . When he left Mihailović , he was joined by Chetnik ideologue Dragiša Vasić and the detachments commanded by Ostojić and Petar Baćović , and around 10 @,@ 000 refugees . This force was formed into the Chetnik 8th Montenegrin Army consisting of the 1st , 5th , 8th and 9th ( Herzegovina ) divisions . 
 To reach Bihać , Đurišić made a safe @-@ conduct agreement with elements of the Armed Forces of the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) and with the Montenegrin separatist Drljević . The details of the agreement are not known , but it is thought he and his troops intended to cross the Sava river into Slavonia where they would join Drljević as the Montenegrin National Army , of which Đurišić was the operational commander . Đurišić apparently tried to outsmart them and sent only his sick and wounded troops across the river , keeping his fit troops south of the river . He began moving his command westwards ; harassed by the NDH troops and Partisans , Đurišić 's forces reached the Vrbas river north of Banja Luka in late May . Between 30 May and 8 April , the combined Chetnik force was defeated by a strong NDH force armed with German @-@ supplied tanks , in the Battle of Lijevče Field . This was probably the largest combat action between NDH forces and the Chetniks in the previous two years . 
 After this defeat and the defection of one of his sub @-@ units to Drljević , Đurišić was forced to negotiate directly with the leaders of the NDH forces about the further movement of his Chetniks towards Slovenia . This appears to have been a trap ; he was attacked and captured by the NDH on his way to the meeting . Events after his capture are unclear , but Đurišić , Vasić , Ostojić , and Baćović were subsequently killed along with others — including some Serbian Orthodox priests . According to Pajović , the Ustaše executed Đurišić in late April 1945 at the Jasenovac concentration camp . The website of the Jasenovac Memorial Site says Đurišić was killed at the camp by the Ustaše in 1945 . The location of Đurišić 's grave , if any , is unknown . 
 Both the NDH forces and Drljević had reasons for ensnaring Đurišić . The NDH forces were motivated by the mass terror committed by Đurišić on the Muslim population in Sandžak and south @-@ eastern Bosnia . Drljević was opposed to Đurišić 's support of a union of Serbia and Montenegro , which ran counter to Drljević 's separatism . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Some of Đurišić 's troops escaped and travelled west . Some were killed by Partisan forces , who were to the south of their intended withdrawal route west to Slovenia . The majority , left without a leader , were integrated into Drljević 's Montenegrin National Army and withdrew towards the Austrian border . Portions of both groups were later captured in Slovenia by the Partisans . About 1 @,@ 000 of Đurišić 's Chetniks crossed into Austria but were forced to return to Yugoslavia , where some were killed by the Partisans near the Yugoslav – Austrian border . Most were taken to southern Slovenia , where they were killed and their bodies thrown into deep <unk> in the Kočevski Rog area . 
 According to Tomasevich , the killing of the Montenegrin Chetniks by the Partisans at Kočevski Rog was an " act of mass terror and brutal political surgery " similar to that carried out by the Chetniks earlier in the war . It was partly an act of revenge for the mass terror carried out by the Chetniks against the Partisans and pro @-@ Partisan segments of the population and partly to stop the Chetniks from continuing an armed struggle against the communists , perhaps with Western assistance . Less than a quarter of the force that began with Đurišić in Montenegro , and other Chetniks who joined him during the journey north and west , survived . A few weeks later , Drljević , who had fled to Austria , was discovered by followers of Đurišić and killed . Đurišić was one of the most able Yugoslav Chetnik leaders ; his fighting skills were respected by his allies and opponents . 
 = = Commemoration controversy = = 
 The Serbian diaspora in the United States set up a monument dedicated to Pavle Đurišić at the Serbian cemetery in Libertyville , Illinois . The management and players of the football club Red Star Belgrade visited it on 23 May 2010 . 
 In May 2002 , plans for a " Montenegrin Ravna Gora " memorial complex to be located near Berane were prepared . The complex was to be dedicated to Đurišić , who spent some of his youth in Berane and established his wartime headquarters there . In June 2003 , the Montenegrin Minister of Culture Vesna <unk> banned the construction of the monument , saying the Ministry of Culture had not applied for approval to erect it . The Association of War Veterans of the National Liberation Army ( <unk> ) objected to the construction of the monument , saying Đurišić was a war criminal who was responsible for the deaths of many colleagues of the veterans association and 7 @,@ 000 Muslims . The Muslim Association of Montenegro condemned the construction and stated , " this is an attempt to rehabilitate him and it is a great insult to the children of the innocent victims and the Muslim people in Montenegro " . On 4 July 2002 , the Montenegrin government forbade the unveiling of the monument , stating that it " caused public concern , encouraged division among the citizens of Montenegro , and incited national and religious hatred and intolerance " . A press release from the committee in charge of the monument 's construction said the actions taken by the government were " absolutely illegal and inappropriate " . On 7 July , the police removed the stand that had been prepared for the monument . 
 In 2011 , the Montenegrin Serb political party New Serb Democracy ( NOVA ) renewed efforts to build a monument ; they stated that Đurišić and other royal Yugoslav officers were " leaders of the 13 July uprising " and they " continued their struggle to liberate the country under the leadership of King Peter and the Government of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia " . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Spira ( Final Fantasy ) = 
 Spira is the fictional world of the Square role @-@ playing video games Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . Spira is the first Final Fantasy world to feature consistent , all @-@ encompassing spiritual and mythological influences within the planet 's civilizations and their inhabitants ' daily lives . The world of Spira itself is very different from the mainly European @-@ style worlds found in previous Final Fantasy games , being much more closely modeled on southeast Asia , most notably with respect to its vegetation , topography and architecture . 
 The creation of Spira includes distinct ethnic minorities including a portrayal of the fictional Al Bhed language that is prevalent throughout the game 's dialogue . The backstory and concept behind the dark religious themes of Final Fantasy X were a central theme to the story and their ultimate resolution was well received . The popularity of the Eternal Calm video served as the impetus of Square Enix to do Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 to make their first direct sequel in video game form and depict the evolution of <unk> society after religious and political upheaval results in new factions and instability in the world . Spira and its inhabiting characters have been featured in several other Square Enix works including Dissidia Final Fantasy , Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy and three games within the Kingdom Hearts series and Theatrhythm Final Fantasy . 
 There have been numerous academic essays on the game 's presentation , narrative and localization aspects . Washburn writes that mastering the game comes with the mastering of the cultural knowledge of Spira to unlock skills and abilities . O 'Hagan writes on the localization of the games that impact the game experience , detailing alterations to the script and dialogue with modifications , additions and omissions . Another aspect was that the presentation of Spira without an overworld view can be considered a pioneer in 3D role @-@ playing game maps . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 In speaking about the inspiration behind Spira , producer Yoshinori Kitase recounted that players had found fault with the science fiction atmosphere of Final Fantasy VII and Final Fantasy VIII , instead desiring a " simple fantasy world " . To Kitase , the word " fantasy " did not indicate a purely medieval European setting , so he intentionally set out with the objective of redefining the stereotype held in players ' minds . Nomura identified the South Pacific , Thailand , and Japan as major influences on the cultural and geographic design of Spira , particularly in regard to the geographic locations of Besaid and Kilika . Yusuke Naora , the art director , noted that during the concept stage many people on the project were interested in Asian themes including Nojima and Kitase . For Zanarkand , the Uzbek city of Samarkand has been cited as an inspiration . 
 Nomura said that Spira deviates from the worlds of past Final Fantasy games most notably in the level of detail incorporated , something he has expressed to have made a conscious effort to maintain during the design process . Fumi Nakashima , the sub @-@ character chief designer , concentrated on giving characters from different regions and cultures distinct styles of clothing . Nakashima wanted the machine @-@ oriented society of the Al Bhed to stand out and had them wear masks and goggles to give them a strange and eccentric appearance . 
 Koji Sugimoto , main programmer for characters , said that the complexities of the PlayStation 2 hardware made mastering it difficult , but more rewarding because the details on Yuna 's sleeves to the depiction of shine and shadow could be rendered more realistically . Final Fantasy X was the first game that allowed for 3 @-@ D model rendering of backgrounds that increased the presentation , including small details like grass blowing in the wind and cloud movement . Takayoshi Nakazato decided to abandon the typical world map concept for a more realistic depiction . Final Fantasy X 's spatial presentation of Spira is tied to progression ; with a player 's progress being marked through the panoramic introduction and depiction of the area upon first entry . Chiharu <unk> , the supervising sound editor , commented that the transition in sound from one environment to the next was done seamlessly in order to mimic the natural surroundings of these environments as the player moved through them . 
 The decision to create Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 came after fan response to the " Eternal Calm " in the International Edition of Final Fantasy X which depicted events two years following Yuna 's final battle . The dark religious theme of the first game was concluded and the cultural changes were explored as the people of Spira , the focus on fashion that " reflects their state of mind " . Toriyama believes the most important element incorporated into Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 was the " peaceful world of Spira achieved in FFX and unification of characters ' state of mind . " Kitase identified Final Fantasy X 's theme as " independence from the ties of law and customs " and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 's theme is about " the changes that occurred from the chaos after gaining that independence . " 
 For Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 many pop culture references were used , including Charlie 's Angels and with the transformation of the dress spheres being a reference to the magical girl genre of anime . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Square Enix chose to update Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 's graphics for a remastered release in high @-@ definition . With a production cycle longer than two years , the graphics were not merely upscaled to higher resolutions and feature updated models and textures . Kitase commented that he wanted to excite new and returning players and added more depth to do so and opened up the possibility of further remasters based on reception . Many views could not simply be reframed to 16 : 9 because that would reveal characters waiting for their cues off @-@ screen , so the remastering team performed a lot of redrawing and additions to the visuals . 
 = = Setting = = 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 The main landmass of Spira is surrounded by small islands , including : Besaid , a tropical town serving as the origin of Yuna 's pilgrimage ; Kilika , a larger island featuring dense jungles and numerous conflicts during the games ; and the desert island of Bikanel , which is also the location of the Al Bhed 's headquarters — " Home " . The ruins of <unk> Temple are on an island to the south of the Spira mainland ; this is where Tidus begins his journey in Spira . 
 The mainland of Spira is where the bulk of Final Fantasy X takes place . The southernmost location of the mainland , Luca , is a large city home to Spira 's pastime , Blitzball . North of Luca is the mountainous area of Djose , which features a Yevonite temple . Connecting Luca and Djose are several roads : the Mi 'ihen Highroad , a historical path that features Chocobos for transportation ; the Mushroom Rock Road , home of the failed operation to defeat Sin ; and Djose Highroad , a rocky path that forks north into the Moonflow and east to Djose Temple . 
 The Moonflow is a large river running through the heart of Spira , featuring <unk> rides , ancient ruins , and a high density of pyreflies . A path from the Moonflow leads to Guadosalam , home of the Guado race and the gateway to the " Farplane " ( <unk> , <unk> , lit . " other world " ) . North of Guadosalam are the Thunder Plains , which are the site of a never @-@ ending thunderstorm made safe by lighting rods calibrated by the Al Bhed . The Thunder Plains lead into Macalania , a sparkling forest complemented by a frozen lake and a Yevonite temple . 
 Bevelle , the spiritual center of the Yevon religion , lies on a thin strip of land slightly north of Macalania . The city is built as a series of layers , with the headquarters of Yevon located at the top . The Via <unk> , located beneath Bevelle , serves as an oubliette for outcasts . Further north are the Calm Lands , a series of plains that have been the site of numerous battles in Spira 's history ; the Cavern of the Stolen Fayth , an equally historical area ; and Mt . Gagazet , home of the <unk> . Lastly , the sacred city of Zanarkand is on the northern tip of the <unk> mainland , reduced to ruins by Sin one thousand years before the events of Final Fantasy X. 
 Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 features several changes to the locations of Spira . The Djose Temple , abandoned by a faltering Yevon after Final Fantasy X , becomes the headquarters of the Machine Faction ; likewise , the Youth League sets up their headquarters at the site of the failed operation on the Mushroom Rock Road . Bevelle remains the capital of the New Yevon faction , although the game introduces a large , technological area hidden beneath the city . Several new enterprises have been started , including : a new pastime in Luca called Sphere Break ; a group of entertainers at the Moonflow ; a tourist service at the Zanarkand Ruins ; and machina transportation in favor of Chocobos on the Mi 'ihen Highroad . Lastly , the death of the Aeons at the end of Final Fantasy X causes the Macalania forest and lake to melt , sinking the former Yevon temple and destroying the forest 's life . Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 also introduces floating ruins atop Mt . Gagazet , and previously unexplored caverns throughout Spira . 
 = = = Creatures and races = = = 
 Although it is predominantly populated by humans , Spira features a variety of races . The people of Spira mainly reside in small towns and villages and cities like Bevelle and Luca . The Al Bhed is a unique ethnic group which plays an important role in the storyline and world of the games with distinctive green eyes with spiral @-@ shaped pupils . The culture and conflicts of the Al Bhed permeate the games . The main characters Rikku , is Al Bhed , and Yuna is part Al Bhed on her mother 's side ; and assistance in gained through a cast of supporting Al Bhed character 's , prevalent in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . With the collapse of the teachings of Yevon and the wider acceptance of machina at the end of Final Fantasy X , prejudice against the Al Bhed seems to have eased significantly by the time of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , though it is still present . 
 The Al Bhed speak their own ' language ' which is really just a substitution cipher of English , a system of transposing certain letters for others ; however , within the game world , it is intended to be an actual language . The original Japanese version of the cipher uses the syllable @-@ based kana system of writing where each symbol represents a combination of " consonant + vowel " or simply a vowel . Certain keywords are not translated into Al Bhed in the game , to give the impression of use of loanwords compared to modern foreign languages . Most keywords are proper nouns , but some common nouns also are not translated , such as " fiend " ( e.g. Y fiend ! Eh <unk> <unk> ! [ A fiend ! In human disguise ! ] ) . Alexander Smith , decided to " map common phonemes in English to common phonemes in Welsh " and gave preference to Welsh pronunciations , but had to work with new diphthongs to maintain consistency in the Al Bhed language . 
 Several other races are found throughout Spira , including the Guado , the Hypello and the Ronso races . The Guado are an arboreal humanoid race with long limbs and fingers , pale skin , and wild , tangled hair . The Guado are the keepers of the entryway to the Farplane , where the dead are sent and have the unique ability to " smell the deceased " and other abilities related to pyreflies . The Ronso are a race of blue furred , lion @-@ like humanoids who live on Mt . Gagazet , which they consider sacred and guard fiercely . Ronso are tall and formidable warriors with strong sense of honor and loyalty . A subplot of Final Fantasy X involves Kimahri Ronso 's conflict with his social status that results in his leadership of the Ronso in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . The Hypello are a docile , amphibious race with blue skin and live primarily in and around the area of the Moonflow . Though extremely quick and agile swimmers , they are the only race in Spira that does not participate in Blitzball tournaments . The male Hypello are all voiced by John <unk> . 
 Spira also features various animal species and fictional species , such as the gigantic <unk> and the chocobo that are used primarily for transport purposes . Most other unusual creatures encountered in Final Fantasy X are " fiends " , monsters created from the restless dead by Pyreflies to devour the living . Aeons and the unsent are also forms created by pyreflies . Sin , the bringer of destruction , is a powerful fiend that is made of high density pyreflies ; it can control gravitation forces to replenish its strength and even fly . Sin 's high concentration of pyreflies effect the pyreflies present in the bodies of those present , it is known as " Sin 's toxin . " Despite the Final Summoning , the core of Sin , is not destroyed and Sin " reborn " after a time . 
 = = = Fictional history = = = 
 Spira 's fictional history centers around an ancient war a thousand years prior to the start of the game that has Yevon preserve the memory of Zanarkand . Yevon 's people became the fayth to create this manifestation and Yevon made himself into Sin to protect it . A religious faith is built on atonement and sacrifice , creating a spiral of death that runs throughout Spira 's history . A ritual known as " the Final Summoning " would provide brief <unk> from Sin 's terror , called the " Calm " ( <unk> , <unk> , lit . " calm time " ) . After completing a pilgrimage the summoner and a guardian would defeat Sin by sacrificing their lives to bring about the Calm . 
 In the one thousand years that followed Sin 's creation and the destruction of Zanarkand , Spira became a rustic land , almost completely devoid of large cities and higher civilization . Due to the actions of Sin , and the Yevon ban on machina , few territories reached larger than hamlet size , as they were destroyed by Sin and their populations decimated before they were able to develop . The only cities left larger than small villages were Luca , which houses the only blitzball stadium in Spira , and Bevelle , the center of the temples of Yevon . Yuna and her guardians break the cycle and bring about the " Eternal Calm " . 
 As a result of the events in Final Fantasy X , in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 the teachings of Yevon were no longer deemed valid , and association with machina and the Al Bhed people no longer sacrilegious . <unk> in general had a positive outlook with the onset of the Eternal Calm . New political groups fought for power the largest being the Youth League , the New Yevon Party , the Machine Faction . Yuna ultimately restores peace and saves Spira a second time with multiple endings based on the player 's performance . 
 = = = Mythos = = = 
 In the world of Final Fantasy X and its sequel , many supernatural elements influence events in the fictional world of Spira , defining the life of the planet 's inhabitants . Magic , spiritual energy , and the power of memories are heavily intertwined , and their effects manifest in a number of situations , including sporting events , religious practices , technology , and even in some of the native wildlife of the planet . The most popular pastime is Blitzball . The depiction of Sin as a " existence that agonizes the world " and as a " disaster with form " plays an important role in Spira 's everyday life throughout Final Fantasy X. In Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , the population of Spira pursues additional <unk> including attending concerts and a coin @-@ collecting fad called Sphere Break . 
 In Spira , when a person dies suddenly and unexpectedly , his or her life force , manifested as pyreflies , must be released from the body and sent to the Farplane , the final resting place of departed souls . If the sending is not performed , the body 's spirit may remain trapped in the physical plane and take on the form of a fiend . A spirit of the dead may resist the transformation into a fiend , even when not sent and remain amongst the living , they are " unsent " . The unsent play a prominent role in the storyline and mythos , including the playable character Auron and other characters including Maester <unk> Guado , Shuyin , and Lady Yunalesca . 
 = = = = Pyreflies = = = = 
 Pyreflies are a mysterious , naturally occurring phenomenon that heavily influence the events of Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , as well as the world of Spira at large . Heavily prevalent throughout Spira , these " bundles of life energy " are closely associated with death and other spiritual events and entities by the people of Spira . At high concentrations , Pyreflies are capable of recording memories , sights and sounds . Pyreflies are also associated with many commonplace technological innovations including sphere @-@ shaped recording devices and large , suspended spherical conglomerations of congealed water ( called " sphere pools " ) that serve as the playing field for blitzball games . The pyreflies are also a source of raw energy to empower the giant machina , Vegnagun . Shinra of the Gullwings suggests that the life energy flowing through Spira on the Farplane could possibly be harnessed for the purpose of supplying electricity to a city . In interviews published in the Final Fantasy X Ultimania Ω and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Ultimania guidebooks , scenario writer Kazushige Nojima and producer Yoshinori Kitase revealed that Final Fantasy VII and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 share a plot @-@ related connection , in which the Shin @-@ ra corporation in Final Fantasy VII is founded on another planet after about one thousand years , after space travel became possible , by descendants of Shinra of the Gullwings in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . This connection was conceived of only after Final Fantasy X was already finished and realized in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 riding on the success of the original game and is not reflected in the gameplay or storylines of Final Fantasy VII or Final Fantasy X. 
 = = = = Religion = = = = 
 Religion is an important part of life for many of the peoples of Spira , with a large majority of the population describing themselves as " <unk> . " Though by the end of Final Fantasy X some people had begun to question them , nevertheless the teachings of Yevon were millennium @-@ old and heavily influential . The Yevonite clergy taught that Sin was a divine punishment set upon the people for their pride in the use of machines . As a result , the temples forbade the use of modern technology , and promoted a culture of atonement for past sins in the hopes of appeasing sin . 
 While the Yevon church forbids most machina including weapons , it retains machina weapons to ensure its dominance . The Al Bhed are seen as dangerous to the Yevon clergy because they use machina and pose a threat to the church 's uncontested control of Spira . The church retains its power by role in using the Final Summoning which results in the sacrifice of the summoner and her guardian to prevent its secrets from being divulged . Though Yevon set up Operation Mi ’ <unk> to instill further loyalty to the teachings by making the Crusaders use machina that would never win against Sin . By the end of Final Fantasy X , the Yevon religion was effectively disbanded once evidence of its corruption was discovered , and its remaining priests volunteered the truth . Half a year later , the moral teachings of Yevon were revitalized in the form of the New Yevon Party , later led in Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 by Praetor Baralai . Although technically a splinter group of Yevon , the New Yevon party was not a religion , but a simple philosophy , their motto and position on Spira 's advancement being " One thing at a time . " 
 In Final Fantasy X the " Hymn of the Fayth " ( <unk> , Inori no Uta , lit . ' song of prayer ' ) is an important song . Its fictional history started as a song of defiance turned scripture and has numerous variations that is played throughout the game throughout Yuna 's journey ; primarily as the music of the temples . Though the Hymn 's words apparently have no discernible meaning within the context of Spira , the lyricist and scenario writer , Kazushige Nojima , composed a small puzzle with the lyrics , using Japanese syllables . When properly deciphered , they form sentences that translates thus : Pray to Yu Yevon . Dream , fayth . Forever and ever , grant us prosperity . The hymn was composed and arranged by Nobuo Uematsu and Masashi Hamauzu . 
 Final Fantasy X 's negative depiction of organized religion has been compared to the Catholic Church and the <unk> of organized religion in general with the ultimate battle against a god . Stark writes that the game is a thesis on religion and the final battle with Yu Yevon offers a discourse on how to defeat it , by " let [ ting ] it die a slow death , murder it with sheer force , or utilize one ’ s knowledge of the ( game ) world to give it no power to stand on " . The Game Theorists add additional concepts , going further as to cite Final Fantasy as " anti @-@ religion " . 
 = = = = Aeons and fayth = = = = 
 The fayth ( <unk> , <unk> , lit . " prayer child " ) are humans who willingly give up their lives to have their souls sealed in statues and commune with summoners with whom they have established a mental link . This link grants a summoner access to a fayth 's dreams and enables him or her to physically realize those dreams as aeons ( <unk> , <unk> , lit . " summon beast " ) , powerful creatures which may be employed to aid the summoner in battle or in a time of special need . During the events of Final Fantasy X , the fayth of the aeon Bahamut serves as the chosen representative of the fayth as a collective . The fayth aids High Summoner Yuna and her guardians in bringing the spiral of death to an end , which results in their own passing . In Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , the fayth return in their aeon forms , this time having been overcome by the despair and malice of Shuyin , rendering them his unwilling puppets of chaos . Yuna and her allies free both the fayth and Shuyin from the darkness that has consumed them . Ten aeons are identified in Final Fantasy X : <unk> , Ifrit , Shiva , Ixion , Bahamut , Anima , Yojimbo and the three Magus Sisters . The game builds on mythological figures through the inclusion of the aeons , such as the Arabic Ifrit , the Hindu deity Shiva and even the Jungian figure Anima and the demon <unk> . Wilder wrote on the Jungian analysis of Anima and tied Square Enix 's depiction of the Aeon as both a representation of Seymour 's corruption . Wilder analyzes the chained and blinded depiction of the figure that is Seymour 's mother and tying the form to her bound to servitude to Seymour in his descent into madness . 
 = = = = Militant factions = = = = 
 The Crusaders ( formerly known as the " Crimson Blades " ) were a loosely @-@ knit army that existed to protect towns and temples from Sin . The group was founded by Lord Mi 'ihen , who made a journey to Bevelle 800 years ago to calm the <unk> ' fears that he was assembling an army to conquer them . Mi 'ihen managed to win their trust , and the Crimson Blades were thereafter inducted into the Yevon clergy as the Crusaders . The road Mi 'ihen had walked was renamed the " Mi 'ihen Highroad " in his honor . Unlike guardians , Crusaders are directly related to the temples . No non @-@ Yevonite is permitted to serve as a Crusader , although there are unofficial chapters composed entirely of people who have been excommunicated . All of the Crusaders were excommunicated , however , when they set up Operation Mi 'ihen , a joint Crusader @-@ Al Bhed attempt to destroy Sin with a giant machina weapon . The operation failed and the Crusaders were largely eradicated in the process . A group known as the Crimson Squad was also formed around Operation Mi 'ihen . Three candidates survived the final exercise ; Baralai , Nooj and Gippal , all of whom would eventually lead one of the three political factions during the events of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Spira is the world of Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , but elements of its world and characters have been included in other Final Fantasy media . For Dissidia Final Fantasy and its sequel / remake Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy the characters Tidus , Yuna , Jecht and an area known as The Dream 's End ( <unk> , Yume no Owari ) were featured . The Dreams ' End shares similarities to the final area of Final Fantasy X complete with a large replica of Jecht 's sword in the center . Final Fantasy X 's Tidus and Wakka are supporting characters in Kingdom Hearts , Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories and Kingdom Hearts coded . Auron makes an appearance in Kingdom Hearts II as a supporting team member and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 's main cast of Yuna , Rikku and Paine appear also make an appearance as supporting characters . Tidus , Auron and Yuna are also playable characters in Theatrhythm Final Fantasy . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 In Imagined History , Fading Memory : Mastering Narrative in Final Fantasy X , Washburn writes that Final Fantasy X " makes the relationship of memory , history , and the struggle for control of knowledge a central element of both its gameplay and its narrative . " Washburn gives a synopsis of the game 's alternate history and describes Spira 's development as " evok [ ing ] a number of culturally vital discourses in Japan that the designers of the game drew on : the modernist aesthetics of evanescence , the loss of faith and belief in a society where technology and religion clash , the desire for a dream realm of memories as the source of an alternative history , and the nostalgic desire for the sublime experience of the annihilation of the past and the completion of history . " Washburn uses Final Fantasy X and the analysis of its narrative to make the case for academic study of the medium and counter the critical views held by detractors like Espen <unk> , summarizing that " The ability to complete the game requires mastering not only the instrumental controls needed to acquire and perfect game skills but also the narrative itself , the cultural knowledge of Spira that facilitates the acquisition of skills and abilities . " In Languages Of Navigation Within Computer Games Flynn asserts that Final Fantasy X 's navigation is a representative and symbolic language , writing that " [ a ] lthough Final Fantasy X establishes itself through the opening cut scene as narrative based , it becomes clear that a poetic and mythic experience of space rather than a cinematic sense of space is in operation . " 
 The localization process of Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 was analyzed as a case study by Mangiron and O 'Hagan to highlight the liberties of localization . Technical limitations include localizing over a thousand weapons with unique names that must be conveyed in 15 characters yet have no English equivalent as in the case of <unk> ( <unk> , Meaning " Beauties of nature " Literally : " flower , bird , wind , and moon " ) that became " Painkiller " in English . Other cases include the addition of accents as in the case of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 's O <unk> , a merchant , who speaks Cockney despite no accent being present in Japanese . Also included were references to Lollapalooza and humorous references to speech , with Rikku 's verb conjugation of a noun having been modified for English audiences . Other differences like Sano 's name being changed to <unk> for the English version , with Mangiron and O 'Hagan noting a possible issue with the Spanish meaning of " Sano " as " healthy " in stark contradiction to <unk> 's obese appearance . Mangiron and O 'Hagan conclude that these changes and <unk> by addition result in <unk> instead of just translation . Using the games as a case study , Mangiron and O 'Hagan highlight that the freedom to modify , omit or add content results in the traditional concept of fidelity being discarded to maintain the " game experience " . 
 In the Marie Curie <unk> on the Challenges of <unk> Translation , Minako O ’ Hagan expanded on the localization issue including the extreme rewrite of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 's theme song 1000 words and the International Edition using " in @-@ game dialogues are produced fresh to match the dubbed American version , instead of using the original Japanese script . " O 'Hagan noted a point of contention raised by fans were Yuna 's final words to Tidus in Final Fantasy X as " Thank you " ( <unk> ) being translated in English as " I love you " ; this translation would extend to the European release and the voice dialogue would be in English . Other academic publications refer to the localization process of Final Fantasy X including <unk> and Marco . 
 Final Fantasy X 's depiction of Spira set a new standard with the traversing of real @-@ time 3D environments instead of an overworld map , making the portrayal of Spira a pioneer in 3 @-@ D RPG maps . 
 = Silent Hill : Origins = 
 Silent Hill : Origins , known as Silent Hill : Zero ( Japanese : サイレントヒル ゼロ , Hepburn : <unk> Zero ) in Japan , is a survival horror video game for the PlayStation Portable developed by Climax Studios . It was published by Konami Digital Entertainment worldwide in late 2007 , beginning in early November with the United Kingdom . A port for the PlayStation 2 was released worldwide in early 2008 , beginning in March with North America , and it is available on the PlayStation Network in Europe . The fifth installment in the Silent Hill series , Origins is a prequel to the first game ( 1999 ) . Set in the series ' eponymous , fictional American town , Origins follows trucker Travis Grady as he searches for information about a girl whom he rescued from a fire . Along the way , he unlocks his repressed childhood memories . Gameplay uses a third @-@ person perspective , and emphasizes combat , exploration , and puzzle @-@ solving , similar to the previous installments . 
 Origins was developed by the United Kingdom branch of Climax Studios , after it was transferred from the United States branch , who faced issues with the game engine and the vision of the game ; the script , monsters , and level design were redone , and aspects of Origins ' atmosphere and gameplay intentionally replicated those of the first Silent Hill game . Origins was generally positively reviewed , although some reviewers wrote that it followed the formula of the series too closely and failed to add anything new . Its PlayStation 2 port received a lower aggregate score , with criticism directed towards its visuals . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The objective of Silent Hill : Origins is to guide player character Travis Grady as he searches the monster @-@ filled town of Silent Hill for information about a girl he rescues from a burning house . The game uses a third @-@ person perspective which it alternates with fixed camera angles . Following the gameplay formula of previous Silent Hill games , Origins primarily revolves around combat , exploration , and puzzle @-@ solving . Typical gameplay of Origins consists of alternating between reality and its darker and dilapidated counterpart , the " Other World " , to obtain keys and objects needed to solve a riddle . Travis carries a flashlight and indicates the direction of a nearby usable item , while his portable radio alerts the player to the presence of nearby monsters by emitting static . Often , actions performed in one dimension will affect the other ; for example , raising a prop on the stage in the theater results in a similar reaction in the Other World . Once solved , the riddle leads to an encounter with a boss , whose defeat unlocks a new area . Completion of the game results in unlocking special items or alternative outfits for Travis depending on various accomplishments . 
 For combat , in addition to using his fists ( the first Silent Hill game where unarmed combat is possible ) , Travis accumulates a range of weapons throughout the town : firearms , melee weapons , and one @-@ shot items usable in close combat ; the latter two are breakable . Although one @-@ shot items can be used to quickly kill some of the monsters encountered early on , Travis is vulnerable while performing this action to damage from quick enemies or those with long @-@ ranged attacks . Origins also introduces the " grapple " system , a quick time event activated when a monster grabs him . Should he escape , no damage is done to either him or the monster . The status of his " health " is indicated in the inventory , since the game does not feature a heads @-@ up display ; however , when his health is critical , the edges of the screen throb red , and his heartbeat is heard . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 A prequel to the first Silent Hill installment , Silent Hill : Origins takes place several years before the events of the first game . Origins is set in the eponymous , foggy , and rural small town located in the northeastern United States . The town is characterized by the " Other World " , a supernatural location periodically encountered by the protagonists of the series . Most frequently assuming the form of the town , the Other World causes the characters to experience delusions and various symbols from their unconscious . 
 Origins introduces Travis Grady , a trucker with a troubled past who suffers from nightmares . Returning characters from the first installment are Alessa <unk> , a young girl who possesses supernatural powers ; licensed practical nurse Lisa Garland , who has a drug addiction and dreams of being an actress instead of a nurse ; physician Michael Kaufmann , who supplies Lisa with illegal drugs ; and Alessa 's mother , Dahlia Gillespie , a member of the town 's cult which plans to bring its malevolent god into this world . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Driving past Silent Hill as a shortcut , Travis swerves his truck to avoid hitting a spirit manifestation of Alessa . While following the spirit manifestation , he stumbles upon a burning house and rescues the real Alessa , who was immolated in a ritual to impregnate her with the cult 's god . Losing consciousness outside the house , he awakens in the town and resolves to learn if she survived . During his journey , Travis unlocks his repressed childhood memories and defeats monstrous forms of his parents : his mother had been committed to a local mental institution after attempting to kill him , and his father had killed himself , unable to live with the guilt of having his wife condemned . Additionally , Travis kills the Butcher , a monster that has been slaughtering other monsters . 
 Travis continues following Alessa 's spirit manifestation , which refuses to speak to him , and gradually collects pieces of an unknown pyramid @-@ shaped object ; after collecting all of the pieces , he assembles them to form the Flauros , an artifact which contains a trapped demon and can be used to amplify thought . Alessa 's spirit manifestation uses the completed Flauros to increase her powers and free herself from Dahlia 's spell , which had inhibited her abilities . Dahlia reveals that the cult plans to use Alessa to give birth to its god , before leaving to take part in the ritual . Travis heads to the cult 's ritual grounds , and sees members of the cult , including Kaufmann , surrounding Alessa 's burned body . Incapacitated by Kaufmann , Travis defeats and imprisons the demon within the Flauros in a dream @-@ like state . 
 Three endings are available . In the " Good " ending , Alessa uses the Flauros to manifest a baby with half of her soul , stopping the ritual , and her spirit manifestation carries the baby to the outskirts of the town , seeing Travis off as he returns to his truck and cheerfully drives away from Silent Hill . Dialogue follows to reveal that the protagonist of the first game , Harry Mason , and his wife find and adopt the baby , naming her Cheryl , while Dahlia and Kaufmann plan to cast a spell to draw the other half of Alessa 's soul back to the town , setting the events of the first Silent Hill game in motion . In the " Bad " ending , Travis awakens strapped to a gurney and is injected with an unknown substance : he starts convulsing and has a series of visions in which he kills two people and his form is briefly replaced by that of the Butcher . The joke ending sees Travis leave with a grey alien and a dog in an unidentified flying object . 
 = = Development = = 
 At E3 2006 , Origins was announced as in development by Climax Studios , instead of by Konami 's Team Silent who had developed previous installments . The first previews of the game featured a departure from the third @-@ person view typical of the series to a Resident Evil 4 @-@ style camera angle , and an emphasis on action and combat to a greater degree than the previous installments in the series . In the previews , Travis had six weapons , divided equally between melee weapons and firearms . Additional changes included a laser sight for his pistol and an option for the player to barricade areas . At the time , the game was expected to be released in late 2006 . 
 Issues with the game 's engine and " a confused high @-@ level vision for the game " led the game 's production to be transferred from the team in the United States to another studio in the United Kingdom , to ensure the final product would be " a tighter , more focused game that will provide fans with the experience they want ... a Silent Hill experience " ; the release date was also pushed forward from winter 2006 to Q3 / Q4 2007 . The version of Origins that the United Kingdom development team received was intended to be a dark comedy inspired by the American television series Scrubs . Konami allowed the team to change the game , provided that the changes were done within the same budget and time frame ; Origins 's script , level design , and monsters were redone within a week by Sam Barlow . For Origins , the developers intentionally replicated aspects of gameplay and atmosphere from the first installment ; for example , the monsters behave more aggressively than those in previous installments , as a throwback to the first game . Later previews showed that the game had changed significantly and contained gameplay more in line with that found in the previous titles in the series . The changes were well received by video game journalists . On August 19 , 2007 , a demo of the game was leaked to internet download sites ; Climax promptly denied they were the source of the leaked content . 
 Origins was released for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) on November 6 , 2007 in North America , on November 16 , 2007 in Europe , on November 29 , 2007 in Australia , and on December 6 , 2007 in Japan . The Japanese release carried the alternate title Silent Hill Zero . On January 22 , 2008 , Konami officially confirmed that a PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) port was in development . The PS2 port was released in North America on March 5 , 2008 , while the United Kingdom and Australian releases followed on May 16 , 2008 , and May 23 , 2008 , respectively . It became available on the PlayStation Network for Europe on April 28 , 2014 . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Released as Silent Hill Zero Original Soundtracks , the musical score of Origins was composed by Akira Yamaoka , who had created the music of previous games in the series , and released in Japan on January 25 , 2008 , by Konami Music Entertainment , Inc . As Origins is a prequel , Yamaoka wished to imbue its music with the atmosphere of the first installment . Mary Elizabeth McGlynn provided vocals for four tracks , for which Joe Romersa wrote the lyrics . All three had previously worked together on the music of the fourth installment of the series ( 2004 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Most reviews for Silent Hill : Origins were positive ; its original release on the PSP received a Metacritic aggregate score of 78 out of 100 . GameDaily wrote that Origins " impressively brings all the elements we love about the Silent Hill franchise to a portable format that works wonderfully . " Shane Bettenhausen of 1UP.com concluded , " Sure , it 's predictable , conventional , and a little bit short , not to mention ill @-@ suited for brief pick @-@ up @-@ and @-@ play sessions on the bus , but we 're encouraged to see developers making an original , console @-@ quality experience for PSP . " According to Kristan Reed of Eurogamer , " No doubt mindful of remaining faithful to the series ' legacy , Climax pays such close attention to the ingredients of the first three Silent Hill games that it 's basically an unapologetic homage to them . " While stating that Origins would appeal to fans for its story that adds to the series ' mythos , Game Informer added , " Unfortunately , the game has fallen into something like a rut in most other areas and less fanatical gamers won 't be as forgiving of its faults . " 
 The storyline was met with generally mixed feelings from reviewers . According to Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot , the premise was unoriginal and <unk> , detracting from Travis ' appeal as a protagonist , although he felt that the game provided new material for fans to analyze . PALGN 's Mat Keller wrote that the Origins ' " blatantly obvious " subtext failed to affect the player , in contrast to the subtext of previous installments . 1UP.com stated that while Origins suffered from heavy foreshadowing and predictable plot twists and character development , it added to the backstory of the series . Conversely , Wesley Yin @-@ Poole of VideoGamer.com described the storyline as " engrossing " . 
 Critics felt that the visual style was similar to those of the previous Silent Hill installments . Enjoying the visuals , Jeff Haynes of IGN wrote : " From the cluttered and junk strewn locations to the rusty , chaos filled doppelgangers of the alternate dimensions , everything feels like it 's been stripped from one of the other titles and shrunk down to the handheld . " Reviewers praised the graphics , the monster designs , the detailed environments , and atmosphere . However , some reviewers wrote that the character models could have been more detailed . 
 Gameplay drew a variety of reactions from " immersive " and " intriguing " , to formulaic . The puzzles were generally considered by critics as challenging and well @-@ done . The duration of the game was considered short , and reviewers criticized the spacing of the save points and absence of checkpoints . The game 's adherence to the formula of the Silent Hill series also drew criticism ; the opening comment of GameSpot 's review remarked that " this old fog needs to learn some new tricks " , and further detailed that the game provided " an entirely conventional adventure that relies on eight @-@ year @-@ old franchise hallmarks at the expense of anything truly new . " Some camera issues were noted , especially in tight corridors . Reviewers wrote that Origins had a greater emphasis on combat than previous installments , although reaction to the combat was generally negative . Some reviewers felt that the player was encouraged to avoid combat , due to a variety of gameplay factors , including the breakable melee weapons . On the other hand , GameSpy 's David Chapman stated that the readily available weapons made Travis too powerful . The inclusion of quick time events was not well received by reviewers , who felt that it added nothing appealing to the game . Additionally , the soundtrack was frequently praised as frightening , and a part of the game 's appeal . The PlayStation Official Magazine UK wrote : " Despite its small @-@ screen setting , Origins even manages a few genuine scares , mostly thanks to the first @-@ rate sound : this should only be played through headphones . " 
 The PS2 port was not as well received by reviewers , with a lower aggregate score of 70 out of 100 , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . The graphics of the port were considered by reviewers to be not as good as the PSP release and other installments in the series for the PS2 . Conversely , a reviewer for GameZone wrote that despite some technical issues with the graphics , the visuals of the port sufficed . Other issues with the port commented on by critics include the lack of manual camera control , the absence of a mini @-@ map or overall map for the more challenging areas , and no new bonus material for the port . 
 = The Seduction of Ingmar Bergman = 
 The Seduction of Ingmar Bergman is the 22nd album by American rock group Sparks , released in August 2009 . The duo 's first work in the radio musical or pop opera genre , the album is built around an imaginary visit to Hollywood by Swedish film director Ingmar Bergman in the mid @-@ 1950s . Its storyline focuses on the divides between European and American culture , between art and commerce . Unlike other Sparks albums , the work is conceived as a single piece , to be listened to as a whole , rather than a collection of stand @-@ alone songs . 
 The work was commissioned by Sveriges Radio Radioteatern , the radio drama department of Sweden 's national radio broadcaster . First released in the Swedish broadcast version in August 2009 , with an English @-@ language version following in November 2009 , it features a cast of Swedish and American actors and a variety of musical styles ranging from opera to vaudeville and pop . The album 's recording was a collaborative effort – while the music and English vocals were recorded by Sparks in the United States , the album 's Swedish vocals were recorded by Sveriges Radio in Stockholm , and then sent to the Maels via an FTP server . The album and its ambitious dramatic concept received favourable reviews , and the Mael brothers have said that they are planning both a live show and a film version of the musical . 
 = = Background = = 
 Sparks produced the album , their first in this genre , after it was commissioned as a radio musical by Sweden 's national broadcasting service , Sveriges Radio . The project was proposed to Sparks by Marie Wennersten of SR Radioteatern , the station 's radio drama department . Wennersten had become a Sparks fan after watching the duo perform in Sweden in 2004 : " I had never seen such energy and love from the audience . I thought the Södra Theatre was going to take off and fly away . I wrote to the Sparks fansite and thanked them for the experience . " Wennersten subsequently travelled to Los Angeles as a journalist , to attend and report on another Sparks concert . By that time , the idea of a collaboration had formed in her mind : " I always dreamed of dragging them into the radio world . " 
 Wennersten contacted Sparks when <unk> <unk> , the head of SR Radioteatern , decided that the station would produce a number of new musicals . She thought Sparks would be suitable for the format : " They are a bit extravagant ; they have a larger @-@ than @-@ life quality , and above all , they make music that is colourful enough for it not to feel like you miss a visual component . " Sparks were initially somewhat surprised by the invitation to write a musical for Swedish radio , and were hesitant to take on the project . However , after several months of persuasive effort from Wennersten , via e @-@ mail and telephone , they decided to accept the challenge . " We originally thought of it as a side project between albums , but once we started working on it , it took on a bigger life , " Sparks have said . " As Americans we have almost abandoned radio drama and it was truly exhilarating for us to work in a medium where the imagination of the listener is so integral a part of the work . Aside from our love of Bergman , we have a love of Orson Welles and his use of the medium of radio was something that inspired us in this work . " 
 Sveriges Radio stipulated that the work had to include a Swedish element . Singer Russell Mael told The National , " At first , we obviously thought of cars and Ikea . I ’ m joking . But the more profound , more lasting idea – being the film fans we are – was Ingmar Bergman . So we hit upon a fantasy situation of him going to Hollywood , which is obviously a lot more universal , too . " Before starting work on the musical , the Mael brothers decided to refresh their memories by looking at Bergman 's films again . " We were both really big film fans in university . At that time unless you only liked foreign film , and hated American ones , you weren ’ t cool " , Ron Mael told The Times . " There was a real kind of seriousness to [ Bergman ] . He actually addressed big things and was able to frame those in really pure , cinematic ways . Now those things are seen as being kind of pretentious . Everyone wants to be seen as though they don ’ t care about the big issues . " Commenting on the suitability of Bergman as the topic of a musical , Russell Mael told a Swedish newspaper , " In a way , he is the least appropriate person for a musical . We like the absurdity of it all . He was such a deep , intense person and the vast majority of his films are about really deep topics . But we did not want to ridicule him , we wanted to do something respectful that Bergman would have been able to appreciate . " 
 In writing a musical about film making in Hollywood , Sparks were also informed by their own past film projects . In the late 1980s and early 1990s , they had spent six years trying to get their film Mai , the Psychic Girl produced . Based on a Japanese manga comic , the film was at one time supposed to be directed by Tim Burton . Although the music had been completed , the film failed to materialise , an experience that coloured their portrayal of the studio head in The Seduction of Ingmar Bergman . Earlier , Sparks had worked with French director Jacques Tati on Confusion , another film project that remained uncompleted . Having had numerous meetings with Tati over the course of a year , they were aware that , like other great European directors , Tati had been wooed by Hollywood : " He showed me a letter from Paramount " , Ron Mael recalled . " He said : ‘ Oooh ! They take me to Hollywood and they have a limousine for me . ’ But it was kind of mocking of the whole similar situation to our fantasy Bergman thing . He could see Hollywood for what it was . " 
 Sveriges Radio gave Sparks free rein to develop the project : " Once we got the basic concept approved , we were able to work according to our own ideas . SR asked us to be as faithful to our own vision as possible . " In the end , Sparks felt it had been " a perfect project . It forced us out of our comfort zone . And it has proved to be a safer way to achieve creative success than any other in the history of Sparks . " 
 = = Storyline = = 
 The musical 's storyline explores the divisions between art and commerce and between European and American culture , dichotomies that have also shaped much of Sparks ' own career . Described as a " dark fairy tale " by Stephen Dalton in The Times – " The Wizard of Oz meets The Truman Show , with a light sprinkling of Life On Mars " – it is based on imaginary events in the career of Swedish film director Ingmar Bergman . 
 The story is set in the mid @-@ 1950s , shortly after Bergman 's award win at the 1956 Cannes Film Festival for Smiles of a Summer Night . After his return to Stockholm , Bergman feels compelled to go to a cinema and watch a Hollywood blockbuster movie . As he exits the cinema , he inexplicably finds himself transported to Hollywood , where a limo driver is waiting to take him to a film studio . The studio 's executives , who give Bergman a lavish welcome , are desperate to entice him to stay in Hollywood and make movies for them , the American way : " We 're not hicks , but we must deliver kicks . " 
 The studio bosses have booked a hotel room for Bergman , complete with a " Hollywood Welcoming Committee " – a hooker they hope will persuade him to accept their offer – and a limo shuttles Bergman from meeting to meeting . Visiting " The Studio Commissary " , he is brought face to face with the many European directors who went to make films in Hollywood : Billy Wilder , Fritz Lang , F. W. Murnau , Jacques Tourneur , Josef von Sternberg , and Alfred Hitchcock , all apparently happy to work in Hollywood : " Alfred Hitchcock , bless his soul , there chomping on a dinner roll , The Man Who Knew Too Much done twice , in Hollywood , done twice as nice " . Bergman is tempted by the prospect of secure funding for his film projects and feels he " must not be hasty " in rejecting the proposal . 
 The story develops into a Kafkaesque nightmare as Bergman , besieged by autograph hunters , finally decides that Hollywood is not for him . Unable to get an international line to call Sweden , he tries to escape on foot , pursued by hotel staff , police cars and helicopters " like an actor in a bad , big @-@ budget Hollywood action film " . He evades his captors and reaches the seashore , where he prays for deliverance and at last meets the angelic figure of Greta Garbo , who guides him " home to somewhere monochrome , but somewhere you will be a certain kind of free " . A circular plot device concludes and resolves the fantasy . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 A cast of Swedish and American actors contributed to the recording . While Sparks recorded the music in the United States , Wennersten oversaw the recording of the Swedish voice artists in Stockholm . Translation of the lyrics was also handled in Sweden : " Since I do not speak Swedish , I will never know how they managed , " Russell Mael said , expressing his appreciation for the efforts of everyone involved to translate the tone and spirit of the Maels ' original text into Swedish lyrics . Sparks and Wennersten communicated mainly via an FTP server , with Sparks sending Wennersten their musical material , and Wennersten sending the edited Swedish voice recordings back to Sparks . Sparks were very pleased with the results of the collaboration , and the fact that Swedish actor Jonas Malmsjö , playing Bergman , had starred in several Bergman productions , enabling him to bring this personal experience to his portrayal of Bergman . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 The album mixes a variety of musical styles , from classical piano and opera , with full orchestral backing , to polka , vaudeville , jazz , pop and rock , and features both song and spoken @-@ word elements . Singer Russell Mael 's falsetto vocals remain a prominent feature , while Ron Mael makes his vocal debut in the roles of the limo driver and Hollywood tour guide . Besides Jonas Malmsjö providing Bergman 's voice , Elin <unk> , one of Bergman 's favourite actresses in the latter stages of his career , appears in the role of Greta Garbo . Sparks drummer Tammy Glover appears as The Hollywood Welcoming Committee , while opera singer Rebecca <unk> plays a Hollywood actress . 
 Structurally , the album is not a collection of stand @-@ alone songs , but a 64 @-@ minute piece of music composed of 24 plot @-@ driven subsections . The music references the band 's own discography at various points , evoking echoes of their earlier records – " sly winks to fans , each with their favourite era of Sparks in mind " . The BBC review stated that the album was " steeped in the same arch humour and orchestral sweep that guided the likes of 2006 ’ s Hello Young Lovers and last year ’ s Exotic Creatures of The Deep " , blending " jaunty songs and rib @-@ tickling tangents with a coherent narrative " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Swedish broadcast version of the musical , containing both Swedish and English lyrics , had its world première on 14 August 2009 , when it was performed at a special event in Stockholm 's Södra Theatre and broadcast on Sveriges Radio 's P1 channel . An exclusive edition of 1 @,@ 000 CDs was released by SR Records , the Sveriges Radio record label , at the same time . The band later released an English version of the work on their own Lil ' Beethoven label , initially only available as a double vinyl and digital download . BBC 6 Music and presenter Stuart Maconie hosted the English version 's première in London on 28 October 2009 , followed by a Q & A session with the Mael brothers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The album has been well received by critics . Simon Price in The Independent called it " an engrossing and enriching piece " when listened to as a whole . Craig Carson in PopMatters commented that the Sparks ' " wry humor and willingness to experiment with different formats continue to stretch the limits of pop music in ways many other acts simply do not attempt . The band continually seem able and willing to explore just about anything – they remain musicians blessedly apart from the herd . " Daryl Easlea , writing for Record Collector , commented in a similar vein : " Only Sparks could do this . A 64 @-@ minute 24 @-@ song cycle commissioned for Swedish radio about Ingmar Bergman . [ ... ] Obscure , of course – delightfully warm , naturally ; it underlines Sparks ' greatness and importance . " Commenting on the portrayal of Bergman , Easlea stated , " Swedish actor Malmsjö plays Bergman with all the appropriate detached paranoia " ; he concluded his review by awarding the album a full five stars . 
 The Times said it was " a very <unk> undertaking – painstaking and slightly ludicrous – to make a musical about an art @-@ house film director , with a very complicated plot , for the radio ( even Rick Wakeman ’ s King Arthur on Ice had something to look at ) . " It said the orchestral arrangements by Ron Mael were " great , actually , recalling the skyscraper bustle of Bernstein and the triumphant fanfares of Michael Nyman " , and stated that " the central concept – pursue your own idea of art , regardless of whether anyone will buy it – seems to be their rule of thumb , too . And you can 't knock that . " The review by Stephen Dalton , also in The Times , found the " modernist musical backdrop " dominated by " electro @-@ orchestral fragments " " less seductive " and , " despite plenty of arch and witty lyrics " , regretted the scarcity of " memorable melodies or fully realised songs " . Dalton concluded that the work was " not wholly successful , perhaps , but still an <unk> barmy and glamorous affair " , and a " fascinating folly from two enduringly inventive oddballs " . 
 The BBC review stated fans hoping for " a fresh suite of crisp new Sparks songs " might be disappointed because " there are no tunes without the tale attached " , but added that " luckily , the tale is a good one " : the story of Hollywood corruption " is told masterfully , and builds to a dramatic conclusion that both condemns Hollywood and satirises its conventions with rapier @-@ sharp wit . " Dave Simpson in The Guardian said the piece , " best experienced as a whole " , was " not an idle fantasy , and emerges as a fascinating and powerful discourse on the struggle between art and commerce , and the destructive power of celebrity " , calling the musical " a bold , major work – as compelling and original as anything in their sporadically brilliant career . " 
 David Quantick in The Word commented that " musically , Seduction is awe @-@ inspiring in the way the Maels perfectly meld their current style – intense , repetitive beats and melodies ( there 's even a bit of squelching techno here ) and caustic , snappy lyrics – with the demands of an actual musical . " He called the album an " amazing record " , a " commissioned piece that not only does what it 's been asked to do , but transcends the brief and creates a genuinely exciting piece of music in its own right . " Andy Gill in The Independent gave The Seduction of Ingmar Bergman a maximum rating of five stars and included the record among his 20 albums of the year : " <unk> scripted , with that sly , knowing touch so typical of Sparks , it 's also scored with scrupulous intelligence , the arrangements drawing on a range of apt influences , from Kurt Weill to jazz , pop and rock , and the orchestrations ingeniously duplicitous , wistful and sinister , as the action dictates . It may well turn out to be the pinnacle of Sparks ' career , and certainly has an ambition well beyond the usual remit of popular culture . " 
 = = Musical and film versions = = 
 Sparks said in October 2009 that they were planning to turn the album into a live show and were in talks with Canadian film director Guy Maddin about a film version of the musical . They confirmed in a September 2010 interview on Michael Silverblatt 's Bookworm show that Maddin and actor Jason Schwartzman were on board , and that they were in the process of seeking funding for the project . 
 The world premiere of the live musical took place on June 25 at the 2011 Los Angeles Film Festival , starring Ron and Russell Mael from Sparks , Maddin , Finnish actor Peter Franzén as Bergman , Ann Magnuson as Greta Garbo , with Rebecca <unk> , Katie <unk> , and Tammy Glover reprising their roles from the album . Other actors included Nina <unk> , Jacob Sidney , Dean Menta , and Sal <unk> . <unk> at the festival to attract investor interest in the film project , the performance at the John Anson Ford Amphitheatre featured Maddin reading stage directions from the film 's screenplay . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Ron Mael and Russell Mael . 
 Note : The digital downloads were released as single tracks with a duration of 64 : 32 ( Swedish broadcast version ) and 64 : 33 ( English version ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Military career of L. Ron Hubbard = 
 The military career of L. Ron Hubbard saw the future founder of Scientology serving in the United States Armed Forces as a member of the Marine Corps Reserve and , between 1941 – 50 , the Navy Reserve . He saw active service between 1941 – 45 , during World War II , as a naval Lieutenant , junior grade and later as a Lieutenant . After the war he was mustered out of active service and resigned his commission in 1950 . 
 As with many other aspects of L. Ron Hubbard 's life , accounts of his military career are much disputed . His account of his military service later formed a major element of his public persona , as depicted by his Scientologist followers . The Church of Scientology presents Hubbard as a " much @-@ decorated war hero who commanded a corvette and during hostilities was crippled and wounded . " According to Scientology publications , he served as a " Commodore of Corvette squadrons " in " all five theaters of World War II " and was awarded " twenty @-@ one medals and palms " for his service . He was " severely wounded and was taken crippled and blinded " to a military hospital , where he " worked his way back to fitness , strength and full perception in less than two years , using only what he knew and could determine about Man and his relationship to the universe . " 
 However , his official Navy service records indicate that " his military performance was , at times , substandard " , that he was only awarded a handful of campaign medals and that he was never injured or wounded in combat and was never awarded a Purple Heart . Most of his military service was spent ashore in the continental United States on administrative or training duties . He briefly commanded two anti @-@ submarine vessels , the USS YP @-@ 422 and USS PC @-@ 815 , in coastal waters off Massachusetts , Oregon and California in 1942 and 1943 respectively . He was removed from command of both vessels and rated by his superiors as being unsuitable for independent duties and " lacking in the essential qualities of judgment , leadership and cooperation " . Although Hubbard asserted that he had attacked and crippled or sunk two Japanese submarines off Oregon while in command of the USS PC @-@ 815 , his claim was rejected by the commander of the Northwest Sea Frontier after a subsequent investigation . He was hospitalized for the last seven months of his active service , not with injuries but with an acute duodenal ulcer . 
 The Church of Scientology rejects the official record and insists that Hubbard had a second set of records that the U.S. Navy has concealed . According to the Church 's chief spokesman , if it was true that Hubbard had not been injured , " the injuries that he handled by the use of Dianetics procedures were never handled , because they were injuries that never existed ; therefore , Dianetics is based on a lie ; therefore , Scientology is based on a lie . " 
 = = Montana Army National Guard and US Marine Corps Reserve = = 
 Hubbard 's first military service was with the Montana Army National Guard , which he joined at the age of 16 in October 1927 while still at school , falsely stating that his age was 18 . Enlisting at the State Armory in his home town of Helena , Montana , he served as a private in the Headquarters Company of 163rd Infantry . In May 1930 , at the age of 19 , he joined the Marine Corps Reserve 20th Regiment , a training unit connected with George Washington University where he was a student from 1930 – 32 . 
 Hubbard attributed his service in the regiment to his need for " a little recreation . Life was dull . Fellow came up to me and he says , ' The Marine Reserves are organizing a twentieth regiment . Why don 't you come down ? ' " He made the dubious claim of being rapidly promoted to the rank of First Sergeant ; Hubbard later explained his unusually rapid promotion as being due to his unit being newly formed and his superiors being unable to " find anyone else who could drill . " He stated that he was rated ' excellent ' for military efficiency , obedience and sobriety . On October 22 , 1931 , Hubbard received an honorable discharge along with the annotation " not to be re @-@ enlisted . " 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Western Pacific service = = = 
 Hubbard joined the United States Navy during the summer of 1941 , a few months before the United States entered the Second World War . He applied in March 1941 and was commissioned as a Lieutenant , Junior Grade on July 19 , 1941 , entering permanent active duty in November . He specifically volunteered for " Special Service ( intelligence duties ) " , an assignation recorded on his commission papers . He spent only a brief time in this nominal role with the Office of Naval Intelligence . After four months working in public relations and at the US Hydrographic Office , he spent three weeks at the Third Naval District in New York training for the role of Intelligence Officer . Hubbard 's training was curtailed by the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 , and on December 18 he was sent to the Philippines via Australia . He was put ashore in Brisbane in January 1942 when his ship was re @-@ routed . He was ordered back to the United States aboard the transport vessel USS Chaumont the following month at the instigation of the US Naval Attaché to Australia , who cabled Washington to complain : 
 By assuming unauthorized authority and attempting to perform duties for which he has no qualifications , he became the source of much trouble ... This officer is not satisfactory for independent duty assignment . He is garrulous and tries to give impressions of his importance . He also seems to think he has unusual ability in most lines . These characteristics indicate that he will require close supervision for satisfactory performance of any intelligence duty . 
 Hubbard and the Church of Scientology presented a number of different accounts of his time in the western Pacific . In 1963 , Hubbard told Australian journalists that he had been " the only anti @-@ aircraft battery in Australia in 1941 – 42 ... There was me and a Thompson submachine gun ... I was a mail officer and I was replaced , I think , by a Captain , a couple of commanders and about 15 junior officers . " Hubbard stated on another occasion that he had been " one of the first officers back from the upper battle areas " and that he had " sent on my own authority , four cargo ships loaded to the gunwales with machine gun ammunition , rifle ammunition and quinine up to MacArthur . " When " Melbourne found out ... there were enough troops in the area so the danger was over , so I went home . I wrote myself some orders and reported back to the US . " According to the Church of Scientology , Hubbard was landed on the island of Java " in the closing days of February 1942 " to search for " stockpiled weapons and fast , shallow @-@ draft vessels . " He was cut off by invading Japanese " and was only able to escape the island after scrambling into a rubber raft and paddling out to meet an Australian destroyer . " Another Church of Scientology account describes Hubbard as " Senior Officer Present Ashore in Brisbane , Australia " and asserts that " his duties included counter @-@ intelligence and the organization of relief for beleaguered American forces on Bataan . It was in this latter capacity that he eventually saw action on the island of Java , and only eluded capture through a daring escape on a raft . In a 1956 lecture to Scientologists , Hubbard said : 
 I was flown in from the South Pacific as the first casualty to be shipped out of the South Pacific war back to the States . The war had been started in Pearl Harbor , and I 'd been down in the South Pacific and – a lot of things happened down there . And the outfits down there were pretty well wiped out , as you can remember before the US and Great Britain started to fight and go back in . All right . 
 Most of the guys that were shipped out of there who had been wounded , were shipped out by slow boat . And I didn 't , I wasn 't that seriously done in . I hooked a ride on the Secretary of the Navy 's plane ; produced the right set of orders ( I hope nobody ever kept them on file ) and got flown home . 
 In another lecture of the same year , Hubbard provided an alternative version of his return to the United States : 
 I picked up a telephone , called the Secretary of [ the ] Navy . See , and I said , " I 'm tired of this place . I 'd like to leave . " And he said , " Yeah . " I said , " Yeah , I 've got some important despatches . As a matter of fact , we 've got enough despatches here to practically sink the Japanese navy if they had to carry them . There 's a lot of traffic and stuff like that , and so forth . " So he sent his plane down and picked me up and flew me home . 
 The US Navy 's files do not record Hubbard spending any time on Java and do not show any evidence of wounds or injuries sustained in combat . 
 = = = Atlantic service : USS YP @-@ 422 and after = = = 
 Hubbard was posted to the Office of the Cable Censor in New York City after returning to the US at the end of March 1942 . As the office had recently ceased to be an organ of Naval Intelligence , his status was amended to Deck Officer . He was also promoted ( as part of a batch of other officers of the same grade ) on June 15 , 1942 to lieutenant , senior grade , the highest rank he was to hold during his active service . 
 In June 1942 he requested that he be assigned to sea duty in the Caribbean ; he was sent instead to the shipyard of George Lawley & Sons of Neponset , Massachusetts , where the fishing trawler MV Mist was being converted for military use as a naval yard patrol ( YP ) vessel . The navy commandeered numerous fishing vessels and redesignated them as YP boats , tasked with defending coastal waters against enemy submarines and delivering food and equipment to military personnel offshore ; they were particularly prized for having refrigeration units . The vessel was commissioned as the USS YP @-@ 422 on July 28 , 1942 , having been refitted as a freighter armed with a 3 @-@ inch deck gun and two .30 @-@ caliber machine guns . In August , the YP @-@ 422 put to sea from the Boston Navy Yard to carry out a 27 @-@ hour training exercise . 
 However , Hubbard fell out with a senior officer at the shipyard and sent a critical memorandum to the Vice @-@ Chief of Naval Operations ( VCNO ) in Washington , D.C. The Commandant of the Navy Yard responded on 25 September 1942 by informing the VCNO that , in his view , Hubbard was " not temperamentally fitted for independent command " and requesting that Hubbard be removed and ordered to " other duty under immediate supervision of a more senior officer . " Hubbard duly lost his command on October 1 , 1942 and was ordered to New York , ending his service in the Atlantic . 
 Various accounts of Hubbard 's service in the North Atlantic have been put forward by the Church of Scientology and Hubbard himself . The Church of Scientology states in one publication that Hubbard " took command of an antisubmarine escort vessel with Atlantic convoys " . In a 1954 lecture , Hubbard asserted that he had been sent " to Boston in the very early part of the war to take command of a corvette " and had been given a crew made up of convicts from Portsmouth Naval Prison . Hubbard stated in another lecture that he had been posted aboard " corvettes , North Atlantic . And I went on fighting submarines in the North Atlantic and doing other things and so on . And I finally got a set of orders for the ship . By that time I had the squadron . " Biographical accounts published by the Church of Scientology have described Hubbard as commanding the " Fourth British Corvette Squadron " and Hubbard himself stated that he " was running British corvettes during the war " . A biographical interview with Hubbard published in 1956 speaks of him commanding " the former British corvette , the Mist " . ( The only British naval vessel named Mist was an Admiralty drifter , one of a number of small wooden vessels constructed for the Royal Navy in 1918 . ) Hubbard also asserted that he had sustained wounds " aboard a corvette in the North Atlantic " . A biographical profile published in 2008 by the Scientology @-@ related imprint Galaxy Press asserts that Hubbard " served with distinction in four theaters and was highly decorated for commanding corvettes in the North Pacific . He was also grievously wounded in combat [ and ] lost many a close friend and colleague ... " 
 In November 1942 , Hubbard was sent to the Submarine Chaser Training Center in Miami , Florida for training on submarine chaser vessels . He subsequently undertook a ten @-@ day anti @-@ submarine warfare training course at the Fleet Sound School in Key West and on January 17 , 1943 he was posted to the Albina Engine & Machine Works in Portland , Oregon , where he was to take command of the subchaser USS PC @-@ 815 when she was commissioned . 
 = = = Pacific service : USS PC @-@ 815 = = = 
 When Hubbard arrived in Portland , the USS PC @-@ 815 was in the last stages of its construction . The ship , a 173 ft ( 53 m ) steel @-@ hulled subchaser of the PC @-@ 461 class , had been laid down on October 10 , 1942 at the Albina <unk> . She was commissioned on April 21 , 1943 with Hubbard in command and Lt ( <unk> ) Thomas Moulton , an officer with whom he had studied in Florida , as the ship 's executive officer . The ship left Portland on May 18 to travel down the Columbia River to Astoria , Oregon , where she took on ammunition . After participating for a day in an air @-@ sea rescue operation , USS PC @-@ 815 was ordered to sail to San Diego to commence its shakedown cruise . 
 In the early hours of May 19 , PC @-@ 815 's sonar detected what the crew believed to be an enemy submarine off Cape Lookout , about ten to twelve miles offshore . Over the next two and a half days , Hubbard ordered his crew to fire a total of 35 depth charges and a number of gun rounds to target what Hubbard believed to be two Imperial Japanese Navy submarines . The PC @-@ 815 was joined by the US Navy blimps K @-@ 39 and K @-@ 33 , the US Coast Guard patrol boats Bonham and <unk> and the subchasers USS SC @-@ 536 and USS SC @-@ 537 to assist it in the search for the suspected enemy vessels . Hubbard was given temporary command of the vessels on the afternoon of May 19 . The larger subchaser PC @-@ 778 also joined the submarine search , though it found no indication of submarines and its commander was subsequently castigated by Hubbard for his refusal to lay its own larger stock of depth charges or resupply the PC @-@ 815 . 
 Hubbard stated in his eighteen @-@ page after @-@ action report that he had intended to force the submarine to surface so that it could be attacked by the surface vessels ' guns . He reported that his vessel had seen oil on the surface , though the PC @-@ 815 took no samples , and asserted that the blimps had seen air bubbles , oil and a periscope , though the blimps ' own reports did not corroborate this . No wreckage was seen , despite the heavy depth @-@ charging . The PC @-@ 815 sustained some minor damage and three crew were injured during the incident when the ship 's radio antenna was accidentally hit by gunfire . At midnight on 21 May , with depth charges exhausted and the presence of a submarine still unconfirmed by any other ship , PC @-@ 815 was ordered back to Astoria . 
 The incident attracted the attention of the naval high command , as there had been a verified Japanese submarine attack against Fort Stevens about 50 miles further north in June 1942 and there had been an invasion scare in southern California earlier in 1942 . Hubbard claimed to have " definitely sunk , beyond doubt " one submarine and critically damaged another . His view was not shared by his superiors . After reviewing the action reports and interviewing Hubbard and the other commanders present , Admiral Frank Jack Fletcher noted : " An analysis of all reports convinces me that there was no submarine in the area . Lieutenant Commander Sullivan states that he was unable to obtain any evidence of a submarine except one bubble of air which is unexplained except by turbulence of water due to a depth charge explosion . The Commanding Officers of all ships except the PC @-@ 815 state they had no evidence of a submarine and do not think a submarine was in the area . " Fletcher also noted that there was a " known magnetic deposit in the area in which depth charges were dropped . " The clear implication was that Hubbard had been targeting the deposit all along . 
 Hubbard nonetheless continued to believe that he had sunk at least one Japanese submarine . Years later , in 1956 , he told Scientologists : 
 I dropped the I @-@ 76 or the Imperial Japanese Navy Trans @-@ Pacific Submarine down into the mouth of the Columbia River , dead duck . And it went down with a resounding furor . And that was that . 
 In another lecture , he commented : 
 I know one officer that was reprimanded for taking on a submarine three times the size of his ship and sinking it – a Japanese submarine . And he was called in and reprimanded . That doesn 't sound possible , does it ? 
 After the war , the British Admiralty and the US Navy analysed the captured records of the Japanese navy to account for all of its vessels . Their reports do not list any Japanese submarine losses off the coast of the contiguous United States during the whole of the war . According to military records , the I @-@ 76 was destroyed off Buka Island in the western Pacific by USS Franks , USS Haggard and USS Johnston on 16 May 1944 . Hubbard 's crew however , who were very loyal to him , shared his conviction that they had engaged an enemy submarine . His second @-@ in @-@ command , Thomas Moulton , later asserted that the Navy had hushed up the incident , fearing that the presence of Japanese submarines so close to the Pacific coast might cause panic . 
 Following its return to Astoria , the USS PC @-@ 815 was ordered to escort a new aircraft carrier to San Diego , where the subchaser was to participate in exercises . On June 28 , Hubbard ordered his crew to fire four shells from the ship 's 3 @-@ inch gun and a number of rifle and pistol shots in the direction of the Coronado Islands , off which the ship anchored for the night . He did not realize that the islands belonged to Mexico , an ally , nor that he had taken the USS PC @-@ 815 into Mexican territorial waters . The islands were garrisoned by Mexican Navy personnel during the war . The Mexican government complained and two days later , Hubbard found himself before a naval Board of Investigation in San Diego . He was found to have disregarded orders by carrying out an unsanctioned gunnery practice and violating Mexican waters . He was reprimanded and removed from command , effective July 7 . Rear Admiral Frank A. <unk> commented , in a fitness report written shortly after the Coronado incident , that he " consider [ ed ] this officer lacking in the essential qualities of judgment , leadership and cooperation . He acts without forethought as to probable results . He is believed to have been sincere in his efforts to make his ship efficient and ready . Not considered qualified for command or promotion at this time . Recommend duty on a large vessel where he can be properly supervised . " 
 = = = USS Algol and shore service = = = 
 On the same day that Hubbard was sent a formal letter of admonition , he reported sick with complaints of <unk> pains and possible malaria . After 77 days on the sick list , it was finally determined that he was suffering from a duodenal ulcer . In October 1943 , he asked to be transferred to landing craft and was sent on a six @-@ week training course at the Naval Small Craft Training Center in San Pedro , California . He was then ordered in December 1943 to join the crew of the USS Algol , an Attack Cargo Auxiliary Vessel , to assist with the ship 's fitting out and crew training in Portland , Oregon . The vessel was commissioned in July 1944 with Hubbard aboard in the role of Navigation and Training Officer . The next two months were occupied with training exercises off the California coast in preparation for the ship 's envisaged departure in September for the western Pacific theater of operations . 
 Hubbard , however , applied instead to undertake a three @-@ month training course in military administration at the School of Military Government , a faculty that had been established on the campus of Princeton University ( but was not part of the University itself , although Hubbard later asserted that he had been a Princeton student ) . His commanding officer approved the detachment and gave Hubbard a generally good fitness report , rating him to be " of excellent personal and military character " though he " is very temperamental and often has his feelings hurt . " On September 27 , a curious incident occurred aboard the USS Algol ; the ship 's deck log records that Hubbard reported that he had discovered " an attempt at sabotage " consisting of a Coke bottle filled with gasoline with a cloth wick inserted , concealed among the ship 's cargo . A few hours later Hubbard was ordered to depart the ship and proceed to Princeton . 
 In later years , Hubbard asserted that the 1955 film Mister Roberts was based on his service aboard the USS Algol with Henry Fonda 's eponymous character being based on Hubbard himself and James Cagney 's tyrannical character based on the commander of the Algol . In a February 1956 lecture , Hubbard told Scientologists : " There was a story made about that vessel [ the Algol ] , by the way . It was called Mister Roberts . You may have seen this picture or read the book . " According to a Church of Scientology publication , 
 At the end of the war , having been relegated because of his physical condition to the amphibious forces in the Pacific , he had the adventures which are reported on the screen in " Mister Roberts " . " The Bucket " of that motion picture , stage play , and the novel is actually the A.K.A. 54 , the U.S.S. Algol . The captain so brutally characterized in the picture is actually Lieutenant Commander Axton P. [ sic ] Jones . L. Ron Hubbard as " Mister Roberts " was with the ship less than a year , however , and contrary to the script , was not killed at Okinawa . 
 George Malko comments that " this [ claim ] has never been substantiated " and notes that the author of the original novel , Thomas <unk> , " would only say about Roberts : " He is too good to be true , he is a pure invention . " " The novel was reportedly " loosely based on [ <unk> 's ] service on the USS Virgo " . 
 At the conclusion of his course at the School of Military Government , Hubbard failed to pass his examinations – finishing only mid @-@ way down the class list – and did not qualify for an overseas posting . He was posted in January 1945 to the Naval Civil Affairs Staging Area in Monterey , California for further training but , as he later acknowledged , he became depressed and fell ill with a duodenal ulcer . He reported sick with stomach pains in April 1945 and spent the remainder of the war on the sick list as a patient in Oak Knoll Naval Hospital in Oakland , California . A Church of Scientology account asserts that " eventual combat wounds would finally preclude him from serving with American occupation forces . " 
 In October 1945 , a Naval Board found that he was " considered physically qualified to perform duty ashore , preferably within the continental United States " in reflection of his chronic ulcer . He was discharged from the hospital and mustered out of active service on December 6 , 1945 . He resigned his commission in October 1950 . According to the Church of Scientology , he quit because the US Navy had " attempted to monopolize all his researches and force him to work on a project " to make man more suggestible " and when he was unwilling , tried to blackmail him by ordering him back to active duty to perform this function . Having many friends he was able to instantly resign from the Navy and escape this trap . " Hubbard himself told Scientologists : 
 [ T ] he Office of Naval Intelligence right here in Washington , DC , threatened to call me to active duty to use what I knew about the mind . ... [ T ] his officer from the Office of Naval Research came to see me right here in Washington and he wanted me to go on as a civilian employee in order to use what I knew of the mind to make men more suggestible . And I smiled a feline smile . And I said , " No . " And he smiled like something out of Faust , and he said to me , " Well , all you have to do is say ' No ' and I will call you back to active duty because you still are an officer of the United States Navy . " And with that purr he exited . ... So I went down here to the Washington Navy Yard , the Potomac River Naval Command , and I got my resignation accepted . 
 According to the US Navy , " There is no evidence on record of an attempt to recall him to active duty . " 
 = = Alleged war wounds = = 
 As the psychologist and computer scientist Christopher Evans has noted , " One aspect of [ Hubbard 's ] war record that is particularly confused , and again typical of the mixture of glamour and obscurantism which surrounds Hubbard and his past , is the matter of wounds or injuries suffered on active service . " Hubbard asserted after the war that he had been " blinded with injured optic nerves , and lame with physical injuries to hip and back ... Yet I worked my way back to fitness and strength in less than two years , using only what I knew about Man and his relationship to the universe . " Accounts published by the Church of Scientology asserted that he had been " flown home in the late spring of 1942 in the secretary of the Navy 's private plane as the first <unk> casualty from the Far East " . A 2006 publication goes further , describing him as " the first American casualty of South Pacific combat " . 
 Thomas Moulton , Hubbard 's executive officer on the USS PC @-@ 815 , testified in 1984 that Hubbard had said that he had been shot in the Dutch East Indies , and that on another occasion Hubbard had told him that his eyes had been damaged by the flash of a large @-@ caliber gun . Hubbard himself told Scientologists in a taped lecture that he had suffered eye injuries after having had " a bomb go off in my face . " He told Robert Heinlein , the science fiction writer , that " both of his feet had been broken ( drumhead @-@ type injury ) when his last ship was bombed . " According to Heinlein , Hubbard said that he " had had a busy war – sunk four times and wounded again and again " . Hubbard was said to have been " twice been pronounced dead " and to have spent a year in a naval hospital which he " utilized in the study of endocrine substances and protein " . The techniques that he developed " made possible not only his own recovery from injury , but helped other servicemen to regain their health " . On another occasion , Hubbard said that he had been hospitalized because " I was utterly exhausted . I 'd just been in combat theater after combat theater , you see , with no rest , no nothing between . " 
 This account was challenged by a series of writers and journalists from the mid @-@ 1970s onwards . Writing in 1974 , Evans noted that the Veterans Administration had confirmed that ( even at that late stage in his life ) Hubbard " receives $ 160 a month in compensation for disabilities incurred during the Second World War . However the conditions listed as being ' 40 % disabling ' are : duodenal ulcer , bursitis ( right shoulder ) , arthritis , and <unk> . " Evans noted : " a Navy Department spokesman has stated that ' an examination of Mr Hubbard 's record does not reveal any evidence of injuries suffered while in the service of the United States Navy ' . " 
 Sixteen years later , the Los Angeles Times obtained Hubbard 's medical records through the Freedom of Information Act . The records stated that Hubbard had told doctors that he had been " lamed " by a chronic hip infection , and that his eye problems were the result of conjunctivitis caused by exposure to " excessive tropical sunlight " . Hubbard 's post @-@ war correspondence with the VA was also included , including letters in which he requested psychiatric treatment to address his " long periods of <unk> " and " suicidal inclinations . " He continued to complain to the VA about various physical ailments into the 1950s , well after he had founded Dianetics ; the Times noted that , significantly , Hubbard had promised that Dianetics would provide " a cure for the very ailments that plagued the author himself then and throughout his life , including allergies , arthritis , ulcers and heart problems . " Other documents on Hubbard 's medical file stated that he had injured his back in 1942 after falling off a ship 's ladder . 
 = = Claimed medals = = 
 Hubbard 's war medals have also been an issue of contention . Although the Church of Scientology has stated that Hubbard was " highly decorated for duties under fire , " the actual number of decorations said to have been awarded to Hubbard has varied considerably over the years . In a 1968 interview with British journalists , Hubbard showed his visitors sixteen war medals that he claimed to have been awarded . A few months later , the Church of Scientology published a " Data Sheet on Lafayette Ron Hubbard " that stated that he had been awarded " Twenty @-@ one medals and palms " . 
 In May 1974 , the Church asked the Navy Department to supply seventeen medals that he was said to have been awarded , including the Purple Heart and Navy Commendation Medal , many of them with bronze service stars denoting participation in military campaigns or multiple <unk> of the same award . The Navy sent only four medals , noting , " The records in this Bureau fail to establish Mr. Hubbard 's entitlement to the other medals and awards listed in your response . " Hubbard responded by circulating to Scientologists a photograph of 21 medals and palms that he said he had been awarded and explained that he had actually won 28 , but that the missing seven had been awarded to him in secret because the naval high command was embarrassed that he had sunk two Japanese submarines in the United States ' " back yard " . A 1994 biography published by the Church of Scientology states that he was awarded 29 medals and awards . 
 In 1990 the Church of Scientology released a document , said to be a copy of Hubbard 's official record of service , to support its assertion that Hubbard had been awarded 21 medals and decorations . The Church asserts that Hubbard was awarded a " Unit Citation which is only awarded by the President to combat units that perform particularly meritorious service . " Among the other awards listed on the record released by the Church is the British Victory Medal , an award issued for service in the British armed forces in the First World War and that was never awarded by itself . The Church 's document also credits Hubbard with a Purple Heart with a Palm , implying two wounds received in action . However , the U.S. Navy uses gold and silver stars , not a palm , to indicate multiple wounds . The Church has distributed a photograph of medals said to have been won by Hubbard ; two of the medals were not even created until after Hubbard left active service . 
 The Church 's record lists Hubbard as commanding the " USS Mist " . Although the USS YP @-@ 422 was originally named the Mist when it was in civilian service , it was never called the USS Mist ; the only 20th century US Navy vessel of that name listed in the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships left naval service in 1919 , when Hubbard was six years old . It also lists the USS Howland , a vessel that is not listed at all in the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships . It is signed by " Howard D. Thompson , Lt. Cmdr. " , who is not listed in the records of commissioned naval officers at that time . Archivist Eric <unk> of the National Personnel Records Center told The New Yorker that the document is a forgery . 
 The Los Angeles Times commented , and NPR later confirmed , that the US Navy 's version of the same record – a DD Form 214 – " indicates Hubbard received four medals during his Navy career , as well as two marksmanship medals " and noted " discrepancies " with the Scientology version . The four medals that the US Navy 's record credits to Hubbard were the American Defense Service Medal , which was awarded to all members of the military in service at the time of the December 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor ; the American Campaign Medal , awarded to all service members who had performed duty in the American Theater of Operations during the war ; the Asiatic @-@ Pacific Campaign Medal , awarded to all who had served in the Pacific Theater ; and the World War II Victory Medal , awarded to all who served during World War II . According to the Department of the Navy , there was " no record of the additional decorations the church says Hubbard received . " 
 Church officials have argued the Navy 's records were " not only grossly incomplete but perhaps were falsified to conceal Hubbard 's secret activities as an intelligence officer . " In the 1980s the Church turned to L. Fletcher Prouty , a former U.S. Army colonel , who said that Hubbard 's records had been falsified to cover up his " intelligence background " . Prouty , who died in 2001 , was a prominent conspiracy theorist best known for advocating John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories and was also associated with the anti @-@ semitic Liberty Lobby group and the Lyndon LaRouche organization . 
 = = Documenting Hubbard 's military career = = 
 Hubbard 's military career has attracted comment from a number of journalists and writers over the years . The claims made by the Church of Scientology were not challenged by some early writers ; C.H. Rolph quoted without comment a 1968 Scientology biographical sketch circulated to British Members of Parliament in which Hubbard 's war service was summarized , and in 1971 Paulette Cooper described as " true " the claim that Hubbard " was severely injured in the war ( and in fact was in a lifeboat for many days , badly injuring his body and his eyes in the hot Pacific sun ) . " Others were more skeptical . George Malko attempted to verify Hubbard 's " revealing , anonymously authored , and totally unsubstantiated biography " in 1970 but reported that " I was unable to confirm a single one of [ Hubbard 's ] critical claims : that he had been crippled and blind , the nature of his ' discoveries , ' and the medical records stating he had ' twice been pronounced dead . ' " His inquiries were frustrated by the Navy 's refusal to provide Hubbard 's service record " without the written consent of the person whose records are concerned . " 
 Information later released by the Navy and the Veterans Administration prompted some to express doubts . Christopher Evans commented in 1974 that " faced with this impressive , if annoyingly undetailed , record it is hard to assess the nature or extent of Hubbard 's battle scars in the service of his country " but noted contradictions between claims of war wounds and the official record . In 1978 , the Los Angeles Times described Hubbard 's war record as " obscure " and quoted Navy spokesmen stating that Hubbard had not received a Purple Heart and had not been treated for any injuries sustained during his military career , contrary to the statements of the Church of Scientology . 
 By 1979 , an amateur researcher , Michael Shannon , had gathered " a mountain of material which included some files that no one else had bothered to get copies of – for example , the log books of the Navy ships that Hubbard had served on , and his father 's Navy service file . " Although Shannon was unable to find a publisher , he sent a hundred @-@ page portfolio of materials , including copies of some of Hubbard 's naval and college records , to a number of " concerned individuals " . His work also found its way to the Church of Scientology 's archivist , Gerry Armstrong , who was undertaking a project to research an official authorized biography of L. Ron Hubbard . According to Jon Atack , " the archive largely confirmed Shannon 's material . Armstrong and Shannon reached the same eventual destination from opposed starting points . " In October 1980 , Omar Garrison , a writer who had previously written two books favorable to Scientology , was hired by the Church to write Hubbard 's biography based on the materials that Armstrong had collected . 
 Armstrong became disillusioned and left Scientology at the start of 1982 . He was declared a " Suppressive Person " ( an enemy of Scientology ) by the Church . With Garrison 's permission , Armstrong made copies of around 100 @,@ 000 pages from the Hubbard archive and deposited them with attorneys for safe keeping . The Church responded by suing Armstrong for breach of confidence , theft and invasion of privacy . The suit went to trial in a California court in 1984 as Church of Scientology of California vs. Gerald Armstrong . Hubbard 's military career was a major focus of the case . Armstrong stated that he had " amassed approximately two thousand pages of documentation concerning Hubbard 's wartime career : what he was doing what vessels he was on , fitness reports and medical and VA disability records . The truth is far different from the public representations . " Garrison , who had by that time agreed to a settlement with the Church under which his manuscript would never be made public , told the court : 
 The inconsistencies were implicit in various documents which Mr. Armstrong provided me with respect to Mr. Hubbard 's curriculum vitae , with respect to his Navy career , with respect to almost every aspect of his life . These undeniable and documented facts did not coincide with the official published biography that the church had promulgated . 
 During the trial 's four weeks of testimony , the court heard evidence from Thomas S. Moulton , Hubbard 's second @-@ in @-@ command aboard the USS PC @-@ 815 . Moulton testified that Hubbard had told him that he had been involved in the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941 and that he had been the only survivor of his destroyer , which had gone down with all hands save himself . The " submarine battle " of May 1943 was also described by Moulton and was hailed by a Church of Scientology attorney as " a new untold chapter to the history of the Pacific conflict during World War II ; and new perspectives on the magnitude – and proximity – of Japanese naval operations off the U.S. coast during the war . " Moulton also testified that Hubbard had told him that he had received combat injuries to his eyes and back . In response , documents contradicting Moulton 's ( and Hubbard 's ) account were read into the record by Armstrong 's attorney , Michael Flynn . 
 The decision , by Judge Paul Breckenridge , found that Armstrong 's fears of persecution by the Church were reasonable , and thus his conduct in turning over the documents in his possession to his attorneys was also reasonable . The judge issued a wide @-@ ranging verdict , commenting of Hubbard that " the evidence portrays a man who has been virtually a pathological liar when it comes to his history , background and achievements . " A few weeks later , a British judge ruled in a case heard at the Royal Courts of Justice that Hubbard had made a number of " false claims " about his military career : " That he was a much decorated war hero . He was not . That he commanded a corvette squadron . He did not . That he was awarded the Purple Heart , a gallantry decoration for those wounded in action . He was not wounded and was not decorated . That he was crippled and blinded in the war and cured himself with Dianetics techniques . He was not crippled and was not blinded . " The judge , Mr. Justice <unk> , noted : " There is no dispute about any of this . The evidence is unchallenged . " 
 Hubbard 's military service has subsequently been covered in detail by the British writers Russell Miller ( Bare @-@ Faced Messiah , 1987 ) and Jon Atack ( A Piece of Blue Sky , 1990 ) , by the Los Angeles Times in a six @-@ part special report on Scientology published in June 1990 , and by Lawrence Wright in The New Yorker in February 2011 and his book Going Clear : Scientology , Hollywood , and the Prison of Belief ( 2013 ) . The accuracy of Miller 's account has been questioned ; Marco Frenschkowski , writing in 1999 , commented that Miller 's book had " definitely exposed some inflated statements about Hubbard 's early achievements " but had also been partly disproved by the Church of Scientology , though he did not state which elements had been disproved . 
 = Manuel Buendía = 
 Manuel Buendía Tellezgirón ( 24 May 1926 – 30 May 1984 ) was a Mexican journalist and political columnist who last worked for the daily Excélsior , one of the most @-@ read newspapers in Mexico City . His direct reporting style in his column Red Privada ( " Private Network " ) , which publicly exposed government and law enforcement corruption , organized crime , and drug trafficking , was distributed and read in over 200 newspapers across Mexico . 
 Born in the state of Michoacán , Buendía first wrote for La Nación , the official magazine of the National Action Party ( PAN ) . After losing interest in the party , he left to work for La Prensa and became the editor @-@ in @-@ chief in 1960 . He left the newspaper in 1963 and worked for several different media outlets in Mexico throughout the 1970s and ' 80s , including the Mexico City @-@ based newspapers El Universal and Excélsior . Buendía was recognized largely for his investigative reporting , and particularly for his coverage of the CIA 's covert operations in Mexico , the rise of ultra @-@ rightwing groups , fraudulent businessmen , corruption in Mexico 's state @-@ owned petroleum company Pemex , and the role of organized crime in Mexico 's political system . He was also famous for breaking news on controversial political subjects thanks to his access to top Mexican officials . His investigative reporting , however , angered many and made him a frequent target of death threats , which he took very seriously . 
 On the afternoon of 24 May 1984 , Buendía left his office in Mexico City and was walking to his car when a man shot him from behind several times , killing him on the scene . For over five years , the murder case remained unsolved and with several irregularities , including the loss of evidence . In 1989 , several members of the extinct Federal Security Directorate ( DFS ) , Mexico 's top police force that was very close to the Central Intelligence Agency , were arrested for their involvement in the murder of Buendía . The murder case was closed after the perpetrators were arrested , but several journalists doubt the probe 's results and believe that the masterminds behind Buendía 's murder were never arrested . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Manuel Buendía Tellezgirón was born in Zitácuaro , Michoacán , Mexico on 24 March 1926 . He was the third child of José Buendía Gálvez ( father ) and Josefina Tellezgirón Tinoco ( mother ) , both from the State of Mexico . Buendía attended a religious elementary school located in front of Teatro Juárez de Zitácuaro , a former theatre in his hometown . At the age of 12 , his parents moved to Morelia , Michoacán and enrolled him at Seminario Menor , where he studied for three years . As a teenager , Buendía contributed to La Nación , a magazine of the National Action Party ( PAN ) . Though he <unk> with the PAN during his early life , Buendía later lost interest in the party . His mother died of natural causes on 21 June 1941 , and Buendía returned to Zitácuaro . After a few years , he was awarded a scholarship at Instituto Patria , a Jesuit high school in Mexico City . Upon graduation he attended the Escuela Libre de Derecho , a private Law school in Mexico City , but dropped out to take care of his family following the death of his father in 1945 . 
 = = Journalism career = = 
 From 1949 to 1953 , Buendía worked for La Nación and met the magazine 's secretary Dolores <unk> <unk> , whom he married on 19 January 1955 . Though he first wrote for La Nación , his professional journalistic career began at the newspaper La Prensa in 1953 . He worked as an editor , crime reporter , and political columnist for the newspaper until he became the editor @-@ in @-@ chief in January 1960 . Around that time Buendía started his daily column Red Privada ( " Private Network " ) , where he wrote about the alleged collusion of organized crime in Mexico 's political system . In 1963 , he left to work at the newspaper El Día and wrote at the political column Para Control de Usted ( " For You to Control " ) under the penname " J.M. Tellezgirón " . From 1964 to 1965 , Buendía directed the weekly Crucero and wrote the column Concierto <unk> ( " Political Concert " ) under the penname " D. I. <unk> " . On 1 January 1971 , he was appointed as the head of the Press and Public Relations of Mexico City alongside Alfonso Martínez Domínguez . However , Buendía turned down the position in June following the massacre of student demonstrators . A year later , Buendía worked as an advisor to Guillermo Martínez Domínguez , the former head of Nacional <unk> , a bank of Mexico 's Secretariat of Finance and Public Credit ( <unk> ) . In Nacional <unk> , Buendía befriended Gerardo Bueno <unk> , who shortly after being appointed as director of the National Council of Science and Technology ( <unk> ) offered him a position as director of the institution 's Press and Public Relations department in 1973 . That year , Henrique González Casanova , the former head of the Political Science department at the National Autonomous University of Mexico ( UNAM ) , invited Buendía to work as a part @-@ time professor , a job that the journalist held until his death in 1984 . 
 On December 1976 Buendía left his post in <unk> to become a full @-@ time columnist . He then worked at El Sol de México , a newspaper owned by <unk> Editorial Mexicana . After facing some differences with the owners of the print media company , Buendía left on 17 August 1978 to work at El Universal , a newspaper based in Mexico City . Only lasting until December of that year , he left to work at Excélsior , a daily newspaper with one of the largest circulations in Mexico City . At this newspaper , Buendía wrote for the column Red Privada , which was distributed and read in over 200 newspaper across Mexico . In his column he wrote about the covert operations of the CIA in Mexico during the Cold War , ultra @-@ rightwing groups , crooked businessmen , and corrupt government officials involved in drug trafficking . His investigations angered many in Mexico 's political elite and made him a frequent target of death threats . Buendía took the death threats he received very seriously and thereby carried a pistol , either on his belt or in a leather pocket . Prior to his death , Buendía wrote extensively on the alleged corruption within Mexico 's Petroleum Workers Union ; the allegations of wrongdoings of Jorge Díaz Serrano , former leader of Pemex , the national oil company ; and Arturo <unk> Moreno , the former head of Mexico City 's police force . Buendía also criticized the role of the U.S. government and the CIA in Mexico , and often published names of American officials involved in secret operations . Although he was quick to publish controversial reports , Buendía 's direct reporting was respected and generally considered reliable given his access to top Mexican officials . He was the most @-@ read journalist in Mexico 's print media , and is often cited by newspapers and journalists as the most influential political columnist in Mexico of the second half of the 20th century . 
 = = Death = = 
 On Wednesday , 30 May 1984 , Buendía left his offices in Colonia Juárez at around 6 : 30 p.m. and headed towards his car in a parking lot near <unk> Avenue at the Zona Rosa neighborhood in Mexico City . As he got closer to his car , a tall man wearing jeans , a black jacket , and a baseball cap approached him from behind and violently grabbed his coat before shooting him four times with a .38 Super . Buendía was carrying a handgun on his waist but he was not able to defend himself at the moment of his death . After killing him , the assailant fled on a motorcycle with another man . There were several bystanders who witnessed the murder and managed to see the faces of the assassins , including Juan Manuel Bautista , a colleague of Buendía ; Rogelio Barrera Galindo , a man who had parked his vehicle close to the journalist 's ; and Felipe Flores Fernández , a bus driver . Among the first to arrive at the murder scene was José Antonio Zorrilla Pérez , then @-@ head of the Federal Security Directorate ( DFS ) , Mexico 's equivalent of the FBI , and one of Buendía 's main sources for his political publications . Photos of Buendía 's corpse circulated across Mexico and the rest of the world . 
 Suspicions first fell on Los <unk> ( " The Owls " ) , an ultra @-@ rightwing group of the Autonomous University of Guadalajara who were largely criticized by Buendía for terrorizing their campus . However , suspicions turned to drug traffickers and high @-@ level government officials , specifically those of the DFS . According to local media reports , once Buendía was killed , DFS agents went into the columnist 's office and stole several files . 
 = = = Investigation = = = 
 The murder of Buendía , alongside the killing of other journalists in Mexico that year , sent a chilling message to newspapers across the country . " The bullets that killed Manuel Buendia ... were not directed at one man but at freedom of expression , " said Excelsior 's front page read on the day after the killing . The killing was immediately condemned by the administration of President Miguel de la Madrid , who promised to bring the perpetrators to justice through a thorough investigation . However , the investigation dragged for over five years with no arrests and several inconsistencies , including the loss of evidence . On 11 June 1989 , Zorrilla Pérez himself was charged with planning the murder ; Juan Rafael Moro Ávila , also a DFS agent and great @-@ grandnephew of former President Manuel Ávila Camacho , was charged of being a co @-@ perpetrator with José Luis Ochoa Alonso ( alias El <unk> ) , who shot Buendía at point @-@ blank . Another hypothesis was that Moro was only responsible for driving the motorcycle used by the real assassin , Juan Arévalo Gardoqui , then Secretariat of National Defense , to escape . Three other DFS agents were also arrested : Juventino Prado Hurtado , Raúl Pérez Carmona and Sofía Naya . At least two main suspects , José Luis Ochoa Alonso and Juan Arévalo Gardoqui , were reported murdered in unclear circumstances before being formally charged . 
 The perpetrators were apprehended in 1989 under the administration of President Carlos Salinas de <unk> . Moro and Zorrilla were sentenced to 25 and 35 years in prison respectively , but were released from prison in February 2009 for good conduct after serving at least half of their sentences . Several public intellectuals , journalists , press freedom organizations , newspapers , and politicians protested their releases . Zorrilla returned to prison later that year after he failed to provide a formal letter petitioning his release . On 10 September 2013 , Zorrilla was released from prison after a Mexico City judge granted him the opportunity to fulfill the remaining years of his sentence at his residence due to unstable health conditions . The Mexican government closed the case after the arrests , but many journalists doubted the results of the investigation and believed that the masterminds behind the murder case remained at large . 
 = = Published books = = 
 La Santa Muerta ( " Saint Death " , 1967 ) 
 La CIA en México ( " The CIA in Mexico " , 1984 ) 
 La <unk> en México ( " The Far @-@ Right in Mexico " , 1984 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( " Journalistic Exercise " , 1985 ) 
 Los <unk> ( " The Oil Dealers " , 1985 ) 
 El Humor ( " The Humor " , 1986 ) 
 Los <unk> ( " The Businessmen " , 1986 ) 
 <unk> y <unk> de la <unk> <unk> ( " Thinking and action of the right in Puebla " , 1987 ) 
 El <unk> de <unk> ( " The Job of Informing " , 1988 ) 
 = Maxinquaye = 
 Maxinquaye is the debut album by English rapper and producer Tricky . After starting his music career in Bristol 's club scene , Tricky became a frequent collaborator with Massive Attack in the early 1990s . He rapped and wrote songs for the group while maturing as a lyricist ; his themes of sex and gang violence eventually evolved into more introspective , personal lyrics . He soon found his role with the group limiting and wanted to record an album with a female vocalist whose singing would offer his songwriting another dimension . Tricky discovered singer Martina Topley @-@ Bird , with whom he formed both a musical and romantic relationship , before signing a recording contract with 4th & B 'way Records in 1993 . 
 Assisted by co @-@ producer Mark Saunders , Tricky recorded Maxinquaye primarily at his home studio in London in 1994 with Topley @-@ Bird , who shared vocals on most of the tracks with him . He incorporated dub production techniques , heavily altered samples , and elements of hip hop , soul , rock , ambient techno , reggae , and experimental music into the record 's groove @-@ oriented and low @-@ tempo sound . The songs explore themes of dysfunctional sexual relationships , fear of intimacy , recreational drug use , and cultural decline , with lyrics inspired by Tricky 's experiences in the British drug culture . His songwriting style and use of female vocalists such as Topley @-@ Bird were influenced by his mother , Maxine Quaye , after whom the album was titled . 
 Released on 20 February 1995 by 4th & B 'way Records , Maxinquaye reached number three on the United Kingdom 's albums chart and sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies in its first few months of release . 4th & B 'way relied on independent record promoters and the British demographic of progressive , young music buyers rather than American markets for the record to perform well . A widespread critical success , Maxinquaye was cited by many journalists as the year 's best record and the key release of a musical style that was being dubbed trip hop at the time . Since then , it has been ranked frequently on all @-@ time lists of the greatest albums and has sold over 500 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 = = Background = = 
 After a troubled upbringing in the Knowle West neighbourhood of Bristol , Tricky became involved with an eclectic collective of DJs and musicians known as The Wild Bunch during the late 1980s . As part of the collective , he helped arrange sound systems around Bristol 's club scene and penned raps under a stage name derived from " Tricky Kid " , the nickname given to him in a street gang as a youth . The Wild Bunch signed a record deal with 4th & B 'way Records and released two singles but their slow , experimental sound failed to make a commercial impact . The collective dissolved in 1989 , but would eventually lead to the formation of the group Massive Attack , with Tricky a frequent collaborator who rapped over their productions ; he later reworked material he had written for Massive Attack on Maxinquaye . 
 Tricky eventually grew frustrated with his role in Massive Attack , finding it limiting , and wanted to record an album with a female vocalist whose singing would offer another dimension to his lyrics and their meaning . In 1993 , he discovered Martina Topley @-@ Bird , then a teenager at Clifton College , when he saw her sitting against a wall near his house , singing to herself . " That 's really how it happened , " she recalled . " A few weeks later , I went around to his house with some friends . We 'd been drinking cider after our GCSEs . We were banging on his door , but he wasn 't in . Then Mark Stewart , who lived there , came up to us and said : ' Yeah , this is Tricky 's house , jump in through the window . ' " Tricky , whose lyrics had matured from simplistic raps about street violence and sex to more personal and introspective writing , said Topley @-@ Bird found his songs " quite depressing " , which he believed was because of her more privileged background : " It 's just reality . She 's been a student all her life , grew up in Somerset , and I don 't think she 's ever faced the real world . She finds it all a bit weird . But she 's my best mate . " They would form a musical and romantic partnership over subsequent years , and their first recording together , " Aftermath " , later appeared on Maxinquaye . After offering the song to Massive Attack , who were not interested in including it on their 1991 album Blue Lines , Tricky released " Aftermath " independently to local record stores in September 1993 before he signed a record deal with 4th & B 'way . 
 = = Music and themes = = 
 Tricky asked Mark Saunders to co @-@ produce Maxinquaye after being impressed by his previous work with English rock band The Cure on their albums Mixed Up ( 1990 ) and Wish ( 1992 ) . They recorded Maxinquaye in the first half of 1994 at Tricky 's home studio in Kilburn ; further recording later took place at the <unk> and Eastcote studios in Notting Hill . Island Records , 4th & B <unk> 's parent label , set up equipment in the home studio at Tricky 's request , including an Akai <unk> sampler , an Atari 1040 computer with Logic software , an Alesis ADAT recorder , an AKG <unk> microphone , a Behringer Composer compressor , and a Mackie 1604 mixing desk . The recording sessions were somewhat chaotic , and Saunders , who had the impression he would only perform engineering duties , often found himself serving as a DJ and programmer . Tricky instructed him on what to sample , regardless of different tempos and pitches , and asked him to piece the results together , something Saunders achieved by pitch @-@ shifting the respective samples until the combination sounded satisfactory . The samples they experimented with were taken from the many vinyl records that Saunders recalled were " littered " all over Tricky 's floor . Influenced by dub music 's production techniques , Tricky exhaustively altered borrowed sounds on his sampler , mixed tracks as they were being recorded live in the studio , and preserved sounds that otherwise would have been unwanted in the final mix , including glitches and crackles . 
 According to American critic Robert Christgau , Maxinquaye 's groove @-@ oriented and low @-@ tempo music drew not only on dub but also on lo @-@ fi , ambient techno , and hip hop , while James Hunter from Rolling Stone said Tricky subsumed American hip hop , soul , reggae , and 1980s English rock sounds into " a mercurial style of dance music " . Entertainment Weekly critic David Browne classified the music as an intellectual form of R & B. In Tricky 's own words , he composed his songs based on a particular sound he liked rather than having a definite song structure in mind : " I couldn 't write you a blues track or a hip @-@ hop track if you asked . I just make what I hear and then me and Martina sing all the words on paper , putting the emphasis on the things that perhaps shouldn 't be sung . " Tricky had no concept of pitch , regard for notational conventions and time signatures , or previous experience with sampling , but his approach for Maxinquaye challenged Saunders to rethink his ideas about music production and experiment in ways he had never tried before . Saunders recalled being asked to combine samples of two songs that were 30 beats per minute apart and composed in entirely different keys : " [ Tricky ] thought differently to anybody I 've ever known ... It didn 't occur to me that by de @-@ tuning one to slow it down , both might then gel musically at that point . I always think of it like going into a scrapyard and building a car out of all the bits you can find . You could probably build a car that would work , and although it might be the ugliest you 've ever seen , it would have loads of character . " 
 Almost all of Topley @-@ Bird 's vocals on Maxinquaye were recorded in a single take , a process she later said was " totally instinctive . There was no time to drum up an alter ego . " Topley @-@ Bird , a soft @-@ spoken singer , found herself backed on most tracks by Tricky 's rapped vocals . According to British music journalist Sean O 'Hagan , she sang with a " broken voice " that acted as " the perfect foil to Tricky 's whispered and <unk> raps " . The liner notes credited Tricky and Topley @-@ Bird for vocals on all songs except " Pumpkin " and " You Don 't " , which Tricky performed with vocalists Alison Goldfrapp and <unk> , respectively . A printing error mistakenly credited the then @-@ unknown Topley @-@ Bird as " Martine " on the record . Other musicians were recruited to play instruments for some tracks , including guitarist James Stevenson and bassist Pete <unk> . The band <unk> performed on " Black Steel " , which was a rock version of Public Enemy 's " Black Steel in the Hour of Chaos " ( 1988 ) and one of two remakes on Maxinquaye ; Tricky also remade one of his contributions for Massive Attack , " <unk> " ( 1994 ) , retitling it as " Overcome " . Saunders contributed guitar himself , with the resulting improvisations treated as samples . 
 Tricky explained Maxinquaye 's title in an interview with Simon Reynolds : " Quaye , that 's this race of people in Africa , and ' <unk> , ' that 's my mum 's name , Maxine , and I 've just taken the E off " ; Reynolds interpreted this as a " place name " similar to the Rastafarian idea of Zion . In another source , Tricky was reported as saying Quaye had also been his mother 's surname . According to Greg Kot , his mother 's name provided the album its title while her suicide , along with his father abandoning him and Tricky 's lack of moral sense as a youth , helped inform his " unsentimental grasp on reality " , which was reflected in Maxinquaye 's " collision of beauty and violence " . In the opinion of Stylus Magazine 's Kenan Hebert , who called it " a document of obsession , mistrust , misconduct , solipsism , and <unk> " , the songs dealing with dysfunctional sexual relationships and fear of intimacy were given a Freudian angle by his mother 's influence on the album , including Tricky 's reference to her on " Aftermath " . In an interview for The Wire , Tricky explained his mother 's influence and his use of female vocalists like Topley @-@ Bird : " My first lyric ever on a song was ' your eyes resemble mine , you 'll see as no others can ' . I didn 't have any kids then ... so what am I talking about ? Who am I talking about ? My mother ... used to write poetry but in her time she couldn 't have done anything with that , there wasn 't any opportunity . It 's almost like she killed herself to give me the opportunity , my lyrics . I can never understand why I write as a female , I think I 've got my mum 's talent , I 'm her vehicle . So I need a woman to sing that . " 
 While songs such as " Overcome " and " <unk> Love " dealt with themes of " sexual paranoia and male dread of intimacy " , the rest of Maxinquaye explored the psychological tolls of the British recreational drug culture , which Reynolds said served as a " temporary utopia " for a generation of users who otherwise lacked a " constructive outlet for its idealism " . He felt the album 's cover art , featuring rusting metal surfaces , represented the cultural decline explored in the music 's themes . Tricky drew on Rastafarian ideas about end time for the record , although unlike adherents to that movement he did not disassociate himself from " Babylon " , or the degenerate qualities of Western society , writing lyrics such as " my brain thinks bomb @-@ like / beware of our appetite " on " Hell Is Round the Corner " . He later told Reynolds , " I 'm part of this fuckin ' psychic pollution ... It 's like , I can be as greedy as you . The conditioned part of me says ' yeah , I 'm gonna go out and make money , I 'm going to rule my own little kingdom . ' " Christgau deemed the album 's songs " <unk> of someone who 's signed on to work for the wages of sin and lived to cash the check " , while O 'Hagan said Tricky 's " impressionistic prose poems " were written from the deviant perspective of the urban hedonist : " Maxinquaye is the sound of blunted Britain , paranoid and obsessive ... This was the inner @-@ city blues , Bristol style " . 
 The songs " Ponderosa " , " <unk> ' " , and " Hell Is Round the Corner " were inspired by Tricky 's experiences with marijuana , alcohol , cocaine , and ecstasy , particularly a two @-@ year binge and consequent state of despondency while on Massive Attack 's payroll after the completion of Blue Lines . His stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness lyrics on Maxinquaye explore the delirious , despondent , and emotionally unstable state associated with drug use while offering a pessimistic view of the drug culture , as Tricky viewed the high of cocaine undeserved and the depth of thought achieved through ecstasy unsubstantial . In Reynolds ' opinion , Tricky 's experiences with drug @-@ induced paranoia , anxiety , and visions of specters and demons were represented in the production of songs such as " Aftermath " and " Hell Is Round the Corner " . For the latter track , he altered and slowed down a vocal sample to give it a wounded basso <unk> sound , while channelling it through a loop of an orchestral Isaac Hayes recording titled " Ike 's Rap II " . On " <unk> ' " , which sampled sounds of a creaking door and the click of a gun being loaded , Tricky 's lyrics made explicit reference to his visions of " mystical shadows , fraught with no meaning " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 After Tricky signed to 4th & B 'way , the label reissued " Aftermath " in January 1994 and released " Ponderosa " in April to promote Maxinquaye . The following year , three more singles were released — " Overcome " in January , " Black Steel " in March , and " Pumpkin " in November . The label also released a four @-@ track EP entitled The Hell E.P. in July , which was a collaboration with American rap group <unk> and featured " Hell Is Round the Corner " ; the song reached number 12 on the UK Singles Chart . Although hip hop records in the United Kingdom had received exposure through dance music dealers and press , 4th & B 'way relied on independent record promoters and Tricky 's cover story in NME to promote the album . According to 4th & B 'way director Julian Palmer , the UK 's demographic of young music buyers such as students was more progressive than in the United States , where he said the record would have to be marketed differently because of his race . He believed that much like Portishead , a contemporary Bristol act , Tricky would have received airplay in the US on alternative or college rock radio if the label focused their efforts to promote him there : " Some people I 've met were confused because he 's black , and it 's not easy to break through those barriers there . " 
 Maxinquaye was released on 20 February 1995 and sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies in its first few months of release in the UK , despite no significant radio airplay . The record charted for 35 weeks on the British albums chart , peaking at number three . After it was released in the US on April 18 , Tricky toured the country as a supporting act for fellow English recording artist PJ Harvey . According to Nielsen SoundScan , the album had sold 222 @,@ 000 copies in the US by 2003 . By 2012 , it had sold over 500 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . That same year , Tricky performed the entire album with Topley @-@ Bird on April 27 at the Sundance London festival , which was their first onstage appearance together in 15 years . 
 When Maxinquaye was first released , it received widespread acclaim from critics . In a review for Mojo , Jon Savage called it a very ambitious and musically audacious work that brilliantly explored the disparities in Britain 's social structure , with Topley @-@ Bird as the " dominant voice " articulating Tricky 's vision of uncertainty in an ever @-@ changing world . Dele Fadele from NME said the record was unprecedented , spellbinding , and revealed something new with every listen . He found Tricky 's production innovative and his fusion of various sounds so seamless , " you can 't label the results under any existing genre " . David <unk> of Melody Maker called the record " all but perfect " and noted that " Tricky 's music is so gripping , original , sublime , his lyrics so abstruse and woven into the sound , that they become inseparable " . In Q magazine Tom Doyle praised Topley @-@ Bird 's vocals for making Maxinquaye " a highly inventive and intoxicating collection " and stated that " with this debut , Tricky proves himself to be more challenging and eclectic than his peers " . 
 Along with Blue Lines , Maxinquaye was hailed by journalists as the pivotal release in what they were calling " trip hop " music ; Jon Pareles , the chief critic at The New York Times , called it the genre 's " first album @-@ length masterpiece " . Tricky disliked the term , saying " I was supposed to have invented trip hop , and I will fucking deny having anything to do with it " . In a retrospective review for Stylus Magazine , Hebert argued that " there 's too much here to be sequestered to any genre , let alone that one ... Calling Tricky ' trip @-@ hop ' is a bit like calling Prince ' pop ' . It 's partially accurate , but the music is so much better than that . " Jason Draper from Record Collector dubbed it " the British postmodern album of the 90s " , and AllMusic senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine said it remained " a bracing sonic adventure that gains richness and resonance with each listen " because of the songs ' imaginative structures and exceptional use of " noise and experimental music " . In The Village Voice , Christgau believed its significance lied in an aesthetic of cool derived from the blues and African @-@ American culture , which valued a self @-@ possessed resolve in the face of oppression : 
 " What stands out isn 't the <unk> pop generalists noticed at the time , but the listenability that induced them to bother : Martina 's pervasive lyricism , beats that are buoyant at any speed , a profusion of sweet @-@ tempered [ keyboard ] effects that signify melody , harmony , strings . It 's still pretty morose , sure . But nothing in its bitter passivity and contained rage comes off as a defeat or a sham ... Maxinquaye had that kind of cool . With blues replications per se having worn out their formal gris @-@ gris , it voiced and embraced a grim new resignation about freedom , power , race , and human connection in the <unk> state — and simultaneously counteracted it . " 
 Reviews of the 2009 deluxe edition continued to praise the album and highlight its originality . Rupert Howe of Q magazine awarded it five stars out of five and called it " an album of contradictions " , saying that at the time it " sounded as alien to hip hop as it did to Britpop " and concluding , " Maxinquaye proved impossible to live up to ... while subsequent Tricky albums tested both musical boundaries and patience , his experiments here still glow with mystery and magic " . In another five @-@ star review in Mojo , Victoria Segal said , " Maxinquaye still sounds like it came from space rather than Bristol , an exotic , erotic alien that nobody ( not least its creator ) has managed to clone " . 
 Maxinquaye was named 1995 's best record in year @-@ end polls by numerous English publications , including NME and Melody Maker , and finished second in the voting for the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics . The record also received a nomination for the 1995 Mercury Prize , an annual music award given to the best album from the UK and Ireland , losing out to Portishead 's 1994 debut Dummy . It was later ranked high in Q magazine 's poll determining the 100 greatest British albums , Mojo 's " 100 Modern Classics " , and Rolling Stone 's " Essential Recordings of the 90s " , among other lists . Since then , Maxinquaye has frequently appeared on authoritative lists of the greatest records ever , including NME 's 2013 list of the 500 greatest albums , which ranked it 202nd best . Slant Magazine named it the 21st greatest electronic album of the 20th century and wrote that along with Blue Lines and Dummy , it was also " one of the most influential trip @-@ hop albums of the ' 90s " . According to Acclaimed Music , Maxinquaye is the 170th most ranked record on critics ' all @-@ time lists . It was also included in the music reference book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die ; according to contributing writer Alex Rayner , the " Innovative , thought provoking , and intricately arranged " album played a significant role in popularizing British hip hop and spoken word music in the UK . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 All songs were written and composed by Tricky , except " Ponderosa " ( Tricky and Howie B ) and " Black Steel " ( Carlton <unk> , Eric Sadler , Hank Shocklee ) . 
 All vocals were performed by Tricky and Martina Topley @-@ Bird , except on " Pumpkin " ( Tricky and Alison Goldfrapp ) and " You Don 't " ( Tricky and <unk> ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Sega CD = 
 The Sega CD , released as the Mega @-@ CD ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Mega @-@ Shī Dī ) in most regions outside North America and Brazil , is a CD @-@ ROM accessory for the Sega Genesis video game console designed and produced by Sega as part of the fourth generation of video game consoles . The add @-@ on was released on December 12 , 1991 in Japan , October 15 , 1992 in North America , and 1993 in Europe . The Sega CD lets the user play CD @-@ based games and adds extra hardware functionality , such as a faster central processing unit and graphic enhancements . It can also play audio CDs and CD + G discs . 
 Seeking to create an add @-@ on device for the Genesis , Sega developed the unit to read compact discs as its storage medium . The main benefit of CD technology was greater storage capacity , which allowed for games to be nearly 320 times larger than their Genesis cartridge counterparts . This benefit manifested in the form of full motion video ( FMV ) games like the controversial Night Trap , which became a focus of the 1993 Congressional hearings on issues of video game violence and ratings . Sega Enterprises partnered with JVC to design the add @-@ on and refused to consult with Sega of America until the project was completed . Sega of America assembled parts from various " dummy " units to obtain a working prototype . While the add @-@ on became known for several well @-@ received games such as Sonic the Hedgehog CD and Lunar : Eternal Blue , its game library contained a large number of Genesis ports and FMV titles . The Sega CD was redesigned a number of times , including once by Sega and several times by licensed third @-@ party developers . 
 2 @.@ 24 million Sega CD units were sold by March 1996 , after which the system was officially discontinued as Sega shifted its focus to the Sega Saturn . Retrospective reception to the add @-@ on is mixed , praising the Sega CD for its individual offerings and additions to the Genesis ' functions , but offering criticism to the game library for its depth issues , high price of the unit , and how the add @-@ on was supported by Sega . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Released in 1988 , the Genesis ( known as the Mega Drive in Europe and Japan ) was Sega 's entry into the fourth generation of video game consoles . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 By the early 1990s , compact discs were making significant headway as a storage medium for music and video games . NEC had been the first to use compact disc technology in a video game console with their PC Engine CD @-@ ROM ² System add @-@ on in October 1988 in Japan ( launched in North America as the TurboGrafx @-@ CD the following year ) , which sold 80 @,@ 000 units in six months . That same year , Nintendo announced a partnership with Sony to develop its own CD @-@ ROM peripheral for the Super NES . Commodore International released their CD @-@ based <unk> multimedia system centered in early 1991 , while long @-@ in @-@ waiting CD @-@ i from Philips finally arrived towards the end of that year . 
 Shortly after the release of the Genesis , Sega 's Consumer Products Research and Development Labs led by manager Tomio Takami were tasked with creating a CD @-@ ROM add @-@ on for the system , which became the Sega CD . The Sega CD was originally intended to equal the capabilities of the TurboGrafx @-@ CD , but with twice as much random @-@ access memory ( RAM ) , and sell for about JP ¥ 20 @,@ 000 ( or US $ 150 ) . In addition to relatively short loading times , Takami 's team planned for the device to feature hardware scaling and rotation similar to that found in Sega 's arcade games , which required the use of a dedicated digital signal processor ( DSP ) . However , two changes made later in development contributed to the final unit 's higher than expected price . Because the Genesis ' Motorola 68000 CPU was too slow to handle the Sega CD 's new graphical capabilities , an additional 68000 CPU was incorporated into the add @-@ on . In addition , upon hearing rumors that NEC planned a memory upgrade to the TurboGrafx @-@ CD , which would bring its available RAM from 0 @.@ 5 Mbit to between 2 and 4 Mbit , Sega decided to increase the Sega CD 's available RAM from 1 Mbit to 6 Mbit . This proved to be one of the greatest technical challenges during development since the Genesis ' access speed was initially too slow to run programs effectively . The cost of the device was now estimated at $ 370 , but market research convinced Sega executives that consumers would be willing to pay more for a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art machine . Sega partnered with JVC , which had been working with Warner New Media to develop a CD player under the CD + G standard , to develop the Sega CD . 
 Up until the middle of 1991 , Sega of America had been kept largely uninformed of the details of the project , without a functioning unit to test ( although Sega of America was provided with preliminary technical documents earlier in the year ) . According to former Sega of America executive producer Michael Latham , " When you work at a multinational company , there are things that go well and there are things that don 't . They didn 't want to send us working Sega CD units . They wanted to send us dummies and not send us the working CD units until the last minute because they were concerned about what we would do with it and if it would leak out . It was very frustrating . " Even though they were not provided a functioning unit , Latham and Sega of America vice president of licensing Shinobu Toyoda put together a functioning Sega CD by acquiring a ROM for the system and installing it in a dummy unit . Further frustrating the Sega of America staff was the construction of the add @-@ on . " The Mega @-@ CD was designed with a cheap , consumer @-@ grade audio CD drive , not a CD @-@ ROM , " stated Scot Bayless , former Sega of America senior producer . " Quite late in the run @-@ up to launch , the quality assurance teams started running into severe problems with many of the units — and when I say severe , I mean units literally bursting into flames . We worked around the clock , trying to catch the failure in @-@ progress , and after about a week we finally realized what was happening , " citing the need of game titles to utilize more time seeking data than the CD drive was designed to provide . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 Sega announced the release of the Mega @-@ CD in Japan for late 1991 , and North America ( as the Sega CD ) in 1992 . It was unveiled to the public for the first time at the 1991 Tokyo Toy Show , to positive reception from critics . The Mega @-@ CD would go on to be released in Japan on December 12 , 1991 , initially retailing at JP ¥ 49 @,@ 800 . Though the unit sold quickly , the small install base of the Mega Drive in Japan meant that sales declined rapidly after launch . Within its first year in Japan , the Mega @-@ CD only sold 100 @,@ 000 units . Third @-@ party development of games for the new system suffered because Sega took a long amount of time to release software development kits . Other factors impacting sales included the high launch price of the Mega @-@ CD in Japan and only two titles being available at launch . 
 On October 15 , 1992 , the Sega CD was released in North America , with a retail price of US $ 299 . Advertising for the add @-@ on included one of Sega 's slogans , " Welcome to the Next Level " . Though only 50 @,@ 000 units were available at launch due to production issues , the add @-@ on sold over 200 @,@ 000 units by the end of 1992 . As part of Sega 's sales , Blockbuster LLC purchased Sega CD units for rental in their stores . The Mega @-@ CD was launched in Europe in the spring of 1993 , at a price of GB £ 270 . Only 70 @,@ 000 units were initially available in the United Kingdom , but 60 @,@ 000 units were sold by August 1993 . <unk> by Sega of America , the benefits of the Sega CD 's additional storage space allowed for a large amount of full motion video ( FMV ) games to be published for the add @-@ on , with Digital Pictures becoming an important partner for Sega . After the initial competition between Sega and Nintendo to develop a CD @-@ based add @-@ on , Nintendo eventually canceled the development process of its own competing peripheral after having partnered with Sony and then with Philips to develop one . 
 Sega would go on to release the add @-@ on 's second model , the Sega CD 2 ( Mega @-@ CD 2 ) , on April 23 , 1993 in Japan at a price of JP ¥ 29 @,@ 800 , It was released in North America several months later at the reduced retail price of US $ 229 , with one of the system 's best @-@ selling games , Sewer Shark , as a pack @-@ in . Designed to bring down the manufacturing costs of the Sega CD , the newer model is smaller and does not contain the motorized disc tray used in the initial model . A limited number of games were also later developed that utilized both the Sega CD and the Sega 32X add @-@ ons , the latter of which was released in November 1994 . 
 = = = Night Trap controversy = = = 
 On December 9 , 1993 , the United States Congress began to hold hearings on video game violence and the marketing of violent video games to children . One of the games at the center of this controversy was the Sega CD 's Night Trap , a full @-@ motion video adventure game by Digital Pictures . Night Trap had been brought to the attention of United States Senator Joe Lieberman , who said of the game , " I looked at that game , too , and there was a classic . It ends with this attack scene on this woman in lingerie , in her bathroom . I know that the creator of the game said it was all meant to be a satire of Dracula ; but nonetheless , I thought it sent out the wrong message . " Lieberman 's research later went on to conclude that the average video game player at the time was between seven and twelve years old , and that video game publishers were marketing violence to children . Similar issues were brought up in the United Kingdom , with former Sega of Europe development director Mike Brogan noting that " Night Trap got Sega an awful lot of publicity .... Questions were even raised in the UK Parliament about its suitability . This came at a time when Sega was capitalizing on its image as an edgy company with attitude , and this only served to reinforce that image . " Although experiencing increased sales as a result of the hearings , Sega decided to recall Night Trap and re @-@ release it with revisions in 1994 . After the close of these hearings , video game manufacturers came together in 1994 to establish the rating system called for by Lieberman , eventually materializing in the form of the Entertainment Software Rating Board . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 As time passed , the releases of new CD @-@ based consoles such as the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer rendered the Sega CD technically obsolete , reducing public interest in the add @-@ on . In late 1993 , less than a year after the system 's launches in North America and Europe , the gaming media reported that Sega of Japan was no longer accepting in @-@ house development proposals for the Mega CD . In early 1995 , Sega shifted its focus to the Sega Saturn and discontinued all advertising for Genesis hardware , including the Sega CD . The add @-@ on itself was officially no longer supported in 1996 . 2 @.@ 24 million Sega CD units were sold worldwide , including 400 @,@ 000 in Japan . 
 = = Technical specifications = = 
 The Sega CD can only be used in conjunction with a Genesis system , attaching through an expansion slot on the side of the main console . Though the Sega CD is an add @-@ on , it does require its own separate power supply . In addition to playing its own library of games in CD @-@ ROM format , the Sega CD can also play compact discs , karaoke CD + G discs , and can also be used in conjunction with the Sega 32X to play 32 @-@ bit games that utilize both add @-@ ons . The second model , also known as the Sega CD 2 , also includes a steel joining plate to be screwed into the bottom of the Genesis , as well as an extension spacer to work with the original model of the Genesis . 
 The main CPU of the Sega CD is a <unk> 16 @-@ bit Motorola 68000 processor , which runs 5 MHz faster than the Genesis processor . It contains 1 Mbit of boot ROM , allocated for the CD game BIOS , CD player software , and compatibility with CD + G discs . 6 Mbit of RAM are allocated to data for programs , pictures , and sounds ; 512 Kbit to PCM waveform memory ; 128 Kbit to CD @-@ ROM data cache memory ; and an additional 64 Kbit are allocated as backup memory . Additional backup memory in the form of a 1 Mbit Backup RAM Cartridge was also available as a separate purchase , released near the end of the system 's life . Audio is able to be supplied through the Ricoh <unk> , and two RCA pin jacks allow the Sega CD to output stereophonic sound separate from the Genesis . Combining stereo sound from a Genesis to either version of the Sega CD requires a cable between the Genesis 's headphone jack and an input jack on the back of the CD unit . This is not required for the second model of the Genesis . 
 Though the Sega CD offers a faster processor , its main purpose is to expand the size of the games . Whereas ROM cartridges of the day typically contained 8 to 16 megabits of data , a CD @-@ ROM disc can hold more than 640 megabytes of data , or more than 320 times the storage of a Genesis cartridge . This allows the Sega CD to run games containing full motion video . 
 = = Variations = = 
 The Sega CD received several variations during its lifetime , of which Sega constructed three . The original model utilized a front @-@ loading motorized disc tray and sat underneath the Genesis . Sega later released the second model of the Sega CD , which was redesigned to sit next to the Genesis console and featured a top @-@ loading disc tray in place of the motorized tray of the original model . In addition to the add @-@ on models , Sega also released the Genesis CDX ( Multi @-@ Mega in Europe ) . This console was a combination of the Genesis and Sega CD into one unit , and initially retailed at US $ 399 . Unique to this model was its additional functionality as a portable compact disc player . 
 Three additional system models were created by other electronics companies . Working with Sega Enterprises , JVC released the Wondermega on April 1 , 1992 , in Japan , at an initial retail price of ¥ 82 @,@ 800 ( or US $ 620 ) . The system was later redesigned by JVC and released as the X <unk> in North America in September 1994 . Designed by JVC to be a Genesis and Sega CD combination with high quality audio , the Wondermega 's high price kept it out of the hands of average consumers . Likewise was the case with the Pioneer LaserActive , which was also an add @-@ on that required an attachment developed by Sega , known as the Mega @-@ LD pack , in order to play Genesis and Sega CD games . Though the LaserActive , developed by Pioneer Corporation , was lined up to compete with the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer , the combined system and Mega @-@ LD pack retailed at nearly $ 1600 , becoming a very expensive option for Sega CD players . Aiwa also released the CSD @-@ GM1 , a combination Genesis / Sega CD unit built into a boombox . 
 = = Game library = = 
 The Sega CD supports a library of over 200 games created both by Sega and an array of third @-@ party publishers . Included in this library are six games which , while receiving individual Sega CD releases , also received separate versions that utilized both the Sega CD and Sega 32X add @-@ ons . Among the titles released for the add @-@ on were a number of FMV games , including Sewer Shark and Fahrenheit . Well @-@ regarded titles include Sonic the Hedgehog CD , Lunar : Eternal Blue and Lunar : The Silver Star , <unk> Mail , and Snatcher , as well as the controversial Night Trap . Although Sega created Streets of Rage for the Genesis to compete against the SNES port of the arcade hit Final Fight , the Sega CD received an enhanced version of the latter game that has been praised for its greater faithfulness to the arcade original . Eternal Champions : Challenge from the Dark Side was noted for its impressive use of the system 's hardware as well as its violent content . In particular , Sonic the Hedgehog CD has garnered critical acclaim for its excellent graphics and new time travel elements , which improved upon the traditional Sonic formula . The Sega CD also received enhanced ports of games from the Genesis , such as Batman Returns and Ecco the Dolphin . 
 Given the large number of FMV games and Genesis ports , the Sega CD 's game library has been criticized for its lack of depth . Full motion video quality was substandard on the Sega CD due to poor video compression software and the system 's limited color palette , and the concept never caught on with the public . According to Digital Pictures founder Tom Zito , " Sega CD could only put up 32 colors at a time , so you had this horrible grainy look to the images , " though the system was able to put up 64 colors at one time . Likewise , most Genesis ports for the Sega CD featured additional full motion video sequences , extra levels , and enhanced audio , but were otherwise identical to their Genesis release . The video quality in these sequences has also been criticized as comparable to an old VHS tape . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Near the time of its release , the Sega CD was awarded Best New Peripheral of 1992 by Electronic Gaming Monthly . Four separate reviews scored the add @-@ on 8 , 9 , 8 , and 8 out of 10 ; reviewers cited its upgrades to the Genesis as well as its high @-@ quality and expanding library of games . Later reception in 1995 by Electronic Gaming Monthly showed a more mixed response to the peripheral , with four reviewers scoring it 5 out of 10 , citing its game library issues and substandard video quality . GamePro also criticized the weak games library and substandard video quality , noting that many of the games were simple ports of cartridge games with minimal enhancements and commenting that " The Sega CD could have been an upgrade , but it 's essentially a big memory device with CD sound . " They gave it a " thumbs sideways " and recommended that Genesis fans buy an SNES before even considering a Sega CD . Likewise , in a special Game Machine Cross Review in May 1995 , Famicom Tsūshin scored the Japanese Mega @-@ CD 2 a 17 out of 40 . 
 Retrospective reception of the Sega CD is mixed , praising certain titles in its game library but criticizing its low value for money and limitations on the benefits it provides to the Genesis . GamePro listed the Sega CD as the 7th @-@ worst selling video game console of all time , with reviewer Blake Snow noting that " The problem was threefold : the device was expensive at $ 299 , it arrived late in the 16 @-@ bit life cycle , and it didn 't do much ( if anything ) to enhance the gameplay experience . " Snow went on to note , however , that the Sega CD did have in its library " the greatest Sonic game of all time " in Sonic the Hedgehog CD . IGN 's Levi Buchanan criticized Sega 's implementation of CD technology for the Genesis , noting , " What good is the extra storage space if there is nothing inventive to be done with it ? No new gameplay concepts emerged from the SEGA CD — it just offered more of the same . In fact , with few exceptions like Sonic CD , it often offered some of the 16 @-@ bit generation 's worst games , like Demolition Man . " Jeremy Parish of USgamer pointed out that " Sega was hardly the only company to muddy its waters with a CD add @-@ on in the early ' 90s " and highlighted some " gems " for the system , but cautioned " the benefits offered by the Sega CD had to be balanced against the fact that the add @-@ on more than doubled the price ( and complexity ) of the [ Genesis ] . " Writing for Retro Gamer , Damien McFerran cited various reasons for the Sega CD 's limited sales , including the add @-@ on 's high price , lack of significant enhancement to the Genesis console , and lack of ability to function without a console attached . Retro Gamer writer Aaron Birch , however , defended the Sega CD and wrote that " the single biggest cause of the Mega @-@ CD 's failure was the console itself . When the system came out , CD @-@ ROM technology was still in its infancy and companies had yet to get to grips with the possibilities it offered ... quite simply , the Mega @-@ CD was a console ahead of its time . " 
 The poor support for the Sega CD has often been criticized as the first link in the devaluation of the Sega brand . Writing for IGN , Buchanan described an outside perspective on Sega 's decision to release the Sega CD with its poor library and console support , stating , " [ T ] he SEGA CD instead looked like a strange , desperate move — something designed to nab some ink but without any real , thought @-@ out strategy . Genesis owners that invested in the add @-@ on were sorely disappointed , which undoubtedly helped sour the non @-@ diehards on the brand . " In reviewing for GamePro , Snow commented that " [ the ] Sega CD marked the first of several Sega systems that saw very poor support ; something that devalued the once @-@ popular Sega brand in the eyes of consumers , and something that would ultimately lead to the company 's demise as a hardware maker . " 
 Former Sega of America senior producer Scot Bayless attributes the unsuccessful market to a lack of direction from Sega with the add @-@ on . According to Bayless , " It was a fundamental paradigm shift with almost no thought given to consequences . I honestly don 't think anyone at Sega asked the most important question : ' Why ? ' There 's a rule I developed during my time as an engineer in the military aviation business : never fall in love with your tech . I think that 's where the Mega @-@ CD went off the rails . The whole company fell in love with the idea without ever really asking how it would affect the games you made . " Sega of America producer Michael Latham offers a contrasting view of support for the add @-@ on , however , stating " I loved the Sega CD . I always thought the platform was under @-@ appreciated and that it was hurt by an over @-@ concentration of trying to make Hollywood interactive film games versus using its storage and extended abilities to make just plain great video games . " Former Sega of Europe president Nick Alexander commented on the Mega CD , saying " The Mega CD was interesting but probably misconceived and was seen very much as the interim product it was . I am afraid I cannot recall the sales numbers , but it was not a success . " 
 = Zelda II : The Adventure of Link = 
 Zelda II : The Adventure of Link ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> no Bōken , " Adventure of Link " ) is an action role @-@ playing video game with platforming elements . The second installment in the The Legend of Zelda series , it was developed and published by Nintendo for the Family Computer Disk System on January 14 , 1987 , less than a year after the original The Legend of Zelda was released and seven months before North America saw the release of the first Zelda title . The game was released in North America and the PAL region for the Nintendo Entertainment System in late 1988 , almost two years after its initial release in Japan . 
 The Adventure of Link is a direct sequel to the original The Legend of Zelda , again involving the protagonist , Link , on a quest to save Princess Zelda , who has fallen under a sleeping spell . The Adventure of Link 's emphasis on side @-@ scrolling and role @-@ playing elements , however , was a significant departure from its predecessor . As of 2016 , the game remains the only technical sequel to the original title , as all other entries in the series either are prequels or take place in an alternative reality , according to the official Zelda timeline . 
 The game was highly successful at the time , and introduced elements such as Link 's " magic meter " and the Dark Link character that would become commonplace in future Zelda games , although the role @-@ playing elements such as experience points and the platform @-@ style side @-@ scrolling and multiple lives were never used again in canonical games . It was followed in 1991 by The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Adventure of Link bears little resemblance to the first game in the series or later games in the series . The Adventure of Link features side @-@ scrolling areas within a larger top @-@ down world map rather than the exclusively top @-@ down perspective of the previous title . It is more an action @-@ RPG , much like Faxanadu ( also on the FC / NES ) . The side @-@ scrolling gameplay and experience system is also very similar to many games in the popular Castlevania series , especially Castlevania II : Simon 's Quest also released for the FDS in 1987 . The game incorporates a strategic combat system , a proximity continue system based on lives , an experience points ( EXP ) system , magic spells , as well as more interaction with non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) . Apart from the CD @-@ i exclusive Zelda : Wand of Gamelon and Link : Faces of Evil , no other game in the series includes a life @-@ feature . The side angle was used again in Link 's Awakening and the other Game Boy entries , but was not the main angle in those games , which relied primarily on the top @-@ down view . 
 = = = Experience levels = = = 
 In this installment , Link gains experience points to upgrade his attack , magic , and life by defeating enemies . This feature is exclusive to Zelda II in the game series . He can raise each of these attributes to a maximum of eight levels . Raising a life level will decrease the damage Link receives when hit , raising a magic level will decrease the magic points ( MP ) cost of spells , and raising an attack level will strengthen his sword 's offensive power . Each attribute requires a different amount of experience to level up , with the life level requiring the least number of points to level and attack requiring the most . When enough points are acquired to raise an attribute , the player may choose to level up that attribute or to cancel and continue gaining experience points towards the next level in another attribute . Once Link has raised an attribute to the maximum level of eight , further advances in that attribute will earn Link an extra life , without advancing the attribute itself . Link begins the game with four Heart Containers and four Magic Containers and can acquire up to four more of each , permanently increasing his life points and magic points respectively . Other games in The Legend of Zelda series only allow Link to increase his strength through new weapons , items , and Heart Containers . Certain enemies drain Link 's experience when they attack , but he will never lose a level once raised . When a game ends or is saved , the cartridge records Link 's current ability levels and the number of experience points required for the next increase , but resets his accumulated points to zero . 
 = = = Overworld map and side @-@ scrolling = = = 
 The Adventure of Link plays out in a two @-@ mode dynamic . The overworld , the area where the majority of the action occurs in other The Legend of Zelda games , is still from a top @-@ down perspective , but it now serves as a hub to the other areas . Whenever Link enters a new area such as a town , the game switches to a side @-@ scrolling view . This mode is where most of the action takes place , and , with the exception of traveling across lava and water , it is the only mode in which Link can take damage and be killed . 
 Link also enters this mode when attacked by wandering monsters . Whenever the player traverses the various environments of Hyrule , enemy silhouettes appear and pursue him . Of the three random creatures that appear , there are three types which correspond to the relative difficulty of the monsters in battle mode : a small , weak blob denoting easy enemies , a large , strong biped denoting harder enemies , and a Fairy , which will put Link on a single screen with a free Fairy to refill his health . This separate method of traveling and entering combat is one of many aspects adapted from the role @-@ playing video game genre . Stepping onto particular spots in the overworld map will automatically switch the game to side @-@ scrolling mode for an enemy encounter or item pickup . 
 = = = Combat system = = = 
 The Adventure of Link has a more complex combat system than its predecessor . Armed with a sword and shield , Link must alternate between standing and crouching positions in order to attack enemies and defend himself ; for example , the Iron Knuckle enemy changes the height of its attack and its shield depending on Link 's current stance , forcing Link to change stances until he has a chance to attack safely . Link has the ability to jump , which can be used for attacking tall or airborne enemies , and can be used for evasion . Eventually , he can learn techniques for downward and upward stabs in midair . 
 = = = Magic and special items = = = 
 Though Link must still collect several items in order to progress in the game ( as in the previous and subsequent installments of the series ) , these special items grant abilities which either remain in permanent use for the rest of the game or can only be activated in the overworld . In place of actively used items , The Adventure of Link features eight spells for Link to use during action scenes . Each spell is learned from a different wise man in one of the eight towns within Hyrule . Link often has to complete side @-@ quests , such as retrieving lost items , before they will teach him their spells . Some spells and items are necessary for advancing beyond certain points in the game . Also , the Life spell becomes the main means of recovering health during action scenes , since healing Fairies are only found in rare fixed spots , and only appear randomly as overworld encounters . 
 = = = Replay = = = 
 Like its predecessor , The Adventure of Link allows storing up to three games in the cartridge 's memory . Once the game has been completed , selecting the corresponding file in the main menu allows starting a new game preserving the acquired experience levels , techniques and magic spells ( but no special items , Heart and Magic containers or extra lives , which must be obtained again ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Several years after the events of The Legend of Zelda , the now @-@ sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Link notices a strange mark on the back of his left hand , exactly like the crest of Hyrule . He seeks out Impa , who responds by taking Link to the North Castle , where a door has been magically sealed for generations . Impa places the back of Link 's left hand on the door , and it opens , revealing a sleeping maiden . Impa tells Link that the maiden is Zelda ( not the Zelda from the first game ) , the princess of Hyrule from long ago , and the origin of the " Legend of Zelda " . Zelda 's brother had tried to force her into telling their recently deceased father 's secrets concerning the last of three sacred golden triangle treasures of his kingdom , known collectively as the Triforce . Princess Zelda refused to reveal its location , and the prince 's wizard friend , in anger , tried to strike her down with a spell . Zelda fell under a powerful sleeping spell , but the wizard was unable to control the wildly arcing magic and was killed by it . The prince , filled with remorse and unable to reverse the spell , had his sister placed in the castle tower , in the hope that she would one day be awakened . He decreed that princesses born to the royal family from that point on would be named Zelda , in remembrance of this tragedy . 
 Impa says that the mark on Link 's hand means that he is the hero chosen to awaken Zelda . She gives Link a chest containing six crystals and ancient writings that only a great future king of Hyrule can read . Link finds that he can read the document , even though he has never seen the language before ; it indicates that the crystals must be set into statues within six palaces scattered all over Hyrule . This will open the way to the Great Palace , which contains the Triforce of Courage . Only the power of the combined <unk> can awaken the enchanted Zelda . Taking the crystals , Link sets out to restore them to their palaces . Meanwhile , the followers of Ganon are seeking to kill Link ; sprinkling his blood on Ganon ’ s ashes will bring Ganon back to life . 
 Ultimately , Link restores the crystals to the six palaces , defeating a strong guardian within each one to do so , and enters the Great Palace . After venturing deep inside , Link must battle a flying creature known as Thunderbird , followed by a shadowy doppelgänger of himself known as Dark Link . Link then claims the Triforce of Courage and returns to Zelda . The three triangles unite into the collective Triforce , and Link 's wish awakens Zelda . The game ends as they ( presumably ) kiss under a falling curtain . 
 = = Development and releases = = 
 Shigeru Miyamoto , the creator of the original The Legend of Zelda , intended to make Zelda II : The Adventure of Link fundamentally different from its predecessor . A different team was assembled to develop the game . However , Miyamoto ( who was credited under the pseudonym " <unk> " ) was the producer , and Takashi Tezuka returned to write the story and script . Zelda II : The Adventure of Link was directed by Tadashi Sugiyama ( credited as " <unk> " ) , for whom it was the first project at Nintendo . The game 's music was composed by Akito <unk> ( credited as " <unk> " ) . 
 The Adventure of Link was originally released on the Family Computer Disk System ( FDS ) before its worldwide release . Like its predecessor , the FDS version appears to be an earlier version of the game , with a few obvious differences . In the English release , the dungeons each have different colors , whereas in the FDS version they are all gray . Also , the two dungeon bosses <unk> and <unk> ( the latter being initially named Barba in the NES release ) have different graphical appearances . The game over screen in the English version features the silhouette of Ganon from the chest up , with the text saying " Game Over / Return of Ganon " , whereas the FDS game over screen is a plain black screen with the text saying " Return of Ganon / The End " . There are some slight additions to the dungeons , as well as a handful of differences on the dungeons themselves . Due to an additional <unk> that the Disk System has , when Nintendo ported Zelda II over to the NES they had to eliminate some musical elements , especially from the title screen . On the main map , the icons denoting attacking monsters look different , but the most significant change is the spending of experience points , as Link 's three attributes cost the same , unlike the worldwide release . Further , the game is designed to promote balanced leveling , as the saved game on the disk will only let the levels for the attributes go as high as whatever is set the lowest ( e.g. if Life is at 5 and Strength is at 4 , but Magic is at 1 , then the saved game will reflect all as level 1 ) , while still saving the data regarding crystals that have been placed and items that have been collected . These differences make leveling up in the game very different . 
 The Adventure of Link was re @-@ released in 2003 on the The Legend of Zelda : Collector 's Edition disc for the GameCube , and again in 2004 as part of the “ Classic NES Series ” for Game Boy Advance , with changes . The intro text has been changed to read " third Triforce " rather than " No.3 Triforce " and the copyright date has been altered to read " <unk> 2004 " . The death animation removed flashing colors in an effort to prevent seizures , replacing it with a solid red color . There were also various graphical and audio tweaks . It was released as the 100th title on the Wii 's Virtual Console in Japan on January 23 , 2007 , in Europe and Australia on February 9 , 2007 and was released in North America on June 4 , 2007 . The text changes weren 't made in this version , but it does feature the solid red color in the death animations from the GameCube and Game Boy Advance versions . 
 The game was released yet again in September 2011 on Virtual Console ( this time on the 3DS ) , bundled with its predecessor as part of a free giveaway of 10 original Nintendo Entertainment System games to 3DS owners who purchased the console before the price drop . It is now available to purchase on the Nintendo eShop for the 3DS and Wii U. The 3DS version is a direct port of the original NES release and , consequently , features the flashing color death scene and none of the text alterations of previous re @-@ releases . Although the game features the save option , fully resetting the software currently results in the save game being deleted , meaning that the user should not do this unless that is the desired outcome . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Original version = = = 
 Upon its release in North America , Zelda II became one of the most popular NES games of 1988 , with many retailers reporting that the game was selling out that year . The game ultimately sold 4 @.@ 38 million copies worldwide , making it the fifth best selling NES game , behind the Super Mario Bros. series and the first Legend of Zelda game . 
 In 1987 , Famicom Tsūshin ( now Famitsu ) gave it a score of 36 out of 40 , based on a panel of four reviewers giving it ratings of 8 , 10 , 9 and 9 out of 10 . This made it their second highest @-@ rated game of 1987 , behind only Dragon Quest II . These were also the only two games to have received a Famitsu score of 35 / 40 or above up until 1987 . Play magazine praised the unique gameplay , saying that " it 's this combination of unique elements that creates an action @-@ RPG experience unlike any other " . Nintendo Power said that the game was " an entertaining and natural step in the franchise 's evolution , " and awarded it their Game of the Year Award for 1988 . Zelda II was reviewed in 1992 by issue # 2 of Total ! magazine , where it received an 82 % rating , due in great part to mediocre sub @-@ scores for music and graphics . A 1993 review of the game was printed in issue # 198 of Dragon by Sandy Petersen , in the " Eye of the Monitor " column . Petersen gave the game 3 out of 5 stars . 
 Zelda II was rated the 110th best game made on a Nintendo System in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list . In August 2008 , Nintendo Power listed it as the 12th best Nintendo Entertainment System video game , describing it as a radical and refreshing departure from its predecessor . 
 = = = Re @-@ releases = = = 
 IGN said that the game is a " recommended and playable adventure " but also said " don 't expect the same gameplay from the truly classic Zelda titles . " 1UP.com praised the game 's length , citing that " you can certainly find plenty here to keep you busy for some time . " The game also received some criticism . GameSpot said that while the game is " decent enough to make it worth the $ 5 price [ on the Wii 's Virtual Console ] " , it features " questionable design decision [ s ] " and can get confusing if players don 't have the help of walkthroughs . The GBA version of the game had an aggregated score of 73 on <unk> and an aggregated score of 68 @.@ 88 on GameRankings , making it the game of the series with the lowest score in both websites . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Many elements first introduced in this game have remained in the series . For instance , non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) were present in The Legend of Zelda , but their role was rather limited . Starting with The Adventure of Link , Zelda games have prominently featured a variety of NPCs who play pivotal roles in Link 's quests . Zelda II was also one of the first games where NPCs walked around and seemingly had their own agendas , giving the world a life of its own rather than being a simple stage for the story to unfold . The use of metered magic and spells has also carried over into other Zelda games . The Triforce of Courage makes its first appearance in The Adventure of Link and plays an important role in later Zelda games , as it is strongly associated with Link . Dark Link is a version of Link 's Shadow which appears in Ocarina of Time , a similar Link clone called Shadow Link appears in Four Swords Adventures , and yet another appears in Spirit Tracks , as well as in A Link Between Worlds . 
 Additionally , The Adventure of Link was one of the first games to combine role @-@ playing video game and platforming elements to a considerable degree . Over the next few years , a number of Japanese @-@ made games appeared with a similar format ; major titles such as <unk> ( 1989 ) closely resemble The Adventure of Link , with side @-@ scrolling platform stages supplemented by RPG @-@ like statistical systems , weapons , armor , magic spells , and so forth . 
 Most of the sages in Ocarina of Time bear the same names as towns from The Adventure of Link ( Rauru , Ruto , <unk> , <unk> , and Darunia ; excluding Impa ) . Another town , Mido , is also the name of a character in <unk> Forest . However , in the in @-@ game chronology , the towns were named after the characters . The Adventure of Link is also the only Zelda game of the main English releases not to use " The Legend of Zelda " in its title , the only Zelda game to feature " lives " counting down , and therefore the only game in the series to include 1 @-@ up dolls . The next Zelda game released after The Adventure of Link was The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past for the Super Famicom in 1991 , which follows new Link and Zelda characters and returns to the top @-@ down style of the original . It is officially considered a prequel to the NES games , and as of 2016 there has been no technical plot sequel to The Adventure of Link , with each Zelda game being either a prequel or a " sequel to a prequel " . 
 There are a small number of side scrolling areas in The Legend of Zelda : Link 's Awakening ; these areas were mainly underground tunnels and caves . The series broke away from the top @-@ down style again in 1998 when Ocarina of Time was released on the Nintendo 64 , with 3D graphics . A new version of the composition " Temple " , arranged by Shogo Sakai , is featured in Super Smash Bros. Melee , where it is played during the " Hyrule Temple " stage and the " Underground Maze " level . A variation of the track , as well as a new version of the ' Grand Palace ' level song , also appears in Super Smash Bros. Brawl . The track was later once again updated and appeared twice , as the " Streetpass Battle Theme " as well as a slower version for the " Battle Victory " music , in the Nintendo 3DS Zelda game A Link Between Worlds , making it the only subsequent Zelda game to include theme music that originated in The Adventure of Link . The Streetpass battle mode is itself inspired by the final boss fight of Zelda 2 , and Streetpass fights occur between the player as Link , and the other player as Shadow / Dark Link . 
 The 3DS title Adventure Time : Hey Ice King ! Why 'd You Steal Our Garbage ? ! , developed by WayForward Technologies was intended to play like Zelda II and pays homage to it . It features very similar gameplay and references to The Legend of Zelda series of video games . 
 = Mido ( footballer ) = 
 Ahmed <unk> Hussein Abdelhamid ( Arabic : أحمد <unk> حسين ; born 23 February 1983 ) , more commonly known as Mido , is an Egyptian football manager . He is currently the technical adviser of Lierse <unk> .. He is also a TV presenter and former footballer who played as a striker . 
 Mido started his career with Zamalek in Egypt in 1999 . He left the club for Gent of Belgium in 2000 , where he won the Belgian Ebony Shoe . This led to a move to Dutch side Ajax in 2001 , from where he joined Celta Vigo on loan in 2003 . His next destination was Marseille in France and he left them for Italian side Roma in 2004 . He joined English side Tottenham Hotspur on an 18 @-@ month loan in 2005 and eventually joined the club permanently in 2006 . He left the club in 2007 to join Middlesbrough , from whom he joined Wigan Athletic , Zamalek , West Ham United and Ajax on loan . In 2011 , he rejoined Zamalek , before joining Barnsley in 2012 . He also played for Egypt 51 times scoring 20 goals . Mido retired from football in June 2013 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Zamalek = = = 
 Born in Cairo , Mido started his career with Egyptian Premier League club Zamalek in 1999 . He made his league debut on 22 May 2000 in a 0 – 0 draw against El <unk> . The next week , Mido scored his first two goals against Aluminium Nag <unk> , which Zamalek won 3 – 2 . His African debut came on 28 May 2000 , in a 2 – 1 win against Ethiopian Coffee , making the aggregate score 3 – 3 , which led to the game being decided on penalties . Zamalek won 4 – 2 . Zamalek eventually reached the 2000 African Cup Winners ' Cup final , beating Cameroonian side Canon Yaoundé 4 – 3 on aggregate . Mido 's performances eventually attracted interest from Belgian club Gent . 
 = = = Gent = = = 
 In 2000 , at the age of 17 , Mido signed for Gent . Initially , he suffered from homesickness , and returned to Egypt shortly after arriving in Belgium , only staying at his father 's vehement insistence . Working hard to fight his reservations , Mido eventually overcame them , in his own words gaining " the mentality of a pro " . Gent manager Patrick Remy was impressed by Mido 's handling of the issue and promoted him to the first team in September 2000 , placing him at first on the substitutes ' bench . However , Mido continued to impress Remy , who commented on his " responsibilities ... [ and ] great technical capabilities " . He eventually became a first @-@ team regular , and made his league debut on 27 August 2000 in a 4 – 1 away win against Eendracht <unk> . On 2 October 2000 , he scored his first goal in a 2 – 1 home win against Standard Liège . His European debut came on 12 September 2000 , where Gent suffered a 6 – 0 home defeat to Ajax . He became a fan favourite , and was praised by the Belgian press at the end of the season . Mido went on to win the Belgian Ebony Shoe in 2001 as the best African player in the Belgian First Division , as well as being named the Belgian " Discovery of the Year " . As he attracted interest from major clubs both in Belgium and abroad , he ended the season with a powerful performance against Royal Antwerp , scoring one of Gent 's goals in a 3 – 1 win and setting up the other two . Two years later , Remy described the match to an Egyptian journalist , saying that " Mido did everything . " He finished the season with 11 goals from 21 matches , as Gent finished fifth , earning them a spot in the following season of the UEFA Intertoto Cup . 
 = = = Ajax = = = 
 After his success in Belgium with Gent , Mido signed a five @-@ year contract with Eredivisie team Ajax in 2001 . He suffered a concussion during their UEFA Cup match with Limassol , after colliding with a defender . He made his return for the team against Heerenveen , a match which Ajax lost 5 – 1 . However , he was sent off against Twente , after kicking Spira Grujić whilst trying to beat him to the ball , for which he was later given a three @-@ match ban . He returned for Ajax against Vitesse , coming on as a substitute in the 75th minute . He failed to be selected for the substitutes bench against Feyenoord in March 2002 , which was due to a minor clash with manager Ronald Koeman , and Mido left for a short vacation in Cairo . Mido scored in Ajax 's victory over Utrecht in the KNVB Cup final , meaning he ended the 2001 – 02 season with the Dutch League and Cup double . 
 He played for only 32 minutes against Groningen , after a display which lacked creativity . He said afterwards he was tired and was carrying a slight injury during the match , but Koeman criticised Mido saying he was not giving everything . He revealed in September 2002 that he wanted to leave Ajax in the transfer window in late December . However , Mido soon apologised to Koeman and Leo <unk> regarding the transfer comments , saying he was " irresponsible " and " <unk> " . He was handed a fine and suspended from Ajax 's game against Olympique Lyonnais . In December of that year , he revealed that he wanted to stay at Ajax . He scored for Ajax during their 6 – 0 defeat of Willem II in February 2003 , but Koeman again criticised Mido , commenting negatively on his performance against Roda in the KNVB Cup . He was dropped for Ajax 's next game against Feyenoord , only featuring as an unused substitute . He suffered a muscle strain in his upper thigh after a friendly for Egypt , and was ruled out of Ajax 's game against Groningen . Mido was relegated to the Ajax reserve team for disciplinary reasons , surrounding a perceived lack of effort in training . His situation at the club led to interest from Serie A clubs Juventus and Lazio and he was later reported to have thrown a pair of scissors at Ajax teammate Zlatan Ibrahimović following an argument in March 2003 . 
 = = = = Loan to Celta Vigo = = = = 
 Celta Vigo made a loan offer for Mido in March , which was reported to have fallen through days later as it was not approved by FIFA . However , FIFA eventually allowed the move to go through and it was completed on 18 March . He scored on his Celta Vigo debut against Athletic Bilbao , which Celta won 2 – 1 . Ajax valued Mido between the values of € 5 million and € 6 million , amidst interest from clubs in Italy and Spain . Newcastle United were reportedly on the verge of making a bid for Mido in May , but this was ruled out by Mido 's agent Christophe <unk> . Ajax attempted to make him return to the club , but he declined this , in favour of staying at Celta . He suffered a muscle injury whilst training in May , but was available to play in Celta 's match against Villarreal CF , which saw Mido sent off in a game which Celta lost 5 – 0 . Mido was linked with a move to A.S. Roma in late May , with Roma chairman Franco <unk> stating " I want Mido " , but Ajax revealed they wanted € 15 million for him . Ajax turned down a loan move from Real Betis for Mido in June . Marseille were then believed to have made an offer for the striker and Celta were not ready to meet Ajax 's asking price of € 15 million . 
 = = = Marseille = = = 
 Ajax accepted a € 12 million bid for Mido from Marseille in July , and completed the move on a five @-@ year contract on 12 July 2003 , which made Mido the most expensive Egyptian player ever . He made his debut for Marseille in 1 – 0 win over Guingamp on 1 August 2003 . Jean @-@ Pierre Papin gave praise to Mido , saying it was down to players like him that the French Ligue 1 was among the top European leagues . He scored against Real Madrid in a UEFA Champions League match in November , which Marseille lost 2 – 1 . 
 Mido stated in March 2004 that he may leave Marseille at the end of the 2003 – 04 season . An English club and several Spanish clubs were believed to be interested in signing Mido , who had been overshadowed at Marseille by Didier Drogba . Atlético Madrid , Zaragoza , Osasuna and former club Celta Vigo were all rumoured to be interested in signing Mido , with Atlético 's interest being confirmed by their Technical Director Toni Muñoz . Meanwhile , Mido was caught speeding on the way to Marseille 's game against AS Monaco , which resulted in a court hearing . Reports suggested Roma were ready to sign Mido for a fee of € 9 million even though Mido would be out injured for the rest of the French football season . Turkish side Beşiktaş revealed they wanted to sign him , and Mido said he was to have talks with Bobby Robson about a possible move to Newcastle United . 
 = = = Roma = = = 
 Mido eventually signed for Roma on the final day of the 2004 summer transfer window , for a fee of € 6 million , signing a five @-@ year contract . It was confirmed that he would miss the opening game of the season , and possibly the following two games . Mido was penciled in to make his Roma debut against Messina in September 2004 , a game in which he did actually play , but Roma lost 4 – 3 . Reports suggested that Mido could be sold to Valencia in a swap deal with Bernardo <unk> and was also linked with a move to Premier League side Manchester City . Southampton were believed to have had Mido on their shortlist of targets , but his agent Christophe <unk> said Roma would not be willing to let Mido leave the club . It was even reported that he had been offered to Southampton on loan but his new agent , Mino <unk> , repeated the earlier claims that Roma wanted to keep Mido until , at least , the end of the season . He was linked with a move to Tottenham Hotspur , with his agent confirming he wanted a move away from Roma . 
 = = = Tottenham Hotspur = = = 
 Mido was signed by Tottenham on an 18 @-@ month loan deal on 28 January 2005 . He scored two goals on his Tottenham debut against Portsmouth on 5 February 2005 . He scored 3 goals in 11 appearances during the 2004 – 05 season for Tottenham . Mido announced plans in July 2005 to launch his own football academy in Egypt , which had the aim of nurturing the country 's young talent . In January 2006 , he expressed that he did not wish to return to Roma at the end of the 2005 – 06 season , but rather sign permanently with Tottenham . Tottenham manager Martin Jol said that the club were confident of signing Mido on a permanent deal due to his good performances , but later admitted Tottenham may be defeated in keeping Mido , with other clubs interested in signing him . His permanent move was further put into doubt in April 2006 , after he suffered a new injury problem . He suffered abuse from a small section of the Southampton and West Ham United fans in 2005 . West Ham manager Alan Pardew apologised to Mido for the abuse by the fans . He finished the 2005 – 06 season with 11 goals in 27 games , meaning he was Tottenham 's second highest goalscorer . Tottenham confirmed in May 2006 that Mido would be returning to Roma . 
 However , Mido re @-@ joined Tottenham on 29 August on a permanent deal for a fee of € 6 @.@ 75 million . After returning to <unk> he commented on the team 's official website that he " always knew in his heart he would be coming back " and that he " couldn 't wait to pull on a Tottenham shirt , play at the Lane and score some more goals " . However , soon after this , Mido was accused of being " irresponsible and disrespectful " by his manager Martin Jol , following comments Mido had made about former Tottenham player Sol Campbell . After failing to score in his first five appearances as a permanent Tottenham player , he finally found the net against rivals West Ham with a match @-@ winning volley on 19 October 2006 , and followed that with two goals against League Two side Milton Keynes Dons in the League Cup . He had to contend with being fourth in line for one of the two striking spots , but insisted that this was a sign of the club 's strength , and something he was fully aware of before rejoining the club . However , he was linked with a move to Manchester City . Mido scored what looked to be his final goal for Tottenham on 31 January 2007 against Arsenal , but his potential move to Manchester City fell through half an hour before the close of the transfer window . He eventually admitted he made a mistake by joining Tottenham on a permanent deal . He ended the 2006 – 07 season with 23 appearances and 5 goals . 
 = = = Middlesbrough = = = 
 Tottenham agreed a £ 6 million fee with Birmingham City for Mido on 20 July 2007 . Birmingham manager Steve Bruce said the move was close to collapsing , as the deal reportedly faltered over the wages and the length of contract Mido was demanding . The deal eventually fell through over a clause that Mido insisted be in the contract . In August 2007 Sunderland made a £ 6 million bid for him and held talks , after which Birmingham confirmed they were trying to revive their deal to sign Mido . Middlesbrough then revealed their interest in signing him , matching the £ 6 million fee of Birmingham and Sunderland and were given permission to speak to him . They eventually signed Mido for a fee of £ 6 million on a four @-@ year contract on 16 August 2007 . He scored on his debut for Middlesbrough against Fulham and on his home debut against Newcastle United . During the Newcastle game , Mido was reportedly subject to Islamophobic abuse from some Newcastle supporters , which The Football Association ( The FA ) was to investigate . 
 He suffered a stress fracture to the pubic bone which kept him out for more than three months from November 2007 until he returned to first @-@ team action for Middlesbrough 's 2 – 0 FA Cup victory over Mansfield Town on 26 January 2008 . He was sent off in the 80th minute in a match against Arsenal on 15 March 2008 after kicking Gaël Clichy in the face with his boot , which resulted in him receiving a three @-@ match ban . Mido was ruled out for the remainder of the 2007 – 08 season in April following a hernia operation on a pelvic injury . He made the bench for Middlesbrough 's opening Premier League fixture against former club Tottenham and came on as a substitute in the 82nd minute and scored four minutes later after deflecting Didier <unk> 's shot . The following weekend saw him score against Liverpool at Anfield to put Middlesbrough 1 – 0 in the lead , but they eventually lost the game 2 – 1 . This was followed up with goals against Yeovil Town in the League Cup and Portsmouth in the league . Mido was again targeted by some Newcastle fans while warming up before Middlesbrough 's 0 – 0 draw , with claims of racist chanting being investigated by The FA . He revealed his anger at The FA 's investigation , believing that they would make no difference to any future abuse . Two men were eventually arrested over the chanting and were due to appear at Teesside Magistrates Court . 
 = = = = Loan to Wigan Athletic = = = = 
 Mido entered talks with Wigan Athletic over signing on a six @-@ month loan deal , and he completed the move on 23 January 2009 . He scored on his debut with the equalizing goal against Liverpool with a penalty kick in a 1 – 1 draw on 28 January . He scored for Wigan in a 4 – 1 defeat against Arsenal and he finished the loan spell with 12 appearances and 2 goals . Following Middlesbrough 's relegation to the Championship , he failed to report to pre @-@ season training , and he was eventually fined by the club after not turning up after a fortnight . He returned to training a day after this . 
 = = = = Loan to Zamalek = = = = 
 Middlesbrough accepted an undisclosed offer for Mido from an unnamed club on 26 July , and he completed a season @-@ long move to former club Zamalek on 3 August , who had an option to sign him permanently if they were able to meet Middlesbrough 's terms . On 20 August , Mido made a disappointing debut for Zamalek , wasting a second @-@ half penalty as Zamalek threw away their lead to suffer a late 2 – 1 home victory to <unk> in the Egyptian Premier League . 
 = = = = Loan to West Ham United = = = = 
 Mido joined West Ham United on a four @-@ month loan on 1 February 2010 after his season @-@ long loan spell with Zamalek was terminated by mutual agreement . He stated " I had to sacrifice some things but I 'm here to play football again and I 'm here to prove a point . I 'm very happy to be here , it 's a great club – and I 'm sure I 'll do well here . " West Ham chairman David Sullivan announced that in order for Mido to secure his long @-@ term footballing future , his contract with West Ham put him amongst the lowest earners in the Premier League . Sullivan said " He doesn 't want to be known as a ' has been ' of English football , so he was willing to come here to play for a nominal fee , just £ 1 @,@ 000 a week . " He made his debut for West Ham on 6 February in 2 – 1 away defeat against Burnley . In nine appearances for West Ham he failed to score and had a tame penalty saved in a 2 – 2 away draw against Everton . In June 2010 , West Ham decided not to offer him a new contract . 
 = = = = Loan to Ajax = = = = 
 Ajax entered talks with Middlesbrough over signing Mido on a free transfer in July . On 1 September , he signed a one @-@ year loan contract . Mido made his league debut on 16 October 2010 , coming on as a substitute for <unk> <unk> in a 3 – 0 win against NAC Breda . He scored his first goal on 11 November in a 3 – 0 win against Veendam in the Dutch Cup . Despite scoring three goals in six appearances , his first @-@ team football opportunities were limited , having been on the starting line @-@ up only once . After Martin Jol resigned , Mido lost his place when new manager Frank de Boer was appointed on 6 December 2010 . On 4 January 2011 , he wrote Ajax a letter to cancel his contract . 
 = = = Return to Zamalek = = = 
 On 21 January 2011 , Mido rejoined Zamalek on a three @-@ and @-@ a half @-@ year contract . However , due to an error made by Zamalek management Mido was not registered in time to play with Zamalek thus sitting out the remainder of the season . 
 = = = Barnsley = = = 
 On 16 June 2012 , Mido agreed a deal with English Championship side Barnsley , subject to a medical . His move was completed on 21 June 2012 when he signed a one @-@ year contract with Barnsley . Mido made his league debut on 10 November 2012 as a substitute for Kelvin Etuhu in a 1 – 0 home defeat against Huddersfield Town . On 31 January 2013 he was released by mutual consent along with defender Lee Collins . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 His retirement from football was announced in June 2013 . 
 Prior to his retirement , Mido was named Honorary Life President of the Old Wykehamist Football Club , a club for alumni of Winchester College and one of the founding member clubs of the Arthurian League . 
 = = International career = = 
 Mido played 13 times for the Egypt youth team between 1999 and 2001 . 
 He has earned 51 caps for Egypt and scored 20 goals . Mido scored on his international debut against the United Arab Emirates , which Egypt won 2 – 1 . Mido sent a fax to the Egypt team to tell them he was not available for international selection in May 2004 , saying he was not psychologically fit to join the team . Mido was a part of the Egypt squad that played at the 2004 African Cup of Nations . 
 Egypt manager Marco Tardelli dropped Mido in September 2004 , after Mido claimed to be unavailable for the national team due to an injury , but played in a friendly match for Roma 24 hours later . A day later , Mido rejected accusations that he refused to play for his country . Also , the Egyptian Football Association announced that he would not play for the team again . However , Tardelli was sacked as Egypt coach and in January 2005 the Egyptian Football Association said they would consider bringing Mido back into the team if he were to apologise for his past behaviour . Mido flew to Cairo in February 2005 and made a public apology and the following month he was recalled by the national team . Mido withdrew from Egypt 's 2006 World Cup qualifier against Cameroon , after sustaining a muscle tear while playing with Tottenham Hotspur . 
 Mido was thrown out of the Egypt team during the 2006 African Cup of Nations as a consequence of an argument with coach Hassan <unk> in the semi @-@ final game against Senegal , which started after Mido reacted badly to being substituted . His replacement Amr Zaki came on to score a header with his first touch , putting Egypt into the final . A day later , Mido reconciled with <unk> , but was given a six @-@ month suspension from playing with Egypt . Mido was eventually recalled by the side following his suspension , ready for the 2008 African Cup of Nations qualification which Egypt won . Mido was included in the Egypt squad to play South Africa in London in November 2006 , despite suffering from a knee injury at the time . However , he was left out of the Egypt squad to play Mauritania in an African Nations Cup qualifier in March 2007 . 
 = = Post @-@ retirement career = = 
 After his retirement , he turned into analysing Premier League matches as well as Champions league matches on Al Jazeera Sports channels . He also has his own show on Al <unk> TV as well as an on @-@ line show on <unk> . He stated that he aims to become a manager after gaining required certificate . 
 = = Managerial career = = 
 = = = Zamalek = = = 
 Although he received numerous offers from teams like Paris Saint @-@ Germain Youth Academy and Egyptian team Al @-@ Masry but turned them down . He was appointed as Zamalek head coach after the firing of Helmy <unk> on 21 January 2014 , despite being only 30 years old . Mido led his team to the third place in the 2013 – 14 Egyptian Premier League and secured a place in the 2015 CAF Confederation Cup after a 1 – 0 loss to his rival Al @-@ Ahly , 2 – 1 loss to Alexandria side <unk> and then a 2 – 0 win over <unk> . 
 Mido succeeded to win the Egypt Cup and secure the cup title for the second year in row , by beating <unk> 1 – 0 , making him the youngest manager to win a trophy with his team in Egypt . On 29 July 2014 Mido was replaced by <unk> Hassan as the manager of Zamalek . 
 = = = Zamalek Youth Academy = = = 
 He later accepted an offer from Zamalek 's chairman Mortada Mansour to be the Director of Zamalek Youth Academy with appointing his former assistant Mohamed Salah as the technical manager of Zamalek Youth Academy . Under his leadership , The U @-@ 16 team won Al Wehda International Championship after defeating FC Steaua București U @-@ 16 by a result of 2 @-@ 0 in the final . 
 = = = Ismaily = = = 
 On 15 July 2015 , Ismaily 's chairman Mohamed Abo El @-@ <unk> announced that Mido will be the manager of the team . He also announced that Ashraf <unk> will be the assistant manager . He resigned from his position in 20 December 2015 following a developed problem with the team captain Hosny Abd Rabo . 
 = = = Return to Zamalek = = = 
 Zamalek 's Chairman Mortada Mansour announced the return of Mido as the manager of Zamalek , succeeding Marcos <unk> who failed to control the team . He also appointed <unk> <unk> as the general manager and Ismail Youssef as the technical director . After only one month as a manager , he was fired after a 2 @-@ 0 loss to rivals Al Ahly in Cairo derby , leading to increase the gap between the two teams to seven points . Later Mortada Mansour said that the board decided to remove Mido from his position after the loss to Ismaily , but announcing it was delayed until Cairo Derby is played , to avoid distraction of players . 
 = = = Lierse = = = 
 On 7th of July 2016 , Lierse S.K. ' s chairman <unk> Samy announced the hiring of Mido as a technical adviser for Lierse S.K. and Wadi <unk> SC . Mido said that he aims to help the club to get promoted to Belgian First Division A. 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Mido married business student <unk> <unk> on 26 June 2002 . Both travelled to Amsterdam for Mido to attend his first training with Ajax . Amsterdam @-@ based channel <unk> sent a team to make a special program on Mido 's wedding , his wife and Mido 's fans in Egypt . Mido is a Muslim . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list Egypt 's goal tally first . 
 1 Egypt 's goalscorer vs. Kenya is also accredited to his teammate Ahmed Salah Hosny . 
 = = Managerial statistics = = 
 As of 13 February 2016 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = As a player = = = 
 = = = = Club = = = = 
 Zamalek 
 African Cup Winners ' Cup ( 1 ) : 2000 
 Ajax 
 Eredivisie ( 2 ) : 2001 – 02 , 2010 – 11 
 KNVB Cup ( 1 ) : 2001 – 02 
 Johan Cruijff Shield ( 1 ) : 2001 – 02 
 = = = = International = = = = 
 = = = = Egypt = = = = 
 Africa Cup of Nations ( 1 ) : 2006 
 = = = = Individual = = = = 
 Belgian Ebony Shoe ( 1 ) : 2001 
 Belgian League Young Player of the Year ( 1 ) : 2000 – 01 
 Egyptian Young Footballer of the Year ( 1 ) : 2000 – 01 
 African Young Player of the Year ( 1 ) : 2001 – 02 
 Honorary Life President of the Old Wykehamist Football Club 
 = = = As a manager = = = 
 = = = = Club = = = = 
 Zamalek 
 Egypt Cup ( 1 ) : 2014 
 Zamalek Youth Academy 
 Al Wehda International Championship ( 1 ) : 2015 
 = Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix = 
 Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix ( キングダム ハーツ HD 1 @.@ 5 <unk> , Kingudamu Hātsu HD 1 @.@ 5 <unk> , stylized Kingdom Hearts HD <unk> <unk> ) is an HD remastered collection of the Kingdom Hearts series , developed by Square Enix for the PlayStation 3 . It was revealed in September 2012 and released in Japan in March 2013 , and North America , Australia and Europe in September 2013 . 
 Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix includes both Kingdom Hearts Final Mix and Re : Chain of Memories in high @-@ definition and with trophy support . Additionally , the collection features Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days in a Theater Mode , spanning 2 hours and 50 minutes of HD remastered cinematics from the original game , as well as new scenes . The 358 / 2 Days cinematic also has trophy support . Ideas for a remastered collection of Kingdom Hearts games were first revealed in August 2011 , with the collection formally announced in September 2012 . Kingdom Hearts Final Mix , in addition to being created from the ground up due to lost assets from the original game , had the most adjustments made to its gameplay , including adding Reaction Commands first introduced in Kingdom Hearts II and allowing the camera to be moved with the right thumb stick . 
 The collection was met to generally favorable reviews . A second collection , Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix , was released in 2014 while a third collection , Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 8 Final Chapter Prologue , will be released in 2016 . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts Final Mix = = = 
 In the original and Final Mix versions of Kingdom Hearts , the command menu had four commands : Attack , Magic , Items , and a fourth context @-@ sensitive slot that varied depending on what the player had targeted , where they were , etc . The command menu has been updated to include " Attack " , " Magic " , " Items " , and " Summons " in the fourth slot , which was originally located as a sub @-@ category beneath the " Magic " menu . The original fourth command has been replaced by the introduction of Reaction Commands from Kingdom Hearts II and are triggered by pressing the Triangle Button . The camera works more similarly to that of Kingdom Hearts II , utilizing the right thumb stick to move the camera and allowing the player to click the R3 button to reset the camera behind Sora , as opposed to the original game which made use of the shoulder triggers L2 and R2 to position the camera . Overall , the gameplay of Kingdom Hearts Final Mix was modified so it would play more similarly to Kingdom Hearts II and Re : Chain of Memories , to create a more consistent play style throughout the series . 
 It was released in North America , Europe and Australia for the first time as part of the collection . 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories = = = 
 This version of Chain of Memories was released in Europe and Australia for the first time as part of the collection , as it was previously released in North America in December 2008 . 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days = = = 
 358 / 2 Days does not appear in playable form , and instead features the Nintendo DS game adapted into 2 hours and 50 minutes worth of cinematic retelling , and features trophy support . 
 = = Development = = 
 In August 2011 , Nomura expressed desire to release a high definition re @-@ release of the game though he had yet to confirm such plans . The idea for a high definition re @-@ release preceded plans for Final Fantasy X re @-@ release , and was a focus for two Square Enix programmers for over a year . 
 In September 2012 , Square Enix announced Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix for release in Japan on the PlayStation 3 . The collection would include both Kingdom Hearts Final Mix and Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories in high definition and trophy support as well as non @-@ playable HD event scenes from Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days as a way for players to understand the story . The development team experimented with using some character models from Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance for HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix . The cutscenes from Kingdom Hearts Final Mix , which were either unvoiced or used English voice acting , now use the original Japanese voice acting . Every cutscene from Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days , whether it was originally a prerendered scene or used in @-@ game graphics , were remade for Theater Mode . 358 / 2 Days was originally planned to be an HD remade game , however , it would delay the development of the new title , so it ended up being within the compilation 's Theater Mode . 
 In January 2013 , Jesse McCartney , the voice of Roxas , posted a picture on Instagram of himself in a recording booth , with Roxas seen on a screen in the background , along with the caption , " For all you ' Kingdom Hearts ' Fans . Recording the next chapter ! # <unk> # Roxas # Gamers . " The image was later deleted by McCartney . In February , Square Enix confirmed the game would release in North America and Europe , later revealing September 2013 releases for North America , Australia , and Europe . 
 It was revealed in March 2013 in a Famitsu interview , that 66 tracks spanning across all three games ( with a majority of them concentrated in Kingdom Hearts Final Mix ) were re @-@ recorded with live instrumentation , as opposed to the original games ' use of the PlayStation 2 's built @-@ in tone generator for their background music . In June 2013 , Nomura stated that the original game assets for Kingdom Hearts had been lost some time ago . He explained , " [ The game data ] was lost , so we had to research , and we had to dig out from the actual game what was available and recreate everything for HD . We had to recreate all the graphics and it was actually not that easy . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix was released in Japan on March 14 , 2013 , in North America on September 10 , 2013 , in Australia on September 12 , 2013 , and in Europe on September 13 , 2013 . Preorders for the game in North America , Australia , and Europe included a book of the game 's concept artwork and a dynamic PlayStation 3 theme . Square Enix will also release the collection in a bundle in Japan with Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix titled , Kingdom Hearts Collector ’ s Pack : HD 1 @.@ 5 + 2 @.@ 5 Remix . The Collector 's pack will feature both collections , a code to get an Anniversary Set for Kingdom Hearts χ [ chi ] , music , and a booklet with art from the series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix has been met to generally positive critical reception . Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the game a 77 / 100 . 
 Kotaku gave the release a generally positive rating , praising the redone visuals , tweaked gameplay and expanded content , but also noting the game 's age is still palpable . Game Informer gave the collection an 8 @.@ 25 out of 10 , stating " The core of this collection is the excellent original game , and that ’ s where your attention should be . The other two lowly offerings are inessential bonus features . " Joystiq gave a positive , unscored review , saying the collection " captures that early era of the franchise at its purest simplicity . It 's a trip down memory lane for long @-@ term fans , while the visual overhaul and back @-@ to @-@ beginnings story should make it a welcoming entry point for newcomers . " GameSpot gave the HD remake a 7 out of 10 , saying , " Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix presents a couple of the earliest games in the beloved series in their best light and makes a revealing cinematic experience out of a third one . The three experiences complement one another with unique elements and welcome context that is a treat for longtime fans and newcomers alike . " 
 Giving the game a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , GameTrailers felt that , " While Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 <unk> certainly lives up to the HD part of its name , the collection is not without its shortcomings . The original game ’ s inclusion with all the new revisions and the addition of Final Mix content is a worthy investment on its own , and the inclusion of Chain of Memories is a nice gesture . The card @-@ based battle system might be off @-@ putting , but it ’ s a unique experiment that deviates from the norm of the series . However , despite the overhauled visuals and new voice work , it ’ s hard to excuse the reduction of 358 / 2 Days to a lengthy film rather than an actual game . " IGN felt that the collection was " an excellent way to replay the series ’ first two games in crisp , high @-@ definition splendor " but was disappointed that the box art did not properly distinguish 358 / 2 Days as a non @-@ playable game . They awarded the collection an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 . Electronic Gaming Monthly gave the collection an 8 out of 10 , stating the collection " brings a PS2 classic to the modern age with a noticeably impressive visual update , improved camera controls , and , for added fun , secondary and tertiary Kingdom Hearts content all contained on one disc . " 
 = = Additional collections = = 
 = = = HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix = = = 
 In October 2012 , game director Tetsuya Nomura suggested that an HD @-@ version of Kingdom Hearts II was likely to be created for another collection , saying that " it ’ d be unusual if there wasn ’ t " another one . In the credits of HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix , clips of Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix , Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep Final Mix and Kingdom Hearts Re : coded were shown , hinting at a second collection . On October 14 , 2013 , Square Enix announced Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix , with the collection including the previously mentioned games in high definition . However , Re : coded appears as HD cinematics , similar to 358 / 2 Days in HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix . The collection was released exclusively for the PlayStation 3 in Japan on October 2 , 2014 , in North America on December 2 , 2014 , in Australia on December 4 , 2014 , and in Europe on December 5 , 2014 . 
 = = = HD 2 @.@ 8 Final Chapter Prologue = = = 
 In the credits of HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix , clips of Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance were shown as well as the inclusion of a secret ending related to the game , hinting at a possible additional collection . In September 2015 , Square Enix announced Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 8 Final Chapter Prologue . The collection features an HD remaster of Dream Drop Distance as well as Kingdom Hearts χ Back Cover , set to tell the tale of the Foretellers and reveal new parts of the series ' history in HD cinematics , and Kingdom Hearts 0 @.@ 2 : Birth by Sleep – A Fragmentary Passage , a new part of the story taking place after the events of the original Birth by Sleep , told from the perspective of Aqua . It will be released worldwide in December 2016 . 
 = Lovesick Blues = 
 " Lovesick Blues " is a show tune written by Cliff Friend and Irving Mills . The song first appeared in the 1922 musical Oh , Ernest . It was recorded by Emmett Miller in 1928 and later by country music singer Rex Griffin . The recordings by Griffin and Miller inspired Hank Williams to perform the song during his first appearances on the Louisiana Hayride in 1948 . Receiving an enthusiastic reception from the audience , Williams decided to record his own version despite initial push back from his producer Fred Rose and his band . 
 MGM Records released " Lovesick Blues " in February 1949 , and it became an overnight success , quickly reaching number one on Billboard 's Top C & W singles and number 24 on the Most Played in Jukeboxes list . The publication named it the top country and western record of the year , while Cashbox named it " Best Hillbilly Record of the Year " . 
 Several cover versions of the song have been recorded . The most popular , Frank Ifield 's 1962 version , topped the UK Singles Chart . In 2004 , Williams ' version was added to the National Recording Registry . 
 = = Background and recordings = = 
 " Lovesick Blues " was originally entitled " I 've Got the Lovesick Blues " and published by Jack Mills , Inc. in 1922 ; Irving Mills authored the lyrics and Cliff Friend composed the music . It was first performed by Anna Chandler in the Tin Pan Alley musical Oh ! Ernest and first recorded by Elsie Clark on March 21 , 1922 with Okeh Records . Following the recording , Cliff and Friend copyrighted the song on April 3 , 1922 . It was featured in a show at the Boardwalk Club in New York City in June 1922 and also recorded by Jack Shea on Vocalion Records later that summer . 
 On September 1 , 1925 , <unk> Records sent scout Ralph Peer and a recording crew to Asheville , North Carolina . Among the aspiring artists recorded by Peer was Emmett Miller . Accompanied by Walter Rothrock on the piano , Miller cut four sides for the label , including " Lovesick Blues " . The single was paired with " Big Bad Bill ( is Sweet William Now ) " and released in November 1925 . On June 12 , 1928 accompanied by the Georgia Crackers ( Tommy Dorsey , Jimmy Dorsey , Eddie Lang , and Leo McConville ) , Miller re @-@ recorded the song , which was subsequently released to weak sales . Miller 's version was covered by country music singer Rex Griffin in December 1939 on Decca Records . Griffin rearranged the song by using the original chorus - " I got a feeling called the blues " — as a verse and turning the verse " I 'm in love , I 'm in love , with a beautiful gal " into the new chorus . 
 = = Hank Williams recording = = 
 Hank Williams , who heard both the Miller and Griffin versions , started performing the song on the Louisiana Hayride shortly after joining in August 1948 . Horace Logan , the show 's producer and programming director for KWKH , reported that the audience " went crazy " the first time Williams performed the song on the show . In light of the live audience 's strong positive reaction , Williams decided to record the song . His decision was questioned by his musicians and also his producer , Fred Rose , who felt that the song did not merit a recording . Williams , mindful of the reaction he received live , persisted , and the recording took place during the final half @-@ hour of a session recorded at Herzog Studio in Cincinnati , Ohio , on December 22 , 1948 . For this recording , Williams replaced the jazz musicians with a modern country music band , using a rhythm guitar , mandolin , string bass , drums and a steel guitar . Williams ' session band was composed of Clyde Baum ( mandolin ) , Zeke Turner ( electric guitar ) , Jerry Byrd ( steel guitar ) , Louis Innis ( rhythm guitar ) , Tommy Jackson ( fiddle ) and Willie <unk> ( bass ) . With little time left , Byrd and Turner replicated the musical arrangement they previously used on an Ernest Tubb session for a cover of Jimmie Rodgers ' " Waiting for a Train " . In the episode of American Masters about Williams , Drifting Cowboy Don Helms recalls , " When they recorded ' Lovesick Blues , ' Fred told Hank , ' That song 's out of meter ! Got too many bars in it . And you hold that note too long . ' And Hank said , ' Well , when I find a note I like , I wanna hold on to it as long as I can , ' you know , just tryin ' to be funny . And Fred said , ' Well , I 'll tell you what I 'm gonna do . That thing is so much out of meter , I 'm gonna get me a cup of coffee and when I get back maybe ya 'll have that thing cut . ' And they did , but it was still out of meter . So Fred lived with that the rest of his life . " Williams combined Griffin 's lyrical arrangement with a two @-@ beat honky @-@ tonk track , borrowing the yodeling and beat drops from Miller 's recording . " Lovesick Blues " was recorded in two takes . 
 MGM released " Lovesick Blues " on February 11 , 1949 , coupling it with " Never Again ( Will I Knock On Your Door ) " . The single sold 50 @,@ 000 copies in the first two weeks . On its February 26 , 1949 review , Billboard opined : " Hank 's <unk> @-@ mah @-@ <unk> approach and ear @-@ catching yodeling should keep this side spinning " . Based on votes sent to Billboard , the record was rated with 85 points by disc jockeys , 82 by record dealers and 85 by jukebox operators . Between the three , the track scored an overall of 84 . In reference to its 100 @-@ point scale , Billboard regarded the record as " Excellent " . It reached number one on Billboard 's Top C & W singles , where it remained for sixteen weeks and reached number twenty @-@ four on Most Played in Jukeboxes . The magazine listed it as the " number one country and western record of 1949 " while Cashbox named it " Best Hillbilly record of the year " . In March 1949 , Wesley Rose requested Williams to send him the records by Griffin and Miller to prove that the song was in the public domain . Irving Mills , the original lyricist , sued Acuff @-@ Rose . The suit was settled on November 1 , 1949 and it was agreed that Mills and Acuff @-@ Rose would share the publishing of Williams ' recording . Mills retained the rest of rights to the song as he had also purchased Friend 's rights during the Great Depression . 
 Following the success of the song , Williams was invited to appear as a guest on the Grand Ole Opry , on June 11 , 1949 . After the performance , Williams received a standing ovation . " Lovesick Blues " became his signature song , which he used to close his shows . It was also his first number one hit , and garnered Williams the stage nickname of " The Lovesick Blues Boy " . In 1949 , the singer received second billing behind Eddy Arnold on the list of the " Year 's Top Selling Folk Artists " . Williams ' version of the song was featured in the films The Last Picture Show ( 1971 ) , Forrest Gump ( 1994 ) and The Shawshank Redemption ( 1994 ) . In 2004 , " Lovesick Blues " was added to the National Recording Registry by the Library of Congress . 
 = = The Crickets recording = = 
 The Crickets released their cover of the song ( based on Williams ' version ) in 1971 on the Philips label . The song appeared originally as the B @-@ side to the single " My Rockin ' Days " . The recording lineup consisted of Sonny Curtis providing lead guitar and vocals , Joe Osborn on bass , Jerry Allison on drums , and Glen Hardin on piano . The song was performed live on The Old Grey Whistle Test in 1972 . The song was later released on the album Bubblegum , Bop , Ballad And <unk> in 1973 . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 Singer Sonny James released a version of the song on the flip side of " Dear Love " in June 1957 . The song peaked at number fifteen on Billboard 's Hot Country Songs . 
 Jerry Lee Lewis recorded a version for Sun Records . 
 Patsy Cline released a version of the song in 1960 . 
 Floyd Cramer 's 1962 version of the song peaked at eighty @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 In December 1962 , Frank Ifield 's version of " Lovesick Blues " topped the UK Singles Chart , and reached number forty @-@ four on the Billboard Hot 100 the following month . Gramophone compared his singing to a " rough and raucous Jimmie Rodgers " . Meanwhile , Elizabethan delivered a negative review , stating : " No true country singer would dare do to a Hank Williams number what Frank Ifield has done to ' Lovesick Blues ' . " The review finished by declaring that Ifield had " none of Jim Reeves ' depth and character , nor of the subtle melodic quality ( of ) Don Gibson . " By the end of February 1963 , Billboard estimated that the single had sold close to a million copies worldwide . 
 Merle Haggard recorded a version on his 1973 live album I Love Dixie Blues . 
 Don McLean recorded a version on his 1976 live album , Solo 
 In 1992 , George Strait released a version that reached number twenty @-@ four on the Billboard Hot Country Singles . The single peaked at number twenty @-@ two on RPM 's Country Tracks . 
 Loretta Lynn , Dolly Parton , and Tammy Wynette included it on their 1993 album " Honky Tonk Angels " featuring Patsy Cline . 
 LeAnn Rimes recorded it on her self @-@ titled album . 
 The Little Willies recorded the song on their 2012 album For the Good Times . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = Hank Williams = = = 
 = = = Other artists = = = 
 = = = Chart @-@ toppers = = = 
 = Northern Isles = 
 The Northern Isles ( Scots : <unk> Isles ; Scottish Gaelic : Na h @-@ Eileanan a <unk> ; Old Norse : Norðreyjar ) is an archipelago comprising a chain of islands off the north coast of mainland Scotland . The climate is cool and temperate and much influenced by the surrounding seas . There are two main island groups : Shetland and Orkney . There are a total of 26 inhabited islands with landscapes of the fertile agricultural islands of Orkney contrasting with the more rugged Shetland islands to the north , where the economy is more dependent on fishing and the oil wealth of the surrounding seas . Both have a developing renewable energy industry . They also share a common Pictish and Norse history . Both island groups were absorbed into the Kingdom of Scotland in the 15th century and remained part of the country following the formation of the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707 , and later the United Kingdom after 1801 . The islands played a significant naval role during the world wars of the 20th century . 
 Tourism is important to both archipelagos , with their distinctive prehistoric ruins playing a key part in their attraction , and there are regular ferry and air connections with mainland Scotland . The Scandinavian influence remains strong , especially in relation to local folklore , and both island chains have strong , although distinct , local cultures . The place names of the islands are dominated by their Norse heritage , although some may retain pre @-@ Celtic elements . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The phrase " Northern Isles " generally refers to the main islands of the Orkney and Shetland archipelagos . Stroma , which lies between mainland Scotland and Orkney , is part of Caithness , and so falls under Highland council area for local government purposes , not Orkney . It is , however , clearly one of the " northern isles " of Scotland . Fair Isle and Foula are outliers of Shetland , but would normally be considered as part of Shetland and thus the Northern Isles . Similarly , Sule Skerry and Sule Stack , although distant from the main group , are part of Orkney and technically amongst the Northern Isles . However , the other small islands that lie off the north coast of Scotland are in Highland and thus not usually considered to be part of the Northern Isles . 
 Orkney is situated 16 kilometres ( 10 mi ) north of the coast of mainland Scotland , from which it is separated by the waters of the Pentland Firth . The largest island , known as the " Mainland " has an area of 523 @.@ 25 square kilometres ( 202 @.@ 03 sq mi ) , making it the sixth largest Scottish island . The total population in 2001 was 19 @,@ 245 and the largest town is Kirkwall . Shetland is around 170 kilometres ( 110 mi ) north of mainland Scotland , covers an area of 1 @,@ 468 square kilometres ( 567 sq mi ) and has a coastline 2 @,@ 702 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 679 mi ) long . Lerwick , the capital and largest settlement , has a population of around 7 @,@ 500 and about half of the archipelago 's total population of 22 @,@ 000 people live within 16 kilometres ( 10 mi ) of the town . Orkney has 20 inhabited islands and Shetland a total of 16 . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The superficial rock of Orkney is almost entirely Old Red Sandstone , mostly of Middle Devonian age . As in the neighbouring mainland county of Caithness , this sandstone rests upon the metamorphic rocks of the Moine series , as may be seen on the Orkney Mainland , where a narrow strip of the older rock is exposed between Stromness and <unk> , and again on the small island of Graemsay . 
 Middle Devonian basaltic volcanic rocks are found on western Hoy , on Deerness in eastern Mainland and on Shapinsay . Correlation between the Hoy volcanics and the other two exposures has been proposed , but differences in chemistry means this remains uncertain . <unk> dykes of Late Permian age are found throughout Orkney . Glacial striation and the presence of chalk and flint erratics that originated from the bed of the North Sea demonstrate the influence of ice action on the geomorphology of the islands . Boulder clay is also abundant and moraines cover substantial areas . 
 The geology of Shetland is quite different . It is extremely complex , with numerous faults and fold axes . These islands are the northern outpost of the Caledonian orogeny and there are outcrops of Lewisian , <unk> and Moine metamorphic rocks with similar histories to their equivalents on the Scottish mainland . There are also small Old Red Sandstone deposits and granite intrusions . The most distinctive feature is the ultrabasic ophiolite , peridotite and gabbro on Unst and Fetlar , which are remnants of the Iapetus Ocean floor . Much of Shetland 's economy depends on the oil @-@ bearing sediments in the surrounding seas . 
 Geological evidence shows that at around 6100 BC a tsunami caused by the Storegga Slides hit the Northern Isles , ( as well as much of the east coast of Scotland ) , and may have created a wave of up to 25 metres ( 82 ft ) high in the voes of Shetland where modern populations are highest . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The Northern Isles have a cool , temperate climate that is remarkably mild and steady for such a northerly latitude , due to the influence of the surrounding seas and the Gulf Stream . In Shetland average peak temperatures are 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) in February and 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) in August and temperatures over 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) are rare . The frost @-@ free period may be as little as 3 months . 
 The average annual rainfall is 982 millimetres ( 38 @.@ 7 in ) in Orkney and 1 @,@ 168 millimetres ( 46 @.@ 0 in ) in Shetland . Winds are a key feature of the climate and even in summer there are almost constant breezes . In winter , there are frequent strong winds , with an average of 52 hours of gales being recorded annually in Orkney . <unk> wind farm on Shetland , which operates with five Vestas <unk> 660 kW turbines , achieved a world record of 57 @.@ 9 % capacity over the course of 2005 due to the persistent strong winds . 
 Snowfall is usually confined to the period November to February and seldom lies on the ground for more than a day . Less rain falls from April to August although no month receives less than an average of 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) . Annual bright sunshine averages 1082 hours in Shetland and overcast days are common . 
 To tourists , one of the fascinations of the islands is their " <unk> " summers . On the longest day in Shetland there are over 19 hours of daylight and complete darkness is unknown . This long twilight is known in the Northern Isles as the " simmer dim " . Winter nights are correspondingly long with less than six hours of daylight at midwinter . At this time of year the aurora borealis can occasionally be seen on the northern horizon during moderate auroral activity . 
 = = Prehistory = = 
 There are numerous important prehistoric remains in Orkney , especially from the Neolithic period , four of which form the Heart of Neolithic Orkney UNESCO World Heritage Site that was inscribed in 1999 : Skara Brae ; Maes Howe ; the Stones of Stenness ; and Ring of Brodgar . The Knap of Howar Neolithic farmstead situated on the island of Papa Westray is probably the oldest preserved house in northern Europe . This structure was inhabited for 900 years from 3700 BC but was evidently built on the site of an even older settlement . Shetland is also extremely rich in physical remains of the prehistoric eras and there are over 5 @,@ 000 archaeological sites all told . <unk> <unk> is a remarkable Neolithic dividing wall that ran for 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) across the island of Fetlar , although the Iron Age has provided the most outstanding archaeology on Shetland . Numerous brochs were erected at that time of which the Broch of Mousa is the finest preserved example of these round towers . In 2011 the collective site , " The Crucible of Iron Age Shetland " including Broch of Mousa , Old Scatness and Jarlshof joined the UK 's " Tentative List " of World Heritage Sites . 
 = = History , culture and politics = = 
 = = = Pictish times = = = 
 The culture that built the brochs is unknown , but by the late Iron Age the Northern Isles were part of the Pictish kingdom . The main archaeological relics from these times are symbol stones . One of the best examples is located on the Brough of Birsay ; it shows three warriors with spears and sword scabbards combined with traditional Pictish symbols . The St Ninian 's Isle Treasure was discovered in 1958 . The silver bowls , jewellery and other pieces are believed to date from approximately 800 AD . O 'Dell ( 1959 ) stated that " the treasure is the best survival of Scottish silver metalwork from the period " and that " the brooches show a variety of typical Pictish forms , with both animal @-@ head and lobed geometrical forms of terminal " . 
 Christianity probably arrived in Orkney in the 6th century and organised church authority emerged in the 8th century . The Buckquoy spindle @-@ whorl found at a Pictish site on Birsay is an Ogham – inscribed artefact whose interpretation has caused controversy although it is now generally considered to be of Irish Christian origin . 
 = = = Norse era = = = 
 The 8th century was also the time the Viking invasions of the Scottish seaboard commenced and with them came the arrival of a new culture and language for the Northern Isles , the fate of the existing indigenous population being uncertain . According to the Orkneyinga Saga , Vikings then made the islands the headquarters of pirate expeditions carried out against Norway and the coasts of mainland Scotland . In response , Norwegian king Harald Hårfagre ( " Harald Fair Hair " ) annexed the Northern Isles in 875 and Rognvald Eysteinsson received Orkney and Shetland from Harald as an earldom as reparation for the death of his son in battle in Scotland . ( Some scholars believe that this story is apocryphal and based on the later voyages of Magnus Barelegs . ) 
 The islands were fully Christianised by Olav Tryggvasson in 995 when he stopped at South Walls on his way from Ireland to Norway . The King summoned the jarl Sigurd the Stout and said , " I order you and all your subjects to be baptised . If you refuse , I 'll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel . " Unsurprisingly , Sigurd agreed and the islands became Christian at a stroke , receiving their own bishop in the early 11th century . 
 = = = Norwegian rule to Scots rule = = = 
 In the 14th century Orkney and Shetland remained a Norwegian province , but Scottish influence was growing . Jon Haraldsson , who was murdered in Thurso in 1231 , was the last of an unbroken line of Norse jarls , and thereafter the earls were Scots noblemen of the houses of Angus and St. Clair . In 1468 Shetland was pledged by Christian I , in his capacity as King of Norway , as security against the payment of the dowry of his daughter Margaret , betrothed to James III of Scotland . As the money was never paid , the connection with the crown of Scotland became permanent . In 1470 William Sinclair , 1st Earl of Caithness ceded his title to James III and the following year the Northern Isles were directly annexed to Scotland . 
 = = = Early British era = = = 
 From the early 15th century on the Shetlanders had sold their goods through the Hanseatic League of German merchantmen . This trade with the North German towns lasted until the 1707 Act of Union when high salt duties prohibited the German merchants from trading with Shetland . Shetland then went into an economic depression as the Scottish and local traders were not as skilled in trading with salted fish . However , some local merchant @-@ lairds took up where the German merchants had left off , and fitted out their own ships to export fish from Shetland to the Continent . For the independent farmer / fishermen of Shetland this had negative consequences , as they now had to fish for these merchant @-@ lairds . 
 British rule came at a price for many ordinary people as well as traders . The Shetlanders ' nautical skills were sought by the Royal Navy : some 3 @,@ 000 served during the Napoleonic Wars from 1800 to 1815 and press gangs were rife . During this period 120 men were taken from Fetlar alone and only 20 of them returned home . By the late 19th century 90 % of all Shetland was owned by just 32 people , and between 1861 and 1881 more than 8 @,@ 000 Shetlanders emigrated . With the passing of the Crofters ' Act in 1886 the Liberal prime minister William Gladstone emancipated crofters from the rule of the landlords . The Act enabled those who had effectively been landowners ' serfs to become owner @-@ occupiers of their own small farms . 
 The Orcadian experience was somewhat different . An influx of Scottish entrepreneurs helped to create a diverse and independent community that included farmers , fishermen and merchants that called themselves <unk> Orcadie and who proved themselves increasing able to defend their rights against their feudal overlords . In the 17th century , Orcadians formed the overwhelming majority of employees of the Hudson 's Bay Company in Canada . The harsh climate of Orkney and the Orcadian reputation for sobriety and their boat @-@ handling skills made them ideal candidates for the rigours of the Canadian north . During this period , burning kelp briefly became a mainstay of the islands ' economy . For example , on Shapinsay over 3 @,@ 048 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 000 long tons ) of burned seaweed were produced per annum to make soda ash , bringing in £ 20 @,@ 000 to the local economy . Agricultural improvements beginning in the 17th century coincided with the enclosure of the commons and in the Victoria era the emergence of large and well @-@ managed farms using a five @-@ shift rotation system and producing high quality beef cattle . There is little evidence of an Orcadian fishing fleet until the 19th century but it grew rapidly and 700 boats were involved by the 1840s with Stronsay and then later Stromness becoming leading centres of development . Many Orcadian seamen became involved in whaling in Arctic waters during the 19th century , although the boats were generally based elsewhere in Britain . 
 = = = World Wars = = = 
 Orkney was the site of a navy base at Scapa Flow , which played a major role in World War I. After the Armistice in 1918 , the German High Seas Fleet was transferred in its entirety to Scapa Flow while a decision was to be made on its future ; however , the German sailors opened their sea @-@ cocks and scuttled all the ships . During World War I the 10th Cruiser Squadron was stationed at <unk> Minn in Shetland and during a single year from March 1917 more than 4 @,@ 500 ships sailed from Lerwick as part of an escorted convoy system . In total , Shetland lost more than 500 men , a higher proportion than any other part of Britain , and there were waves of emigration in the 1920s and 1930s . 
 One month into World War II , the Royal Navy battleship HMS Royal Oak was sunk by a German U @-@ boat in Scapa Flow . As a result barriers were built to close most of the access channels ; these had the additional advantage of creating causeways enabling travellers to go from island to island by road instead of being obliged to rely on ferries . The causeways were constructed by Italian prisoners of war , who also constructed the ornate Italian Chapel . The Scapa Flow base was run down after the war , eventually closing in 1957 . 
 During World War II a Norwegian naval unit nicknamed the " Shetland Bus " was established by the Special Operations Executive in the autumn of 1940 with a base first at Lunna and later in Scalloway to conduct operations around the coast of Norway . About 30 fishing vessels used by Norwegian refugees were gathered and the Shetland Bus conducted covert operations , carrying intelligence agents , refugees , instructors for the resistance , and military supplies . It made over 200 trips across the sea with Leif Larsen , the most highly decorated allied naval officer of the war , making 52 of them . 
 The problem of a declining population was significant in the post @-@ war years , although in the last decades of the 20th century there was a recovery and life in the islands focused on growing prosperity and the emergence of a relatively classless society . 
 = = Modern times = = 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Due to their history , the islands have a Norse , rather than a Gaelic flavour , and have historic links with the Faroes , Iceland , and Norway . The similarities of both geography and history are matched by some elements of the current political process . Both Orkney and Shetland are represented in the House of Commons as constituting the Orkney and Shetland constituency , which elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) , the current incumbent being Alistair Carmichael . Both are also within the Highlands and Islands electoral region for the Scottish Parliament . 
 However there are also two separate constituencies that elect one Member of the Scottish Parliament each for Orkney and Shetland by the first past the post system . Orkney and Shetland also have separate local Councils which are dominated by independents , that is they are not members of a political party . 
 The Orkney Movement , a political party that supported devolution for Orkney from the rest of Scotland , contested the 1987 general election as the Orkney and Shetland Movement ( a coalition of the Orkney movement and its equivalent for Shetland ) . Their candidate , John Goodlad , came 4th with 3 @,@ 095 votes , 14 @.@ 5 % of those cast , but the experiment has not been repeated . 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 Ferry services link Orkney and Shetland to the rest of Scotland , the main routes being Scrabster harbour , Thurso to Stromness and Aberdeen to Lerwick , both operated by Serco NorthLink Ferries . Inter @-@ island ferry services are operated by Orkney Ferries and SIC Ferries , which are operated by the respective local authorities and Northlink also run a Lerwick to Kirkwall service . The archipelago is exposed to wind and tide , and there are numerous sites of wrecked ships . Lighthouses are sited as an aid to navigation at various locations . 
 The main airport in Orkney is at Kirkwall , operated by Highland and Islands Airports . Loganair , a franchise of Flybe , provides services to the Scottish mainland ( Aberdeen , Edinburgh , Glasgow and Inverness ) , as well as to Sumburgh Airport in Shetland . Similar services fly from Sumburgh to the Scottish mainland . 
 Inter @-@ Island flights are available from Kirkwall to several Orkney islands and from the Shetland Mainland to most of the inhabited islands including those from Tingwall Airport . There are frequent charter flights from Aberdeen to <unk> near Sullom Voe , which are used to transport oilfield workers and this small terminal has the fifth largest number of international passengers in Scotland . The scheduled air service between Westray and Papa Westray is reputedly the shortest in the world at two minutes ' duration . 
 = = = Economics = = = 
 The very different <unk> of the two archipelagos have resulted in dissimilar local economies . In Shetland , the main revenue producers in Shetland are agriculture , aquaculture , fishing , renewable energy , the petroleum industry ( offshore crude oil and natural gas production ) , the creative industries and tourism . Oil and gas was first landed at Sullom Voe in 1978 , and it has subsequently become one of the largest oil terminals in Europe . Taxes from the oil have increased public sector spending in Shetland on social welfare , art , sport , environmental measures and financial development . Three quarters of the islands ' work force is employed in the service sector and Shetland Islands Council alone accounted for 27 @.@ 9 % of output in 2003 . Fishing remains central to the islands ' economy today , with the total catch being 75 @,@ 767 tonnes ( 74 @,@ 570 long tons ; 83 @,@ 519 short tons ) in 2009 , valued at over £ 73 @.@ 2 million . 
 By contrast , fishing has declined in Orkney since the 19th century and the impact of the oil industry has been much less significant . However , the soil of Orkney is generally very fertile and most of the land is taken up by farms , agriculture being by far the most important sector of the economy and providing employment for a quarter of the workforce . More than 90 % of agricultural land is used for grazing for sheep and cattle , with cereal production utilising about 4 % ( 4 @,@ 200 hectares ( 10 @,@ 000 acres ) ) , although woodland occupies only 134 hectares ( 330 acres ) . 
 Orkney and Shetland have significant wind and marine energy resources , and renewable energy has recently come into prominence . The European Marine Energy Centre is a Scottish Government @-@ backed research facility that has installed a wave testing system at Billia Croo on the Orkney Mainland and a tidal power testing station on the island of Eday . This has been described as " the first of its kind in the world set up to provide developers of wave and tidal energy devices with a purpose @-@ built performance testing facility . " 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 The Northern Isles have a rich folklore . For example , there are many Orcadian tales concerning trows , a form of troll that draws on the islands ' Scandinavian connections . Local customs in the past included marriage ceremonies at the Odin Stone that forms part of the Stones of Stenness . The best known literary figures from modern Orkney are the poet Edwin Muir , the poet and novelist George Mackay Brown and the novelist Eric Linklater . 
 Shetland has a strong tradition of local music . The Forty Fiddlers was formed in the 1950s to promote the traditional fiddle style , which is a vibrant part of local culture today . Notable exponents of Shetland folk music include Aly Bain and the late Tom Anderson and <unk> Willie Johnson . Thomas Fraser was a country musician who never released a commercial recording during his life , but whose work has become popular more than 20 years after his untimely death in 1978 . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 The Norn language formerly spoken in the islands , a descendant of the Old Norse of the Vikings , became extinct in the 18th or 19th century . The local dialects of the Scots language , collectively known as Insular Scots , are highly distinctive and retain strong Norn influences . 
 = = Island names = = 
 The etymology of the island names is dominated by Norse influence . There follows a listing of the derivation of all the inhabited islands in the Northern Isles . 
 = = = Shetland = = = 
 The oldest version of the modern name Shetland is <unk> recorded in 1190 becoming Hetland in 1431 after various intermediate transformations . This then became Hjaltland in the 16th century . As Shetlandic Norn was gradually replaced by Scots Hjaltland became <unk> . When use of the letter yogh was discontinued , it was often replaced by the similar @-@ looking letter z , hence Zetland , the mispronounced form used to describe the pre @-@ 1975 county council . However the earlier name is Innse Chat – the island of the cats ( or the cat tribe ) as referred to in early Irish literature and it is just possible that this forms part of the Norse name . The Cat tribe also occupied parts of the northern Scottish mainland – hence the name of Caithness via the Norse <unk> ( " headland of the cat " ) , and the Gaelic name for Sutherland , Cataibh , meaning " among the Cats " . 
 The location of " Thule " , first mentioned by Pytheas of Massilia when he visited Britain sometime between 322 and 285 BC is not known for certain . When Tacitus mentioned it in AD 98 it is clear he was referring to Shetland . 
 = = = Orkney = = = 
 Pytheas described Great Britain as being triangular in shape , with a northern tip called Orcas . This may have referred to Dunnet Head , from which Orkney is visible . Writing in the 1st century AD , the Roman geographer Pomponius Mela called the Orkney islands Orcades , as did Tacitus in AD 98 " Orc " is usually interpreted as a Pictish tribal name meaning " young pig " or " young boar " . The old Irish Gaelic name for the islands was <unk> Orc ( " island of the pigs " ) . The ogham script on the Buckquoy spindle @-@ whorl is also cited as evidence for the pre @-@ Norse existence of Old Irish in Orkney . The Pictish association with Orkney is leant weight by the Norse name for the Pentland Firth – <unk> @-@ <unk> i.e " Pictland Firth . 
 The Norse retained the earlier root but changed the meaning , providing the only definite example of an adaption of a pre @-@ Norse place name in the Northern Isles . The islands became <unk> meaning " seal islands " . An alternative name for Orkney is recorded in 1300 — <unk> , meaning " horse isle " and this may also contain a Pictish element of ros meaning " moor " or " plain " . 
 Unlike most of the larger Orkney islands , the derivation of the name " Shapinsay " is not obvious . The final ' ay ' is from the Old Norse for island , but the first two syllables are more difficult to interpret . Haswell @-@ Smith ( 2004 ) suggests the root may be <unk> @-@ øy ( helpful island ) due to the presence of a good harbour , although anchorages are plentiful in the archipelago . The first written record dates from 1375 in a reference to <unk> , which may suggest a derivation from " judge 's island " . Another suggestion is " <unk> 's island " , although no one of that name is known to have been associated with Shapinsay . 
 = = = Uninhabited islands = = = 
 Stroma , from the Norse <unk> means " current island " or " island in the tidal stream " , a reference to the strong currents in the Pentland Firth . The Norse often gave animal names to islands and these have been transferred into English in for example , the Calf of Flotta and Horse of <unk> . Brother Isle is an anglicisation of the Norse <unk> meaning " broad beach island " . The Norse <unk> , meaning " a small islet " has become " Holm " in English and there are numerous examples of this use including Corn Holm , Thieves Holm and Little Holm . " Muckle " meaning large or big is one of few Scots words in the island names of the <unk> and appears in Muckle Roe and Muckle <unk> in Shetland and Muckle Green Holm and Muckle Skerry in Orkney . Many small islets and skerries have Scots or Insular Scots names such as Da Skerries o da <unk> and Da <unk> Stane in Shetland , and Kirk Rocks in Orkney . 
 = Black Ice ( album ) = 
 Black Ice is an album by Australian hard rock band AC / DC . It was the band 's fourteenth internationally released studio album and the fifteenth in Australia . Released internationally on 17 October 2008 , it was produced by Brendan O 'Brien . It marked the band 's first original recordings since 2000 's Stiff Upper Lip , with the eight @-@ year gap being the longest between AC / DC 's successive studio albums . Black Ice has the longest running time of any AC / DC studio album . 
 The album 's development was delayed because bass guitarist Cliff Williams sustained an injury and the band changed labels from Elektra Records to Sony Music . The first composing sessions between guitarists / brothers Angus and Malcolm Young were in London in 2003 . Recording happened during March and April 2008 at The Warehouse Studio in Vancouver , Canada . O 'Brien tried to recapture the rock sound of the band 's early work , as opposed to the blues orientation of Ballbreaker and Stiff Upper Lip , with suggestions such as adding " soul crooning " to Brian Johnson 's singing . The songs were mostly recorded live in the studio ; engineer Mike Fraser used only sparse overdubs and effects to keep the tracks as close to the originals as possible . 
 Black Ice was released exclusively in physical formats , as the group did not sell its music digitally at the time . Walmart got exclusive rights to distribute the album in North America . Its release was promoted with an extensive marketing campaign , which included displays of AC / DC memorabilia . The four singles issued from the album were , " Rock ' N ' Roll Train " , " Big Jack " , " Anything Goes " , and " Money Made " . Black Ice peaked at number one in 29 countries , including Australia , Canada , the United Kingdom and the United States . It was the second best @-@ selling record of 2008 , behind Coldplay 's Viva La Vida or Death and All His Friends and had shipped 6 million copies worldwide by December . Critical reviews were generally positive , praising the music and its resemblance to the classic AC / DC sound , although some critics found the work too long and inconsistent . The track " War Machine " won the Best Hard Rock Performance category at the Grammys . The album itself was nominated for many awards , including the Grammy , Brit , Juno and ARIA Music Awards ; and was supported by a world tour between 2008 and 2010 . 
 Black Ice is the final AC / DC studio album to feature founding rhythm guitarist Malcolm Young , who left the band in September 2014 after being diagnosed with dementia . 
 = = Production = = 
 Black Ice is AC / DC 's seventeenth studio album release in Australia and their fourteenth international release . The band took a break after finishing the Stiff Upper Lip World Tour in 2001 , and resumed performing in 2003 , with eight presentations that included AC / DC 's induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and they opened three concerts for The Rolling Stones ' Licks Tour . During those two years , guitarists Angus Young and Malcolm Young wrote music separately , then met in a London studio to work on new songs . 
 The production of Black Ice was delayed for several reasons . AC / DC left their label Atlantic Records , signed a deal with Sony Music and changed labels within Sony from Epic Records to Columbia Records . Bass guitarist Cliff Williams suffered an injury to his hand in 2005 and was unable to play for 18 months . While Williams was recovering , the Young brothers perfected the songs they had written . Angus revealed that there was no pressure from Sony for the band to release a new album , as the label was releasing DVDs and remasters of the AC / DC catalogue , and thus the group " could afford to sit back and say we 'll do another album when we think we 've got all the goods . " In a 2004 interview , vocalist Brian Johnson said that Angus had written harder riffs than those on Stiff Upper Lip and that he would be writing song lyrics for the first time since the band 's 1988 album Blow Up Your Video , but his input would end up minimal , with all tracks on Black Ice credited to the Youngs . Johnson explained that the brothers had done most of the lyrical job , and his collaboration was that he " helped with melody and just filling in gaps that I thought needed filling in " . 
 While producer Robert John " Mutt " Lange expressed an interest in working again with AC / DC , his schedule did not allow this . When the Young brothers called Columbia Records ' president Steve Barnett to announce the making of a new album , Barnett recommended producer Brendan O 'Brien . Angus said the band had considered talking to O 'Brien since the 1990s , as " he seemed to us a very competent professional " and because he and the band would benefit from working with a producer they had not worked with before . 
 On 3 March 2008 , recording started at The Warehouse Studio in Vancouver , where Stiff Upper Lip was recorded , and lasted for eight weeks . Engineer Mike Fraser , who has mixed all AC / DC albums since The Razors Edge , said they recorded in batches of three songs to " keep things interesting " and to avoid overextended sessions . According to Fraser , the band had not rehearsed the songs before entering the studio . Despite " a couple of tweaks in the writing , sparkling up the choruses a bit better " during the recording , the compositions were mostly complete . Still , the Young brothers had new ideas during production , including the song " Anything Goes " , which was written when the studio sessions were nearly finished . The songs were mostly recorded live in the studio ; the instruments and backing vocals were recorded in the live room and the vocals at both the control room and an overdubbing booth . The performances were first recorded with analogue equipment , as Fraser considers that tape conveys " the sound of rock & roll " , and then digitised for mixing and overdubs . Fraser tried to not alter the original recordings – " I used Pro @-@ Tools purely as a tape machine " – with no effects on the bass and rhythm guitar , sparse delay and reverb effects on the vocals and other instruments and overdubs were only used for the lead guitar and vocals . 
 The first title considered for the album was Runaway Train . Malcolm suggested using a photograph of a famous 1895 derailment for the cover , but reconsidered after he found that Mr. Big had used it for their album Lean into It . According to Angus , Runaway Train was rejected was because it had been used by many musicians , including Elton John , Tom Petty and Eric Clapton , and he " wanted something unique , new , different " . So he suggested Black Ice , which refers to gigs played during winter in Scotland . He said , " it rolled off the tongue " and it reminded him of " radio warnings up north of black ice . " Angus was inspired to write the eponymous song by a similar warning heard on his car radio during production . 
 = = Composition = = 
 With Black Ice , Brendan O 'Brien tried to recapture the rock sound of AC / DC 's early work on albums such as Highway to Hell and Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap . He thought the two previous studio albums , Ballbreaker and Stiff Upper Lip , were blues @-@ influenced . O 'Brien tried to focus on the choruses , which he felt were the best part of the AC / DC songs , and encouraged the band to emphasise the " hooky , melodic side " of its song @-@ writing , which Angus complimented , since he had " never been great with harmonies " . Mike Fraser said the band aimed " towards The Razors Edge era , a little bit more up @-@ tempo stuff . " O 'Brien made suggestions about the band 's performance , got Angus to play slide guitar on " Stormy May Day " , and told Johnson to swap some screaming for " soul crooning " as Johnson was a soul singer . Johnson was worried that the rest of the band would think this did not suit the band 's style of hard rock and roll , but the band was quite receptive . Because of the highly demanding singing style , Johnson only recorded his vocals for one hour a day . The rhythm section continues the basic structure from other AC / DC records ; Cliff Williams played bass lines of eighth notes , and Phil Rudd 's drumming was a consistent 4 / 4 time , mostly on his snare , kick drum and hi @-@ hat cymbal . Both musicians expressed contentment with their roles in the band ; Rudd said , " I 'm not repressing skills . Most drummers are scared to try this " , and Williams admitted he plays " the same thing in every song , for the most part " , but added " [ i ] n AC / DC 's music , the song is more important than any individual 's bit in it " . 
 Angus said that when composing with Malcolm they share ideas to make each track " work together " to form a complete album , and Johnson added " these songs belong together . It 's about five boys having a damn good time in a studio . " With 15 songs and a running time of over 55 minutes , Black Ice has the longest running time of any AC / DC studio record . Malcolm said that " about 60 or 70 song ideas " were developed , but Angus stated that most were discarded because they were not " representative of how we are " . Angus also said that the first attempt to sequence the album resulted in a track list comprising eleven songs , " but as the days went by each band member voted for a new track , and then another , and other one " so they decided to include all the recorded tracks . 
 Most of the album 's tracks are about rock and roll itself – Angus stated , " Certain songs just seem to come to life when you add that phrase " . However , other themes served as inspiration . " Money Made " is a criticism on how , according to Angus , in the US " everything is money these days " . " War Machine " was based on a documentary on Hannibal , which led to the conclusion that the military has not changed since Ancient Rome . " Wheels " tells about Johnson 's passion for motorcars . He described the album 's release as the " best one we 've done " , he felt that while Back in Black was great for its time , Black Ice shows the band 's versatility . Angus also said he admired the album 's diversity , saying " It is sufficiently varied to please people in varied moods " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 On 18 August 2008 , Columbia Records announced that Black Ice would be released on 20 October in the US , and began accepting pre @-@ orders . " Rock ' n ' Roll Train " was issued as the first single from the album on 28 August ; " Big Jack " and " Anything Goes " followed in some markets , and " Money Made " was an airplay single in Australia and the United Kingdom . The track " <unk> ' for a Fight " , was used by the WWE as the theme song for its 2008 Survivor Series event , and " War Machine " would later be included in both a trailer for 2010 's Iron Man 2 and the film 's soundtrack album in addition to serving as one of the theme songs for Wrestlemania XXV . 
 The CD version was also available in a hardcover , deluxe edition with a 30 @-@ page booklet containing exclusive new illustrations , studio and live photographs of the group and lyrics . A limited edition steel @-@ box version , containing the CD , a 20 @-@ page colour booklet , a DVD featuring the " Rock ' n ' Roll Train " video and a making of documentary , a large AC / DC flag , five stickers and a Gibson guitar pick , was issued in Germany and the United Kingdom in December . The album was released as a double LP on two 180 @-@ gram discs in a gatefold package featuring the standard red lettering artwork on the front . The LP was sold through the official website and through independent record shops in the US . An unknown number of copies of the vinyl version were incorrectly pressed ; side 1B had tracks from The Clash 's Live at Shea Stadium . Black Ice was not issued digitally as the band refused to sell their tracks separately . Angus declared , " If we were on iTunes , we know a certain percentage of people would only download two or three songs from the album – and we don 't think that represents us musically . " However , the entire album was leaked online a week before the official release . Rumours spread that Sony Music tried to control leaks by releasing fake tracks on peer @-@ to @-@ peer websites . 
 In North America , Walmart made a deal for the exclusive distribution of Black Ice , though a few independent music shops ordered copies of the album from foreign outlets . Angus declared that the band chose Walmart because the company is the biggest physical music retailer in America , which they believed to be " the best alternative to iTunes " . He also said , " There aren 't as many record stores these days , and <unk> are all over America . New York and Los Angeles and Chicago may be covered , but in the heartland of America , Walmart may be the only gig in town . " Walmart created over 3000 " Rock Again AC / DC Stores " with displays showcasing the band 's albums , branded clothing , the No Bull DVD , the video game AC / DC Live : Rock Band , and products from sponsors . Gary Severson , a Walmart senior vice president , said that AC / DC was one of the rare artists whose loyal fan @-@ base allowed them to display other merchandise along with the music . In October , MTV , Walmart and Columbia created " AC / DC Rock Band Stores " in cities without regular Walmart retail locations – New York 's Times Square and Los Angeles . " Black Ice " trucks were dispatched on the streets of these cities after the release , playing tracks and making stops each day to sell merchandise . Advertising agency Arnold Worldwide was awarded both Best Activity Generating Brand Volume by the Marketing Agencies Association , and Best Retail / Co @-@ Marketing Campaign by Promo Magazine for Black Ice 's marketing campaign . 
 A digital version of Black Ice was made available on iTunes , along with the rest of AC / DC 's catalogue , on 19 November 2012 . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The cover art of Black Ice was drawn by Joshua Marc Levy , art director for Columbia and a longtime fan of the band who volunteered for the project among " many people at Sony who desired to work on it " . There are four different covers , the standard edition has a red logo , the deluxe edition has a blue logo and two variants to the regular design include yellow or white logos . Angus said the options were not to deliver the message that fans would need to purchase all covers . He said , " We know most people will only purchase the record once , in their colour of choice . For me , it 's not relevant . What matters is that fans enjoy it . Music is the essence . " 
 After working with the cover for the album , provisionally titled Runaway Train , Levy went on vacation and travelled with Pearl Jam on their 2008 tour . After a concert in Washington D.C. , Levy came up with the idea " to do it all graphic black on black " and sketched what would become the yellow artwork . The record company liked it and requested he do two more in the same style , which became the red and white versions . During the promotional photography sessions , Levy made the deluxe edition art . The tracks on the album did not have much influence on the artwork as Levy had heard " maybe 5 songs at that point " , but he found it curious that his artwork fit the title track " Black Ice " , which was not among the tracks he had heard . Levy said that since the album had many similarities with Back in Black – " Black " in the title , dark covers , and AC / DC resurfacing with a sound based on the band 's early work – the art was " like a time travel , which is why there are so many psychedelic drawings " . The artwork 's resemblance to a train , echoing lead single " Rock N ' Roll Train " , was a coincidence , given Levy " never thought of it that way " . Atop the image there is a cog with an image of Angus with his fist in the air resembling the statue on Stiff Upper Lip , because Levy " just thought it was great as a continuing icon . " The photographs for the booklet and promotional photography were taken by music photographer Guido Karp , in August 2008 in London . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Professional reviews = = = 
 Critical reviews of Black Ice were generally favourable according to Metacritic , which provided a normalised rating of 69 out of 100 based on 24 reviews from mainstream critics . Most reviewers complimented the album 's sound , with The Village Voice 's Richard Bienstock considering that Brendan O 'Brien 's production restored a sonority closer to the Vanda and Young produced 1970s albums and effective choruses like those with " Mutt " Lange , and Aaron Burgess of The A.V. Club finding Black Ice the most inspired AC / DC album since The Razors Edge while sounding " harder , hungrier , and more relevant than anything on contemporary radio . " A common argument was that Black Ice succeeded because AC / DC did not want to change the style that succeeded in previous albums , with Bernard Zuel of The Sydney Morning Herald declaring that given " almost all of [ the tracklist ] could have appeared on any AC / DC album of the past 28 years " , and Chris Jones of BBC saying that the band 's " almost platonic form of rock ' n ' boogie that was hand built to last " remains because they " have no reason to tinker with a formula that was well @-@ nigh perfect to begin with . " Writers such as Spin 's David Marchese and The Observer 's Peter Kimpton complimented the band 's attempts at " some new sonic tricks " , such as the slide guitar of " Stormy May Day " and the quieter " Decibel " . 
 However , some reviewers found the album inconsistent , overly long or formulaic . Black Ice was described as a retread of other AC / DC albums without the same inspiration , with Spence D. of IGN declaring that " the band sounds tight , but very few of the songs actually resonate with that sense of classicism found on much of their earlier efforts " , The Austin Chronicle 's Austin Powell feeling that despite " a few cheap thrills " the album lacked " the urgent indecency and iron force that defined the Bon Scott era " , and Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine considering that after " Big Jack " the tracks went into a " too @-@ comfortable groove , fueled by too @-@ tight rhythms and guitars that sound loud but not beefy " . Many complained about the lack of variation , made more flagrant by the long track list . Entertainment Weekly 's reviewer Clark Collis wrote that " even 2000 's fairly monochromatic Stiff Upper Lip had more varied material " , Brian Hiatt of Rolling Stone felt that Black Ice " feels longer than its 55 minutes , thanks to a stretch of throwaway rockers " , and Robert Forster of The Monthly thought that a shorter running time would " maximise the album 's impact " , given he found the first four songs and the title track the best for sounding more diverse , while the other tracks were let down by poor songwriting and a " numbing predictability " . 
 = = = Chart performance and sales = = = 
 Black Ice made history by debuting at number one on album charts of 29 countries , and is Columbia Records ' biggest debut album since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking sales data for Billboard in March 1991 . Black Ice was the second best @-@ selling album worldwide in 2008 , behind Coldplay 's Viva La Vida or Death and All His Friends . As of December 2008 , it had shipped 6 million copies worldwide , and earned sales certifications in 24 countries , with multi @-@ platinum status in eight , platinum in twelve more , and gold in the four remaining . 
 On the first day of its US release , 20 October 2008 , Black Ice sold over 193 @,@ 000 units . By 28 October , Black Ice debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 albums chart , selling over 784 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , the second highest one @-@ week sales of an album in the US of 2008 , behind Lil Wayne 's Tha Carter III . It was AC / DC 's second release to top the US charts , after For Those About to Rock We Salute You ( 1981 ) and became the biggest debut ever by a mainstream hard rock album . As of 31 December 2008 , the album had sold 1 @.@ 915 million copies in the US , according to Nielsen SoundScan , and was certified 2x Platinum by the RIAA . Black Ice also debuted at number one on the ARIA Album Charts , selling over 90 @,@ 000 units , and the UK Album charts , with 110 @,@ 000 copies sold . It was their first number one in the UK since Back in Black ( 1980 ) . In Canada , Black Ice debuted at number one and sold 119 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , making it the best @-@ selling album debut in Canada in 2008 . The album held the top spot in Canada for three consecutive weeks , with sales of over 200 @,@ 000 copies . In Germany , Black Ice became the 14th best @-@ selling album of the 2000s , with sales of 1 million copies and being certified 5 times platinum . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the ARIA Music Awards of 2009 , Black Ice won in the categories of Best Rock Album and Highest Selling Album ; it was nominated for Album of the Year and AC / DC were nominated for Group of the Year . It was nominated for Best International Album at the Juno Awards and the Brit Awards . At the APRA Awards of 2010 Angus and Malcolm won Songwriters of the Year , and " Rock ' n ' Roll Train " won Most Played Australian Work Overseas . At the 51st Grammy Awards in 2009 , " Rock ' n ' Roll Train " was nominated for Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal , and at the 2010 ceremony , Black Ice was nominated for Best Rock Album and the track " War Machine " won the Best Hard Rock Performance category . 
 Black Ice was ranked 41st on Rolling Stone 's Top 50 Albums of 2008 list , 29th on a similar list by Q magazine , 17th on Kerrang ! ' s Top 20 Albums of the Year and 3rd in UGO 's list of the 11 Best Metal Albums of 2008 . 
 = = Black Ice World Tour = = 
 To promote Black Ice , AC / DC launched the Black Ice World Tour on 28 October 2008 in Wilkes @-@ Barre , Pennsylvania . Two days earlier ; they had held a dress rehearsal in the same city . The tour lasted for 168 shows in 11 legs , with the last in Bilbao , Spain , on 28 June 2010 . 
 Mark Fisher , who had worked on the Stiff Upper Lip World Tour , designed the stage . The set 's centrepiece was a full size locomotive , weighing 3500 kg , that was inspired by the working title Runaway Train and the track " Rock ' n ' Roll Train " . Five songs from Black Ice were included on the tour 's set list ; " Rock ' n ' Roll Train " , " Big Jack " , " Black Ice " , " War Machine " , and " Anything Goes " . 
 The Black Ice World Tour was AC / DC 's most successful , grossing $ 441 @.@ 6 million , making it the fourth highest @-@ grossing concert tour of all @-@ time . Three concerts in December 2009 at the River Plate Stadium in Buenos Aires were released as the DVD Live at River Plate on 10 May 2011 . A limited edition photo book of the tour , AC / DC Black Ice World Tour 2008 – 2010 , by Matteo Abruzzo , was published in Italy in October 2010 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Angus Young and Malcolm Young . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 AC / DC 
 Angus Young – lead guitar , slide guitar on " Stormy May Day " 
 Malcolm Young – rhythm guitar , backing vocals 
 Brian Johnson – lead vocals 
 Cliff Williams – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Phil Rudd – drums , percussion 
 Production 
 Brendan O 'Brien – producer 
 Mike Fraser – engineer , mixer 
 Eric Mosher – assistant engineer 
