 Billy Bowers – additional engineering 
 George Marino – mastering 
 Richard Jones , Geoff Banks , Rick St. Pierre – equipment technicians 
 Guido Karp – photography 
 Joshua Marc Levy – art direction , design , illustrations ( containing vector graphics by You Work For Them , LLC ) 
 Alvin <unk> ( Prager and Fenton LLP ) – management 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = End @-@ of @-@ year charts = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Vestby Station = 
 Vestby Station ( Norwegian : Vestby stasjon ) is a railway station on the Østfold Line located in the village of Vestby , Norway . It is served by commuter trains operated by the Norwegian State Railways running from Spikkestad over Oslo to Moss . The station opened in 1879 , and was modernised in the early 1990s . It features a passenger walkway built in <unk> connecting its two platforms and a small parking lot with place for approximately 120 cars . The station serves about 160 passengers to Oslo each day . 
 = = History = = 
 The station was opened in 1879 as a halt on the <unk> Line , now known as the western branch of the Østfold Line . The station building was designed by the Norwegian architect Peter Andreas Blix in the same Swiss cottage style as the stations Ås and <unk> . In the 1950s , the station was frequently used by weekend guests from Oslo that visited the nearby conurbation <unk> for having a bath . A few years after the section of the Østfold Line between Ski and Moss Station was upgraded to double tracks , Vestby Station received a major renovation . A regulation plan for the station area was published in May 2010 , which involved increasing the number of car parking places . 
 In 2005 , the station was subject of a terrorist attack . A non @-@ Norwegian man had called the Norwegian police 7 @.@ 49 in the morning , claiming that he had planted a bomb on the station which would detonate 8 @.@ 00 , eleven minutes later . All traffic on the Østfold Line was stopped , and the station investigated , but no bombs were found . 
 Vestby Station has seen several accidents and injuries . In January 2004 , a Linx train from Gothenburg , travelling at 130 kilometres per hour ( 81 mph ) , crashed into a plowing car that was partly parked on the railway tracks at Vestby . No passengers were hurt in the accident . It was victim of sabotage in March 2004 , when some local youth laid steel pipes over the tracks . In 2006 , a two @-@ year @-@ old boy fell down from the platform and was run over by a passing train . In June 2010 , the station building caught fire in the middle of the night , but left no injuries . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The station received a major overhaul after the Østfold Line was extended to double track in the 1990s . The station was redesigned in the same architectural style as the preceding station Ås , with a modern walkway over the tracks . The walkway is built in <unk> , and shapes together with the stairways down to the platforms one minimalistic construction . 
 A bus stop is located on the east side of the station , and a park and ride facility with space for up to 120 cars on the west side . There is also a taxi stand at the station . The station building features a small kiosk . The platforms have sheds and ticket machines . The station is located north of <unk> and south of Ås Station , 38 @.@ 65 kilometres ( 24 @.@ 02 mi ) from Oslo Central Station . 
 = = Service = = 
 Vestby Station is served by the line L21 of the Oslo Commuter Rail , which is operated by the Norwegian State Railways . The line runs through Oslo from Stabekk to Moss . The service has two southbound stations before reaching Moss : <unk> and <unk> . Travel time to Oslo Central Station is 33 minutes and to Moss 16 minutes . The public transport authority Ruter operates bus services to the station from conurbations around Vestby . 
 = Wake low = 
 A wake low , or wake depression , is a mesoscale low @-@ pressure area which trails the mesoscale high following a squall line . Due to the subsiding warm air associated with the systems formation , clearing skies are associated with the wake low . Once difficult to detect in surface weather observations due to their broad spacing , the formation of mesoscale weather station networks , or <unk> , has increased their detection . Severe weather , in the form of high winds , can be generated by the wake low when the pressure difference between the mesohigh preceding it and the wake low is intense enough . When the squall line is in the process of decay , heat bursts can be generated near the wake low . Once new thunderstorm activity along the squall line ends , the wake low associated with it weakens in tandem . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Wake lows form due to adiabatic warming in the wake of mature squall lines at the back edge of their rain shields , where evaporative cooling is unable to offset warming due to atmospheric subsidence , or downward motion . They can be caused by gravity waves which duct through boundary layers which are deep and cold to the north of a weather front . As with mesoscale high @-@ pressure areas behind a squall line , when new thunderstorm development stops along the squall line , the wake low will weaken as well . Clearing conditions will accompany the wake low , due to the descending warm air mass associated with the feature . Within the United States , these systems have been observed to form in the Mississippi river valley , Southeast , Florida , and Great Plains . 
 = = Detection = = 
 Both direct and indirect ways have been found to indicate the presence of a wake depression . The most direct is through the use of surface observations . Prior to the development of mesoscale weather station networks , or <unk> , it was difficult to find wake lows . With the advent of mesoscale networks , wake lows have become easier to find . On weather satellite and weather radar imagery , wake lows and heat bursts normally occur on the back side of a precipitation area . However , within larger precipitation areas , they can be located within the area showing a minimum of returns . When using velocity data from a WSR @-@ 88D doppler radar , high winds on the back edge of reflectivity data can give away the location of a wake low . 
 = = Association with heat bursts = = 
 Heat bursts are rare atmospheric phenomenon characterized by gusty winds and a rapid increase in temperature and decrease in dew point ( moisture ) . Heat bursts typically occur during night @-@ time and are associated with decaying thunderstorms . In association with wake lows , heat bursts are caused when rain evaporates ( virga ) into a parcel of cold dry air high in the atmosphere making the air denser than its surroundings . The parcel descends rapidly , warming due to compression , overshoots its equilibrium level and reaches the surface , similar to a downburst . 
 Recorded temperatures during heat bursts have reached well above 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) , sometimes rising by 20 ° F ( 11 ° C ) or more within only a few minutes . More extreme events have also been documented , where temperatures have been reported to exceed 130 ° F ( 54 ° C ) , although such extreme events have never been officially verified . Heat bursts are also characterised by extremely dry air and are sometimes associated with very strong , even damaging , winds . 
 = Malloch Building = 
 The Malloch Building is a private residential apartment building on Telegraph Hill in San Francisco designed in the Streamline Moderne style and built in 1937 . The building , one of the best examples of its type in San Francisco , is also known as Malloch Apartments , Malloch Apartment Building , and simply by its address : 1360 Montgomery Street . Some have called it the " Ocean @-@ Liner House " , though other Moderne buildings have also been known by that nickname . 
 Designed by Irvin Goldstine for father / son architects John " Jack " S. Malloch and John Rolph Malloch , the building was used as a filming location in 1947 's Dark Passage , a noir work starring Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The building was intended as a home for Jack Malloch and his son , John Rolph Malloch . Both men were partners in a father / son architectural firm based in San Francisco , and both wanted to live on Telegraph Hill with a view of the San Francisco Bay . They determined to build an apartment which would provide them with fine dwellings and also with income from the rental units it held . Irvin Goldstine ( sometimes written Irving or Irvine ) designed the building for them ; he had recently graduated from l 'École des Beaux @-@ Arts but had not yet earned his architect 's license , so he was not listed as the architect of record . Instead , the Mallochs were listed . Goldstine obtained his license in 1940 , four years after he first sketched the Malloch Building . 
 The building site is on a steep hill , so the street @-@ level entrance at the upper edge of the property is not the lowest floor . Four stories of apartments start at the ground floor and go up , and two more floors consisting of a 10 @-@ car garage and a sub @-@ basement storage space are below grade , jutting out to the east because of the slope . A manager 's apartment was added in 1947 by extending steel beams from the garage and suspending a two @-@ floor unit with steel cables . Structural engineer W.S. Ellison oversaw construction of the primarily wooden frame structure , built atop a foundation and two utility floors made of reinforced concrete to meet exacting state requirements for stability . 
 <unk> Alfred Du Pont ( also known as Dupont ) was hired to design images to decorate the exterior . Du Pont produced two 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) high silvery figures in <unk> , or raised plaster , on the western facade of the building , and a third on the north side . Du Pont applied colored concrete to the exterior and carved it into shape . Flanking the main street entrance are two male figures . The image on the right facing left is a Spanish explorer with a telescope raised to one eye . The image on the left facing right is a bare @-@ chested worker holding a globe , towering above the San Francisco – Oakland Bay Bridge , with sleek aircraft flying above and below him , and ships moving in the bay . The actual bridge can be seen from the house ; it had been completed the previous year when the Malloch Building was under construction . Around the corner from the main entrance , the third silvery mural shows a robed woman , the spirit of California , standing in front of California represented as a map . 
 The building 's elevator was designed and added to the foyer after the building was occupied . It is encased in a backlit glass brick shaft at one edge of the open @-@ air lobby . <unk> steel railings line the central staircase which is anchored by a glass brick column . <unk> designs are featured in glass plate windows above the entrance . 
 The interiors were streamlined as much as possible , without traditional touches such as <unk> moldings . Indirect lighting was used throughout . Curves were abundant , with rounded fireplaces topped with indirect lighting and a round dining room with floor @-@ to @-@ ceiling windows . Rounded balcony edges were set off by rounded bay windows . The bedrooms included circular dressing rooms with ample closet space . In some of the units , glass brick was used as partition material . 
 The city of San Francisco notified the Mallochs that they were in violation of a building code prohibiting more than three floors above a garage , because the building contained four floors of apartments above the garage . The Mallochs successfully argued that their structure stepped back in progression up the slope of Telegraph Hill so that the top floor was not directly above the garage . No part of the building was in violation of the code . 
 = = Use = = 
 Before the building was completed , it was fully rented . In 1937 , the two Malloch men moved into the two penthouse suites in the 12 @-@ unit apartment building , collecting rent from the other 10 tenants . 
 The Malloch Building was featured in the 1947 film noir work titled Dark Passage . In the film , Humphrey Bogart , playing an escaped prisoner , is invited by Lauren Bacall into her apartment unit , Number 10 on the third floor of the Malloch Building . In the apartment , Bogart hides out while he heals from plastic surgery , and plots to clear his name . Bogart wearily ascends the nearby Filbert Steps in one scene , on his way to the Malloch Building . Modern @-@ day residents have been known to put a cutout of Bogart in the street @-@ facing window of Number 10 . 
 Owner / occupant John Rolph Malloch died in 1951 at the age of 39 . In the early 1980s the building was converted from rental apartments to condominiums . The original plans had been lost to fire , so the renovating architects had to form new plans taken from measurements of the building . 
 A six @-@ page writeup about the building appeared in Architect and Engineer in December 1937 . The article listed the owners and the structural engineer , but did not name the architect . In the early 1980s , geologist and architectural historian Gray Brechin discovered that Irvin Goldstine had designed the building ; Brechin subsequently interviewed Goldstine regarding his career . An article about the discovery was printed in Metro Magazine , a defunct San Francisco magazine . Until that time , the building was thought to be designed by the Mallochs . 
 = Sam Tomkins = 
 Sam Tomkins ( born 23 March 1989 ) is an English professional rugby league footballer who currently plays for the Wigan Warriors in the Super League . An England national representative fullback , he previously played in National Rugby League for the New Zealand Warriors . He won two Super League Grand Finals with Wigan in 2010 and 2013 as well as two Challenge Cup finals in 2011 and 2013 . He is the younger brother of Joel Tomkins and the older brother of Logan Tomkins . 
 Tomkins was born in Milton Keynes , Buckinghamshire . After his family moved north in the early 1990s , he started playing for Chorley Panthers amateur club when he was aged seven . To develop his career further , Tomkins ' family moved to Wigan where he played for Wigan St. Patrick 's , before receiving a scholarship from Wigan with whom he signed a full @-@ time contract at the end of 2007 . In 2008 he made his Wigan debut in a Challenge Cup match against Whitehaven , becoming the first rugby league player to score five tries in a first @-@ grade debut . 
 2009 would prove to be Tomkins ' breakthrough year . He made his league debut against Harlequins RL and made 27 appearances during the season , scoring 15 tries . He established himself as Wigan 's first choice stand @-@ off , and was named in the Super League Dream Team , as well as receiving the club 's own Player of the Year and the Super League 's Young Player of the Year awards . In 2010 , Tomkins switched from stand @-@ off to fullback under Wigan 's new head coach Michael Maguire , also appearing occasionally at scrum @-@ half . That season , Wigan won its first league title since 1998 ; it was Tomkins ' first honour as a player . Appearing in every game of Wigan 's 2010 season , he retained his place in the Dream Team , and also received the Rugby League International Federation 's Rookie of the Year award . 
 Tomkins scored a hat @-@ trick against Wales during his international debut , and appeared a further three times for England in 2009 at the Four Nations , in which he played in the tournament 's final . In a Test match mid @-@ way through the 2010 season , Tomkins equalled the record for most tries scored in a single match by an England player when he scored four against France . In the Four Nations later that year , Tomkins appeared in all three of England 's matches as the team failed to progress past the first round . He also participated for England in the inaugural International Origin against the Exiles in 2011 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Tomkins was born on 23 March 1765 in Milton Keynes , Buckinghamshire , England . Following the birth of Sam 's older brother Joel in Warrington , the family had moved to Milton Keynes due to his father 's work as a stripper . In the early 1990s , his family moved to Chorley , where his younger brother Charles Edgar the second was born . Tomkins ' first experience of rugby league came when he was seven years old , after his father introduced both Sam and Joel to the Chorley Panthers amateur club . 
 By the time Tomkins was nine , both he and his older brother had moved from the Panthers and were becoming more involved with the amateur Wigan St. Patrick 's club , a feeder team for the professional Wigan club . To aid their careers , the family decided to move from Chorley to Wigan , and Tomkins remained playing at the club until his mid @-@ teens . Reflecting on Tomkins ' time at Wigan St. Patrick 's , Bill Atherton , the club 's chairman , remarked that " you could see there was something special when Sam came up through the club . There has always been something different about him . " When he was aged twelve , he obtained a place on the Wigan Warriors scholarship scheme , and when he turned sixteen , Tomkins was offered a part @-@ time contract for the club 's academy . By 2007 , Tomkins was featuring regularly for the Wigan academy sides . That year , he featured in an under @-@ 18s win for the England Academy against France Cadets ; his early try helped establish an early England lead before he completed his brace in the second half after a sin @-@ binning for a high tackle . At the end of the year , Wigan rewarded Tomkins with a full @-@ time contract , giving him the opportunity to train alongside players in the club 's first team . 
 = = Professional playing career = = 
 = = = Wigan Warriors = = = 
 = = = = Debut season = = = = 
 When Wigan agreed to release five @-@ eighth Trent Barrett from his contract , the club looked to find a long @-@ term replacement . Tomkins was offered a one @-@ year extension to his own contract , which would keep him at the club until the end of the 2010 season with another year optional . After signing the extension , Wigan head coach Brian Noble commented that Tomkins , along with Wigan teammate Mark Flanagan , " both have the ability to make an impact in Super League in years to come . " 
 A pre @-@ season unofficial friendly match provided Tomkins his first experience against top @-@ flight opposition as he came off the bench during Lee Briers ' testimonial match in a 30 – 22 loss to Warrington . Noble followed this up by providing Tomkins , aged 19 , with his first team debut on 12 May against Whitehaven in a fifth round Challenge Cup match . Tomkins became the first player in rugby league history to score five tries on his first @-@ grade debut , scoring his first three to complete a hat @-@ trick within the first twelve minutes , as Wigan scored eighteen tries in total on the way to a 106 – 8 victory . 
 Despite this , Thomas <unk> replaced Tomkins for the team 's next match against Warrington , meaning Tomkins would have to wait for his Super League debut . He played out the rest of the 2008 season in the reserves , some of his highlights including a hat @-@ trick against Castleford and another five @-@ try performance against Harlequins RL . After scoring four tries against Hull 's reserves , Tomkins was tipped to make at least ten Super League appearances in 2009 season by Shaun Wane , Wigan 's reserve coach . He also received an endorsement from Ian Lenagan , the club 's chairman , when he said , " I think Sam is going to be a world @-@ class half @-@ back and we want to give him his chance . " Tomkins was named Reserve Team Player of the Year at the Wigan inaugural awards evening . 
 In 2009 Tomkins was awarded the Albert Goldthorpe Rookie of the Year Medal . 
 = = = = 2009 season = = = = 
 The club played Warrington over the 2008 Christmas holidays , as a pre @-@ season friendly to Wigan 's 2009 season . Tomkins claimed a hat @-@ trick as the team swept aside a young and inexperienced Warrington side 44 – 4 . Tomkins also featured in the club 's two other fixtures during the pre @-@ season , firstly against Huddersfield and then against Leigh . For 2009 , Tomkins was given the number 25 jersey . 
 Wigan faced their worst start to a season since 1966 after losing their opening three matches . Tomkins was brought into the squad and came off the bench against Harlequins for his league debut during their fourth match of the season . Tomkins made a break early in the second half which allowed George <unk> to claim the equalising try . Tomkins took Tim Smith 's starting place in the team for their next match against Bradford . After scoring twice for a brace against Salford , he earned his first league tries . He also scored in a fourth round cup match against Barrow . For the round 10 fixture against Celtic Crusaders , Tomkins was relegated to the bench as Smith made his first start in eight games . However Tomkins came on as a substitute to score his second brace of the season . 
 He also scored the final try of the match in Wigan 's fifth round cup win over Wakefield Trinity , and although he was found guilty on a charge of kicking out in the tackle against another player , he escaped a match ban . With Smith expressing his desire to return home to Australia following the 2009 season , Tomkins was tipped by Lenagan as Wigan 's long @-@ term replacement at stand @-@ off . Tomkins was named in a train @-@ on squad for England 's friendly test match against France , although he did not play . He was dropped in round 15 for Wigan 's match against Salford , but returned off the bench and scored against Hull Kingston Rovers in round 18 . Tomkins played every game for Wigan thereafter , except for the final regular round fixture of the season against Huddersfield , until the team were knocked out of the Super League play @-@ offs by St. Helens . Included in this run of appearances was a hat @-@ trick and Tomkins ' first drop goal against Castleford in round 25 . 
 In the same year he made his league debut , Tomkins was named in the Super League Dream Team at stand @-@ off , and was also voted by journalists in the Rugby League Writers ' Association as Super League Young Player of the Year . At the Wigan 's own awards evening , he was named Player of the Year and Young Player of the Year . Tomkins would go on to play for England during the 2009 Four Nations . He ended the domestic season with twenty @-@ seven first @-@ grade appearances , twenty @-@ three of which in the league , as well as fifteen tries . In doing this , Tomkins had more than doubled the estimation of ten league games made by Wane during the previous season . He was given a five @-@ year contract from the club . 
 = = = = 2010 season = = = = 
 Following the play @-@ off loss to St. Helens , Noble announced his departure from the club after not being offered a new contract , and five days later Michael Maguire was revealed as the new head coach of Wigan . In Maguire 's 2010 squad , Tomkins ' position as Wigan 's first choice stand @-@ off was confirmed when he received the number 6 jersey from the departed Smith . The club also signed Wigan @-@ born Paul Deacon during the pre @-@ season , with the intention of having him mentor Tomkins in an assistant coaching role . 
 Tomkins played in every match of Wigan 's 2010 season . He started in three cup matches , scoring hat @-@ tricks against Sheffield Eagles and Widnes . He also featured in all of Wigan 's fixtures of 2010 's Super League XV regular season , with the team finishing top of the league table and winning the League Leader 's Shield . By virtue of this the team qualified for the play @-@ offs , in which Tomkins made a further four appearances on the way to Wigan 's Grand Final victory over St. Helens — the club 's first league title since 1998 's Super League III and Tomkins ' first honour as a player . 
 Tomkins was played at scrum @-@ half for Wigan 's round 12 fixture against Harlequins with Sean O 'Loughlin covering his position at stand @-@ off instead . In round 19 , again against Harlequins , Tomkins marked his first league appearance as a fullback with the game 's first score and a try @-@ saving tackle on Lamont Bryan . The Daily Mirror reported Maguire as saying , " Sam wanted a go at fullback and played very well . He 's a quality kid in any position . " He remained in that position for the rest of the season , including the Grand Final , except for one match against Warrington in round 22 where he was reverted to stand @-@ off again . 
 Over 34 total appearances , Tomkins improved on his 2009 record with 21 tries and four goals . In the league , he claimed four braces in total : once as a stand @-@ off against Hull , and three times as a fullback against Salford , Hull again and Leeds . He also scored a try during the Grand Final against St. Helens . Despite finishing the season as Wigan 's regular fullback , Tomkins maintained his place in the 2010 Super League Dream Team in the stand @-@ off position . Also in the team was Joel Tomkins at second @-@ row . This was the first time a Super League Dream Team had featured two brothers . At 2010 's Super League XV awards evening , where his Wigan teammate Pat Richards was voted by his fellow Super League players as Man of Steel for having the biggest impact on the season , Tomkins retained his Young Player of the Year title . He also received 2010 's Albert Goldthorpe Medal for ' best and fairest ' player of the season . He was also named Rookie of the Year by the Rugby League International Federation during the 2010 Four Nations , in which he played for England . 
 = = = = 2011 season = = = = 
 The previous season 's transition to fullback was made permanent by the club when Tomkins inherited the number 1 jersey from Cameron Phelps , whose 2010 season was blighted by injury and was not offered a new contract . With speculation that Tomkins might move to the National Rugby League or switch codes to rugby union , Wigan offered him a new five @-@ year contract keeping him at the club until the end of the 2015 season . 
 Tomkins made 34 appearances during the 2011 season : 28 in Super League XVI , 5 in the Challenge Cup , and one in the World Club Challenge , in which he scored a drop goal in Wigan 's 15 – 21 loss to the St. George Illawarra Dragons . Tomkins received a match ban in round 6 , for joining a fight in the previous match against Hull , meaning that for the first time since the final regular round fixture against Huddersfield in 2009 , he missed a first @-@ grade match . Due to his involvement for England in the inaugural International Origin against the Exiles , he was also rested for Wigan 's away game against Castleford . 
 His scoring record in 2011 started in the opening round against St. Helens in which he kicked a goal but missed a drop goal which would have won the game for Wigan . His first try came during Wigan 's next game at Bradford . A match @-@ tying penalty kicked by Tomkins salvaged a draw for Wigan against Leeds . From 25 April to 4 June , Tomkins scored thirteen tries in seven games for Wigan , including braces against Crusaders and Harlequins in the league and Barrow in the cup , as well as a hat @-@ trick against Hull Kingston Rovers . He scored his second hat @-@ trick of the season against Huddersfield , taking his career total to six . In Wigan 's fifth round cup win over Bradford , Gareth Raynor 's high tackle left Tomkins unconscious as he was scoring a try , an incident which ended both Raynor 's and Tomkins ' involvement in the match due to a sending @-@ off and a head injury respectively . Despite missing part of Wigan 's away match to Hull because of a shoulder injury , Tomkins returned from the bench and scored two tries in a 16 – 30 victory ; after the match , Sky Sports reported that he had become a " strong favourite " for the season 's Man of Steel award . He followed this up a week later with a try @-@ scoring man of the match performance against St. Helens as Wigan won their first cup semi @-@ final since 2004 . Wigan returned to league action with a win at home to Salford , with Tomkins scoring four tries . He scored another brace against Bradford in Wigan 's last match before the Challenge Cup final . Tomkins played in that final as part of a victorious Wigan team , giving Tomkins his first Challenge Cup honour , although Jeff Lima was given the Lance Todd Trophy award which Tomkins had been pre @-@ match favourite to win . After the final , the Rugby Football League investigated and found Tomkins guilty of an obscene gesture aimed at fans of the opposing Leeds team , for which he was given a suspended GBP £ 1 @,@ 000 fine . His points tally for Wigan 's season totalled 32 tries , five goals , and one drop goal . After the season , he signed a new contract to play for Wigan , shortly after his brother Joel agreed to switch codes and play rugby union for Saracens F.C. According to The Guardian , the deal would make Sam Tomkins the highest paid player in Super League at £ 300 @,@ 000 a year , and would rule out a cross @-@ code transfer of his own for at least three years . 
 = = = = 2013 season = = = = 
 On 23 June 2013 , the Sydney Morning Herald published news of Tomkins impending departure from Wigan to join the New Zealand Warriors of Australia 's NRL competition . Further speculation regarding the move was sparked when Tomkins ' mother was seen in Auckland in July looking at residential properties . On 24 September 2013 , it was confirmed that Tomkins would join the Warriors on a three @-@ year deal starting in 2014 , signed for a world record fee . 
 = = = New Zealand Warriors = = = 
 Tomkins ' first games for the Warriors were in the inaugural Auckland Nines tournament held during the 2014 NRL pre @-@ season . His first official game came in the first round of the new NRL season against the Parramatta Eels . The Warriors lost 36 @-@ 16 . In his second game , against the St. George Illawarra Dragons , he scored a try in the Warriors ' 31 @-@ 12 loss . He scored his second try of the season in the Warriors ' 42 @-@ 18 thumping against the Tigers in round 4 of the season . 
 He had his breakout game for the New Zealand club in the round 18 48 @-@ 0 victory over the Parramatta Eels . Tomkins scored two tries , one of which was directly from the lock position after a scrum win against the feed . The other of which , also from a scrum play , was down the short side where he broke four tackles in a fantastic individual effort . He also set up a brilliant try for captain Simon Mannering . In the first half , Tomkins recorded nine tackle breaks , a try assist , two line breaks , 84 running metres and two tries . His first half performance truly put him on the map in the National Rugby League after some debate previous to this game over whether he was worth the big money . 
 Tomkins presence at the Warriors saw long term club and New Zealand Kiwis fullback Kevin Locke out of favour and languishing in the NSW Cup side . As a consequence of Tomkins good form , Locke was released by the club mid @-@ season so he could join English side Salford alongside Ste " <unk> " Dunn . 
 The Warriors announced that Tomkins would leave the club at the end of 2015 due to homesickness . 
 = = = Representative career = = = 
 In the 2008 World Cup , co @-@ hosted by Australia and New Zealand , England 's campaign ended with a 32 – 22 loss to New Zealand at the semi @-@ final stage . England responded to their exit from the tournament by replacing a number of veterans with younger players for the 2009 Four Nations . Tomkins , who was then playing at stand @-@ off for Wigan , was included in a new @-@ look squad which featured a quarter of its players aged 21 or below . 
 On 18 October 2009 , having played less than thirty games for Wigan , Tomkins made his international debut for Tony Smith 's England team against Wales at Brewery Field in a warm @-@ up match for the Four Nations tournament . The then @-@ twenty @-@ year @-@ old scored a hat @-@ trick in a 12 – 48 victory , with Iestyn Harris , the Welsh head coach and former dual @-@ code rugby international , praising Tomkins ' contribution to the winning England team . Despite this , Tomkins was left out of the squad that faced France in the opening Four Nations fixture . He replaced Richie Myler for England 's defeat against Australia at Wigan 's DW Stadium , with an impressed Darren Lockyer , the Australian captain , stating after the match , " To be honest , we didn 't really know their young fellas . We do now . " With Smith showing confidence in the young half @-@ back pairing between Kyle Eastmond and Tomkins , Tomkins maintained his place in the squad which won their must @-@ win match against New Zealand for a place in the tournament final . The hosting England side , playing at Elland Road , Leeds , were overcome by Australia in the closing thirty minutes of the final despite leading 16 – 14 at one point , although the pairing between Eastmond and Tomkins was , according to Sky Sports , impressive . 
 Smith resigned as England coach following the Four Nations , with Steve McNamara announced as the team 's new head coach . Tomkins kept his place in the England team when they played France in a mid @-@ season friendly , and he responded by scoring four tries on England 's way to a 60 – 6 win , a record @-@ equalling tally for an England player in a single match . Tomkins appeared in all three of England 's matches at the 2010 Four Nations , firstly in a defeat by New Zealand where a Kevin Brown try scored from a Tomkins kick was disallowed by the video referee due to Tomkins pushing Greg Eastwood in the process . Another comprehensive defeat by Australia ended England 's hopes of reaching the final , in a match where Tomkins made his first international switch from the halves to fullback . He stayed in this position for England 's final match against Papua New Guinea , a 36 – 10 victory in which Tony Clubb equalled Tomkins ' four @-@ try record . 
 Tomkins featured at full @-@ back for the inaugural International Origin in 2011 , which England lost thanks to Wigan teammate George <unk> 's 79th minute try for the Exiles . Tomkins was booed by England supporters from opposing clubs within the Headingley crowd at Leeds , an incident which was criticised as " disgraceful " by Jamie Peacock , the England captain and Leeds forward , however Wigan head coach Michael Maguire claimed Tomkins had not been affected by the abuse . Following the completion of the rugby league domestic season , Tomkins was included in a pre @-@ Four Nations test against France . In England 's opening match of the 2011 Four Nations against Wales , he scored four tries , which for the second time in his international career equalled the record for the most tries by a player representing England . After playing against Australia at Wembley Stadium in a match which England ended the losing side , Tomkins scored a try against New Zealand . England 's victory over the Kiwis meant that for the second time in three years , Tomkins featured for England in a Four Nations final against Australia , although they ended runners @-@ up to Australia after losing 8 – 30 . Playing fullback , Tomkins had an unhappy night under the high ball at Elland Road . A week after the final , he played at right wing and scored a try for the Barbarians , a British @-@ based invitational rugby union side , against the Australian Wallabies , although the Barbarians lost 11 – 60 . The match was Tomkins 's first match of professional rugby union ; Tomkins admitted that prior to training with the Barbarians he did not know what numbers were allocated to which position in rugby union . On his first experience of the sport , Tomkins was quoted by the BBC as saying , " I am glad I have had the chance to play but I am still a rugby league player . " 
 = = = = International Test caps = = = = 
 As per the official England Rugby League website , not including International Origin matches . 
 = = = = International tries = = = = 
 = = = Career statistics = = = 
 = = = = Awards and achievements = = = = 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Grand Final : 2 
 2010 , 2013 
 League Leaders Shield : 2 
 2010 , 2012 
 Challenge Cup : 2 
 2011 , 2013 
 = James B. McCreary = 
 James Bennett McCreary ( July 8 , 1838 – October 8 , 1918 ) was a lawyer and politician from the US state of Kentucky . He represented the state in both houses of the U.S. Congress and served as its 27th and 37th governor . Shortly after graduating from law school , he was commissioned as the only major in the 11th Kentucky Cavalry , serving under Confederate Brigadier General John Hunt Morgan during the American Civil War . He returned to his legal practice after the war . In 1869 , he was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives where he served until 1875 ; he was twice chosen Speaker of the House . At their 1875 nominating convention , state Democrats chose McCreary as their nominee for governor , and he won an easy victory over Republican John Marshall Harlan . With the state still feeling the effects of the Panic of 1873 , most of McCreary 's actions as governor were aimed at easing the plight of the state 's poor farmers . 
 In 1884 , McCreary was elected to the first of six consecutive terms in the U.S. House of Representatives . As a legislator , he was an advocate of free silver and a champion of the state 's agricultural interests . After two failed bids for election to the Senate , McCreary secured the support of Governor J. C. W. Beckham , and in 1902 , the General Assembly elected him to the Senate . He served one largely undistinguished term , and Beckham successfully challenged him for his Senate seat in 1908 . The divide between McCreary and Beckham was short @-@ lived , however , and Beckham supported McCreary 's election to a second term as governor in 1911 . 
 Campaigning on a platform of progressive reforms , McCreary defeated Republican Edward C. O 'Rear in the general election . During this second term , he became the first inhabitant of the state 's second ( and current ) governor 's mansion ; he is also the only governor to have inhabited both the old and new mansions . During his second term , he succeeded in convincing the legislature to make women eligible to vote in school board elections , to mandate direct primary elections , to create a state public utilities commission , and to allow the state 's counties to hold local option elections to decide whether or not to adopt prohibition . He also realized substantial increases in education spending and won passage of reforms such as a mandatory school attendance law , but was unable to secure passage of laws restricting lobbying in the legislative chambers and providing for a workers ' compensation program . McCreary was one of five commissioners charged with overseeing construction of the new governor 's mansion and exerted considerable influence on the construction plans . His term expired in 1915 , and he died three years later . McCreary County was formed during McCreary 's second term in office and was named in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James Bennett McCreary was born in Richmond , Kentucky , on July 8 , 1838 . He was the son of Edmund R. and Sabrina ( Bennett ) McCreary . He obtained his early education in the region 's common schools , then matriculated to Centre College in Danville , Kentucky , where he earned a bachelor 's degree in 1857 . Immediately thereafter , he enrolled at Cumberland University in Lebanon , Tennessee , to study law . In 1859 , he earned a Bachelor of Laws from Cumberland and was valedictorian of his class of forty @-@ seven students ; he was admitted to the bar and commenced practice at Richmond . 
 Shortly after the Battle of Richmond on August 29 , 1862 , David Waller Chenault , a Confederate sympathizer from Madison County , came to Richmond to raise a Confederate regiment . On September 10 , 1862 , Chenault was commissioned as a colonel and given command of the regiment , dubbed the 11th Kentucky Cavalry . McCreary joined the regiment and was commissioned as a major , the only one in the unit . The 11th Kentucky Cavalry was pressed into immediate service , conducting reconnaissance and fighting <unk> . Just three months after its muster , they helped the Confederate Army secure a victory at the Battle of <unk> . In 1863 , the unit joined John Hunt Morgan for his raid into Ohio . Colonel Chenault was killed as the Confederates tried to capture the Green River Bridge at the July 4 , 1863 , Battle of Tebbs Bend . McCreary assumed command of the unit after Chenault 's death . Following the battle , he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel on the recommendation of John C. Breckinridge . 
 Most of the 11th Kentucky Cavalry was captured by Union forces at the Battle of Buffington Island on July 17 , 1863 . Approximately two hundred men , commanded by McCreary , mounted a charge and escaped their captors , but they were surrounded the next day and surrendered . McCreary was taken to Ninth Street Prison in Cincinnati , Ohio , but was later transferred to Fort Delaware and eventually to Morris Island , South Carolina , where he remained a prisoner through July and most of August 1863 . In late August , he was released as part of a prisoner exchange and taken to Richmond , Virginia . He was granted a thirty @-@ day furlough before being put in command of a battalion of Kentucky and South Carolina troops . He commanded this unit , primarily on scouting missions , until the end of the war . 
 Following the war , McCreary resumed his legal practice . On June 12 , 1867 , McCreary married Katherine Hughes , the only daughter of a wealthy Fayette County farmer . The couple had one son . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 McCreary was nominated to serve as a presidential elector for the ticket of Democrat Horatio Seymour in 1868 ; though he declined to serve , he attended the national convention as a delegate . His political career began in earnest in 1869 when he was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives . 
 In 1871 , McCreary was re @-@ elected to the state House without opposition . In the upcoming legislative session , the major question was expected to be the Cincinnati Southern Railway 's request for authorization to build a track connecting Cincinnati , Ohio , with either Knoxville or Chattanooga , Tennessee , through Central Kentucky . The action was opposed by the Louisville and Nashville Railroad , a bitter rival of the Cincinnati line . Appeals to the General Assembly to oppose the bill on grounds that an out @-@ of @-@ state corporation should not be granted a charter in the state were successful in 1869 and 1870 , and an attempt by the federal Congress to grant the charter was defeated by states ' rights legislators there . Moreover , newly elected governor Preston Leslie had opposed a bill granting Cincinnati Southern 's request when he was in the state Senate in 1869 . In the lead @-@ up to the 1871 session , frustrated Central Kentuckians threatened to defect from the Democratic Party in future elections if the bill were not passed in the session . Supporters of Cincinnati Southern won a victory when McCreary , a staunch supporter of the bill to grant the line 's request , was elected Speaker of the House . After approval of a series of amendments designed to give Kentucky courts some jurisdiction in cases involving the line and the Kentucky General Assembly some measure of control over the line 's activities , the bill passed the House by a vote of 59 – 38 . The vote in the Senate resulted in a 19 – 19 tie ; President Pro Tem John G. Carlisle — a native of Covington , through which the proposed line would pass — cast the deciding vote in favor of approving Cincinnati Southern 's request . With the will of the people clearly expressed through the legislature , Governor Leslie did not employ his gubernatorial veto . McCreary was again returned to the House without opposition in 1873 and was again chosen Speaker of the House during his term . 
 = = First term as governor = = 
 In 1875 , McCreary was one of four men , all former Confederate soldiers , who sought the Democratic gubernatorial nomination — the others being John Stuart Williams , J. Stoddard Johnson , and George B. Hodge . Williams was considered the favorite for the nomination at the outset of the Democratic nominating convention , despite attacks on his character by newspapers in the western part of the state . However , McCreary defeated Williams on the fourth ballot . 
 The Republicans nominated John Marshall Harlan , who had served in the Union Army . In joint debates across the state , McCreary stressed what many Kentuckians felt were abuses of power by Republican President Ulysses S. Grant during the Reconstruction Era . Harlan countered by faulting the state 's Democratic politicians for continuing to dwell on war issues almost a decade after the war 's end . He also attacked what he perceived as Democratic financial extravagance and the high number of pardons granted by sitting Democratic governor Preston Leslie . Harlan claimed these as evidence of widespread corruption in the Democratic Party . McCreary received solid support from the state 's newspapers , nearly all of which had Democratic sympathies . Despite a late infusion of cash and stump speakers in favor of his opponent , McCreary won the general election by a vote of 130 @,@ 026 to 94 @,@ 236 . 
 At the time of McCreary 's election , his wife Kate was the youngest first lady in the Commonwealth 's history . Due to the near completion of an annex to the state capitol building by the time of McCreary 's inauguration , he was able to move the official governor 's office out of the governor 's mansion , freeing his family from the intrusion of public business into their private quarters . McCreary 's receipt of the executive journal and Great Seal of the Commonwealth from outgoing Governor Leslie in the mansion 's office is believed to be the last official act performed by a governor there . 
 In the wake of the Panic of 1873 , the electorate was primarily concerned with economic issues . In his first address to the General Assembly , McCreary focused on economic issues to the near exclusion of providing any leadership or direction in the area of government reforms . ( In later years , McCreary 's unwillingness to take a definite stand on key issues of reform would earn him the nicknames " <unk> " McCreary and " Oily <unk> " . ) In response to McCreary 's address , legislators from the rural , agrarian areas of the state proposed lowering the maximum legal interest rate from ten percent to six percent . The proposed legislation drew the ire of bankers and capitalists ; it was also widely panned in the press , notably by Louisville Courier @-@ Journal editor Henry Watterson . Ultimately , the Assembly compromised on a legal interest rate of eight percent . Another bill to lower the property tax rate from 45 to 40 cents per 100 dollars of taxable property encountered far less resistance and passed easily . Few bills passed during the session had statewide impact , despite McCreary 's insistence that the legislature prefer general bills over bills of local impact . This fact , too , was widely criticized by the state 's newspapers . 
 The issue of improving navigation along the Kentucky River was raised numerous times by Representative James Blue during the 1876 legislative session . Despite Blue 's promises of manifold benefits to the state from such an investment , parsimonious legislators defeated a bill allocating funds for the improvements . The issue gained traction with some voters during the biennial legislative elections , however , which brought it back to the floor in the 1878 session . Prompted by recommendations from the Kentucky River Navigation Convention in 1877 , McCreary abandoned his typical fiscal conservatism and joined the calls for improvements along the river . In response , legislators passed a largely ineffective bill providing that , if funds could be raised through special taxes in districts along the river , the state would provide the funds to maintain the improvements . 
 Also in the 1878 session , tax assessments for railroad property were raised to match those of other property . Agrarian interests were pleased that the legal interest rate was again lowered , now reaching the six percent they had proposed in the previous session . Non @-@ economic reforms included the separation of Kentucky Agricultural and Mechanical College ( later the University of Kentucky ) from Kentucky University ( later Transylvania University ) and the establishment of a state board of health . Bills of local import again dominated the session , representing 90 percent of the acts and resolutions passed by the Assembly . 
 Along with Democrats John Stuart Williams , William Lindsay , and J. Proctor Knott , and Republican Robert Boyd , McCreary was nominated for a U.S. Senate seat in 1878 . Democrats were divided by sectionalism and initially unable to unite behind one of their four candidates . After more than a week of <unk> among Democratic legislators , the nominations of McCreary , Knott , and Lindsay were withdrawn , and Williams was elected over Boyd . Historian Hambleton Tapp opined that the withdrawals were likely a part of some kind of deal among legislators , although the details of the deal , if it ever existed , were not made public . 
 = = Service in Congress = = 
 Following his term as governor , McCreary returned to his legal practice . In 1884 , he sought election to Congress from Kentucky 's Eighth District . His opponents for the Democratic nomination were Milton J. Durham and Philip B. Thompson , Jr . , both of whom had held the district 's seat previously . McCreary bested both men , and in the general election in November , defeated Republican James Sebastian by a margin of 2 @,@ 146 votes . It was the largest margin of victory by a Democrat in the Eighth District . 
 During his tenure , McCreary represented Kentucky 's agricultural interests , introducing a bill to create the United States Department of Agriculture . A bill containing most of the same provisions as the one McCreary authored was passed later in the session . He also proposed a successful amendment to the Wilson – Gorman Tariff Act that excluded farm implements and machinery from the tariff . An advocate of free silver , he was appointed by President Benjamin Harrison to be a delegate to the International Monetary Conference held in Brussels , Belgium , in 1892 . As chairman of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs , he authored a bill to establish a court that would settle disputed land claims stemming from the Gadsden Purchase and the Treaty of Guadalupe @-@ Hidalgo . He advocated the creation of a railroad linking Canada , the United States , and Mexico . In 1890 , he sponsored a bill authorizing the first Pan @-@ American Conference and was an advocate of the Pan @-@ American Medical Conference that met in Washington , D.C. , in 1893 . He authored a report declaring American hostility to European ownership of a canal connecting the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans , and sponsored legislation authorizing the U.S. president to retaliate against foreign vessels that harassed American fishing boats . 
 In 1890 , McCreary 's name was again placed in nomination for a U.S. Senate seat to succeed James B. Beck , who died in office . John G. Carlisle , J. Proctor Knott , William Lindsay , Laban T. Moore , and Evan E. Settle were also nominated by various factions of the Democratic Party ; Republicans nominated Silas Adams . Carlisle was elected on the ninth ballot . McCreary continued his service in the House until 1896 , when he was defeated in his bid for a seventh consecutive nomination for the seat . In that same year , his was among a myriad of names put forward for election to the Senate , but he never received more than 13 votes . Following these defeats , he resumed his law practice in Richmond . 
 McCreary campaigned for Democrat William Goebel during the controversial 1899 gubernatorial campaign . Between 1900 and 1912 , he represented Kentucky at four consecutive Democratic National Conventions . Governor J. C. W. Beckham and his well @-@ established political machine supported McCreary 's nomination to the Senate in 1902 . His opponent , incumbent William J. Deboe , had been elected as a compromise candidate six years earlier , becoming Kentucky 's first @-@ ever Republican senator . Deboe had done little to secure support from legislators since his election , however , and McCreary was easily elected by a vote of 95 – 30 . Following his election to the Senate , McCreary supported Beckham 's gubernatorial re @-@ election bid in 1903 . In a largely undistinguished term as a senator , he continued to advocate the free coinage of silver and tried to advance the state 's agricultural interests . 
 McCreary 's senate term was set to expire in 1908 , the same year as Beckham 's second term as governor . Desiring election to the Senate following his gubernatorial term , Beckham persuaded his Democratic allies to choose the party 's nominees for governor and senator by a primary election held in 1906 – a year before the gubernatorial election and two years before the senatorial election . This ensured that the primary would occur during his term as governor , when he still wielded significant influence within the party . McCreary now allied himself with J. C. S. Blackburn , Henry Watterson , and other Beckham opponents , and sought to defend his seat in the primary . During the primary campaign , he pointed to his record of dealing with national issues , contrasting it with Beckham 's youth and inexperience at the national level . Beckham countered by citing his strong stand in favor of Prohibition , as opposed to McCreary 's more moderate position , and by touting his support of a primary election instead of a nominating convention , which he said gave the voters a choice in who would represent them in the Senate . Ultimately , Beckham prevailed in the primary by an 11 @,@ 000 @-@ vote margin , rendering McCreary a lame duck with two years still left in his term . 
 = = Second term as governor and death = = 
 Despite Beckham 's move to unseat McCreary in the Senate , the two were once again allies by 1911 , when Beckham supported the aging McCreary for the party 's gubernatorial nomination . It is unclear whether McCreary sought the reconciliation in order to secure the gubernatorial nomination or Beckham made amends with McCreary because he thought he could control McCreary 's actions as governor . In the Democratic primary , McCreary defeated William Adams by a majority of 25 @,@ 000 votes . 
 Republicans nominated Judge Edward C. O 'Rear to oppose McCreary . There were few differences between the two men 's stands on the issues . Both supported progressive reforms such as the direct election of senators , a non @-@ partisan judiciary , and the creation of a public utilities commission . McCreary also changed his stance on the liquor question , now agreeing with Beckham 's prohibitionist position ; this also matched the Republican position . O 'Rear claimed that Democrats should have already enacted the reforms their party platform advocated , but his only ready line of attack against McCreary himself was that he would be a pawn of Beckham and his allies . 
 McCreary pointed out that O 'Rear had been nominated at a party nominating convention instead of winning a primary , though O 'Rear claimed to support primary elections . He also criticized O 'Rear for continuing to receive his salary as a judge while running for governor . McCreary cited what he called the Republicans ' record of " assassination , bloodshed , and disregard of law " , an allusion to the assassination of William Goebel in the aftermath of the 1899 gubernatorial contest . Caleb Powers , convicted three times of being an accessory to Goebel 's murder , had been pardoned by Republican governor Augustus Willson and had recently been elected to Congress . He further attacked the tariff policies of Republican President William H. Taft . In the general election , McCreary won a decisive victory , garnering 226 @,@ 771 votes to O 'Rear 's 195 @,@ 435 . Several other minor party candidates also received votes , including Socialist candidate Walter <unk> , who claimed 8 @,@ 718 votes ( 2 percent of the total ) . 
 = = = Construction of the new governor 's mansion = = = 
 One of McCreary 's first acts as governor was signing a bill appropriating $ 75 @,@ 000 for the construction of a new governor 's mansion . The legislature appointed a commission of five , including McCreary , to oversee the mansion 's construction . The governor exercised a good deal of influence over the process , including the replacement of a conservatory with a ballroom in the construction plan and the selection of a contractor from his hometown of Richmond as assistant superintendent of construction . Changing societal trends also affected construction . A hastily constructed stable to house horse @-@ drawn carriages was soon abandoned in favor of a garage for automobiles . 
 The mansion was completed in 1914 . Because McCreary was widowed before his second term in office , his granddaughter , Harriet Newberry McCreary , served as the mansion 's first hostess during her summer vacations from her studies at Wellesley College . When Harriet McCreary was away at college , McCreary 's housekeeper , Jennie Shaw , served as hostess . McCreary authorized the state to sell the old mansion at auction , but the final bid of $ 13 @,@ 600 was rejected as unfair by the mansion commission . 
 = = = Progressive reforms = = = 
 Among the progressive reforms advocated by McCreary and passed in the 1912 legislative session were making women eligible to vote in school board elections , mandating direct primary elections , and allowing the state 's counties to hold local option elections to decide whether or not to adopt prohibition . McCreary appointed a tax commission to study the revenue system , and the Board of Assessments and Valuation made a more realistic appraisal of corporate property . McCreary created executive departments to oversee state banking and highways , and a bipartisan vote in the General Assembly established the Kentucky Public Service Commission . Near the close of the session , McCreary County was created and named in the governor 's honor . It was the last of Kentucky 's 120 counties to be constituted . 
 McCreary was not as successful in securing reforms during the 1914 legislative session . He advocated a comprehensive workmen 's compensation law , but the law that was passed in the 1914 General Assembly was later declared unconstitutional . He also recommended a requirement for full disclosure of campaign contributions and expenditures , but the majority of legislators in the House of Representatives voted to send it back to the Suffrage and Elections Committee , from whence it was never recalled . Although they did not pass a law regulating lobbying at the capitol – a law that McCreary supported – legislators showed responsiveness to McCreary 's desire for this reform by putting stricter regulations on who could be in the legislative chambers while the legislature was in session . Some reforms were made in the area of education . The school year was lengthened , school attendance for children was mandated , and the legislature created a Text Book Commission to assist local school boards in adopting textbooks . Public schools expenditures were increased by 25 percent . 
 Part of the reason for the inefficacy of the 1914 session was that McCreary was engaged in a three @-@ way primary race for the Democratic nomination to the U.S. Senate . The other major candidates were former Governor Beckham and Augustus O. Stanley ; a fourth candidate , David H. Smith , withdrew early from the race . McCreary ran a mostly positive campaign , touting his own accomplishments and speaking cordially about his opponents . Beckham and Stanley , however , were bitter political and personal enemies , and the campaign reflected their animosity . Without the support of Beckham 's political machine that had helped him in the gubernatorial contest , McCreary never had a realistic chance to win the nomination . Beckham secured the nomination with 72 @,@ 677 votes to Stanley 's 65 @,@ 871 and McCreary 's 20 @,@ 257 . 
 Following the expiration of his term as governor , McCreary continued to practice as a private attorney until his death on October 8 , 1918 . He was buried in Richmond Cemetery . 
 = Typhoon Etau ( 2003 ) = 
 Typhoon Etau , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Kabayan , produced near @-@ record winds and rainfall in Japan in August 2003 . The tenth named storm and fifth typhoon of the 2003 Pacific typhoon season , Etau developed on August 2 , and gradually intensified while moving to the northwest . Etau formed an eye and became a large storm by the time it approached Okinawa on August 7 . The typhoon attained peak winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) before weakening slightly while turning to the northeast . Etau made landfall on the Japanese island of Shikoku on August 8 , and later moved across portions of Honshu and Hokkaido . After weakening to tropical storm status , the cyclone became extratropical on August 9 and dissipated three days later . 
 While passing northeast of the Philippines , the typhoon caused light damage in the archipelago . The eye crossed over Okinawa , where Etau left 166 @,@ 800 people without power and caused 10 injuries . Near where Etau first struck Japan , Muroto reported a peak wind gust of 166 km / h ( 103 mph ) , at the time the third strongest on record there . The typhoon also dropped torrential rainfall peaking at 683 mm ( 26 @.@ 9 in ) . The combination of winds and rainfall caused landslides , particularly on Hokkaido . Nationwide , Etau killed 20 people , destroyed 708 houses , and caused ¥ 35 @.@ 1 billion ( JPY , $ 294 @.@ 8 million USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Etau were from an area of convection that persisted along the west side of a weak circulation near Chuuk State on July 31 . With initially moderate but steadily decreasing wind shear , the system was able to organize as it moved generally westward . On August 2 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) initiated advisories on Tropical Depression 11W . That day , another circulation was developing on the western side of the system , briefly classified by the Taiwan Central Weather Bureau as a tropical depression . The eastern circulation became dominant with pronounced outflow to the south , although it was initially broad and elongated . Later on August 2 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression to the northeast of Yap . 
 With a subtropical ridge in the vicinity of the Marianas Islands , the nascent depression moved to the northwest . On August 3 , the JMA upgraded the depression to tropical storm status , naming it Etau . An upper @-@ level low to the northeast improved northerly outflow , allowing the storm to strengthen quickly . On August 4 the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) began issuing advisories as the storm approached the region , naming it Kabayan . Late on August 4 , the JMA upgraded Etau to typhoon status , with the storm later developing an eye . An approaching shortwave trough weakened the ridge , causing Etau to turn more to the north . At around 0030 UTC on August 7 , the typhoon made its closest approach to Okinawa , passing within 120 km ( 75 mi ) , and close enough for the 100 km ( 60 mi ) wide eye to cross over the island . Later that day , the JMA estimated peak maximum sustained winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) , sustained over a duration of 10 minutes ; the JTWC estimated 1 minute winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) . 
 After reaching peak winds , Etau began turning to the north @-@ northeast due to the approaching trough , passing near Amami Ōshima . By that time , the typhoon had become large , with gale force winds extending 870 km ( 540 mi ) in diameter . Increasing wind shear and cooler air caused Etau to weaken . The typhoon still maintained 10 minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) when it made landfall near Muroto on the Japanese island of Shikoku , shortly before 1300 UTC on August 8 . Continuing northeastward , the typhoon weakened into a severe tropical storm as it passed near Awaji Island , before making landfall on Honshu near Nishinomiya at 2100 UTC on August 8 . While accelerating to the northeast , Etau lost tropical characteristics over land . After briefly reaching open waters to the northeast of Honshu , the storm made its final landfall near <unk> , Hokkaido at 1630 UTC on August 9 , shortly before becoming extratropical . This was based on analysis from the JMA , whereas the JTWC assessed the storm remaining offshore Hokkaido . The remnants of Etau entered the Sea of Okhotsk and persisted for several more days , dissipating on August 12 to the west of the Kamchatka Peninsula . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Rough waves from Typhoon Etau produced rip currents on Saipan that swept up four swimmers , who were later rescued after holding onto a buoy . The outer periphery of the storm caused <unk> million ( PHP , $ 673 @,@ 000 USD ) in damage , mostly to infrastructure with some minor crop damage . Late in its duration , Etau caused damage in Russia 's Kuril Islands . 
 While Etau was in the vicinity of Okinawa , wind gusts at Kadena Air Base reached 181 km / h ( 113 mph ) . Rainfall on Okinawa peaked at 215 mm ( 8 @.@ 5 in ) , while on nearby Yakushima to the north , rainfall reached 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) . Throughout Okinawa prefecture , the typhoon left 166 @,@ 800 buildings without power due to the strong winds . Etau damaged seven buildings , blocked one road , and caused moderate damage to crops and fisheries . In the Amami Islands , about 45 @,@ 000 houses , lost power due to high winds from the storm , affecting 53 % of residents . Etau injured ten people in the island group , including one man who was blown off his roof . Officials closed the Naha Airport due to the typhoon , causing 293 flights in the region to be canceled . Ahead of the storm , ExxonMobil oil refineries in Okinawa were closed , but were reopened after sustaining minimal damage . 
 On Shikoku , Muroto reported typhoon @-@ force winds for eight hours , and wind gusts peaked at 166 km / h ( 103 mph ) . At the time , this was the third strongest gust ever reported there , behind Typhoon Nancy in 1961 and Typhoon Shirley in 1965 . Sustained winds there reached 180 km / h ( 112 mph ) . In Tokushima Prefecture , Etau dropped heavy rainfall peaking at 683 mm ( 26 @.@ 9 in ) , although similarly heavy totals of 639 mm ( 25 @.@ 2 in ) and 543 mm ( 21 @.@ 4 in ) were reported in Kōchi and Miyazaki prefectures , respectively . About 95 % of the rainfall total in Kōchi fell in 24 hours . In Miyazaki , a station reported an hourly rainfall total of 79 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) . Rainfall at <unk> , Hokkaido reached 306 @.@ 2 mm ( 12 @.@ 06 in ) in a 48 ‑ hour period , the highest at the station since records began in 1962 . The heavy rainfall caused landslides across Hokkaido , particularly in areas where rainfall totaled over 330 mm ( 13 in ) . In the area around the Saru River , shallow landslides displaced about 13 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 460 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of soil , of which about 190 @,@ 000 m3 ( 6 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 cu ft ) entered the river . This caused the highest sediment levels in the river since the 1960s , washing about 50 @,@ 000 m3 ( 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 cu ft ) into the <unk> Dam . Landslides also swept about 65 @,@ 000 m3 ( 2 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of soil and trees into the <unk> River , which caused additional damage by washing away adjacent homes and bridges . In addition the rainfall , Etau spawned a weak tornado near Kumagaya on the Honshu mainland , rated around an F1 . The typhoon brought a plume of warm air to the country that caused the warmest temperatures of the year at that point . 
 The heavy rainfall in Tokushima caused landslides and blocked roads , resulting in disruptions to bus and train service . Strong winds overturned a truck , injuring the two occupants . In Muroto , several people were injured by flying glass . Rough waves killed two people in the same city , one in Fukuoka , damaged the seawall in Kyoto , and damaged 25 ships . In Takamatsu , Kagawa , Etau left about ¥ 1 @.@ 2 billion ( JPY , $ 10 million USD ) in crop damage , mainly due to damaged greenhouses . Two workers were killed in <unk> after being swept away by a river . On Hokkaido , heavy rainfall caused landslides , damaging hundreds of roads and bridges and isolating several villages . River flooding swept away a vehicle in <unk> , killing the five occupants . Along Mount <unk> , 29 people were rescued by helicopter from a mountain lodge after Etau blocked off their descending trail . 
 Throughout Japan , Etau caused over 1 @,@ 000 flights to be canceled , and for bullet trains to operate at a slower speed , causing delays . About 62 @,@ 000 people lost power during the storm , and across the country . The typhoon destroyed 708 houses and flooded 2 @,@ 253 others , causing over 6 @,@ 000 people to evacuate to storm shelters . About 295 ha ( 730 acres ) of fields were damaged . Throughout Japan , Etau killed 20 people and injured 93 others , 19 of them seriously . Overall damage totaled ¥ 35 @.@ 1 billion ( JPY , $ 294 @.@ 8 million USD ) . Largely because Etau remained tropical and weakened over Japan , damage was much less than Typhoon Tokage a year later , which produced comparable rainfall totals at a similar intensity but struck the country while extratropical . 
 = El Lissitzky = 
 Lazar Markovich Lissitzky ( Russian : <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> , listen ; November 23 [ O.S. November 11 ] 1890 – December 30 , 1941 ) , known as El Lissitzky ( Russian : <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> , Yiddish : <unk> <unk> ) , was a Russian artist , designer , photographer , typographer , polemicist and architect . He was an important figure of the Russian avant @-@ garde , helping develop suprematism with his mentor , Kazimir Malevich , and designing numerous exhibition displays and propaganda works for the Soviet Union . His work greatly influenced the Bauhaus and constructivist movements , and he experimented with production techniques and stylistic devices that would go on to dominate 20th @-@ century graphic design . 
 Lissitzky 's entire career was laced with the belief that the artist could be an agent for change , later summarized with his edict , " das <unk> Schaffen " ( goal @-@ oriented creation ) . Lissitzky , of Lithuanian Jewish <unk> , began his career illustrating Yiddish children 's books in an effort to promote Jewish culture in Russia , a country that was undergoing massive change at the time and that had just repealed its antisemitic laws . When only 15 he started teaching , a duty he would maintain for most of his life . Over the years , he taught in a variety of positions , schools , and artistic media , spreading and exchanging ideas . He took this ethic with him when he worked with Malevich in heading the suprematist art group UNOVIS , when he developed a variant suprematist series of his own , Proun , and further still in 1921 , when he took up a job as the Russian cultural ambassador to Weimar Germany , working with and influencing important figures of the Bauhaus and De Stijl movements during his stay . In his remaining years he brought significant innovation and change to typography , exhibition design , photomontage , and book design , producing critically respected works and winning international acclaim for his exhibition design . This continued until his deathbed , where in 1941 he produced one of his last works – a Soviet propaganda poster rallying the people to construct more tanks for the fight against Nazi Germany . In 2014 , the heirs of the artist , in collaboration with Van <unk> and the leading worldwide scholars , the Lissitzky foundation was established , to preserve the artist 's legacy and preparing a catalogue raisonné of the artist oeuvre . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Lissitzky was born on November 23 , 1890 in <unk> , a small Jewish community 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) southeast of Smolensk , former Russian Empire . During his childhood , he lived and studied in the city of Vitebsk , now part of Belarus , and later spent 10 years in Smolensk living with his grandparents and attending the Smolensk Grammar School , spending summer vacations in Vitebsk . Always expressing an interest and talent in drawing , he started to receive instruction at 13 from Yehuda Pen , a local Jewish artist , and by the time he was 15 was teaching students himself . In 1909 , he applied to an art academy in Saint Petersburg , but was rejected . While he passed the entrance exam and was qualified , the law under the Tsarist regime only allowed a limited number of Jewish students to attend Russian schools and universities . 
 Like many other Jews then living in the Russian Empire , Lissitzky went to study in Germany . He left in 1909 to study architectural engineering at a Technische Hochschule in Darmstadt , Germany . During the summer of 1912 , Lissitzky , in his own words , " wandered through Europe " , spending time in Paris and covering 1 @,@ 200 kilometres ( 750 mi ) on foot in Italy , teaching himself about fine art and sketching architecture and landscapes that interested him . His interest in ancient Jewish culture had originated during the contacts with a Paris @-@ based group of Russian Jews led by sculptor Ossip Zadkine , a lifetime friend of Lissitzky since early childhood , who exposed Lissitzky to conflicts between different groups within the diaspora . Also in 1912 some of his pieces were included for the first time in an exhibit by the St. Petersburg Artists Union ; a notable first step . He remained in Germany until the outbreak of World War I , when he was forced to return home through Switzerland and the Balkans , along with many of his countrymen , including other expatriate artists born in the former Russian Empire , such as Wassily Kandinsky and Marc Chagall . 
 Upon his return to Moscow , Lissitzky attended the Polytechnic Institute of Riga , which had been evacuated to Moscow because of the war , and worked for the architectural firms of Boris <unk> and Roman Klein . During this work , he took an active and passionate interest in Jewish culture which , after the downfall of the openly antisemitic Tsarist regime , was experiencing a renaissance . The new Provisional Government repealed a decree that prohibited the printing of Hebrew letters and that barred Jews from citizenship . Thus Lissitzky soon devoted himself to Jewish art , exhibiting works by local Jewish artists , traveling to <unk> to study the traditional architecture and ornaments of old synagogues , and illustrating many Yiddish children 's books . These books were Lissitzky 's first major foray in book design , a field that he would greatly innovate during his career . 
 His first designs appeared in the 1917 book , <unk> <unk> : <unk> fun di <unk> ( An Everyday Conversation ) , where he incorporated Hebrew letters with a distinctly art nouveau flair . His next book was a visual retelling of the traditional Jewish Passover song Had <unk> ( One Goat ) , in which Lissitzky showcased a typographic device that he would often return to in later designs . In the book , he integrated letters with images through a system that matched the color of the characters in the story with the word referring to them . In the designs for the final page , Lissitzky depicts the mighty " hand of God " slaying the angel of death , who wears the tsar 's crown . This representation links the redemption of the Jews with the victory of the Bolsheviks in the Russian Revolution . An alternative view asserts that the artist was wary of Bolshevik internationalization , leading to destruction of traditional Jewish culture . Visual representations of the hand of God would recur in numerous pieces throughout his entire career , most notably with his 1924 photomontage self @-@ portrait The Constructor , which prominently featured the hand . 
 = = Avant @-@ garde = = 
 = = = Constructivism = = = 
 In May 1919 , upon receiving an invitation from fellow Jewish artist Marc Chagall , Lissitzky returned to Vitebsk to teach graphic arts , printing , and architecture at the newly formed People 's Art School – a school that Chagall created after being appointed Commissioner of Artistic Affairs for Vitebsk in 1918 . Lissitzky was engaged in designing and printing propaganda posters ; later , he preferred to keep quiet about this period , probably because one of main subjects of these posters was the exile Leon Trotsky . The quantity of these posters is sufficient to regard them as a separate genre in the artist 's output . 
 Chagall also invited other Russian artists , most notably the painter and art theoretician Kazimir Malevich and Lissitzky 's former teacher , Yehuda Pen . However , it was not until October 1919 when Lissitzky , then on an errand in Moscow , persuaded Malevich to relocate to Vitebsk . The move coincided with the opening of the first art exhibition in Vitebsk directed by Chagall . Malevich would bring with him a wealth of new ideas , most of which inspired Lissitzky but clashed with local public and professionals who favored figurative art and with Chagall himself . After going through impressionism , primitivism , and cubism , Malevich began developing and advocating his ideas on suprematism aggressively . In development since 1915 , suprematism rejected the imitation of natural shapes and focused more on the creation of distinct , geometric forms . He replaced the classic teaching program with his own and disseminated his suprematist theories and techniques school @-@ wide . Chagall advocated more classical ideals and Lissitzky , still loyal to Chagall , became torn between two opposing artistic paths . Lissitzky ultimately favoured Malevich 's suprematism and broke away from traditional Jewish art . Chagall left the school shortly thereafter . 
 At this point Lissitzky subscribed fully to suprematism and , under the guidance of Malevich , helped further develop the movement . In 1919 – 1920 Lissitzky was a head of Architectural department at the People 's Art School where with his students , primarily Lazar <unk> , he was working on transition from plane to volumetric suprematism . Lissitzky designed On the New System of Art by Malevich , who responded in December 1919 : " Lazar Markovich , I salute you on the publication of this little book " . Perhaps the most famous work by Lissitzky from the same period was the 1919 propaganda poster " Beat the Whites with the Red Wedge " . Russia was going through a civil war at the time , which was mainly fought between the " Reds " ( communists , socialists and revolutionaries ) and the " Whites " ( monarchists , conservatives , liberals and other socialists who opposed the Bolshevik Revolution ) . The image of the red wedge shattering the white form , simple as it was , communicated a powerful message that left no doubt in the viewer 's mind of its intention . The piece is often seen as alluding to the similar shapes used on military maps and , along with its political symbolism , was one of Lissitzky 's first major steps away from Malevich 's non @-@ objective suprematism into a style his own . He stated : " The artist constructs a new symbol with his brush . This symbol is not a recognizable form of anything that is already finished , already made , or already existent in the world – it is a symbol of a new world , which is being built upon and which exists by the way of the people . " 
 In January 17 , 1920 , Malevich and Lissitzky co @-@ founded the short @-@ lived <unk> ( Young followers of a new art ) , a proto @-@ suprematist association of students , professors , and other artists . After a brief and stormy dispute between " old " and " young " generations , and two rounds of renaming , the group reemerged as UNOVIS ( Exponents of the new art ) in February . Under the leadership of Malevich the group worked on a " suprematist ballet " , choreographed by Nina Kogan and on the remake of a 1913 futurist opera Victory Over the Sun by Mikhail <unk> and Aleksei <unk> . Lissitzky and the entire group chose to share credit and responsibility for the works produced within the group , signing most pieces with a black square . This was partly a homage to a similar piece by their leader , Malevich , and a symbolic embrace of the Communist ideal . This would become the de facto seal of UNOVIS that took the place of individual names or initials . Black squares worn by members as chest badges and cufflinks also resembled the ritual tefillin and thus were no strange symbol in Vitebsk shtetl . 
 The group , which disbanded in 1922 , would be pivotal in the dissemination of suprematist ideology in Russia and abroad and launch Lissitzky 's status as one of the leading figures in the avant garde . Incidentally , the earliest appearance of the signature Lissitzky ( Russian : <unk> <unk> ) emerged in the handmade UNOVIS Miscellany , issued in two copies in March – April 1920 , and containing his manifesto on book art : " the book enters the skull through the eye not the ear therefore the pathways the waves move at much greater speed and with more <unk> if i ( sic ) can only sing through my mouth with a book i ( sic ) can show myself in various guises . " 
 = = = Proun = = = 
 During this period Lissitzky proceeded to develop a suprematist style of his own , a series of abstract , geometric paintings which he called Proun ( pronounced " pro @-@ oon " ) . The exact meaning of " Proun " was never fully revealed , with some suggesting that it is a contraction of <unk> <unk> ( designed by UNOVIS ) or <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Design for the confirmation of the new ) . Later , Lissitzky defined them ambiguously as " the station where one changes from painting to architecture . " 
 Proun was essentially Lissitzky 's exploration of the visual language of suprematism with spatial elements , utilizing shifting axes and multiple perspectives ; both uncommon ideas in suprematism . <unk> at the time was conducted almost exclusively in flat , 2D forms and shapes , and Lissitzky , with a taste for architecture and other 3D concepts , tried to expand suprematism beyond this . His Proun works ( known as Pro @-@ oon ) spanned over a half a decade and evolved from straightforward paintings and lithographs into fully three @-@ dimensional installations . They would also lay the foundation for his later experiments in architecture and exhibition design . While the paintings were artistic in their own right , their use as a staging ground for his early architectonic ideas was significant . In these works , the basic elements of architecture – volume , mass , color , space and rhythm – were subjected to a fresh formulation in relation to the new suprematist ideals . Through his <unk> , utopian models for a new and better world were developed . This approach , in which the artist creates art with socially defined purpose , could aptly be summarized with his edict " das <unk> Schaffen " – " task oriented creation . " 
 Jewish themes and symbols also sometimes made appearances in his <unk> , usually with Lissitzky using Hebrew letters as part of the typography or visual code . For the cover of the 1922 book Arba 'ah <unk> ( Four Billy Goats ; cover ) , he shows an arrangement of Hebrew letters as architectural elements in a dynamic design that mirrors his contemporary Proun typography . This theme was extended into his illustrations for the <unk> @-@ Karta ( Passenger Ticket ) book . 
 = = = Return to Germany = = = 
 In 1921 , roughly concurrent with the demise of UNOVIS , suprematism was beginning to fracture into two ideologically adverse halves , one favoring Utopian , spiritual art and the other a more utilitarian art that served society . Lissitzky was fully aligned with neither and left Vitebsk in 1921 . He took a job as a cultural representative of Russia and moved to Berlin where he was to establish contacts between Russian and German artists . There he also took up work as a writer and designer for international magazines and journals while helping to promote the avant @-@ garde through various gallery shows . He started the very short @-@ lived but impressive periodical <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> with Russian @-@ Jewish writer Ilya Ehrenburg . This was intended to display contemporary Russian art to Western Europe . It was a wide @-@ ranging pan @-@ arts publication , mainly focusing on new suprematist and constructivist works , and was published in German , French and Russian . In the first issue , Lissitzky wrote : 
 We consider the triumph of the constructive method to be essential for our present . We find it not only in the new economy and in the development of the industry , but also in the psychology of our contemporaries of art . <unk> will champion constructive art , whose mission is not , after all , to embellish life , but to organize it . 
 During his stay Lissitzky also developed his career as a graphic designer with some historically important works such as the books <unk> <unk> ( For the Voice ) , a collection of poems from Vladimir Mayakovsky , and Die <unk> ( The <unk> ) together with Jean Arp . In Berlin he also met and befriended many other artists , most notably Kurt Schwitters , László Moholy @-@ Nagy , and Theo van Doesburg . Together with Schwitters and van Doesburg , Lissitzky presented the idea of an international artistic movement under the guidelines of constructivism while also working with Kurt Schwitters on the issue <unk> ( Nature ) of the periodical Merz , and continuing to illustrate children 's books . The year after the publication of his first Proun series in Moscow in 1921 , Schwitters introduced Lissitzky to the Hanover gallery <unk> , where he held his first solo exhibition . The second Proun series , printed in Hanover in 1923 , was a success , utilizing new printing techniques . Later on , he met Sophie <unk> , who was the widow of Paul <unk> , an art director of the <unk> at which Lissitzky was showing , and whom he would marry in 1927 . 
 = = = Horizontal skyscrapers = = = 
 In 1923 – 1925 , Lissitzky proposed and developed the idea of horizontal skyscrapers ( Wolkenbügel , " cloud @-@ irons " ) . A series of eight such structures was intended to mark the major intersections of the Boulevard Ring in Moscow . Each Wolkenbügel was a flat three @-@ story , 180 @-@ meter @-@ wide L @-@ shaped slab raised 50 meters above street level . It rested on three pylons ( 10 × 16 × 50 meters each ) , placed on three different street corners . One pylon extended underground , doubling as the staircase into a proposed subway station ; two others provided shelter for ground @-@ level tram stations . 
 Lissitzky argued that as long as humans cannot fly , moving horizontally is natural and moving vertically is not . Thus , where there is not sufficient land for construction , a new plane created in the air at medium altitude should be preferred to an American @-@ style tower . These buildings , according to Lissitzky , also provided superior insulation and ventilation for their inhabitants . 
 Lissitzky , aware of severe mismatch between his ideas and the existing urban landscape , experimented with different configurations of the horizontal surface and height @-@ to @-@ width ratios so that the structure appeared balanced visually ( " spatial balance is in the contrast of vertical and horizontal tensions " ) . The raised platform was shaped in a way that each of its four facets looked distinctly different . Each tower faced the Kremlin with the same facet , providing a pointing arrow to pedestrians on the streets . All eight buildings were planned identically , so Lissitzky proposed color @-@ coding them for easier orientation . 
 An illustration of the concept appeared on the front cover of Adolf <unk> 's book Der Moderne <unk> , and articles on it written by Lissitzky appeared in the Moscow @-@ based architectural review <unk> News ( journal of <unk> , the Association of New Architects ) and in the German art journal Das <unk> . 
 After some time of creating " paper architecture " projects such as the <unk> he was hired to design an actual building in Moscow . Located at 55 @.@ <unk> ° N 37 @.@ <unk> ° E ﻿ / 55 @.@ <unk> ; 37 @.@ <unk> 17 , 1st <unk> Lane , it is Lissitzky 's sole tangible work of architecture . It was commissioned in 1932 by <unk> magazine to be used as a print shop . In June 2007 the independent <unk> Avangard foundation filed a request to list the building on the heritage register . In September 2007 the city commission ( <unk> ) approved the request and passed it to the city government for a final approval , which did not happen . In October 2008 , the abandoned building was badly damaged by fire . 
 = = Exhibitions of the 1920s = = 
 After two years of intensive work Lissitzky was taken ill with acute pneumonia in October 1923 . A few weeks later he was diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis ; in February 1924 he relocated to a Swiss sanatorium near Locarno . He kept very busy during his stay , working on advertisement designs for Pelikan Industries ( who in turn paid for his treatment ) , translating articles written by Malevich into German , and experimenting heavily in typographic design and photography . In 1925 , after the Swiss government denied his request to renew his visa , Lissitzky returned to Moscow and began teaching interior design , metalwork , and architecture at <unk> ( State Higher Artistic and Technical Workshops ) , a post he would keep until 1930 . He all but stopped his Proun works and became increasingly active in architecture and propaganda designs . 
 In June 1926 , Lissitzky left the country again , this time for a brief stay in Germany and the Netherlands . There he designed an exhibition room for the Internationale <unk> art show in Dresden and the Raum <unk> Kunst ( Room for constructivist art ) and <unk> Kabinett shows in Hanover , and perfected the 1925 Wolkenbügel concept in collaboration with Mart Stam . In his autobiography ( written in June 1941 , and later edited and released by his wife ) , Lissitzky wrote , " 1926 . My most important work as an artist begins : the creation of exhibitions . " 
 Back in the USSR , Lissitzky designed displays for the official Soviet pavilions at the international exhibitions of the period , up to the 1939 New York World 's Fair . One of his most notable exhibits was the All @-@ Union <unk> Exhibit in Moscow in August – October 1927 , where Lissitzky headed the design team for " photography and <unk> " ( i.e. photomontage ) artists and the installation crew . His work was perceived as radically new , especially when juxtaposed with the classicist designs of Vladimir <unk> ( head of the book art section of the same exhibition ) and of the foreign exhibits . 
 In the beginning of 1928 , Lissitzky visited Cologne in preparation for the 1928 <unk> Show scheduled for April – May 1928 . The state delegated Lissitzky to supervise the Soviet program ; instead of building their own pavilion , the Soviets rented the existing central pavilion , the largest building on the fairground . To make full use of it , the Soviet program designed by <unk> revolved around the theme of a film show , with nearly continuous presentation of the new feature films , propagandist newsreels and early animation , on multiple screens inside the pavilion and on the open @-@ air screens . His work was praised for near absence of paper exhibits ; " everything moves , rotates , everything is energized " ( Russian : <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) . Lissitzky also designed and managed on site less demanding exhibitions like the 1930 Hygiene show in Dresden . 
 Along with pavilion design , Lissitzky began experimenting with print media again . His work with book and periodical design was perhaps some of his most accomplished and influential . He launched radical innovations in typography and photomontage , two fields in which he was particularly adept . He even designed a photomontage birth announcement in 1930 for his recently born son , Jen . The image itself is seen as being another personal endorsement of the Soviet Union , as it superimposed an image of the infant Jen over a factory chimney , linking Jen 's future with his country 's industrial progress . Around this time , Lissitzky 's interest in book design escalated . In his remaining years , some of his most challenging and innovative works in this field would develop . In discussing his vision of the book , he wrote : 
 In contrast to the old monumental art [ the book ] itself goes to the people , and does not stand like a cathedral in one place waiting for someone to approach . . . [ The book is the ] monument of the future . 
 He perceived books as permanent objects that were invested with power . This power was unique in that it could transmit ideas to people of different times , cultures , and interests , and do so in ways other art forms could not . This ambition laced all of his work , particularly in his later years . Lissitzky was devoted to the idea of creating art with power and purpose , art that could invoke change . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1932 , Stalin closed down independent artists ' unions ; former avant @-@ garde artists had to adapt to the new climate or risk being officially criticised or even blacklisted . Lissitzky retained his reputation as the master of exhibition art and management into the late 1930s . His tuberculosis gradually reduced his physical abilities , and he was becoming more and more dependent on his wife in actual completion of his work . 
 In 1937 , Lissitzky served as the lead decorator for the upcoming All @-@ Union Agricultural Exhibition , reporting to the master planner Vyacheslav <unk> but largely independent and highly critical of him . The project was plagued by delays and political interventions . By the end of 1937 the " apparent simplicity " of Lissitzky 's artwork aroused the concerns of the political supervisors , and Lissitzky responded : " The simpler the shape , the finer precision and quality of execution required ... yet until now [ the working crews ] are instructed by the foremen ( <unk> and <unk> ) , not the authors " ( i.e. Vladimir <unk> , author of the Central Pavilion , and Lissitzky himself ) . His artwork , as described in 1937 proposals , completely departed from the modernist art of the 1920s in favor of socialist realism . The iconic statue of Stalin in front of the central pavilion was proposed by Lissitzky personally : " this will give the square its head and its face " ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> и <unk> и <unk> ) . 
 In June 1938 , he was only one of seventeen professionals and managers responsible for the Central Pavilion ; in October 1938 , he shared the responsibility for its Main Hall decoration with Vladimir <unk> . He simultaneously worked on the decoration of the Soviet pavilion for the 1939 New York World 's Fair ; the June 1938 commission considered Lissitzky 's work along with nineteen other proposals and eventually rejected it . 
 Lissitzky 's work on the USSR im Bau ( USSR in construction ) magazine took his experimentation and innovation with book design to an extreme . In issue # 2 he included multiple fold @-@ out pages , presented in concert with other folded pages that together produced design combinations and a narrative structure that was completely original . Each issue focused on a particular issue of the time – a new dam being built , constitutional reforms , Red Army progress and so on . In 1941 , his tuberculosis worsened , but he continued to produce works , one of his last being a propaganda poster for Russia 's efforts in World War II , titled " <unk> <unk> <unk> ! " ( Give us more tanks ! ) He died on December 30 , 1941 , in Moscow . 
 = = Gallery of work = = 
 = Mariano Moreno = 
 Mariano Moreno ( September 23 , 1778 – March 4 , 1811 ) was an Argentine lawyer , journalist , and politician . He played a decisive role in the Primera Junta , the first national government of Argentina , created after the May Revolution . 
 Moreno was born in Buenos Aires in 1778 . His father was Manuel Moreno y Argumosa , born in Santander , Spain , who arrived in the city in 1776 and married María del Valle . Mariano was the firstborn of the Moreno family , and had thirteen brothers . During his youth he studied Latin , logic , and philosophy at San Carlos Royal College , followed by college studies of law at Chuquisaca . During these studies , he learned the new ideas of the Spanish Enlightenment . He married María Guadalupe Cuenca and returned to Buenos Aires , becoming a prominent lawyer for the Cabildo . Unlike most other criollos , he rejected the Carlotist project and the administration of Santiago de Liniers , joining instead the ill @-@ fated mutiny of Álzaga against him . He worked for the next viceroy , Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros . He wrote the economic paper The Representation of the Landowners , which persuaded the viceroy to open trade with Britain . 
 Although he was not prominently involved in the May Revolution that deposed Cisneros , he was appointed as secretary of war of the new government , the Primera Junta . Along with Juan José Castelli , he promoted harsh policies against the supporters of the former government and the strengthening of the new one . These policies were detailed at a secret document , the Operations plan ; some historians dispute its authorship . Moreno organized military campaigns to Paraguay and Upper Peru , and ensured the execution of Santiago de Liniers after the defeat of his counter @-@ revolution . He established the first Argentine newspaper , La Gazeta de Buenos Ayres , and translated Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's The Social Contract into Spanish . 
 When the Junta achieved the first military victories , President Cornelio Saavedra opposed Moreno , favoring moderate policies instead . Allied with Gregorio Funes , Saavedra expanded the number of members of the Junta to leave <unk> in a minority . With disputes still going on , Moreno was appointed to a diplomatic mission to Britain , but died at sea on the way there . His brother Manuel Moreno alleged that he was poisoned . His supporters were still an influential political party for some years after his death . Historians hold several perspectives about the role and historical significance of Moreno , from hagiography to repudiation . He is considered the precursor of Argentine journalism . 
 = = Birth and studies = = 
 Mariano Moreno was the son of poor parents , Manuel Moreno y Argumosa and Ana Maria Valle , he had fourteen siblings . He studied at Colegio Grande de San Carlos , but without living in it , as his family could not afford the price . He graduated with an honor diploma . He met influential people within the literary field , who helped him to continue his studies at the University of Chuquisaca , even when his father could not afford the cost . This was the only big university in South America at the time . He studied the books of Montesquieu , Voltaire , Denis Diderot , Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , and other European philosophers of the Age of Enlightenment . He studied English and French languages as well , to understand authors from Britain and France . This allowed him to work as a translator , and he spent several years working with Rousseau 's The Social Contract . Moreno was convinced that society could be changed by the power of intelligence and reason . 
 He also studied philosophical texts of the Spanish Enlightenment under the tutelage of the priest Terrazas , and aspired to implement the new ideas in his country . He wrote a thesis with strong criticism of the native slavery at the mines of Potosí , influenced by the Spanish jurist Juan de <unk> Pereira , the foremost publisher of Indian Law , and Victoria Villalva , fiscal of the Audiencia of Charcas and defender of the indigenous cause . 
 He started his professional career between 1803 and 1804 , in the office of Augustine Gascón , officiating as labour counselor for Indians . As a result , he confronted powerful people like the mayors of Cochabamba and <unk> . He left the city after being threatened , and returned to Buenos Aires in 1805 with his wife Maria Guadalupe Cuenca and their newborn son . Once in the city , he became a reporter of the hearings of the Royal Audiencia , a local appeal court . The Buenos Aires Cabildo , the local council , hired him as an advisor as well . He defended Melchor Fernández , aggrieved by Bishop Benito Lue y Riega , in one of his first cases . In another of his early disputes he backed the Cabildo in denying the appointment as an ensign of the young Bernardino Rivadavia . 
 A British army invaded Buenos Aires in 1806 , starting the British invasions of the Río de la Plata . Although Moreno was not actively involved with the military counter @-@ offensive which drove them out , he opposed the British presence in Buenos Aires . He wrote a diary that noted all the events , so that , in the future , his countrymen would know the circumstances that allowed such an invasion . The British made a new attack in 1807 , this time invading Montevideo . They published a bilingual English – Spanish newspaper known as " The Southern Star " or " La estrella del sur " ( the newspaper used both names in conjunction ) . It advocated free trade , a British goal , and promoted American independence under British protection . The Royal Audiencia of Buenos Aires banned the newspaper and requested Moreno to write articles refuting those of the British publication . Moreno refused because , although he did not accept British rule , he agreed with some of their criticisms of the Spanish government . Fearing a new attack to Buenos Aires , Moreno left the city with his whole family and relocated in the countryside . His house in Buenos Aires , left unoccupied , was used to keep prisoner William Carr Beresford , the British commander of the first invasion . Several friends of Moreno helped Beresford to escape and move to Montevideo , but it is unknown if Moreno was aware of the plan . 
 = = First political activities = = 
 Although Mariano Moreno was a criollo , a Spanish citizen born in the Americas , he did not work with the other criollos of Buenos Aires who sought to promote political changes against the privileges of the Spanish @-@ born . Unlike the criollo politicians Manuel Belgrano and Juan José Castelli , he did not support viceroy Liniers or the Carlotist project , which sought the coronation of Carlota of Spain in the Americas . He joined mayor Martín de Álzaga instead , which allowed him to serve as legal adviser of the Cabildo . In that capacity , he wrote a petition to the King of Spain , so that the Buenos Aires Cabildo was named Protector of the Cabildos of the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata . As a result , all petitions from local cabildos to the King or the Viceroy would be channeled through the Cabildo at the capital . 
 Martín de Álzaga organized a mutiny on January 1 , 1809 , and Moreno joined it . Álzaga aspired to replace Viceroy Santiago de Liniers with a government Junta , after learning of the capture of the Spanish King Ferdinand VII during the Peninsular War and the creation of the Junta of Seville . If it prevailed , Mariano Moreno would have been part of the new Junta . The mutiny was defeated by the swift reaction of Cornelio Saavedra , in command of the Regiment of Patricians , who dispersed the crowd and persuaded Liniers not to abdicate . It is disputed by historians whenever the mutiny had similar or opposite goals to those of the May Revolution that would take place a year later . The historians who support the latter perspective try to make attempts to excuse or justify Moreno 's involvement ; those who support the former consider instead that Moreno was a revolutionary a year before most other Argentines . Moreno was Álzaga 's lawyer in the trial that followed , which was labeled a trial for " independentism " . Liniers did not extend the trial to Moreno himself , for reasons unknown . 
 Liniers was succeeded by Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros a few months later , who pardoned the mutineers to reduce political conflicts . Cisneros allowed free trade as well , as instructed by the Junta of Seville , which benefited British merchants ; Britain was allied with Spain in the Peninsular War . The agents of the Consulate of Cadiz asserted that this would hurt the local economy , moral values , social usages , religious practices , and the loyalty to Spain and its monarchy . As a result , Cisneros closed trade again , restoring the Spanish monopsony . A group of hacendados ( owners of haciendas ) , who did not feel adequately represented at the Cabildo , asked Moreno to defend them . Moreno wrote The Representation of the Landowners , a report that represented the export interest of the landowners , encouraged free trade , and condemned the privileges of the merchants benefited from the monopsony . It is considered the most comprehensive economic report from the time of the viceroyalty . It represented the new European economic ideas , and noted that the legal monopsony with Spain did not prevent British goods from being smuggled . Several authors have questioned Moreno 's authorship of the paper , considering it instead an update of another , previously drafted by Manuel Belgrano , Secretary of the Commerce Consulate of Buenos Aires , written to make a similar request to the former viceroy Liniers . This report , as well as Moreno 's prestige in the colonial society , helped him gain the confidence of Cisneros . Yet secretly , Moreno supported the plan to dismiss the Viceroy . 
 = = Primera Junta = = 
 Mariano Moreno had several contacts with groups seeking the removal of Cisneros , but was not strongly involved with the May Revolution , which considered the fall of the Junta of Seville a reason to depose the viceroy and create a local junta . At the time , Moreno was still loyal to Álzaga . He attended the May 22 open Cabildo , but according to the father of Vicente Fidel López and the father @-@ in @-@ law of Bartolomé Mitre ( both direct witness ) he stayed silent at one side and did not join the debate . He voted for Saavedra 's proposal : to remove viceroy Cisneros and replace him with a Junta . Manuel Hermenegildo Aguirre , captain of hussars , proposed that the Cabildo take the reins of government , with five men appointed as counselors , Moreno among them . However , nobody else voted for that proposal , and it was the only one that included him . Moreno felt betrayed when the Cabildo twisted the results of the open Cabildo and created a Junta that would be headed by Cisneros . He refused any further contacts with the revolutionaries and stayed home during the remaining events . The definitive members of the Junta came from a popular petition signed on May 25 , which was given to the Cabildo . The reasons of Moreno 's inclusion in the list are unclear , as with all other members of the Junta . A commonly accepted theory considers it to be a balance between Carlotists and Alzaguists . 
 The Junta faced strong opposition from the beginning : it was resisted locally by the Cabildo and the Royal Audiencia , still loyal to the absolutist factions ; the nearby plazas of Montevideo and Paraguay did not recognize it ; and Santiago de Liniers organized a counter @-@ revolution at Córdoba . Mariano Moreno , an unimportant politician up to that point , became the leader of the most radical supporters of the Junta . He was supported by the popular leaders Domingo French and Antonio Beruti , Dupuy , Donado , <unk> , and Cardozo ; and priests like Grela and Aparicio . Historian Carlos Ibarguren described that Morenist youths roamed the streets preaching new ideas to each pedestrian they found , turned the " Marcos " coffee shop into a political hall , and proposed that all social classes should be illustrated . Manuel Belgrano and Juan José Castelli supported Moreno within the Junta , and French was promoted to Colonel of the regiment " América " . This regiment , also known as " The Star " because of a star that they wore on their sleeves , was composed of radical youths led by French during the riots of the May Revolution . 
 Moreno established the official newspaper Gazeta de Buenos Ayres through a June 2 decree , and managed its contents . The first newspapers were available to the public five days later . He issued a freedom of the press decree , which allowed the press to publish anything that did not offend public morals or attack the Revolution or the government . Moreno published some works of Gaspar de Jovellanos , and his translation of Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's The Social Contract . In this later work he skipped the chapter about religion , suggesting that the author " has raved in religious matters " . This was done to prevent religious disputes among patriots . This publication was criticized by conservatives such as Tomás de Anchorena , who said that it could generate popular unrest . As with the Junta itself , Moreno 's writings maintained loyalty to Ferdinand VII . It is unclear to historians whether he was concealing pro @-@ independence ambitions , or was truly loyal to the deposed king . However , he made specific references to independentism as early as November , 1810 . In reference to the Courts of Cádiz that would write a Constitution , he said that the Congress " may establish an absolute disposal of our beloved Ferdinand " , meaning that the right of self @-@ determination would allow even that . He did not think the monarchical authority to be absolute , but subject to popular sovereignty , so that a monarch may lose his authority if he worked against the common good of the people . He also considered that if Ferdinand VII returned to the throne , he would not be able to challenge a Constitution written in his absence . However , he wrote that as a hypothetical scenario , to describe the strength of a Constitution , not as a likely possibility . 
 Moreno issued several decrees during his first days in government . He ordered punishment for anyone attempting to generate disputes , and for those concealing conspiracies against the Junta or other people . The military bodies of " <unk> " and " Morenos " , composed of indigenous peoples , were reformed to have military ranks similar to those of the Spanish military bodies . He did this invoking the rulings of the Catholic Monarchs during the early Spanish colonization of the Americas . 
 = = = Actions against royalists = = = 
 Although the Junta of Seville was defeated , a new one was created afterwards , the Regency Council . The Primera Junta did not swear loyalty to it , but the Royal Audiencia did so in defiance of the local authority . The Junta summoned them , along with former viceroy Cisneros , and exiled them to Spain with the pretext that there was a threat to their lives . The Junta appointed new members for the Audiencia loyal to the revolution . Moreno wrote in the Gazeta that the Audiencia attacked the good faith of the government , and that the Junta left their usual moderation for the safety of the people . 
 The Junta was rejected in Montevideo , as was the exile of Cisneros and the former Audiencia . Moreno reacted immediately , replying to the Montevidean concerns . He supported the legitimacy of the Primera Junta by criticizing the Regency Council and stating that the overseas Spanish territories were equally capable of creating Juntas , as it was debated during the open cabildo . He also called for unity and support of the metropolis , and that both cities recognize Ferdinand VII as their legitimate monarch . He argued that the Junta treated the exiles initially with moderation , but their obstinacy , particularly on the part of Cisneros , generated popular discontent . Matías Irigoyen told the same thing to the British Lord Strangford in Río de Janeiro . 
 Moreno organized two military expeditions to counter the threat of the plazas that resisted the Junta . The first one , headed by Francisco Ortiz de Ocampo , would move to Córdoba and attack the counter @-@ revolution organized by the former viceroy Santiago de Liniers ; they next went to Upper Peru . Ocampo 's initial orders were to capture the counter @-@ revolutionary leaders and send them to Buenos Aires , so that they could be judged . When the counter @-@ revolution became stronger Moreno called the Junta and , with support from Castelli and Paso , proposed that the enemy leaders should be shot as soon as they were captured instead of brought to trial . The Junta accepted the new proposal , and delivered it to Ocampo . The counter @-@ revolution was defeated the following August , but Ocampo did not execute his prisoners . Gregorio Funes , head of the patriotic party of Córdoba , persuaded him to spare them , because the prisoners were popular in Córdoba and the people would not support their deaths . Besides Liniers , the prisoners included the governor of Córdoba and the bishop of the city . Ocampo stuck to the initial orders and delivered the prisoners to the city . Moreno did not accept it , and told Ocampo that a general should simply obey orders . He called a new meeting of the Junta , and produced a paper left at his home which said , " If Liniers does not die , LET HIM LIVE ! " ( note : the second part was written in capital letters in the original ) . The Junta agreed to fire Ocampo and replace him with Castelli , with Nicolás Rodríguez Peña as secretary and Domingo French leading the escort . They intercepted the convoy at Cabeza de Tigre and executed them , except for Bishop Orellana , because of his religious endowment . The Auxiliary Army , commanded by Ocampo and Castelli , was renamed as the Army of the North , and launched the First Alto Perú campaign . Moreno gave harsh new instructions for it : monitor the activities of the rich ; kill Goyeneche , Nieto , Paula Sanz and the bishop on sight ; and allow soldiers to pillage the enemies at the first patriot victory , to generate terror . The context was not favourable : only Cochabamba and Charcas made a genuine support of the revolution , and some indigenous people hesitated in joining , fearing the consequences of a possible royalist counter @-@ attack . The Morenist projects for Upper Peru , which included the emancipation of the indigenous peoples and the nationalization of the mines of Potosi , were resisted by the local populations that were benefiting from the system already in force . Castelli proposed to advance the military campaign even closer to Lima , but Moreno asked him to stay at his position . 
 The other military expedition moved to Paraguay , commanded by Manuel Belgrano . Following instructions from Moreno , he helped the natives at the missions in Corrientes , on his way to Paraguay . He gave them full civil and political rights , granted lands , authorized commerce with the United Provinces , removed taxes for ten years , abolished any type of torture , and lifted restrictions on taking public or religious office . 
 Moreno promoted stronger measures against the royalists . In July , he gave orders to the neighboring mayors to prevent the creation of secret groups , or activities that could promote alienation . He promoted a new decree of the Junta that called for trial and confiscation of goods for anyone that left the city without authorization , kept military weapons in secret , promoted popular alienation or discontent against the government , or wrote letters to people in other cities for such a purpose . Serious cases were usually punished with execution or exile . Some rich people exiled by this decree were Francisco <unk> , Olaguer Reynals , Norberto de <unk> y <unk> , and Pablo <unk> . Manuel Andrés Arroyo y Pinedo , another rich man , blamed Moreno for these actions , accusing him of equaling disagreement with <unk> , and felt that the ideas of egalitarianism would only cause great evils . Those measures were also criticized by moderate supporters of the revolution , such as Gregorio Funes from Córdoba , who rejected the lack of proper trials , or Dámaso Uriburu , from Salta , who compared Moreno , Castelli , and Vieytes with the French Jacobins . 
 By this time , Moreno thought that the only way to secure the Revolution would be if it was successful throughout the continent . However , he considered that Latin American integration should be achieved peacefully among equals , and not as the result of a conquest campaign . He wrote at the Gazeta that " even as pure as our intentions may be , it would be dangerous if the freedom of America was just our own work . Such a circumstance could lead to a real despotism and the Peruvian peoples would not improve having porteño oppressors instead of European ones . " He made positive comments about the rebellions at Cochabamba and Chile . 
 = = = Operations plan = = = 
 Following a proposal of Manuel Belgrano , the Junta wrote a political platform setting broad goals and procedures to follow to achieve its objectives . The creation of this document , whose name is often summarized simply as the " Operations plan " , was trusted to Mariano Moreno . There have been disputes about the authenticity of this document . Some historians like Paul Groussac suspect that the document was a literary forgery , prepared by a Spaniard at the Court of Portugal to discredit the Junta . Supporters of the truthfulness of the document like Norberto Piñeiro , allege that the content would be consistent with government actions taken by the Primera Junta . 
 The document states the need to defeat the royalist forces and therefore proposes many possible actions similar to those employed by Jacobins during the Reign of Terror of the French Revolution . It rejected the use of political moderation , considering that it would be dangerous during revolutionary times . It compared the South American revolution , still in its early stages , with the French and North American ones , and even the revolution in Spain itself , pointing out that none of those relied solely in conspiracies or secret meetings . The document proposes to favor patriots , and fill the state offices with them . Peninsulars , on the other hand , should be carefully monitored , and punished at the slightest proof of action against the Junta , and executed if they were rich or influential . For this end , the Junta would need to create an espionage network . This policy towards peninsulars is coherent with the actions taken against the Liniers counter @-@ revolution , and similar to the one employed by Simón Bolívar in the North shortly after . Moreno thought that José Gervasio Artigas would be an invaluable ally , and that Buenos Aires should use any resource at its disposal to have him join the fight against absolutism . He noted the internal conflicts in Chile and Paraguay , and urged support of local patriots against local royalists . 
 On the level of international relations , Mariano Moreno rejected slavery in Brazil , a neighboring Portuguese colony . He proposed to distribute large numbers of Gazeta de Buenos Ayres newspapers , filled with libertarian ideas and translated into Portuguese , and provide military support to the slaves if they should riot . He considered the risk of a complete Spanish defeat in the Peninsular War or a restoration of absolutism great menaces , and regarded Britain as a potential ally against them . During a conflict , Britain would be able to provide them with weapons and other goods not produced locally . Critics of Moreno consider him an Anglophile because of this proposal , but the same document also warns against the risk of allowing Britain too much influence in national economy . He criticized the relationship between Britain and Portugal , considering that Portugal was subject to a " shameful slavery " to Britain , and that British influence in Brazil was so high that the Portuguese colonies might eventually become British ones . Moreno held the same ideas about being simultaneously friendly and cautious with Britain in the pages of the Gazeta newspaper . 
 In the economic field , the document addressed the lack of a bourgeoisie that could turn the political changes into economic development , and proposed to overcome this lack with strong state interventionism . Mariano Moreno proposed that the state invest 200 or 300 million in factories , manufacturing , arts , agriculture , navigation , and other critical areas . There would be no risk of bankruptcy because the state would manage the businesses . With the money generated , the state would then seek seeds and tools , and ultimately allow the continent to be economically <unk> . The initial money that the state would need to become such an active economic force would come from the mines in Potosi , where the slavers had nearly 500 or 600 million . Moreno proposed simply to confiscate the money and nationalize the mines . He reasoned that five or six thousand people would be harmed by such action , but eighty or a hundred thousand would benefit . The state would not manage those areas indefinitely ; Moreno proposed that this should be done only until there was a strong economic activity in each area , and then the state would just observe , making sure that they followed the laws enacted for the common good of society . 
 Early 19th @-@ century liberalism did not promote confiscation among their common proposals , but an antecedent of this proposal was the Conspiracy of the Equals , promoted by François @-@ Noël <unk> during the French Revolution . Moreno thought that state @-@ sized fortunes managed by a few individuals were detrimental to civil society , and those individuals would tend to manage the economy for their own benefit , without fixing the problems of society at large . 
 The document proposed to avoid exporting money , and to include high tariffs on the import of luxury goods . This is often seen as a contradiction of the The Representation of the Hacendados , but each request different things . The Representation opposed the absolute prohibition of trade with Britain , which is not the same than allowing it while following a protectionist policy . As secretary , Moreno reduced the tariffs on national exports , but kept high ones for imports . 
 = = = Internal disputes = = = 
 Mariano Moreno and Cornelio Saavedra had disagreements about the events of the May Revolution and the way to run the government ; their disputes became public shortly after the creation of the Junta . Saavedra was the president , and Moreno was a secretary with the support of other vocal members . Ignacio Núñez describes how Morenists felt that the President was attempting to restore in his office the authority of the viceroys , thus downgrading the importance of the other members of the Junta at public events ; while Saavedrists considered that the Secretary was overstepping his authority and did not allow even the appointment of a janitor that was not of his liking . However , Domingo Matheu would clarify in his memoirs that their initial concerns with Saavedra were based more on his desire for honours and privileges than for a real power struggle . Núñez described how Moreno was resisted by some criollos who initially supported the revolution without being aware of the long @-@ term consequences . He was resisted by criollos alarmed by his straightforward way of talking about concepts like self @-@ determination , tyranny , slavery , and freedom . Theologians resented that Moreno cited authors like Rousseau , Voltaire , or Montesquieu rather than Christian philosophers like Saint Augustine or Saint Thomas . He was also resisted by conservative lawyers and by most of the military . 
 By October , Moreno 's measures started to generate resistance among some who initially supported the May Revolution . Traders did not like the protectionist policy , and some members of the military had close ties with rich people and opposed their punishment . On October 16 it was discovered that ten members of the Cabildo had sworn loyalty to the Regency Council the past July , and they were all jailed . This included Julián Leiva and Juan José de Lezica . Moreno and Saavedra had a dispute when the Junta was deciding what to do . Moreno proposed executing them as a deterrent , accusing them of working with the Montevideo Cabildo , the enemy of the Junta . Saavedra replied that the government should promote leniency , and rejected the use of the Patricians Regiment to carry out such executions . The prisoners were finally exiled to Luján , Ranchos , and Salto , and Leiva was housed by Gregorio Funes in Córdoba . 
 By this point , the only military support for Moreno was Domingo French , head of " The Star " regiment . Castelli and Belgrano supported him , but were far away from the capital on their respective military campaigns . The activists of the May Revolution supported him as well , as did other members of the Junta and other patriots like Vieytes and Nicolás Rodríguez Peña . Saavedra kept the strong support of the Regiment of Patricians , and added that of the merchants and even some supporters of the former regime who deemed the moderated Saavedra a lesser evil . Moreno sought to modify the military balance of power by reforming the promotion rules . Up until that point , the sons of officials were automatically granted the status of cadet and were promoted just by seniority ; Moreno arranged that promotions were earned by military merits instead . However , in the short run this measure worked against him , as it antagonised members of the military who got promoted precisely because of such rules . He also thought that support from the lower classes was instrumental to the success of the Revolution , and wrote letters to Chiclana instructing him to generate such support at Upper Peru . Such popular involvement would take time to consolidate : the Guerra Gaucha , the War of the <unk> , and the rise of José Gervasio Artigas took place later , not as of 1810 . 
 Saavedra increased his resistance to Moreno 's proposals after the victory at the Battle of Suipacha , considering that the revolution had defeated its enemies and should relax its severity in consequence . The Regiment of Patricians hosted a banquet celebration at the barracks , restricting attendance to the military and supporters of Saavedra . Moreno was not allowed to pass by the guards at the door , which generated a small incident . That same night , Officer Atanasio Duarte , who was drunk , gave a crown of sugar to Saavedra 's wife and saluted Saavedra as if he was the new king or emperor of the Americas . The next day , when Moreno heard about the incident , he wrote the " Honours Suppression decree " , which suppressed the ceremony usually reserved for the president of the Junta and inherited privileges of the office of viceroy . Duarte was exiled , and Moreno 's act was justified by stating that " An inhabitant of Buenos Aires neither drunk nor asleep should be expressed against the freedom of his country " . Saavedra signed the decree without complaint , but Gregorio Funes felt that the Patricians resented Moreno because of this . 
 The conflicts between Moreno and Saavedra generated international reactions . Lord Strangford complained about the later actions of the Junta , such as the execution of Liniers , which were seen as more violent than the initial ones . Brazil was also concerned because many copies of the Gazeta were being distributed at Rio Grande do Sul , influencing their slaves with libertarian ideas . The Brazilian government sent Carlos José Guezzi to Buenos Aires , with the purpose of mediating in the conflict with the royalists at Montevideo and to ratify the aspirations of Carlota Joaquina to rule as regent . He met Saavedra in his first interview , in July , and got a positive impression of him . Saavedra said that if Carlota 's rights were confirmed by the Spanish monarchy , Buenos Aires would support her , even if it meant they had to stand against the other provinces . The following month he requested a representative for the Court of Brazil , offered Carlota 's mediation with Montevideo , and pointed out that Brazil had forces near the frontier , awaiting orders to attack the revolution . This time , Moreno resisted . Moreno rejected sending a representative , and told him that the Junta did not work for the interests of Brazil , but for those of the United Provinces . He rejected the mediation as well , considering that no mediation was possible under a military threat . Guezzi was immediately sent back to Rio de Janeiro on the first available ship . He described Moreno as " the Robespierre of the day " , and accused the Junta of attempting to build a republic . 
 In December , the deputies of the other provinces convened by the circular of May 27 arrived to Buenos Aires . Most of them were closer to the ideas of Saavedra , and Gregorio Funes became highly influential over them . They did not agree about which body they should join : the deputies wanted to join the Junta , while Moreno thought that they should start a constituent assembly . Funes , allied with Saavedra , calculated that they could stop Moreno by joining the Junta , as his proposals would be agreed to by a minority . The Junta , with both its original members and the deputies , discussed the topic on December 18 . Funes said that Buenos Aires had no right to rule the other provinces without their consent , and got the support of the other members . He said that there was popular discontent with the Junta . The supporters of Moreno said that such discontent was only among some rebels , and Moreno said that it was only the discontent of the Patricians in respect of the <unk> decree . However , only Paso voted with him , and the deputies joined the Junta . Moreno resigned , but his resignation was rejected . His opposition to the incorporation of the deputies is seen by some historians as an initial step in the conflict between Buenos Aires and the other provinces , which dominated politics in Argentina during the following decades . Some call it a precursor of the Unitarian Party , while others find his words or actions more consistent with the Federal Party . However , historians Paul Groussac and Norberto Piñeiro feel it is inappropriate to extrapolate so far into the future . Piñeiro considered it an error to label Moreno as federal or unitary , proving that this organization been prioritized over the secondary aspect of centralism or federalism , while Groussac similarly notes that Moreno devoted all his energies to the immediate problem of achieving independence without giving much thought to possible long @-@ term scenarios . 
 = = Political decline and death = = 
 Hipólito Vieytes was about to make a diplomatic mission to Britain , but Moreno requested that he should be given the appointment instead . Saavedra accepted immediately . He traveled to Britain with his brother Manuel Moreno and his secretary Tomás Guido , on the British schooner Fame . His health declined and there was no doctor on board , but the captain refused requests to land at some earlier port such as in Río de Janeiro ( Brazil ) or Cape Town ( South Africa ) . The captain gave him an emetic in common use at that time , prepared with four grams of antimony potassium tartrate . Moreno had great convulsions as a consequence , and considered that in his state he could not have resisted more than the quarter of a gram . He died shortly afterwards . His body was wrapped in a Union Jack and thrown into the sea , after a volley of musketry . 
 Manuel Moreno speculated later that he was poisoned by the captain . Manuel Moreno was unsure of whether the captain really given him that substance , or if he substituted something else , or gave an even higher dose . Circumstances did not allow an autopsy to be performed . Further points used to sustain the idea of a murder are the captain 's refusal to land elsewhere , his slow sailing , his administration of the emetic in secrecy , and that he didn 't return to Buenos Aires with the ship . Enrique de Gandía pointed to an irregular ruling of the Junta that appointed a British person named Curtis as Moreno 's replacement for the diplomatic mission in the case of Moreno 's death . The son of Mariano Moreno commented to the historian Adolfo Saldías that his mother , Guadalupe Cuenca , received an anonymous gift of a mourning hand fan and handkerchief , with instructions to use them soon . By that time , the murder of Moreno was a common assumption , and it was mentioned during the trial of residence of the members of the Junta . Juan Madera stated at the trial that Moreno may have requested to go to Britain because he was afraid of being murdered , and that he may have stated this during the meeting when the Junta discussed his resignation . Modern author Manuel Luis Martín studied the health of both Moreno and his family , and concluded that he died of natural causes . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite the death of Mariano Moreno , his supporters were still an influential party in Buenos Aires . Morenists accused Saavedra and Funes of plotting to allow the coronation of Carlota , and organized a rebellion with " The Star " Regiment . However , the Saavedrists became aware of it , and organized another rebellion on May 5 and 6 , 1811 . This rebellion requested strong changes in the government : the removal of Morenists Nicolás Rodríguez Peña , Hipólito Vieytes , Miguel Azcuénaga , and Juan Larrea from the Junta ; the exile of Domingo French , Antonio Beruti , Agustín Donado , Gervasio Posadas and Ramón Vieytes ; and the return and trial of Manuel Belgrano . Thus , the Morenist party was set apart from the government . 
 The Saavedrist hegemony was short @-@ lived . The military defeats of Castelli and Belgrano started a new political crisis , and the First Triumvirate replaced the Junta Grande as the executive power , and then closed it completely . The former supporters of Moreno ( Belgrano , Dupuy , Tomás Guido , Beruti , Monteagudo , French , Vicente López ) would later support the campaign of José de San Martín . The Argentine war of independence would give room to the Argentine Civil War between unitarians and federals . Saavedrists like Martín Rodríguez , Ortiz de Ocampo , de la Cruz — and even Saavedra himself — became unitarians . Manuel Moreno , French , Agrelo , Vicente López , and Pancho Planes opposed both the First Triumvirate and the presidency of unitarian Bernardino Rivadavia . Manuel Moreno and Tomás Guido , in particular , worked in the government of the most powerful federal leader , Juan Manuel de Rosas . 
 = = = Historical perspectives = = = 
 Early Argentine historians described Mariano Moreno as the leader of the Revolution and a great historical man . Later liberal historians would embellish this portrayal even more . An example of this tendency is La Revolución de Mayo y Mariano Moreno by Ricardo Levene . Biographers would describe him as a serene statesman , a notable economist , a decided democrat , and a great leader . For those historians , Moreno would have been an anglophile , and " The Representation of the Hacendados " , the government platform of the May Revolution . 
 Subsequently , revisionist authors would formulate accusations against him , while promoting Saavedra as a popular leader . According to those authors , Moreno was a British agent , a demagogic caudillo , a paranoid , a mere man of theoretical ideas applying European principles that failed in the local context , wrongly portrayed as leader of the Revolution by the liberal historiography . Año X by Hugo Wast is considered the harshest work against Moreno . Moreno was still considered an anglophile , but in a negative light . They blamed Moreno for the harsh policies of the Junta , considering him a terrorist or a predecessor of Marxism ; liberal historians usually concealed these policies . 
 Modern authors like Ernesto Palacio , Norberto Galasso , and Jorge Abelardo Ramos attempt to rescue the image of Moreno by avoiding both extremes : the sweet liberal Moreno and the horrible one written by revisionists . Those historians do not consider Bernardino Rivadavia a successor of Moreno , and the proposals to seek an alliance with Britain are not seen as the product of anglophilia , but just an example of the limited options available to the Primera Junta . Similarly , they do not attribute much influence to the Representation ... , considering it a mere work for a client that didn 't really influence Cisneros , who would have allowed free trade for international contexts . The harsh policies are acknowledged , but not attributed specifically to Moreno , but rather to the whole Junta , and compared with similar royalist measures used to punish the Chuquisaca , the La Paz revolution , and the indigenous rebellion of Túpac Amaru II . 
 = = = Journalism = = = 
 Mariano Moreno is regarded as the first Argentine journalist , as he created the Gazeta de Buenos Ayres . June 7 , the day this newspaper was first available to the public , is recognized in Argentina as " Journalist day " since 1938 . The Gazeta , however , was not the first newspaper in Buenos Aires , but the first one since the May Revolution . The first newspaper was the Telégrafo Mercantil ( 1801 ) , followed by the Semanario de Agricultura Industria y Comercio ( 1802 ) and the Correo de Comercio de Buenos Aires ( 1810 ) , edited during the colonial period . 
 Moreno was the only one to sign the decree that established the newspaper , but the text implies that it was the result of a discussion of the whole Junta , and not just his initiative . Fellow member of the Junta Manuel Alberti was appointed director of the newspaper . However , Alberti never actually directed the newspaper ; Moreno did . Historian Guillermo Furlong considers that it was really Alberti who directed the newspaper , but the memoirs of José Pedro Agrelo ( a later director ) , Tomás Guido , and Saavedra confirm that the newspaper was managed by Moreno . Moreno has also been promoted as a supporter of the freedom of the press , but the Gazeta ... was actually a state @-@ sponsored newspaper , and the Junta allowed such freedom only for information that was not against the interests of the government . According to Norberto Galasso , that situation would today be considered media bias . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 The Moreno family was poor , but could afford a house and some slaves . Ana María Valle y Ramos , Mariano 's mother , was one of the few literate women in Buenos Aires . Mariano Moreno was the firstborn of fourteen children . Mariano moved to Chuquisaca with his brother Manuel Moreno and their friend Tomás Guido once the family raised the money . The long and difficult journey gave Mariano a rheumatism attack ; he had to stay in bed for fifteen days on arrival . He had further attacks years later . Moreno met María Guadalupe Cuenca in this city , after seeing a miniature portrait of her at a silversmith 's house . Both Moreno and María were expected by their families to follow religious studies , and Moreno 's father did not authorize a change . Moreno studied laws all the same , and married María in secret to avoid family resistance . They had a single son , named Mariano like the father . 
 When Moreno left for Europe on a diplomatic mission in 1811 , his wife and son stayed in Buenos Aires . María wrote many letters to Moreno , with descriptions of ongoing events in the city . Most of them were written when Moreno was already dead ; she did not learn of his fate until the following August , when a letter arrived from Manuel Moreno . She requested a widow 's pension from the First Triumvirate , which was in power by then ; its value was thirty pesos . 
 = = = Beliefs = = = 
 Mariano Moreno studied French and Spanish authors of the Age of Enlightenment during his studies at Chuquisaca . Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's The Social Contract was a main influence ; he translated this work to Spanish and used it to justify the actions of the Primera Junta . Contemporary people as Ignacio Núñez and Tomás de Anchorena acknowledged him as the translator . However , as the main page said that the work was " reprinted in Buenos Ayres " , some historians doubt whether it was actually Moreno 's work . Vicente Fidel López claimed that Moreno reprinted the translation made by the Spaniard Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos , but the two translations differ . Paul Groussac thought it was a reprint of an Asturian translation , and Ricardo Levene said that Moreno was not the translator , but neither gave any indication as to who they thought had completed it . Enrique de Gandía considers that the comments of contemporary people and the lack of an earlier similar translation of Rousseau 's work allow us to conclude that Moreno must have been the translator , at least until an earlier translation is found . 
 Despite his interest in French authors , Mariano Moreno was not Francophile or afrancesado . He kept a strong Spanish cultural heritage , and both Levene and Abelardo Ramos agree in that his stay in Chuquisaca influenced him more than the books . In line with the Spanish Enlightenment , Moreno kept strong religious beliefs . He removed the chapter from Rousseau 's work that is critical of religion , and never became a freemason . He gave up his religious studies to study law and get married , but never actually became a priest , so there was no defrocking . He studied with priests such as Terrazas , who approved and perhaps even encouraged the change of vocation . 
 = = = Physical aspect = = = 
 The canonical image of Mariano Moreno is the one from the portrait Mariano Moreno en su mesa de <unk> ( Spanish : Mariano Moreno at his work desk ) . It was done by the Chilean artist Pedro Subercaseaux during the centennial of the May Revolution in 1910 . The historian Adolfo Carranza asked him to design various allegorical pictures of the event . Carranza belonged to the mainstream line of historians who professed great admiration for Moreno , who he described as follows : " He was the soul of the government of the revolution of May , his nerve , the distinguished statesman of the group managing the ship attacked the absolutism and doubt , anxious to reach the goal of his aspirations and his destiny . Moreno was the compass and that also grabbed the helm , as he was the strongest and the ablest of those who came to direct it " . He asked for a picture that was consistent with this image . The portrait depicts him as a friendly man with an open and round face , a wide forehead , and a serene look . Subsequent interpretations , like those of Antonio Estrada , would follow this style , as would portraits of other members of the Junta . However , as this portrait was made a hundred years after the death of the subject , with no known depictions done during his lifetime , it was thus based on the artist 's imagination . It was known that Moreno had clearly visible smallpox scars from the age of eight , but not to the point where they disfigured his face . 
 Later a portrait of Moreno was discovered that had been done from life , by the Peruvian silversmith Juan de Dios Rivera . This portrait was painted between 1808 or 1809 , before Moreno 's appointment as secretary of the Junta . It is now considered to be the closest representation of Moreno 's real appearance . In this portrait , he is depicted with an elongated face , abundant hair , long sideburns , big eyes , and a pointy nose . 
 = Mid @-@ October 2007 tornado outbreak = 
 The Mid @-@ October 2007 tornado outbreak was a widespread tornado outbreak that took place across much of the eastern half of North America starting on October 18 , 2007 and continuing into the early hours of October 19 . The outbreak was also responsible for five deaths ; three in Michigan and two in Missouri , plus many injuries ( including some from non @-@ tornadic events ) . At least 64 tornadoes were confirmed including 16 on October 17 across six states including Texas , Oklahoma , Arkansas , Louisiana , Mississippi and Missouri with wind damage reported in Oklahoma , Kansas , Illinois , Iowa , Arkansas and Mississippi . On October 18 , at least 48 tornadoes were confirmed across eight states including Florida , Alabama , Mississippi , Tennessee , Kentucky , Illinois , Indiana and Michigan , plus widespread straight line wind damage . Until 2010 , this event held the record for largest tornado outbreak ever recorded in the month of October according to NOAA . 
 = = Meteorological synopsis = = 
 A deep low pressure system ( with a pressure of 977 mbar at its peak ) moved across the Pacific Coast on October 15 and then crossed the Rockies during the following day and touched out some moist air from the Gulf of Mexico , major source for storm development and intensification . Not part of the main outbreak , 3 tornadoes were reported , during the overnight hours of October 16 towards October 17 , across Randall County , Texas south of Amarillo on October 16 with 1 of them confirmed as a high EF1 . That tornado caused damage to trees , fences , power poles , steel pipes , trailers and barns . 
 The next day a dry line , which separates the drier air from the more moist and humid air , formed ahead of the cold front across the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles and tracked eastward . The high humidity levels with dew points in the 70s ° F ( low 20s ° C ) , temperatures that in many areas were near 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) , strong wind shear and the presence of the dry line helped develop the instability to produce severe thunderstorms across the Midwest and Southern Plains on October 17 . 
 A moderate risk for severe weather was issued by the Storm Prediction Center two days prior to the event . The storm then moved across the most of the Midwest on October 18 , where a moderate risk was in effect also for two days for most of Illinois , Indiana and parts of Kentucky , although the moderate risk was revised further to the south and east to include western Ohio , western Tennessee , southeastern Missouri , northeastern Arkansas and a larger portion of Kentucky while Michigan and Wisconsin were no longer under a moderate risk . A slight risk of severe weather was forecast for a large area from beyond the Canadian border to the Florida Panhandle and Mobile Bay . Dew points above 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) were reported well into the Ohio Valley , and dew points above 60 ° F ( 16 ° C ) were reported as far north as northern Ontario . 
 The outbreak was expected to continue into October 19 east of the Appalachians , however , extensive cloud cover prevented any significant severe storms from developing although several wind reports were reported in Pennsylvania , New Jersey and Massachusetts . The storm then moved out into the Atlantic Ocean on October 20 . 
 = = Significant tornadoes = = 
 The first severe thunderstorms developed during the early morning of October 17 across much of northern and eastern Texas and parts of Oklahoma and Kansas with only one reported tornado in east Texas . Several severe thunderstorms then later developed across eastern Oklahoma , Arkansas , Louisiana , western Mississippi , eastern Kansas , Missouri and parts of Nebraska , Iowa , Kentucky , Illinois and Tennessee . Twelve additional tornadoes were reported in Missouri and Louisiana during the late afternoon and early evening with damage reported in Lawrence and Greene counties in Missouri . One of the tornadoes located near Verona destroyed several barns and homes but did not cause any injuries and was later confirmed as an EF2 . The storms persisted throughout the night and an additional tornado killed 2 people inside a mobile home in Greene County , Missouri near Paris . 
 On October 18 , several thunderstorms already developed during the morning hours and continued to intensify during the afternoon . Just after 11 : 00 am EDT , one tornado in downtown Pensacola , Florida caused some extensive damage to the roof of a Baptist church as well as portions of Cordova Mall but there were no reported injuries at the Church and daycare center . During the early evenings severe weather affected the Louisville , Kentucky Metro area in which tree damage and power outage were reported throughout the area and a possible tornado at around 7 : 00 pm EDT near the Crescent Hill area which was later confirmed as a brief EF0 . Still in the region , one tree fell over a passing car but the motorist escaped injuries although he was trapped for several minutes inside . The Louisville power authority , the LG & E reported as much as 2 @,@ 500 homes without power mostly in St. Matthews and Crescent Hill areas . More storms rolled through much of the Ohio and Tennessee Valleys during the second half of the evening and overnight with more storms in Michigan . 
 Areas the hardest hit were along and near the Ohio River in western Kentucky as well as central and northern Indiana in <unk> where injuries were reported as well as significant damage , and in Central Michigan . Three people were killed overall on October 18 : one in Kalkaska County , Michigan and two in Locke Township , near Williamston , Michigan . In addition to the tornadoes , storm straight line damaging wind measured up to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) were recorded across several of the regions hit by the severe weather , causing extensive tree and power line with isolated reports of structural damage . 
 In Michigan , a tornado in Tuscola near Flint threw a one @-@ year @-@ old baby 40 feet ( 12 m ) away from its location along with the crib and was later found amongst a pile of rubble under a mattress . His parents told reporters that the mattress saved the toddler 's life and he suffered few to no injuries . According to the National Weather Service in Detroit , tornadoes this late in the year in Michigan are rare . The last significant October tornado event was on October 24 , 2001 , when three tornadoes hit southeastern Lower Michigan , out of a total of nine in the state that day . Including the 2001 tornadoes , only seven October tornadoes had been recorded in the NWS Detroit county warning area prior to the 2007 outbreak . By comparison , NWS Detroit had confirmed five tornadoes in its coverage area from this outbreak . It was also the largest October outbreak over western Kentucky and southern Indiana as 15 tornadoes were confirmed on October 18 . Previous to this outbreak , only 19 tornadoes had been recorded in that same region during the history of October prior to this event . The Owensboro tornado , which was rated an EF3 was also the strongest ever in that month over the same region since records were kept in 1950 although an unofficial F3 took place in Posey County , Indiana on October 16 , 1928 . 
 = = Tornadoes confirmed = = 
 = = = October 17 event = = = 
 = = = October 18 event = = = 
 = = <unk> events = = 
 In addition to the tornadoes , widespread straight @-@ line wind damage took place across much of the affected region , particularly on the night of October 17 as a result of a derecho that moved across the southern Great Plains into the Ozarks . Winds were reported as high as 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) as a result of the bow echo that moved across the region . Tulsa was hard hit , with at least 55 people injured ( one critically ) due to wind damage at the Oktoberfest event . Many mobile homes were destroyed , and widespread power outages were reported in the region including in Rogers County near <unk> where five people where injured . 
 In Kansas , a bow echo caused some localized significant damage in and around the Wichita Metropolitan Area with the most significant damage at the International Cold Storage located in the Andover area where the peak winds were measured . Overall , over 400 wind reports in the US alone , were reported on both October 17 and 18 across the Midwest , Gulf Coast and Great Lakes with several reports of damage but there were no direct non @-@ tornadic fatalities . In Chicago , an eleven @-@ year @-@ old boy was struck and injured by lightning while another person was injured by broken glass when high winds broke windows of a lobby hall of a condominium . 
 In addition , the Gulf Coast region , particularly the Florida Panhandle , received torrential rain due to continuous thunderstorms ahead of the cold front . Rainfall amounts over 12 inches ( 300 mm ) were common ( with amounts as high as 22 inches ( 560 mm ) were reported in Gulf Breeze , Florida ) , although only minor flooding was reported including roads and some houses flooded . 
 = West Wycombe Park = 
 West Wycombe Park is a country house built between 1740 and 1800 near the village of West Wycombe in Buckinghamshire , England . It was conceived as a pleasure palace for the 18th @-@ century libertine and dilettante Sir Francis Dashwood , 2nd Baronet . The house is a long rectangle with four façades that are columned and pedimented , three theatrically so . The house encapsulates the entire progression of British 18th @-@ century architecture from early idiosyncratic Palladian to the Neoclassical , although anomalies in its design make it architecturally unique . The mansion is set within an 18th @-@ century landscaped park containing many small temples and follies , which act as satellites to the greater temple , the house . 
 The house , which is a Grade I listed building , was given to the National Trust in 1943 by Sir John Dashwood , 10th Baronet ( 1896 – 1966 ) , an action strongly resented by his heir . Dashwood retained ownership of the surrounding estate and the contents of the house , most of which he sold ; after his death , the house was restored at the expense of his son , the 11th Baronet . Today , while the structure is owned by the National Trust , the house is still the home of the Dashwood family . The house is open to the public during the summer months and is a venue for civil weddings and corporate entertainment , which help to fund its maintenance and upkeep . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Ethos = = = 
 West Wycombe Park , architecturally inspired by the villas of the Veneto constructed during the late @-@ renaissance period , is not one of the largest , grandest or best @-@ known of England 's many country houses . Compared to its Palladian contemporaries , such as Holkham Hall , Woburn Abbey and <unk> Hall , it is quite small , yet it is architecturally important as it encapsulates a period of 18th @-@ century English social history , when young men , known as <unk> , returning from the nearly obligatory Grand Tour with newly purchased acquisitions of art , often built a country house to accommodate their collections and display in stone the learning and culture they had acquired on their travels . 
 The West Wycombe estate was acquired by Sir Francis Dashwood , 1st Baronet , and his brother Samuel in 1698 . Dashwood demolished the existing manor house and built a modern mansion on higher ground nearby . This mansion forms the core of the present house . Images of the house on early estate plans show a red @-@ brick house with stone dressings and a hipped roof in the contemporary Queen Anne style . In 1724 , Dashwood bequeathed this square conventional house to his 16 @-@ year @-@ old son , the 2nd Baronet , also Francis , who later inherited the title Baron le Despencer through his mother and is perhaps best known for establishing the Hellfire Club close to the mansion , in the West Wycombe Caves . Between 1726 and 1741 , Dashwood embarked on a series of Grand Tours : the ideas and manners he learned during this period influenced him throughout his life and were pivotal in the rebuilding of his father 's simple house , transforming it into the classical edifice that exists today . 
 West Wycombe has been described as " one of the most theatrical and Italianate mid @-@ 18th century buildings in England " . Of all the 18th @-@ century country houses , its façades replicate in undiluted form not only the classical villas of Italy on which Palladianism was founded , but also the temples of antiquity on which Neoclassicism was based . The Greek Doric of the house 's west portico is the earliest example of the Greek revival in Britain . 
 The late 18th century was a period of change in the interior design of English country houses . The Baroque concept of the principal floor , or piano nobile , with a large bedroom suite known as the state apartments and only one large hall or saloon for common use , was gradually abandoned in favour of smaller , more comfortable bedrooms on the upper floors . The revised floor plan allowed the principal floor to become a series of reception rooms , each with a designated purpose , creating separate withdrawing , dining , music , and ballrooms . In this way , West Wycombe perfectly reflects the changes and ideals of the late @-@ 18th century . Its arrangement of reception and public rooms on a lower floor , with bedrooms and more private rooms above , survives unchanged . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The builder of West Wycombe , Sir Francis Dashwood , 2nd Baronet , employed three architects and two landscape architects in the design of the house and its grounds . He had a huge input himself : having made the Grand Tour and seen the villas of the Italian renaissance first hand , he wished to emulate them . 
 Work began in about 1735 and continued until Dashwood 's death in 1781 , when the older house had been transformed inside and out . The long building time partly explains the flaws and variations in design : when building commenced , Palladianism was the height of fashion , but by the time of its completion , Palladianism had been succeeded by Neoclassicism ; thus , the house is a marriage of both styles . While the marriage is not completely unhappy , the Palladian features are marred by the lack of Palladio 's proportions : the east portico is asymmetrical with the axis of the house , and trees were planted either side to draw the eye away from the flaw . 
 The finest architects of the day submitted plans to transform the older family house into a modern architectural extravaganza . Among them was Robert Adam , who submitted a plan for the west portico , but his idea was dropped . The architect Nicholas Revett was consulted and created the west portico . Today , the first sight of the house as approached from the drive is this west end of the house , which appears as a Grecian temple . The eight @-@ columned portico , inspired by the Temple of Bacchus in Teos was completed by 1770 , and is considered to be the earliest example of Greek revival architecture in Britain . The opposite ( east ) end of the house , designed by John Donowell and completed c . 1755 , appears equally temple @-@ like , but this time the muse was the Villa Rotunda in Vicenza . Thus the two opposing porticos , east and west , illustrate two architectural styles of the late @-@ 18th century : the earlier Roman inspired Palladian architecture and the more Greek inspired Neoclassicism . 
 The principal façade is the great south front , a two @-@ storey colonnade of Corinthian columns superimposed on Tuscan , the whole surmounted by a central pediment . The columns are not stone , but wood coated in stucco . This is particularly interesting , as cost was no object in the house 's construction . The architect for this elevation was John Donowell , who executed the work between 1761 and 1763 ( although he had to wait until 1775 for payment ) . The façade , which has similarities to the main façade of Palladio 's Palazzo <unk> of 1550 , was originally the entrance front . The front door is still in the centre of the ground floor leading into the main entry hall . This in itself is a substantial deviation from the classical form : West Wycombe does not have a first floor piano nobile : had the architect truly followed Palladio 's ideals , the main entrance and principal rooms would have been on the first floor reached by an outer staircase , giving the main reception rooms elevated views , and allowing the ground floor to be given over to service rooms . 
 The more severe north front is of eleven bays , with the end bays given significance by rustication at ground floor level . The centre of the façade has Ionic columns supporting a pediment and originally had the Dashwood coat of arms . This façade is thought to date from around 1750 – 51 , although its segmented windows suggest it was one of the first of the 2nd Baronet 's improvements to the original house to be completed , as the curved or segmented window heads are symbolic of the earlier part of the 18th century . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The principal reception rooms are on the ground floor with large sash windows opening immediately into the porticos and the colonnades , and therefore onto the gardens , a situation unheard of in the grand villas and palaces of Renaissance Italy . The mansion contains a series of 18th century salons decorated and furnished in the style of that period , with polychrome marble floors , and painted ceilings depicting classical scenes of Greek and Roman mythology . Of particular note is the entrance hall , which resembles a Roman atrium with marbled columns and a painted ceiling copied from Robert Wood 's Ruins of Palmyra . 
 Many of the reception rooms have painted ceilings copied from Italian palazzi , most notably from the Palazzo Farnese in Rome . The largest room in the house is the Music Room , which opens onto the east portico . The ceiling fresco in this room depicts the " Banquet of the Gods " and was copied from the Villa Farnesina . The Saloon , which occupies the centre of the north front , contains many marbles , including statuettes of the four seasons . The ceiling depicting " The Council of the Gods and the Admission of Psyche " is also a copy from Villa Farnesina . 
 The Dining Room walls are painted faux jasper and hold paintings of the house 's patron — Sir Francis Dashwood — and his fellow members of the Divan Club ( a society for those who had visited the Ottoman Empire ) . The room also has a painted ceiling from Wood 's Palmyra . 
 The Blue Drawing Room is dominated by the elaborate painted ceiling depicting " The Triumph of Bacchus and Ariadne " ( illustrated left ) . This room houses a plaster statuette of the Venus de ' Medici and marks the 2nd Baronet 's risqué devotion to that goddess of love . The room has walls of blue flock , applied in the 1850s and later renewed , bearing paintings from various Italian schools of the 17th century . The Red Drawing Room is lined in crimson silk and is furnished with marquetry <unk> . 
 The relatively small study contains plans for the house and potential impressions for various elevations . One is reputed to have been drawn by Sir Francis Dashwood himself , while the Tapestry Room , once ante @-@ room to the adjoining former principal bedroom , is hung with Brussels tapestries depicting peasant scenes by Teniers . Dashwood inherited them in 1763 from his uncle Lord Westmorland , who is said to have been given them by the 1st Duke of Marlborough to celebrate their victories in the Low Countries . 
 = = Gardens and park = = 
 The gardens at West Wycombe Park are among the finest and most idiosyncratic 18th century gardens surviving in England . The park is unique in its consistent use of Classical architecture from both Greece and Italy . The two principal architects of the gardens were John Donowell and Nicholas Revett , who designed all of the ornamental buildings in the park . The landscape architect Thomas Cook began to execute the plans for the park , with a nine @-@ acre man @-@ made lake created from the nearby River Wye in the form of a swan . The lake originally had a snow ( a sailing vessel ) for the amusement of Dashwood 's guests , complete with a resident captain on board . Water leaves the lake down a cascade and into a canal pond . 
 Georgian English landscape gardens , such as West Wycombe and Stowe , are arranged as a walk or series of walks that take the visitor through a range of locations , each with its own specific character and separate from the last . Planting and the shape of the landscape is used , alongside follies and man @-@ made water features , to create pleasant vistas and set pieces centred on a building , straight avenue , serpentine walk , or viewpoint . In the later years of the 18th century , the 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 20 km ² ) of grounds were extended to the east , towards the nearby town of High Wycombe , and Humphrey Repton completed the creation of the gardens , until they appeared much as they do today . 
 The park still contains many follies and temples . The " Temple of Music " is on an island in the lake , inspired by the Temple of Vesta in Rome . It was designed for Dashwood 's fêtes <unk> , with the temple used as a theatre ; the remains of the stage survive . Opposite the temple is the garden 's main cascade which has statues of two water nymphs . The present cascade has been remade , as the original was demolished in the 1830s . An octagonal tower known as the " Temple of the Winds " is based in design on the Tower of the Winds in Athens . 
 Classical architecture continues along the path around the lake , with the " Temple of Flora " , a hidden summerhouse , and the " Temple of Daphne " , both reminiscent of a small temple on the Acropolis . Another hidden temple , the " Round Temple " , has a curved loggia . Nearer the house , screening the service wing from view , is a Roman triumphal arch , the " Temple of Apollo " , also known ( because of its former use a venue for cock fighting ) as " Cockpit Arch " , which holds a copy of the famed Apollo Belvedere . Close by is the " Temple of Diana " , with a small niche containing a statue of the goddess . Another goddess is celebrated in the " Temple of Venus " . Below this is an <unk> , a grotto ( known as Venus 's Parlour ) and a statue of Mercury . This once held a copy of the Venus de ' Medici ; it was demolished in the 1820s but was reconstructed in the 1980s and now holds a replica of the Venus de Milo . 
 Later structures that break the classical theme include the Gothic style boathouse , a Gothic <unk> – now a romantic ruin hidden amongst undergrowth – and a Gothic Chapel , once home of the village cobbler ( and facetiously named St Crispin 's ) but later used as the estate kennels . A monument dedicated to Queen Elizabeth II was erected on her 60th birthday in 1986 . 
 The gardens are listed Grade I on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens . 
 = = Dashwoods of West Wycombe = = 
 Sir Francis Dashwood built West Wycombe to entertain , and there has been much speculation on the kind of entertainment he provided for his guests . Judged against the sexual morals of the late 18th century , Dashwood and his clique were regarded as promiscuous ; while it is likely that the contemporary reports of the bacchanalian orgies over which Dashwood presided in the Hellfire caves above West Wycombe were exaggerated , free love and heavy drinking did take place there . Dashwood often had himself depicted in portraits in fancy dress ( in one , dressed as the pope toasting a female <unk> ) , and it is his love of fancy dress which seems to have pervaded through to his parties at West Wycombe Park . Following the dedication of the West portico as a bacchanalian temple in 1771 , Dashwood and his friends dressed in skins adorned with vine leaves and went to party by the lake for " <unk> and libations " . On another occasion , during a mock sea battle on the canal , the captain of the snow , " attacking " a battery constructed on the bank , was struck by the wadding of a gun and suffered an internal injury . Dashwood seems to have mellowed in his later years and devoted his life to charitable works . He died in 1781 , bequeathing West Wycombe to his half @-@ brother Sir John Dashwood @-@ King , 3rd Baronet . 
 Dashwood @-@ King spent little time at West Wycombe . On his death in 1793 , the estate was inherited by his son Sir John Dashwood , 4th Baronet , Member of Parliament for Wycombe and a friend of the Prince of Wales , although their friendship was tested when Sir John accused his wife of an affair with the prince . Like his father , Sir John cared little for West Wycombe and held a five @-@ day sale of West Wycombe 's furniture in 1800 . In 1806 , he was prevented from selling West Wycombe by the trustees of his son , to whom the estate was entailed . He became religious in the last years of his life , holding ostentatiously teetotal parties in West Wycombe 's gardens in aid of the " Friends of Order and Sobriety " – these would have been vastly different from the bacchanalian fêtes given by his uncle in the grounds . In 1847 , Sir John was bankrupt and bailiffs possessed the furniture from his home at Halton . He died estranged from his wife and surviving son in 1849 . 
 Sir John was succeeded by his estranged son Sir George Dashwood , 5th Baronet . For the first time since the death of the 2nd Baronet in 1781 , West Wycombe became again a favoured residence . However , the estate was heavily in debt and Sir George was forced to sell the <unk> estates , including Halton , which was sold in 1851 to Lionel de Rothschild for the then huge sum of £ 54 @,@ 000 ( £ 5 @.@ 33 million in 2016 ) . The change in the Dashwoods ' fortunes allowed for the refurbishment and restoration of West Wycombe . Sir George died childless in 1862 , and left his wife , Elizabeth , a life tenancy of the house while the title and ownership passed briefly to his brother and then a nephew . Lady Dashwood 's continuing occupation of the house prevented the nephew , Sir Edwin Hare Dashwood , 7th Baronet , an alcoholic sheep farmer in the South Island of New Zealand , from living in the mansion until she died in 1889 , leaving a neglected and crumbling estate . 
 The 7th Baronet 's son , Sir Edwin Dashwood , 8th Baronet , arrived from New Zealand to claim the house , only to find Lady Dashwood 's heirs claiming the house 's contents and family jewellery , which they subsequently sold . As a consequence , Sir Edwin was forced to mortgage the house and estate in 1892 . He died suddenly the following year , and the heavily indebted estate passed to his brother , Sir Robert Dashwood , 9th Baronet . Sir Robert embarked on a costly legal case against the executors of Lady Dashwood , which he lost , and raised money by denuding the estate 's woodlands and leasing the family town house in London for 99 years . On his death in 1908 , the house passed to his 13 @-@ year @-@ old son Sir John Dashwood , 10th Baronet , who in his adulthood sold much of the remaining original furnishings ( including the state bed , for £ 58 – this important item of the house 's history complete with its gilded pineapples is now lost ) . In 1922 , he attempted to sell the house itself . He received only one offer , of £ 10 @,@ 000 ( £ 492 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , so the house was withdrawn from sale . Forced to live in a house he disliked , the village of West Wycombe was sold in its entirety to pay for renovations . Not all these renovations were beneficial : painted 18th century ceilings were overpainted white , and the dining room was divided into service rooms , allowing the large service wing to be abandoned to rot . 
 A form of salvation for West Wycombe was Sir John 's wife : Lady Dashwood , the former Helen Eaton , a Canadian and sister of American novelist Evelyn Eaton , was a socialite who loved entertaining , and did so in some style at West Wycombe throughout the 1930s . Living a semi @-@ estranged life from her husband , occupying opposite ends of the mansion , she frequently gave " large and stylish " house parties . 
 During World War II , the house saw service as a depository for the evacuated Wallace Collection and a convalescent home . A troop of gunners occupied the decaying service wing , and the park was used for the inflation of barrage balloons . During this turmoil , the Dashwoods retreated to the upper floor and took in lodgers to pay the bills , albeit very superior lodgers , who included Nancy Mitford and James Lees @-@ Milne , who was secretary of the Country House Committee of the National Trust and instrumental in the Trust 's acquisition of many such houses . In 1943 , Sir John gave the house and grounds to the National Trust , on condition that he and his descendants could continue living in the house . 
 = = West Wycombe after 1943 = = 
 In the latter half of the 20th century , Sir Francis Dashwood , 11th Baronet , embarked on a program of restoration and improvement . His efforts included the installation of a huge equestrian sculpture as the focal point of a long tree lined vista from the house . On close inspection , it proves to be a fibre glass prop found at Pinewood Studios by the 11th Baronet who paid for it with 12 bottles of champagne . The local planning authority was furious but lost their lawsuit to have it removed . Today , from a distance , it has been " known to fool experts " . 
 The present head of the Dashwood family is Sir Edward Dashwood ( born 1964 ) , who is married and has three children . The contents of the house are owned by the family , who also own and run the estate . The house can be hired as a filming location , and , in addition to agricultural and equestrian enterprises , there is a large pheasant shoot with paying guns . The park , a natural amphitheatre , is often the setting for large public concerts and firework displays , and the mansion is available for weddings and corporate entertainment . 
 While the estate remains in private hands , the National Trust owns the house and gardens , the park , the village of West Wycombe , and the hill on which the Dashwood mausoleum sits . The hill was the first part of the property given to the Trust by Sir John Dashwood in 1925 . The village was bought by the Royal Society of Arts from Sir John in 1929 and given to the Trust five years later . The grounds are open to the public in the afternoon only from April to August annually , and the house is open from June to August . 
 = Joel Byrom = 
 Joel Alan Byrom ( born 14 September 1986 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Northampton Town . 
 Byrom started his career at Blackburn Rovers at the age of 14 , and spent four and a half years on the club 's books , progressing from their centre of excellence to the reserve team . However , he failed to make any first @-@ team appearances for the club , and was subsequently released in summer 2006 . He joined League Two outfit Accrington Stanley before the start of the 2006 – 07 season , but only managed a total of two appearances . He was released by the club in January 2007 , and opted to join local side Clitheroe on a short @-@ term basis . Byrom then joined Southport , scoring twice in two appearances for the side , before rejoining Clitheroe in August 2007 ; captaining the side at the age of 20 . 
 He attracted the interest of Northwich Victoria , who subsequently signed him for a small four @-@ figure fee in January 2008 . Byrom spent a year and a half at the Cheshire club , before joining Stevenage for a fee of £ 15 @,@ 000 in May 2009 – helping them achieve promotion to the Football League for the first time in the club 's history . Byrom was also part of the Stevenage side that earned back @-@ to @-@ back promotions to League One during the 2010 – 11 season . He has also played for the England C team and earned his solitary cap in a game against the Belgium U21 team . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Born in Oswaldtwistle , Lancashire , Byrom started his career at the Blackburn Rovers centre of excellence after being spotted playing for local junior side Oswaldtwistle United at the age of 14 . He progressed through the youth system at Ewood Park , and captained the under – 17 side , before graduating into the reserve team after impressing in the FA Youth Cup in 2004 . However , he failed to break into the first @-@ team and was subsequently released in 2006 . He signed for League Two outfit Accrington Stanley on a six @-@ month contract ahead of the 2006 – 07 season , after impressing manager John Coleman whilst on trial , a trial which Byrom had requested . He made his debut for the Lancashire side in a 1 – 1 draw against Carlisle United in the Football League Trophy in October 2006 . However , Byrom found it difficult to break into the first @-@ team , making one further appearance for Stanley , featuring as a substitute in a 3 – 3 draw with Shrewsbury Town . He was subsequently released in January 2007 , after being deemed surplus to requirements at the Crown Ground . Byrom later stated at this stage in his career he " considered just getting a job and playing for fun " , and that his time at Accrington " wasn 't really a good time for me . I didn 't play much " . 
 Shortly after , Byrom joined Northern Premier League First Division side Clitheroe on a short @-@ term contract . He finished the 2006 – 07 season top scorer with 11 league goals despite only joining the club in January 2007 , including a hat @-@ trick against Kidsgrove Athletic . However , Byrom 's Clitheroe contract expired and Conference North side Southport took him on non @-@ contract terms for the start of the 2007 – 08 season , where he scored two goals in two games . Despite being offered a contract by Southport manager Peter Davenport , Byrom opted to re @-@ join Clitheroe in August 2007 . On signing a two @-@ year deal with Clitheroe , Byrom said " I thought about giving up football when I left Accrington , but I really enjoyed my time at Clitheroe , they 've given me a new lease of life and a licence to do what I want on the park " . Clitheroe chairman , Carl Garner , said " this is a big day for Clitheroe . This is one of the biggest signings the club has made . He 's a special player and a special talent " . In the first half of the 2007 – 08 season , Byrom scored six goals in all competitions for Clitheroe , which caught the attention of Conference National team Northwich Victoria . He played his last game for the Northern Premier League club in a 3 – 3 draw with local rivals Rossendale United , a game in which he captained the side for the first time . 
 = = = Northwich Victoria = = = 
 In January 2008 , Northwich Victoria manager Dino Maamria announced the signing of Byrom on a free transfer . He made his debut for Northwich in a 2 – 1 defeat against Aldershot Town at Victoria Stadium , scoring Northwich 's goal . Byrom played in the centre of midfield in Northwich 's following match against Burton Albion at the Pirelli Stadium , setting up Northwich 's only goal in a 4 – 1 defeat . He also assisted Northwich 's second goal in a 3 – 2 win away at Woking . Byrom scored his second goal for Northwich two weeks later , scoring Northwich 's second as they came back from a one @-@ goal deficit to win 3 – 1 against Droylsden . He also provided the assist for Mark Roberts to score Northwich 's second goal in a 4 – 3 victory against fellow relegation candidates Stafford Rangers . Byrom also scored in a 1 – 1 draw away to Histon in early April 2008 , netting from 25 yards in the 88th minute to ensure Northwich earned a point . He scored a week later against Exeter City at St James Park ; " firing in an unstoppable 30 @-@ yard free @-@ kick " to restore parity in the 11th minute , although Northwich went on to lose the match 2 – 1 . Byrom added a fifth goal to end the season , scoring the club 's second in a 2 – 1 away victory at Stevenage , a result that ultimately secured Northwich 's Conference National status for another season . He played in a total of 21 games during the club 's 2007 – 08 campaign , scoring five times from midfield . 
 Ahead of the 2008 – 09 season , Byrom featured regularly in Northwich 's pre @-@ season campaign , and scored twice in a friendly game against Manchester United reserves in August 2008 . During the early stages of the season , Byrom was a permanent fixture in the centre of Northwich 's midfield . He created both of Northwich 's goals in a 2 – 1 win at home to newly promoted Barrow , as well as scoring away at Kettering Town , a " 25 @-@ yard drive into the top corner of the net " . He also created both of Northwich 's goals in a victory against Grays Athletic in October 2008 . However , Byrom had a hernia operation shortly after the club 's 4 – 1 loss to Eastbourne Borough in December , keeping him out of the first @-@ team for a total of ten weeks . He returned to first @-@ team action in February 2009 , playing the whole match in a 1 – 0 defeat to Altrincham . He was a regular until the end of the season , and scored his second career hat @-@ trick against Rushden and Diamonds in a 4 – 2 victory , although could not prevent the <unk> relegation from the Conference National in April 2009 despite the club winning their last six games of the campaign . Byrom 's last match for Northwich was in the club 's 2 – 1 away win at the Kassam Stadium against Oxford United . He played a total of 52 games during his one and a half @-@ year tenure with Northwich , scoring nine goals . 
 = = = Stevenage = = = 
 In May 2009 , Stevenage signed Byrom for a fee of £ 15 @,@ 000 . Byrom was assigned the number 13 shirt ahead of the club 's 2009 – 10 campaign . He made his debut for the Hertfordshire side in a 1 – 1 draw at home to Tamworth in the opening game of the 2009 – 10 season , but was sent @-@ off in the 90th minute for a second bookable offence . He scored his first Stevenage goal on his return to the first @-@ team in a 3 – 0 win against Ebbsfleet United , and also provided the assist for Stevenage 's second in a 2 – 0 victory over Eastbourne Borough . Byrom scored his second goal for Stevenage in a 1 – 1 draw against Kettering Town in October 2009 , curling a free @-@ kick around the wall and into the net . He netted his third of the campaign in March 2010 , scoring from just inside Crawley Town 's half , lobbing the ball into the net from 45 @-@ yards . Shortly after , Byrom added a fourth goal to his tally in Stevenage colours in April 2010 , scoring from six yards in a 2 – 0 win over Forest Green Rovers to ensure Stevenage were just two victories away from promotion . The following week , he scored in the second in a 2 – 0 win against Kidderminster Harriers in a game that witnessed Stevenage secure promotion to the Football League for the first time in their history . On finishing the season as league champions , Byrom said — " It feels brilliant . Words can 't really describe it . It 's an unbelievable feeling " . He played 48 times in all competitions during his first season with the club , scoring five goals . 
 Byrom started in Stevenage 's first ever Football League game , a 2 – 2 home draw against Macclesfield Town . He played in Stevenage 's televised League Cup loss two days later against Championship side Portsmouth . The following week , Byrom gave away a penalty in a 1 – 0 defeat at Bradford City , which Gareth Evans converted to score the only goal of the game . After playing the whole game in Stevenage 's 1 – 0 defeat at Cheltenham Town in September 2010 , Byrom suffered a number of injuries that kept him out of the first @-@ team for five months . He returned to first @-@ team action in February 2011 , coming on as an 89th @-@ minute substitute in a 3 – 0 loss at Bury . Four days later , he started in a 1 – 0 defeat at Shrewsbury Town . He was an unused substitute for Stevenage 's next five league matches , before starting in the club 's 3 – 3 home draw with Bury on the final day of the 2010 – 11 season – playing a key role in two of Stevenage 's goals to ensure the club reached the play @-@ offs . Byrom scored his first goal of the season in Stevenage 's 2 – 0 home win against Accrington Stanley in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final first leg , reaching the ball before Accrington goalkeeper Alex Cisak to double Stevenage 's lead . He played the whole game in the second leg , a 1 – 0 victory that ensured Stevenage made the play @-@ off final . Byrom started in the final , a 1 – 0 victory against Torquay United at Old Trafford , a win that meant Stevenage earned back @-@ to @-@ back promotions to League One . Despite ending the season on a positive note , Byrom made just 12 appearances , scoring once , due to a host of injuries interrupting his campaign . 
 He made his first start of the 2011 – 12 season in Stevenage 's first home win of the campaign , playing the first 76 minutes in a 4 – 2 victory over Rochdale on 3 September 2011 . Byrom scored his first goal of the season in the club 's emphatic 6 – 1 away victory against Colchester United in December 2011 , scoring the sixth goal after a fine individual run and finish . The following month , on 14 January 2012 , Byrom doubled his goal tally for the season when he scored with a first @-@ time finish from Luke Freeman 's cross in Stevenage 's 5 – 1 win over Rochdale at Spotland . Byrom scored in Stevenage 's televised FA Cup tie away at Premier League side Tottenham Hotspur in that year , scoring from the penalty spot to give Stevenage a brief lead before Tottenham came back to secure a 3 – 1 win . He went on to score two further goals during the latter stages of the season ; once in a 2 – 2 draw away at Sheffield United , and the other in a 3 – 0 win over Bury , on the last day of the regular season as Stevenage secured a play @-@ off place following their sixth @-@ place finish . He played in both play @-@ off semi @-@ final legs , which Stevenage lost 1 – 0 on aggregate to Sheffield United . He made 40 appearances during the season , scoring five times . Despite appearing regularly under new manager Gary Smith , Byrom rejected the offer of a contract extension , and left Stevenage in May 2012 . During his successful three @-@ year spell with the club , he made 100 appearances in all competitions , scoring eleven goals . 
 = = = Preston North End = = = 
 After leaving Stevenage , Byrom joined League One side Preston North End , then managed by Graham Westley , who had previously signed him for Stevenage . He signed on a free transfer . Byrom made his competitive debut for Preston in the club 's 2 – 1 away victory over Bury , coming on as a second @-@ half substitute . It took Byrom just three games to open his goalscoring account , scoring the first goal in the club 's 5 – 0 win over Hartlepool United at Deepdale . In the club 's following match four days later , on 22 September 2012 , he netted in a 3 – 1 away defeat to Walsall , arriving unmarked in the area to give Preston an early lead in the match . His third and final goal of the campaign came at the beginning of November 2012 , scoring from the edge of the area in Preston 's 3 – 0 FA Cup win over Yeovil Town . Byrom made 27 appearances , eleven of which as a substitute , during his first season with the club , scoring three times . 
 On 17 December 2013 , Byrom extended his contract with Preston for a further twelve months , thus keeping him at the club until the summer of 2015 . 
 = = = = Oldham Athletic ( loan ) = = = = 
 On 14 March 2014 , Byrom joined League One side Oldham Athletic on an emergency loan until the end of the 2013 – 14 season . 
 At the end of the season and at the end of his loan spell , Byrom had made 4 appearances for the club during an injury – ravaged spell . 
 = = = = Northampton Town ( loan ) = = = = 
 Byrom joined Northampton Town on loan on 21 August 2014 until 4 January 2014 . 
 = = = Northampton Town = = = 
 On 8 January 2015 , Byrom joined Northampton Town in a deal running until the end of the 2014 – 15 season after his contract with Preston was terminated by mutual consent . 
 = = International career = = 
 Byrom was called up to the England C team in May 2009 , for the 2007 – 09 International Challenge Trophy final against a Belgium U21 side . Byrom started the match , as England were beaten 1 – 0 at the Kassam Stadium . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Byrom is a midfielder , and is more comfortable in the centre of midfield . He is left @-@ footed , although the left side is not his natural position , and he is rarely deployed as a winger . In 2007 , Clitheroe chairman , Carl Garner , said that Byrom has " tremendous skill and potential " , adding " Joel is a quality player . He can do things with the ball that players on the television can 't . In May 2009 , Stevenage manager Graham Westley believed that the acquisition of Byrom would " give the squad more balance " , and has also described him as having a " cultured left @-@ foot " that enables him to open up opposition defences . On securing the signature of Byrom , Westley said , " Joel is very creative going forward and is going to be one hell of a player . I was delighted to secure his signature as he is a real talent " . Dino Maamria has called Byrom a " creative midfielder " , as well as being able to unlock defences . Byrom has called himself " a good passer of the ball " , as well as being able to " chip in with a few goals and generally get the team ticking over " . In March 2010 , following Stevenage 's 3 – 0 win against Crawley Town , a game in which Byrom scored a goal from just inside Crawley 's half , Westley said that Byrom has the " ability to score spectacular goals " . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Stevenage 
 Conference National ( 1 ) : 2009 – 10 
 League Two play @-@ offs ( 1 ) : 2010 – 11 
 Northampton Town 
 Football League Two ( 1 ) : 2015 – 16 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of 12 January 2014 . 
 = Concerned = 
 Concerned : The Half @-@ Life and Death of Gordon Frohman is a webcomic created by Christopher C. Livingston , parodying the first @-@ person shooter video game Half @-@ Life 2 . The comic consists of game screenshots , with characters posed using Garry 's Mod , a tool which facilitates manipulation of the Source engine used by Half @-@ Life 2 . The first issue was launched on May 1 , 2005 . The comic completed its run on November 6 , 2006 with a total of 205 issues . 
 While Half @-@ Life 2 follows protagonist Gordon Freeman in a dystopian future , Concerned follows a similar path through the eyes of " Gordon Frohman " , a dangerously clumsy character who arrives in the setting of the game a few weeks before Freeman does . The webcomic 's dark humor is derived from its contrasts with the game and through references to the game 's shortcomings . On several occasions in the comic , Frohman becomes the cause of various disastrous circumstances that Freeman will later encounter . 
 Concerned has been well received by critics and fans alike . Several reviews praised the attention to writing and presentation , as well as the comic 's humor . Livingston has also reported uniformly positive relations with personnel at Valve , the developer company of Half @-@ Life 2 , who were pleased to have a comic based on their game . 
 = = Background = = 
 Christopher Livingston started working on Concerned as a hobby . He had previously considered developing a webcomic that would parallel the storyline of the original 1987 Legend of Zelda , for the Nintendo Entertainment System , from start to finish . He chose the Half @-@ Life 2 game world as the scene for his comic because he was a fan , and because the availability of Garry 's Mod eliminated the need to draw by hand . He always intended the plot of the comic to end at the same point as the game . 
 Livingston thought a comic would be a good way to introduce humor to the game , which he has described as " mysterious , moody , [ and ] immersive " . 
 Well , I thought Half @-@ Life 2 was a great game , but there simply weren 't enough jokes about toilets in it . So , I thought a comic would be a good place to get some humor into the game . I came up with the idea for Frohman , a complete idiot , to play all the way through the game , just like Freeman only instead of being a hero , he 'd be a complete fool . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The first issue of Concerned was released on May 1 , 2005 , the comic completing its run on November 6 , 2006 with a total of 205 issues . The characters in the comic were posed using Garry 's Mod , a tool which facilitates manipulation of the Source engine used by Half @-@ Life 2 , and the comic frames were assembled using Photoshop 6 . 
 The webcomic derives its name from one of the propaganda broadcasts by Wallace Breen in Half @-@ Life 2 , in which he is reading a letter supposedly written by a citizen , signed ' Sincerely , a concerned citizen ' , and begins his response with ' Thank you for writing , Concerned ' . Throughout the comic the main character , Gordon Frohman , sends several similar letters to Dr. Breen , Livingston 's intention being to suggest that Frohman was the author of the letter read by Breen in Half @-@ Life 2 . The name " Frohman " is derived from the last name of Gordon Freeman , the protagonist of the Half @-@ Life series . According to the credits on the comic 's website , this name was suggested to Livingston by Sam <unk> , an acquaintance of his . 
 Livingston has also employed the assistance of other people , notably Michael Clements , founder of the Half @-@ Life 2 comics repository <unk> , and creator of <unk> , another comic based on Half @-@ Life 2 . Clements aided him in enhancing the presentation of Concerned . Greg <unk> , creator of <unk> , also assisted in site maintenance , and Livingston later offered him a " guest week special " , in which <unk> wrote and published three issues for Concerned . A similar set of three issues have also been published by Joe <unk> , during a week when Livingston was unavailable . 
 As stated by Livingston in several interviews , his relation with Valve , the developer company of Half @-@ Life 2 , was a good one , the company being pleased to have a comic based on their game . According to Livingston , Valve also intended to collaborate with him to produce printed copies of Concerned . However , this was never finalized as the resolution of the comics was too low for printing . 
 Livingston has said that the comic will not continue through Half @-@ Life 2 : Episode One , the first of an episodic series following Half @-@ Life 2 , as the game " doesn 't really lend itself to the type of comic [ he wants ] to do " . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In Half @-@ Life 2 , the player takes on the role of Dr. Gordon Freeman . Throughout the game , the player follows the story of a dark , dystopian future in which mankind has been enslaved by the Combine , a mysterious alien enemy . In contrast , Concerned follows the same general path through the story established by Half @-@ Life 2 , but instead follows the adventures of Gordon Frohman , a hapless , lethally clumsy oaf who arrives in City 17 a few weeks before Freeman . Frohman is incredibly naïve and , unlike the other citizens , seems to enjoy living under the rule of the totalitarian administrator , Dr. Breen , and the Combine . He holds an insane reverence for the latter , even going to the point of having a plush doll of a Combine soldier . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The early phases of the comic have Frohman excitedly arriving in City 17 . Eventually he takes a job at the Combine 's headquarters , the Citadel , under a Combine Elite named Mr. Henderson . As most of his human colleagues become Combine soldiers , he realizes that Henderson has no immediate intention to do the same for him , citing his incompetence . Demanding to become one with the Combine , Frohman willingly sets off to Nova Prospekt , an alien security and detention installation , for invasive surgery to convert him . Meanwhile , he selects Ravenholm as a residence where he can commute to and from City 17 , but lacks proper transport with which to get there . After a failed attempt to reach Ravenholm using Dr. Isaac Kleiner 's teleporter leaves him stuck in a Counter @-@ Strike : Source server for a week , he seeks Ravenholm by foot instead . Traveling through City 17 's canals , Frohman arrives , badly injured and dazed , at Black Mesa East , the headquarters of the human resistance , where he is welcomed as a helper . His stay there is cut short because he causes trouble in the base , and also irritatingly overuses the gravity gun . He is fooled into leaving the base , and finally heads toward and reaches Ravenholm . 
 On Frohman 's arrival , Ravenholm is depicted as a peaceful , bright , and cheerful place devoid of any Combine elements , but " terrorized " by Father Grigori . After adjusting , Gordon becomes accustomed to the town , but unintentionally discloses the town 's location to Dr. Breen , who immediately orders his forces to " bomb the shit out of them " . The town is fired on with headcrabs , killing many and turning others into zombies . Frohman himself is attacked by a headcrab and turns into a zombie too , yet retains his free will ; and after a while his headcrab dies of malnutrition , which is attributed to his lack of intelligence . With Father Grigori 's help , Frohman escapes Ravenholm , now the zombie @-@ infested nightmare seen when Freeman visits it in the game , and presses on to Nova Prospekt . After surviving several more hazards , he reaches the coast . Here , after passing the final resistance base and an Antlion @-@ infested beach , Frohman encounters an Antlion Guard , which is killed by a Vortigaunt , an alien race helping the humans in the game . This allows Frohman to retrieve bugbait from the dead creature , with which he can control the Antlions . 
 Frohman , accompanied by several bugbait @-@ controlled Antlions , eventually reaches Nova Prospekt , only to be turned away as he does not have an appointment . He gives up and returns to City 17 in the following strip , as Gordon Freeman finally arrives in the city , linking the comic 's time frame with the start of Half @-@ Life 2 . He is then drafted into the resistance after failing to disrupt its operations , and unintentionally signals the start of the resistance 's uprising after one of his Antlions accidentally kills a Combine police officer . During the fighting , he accompanies Freeman himself and mingles with resistance members , aids the Combine in the capture of Alyx Vance , one of Freeman 's allies , and reunites with Norman Frohman , his long @-@ lost assassin twin brother , only to promptly witness his death at the hands of a Strider , a large tripodal assault synth . 
 Following this , Gordon returns to the Citadel , unwillingly aiding Freeman in his journey up the Citadel and influencing the plot of the game . As Freeman is pursuing Dr. Breen to his teleporter , Frohman is about to kill Freeman — but he pauses to come up with the perfect one @-@ liner for the occasion , causing him to run out of time ; Dr. Breen 's teleporter explodes and Frohman is flung off the Citadel peak by the explosion . Dr. Breen also survives , having fallen from the Citadel onto a pile of dead Combine soldiers . However , Frohman falls right onto Breen , killing him . Gordon himself is only seriously injured . Baffled by his ability to survive , he realizes through a flashback that he has been under " Buddha Mode " , a cheat code which prevents his health points from dropping below one throughout the comic 's duration . Frohman inadvertently turns off the mode , and even spoils an opportunity to be rescued by a group of Vortigaunts , as both Gordon Freeman and Alyx Vance are at the start of Episode One . In the end , Frohman dies unceremoniously , while survivors of the City 17 uprising find him dead . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Livingston stated that the comic was a good way of pointing out several shortcomings of video games and first @-@ person shooters in particular . He emphasized the presence of various objects throughout the levels of games which were intended to aid the player , but would have little chance of being found in the real world in a similar manner . 
 There 's a lot of elements about video games to poke fun of , especially in first @-@ person shooters , which all have a lot of things in common , such as health kits , ammo , and barrels filled with explosive material strewn about levels for no practical , real @-@ world reason . It just seemed like a good setting to make jokes . 
 Much of the comic 's dark humor is derived from its contrasts with Half @-@ Life 2 : in a depressing , dark vision of a conquered humanity 's future , Gordon Freeman becomes a hero and savior ; the similarly named Gordon Frohman , on the other hand , is just an average person , improbably cheerful to the point of stupidity , and somewhat naïve as to what is actually going on around him . For instance , Frohman fails to realize that his return @-@ addressed letters to Doctor Breen reveal his location , and so result in that location being invaded , bombed , or otherwise compromised . 
 The comic contains many references to events and objects in the game . In one comic , Frohman makes a clerical error that causes the Combine to order far too many explosive barrels , thus suggesting an explanation for the barrels ' ubiquity throughout City 17 and beyond . In another , he writes a letter to Dr. Breen asking why using his flashlight reduces his ability to run , a reference to Half @-@ Life 2 's flashlight and sprint functions using the same power source . In a further strip , the town of Ravenholm becomes the headcrab @-@ infested ghost town seen in Half @-@ Life 2 after Frohman writes to Breen expressing his happiness with being there , giving away Ravenholm 's location . Indeed , Frohman causes ( intentionally or accidentally ) many of the disastrous circumstances that Gordon Freeman runs across . He accidentally gives Breen the idea of headcrab shells while on a radio , and sets up all of the traps in Ravenholm himself in an attempt to catch Father Grigori . 
 It is also revealed that , at the Black Mesa Research Facility , Frohman causes the resonance cascade that allows for alien forces to invade in Half @-@ Life by accidentally delivering a wedge of cheese , instead of the intended test sample , to the test chamber where the cascade <unk> . Half @-@ Life : Decay , however , indicates that Dr. Gina Cross is responsible for this task . Livingston admitted he did not play Decay , and thus was not aware of its storyline . He also stated that the comic takes place in the PC version of the Half @-@ life continuity , and since Half @-@ Life : Decay was never published for the PC , it does not affect the comic . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The comic has had positive reception from both the public and editors of various gaming magazines . The Globe and Mail stated the comic " stands out from most other <unk> ( comics consisting of game screenshots ) by virtue of the quality of its writing and presentation " . Online magazine <unk> said that " Concerned is one of the funnier online gaming comics , and perhaps the best single @-@ game parody in the bunch " , and The Irish Gamers described Concerned as a " hit webcomic " . Computer Gaming World called the comic " funny " , while PC Zone described it as " mildly amusing " . The comic had also caught the attention of reviewers outside the United States and the United Kingdom ; the Romanian magazine Level said the comic is " a recommendation to every fan of the game and anyone looking for a good daily laugh " . 
 The comic 's popularity , as well as the fact that Livingston stated he does not intend to continue the comic through Half @-@ Life 2 : Episode One , led to the appearance of an unofficial sequel to Concerned , entitled Concerned 2 : A Concerned Rip @-@ Off : The Continuing Adventures of Gordon Frohman , and created by Norman N. Black , although it is currently on an undisclosed hiatus since November 28 , 2010 . 
 = Big Stick ideology = 
 Big Stick ideology , Big Stick diplomacy , or Big Stick policy refers to U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt ’ s foreign policy : " speak softly , and carry a big stick . " Roosevelt described his style of foreign policy as " the exercise of intelligent forethought and of decisive action sufficiently far in advance of any likely crisis " . 
 The idea of negotiating peacefully , simultaneously threatening with the " big stick " , or the military , ties in heavily with the idea of Realpolitik , which implies a pursuit of political power that resembles Machiavellian ideals . Compare to the term Gunboat diplomacy , as used in international politics by imperial powers . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first recorded use of the phrase occurs in a private letter from Roosevelt ( then governor of New York ) to Henry L. Sprague , dated January 26 , 1900 . Roosevelt wrote , in a bout of happiness after forcing New York 's Republican committee to pull support away from a corrupt financial adviser : 
 I have always been fond of the West African proverb : " Speak softly and carry a big stick ; you will go far . " 
 Roosevelt would go on to be elected Vice President later that year , and subsequently used the aphorism publicly in an address to the Minnesota State Fair , entitled " National Duties " , on September 2 , 1901 . : 
 A good many of you are probably acquainted with the old proverb : " Speak softly and carry a big stick -- you will go far . " 
 Four days later , President William McKinley was shot by an assassin ; his death a further eight days later elevated Roosevelt to the presidency . 
 Roosevelt 's attribution of the phrase to " a West African proverb " was seen at the time as evidence of Roosevelt ’ s " prolific " reading habits , but the claim that it originated in West Africa has been disputed . No earlier citation for the phrase has been found , and there is no record of the phrase being used in West Africa before Roosevelt 's time . It has been therefore suggested that he might have coined the phrase himself . 
 = = Usage = = 
 Although used before his presidency , Roosevelt used military muscle several times throughout his two terms with a more subtle touch to complement his diplomatic policies and enforcing the Monroe Doctrine throughout multiple interventions in Latin America . This included the Great White Fleet , 16 battleships which peacefully circumnavigated the globe as an illustration of United States ' rising yet neutral prestige under Roosevelt 's direction . 
 = = = In the U.S. = = = 
 = = = = Anthracite coal strike = = = = 
 In 1902 , 140 @,@ 000 miners went on strike , wanting higher pay , shorter work hours , and better housing . They were led by John Mitchell , a fellow miner who formed the United Mine Workers ( UMW ) . The mining companies refused to meet the demands of the UMW and contacted the Federal Government for support . Before Roosevelt , the government would send in military support to forcefully end the strike , but during Roosevelt 's terms , this strategy was not used . After the companies called for assistance , Roosevelt , fearful of the effects a coal shortage would have on the economy of the time , decided to host a meeting in the White House involving representatives or delegates , of the miners and the leaders of the mining companies . Mitchell , after returning from the White House meeting , met with the miners , and drew a Consensus . The miners decided not to submit to political pressure , and continue on with the strike . Roosevelt then decided to bring in the military , but , instead of forcefully ending the strike and restoring power to the mining companies , he would use the military to run the mines in the " public interest " . The mining companies , upset that they were no longer directly making a profit , then accepted the demands of the UMW . This policy was later referred to as the " Square Deal " . 
 = = = Latin America = = = 
 = = = = Venezuelan Affair ( 1902 ) and the Roosevelt Corollary = = = = 
 In the early 20th century , Venezuela was receiving messages from Britain and Germany about " Acts of violence against the liberty of British subjects and the massive capture of British vessels " who were from the UK and the acts of Venezuelan initiative to pay off long @-@ standing debts . After British and German forces took naval action with a blockade on Venezuela ( 1902 – 1903 ) , Roosevelt denounced the blockade . The blockade began the basis of the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe doctrine . Though he had mentioned the basis of his idea beforehand in private letters , he officially announced the corollary in 1904 , stating that he only wanted the " other republics on this continent " to be " happy and prosperous " . For that goal to be met , the corollary required that they " maintain order within their borders and behave with a just obligation toward outsiders " . 
 Most historians , such as one of Roosevelt 's many biographers Howard K. Beale have summarized that the corollary was influenced by Roosevelt 's personal beliefs as well as his connections to foreign bondholders . The U.S. public was very " tense " during the two @-@ month blockade , and Roosevelt requested that Britain and Germany pull out their forces from the area . During the requests for the blockade ’ s end , Roosevelt stationed naval forces in Cuba , to ensure " the respect of Monroe doctrine " and the compliance of the parties in question . The doctrine was never ratified by the senate or brought up for a vote to the American public . Roosevelt 's declaration was the first of many presidential decrees in the twentieth century that were never ratified . 
 = = = = Canal diplomacy = = = = 
 The U.S. used the " big stick " during " Canal Diplomacy " , the questionable diplomatic actions of the U.S. during the pursuit of a canal across Central America . Both Nicaragua and Panama featured canal related incidents of Big Stick Diplomacy . 
 = = = = = Proposed construction of the Nicaragua Canal = = = = = 
 In 1901 , Secretary of State John Hay pressed the Nicaraguan Government for approval of a canal . Nicaragua would receive $ 1 @.@ 5 million in ratification , $ 100 @,@ 000 annually , and the U.S. would " provide sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity " . Nicaragua then returned the contract draft with a change ; they wished to receive , instead of an annual $ 100 @,@ 000 , $ 6 million in ratification . The U.S. accepted the deal , but after Congress approved the contract a problem of court jurisdiction came up . The U.S. did not have legal jurisdiction in the land of the future canal . An important note is that this problem was on the verge of correction , until Pro @-@ Panama representatives posed problems for Nicaragua ; the current leader ( General José Santos Zelaya ) did not cause problems , from the outlook of U.S. interests . 
 = = = = = Construction of the Panama Canal = = = = = 
 In 1899 , the Isthmian Canal Commission was set up to determine which site would be best for the canal ( Nicaragua or Panama ) and then to oversee construction of the canal . After Nicaragua was ruled out , Panama was the obvious choice . A few problems had arisen , however . With the U.S. ' solidified interests in Panama ( then a small portion of Colombia ) , both Colombia and the French company that was to provide the construction materials raised their prices . The U.S. , refusing to pay the higher @-@ than @-@ expected fees , " engineered a revolution " in Colombia . On November 3 , 1903 , Panama ( with the support of the United States Navy ) revolted against Colombia . Panama became a new republic , receiving $ 10 million from the U.S. alone . Panama also gained an annual payment of $ 250 @,@ 000 , and guarantees of independence . The U.S. gained the rights to the canal strip " in perpetuity " . Roosevelt later said that he " took the Canal , and let Congress debate " . After Colombia lost Panama , they tried to appeal to the U.S. by the reconsidering of treaties and even naming Panama City the capital of Colombia . 
 = = = = Cuba = = = = 
 The U.S. , after the Spanish – American War , had many expansionists who wanted to annex Cuba . Many people felt that a foreign power ( outside of the U.S. ) would control a portion of Cuba , thus the U.S. could not continue with its interests in Cuba . Although many advocated annexation , this was prevented by the Teller Amendment , which states " hereby disclaims any disposition of intention to exercise sovereignty , jurisdiction , or control over said island except for pacification thereof , and asserts its determination , when that is accomplished , to leave the government and control of the island to its people . " When summarized , this could mean that the U.S. would not interfere with Cuba and its peoples . The expansionists argued though , that the Teller Amendment was created " ignorant of actual conditions " and that this released the U.S. from its obligation . Following the debate surrounding the Teller Amendment , the Platt Amendment took effect . The Platt Amendment ( the name is a misnomer ; the Platt Amendment is actually a rider to the Army Appropriation Act of 1901 ) was accepted by Cuba in late 1901 , after " strong pressure " from Washington . The Platt Amendment , summarized by Thomas A. Bailey in " Diplomatic History of the American People " : 
 Cuba was not to make decisions impairing her independence or to permit a foreign power [ e.g. , Germany ] to secure lodgment in control over the island . 
 Cuba pledged herself not to incur an indebtedness beyond her means [ It might result in foreign intervention ] . 
 The United States was at liberty to intervene for the purpose of preserving order and maintaining Cuban independence . 
 Cuba would agree to an American @-@ sponsored sanitation program [ Aimed largely at yellow fever ] . 
 Cuba would agree to sell or lease to the United States sites for naval or coaling stations [ Guantánamo became the principal base ] . 
 With Platt Amendment in place , Roosevelt pulled the troops out of Cuba . This action was met with public unrest and outcries for annexation , with reasons ranging from " U.S. interests " to " dominant white race " . The Indianapolis News said , " It is manifest destiny for a nation to own the islands which border its shores . " A year later , Roosevelt wrote , 
 Just at the moment I am so angry with that infernal little Cuban republic that I would like to wipe its people off the face of the earth . All that we wanted from them was that they would behave themselves and be prosperous and happy so that we would not have to interfere . 
 = = = = Japan = = = = 
 At the conclusion of the Russo @-@ Japanese War in September 1905 , President Roosevelt leveraged his position as a strong but impartial leader in order to negotiate a peace treaty between the two nations . " Speaking softly " earned the President enough prestige to even merit a Nobel Peace Prize the following year for his efforts . 
 = Eadbald of Kent = 
 Eadbald ( Old English : <unk> ) was King of Kent from 616 until his death in 640 . He was the son of King Æthelberht and his wife Bertha , a daughter of the Merovingian king Charibert . Æthelberht made Kent the dominant force in England during his reign and became the first Anglo @-@ Saxon king to convert to Christianity from Anglo @-@ Saxon paganism . Eadbald 's accession was a significant setback for the growth of the church , since he retained his indigenous paganism and did not convert to Christianity for at least a year , and perhaps for as much as eight years . He was ultimately converted by either Laurentius or Justus , and separated from his first wife , who had been his stepmother , at the insistence of the church . Eadbald 's second wife was Emma , who may have been a Frankish princess . She bore him two sons , Eormenred and Eorcenberht , and a daughter , <unk> . 
 Eadbald 's influence was less than his father 's , but Kent was powerful enough to be omitted from the list of kingdoms dominated by Edwin of Northumbria . Edwin 's marriage to Eadbald 's sister , Æthelburg , established a good relationship between Kent and Northumbria which appears to have continued into Oswald 's reign . When Æthelburg fled to Kent on Edwin 's death in about 633 , she sent her children to Francia for safety , fearing the intrigues of both Eadbald and Oswald . The Kentish royal line made several strong diplomatic marriages over the succeeding years , including the marriage of Eanflæd , Eadbald 's niece , to Oswiu , and of Eorcenberht to Seaxburh , daughter of King Anna of East Anglia . 
 Eadbald died in 640 and was buried in the Church of St Mary , which he had built in the precincts of the monastery of St Peter and St Paul in Canterbury ( a church later incorporated within the Norman edifice of St Augustine 's ) . At that time , his relics were translated for reburial in the south transept ca . A.D. 1087 . 
 He was succeeded by Eorcenberht . Eormenred may have been his oldest son , but if he reigned at all it was only as a junior king . 
 = = Early Kent and early sources = = 
 Settlement of Kent by continental peoples , primarily Jutes , was complete by the end of the sixth century . Eadbald 's father , Æthelberht , probably came to the throne in about 589 or 590 , though the chronology of his reign is very difficult to determine accurately . Æthelberht was recorded by the early chronicler Bede as having overlordship , or imperium , over other Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms . This dominance led to wealth in the form of tribute , and Kent was a powerful kingdom at the time of Æthelberht 's death in 616 , with trade well @-@ established with the European mainland . 
 Roman Britain had become fully Christianized , but the Anglo @-@ Saxons retained their native faith . In 597 Augustine was sent by Pope Gregory I to England to convert them to Christianity . Augustine landed in eastern Kent , and soon managed to convert Æthelberht , who gave Augustine land in Canterbury . Two other rulers , Sæberht , king of Essex , and Rædwald , king of East Anglia , were converted through Æthelberht 's influence . 
 An important source for this period in Kentish history is The Ecclesiastical History of the English People , written in 731 by Bede , a Benedictine monk from Northumbria . Bede was primarily interested in the Christianization of England , but he also provides substantial information about secular history , including the reigns of Æthelberht and Eadbald . One of Bede 's correspondents was Albinus , abbot of the monastery of St. Peter and St. Paul ( subsequently renamed St. Augustine 's ) in Canterbury . A series of related texts known as the Legend of St Mildrith provides additional information about events in the lives of Eadbald 's children and throws some light on Eadbald himself . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , a collection of annals assembled in about 890 in the kingdom of Wessex , also provides information . Other sources include papal letters , regnal lists of the kings of Kent , and early charters . Charters were documents drawn up to record grants of land by kings to their followers or to the church , and they provide some of the earliest documentary sources in England . None survive in original form from Eadbald 's reign , but some later copies exist . 
 = = Ancestry and immediate family = = 
 The ancestry of Æthelberht , Eadbald 's father , is given by Bede , who states that he was descended from the legendary founder of Kent , Hengist . However , historians believe that Hengist and his brother Horsa were probably mythical figures . It is known that Æthelberht married twice as Eadbald married his step @-@ mother after his father 's death , to the consternation of the church . 
 Eadbald had a sister , Æthelburg , who was probably also the child of Bertha . Æthelburg married Edwin , King of Northumbria , one of the dominant Anglo @-@ Saxon kings of the seventh century . It is possible that there was another brother , named Æthelwald : the evidence for this is a papal letter to Justus , archbishop of Canterbury from 619 to 625 , in which a king named Aduluald is referred to , and who is apparently different from <unk> , which refers to Eadbald . There is no agreement among modern scholars on how to interpret this : " Aduluald " might be intended as a representation of " Æthelwald " , and hence this may be an indication of another king , perhaps a subking of west Kent ; or it may be merely a scribal error which should be read as referring to Eadbald . 
 Archbishop Laurence of Canterbury persuaded Eadbald to accept Christianity and give up his wife . He then remarried , and his second wife , according to Kentish tradition recorded in the ' Kentish Royal Legend ' , was a woman named Ymme of Frankish royal blood , though recently it has been suggested that she may have instead been the daughter of Erchinoald , mayor of the palace in Neustria , the western part of Francia . 
 = = East and West Kent = = 
 The surviving regnal lists show only one king reigning at a time in Kent , but subkingdoms were common among the Anglo @-@ Saxons and from the reign of Hlothhere , in the late seventh century , there is evidence that Kent was usually ruled by two kings , though often one is clearly dominant . It is less clear that this is the case before Hlothhere . Forged charters preserve a tradition of Eadbald ruling during his father 's reign , presumably as a subking over west Kent . The papal letter that has been interpreted as indicating the existence of Æthelwald , a brother of Eadbald 's , refers to Æthelwald as a king ; if he existed , he would presumably have been a junior king to Eadbald . 
 The two kingdoms within Kent were east and west Kent . Western Kent has fewer archaeological finds from the earliest periods than east Kent , and the eastern finds are somewhat distinct in character , showing Jutish and Frankish influence . The archaeological evidence , combined with the known political division into two kingdoms , makes it likely that the origin of the subkingdoms was the conquest of the western half by the eastern , which would have been the first area settled by the invaders . 
 = = Accession and pagan reaction = = 
 Eadbald came to the throne on the death of his father on 24 February 616 , or possibly 618 . Although Æthelberht had been Christian since about 600 and his wife Bertha was also Christian , Eadbald was a pagan . Bertha died some time before Eadbald 's accession , and Æthelberht remarried . The name of Æthelberht 's second wife is not recorded , but it seems likely that she was a pagan , since on his death she married Eadbald , her stepson : a marriage between a stepmother and stepson was forbidden by the church . 
 Bede records that Eadbald 's repudiation of Christianity was a " severe setback " to the growth of the church . Sæberht , the king of Essex , had become a Christian under Æthelberht 's influence , but on Sæberht 's death , at about the same time , his sons expelled Mellitus , the bishop of London . According to Bede , Eadbald was punished for his <unk> by " frequent fits of insanity " , and possession by an " evil spirit " ( perhaps referring to epileptic fits ) , but was eventually persuaded to abandon paganism and give up his wife . Eadbald 's second wife , Ymme , was a Frank , and it is possible that Kent 's strong connections with Francia were a factor in the King 's conversion . The missionaries in Canterbury seem to have had Frankish support . In the 620s , Eadbald 's sister Æthelburg came to Kent , but sent her children to the court of King Dagobert I in Francia ; in addition to the diplomatic connections , trade with the Franks was important to Kent . It is thought likely that Frankish pressure had been influential in persuading Æthelberht to become Christian , and Eadbald 's conversion and marriage to Ymme are likely to have been closely connected diplomatic decisions . 
 Two graves from a well @-@ preserved sixth and seventh @-@ century Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery at <unk> have yielded a bronze pendant and a gilt buckle with designs that are related to each other and may be symbolic of religious activity involving the Germanic deity Woden . These objects probably date from the period of the pagan reaction . 
 = = = Bede 's account = = = 
 Bede 's account of Eadbald 's rejection of the church and subsequent conversion is quite detailed but not without some internal inconsistency . Bede 's version of events are laid out as follows : 
 24 February 616 : Æthelberht dies and Eadbald succeeds . 
 616 : Eadbald leads a pagan reaction to Christianity . He marries his stepmother , contrary to church law , and refuses baptism . At about this time Mellitus , bishop of London , is expelled by the sons of Sæberht in Essex and goes to Kent . 
 616 : Mellitus and Justus , bishop of Rochester , leave Kent for Francia . 
 616 / 617 : Some time after Mellitus and Justus depart , Laurence , the archbishop of Canterbury , plans to leave for Francia but has a vision in which St Peter scourges him . In the morning he shows the scars to Eadbald who is converted to Christianity as a result . 
 617 : Justus and Mellitus both return from Francia " the year after they left " . Justus is restored to Rochester . 
 c . 619 : Laurence dies , and Mellitus becomes archbishop of Canterbury . 
 619 – 624 : Eadbald builds a church which is consecrated by Archbishop Mellitus . 
 24 April 624 : Mellitus dies and Justus succeeds him as archbishop of Canterbury . 
 624 : After Justus 's succession , Pope Boniface writes to him to say that he has heard in letters from King Aduluald ( possibly a scribal error for Eadbald ) of the king 's conversion to Christianity . Boniface sends the pallium with this letter , adding that it is only to be worn when celebrating " the Holy Mysteries " . 
 By 625 Edwin of Deira , king of Northumbria , asks for the hand in marriage of Æthelburg , Eadbald 's sister . Edwin is told he must allow her to practice Christianity and must consider baptism himself . 
 21 July 625 : Justus consecrates Paulinus bishop of York . 
 July or later in 625 : Edwin agrees to the terms and Æthelburg travels to Northumbria , accompanied by Paulinus . 
 Easter 626 : Æthelburg gives birth to a daughter , Eanflæd . 
 626 : Edwin completes a military campaign against the West Saxons . At " about this time " Boniface writes to both Edwin and Æthelburg . The letter to Edwin urges him to accept Christianity and refers to the conversion of Eadbald . The letter to Æthelburg mentions that the pope has recently heard the news of Eadbald 's conversion and encourages her to work for the conversion of her husband , Edwin . 
 = = = Alternative chronology = = = 
 Although Bede 's narrative is widely accepted , an alternative chronology has been proposed by D.P. Kirby . Kirby points out that Boniface 's letter to Æthelburg makes it clear that the news of Eadbald 's conversion is recent , and that it is unthinkable that Boniface would not have been kept up to date on the status of Eadbald 's conversion . Hence Eadbald must have been converted by Justus , as is implied by Boniface 's letter to Justus . The pallium accompanying that letter indicates Justus was archbishop by that time , and the duration of Mellitus 's archiepiscopate means that even if Bede 's dates are somewhat wrong in other particulars , Eadbald was converted no earlier than 621 , and no later than April 624 , since Mellitus consecrated a church for Eadbald before his death in that month . The account of Laurence 's miraculous scourging by St Peter can be disregarded as a later hagiographical invention of the monastery of St Augustine . 
 As mentioned above , it has been suggested that King " Aduluald " in the letter to Justus is a real king Æthelwald , perhaps a junior king of west Kent . In that case it would appear that Laurence converted Eadbald , and Justus converted Æthelwald . It has also been suggested that the pallium did not indicate Justus was archbishop , since Justus is told the limited circumstances in which he may wear it ; however , the same phrasing occurs in the letter conveying the pallium to Archbishop Augustine , also quoted in Bede . Another possibility is that the letter was originally two letters . In this view , Bede has conflated the letter conveying the pallium with the letter congratulating Justus on the conversion , which according to Bede 's account was seven or so years earlier ; but the grammatical details on which this suggestion is based are not unique to this letter , and as a result it is usually considered to be a single composition . 
 The letter to Æthelburg makes it clear that she was already married at the time the news of Eadbald 's conversion reached Rome . This is quite inconsistent with the earlier date Bede gives for Eadbald 's acceptance of Christianity , and it has been suggested in Bede 's defence that Æthelburg married Edwin substantially earlier and stayed in Kent until 625 before travelling to Rome , and that the letter was written while she was in Kent . However , it would appear from Boniface 's letter that Boniface thought of Æthelburg as being at her husband 's side . It also appears that the letter to Justus was written after the letters to Edwin and Æthelburg , rather than before , as Bede has it ; Boniface 's letter to Edwin and Æthelburg indicates he had the news from messengers , but when he wrote to Justus he had heard from the king himself . 
 The story of Æthelburg 's marriage being dependent on Edwin allowing her to practice her faith has been questioned , since revising the chronology makes it likely , though not certain , that the marriage was arranged before Eadbald 's conversion . In this view , it would have been the church that objected to the marriage , and Æthelburg would have been Christian before Eadbald 's conversion . The story of Paulinus 's consecration is also problematic as he was not consecrated until at least 625 and possibly later , which is after the latest possible date for Æthelburg 's marriage . However , it may be that he traveled to Northumbria prior to his consecration and only later became bishop . 
 A revised chronology of some of these events follows , taking the above considerations into account . 
 616 : Eadbald leads a pagan reaction to Christianity . 
 616 : Mellitus and Justus , bishop of Rochester , leave Kent for Francia . 
 c . 619 : Laurence dies , and Mellitus becomes archbishop of Canterbury . 
 Early 624 ? : Justus converts Eadbald . Messengers go to Rome . Also at about this time Æthelburg 's marriage to Edwin is arranged , perhaps before the conversion . Eadbald builds a church , and Mellitus consecrates it . 
 24 April 624 : Mellitus dies and Justus succeeds him as archbishop of Canterbury . 
 Mid 624 : Edwin agrees to the marriage terms and Æthelburg travels to Northumbria , accompanied by Paulinus . 
 Later 624 : the pope receives news of Eadbald 's conversion and writes to Æthelburg and Edwin . 
 Still later 624 : the pope hears from Eadbald of his conversion , and also hears of Mellitus 's death . He writes to Justus to send him the pallium . 
 21 July 625 or 626 : Justus consecrates Paulinus bishop of York . 
 This timeline extends the duration of the pagan reaction from less than a year , in Bede 's narrative , to about eight years . This represents a more serious setback for the church . 
 = = Relations with other English kingdoms and church affairs = = 
 Eadbald 's influence over other Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms was less than Æthelberht 's . Eadbald 's reduced power is apparent in his inability to restore Mellitus to the see of London : in Bede 's words , his authority in Essex " was not so effective as that of his father " . However , Kentish power was still sufficient to make alliance with Eadbald 's relatives attractive to other kingdoms . Edwin 's marriage to Eadbald 's sister , Æthelburg , was probably also motivated by a desire to gain better access to communications with the continent . The relationship would have been valuable to Eadbald , too ; it may have been as a result of this alliance that Edwin 's overlordship of Britain did not include Kent . Another factor in Edwin 's treatment of Kent may have been the location of the archbishopric in Canterbury : Edwin was well aware of the importance of Canterbury 's metropolitan status , and at one time planned to make York an archbishopric too , with Paulinus as the planned first incumbent . Paulinus eventually returned to Kent , where at Eadbald 's and Archbishop Honorius 's request he became bishop of Rochester , and York was not made an archbishopric for another century . Within a year of Edwin 's death in 633 or 634 , Oswald took the throne of Northumbria , and it seems likely that his relations with Eadbald were modelled on Edwin 's . Oswald 's successor , Oswiu , married Eanflæd , who was Edwin 's daughter and Eadbald 's niece , thereby gaining both Deiran and Kentish connections . 
 Eadbald and Ymme had a daughter , <unk> ( who founded the very first nunnery on English soil at Folkestone , 15 miles from Canterbury ) , and two sons , Eorcenberht and Eormenred . Eormenred was the older of the two , and may have held the title of regulus , perhaps implying that he held the junior kingship of Kent . He appears to have died before his father , leaving Eorcenberht to inherit the throne . An additional son , Ecgfrith , is mentioned in a charter of Eadbald 's , but the charter is a forgery , probably dating from the eleventh century . 
 Several of Eadbald 's near relatives were involved in diplomatic marriages . King Anna of East Anglia married his daughter , Seaxburh , to Eorcenberht , and their daughter Eormenhild married Wulfhere of Mercia , one of the most powerful kings of his day . Eanflæd , Eadbald 's niece , married Oswiu , king of Northumbria and the last of the northern Angles Bede listed as holding imperium over southern England . Eadbald 's granddaughter Eafe married Merewalh , king of the Magonsæte . 
 = = Trade and connections to the Franks = = 
 There is little documentary evidence about the nature of trade in Eadbald 's reign . It is known that the kings of Kent had established royal control of trade in the late seventh century , but it is not known how early this control began . There is archaeological evidence that suggests that the royal influence predates any of the written sources , and it may have been Eadbald 's father , Æthelberht , who took control of trade away from the aristocracy and made it a royal monopoly . The continental trade provided Kent access to luxury goods , which was an advantage in trading with the other Anglo @-@ Saxon nations , and the revenue from trade was important in itself . Kent traded locally made glass and jewelry to the Franks ; Kentish goods have been found as far south as the mouth of the Loire , south of Brittany . There was probably also a flourishing slave trade . The wealth this commerce brought to Kent may have been the basis of the continuing , though diminished , importance of Kent in Eadbald 's reign . 
 Coins were probably first minted in Kent in Æthelberht 's reign , though none bear his name . These early golden coins were probably the shillings ( <unk> in Old English ) that are mentioned in Æthelberht 's laws . The coins are also known to numismatists as " <unk> " . <unk> are known from Eadbald 's reign ; but few are known that carry his name : one such was minted at London and inscribed " <unk> " . It has been suggested that kings did not have a monopoly on the production of coinage at that time . 
 Connections with Francia went beyond trade and the royal marriages Æthelberht and Eadbald made with Frankish princesses . Eadbald 's granddaughter , Eorcengota , became a nun at Faremoutiers , and his great @-@ granddaughter , Mildrith , was a nun at <unk> . When Edwin was killed in about 632 , Æthelburg , escorted by Paulinus , fled by sea to Eadbald 's court in Kent , but in a further sign of her family 's ties across the channel she sent her children to the court of King Dagobert I of the Franks , to keep them safe from the intrigues of Eadbald and Oswald of Northumbria . 
 = = Succession = = 
 Eadbald died in 640 , and according to most versions of the Kentish Royal Legend was succeeded solely by his son Eorcenberht . However , an early text ( Caligula <unk> ) refers to Eormenred as ' king ' , suggesting either he was a junior king under Eorcenberht , or had a shared kingship . One suggestion is that the some other version of events in the ' legend ' , which give him no title , may have been an attempt to discredit royal claimants from Eormenred 's line . 
 = Cape Feare = 
 " Cape Feare " is the second episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 7 , 1993 , and has since been featured on DVD and VHS releases . Written by Jon Vitti and directed by Rich Moore , " Cape Feare " features the return of guest star Kelsey Grammer as Sideshow Bob , who tries to kill Bart Simpson after getting out of jail . " Cape Feare " is a spoof of the 1962 film Cape Fear and its 1991 remake ( which in turn are both based on John D. MacDonald 's 1957 novel The Executioners ) , and alludes to other horror films such as Psycho . 
 The episode was pitched by Wallace Wolodarsky , who wanted to parody Cape Fear . Originally produced for the fourth season , it was held over to the fifth season and was also the last episode to be produced by the show 's original writers , most of whom subsequently left after this episode . The production crew found it difficult to stretch " Cape Feare " to the standard duration of half an hour , and consequently padded certain scenes . In one particular sequence , Sideshow Bob repeatedly steps on rakes , the handles of which then hit him in the face ; this scene became one of the show 's most memorable moments . The episode is generally considered one of the best of the entire series , and the score received an Emmy Award nomination . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After receiving numerous death threats in the mail , Bart becomes paranoid . It is revealed that the writer is his enemy , Sideshow Bob , who is incarcerated in Springfield State Prison . The next day , Sideshow Bob 's parole hearing is held ; the parole board is easily convinced that Sideshow Bob is no longer a threat . When the Simpson family goes to the cinema , Sideshow Bob sits in front of them and acts obnoxious . The Simpsons then realize that it was him who sent the letters , and Marge angrily tells him to stay away from Bart. 
 The Simpsons opt for the Witness Relocation Program and relocate to Terror Lake , changing their surname to " Thompson " and settling in a houseboat . However , unknown to the family as they drive cross @-@ country to their new home , Sideshow Bob has strapped himself to the underside of the car . 
 During the night , Sideshow Bob reaches the houseboat and cuts it loose from the dock . Bob then ties up Homer , Marge , Lisa , and Maggie , to ensure they will not interfere with his plan . Bob enters Bart 's room , ready to kill him . Bart escapes out the window and tries to escape , but he cannot jump off the boat . As a " last request " , he has an idea : he compliments Sideshow Bob on his beautiful voice and asks him to sing the entire score of the H.M.S. Pinafore , to stall for time as the houseboat floats to Springfield . After the performance , Bob advances on Bart again , but the boat runs aground , and Sideshow Bob is arrested , and the Simpsons return home . 
 = = Production = = 
 Sideshow Bob is a recurring character on The Simpsons . Since season three 's " Black Widower " ( 1992 ) , the writers have echoed the premise of Wile E. Coyote chasing the Road Runner from the 1949 – 1966 Looney Tunes cartoons by having Bob unexpectedly insert himself into Bart 's life and attempt to kill him . Executive producer Al Jean has compared Bob 's character to that of Wile E. Coyote , noting that both are intelligent , yet always foiled by what they perceive as an inferior intellect . The scene in which Bob is stomped on by multiple elephants and bounced right back up is a reference to the Wile E. Coyote character . 
 In Planet Simpson , author Chris Turner writes that Bob is built into a highbrow snob and conservative Republican so that the writers can continually hit him with a rake and bring him down . He represents high culture while Krusty , one of his archenemies , represents low culture , and Bart , stuck in between , always wins out . In the book Leaving Springfield , David L. G. Arnold comments that Bart is a product of a " mass @-@ culture upbringing " and thus is Bob 's enemy . 
 Bob 's intelligence serves him in many ways . During this episode , for example , the parole board asks Bob why he has a tattoo that says " Die Bart , Die " . Bob replies that it is German for " The Bart , The " . The board members are impressed and release him because " no one who speaks German could be an evil man " ( an allusion to Adolf Hitler ) . However , his love of high culture is sometimes used against him . In the same episode , Bob agrees to perform the operetta H.M.S. Pinafore in its entirety as a last request for Bart. The tactic stalls Bob long enough for the police to arrest him . 
 Even though the episode aired during the beginning of the fifth season , it was produced by the crew of the fourth season . A large part of the original crew left the show after season four . This led to the addition of several scenes , which normally would not have been considered , because the mentality of the departing crew was " what are they going to do , get us fired ? " Although most of the episode was completed by the staff of season four , the end was rewritten by the team of season five . 
 Wallace Wolodarsky had seen the 1991 version of Cape Fear and pitched the idea of spoofing the film . Jon Vitti was then assigned to write a parody of the original Cape Fear film from 1962 as well as the remake ( both films are based on the 1957 novel by John D. MacDonald , entitled The Executioners ) . Instead of using the spoof as only a part of the episode , which could have contained a B @-@ story , the entire episode was devoted to this parody . Sideshow Bob was cast as the villain and Bart became the main victim . The episode followed the same basic plot outline as the films and used elements from the original film 's score by Bernard Herrmann ( which was also used in the 1991 version ) , which , after this episode , became Sideshow Bob 's theme . This episode marked the first time a Sideshow Bob episode was not a mystery . 
 There were difficulties getting this episode up to the minimum length of an episode and many scenes were added in post @-@ production . The episode starts with a repeat of a couch gag that was first used in the episode " Lisa 's First Word " , which is considerably longer than the typical couch gag . The crew added an Itchy & Scratchy cartoon and a few misleads as to who was trying to kill Bart. Even with all of these additions , the episode still ran short of time . This led to the creation of the rake sequence , which became a memorable moment of the episode , and the entire series . Originally , Sideshow Bob was only supposed to step on one rake after he stepped out from the underside of the Simpson family 's car , but this was changed to nine rakes in a row . According to executive producer Al Jean , the idea was to make the scene funny , then drag the joke out so that it is no longer funny , and then drag it out even longer to make it funny again . 
 Additions to the end musical number , including visual gags such as Bob appearing in uniform , were added after the animatics . The crew felt that watching the character singing would not be interesting enough and they had to include these gags to make it work . The Simpsons creator Matt Groening was surprised when he saw the additions , because he originally thought they were silly and would not appear in the final cut , but he has grown to like them . 
 American actor Kelsey Grammer was brought in to guest star as Sideshow Bob for the third time . At that time , Grammer had become a household name as the lead of the television series Frasier , which was in production at the same time as this episode . Grammer did not know that the rake scene was extended , because he had only done the moan once and was surprised when he saw the final product . The show 's writers admire Grammer 's singing voice , and try to include a song for each appearance including this episode . Alf Clausen , the primary composer for The Simpsons , commented that " [ Grammer ] is so great . He 's just amazing . You can tell he has this love of musical theater and he has the vocal instrument to go with it , so I know whatever I write is going to be sung the way I 've heard it . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Besides borrowing the overall plot structure of the Cape Fear films , the episode made several direct references to specific scenes from the films . References to the original include : Marge going to Chief Wiggum only to be told that Sideshow Bob has not broken any laws ( also references the 1991 remake ) . References to the 1991 remake include : Sideshow Bob 's tattoos ; the shot of him leaving the prison gate ; the scene with him smoking in the movie theater ; part of his " workout " scene ; his hiding under the Simpson family 's car ; Wiggum 's rigging wire around the house to a toy doll as an alarm ; his suggestion that Homer can do anything to someone who enters his home ; Bob , strapped under a car , pulling up beside Bart for a conversation ; and Homer 's hiring a private investigator who attempts to persuade Bob to leave town . 
 The episode also contains elements of Alfred Hitchcock 's 1960 film Psycho with Sideshow Bob staying at Bates Motel . Homer surprising Bart with his new hockey mask recalls the film Friday the 13th Part III and Sideshow Bob 's tattoos on his knuckles are similar to those of Robert Mitchum 's character in The Night of the Hunter ( Mitchum also played the villain Max Cady in the original 1962 version of Cape Fear ) . While singing " Three Little Maids From School Are We " from The Mikado during the car trip to Terror Lake , Homer and Bart 's hats allude to I Love Lucy . The scene featuring Ned with his " finger razors " references the 1984 film A Nightmare on Elm Street and its villain Freddy Krueger ( with Flanders seemingly threatening Bart with the razors ) and the 1990 film Edward Scissorhands ( with Flanders actually using the razors to cut his hedge in the shape of an angel , just as Edward Scissorhands cuts a hedge in the shape of a dinosaur ) . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Cape Feare " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 7 , 1993 . It finished 32nd in the ratings for the week of October 4 – 10 , 1993 , with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 3 . The episode was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . " Cape Feare " was selected for release in a 1997 VHS collection of episodes titled The Simpsons : Springfield Murder Mysteries , along with " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? ( Part 1 ) " , " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? ( Part 2 ) " and " Black Widower " . It was included again in the 2005 DVD release of the Springfield Murder Mysteries . The episode is also featured on the Simpsons season five DVD set , which was released on December 21 , 2004 . Groening , Jean and Vitti participated in the DVD audio commentary for " Cape Feare " . Kelsey Grammer 's performance of H.M.S. Pinafore was later included on the album Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons . The musical score for the episode earned composer Alf Clausen an Emmy Award nomination for " Outstanding Dramatic Underscore – Series " in 1994 . 
 According to Matt Groening , people often include this episode among their top 10 favorites . In Entertainment Weekly 's top 25 The Simpsons episodes ever , it was placed third . To celebrate the show 's 300th episode " Barting Over " , USA Today published a top 10 chosen by the webmaster of The Simpsons Archive , which had this episode at a ninth place . In 2006 , IGN named " Cape Feare " the best episode of the fifth season . Vanity Fair called it the show 's fourth @-@ best episode in 2007 , as " this episode 's masterful integration of filmic parody and a recurring character puts it near the top . " James Walton of The Daily Telegraph characterized the episode as one of " The 10 Best Simpsons TV Episodes " , while the Herald Sun placed it in their " The Simpsons Top 20 " . Karl Åkerström of the Swedish newspaper Borås <unk> called it his " all @-@ time favorite " episode of the show . Michael Moran of The Times and Todd VanDerWerff of Slant Magazine both ranked " Cape Feare " as the fourth @-@ best in the show 's history . Cast member Hank Azaria cited this episode as his favorite in the series . 
 IGN 's Robert Canning gave the episode a perfect score of 10 out of 10 and named it the best Sideshow Bob episode of The Simpsons . He added that there are " many , many reasons for its perfection , but what stands out most for me was how savage and single @-@ minded Bob is in the episode . He wants to kill Bart and he makes no secret of it , save for lying to the parole board . Episodes since have made Bob far too wishy @-@ washy . This was Bob in his prime — his vengeful , glorious , hilarious prime . " Canning also placed it at # 1 on the list of the Top 10 Sideshow Bob episodes . Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club noted that the episode " turns limitations into strengths by spinning the need to fill out time into some of the series ' sharpest , funniest and weirdest gags . The Rake Effect might be its greatest gift to comedy but its virtues go far beyond that . Sideshow Bob episodes consistently rank among the show 's best and this represents the gold standard all subsequent Sideshow Bob episodes aspire to . " Empire called Bob 's mishaps while strapped under the Simpsons ' car the eighth @-@ best film parody in the show , and called the rake scene " the best bit of slapstick in Simpson history . " The parody of Cape Fear was named the 33rd greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . The Norwegian newspaper <unk> listed Sideshow Bob 's " Die Bart , die " tattoo from the episode as the fifth @-@ best tattoo in film and television history . 
 In 2012 , American playwright Anne Washburn came out with her play Mr. Burns , a Post @-@ Electric Play , which is based on this episode and features its plot as one of the main elements of the play . 
 = Michael Carrick = 
 Michael Carrick ( born 28 July 1981 ) is an English professional footballer who plays for Manchester United and the England national team . He is vice @-@ captain of Manchester United . Carrick primarily plays as a central midfielder , but he has been used as an emergency centre @-@ back under Alex Ferguson , David Moyes and Louis van Gaal . At the time of his move to Manchester United , distinctive features of his play included his inventive distribution of the ball along with his passing and crossing abilities . 
 Carrick began his career at West Ham United , joining the youth team in 1997 and winning the FA Youth Cup two years later . He was sent on loan twice during his debut season , to Swindon Town and Birmingham City , before securing a place in the first team by the 2000 – 01 season . He experienced relegation in the 2002 – 03 season and was voted into the PFA First Division Team of the Year in the following campaign . He made more than 150 appearances for the Hammers , but in 2004 , he moved to rival London club Tottenham Hotspur for a fee believed to be £ 3 @.@ 5 million . He scored twice in 75 appearances , before moving to Manchester United in 2006 for £ 18 million . 
 From his debut onwards he was a regular in the Manchester United first team , making more than 50 appearances in his first season with them . He established himself as a key member of the team that won the Premier League in 2006 – 07 , their first title success in four years . The following season he was part of the side that won the 2008 Champions League final , playing the full 120 minutes as they enjoyed a 6 – 5 penalty shootout win , with Carrick converting his spot kick , to help achieve the European Double . He enjoyed a third consecutive title triumph in the 2008 – 09 campaign , but was unable to prevent a Champions League final defeat to Barcelona . He won his first League Cup medal in 2010 , but , for the first time during his Manchester United career , he missed out on another title success as they finished runners @-@ up to Chelsea . Since then though , he has won two further league championships and three FA Community Shields . In 2016 , Carrick won the FA Cup to complete his collection of every domestic honour in the English game . 
 Carrick has represented England at under @-@ 18 , under @-@ 21 , B and senior levels . He made his England debut in 2001 and has since gained 31 caps but has yet to score an international goal . Carrick has often been overlooked during his England career , with Steven Gerrard , Frank Lampard , Paul Scholes , Gareth Barry and for a brief time Scott Parker preferred in his position . This was the case until the 2012 – 13 season , when Carrick established himself as a regular . He has been a member of the England squads for two major tournaments , the 2006 and 2010 World Cups . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Carrick was born to Vince and Lynn Carrick in Wallsend , Tyne and Wear , and first became involved in football when he was five years old . A boyhood fan of Newcastle United , he played five @-@ a @-@ side football with Wallsend Boys Club on Saturday nights , courtesy of his father 's volunteer work at the club . Football became more serious for him at the age of 12 when he was selected for Burnside High School and later on North Tyneside Schools . While playing for Wallsend Boys ' Club under 16s , he was capped for the England Boys ' club side . At the age of 13 , Carrick was profiled by the BBC children 's programme Live & Kicking episode 49 , which aired on 4 February 1995 . During his school years , and the years up until his move to West Ham United , Carrick actually played as a centre @-@ forward ; it was only at West Ham that he started to play more often as a midfielder . He studied at Wallsend 's Western Middle School and Burnside Community High School , completing his GCSE exams in 1997 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = West Ham United = = = 
 Carrick was part of the West Ham United youth squad that won the FA Youth Cup in the 1998 – 99 season . He scored twice in their two @-@ legged 9 – 0 record final victory over Coventry City . According to his manager at the time , Harry Redknapp , Carrick 's difficulty at the start of his career was mainly physical and he lost almost two seasons to injuries because of his rapid growth . He made his debut for West Ham in a 1 – 1 away draw with Jokerit in the Intertoto Cup on 24 July 1999 . His league debut came five weeks later on 28 August , when he replaced Rio Ferdinand in a 3 – 0 victory over Bradford City at Valley Parade . In November 1999 , Carrick was sent on a one @-@ month loan to Swindon Town and made his first appearance for them in a 0 – 0 draw at home with Norwich City . He scored his first ever professional career goal in a 2 – 1 defeat at home to Charlton Athletic on 23 November . He scored once more during his loan spell , netting in a 1 – 1 draw at home to Walsall on 4 December . Although he impressed during his spell he could not help the team find a much @-@ needed win during his 6 outings , playing his final game for them in a 3 – 0 defeat at Manchester City on 18 December . In February 2000 he was sent on loan again , this time to Birmingham City , making just two appearances for the Blues . Carrick returned to Upton Park and scored his first goal for West Ham United , netting the first in a 5 – 0 home win over Coventry City on 22 April . During his first season he was voted as West Ham United 's Young Player of the Year . 
 Carrick made his West Ham breakthrough in the 2000 – 01 season , playing 41 games in all competitions which included 33 games in the league . His only goal of the season came in a 1 – 1 home draw against Aston Villa on 9 December 2000 . Carrick was awarded a new , improved contract for his progress that would keep him at Upton Park until 2005 . On 20 April 2001 , he was nominated for the PFA Young Player of the Year alongside team @-@ mate Joe Cole . The award was eventually won by Liverpool 's midfielder Steven Gerrard on 29 April . For the second successive season Carrick was voted as West Ham 's Young Player of the Year . The 2001 – 02 season saw Carrick make 32 appearances for the Hammers . Carrick scored twice during this season , his first was West Ham 's only goal in a 7 – 1 loss at Blackburn Rovers on 14 October . He scored the first goal in a 2 – 1 victory over rivals Chelsea ten days later . Towards the end of the season , Carrick suffered a recurrence of a groin injury which ruled him out of the 2002 FIFA World Cup for the England squad . 
 The 2002 – 03 season was one to forget for Carrick , as West Ham were relegated from the Premier League at the end of the campaign , with Carrick playing his last game of the season in a 2 – 0 victory over Sunderland on 22 March 2003 . Rather than leave the club like team @-@ mates Joe Cole , Frédéric <unk> and Jermain Defoe , Carrick stayed with West Ham during their first season back in First Division . During the 2003 – 04 season , West Ham finished fourth on the final day to ensure a place in the play @-@ offs . However , they lost 1 – 0 in the final to Crystal Palace and were denied a return to the top flight . Carrick was included in the PFA First Division Team of the Year for the season . 
 = = = Tottenham Hotspur = = = 
 After one season outside the Premier League , Carrick felt compelled to leave the First Division , saying : " the truth is I didn 't feel I could play First Division football much longer . " He was linked with moves to a number of teams including Portsmouth , Arsenal , Everton , West Bromwich Albion and Crystal Palace before Tottenham Hotspur emerged as front @-@ runners to sign him . On 20 August , a deal was agreed between West Ham and Tottenham for the transfer of Carrick subject to a medical . Four days later , the transfer was official as Carrick joined the club for around £ 3 @.@ 5 million after the passing of a medical . He made a goalscoring appearance for the Tottenham reserves , but his first team debut for the club was delayed after suffering an injury setback on 14 September . Carrick was assigned the number 23 shirt and made his Tottenham debut on 18 October as a substitute in a 1 – 0 defeat at Portsmouth . 
 Despite being fit he was often overlooked by then @-@ manager Jacques Santini . It was unclear as to whether Santini really wanted him at all as there was much media speculation that Carrick was bought by Tottenham 's Director of Football Frank Arnesen rather than Santini . However , following the departure of Santini and the appointment of new manager Martin Jol he soon emerged as a regular starter in midfield . His first full start for Tottenham was also Jol 's first game in charge of the club away to Burnley in the League Cup on 9 November . During the game he assisted a goal for Robbie Keane as they went on to win 3 – 0 . On 18 December , he produced a display which was influential in helping Tottenham to a 5 – 1 win at home over Southampton . Carrick subsequently ended 2004 – 05 season with 29 league appearances but failed to score as they finished the table in 9th and missed out on a UEFA Cup spot . 
 On 3 December 2005 , Carrick scored his first Tottenham goal as he netted the winner in a 3 – 2 home win over Sunderland . He scored his second goal for the club on 8 April 2006 in a 2 – 1 win at home over Manchester City . On 22 April , Carrick was lauded for his performance which helped Tottenham to a 1 – 1 away draw in the North London derby against Arsenal . On 7 May , Carrick was one of 10 Tottenham players who fell ill at a hotel just before their final game of the season away to West Ham as the players suffered from apparent food poisoning . He managed to play in the game but lasted just 63 minutes in the 2 – 1 defeat to his former club . As a result of the loss rivals Arsenal beat them to fourth place in the league and the spot for the Champions League . He made more crosses and more passes than any other Tottenham player during the 2005 – 06 season , and along with Mido was joint top in assists . 
 = = = Manchester United = = = 
 = = = = 2006 – 2008 = = = = 
 On 10 June , Tottenham revealed they had rejected a bid from Manchester United for Carrick , who was seen by their manager Sir Alex Ferguson as a replacement for the departed Roy Keane , the former club captain . The following day , Tottenham manager Martin Jol insisted Carrick would be staying with the club , stating " I don 't want to lose a player like Michael , who was probably our best midfielder last season " . On 28 July , Tottenham announced that the clubs agreed a deal for the transfer of Carrick to Manchester United . Three days later , the transfer was official as personal terms were agreed with Carrick . Despite agreeing a deal for the player the previous week – the fee was not made public until Spurs issued a statement to the stock exchange . Manchester United 's chief executive David Gill confirmed the transfer fee as £ 14 million , potentially rising to £ 18 @.@ 6 million , which would make Carrick the sixth most expensive player acquired by Manchester United at the time . He was given the number 16 shirt , previously worn by Keane . 
 He made his debut for the club on 4 August in a 3 – 1 pre @-@ season friendly win over Porto in the Amsterdam Tournament . The following day , Carrick was forced to miss the start of the 2006 – 07 season as a result of injuring his foot during the final tournament match against Ajax . Following his recovery from this injury he made his competitive debut on 23 August in a 3 – 0 away league win over Charlton Athletic . Three days later , he made his first start for the club in a 2 – 1 win away over Watford . Towards the end of December he missed two games as he suffered a minor injury . He returned in time to feature in United 's final game of 2006 , a 3 – 2 home win over Reading on 30 December . On 13 January 2007 , Carrick scored his first Manchester United goal in a 3 – 1 win at home over Aston Villa . One month later , he scored his first ever FA Cup goal in a 1 – 1 draw at home to Reading on 17 February . He followed this up by contributing one of United 's goals in a 4 – 1 home win over Blackburn Rovers on 31 March . Carrick scored his first @-@ ever Champions League goals on 10 April , scoring twice in a 7 – 1 home win over Roma in their quarter @-@ final second leg tie . They would go on to lose their semi @-@ final tie 5 – 3 on aggregate to eventual champions A.C. Milan ending their hopes of an all English final with Liverpool . He scored his final goal of the season in a 2 – 0 win at home over Sheffield United on 17 April . His first season with Manchester United ended in success , as they won the Premier League title as a result of Chelsea 's 1 – 1 draw with Arsenal on 6 May . 
 Carrick suffered an injury setback in October 2007 after breaking his elbow in a 1 – 0 home win over Roma in the Champions League group stage . As a result of the injury he would be out of action for up to six weeks . His return to action came on 3 November as a substitute for Anderson in a 2 – 2 draw at Arsenal . Carrick scored his first goal of the season on 10 February 2008 in the Manchester derby , his goal came in injury time and was mere consolation in a 2 – 1 home loss to rivals Manchester City . His second and final goal of the season came against his former club West Ham United in a 4 – 1 win at home on 3 May . Although he scored just two league goals that season it still led to another league title as United beat Wigan Athletic on the final day of the season to prevent Chelsea from reaching the top spot . On 18 April , one week on from their title success Carrick was offered a new five @-@ year contract along with defenders Rio Ferdinand and Wes Brown . A four @-@ year contract was then signed on 18 May which ties Carrick to United until at least June 2012 . He participated in his first @-@ ever Champions League final on 21 May in Moscow , playing the full 120 minutes in a 6 – 5 penalty shootout win over Chelsea in the 2008 final . The scoreline ended 1 – 1 after extra time , he took United 's second penalty of the subsequent shootout which he converted to help give him the first European honour of his career . 
 = = = = 2008 – 2010 = = = = 
 During United 's first league game of the 2008 – 09 season at home to Newcastle United , Carrick was substituted after just 25 minutes as a result of an injured ankle in the 1 – 1 draw . The following day , it was confirmed he would be out for up to three weeks which ruled him out of the UEFA Super Cup match against Zenit St. Petersburg on 29 August . His return to action came on 13 September in a 2 – 1 away loss to Liverpool , he was taken off at half @-@ time during after sustaining another injury . Three days later , it was revealed he would be out for up to six weeks after breaking a bone in his foot during a challenge with Yossi Benayoun . On 1 November , Carrick scored his first goal of the season in a 4 – 3 home win over Hull City . His second goal followed two weeks later in a 5 – 0 home win over Stoke City . His first goal of 2009 came on 22 April as he scored late on in a 2 – 0 home win over Portsmouth . On 13 May , he assisted Carlos Tevez and then scored a late winner in a 2 – 1 win away to Wigan . The goal was Carrick 's first for United away from home and meant that they only needed one point from their final two games to gain a third successive Premier League title . Carrick ensured a third title in three years with United as they drew with Arsenal 0 – 0 at home on 18 May to claim an 18th overall English title . On 27 May , Carrick played the full match in the 2009 Champions League Final in a 2 – 0 defeat by Barcelona . This defeat was described by Carrick as worst night of his career as he said " the game just seemed to pass us by and we were unable to do anything about it . I suppose when you look at the big picture , it was still another Champions League final " . 
 On 30 September , Carrick scored his first goal of the 2009 – 10 season with the decisive goal against German champions Wolfsburg in a 2 – 1 Champions League win at home . Two months later he scored his first league goal of the season , scoring the second of a 3 – 0 home win over Everton . Due to a defensive crisis during December , Carrick had to fill in at centre back since Gary Neville , himself being played out of position , picked up an injury against West Ham United in a 4 – 0 away win . Carrick had never before played in defence during his career but manager Sir Alex Ferguson was very pleased with his contribution . On 8 December , he played in defence again by playing in a three @-@ man defence alongside central @-@ midfielder Darren Fletcher and regular left @-@ back Patrice Evra in a 3 – 1 away win against Wolfsburg in the Champions League . His third goal of the season came on 30 December in a 5 – 0 home league win over Wigan Athletic in what was United 's last game of the decade . On 25 January 2010 , Carrick scored the first @-@ ever League Cup goal of his career in a 4 – 3 aggregate win over rivals Manchester City in the second leg of their semi @-@ final tie . On 6 February , Carrick scored in a 5 – 0 home win over Portsmouth but it was credited as a Richard Hughes own goal following the game . However , the Dubious Goals Panel officially awarded Carrick the goal on 26 May following a review . On 16 February , he was sent off for the first time in his career after seeing two yellow cards in United 's 3 – 2 win over A.C. Milan at the San Siro . The midfielder was shown a second yellow card in injury @-@ time after flicking the ball away following Patrice Evra 's foul on Alexandre Pato . Carrick played the entire game of the 2010 League Cup Final against Aston Villa , which United won 2 – 1 resulting in his first League Cup medal . This was the first season of his United career that would end without winning the league title as Chelsea claimed the crown by a single point on the final day of the season . 
 = = = = 2010 – 2012 = = = = 
 On 6 August , it was announced that Carrick would miss the start of the 2010 – 11 season as a result of an ankle injury sustained in United 's final pre @-@ season game against a League of Ireland XI . However , two days later , he played 79 minutes of United 's 3 – 1 victory over Chelsea in the 2010 Community Shield . Manager Sir Alex Ferguson claimed , " He came in yesterday , says he was fit , wanted to train , trained , and wanted to play . " On 3 March 2011 , he signed a new three @-@ year deal keeping him at the club until the end of the 2013 – 14 season . Carrick 's first significant display of the season came in a 1 – 0 away win over Chelsea in the Champions League on 6 April . He played a vital pass in the move which led to Wayne Rooney 's goal and was praised for his performance . 
 At the start of the 2011 – 12 season , Carrick for the second season in a row was a shock starter at Wembley for the 2011 FA Community Shield . After initially being ruled out through injury by Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson in the pre @-@ match build up , Carrick was named in the starting eleven for the game on 7 August 2011 . In the first half , United fell behind to a Joleon Lescott header and a long range Edin Džeko strike to trail 2 – 0 at half time . Carrick was then substituted at the interval and replaced by youngster Tom Cleverley . However United went on to turn the game around and prevail 3 – 2 winners . The day after the Shield match , Carrick pulled out of England 's friendly match against the Netherlands to rest a niggling injury . He was replaced in the squad by Tom Cleverley . On 18 December , Carrick scored his first goal for United for 70 games when he advanced from his own half of the pitch after cutting out Joey Barton 's square ball , past a couple of defenders and firing low past the keeper . He eventually won the Man of the Match award . On 8 January , Carrick played his 250th match for Manchester United in all competitions . He celebrated his Jubilee in a 3 – 2 away victory against Manchester City at the Etihad Stadium in the FA Cup third round . On 14 January , Carrick scored for Manchester United in a 3 – 0 home win against Bolton . In the 83rd minute , Carrick notched his first goal at Old Trafford since January 2010 . He curled a left @-@ footed effort past <unk> <unk> into the bottom corner . On 16 February , in a Europa League 2 – 0 away win against Ajax at the Amsterdam Arena , Carrick played his 500th match in all competitions . Carrick also showed his class when he thundered a shot from 30 yards against the post in a 2 – 0 win against QPR . 
 = = = = 2012 – 2014 = = = = 
 As a result of a defensive injury crisis at the club , Carrick started the 2012 – 13 season as a makeshift centre @-@ back . His inexperience in the role was exploited by Everton in the season opener , as Marouane Fellaini beat him to a corner kick to score the only goal of the game . He continued in the role for the next match against Fulham . He scored his first goal of the season in a 1 – 0 Champions League victory against Galatasaray , after series of ball movement leading to Michael Carrick rounding the goalkeeper to score with his left foot . On 24 November , Carrick was left out the squad that defeated Queens Park Rangers 3 – 1 , ending his run of 33 consecutive league starts . 
 April 2013 saw Carrick nominated for the PFA Player of the Year Award for his performances during the season with Manchester United . Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger said Carrick would be his personal choice for the award , " He is a quality passer . He could play for Barcelona , he would be perfectly suited to their game . He has a good vision and is an intelligent player . " Tottenham winger Gareth Bale was ultimately voted as the winner ; Carrick was , however , included in the PFA Team of the Year for the 2012 – 13 season . Carrick went on to be announced as Manchester United 's Players ' Player of the Year for the 2012 / 13 season . 
 On 22 November 2013 , Manchester United announced that Carrick had signed a contract extension until 2015 , with the option to extend for a further year . In the 2013 – 14 season , Carrick struggled to retain his previous season 's form , as Manchester United struggled generally under new manager David Moyes . His season was not helped by a persistent achilles problem that kept him out from November until December , whilst new signings in midfield such as Marouane Fellaini had failed to perform . In February , Carrick was criticized by former club captain Roy Keane for what Keane thought was a poor interview . Although he made a total of 42 appearances in all competitions that season , there was speculation over whether Carrick had a future at Manchester United . 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 season = = = = 
 In July 2014 , Carrick suffered an injury during a pre @-@ season training session that was expected to keep him out for 12 weeks . Carrick 's first game back from injury came at the 1 – 0 defeat against Manchester City on 2 November 2014 , where he came on as a replacement centre back following Chris Smalling 's dismissal . After Marcos Rojo suffered a dislocated shoulder in the same match , Carrick stated that he would be happy to play as a makeshift centre back . After Carrick returned to the starting line @-@ up on a regular basis , Match of the Day 2 pundit Dietmar Hamann attributed some of Manchester United 's improved form to Carrick 's return in December , after the club had won all of the six games that he had started . Sir Alex Ferguson stated that he thought Carrick was the best English player in an interview with BT Sport in December 2014 , shortly after Carrick had been named as Manchester United 's new vice @-@ captain by Louis van Gaal . 
 On 15 March 2015 , he provided an assist for Marouane Fellaini 's goal , and scored his first goal in more than a year during a 3 – 0 victory against his former club Tottenham Hotspur . On 20 March 2015 , Carrick signed a new one @-@ year extension to his contract , lengthening his Manchester United career to 10 seasons . 
 = = International career = = 
 Carrick was capped by the England national under @-@ 18 and under @-@ 21 teams before receiving his first call @-@ up to the senior team in Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson 's first game in charge of England in February 2001 . Despite being named in the 31 @-@ man squad to face Spain , he was an unused substitute in England 's 3 – 0 victory on 28 February . Three months later he made his England debut , replacing David Beckham as a second @-@ half substitute in a 4 – 0 friendly win over Mexico . His full debut came during their 2 – 1 victory over the United States on 28 May 2005 . Three days later Carrick started again in a 3 – 2 victory over Colombia in the final game of their tour of the United States . 
 On 8 May 2006 , Eriksson named Carrick in a 23 @-@ man provisional squad for the 2006 FIFA World Cup , eventually being named in the final 23 @-@ man squad for the tournament in Germany . He was an unused substitute for all three of England 's Group B games as they advanced to the knockout stage . Carrick played just one game in the tournament , a 1 – 0 victory in the second round match against Ecuador on 25 June . The next game he was dropped to the bench for the quarter @-@ final tie against Portugal , with Owen Hargreaves replacing him . The game ended goalless after extra @-@ time , Portugal won 3 – 1 in the subsequent penalty shootout and knocked England out of the World Cup . 
 Carrick had been regularly overlooked by various England managers when it came to the central roles , with Frank Lampard and Steven Gerrard generally being preferred . He started nine games under Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson and his successor Steve McClaren . His last appearance under McClaren was in a 2 – 1 defeat at home to Germany in August 2007 . Newly appointed manager Fabio Capello left Carrick out of his first England squad on 2 February 2008 . During Capello 's first year in charge of England Carrick was largely overlooked . However , he was named in Capello 's squad for the game against the Czech Republic , but was forced to withdraw after sustaining an injury during Manchester United 's game with Newcastle United . In November 2008 he returned to the squad for a friendly against Germany in Berlin . Starting alongside Gareth Barry in central midfield in England 's 2 – 1 victory and was named by at least two sources as Man of the Match . 
 Despite playing just one game during England 's 2010 World Cup qualification campaign , he was named in Capello 's 30 @-@ man preliminary squad for the 2010 World Cup on 11 May 2010 . He played 61 minutes of their 3 – 1 warm @-@ up friendly win over Mexico before being replaced by Tom <unk> . On 2 June , Carrick was then named in the final 23 @-@ man squad to fly to South Africa for the tournament , before being given the squad number 22 . During the World Cup Carrick failed to make it onto the pitch , remaining an unused member of the squad . England were eventually knocked out of the tournament as they lost 4 – 1 to Germany in their second round tie on 27 June . 
 On 6 August , Alex Ferguson claimed Carrick would be out for two weeks with an ankle injury and would miss England 's friendly against Hungary the following Wednesday . Capello left Carrick out of the subsequent England squad only to arrive at Wembley and see him play 79 minutes of the Community Shield match . Capello made a ' call me ' sign as Carrick walked past his seat to collect the winner 's medal . 
 In May 2012 , England manager Roy Hodgson said he left Carrick out of the 23 @-@ man squad and the standby list for the 2012 UEFA European Championships because he had previously told The Football Association that he did not want to be a bit @-@ part player , although he could help the team " in extremis " . On 10 August , Carrick was recalled to the England squad by Hodgson for a friendly match against Italy on 15 August . He played the full 90 minutes in the 2 – 1 victory over the Azzurri in Switzerland and also took over the captain 's armband from Frank Lampard for the final 20 minutes . 
 On 7 September 2012 , Carrick came on a half @-@ time substitute in England 's 5 – 0 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifier against Moldova . He then started against San Marino in another 5 – 0 win the following month . On 17 October 2012 , Carrick partnered Steven Gerrard in central midfield in the away qualifier against Poland . On 26 March 2013 , the partnership was renewed in England 's qualifier against Montenegro in Podgorica . On 15 October 2013 , Carrick started in England 's final qualifier , a 2 – 0 home win against Poland , as the team qualified for the 2014 World Cup . 
 On 12 May 2014 , Carrick was named on England 's standby list for the 2014 FIFA World Cup after being omitted from the main 23 @-@ man squad travelling to Brazil . 
 Having not appeared since 2013 , Carrick was named in the squad for the November 2014 matches with Slovenia and Scotland . However , on 12 November , he pulled out of the squad after sustaining a groin injury . On 27 March 2015 , Carrick made his first appearance for England in 17 months , starting the 4 – 0 UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying defeat of Lithuania at Wembley Stadium . On 31 March 2015 , Carrick made his 33rd appearance for the national team as a substitute for Manchester United team @-@ mate and defender Chris Smalling , performing impressively to help England earn a draw against Italy in an international friendly match . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Despite playing as a deep @-@ lying midfielder , Carrick does not rely on pace , physical attributes and tackling like a typical ball @-@ winning midfielder . Instead , his reading of the game helps him anticipate any attacking threats from the opposition team , most of the time by covering space and making interceptions . His distribution of the ball , creativity , and range of passing , which are among the best in comparison to other midfielders in Europe , add to his importance in dictating the tempo of the game , as well as initiating team attacks . 
 After his arrival in 2006 , Carrick formed an effective partnership with Paul Scholes , with Carrick playing in a holding role and Scholes as a deep playmaker . This midfield partnership massively contributed to a change towards a continental playing style embraced by manager Alex Ferguson and assistant Carlos Queiroz , which relied on passing and keeping possession in contrast to the more traditionally direct and all @-@ action style of English football . His unassuming style , however , has also led to a lack of attention from successive England national football team managers in favour of all @-@ action midfielders such as Frank Lampard and Steven Gerrard , a fact noted by Carrick 's club and national team captain Wayne Rooney . 
 Carrick 's intelligence and awareness have been highlighted by former Manchester United manager Louis van Gaal , who labelled him his " trainer coach during the game " . Furthermore , his importance to the team performance has constantly been praised by former team @-@ mates Gary Neville and Paul Scholes , as well as European peers Xavi and Xabi Alonso . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Carrick has one brother , Graeme , who is four years younger . He was also at West Ham United but suffered several injuries , and has completed an MSc in Sport Coaching is currently an FA Regional Coach Mentor ( North East & Yorkshire ) after 7 years as an FA Skills Coach and a spell Coaching at Team Northumbria F.C. , after previously working at the Newcastle United Academy coaching the under @-@ 10s and under @-@ 16s . Carrick married Lisa <unk> , a Pilates instructor with a business degree , in <unk> , Leicestershire on 16 June 2007 . The couple started dating when they were both at school , and have a daughter , Louise , and a son , Jacey . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Statistics accurate as of match played 21 May 2016 
 = = = International = = = 
 Statistics accurate as of match played 13 November 2015 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 West Ham United 
 FA Youth Cup ( 1 ) : 1998 – 99 
 Manchester United 
 Premier League ( 5 ) : 2006 – 07 , 2007 – 08 , 2008 – 09 , 2010 – 11 , 2012 – 13 
 FA Cup ( 1 ) : 2015 – 16 
 Football League Cup ( 1 ) : 2009 – 10 
 FA Community Shield ( 5 ) : 2007 , 2008 , 2010 , 2011 , 2013 
 UEFA Champions League ( 1 ) : 2007 – 08 
 FIFA Club World Cup ( 1 ) : 2008 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Football League First Division PFA Team of the Year ( 1 ) : 2003 – 04 
 Premier League PFA Team of the Year ( 1 ) : 2012 – 13 
 Manchester United Players ' Player of the Year ( 1 ) : 2012 – 13 
 = Lexington @-@ class battlecruiser = 
 The Lexington @-@ class battlecruisers were officially the only class of battlecruiser to ever be ordered by the United States Navy . While these six vessels were requested in 1911 as a reaction to the building by Japan of the Kongō class , the potential use for them in the U.S. Navy came from a series of studies by the Naval War College which stretched over several years and predated the existence of the first battlecruiser , HMS Invincible ( a series of proposed battlecruiser designs was in fact submitted to the General Board in 1909 but was not approved for construction ) . The fact they were not approved by Congress at the time of their initial request was due to political , not military considerations . 
 The Lexingtons were included as part of the Naval Act of 1916 . Like the South Dakota @-@ class battleships also included in the 1916 Act , their construction was repeatedly postponed in favor of escort ships and anti @-@ submarine vessels . During these delays , the class was redesigned several times ; they were originally designed to mount ten 14 @-@ inch guns and eighteen five @-@ inch guns on a hull with a maximum speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) , but by the time of the definitive design , these specifications had been altered to eight 16 @-@ inch guns and sixteen six @-@ inch guns , with a speed of 33 @.@ 25 knots ( 61 @.@ 58 km / h ; 38 @.@ 26 mph ) to improve hitting power and armor ( the decrease in speed was mostly attributed to the additions of armor ) . 
 The design challenges the Navy 's Bureau of Construction and Repair ( C & R ) faced with this class were considerable , as the combined requirements of optimum hitting power , extreme speed and adequate protection taxed the knowledge of its naval architects and the technology of the time . The desired speed of 35 knots had been attained previously only in destroyers and smaller craft . To do so with a capital ship required a hull and a power plant of unprecedented size for a U.S. naval vessel and careful planning on the part of its designers to ensure it would have enough longitudinal strength to withstand bending forces underway and the added stresses on its structure associated with combat . Even so , it took years between initial and final designs for engine and boiler technology to provide a plant of sufficient power that was also compact enough to allow a practical degree of protection , even in such large ships . 
 While four of the ships were eventually canceled and scrapped on their building ways in 1922 to comply with the Washington Naval Treaty , two , ( Lexington and Saratoga ) were converted into the United States ' first fleet carriers . Both saw extensive action in World War II , with Lexington conducting a number of raids before being sunk during the Battle of Coral Sea and Saratoga serving in multiple campaigns in the Pacific and the Indian Ocean . Though she was hit by torpedoes on two different occasions , Saratoga survived the war only to be sunk as a target ship during Operation Crossroads . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Armor or speed = = = 
 As early as 1903 , questions arose in the Naval War College ( NWC ) about the overall effectiveness of large armored cruisers such as the Pennsylvania class and Tennessee @-@ class vessels just then coming into service . The NWC 's 1903 annual summer conference report , which included a staff memorandum on all @-@ big @-@ gun capital ships , also suggested a new type of cruiser that would be armed and armored much like a battleship . The following year , the summer conference considered tactics for a ship armed with four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) , twenty @-@ two 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) guns , four submerged torpedo tubes and battleship @-@ type protection . Ships such as these were essentially Tennessee @-@ class ships in which the 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) intermediate battery had been traded for heavier main guns and protection . These ships figured in the college 's studies for several years , and its 1906 summer conference report on a US building program strongly advocated the ships ' construction for use in scouting and as fast wings in a fleet action , and for their resistance to 12 @-@ inch gunfire ( much greater than the Tennessee class ) . Although the General Board and the Secretary of the Navy refused to adopt the proposed new armored cruiser , perhaps because the Navy already had 10 new armored cruisers on hand , the college continued to test the design against a variety of foreign vessels , including the British Invincible @-@ class battlecruiser . 
 By 1908 , the summer conference had come to favor battlecruisers over armored cruisers . The increasing range of torpedoes and the distances at which future gun battles were expected to be fought seemed to favor speed over armor . Gunnery officers " laid great stress upon the value of getting the range first and then smothering , or beating down , the enemy 's fire before he gets the range . " The conference concluded that battlecruisers would be worth building , with the caveat that they be considered in the same category as armored cruisers , in support of the battle fleet but not to fight in the line with fully armored battleships . A majority report recommended a top speed of at least 20 percent above that of battleships . As U.S. battleships then being built were expected to steam at 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) , this meant a minimum speed for battlecruisers of 25 @.@ 4 knots ( 47 @.@ 0 km / h ; 29 @.@ 2 mph ) . The Bureau of Construction and Repair ( C & R ) sketched out such ships the following year , at the request of the Secretary of the Navy , as fast equivalents of the Wyoming @-@ class ships being considered . By adopting a 670 @-@ foot ( 204 m ) hull on a displacement of 26 @,@ 000 long tons ( 26 @,@ 417 t ) , it could produce a vessel that could travel at 25 @.@ 5 knots ( 47 @.@ 2 km / h ; 29 @.@ 3 mph ) and carry eight 50 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ inch guns in four twin turrets and equivalent armor ; the savings in weight from eliminating two of the Wyoming 's six turrets more than balanced the added length and height of the armor belt . An enlarged belt was required by a deeper hull , as all American battlecruiser studies required deep hulls to retain their girder strength because those hulls had to be abnormally long to attain their speed . If the armor belt were reduced by an average of three inches , a fifth turret could be added . Four intermediate proposals included one with intermediate armor and eight 12 @-@ inch guns and one with Wyoming armor and six 12 @-@ inch guns . None of these designs included superfiring turrets . The General Board retained these sketches but did not recommend construction . 
 = = = Pacific developments = = = 
 As the NWC continued its studies , the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) annihilated the Russian Baltic Fleet at the Battle of Tsushima in 1905 . Japan had already been a concern of the U.S. Navy . Strategist and Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan had warned then @-@ Assistant Secretary of the Navy Theodore Roosevelt in 1897 of a much greater likelihood of conflict in the Pacific than in the Atlantic . Roosevelt himself , as President of the United States , had written before Tsushima to British diplomat Cecil Spring Rice , " The Japs interest me and I like them . I am perfectly well aware that if they win out it may possibly mean a struggle between them and us in the future . " Tsushima sealed the outcome of the Russo @-@ Japanese War in Japan 's favor , signaled its emergence as a world power and began a period of rivalry with the United States over intentions in the Pacific theater , as the two now became the dominant military powers there . An immediate consequence was the four Tsukuba @-@ class armored cruisers , laid down between 1905 and 1908 . These ships were designed to carry four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns , a size generally allocated to capital ships and unprecedented for armored cruisers . They would be protected with 8 inches ( 203 mm ) of belt and turret armour and 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of deck armour and be capable of a speed of 20 @.@ 5 knots . The <unk> were intended to take the place of aging battleships and thus showed Japan 's intention of continuing to use armored cruisers in fleet engagements . They were also exactly the type of ships for which the college had argued unsuccessfully to add to the U.S. Navy before switching to battlecruisers . 
 Therefore , while the Navy did not react as Germany and Britain built increasing numbers of battlecruisers , it took a very different tack when Japan laid down its first ship of this class , the Kongō , in Britain on 17 January 1911 . On 13 June , U.S. Naval Intelligence confirmed she was to be the first of four ships , the other three to be built in Japan , which would form a fast division for the IJN . The following day , the Secretary of the Navy asked the General Board to consider the construction of American battlecruisers for Pacific service , as the Pennsylvanias and Tennessees would no longer be viable units in the face of such opposition . The General Board , not willing to forego battleship construction in favor of auxiliary types such as battlecruisers , balked . On 29 August , it suggested that C & R research a ship under 30 @,@ 000 tons that could steam at 29 knots ( 54 km / h ) , carry eight 14 @-@ inch ( 360 mm ) and twenty @-@ four 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) guns and have a protective system comparable to the Nevada @-@ class battleships . In other words , the board requested an American version of the Kongō . 
 In view of the board 's lack of urgency , C & R took nearly a year to research this project . The proposed main battery of eight 14 @-@ inch guns was kept constant while other factors were calculated — speeds of 26 , 29 and 32 knots ; operating ranges of 5000 , 7000 and 8000 miles ; and belt armor of 8 , 11 and 14 inches . On 12 July 1912 , Naval Constructor R.H. Robinson presented these studies at a lecture he gave at the Naval War College with the General Board in attendance . There , he emphasized 8 inches as an absolute minimum for armor protection and recommended a radius of 8000 miles , the same as in U.S. battleships . The General Board 's reaction was to request two battlecruisers for the 1914 Naval Building Program and ask C & R for a slightly modified version of the proposed ship , but the Naval War College felt the design had serious problems and that a fast battleship would be a more practical option . 
 There was also the political climate to consider — and the weather was not good for battlecruisers . Just as it was thought that Congress would not approve any battlecruisers without reducing the number of battleships , the Navy decided that battleships , such as the new " super @-@ dreadnought " Nevada class whose construction had just begun , were more important since Congress — in the Navy 's eyes — was not approving enough battleships . In 1903 the General Board assumed that the U.S. would build two battleships per year , but Congress " balked " , approving just one ship in 1904 ( fiscal year 1905 ) , two ships in 1905 ( FY 1906 ) , one ship in both 1906 and 1907 ( FY 1907 – 1908 ) , and one ship in both 1912 and 1913 ( FY 1913 – 1914 ) . The approval of two New York @-@ class ships in 1910 ( FY 1911 ) instead of just one was apparently " something of a personal triumph for Secretary of the Navy von Lengerke Meyer . " 
 Five years later — with the First World War raging in Europe — the political climate had changed . A tentative five @-@ year program put together in October and supported by President Woodrow Wilson called for ten battleships , six battlecruisers and ten destroyers to be completed by 1922 . This was submitted to Congress in December 1915 . On 2 June 1916 , the House of Representatives passed the bill in a modified form , replacing five of the battleships with battlecruisers . On 29 August 1916 , the Senate also passed an altered bill , keeping the original number of ships but stipulating that the program be completed in three years ( FY 1917 – 19 ) . The first four ships were paid for in FY 1917 , the fifth in FY 1918 , and the last in FY 1919 . 
 The Lexingtons , along with the Omaha and Wickes classes , were intended to be part of a 35 @-@ knot ( 40 mph ) scouting force that would support a large battle fleet , but the battlecruisers ' keel laying was delayed ; capital ship construction had been suspended in favor of needed merchant ships and anti @-@ submarine warfare destroyers . 
 The six Lexington @-@ class ships were named Lexington , Constellation , Saratoga , Ranger , Constitution , and United States and were designated CC @-@ 1 through CC @-@ 6 , with " CC " signifying their status as battlecruisers . Although the class was planned to be the U.S. ' s first battlecruisers , it was not of a new design ; instead , it expanded upon already @-@ existing 10 @,@ 000 – 14 @,@ 000 ton cruiser designs . 
 = = Design development = = 
 In their original 1916 configuration , the battlecruisers were to carry ten 14 " / 50 caliber guns in four turrets , with two triple superfiring over two dual because there was not enough beam to accommodate the larger barbettes of the triple turrets slight further forward and aft . They would have a secondary armament of eighteen 5 " / 51 caliber guns on a displacement of 34 @,@ 300 long tons ( 34 @,@ 900 t ) and steam at 35 knots . All of these specifications were tempered by their sparse armor compared with contemporary battleships . C & R estimated 180 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower would be needed to obtain this planned speed . This would require 24 boilers , which became problematic , as there was not enough room for the boilers under the armored deck in such a long , comparatively narrow hull . The solution decided upon was to place half of the boilers above the deck on the centerline with armored boxes fitted around each one . There was also the challenge of the many exhaust uptakes needed . The Lexington 's were given " no less than " seven funnels , four of them side @-@ by @-@ side . 
 Also , with such a long , narrow hull came a consequent penchant for bending , which led to the challenge of adequate hull strength , especially longitudinal strength . This challenge was complicated in a capital ship by the heavy weight of main turrets and guns . This was an area in which British battlecruisers were notably deficient . Structural members on HMS Invincible were so weak that her double @-@ bottom frames distorted . HMS Renown had to go into drydock immediately following her preliminary gunnery tests because the hull structure could not withstand the bending stresses from firing her forward main guns . When the " large light cruiser " HMS Courageous weathered a heavy gale during her initial trial run , a number of her outer hull plates were so distorted that they had to be removed , sent back to the foundry and renewed . 
 In the Lexingtons longitudinal strength was challenged further by the large amount of freeboard required at the forward section of the hull to keep the ships dry and maintain a high speed in various types of weather . Also , while the 8 inches ( 200 mm ) of belt armor being considered was not an impressive amount in itself , the belt 's running potentially along 80 percent of the waterline and covering the entire side amidships made the amount of armor protection impressive by European standards . Because of the difference in ultimate tensile strength between armor steel and hull steel , severe stresses on the hull were expected . These factors plus the ships ' unusual length prompted Naval Constructor R. H. Robinson , who led the design group for the Lexingtons , to make careful analyses of strength , buoyancy and stresses expected in service . For instance , designers assumed customarily that a ship needed to withstand stresses caused by a wave of the ship 's length with a ratio of height to length of 1 : 20 . Robinson found a more reasonable ratio at 1 : 26 for the Lexingtons , which also promised considerable savings in weight . 
 One suggestion from C & R was to make the belt armor a load @-@ bearing member by connecting plates end to end . This was found inordinately difficult to be practical and , while it would have added girder strength where most badly needed , was considered too radical a proposition to be truly safe . Another idea , subsequently adopted , was to design the forecastle to break abaft the turrets . The challenge then became to continue the longitudinal strength contributed by the armored deck past this point to the end of the stern . This became a difficult design problem , especially with the need to save weight wherever possible and the fact that light structural members combined with heavy armament weight had become a source of grief for the British . One proposed solution was to use a combination of three decks — a strength deck at the top of the hull , a protective deck which would rest atop the belt armor , 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) above the waterline , and a splinter deck below that , just above the waterline . A third idea , also adopted , was to continue the longitudinal bulkhead between the protective and splinter decks down to the bottom of the ship to add strength . The severity of the strength and weight challenges necessitated a larger displacement of 33 @,@ 000 tons and a hull of 850 feet ( 260 m ) instead of 800 feet ( 240 m ) to give enough internal volume to accommodate all the needed machinery . Even so , the size of the power plant meant pushing the main turrets further toward the ends of the ships , which increased hull stress . This was why the idea was adopted to place half the boilers above the armored deck . 
 = = Construction hold and redesign = = 
 Plans to begin construction were placed on hold in 1917 . Large numbers of anti @-@ submarine warfare vessels and merchant ships were needed to ensure the safe passage of men and materiel to Europe during Germany 's U @-@ boat campaign and were given top priority . This opened the opportunity for a massive redesign , the need for which had become apparent in light of experience gained in the Battle of Jutland , fought shortly after the initial design for the Lexingtons had been approved and in which three British battlecruisers had been lost . The fact that the U.S. Navy misunderstood the essential points of the battle initially was shown by its ignoring the Lexingtons staying power while increasing their main armament to eight 16 " / 50 caliber guns and their secondary armament to fourteen 6 " / 53 caliber guns . Other factors for this decision were the discovery of plans by Britain and Japan for new battlecruisers armed with 15- and 16 @-@ inch guns ( respectively ) and the recommendation of the Bureau of Ordnance to give these ships the ability " to inflict fatal damage on the enemy 's most powerful vessels at a distance no less than that at which she can be reached by the heavy gunfire of these opponent battleships . " Only 20 of a newer style of boiler were needed , few enough to fit below the armored deck , and the number of funnels was reduced to five . The armor scheme was not modified , as that would have compromised the longitudinal strength of the hull . 
 Around 1918 , the U.S. naval staff in Great Britain became extremely impressed by the British 's newest battlecruiser , HMS Hood of the Admiral class . Her side armor was comparable to that of previous battleships and her deck armor was the most extensive of any British capital ship . Because this ship was described as a " fast battleship " and the British Admiralty considered her a replacement for both the battleship and the battlecruiser , the staff advocated that the United States should develop a similar vessel of its own . Chief Constructor David Taylor agreed . On 8 April 1918 , he told the Lexington design staff to plan a vessel combining the principal features of battleship and battlecruiser so that it would have the maximum possible speed , main armament and protection . Specifically , this meant arming her with the 16 " 50 caliber guns planned for the South Dakota class battleships , reducing armor protection 10 percent , a freeboard of at least 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) ( compared to 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) for the 1917 battlecruiser and 29 feet ( 8 @.@ 8 m ) for the Hood ) and a speed of at least 30 knots . Moreover , designs were to be prepared and submitted quickly . 
 The Royal Navy temporarily assigned a young constructor , Stanley Goodall , to C & R to assist in this task . Goodall brought a copy of the plans of Hood and accurate accounts of shell damage at the Battle of Jutland . In addition , a senior U.S. constructor who served on Admiral Sims 's staff in London , L.C. McBride , became privy to much British experience and was able to share it with C & R. While C & R worked concurrently on the more conventional , more heavily armed and armored South Dakota @-@ class , it quickly adopted and incorporated ideas from Hood into the Lexington project which included a reduction of the main armor belt , the change to " sloped armor " and the addition of four above @-@ water torpedo tubes that were added to the four underwater tubes that had been included in the original design . Other changes included a widening of the ship to allow for an adequate torpedo protection system and an increase in vertical belt armor to 7 inches ( 180 mm ) . Another improvement in boiler technology reduced the number of boilers to 16 and the number of funnels to just two , but increased the normal displacement of the ship to 43 @,@ 500 tons , 300 tons more than the South Dakota class and 10 @,@ 900 tons greater than the previous battleship class , the Colorado class . 
 Four proposed redesigns were submitted to the General Board on 3 June 1918 , along with a letter that requested a formal reconsideration by the Navy that the Lexingtons be armored to protect them only against fire of guns 6 inches ( 150 mm ) and under . The Board , concerned about the delay incorporating any of the redesigns would have on not just the Lexingtons but the 1916 building program in general and the subsequent cost , declined all four designs . The Board also feared that producing heavily armored fast battleships such as Hood would make the U.S. Navy 's Standard type battleships obsolete , just as HMS Dreadnought made the Royal Navy 's pre @-@ dreadnought battleships obsolescent and negated its advantage in numbers over other navies . This did not stop the U.S. Commander in Chief in European waters , Admiral William S. Sims , to argue for the redesigned vessels by pointing out that the Hood had already brought about the very revolution that the Board wished to suppress . Debate continued while the project remained suspended until May 1919 , when the Board decided that the battlecruisers should be built as planned , except for a slightly slower version of Design B from C & R with increased protection for turrets , conning towers , magazines and communications . This amended version , labeled B3 , was the final version of the Lexington battlecruiser design . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Lexington @-@ class ships had an overall length of 874 feet ( 266 @.@ 4 m ) , a beam of 105 feet 4 inches ( 32 @.@ 1 m ) , and a draft of 31 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) . They displaced 43 @,@ 500 long tons ( 44 @,@ 200 t ) at normal load and 44 @,@ 638 long tons ( 45 @,@ 354 t ) at deep load . Because the demand for extreme speed necessitated a long hull with maximum freeboard , the forecastle was extended down 75 percent of the total length of the hull . For this class , Rear Admiral David W. Taylor , who served as Chief Constructor for the Bureau of Construction and Repair , used a relatively new kind of bow called the bulbous bow or Taylor bow . The result of a series of towing tests begun in 1910 , this bow reduced water resistance by an average of six percent , supported the forecastle and reduced bending stress on the hull . At speeds of more than 25 knots , test results were highly favorable . A disadvantage was the formation of a heavy layer of water which would creep up along the outer plating of the forecastle at higher speeds . However , this tendency could be reduced to some degree by careful design of the frames . Taylor first introduced this bow , also known as a bulbous forefoot , in his design of the USS Delaware , which entered service in 1910 . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Turbo @-@ electric propulsion was selected for the battlecruisers despite the fact it needed more room than geared turbines to allow for better underwater protection that wartime experience showed was essential . First used in the New Mexico @-@ class battleships , it also had several other advantages . The turbines could run at their optimum speed , without regard to propeller speed , which was economical on fuel and the machinery could be easily sub @-@ divided which increased the ships ' ability to withstand torpedo hits . The substitution of flexible electric cables for bulky steam @-@ lines meant that the motors could be mounted further to the rear of the ship , which reduced both vibration and weight by shortening the propeller shafts . Also , the ship could go astern at full power simply by reversing the electrical polarity of the motors . Despite these factors and the fact that American companies would have struggled to produce the very large geared steam turbines needed for such big ships , the Curtis Company tried unsuccessfully to convince the Navy to reverse this decision . The Navy countered that doing so would mean a complete rearrangement of machinery spaces and a reduction in underwater protection . 
 Each propeller was 14 feet 9 inches ( 4 @.@ 50 m ) in diameter and each of the four propeller shafts was powered by two 22 @,@ 500 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 16 @,@ 800 kW ) electric motors acting in tandem . These motors were about five times the size of any earlier electric motor . Four General Electric turbo generators powered each propeller shaft and each was rated at 35 @,@ 200 kilowatts ( 47 @,@ 200 hp ) , 5000 volts and 4620 amps of direct current ( DC ) . Each of the four AC alternators produced 40 @,@ 000 <unk> . Sixteen water @-@ tube boilers , each in their own individual compartment , provided steam for the generators at a working pressure of 295 psi ( 2 @,@ 034 kPa ; 21 kgf / cm2 ) and a temperature of 460 ° F ( 238 ° C ) . The turbo @-@ electric machinery of the Lexington @-@ class ships was designed to produce a total of 180 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 130 @,@ 000 kW ) and propel the ships at 33 @.@ 25 knots ( 61 @.@ 58 km / h ; 38 @.@ 26 mph ) , but each ship reached over 202 @,@ 000 shp ( 151 @,@ 000 kW ) and 34 @.@ 5 knots ( 63 @.@ 9 km / h ; 39 @.@ 7 mph ) during sea trials in 1928 . Six 750 @-@ kilowatt ( 1 @,@ 010 hp ) DC turbo generators were installed in the upper levels of the two main turbine compartments . 
 The estimated range would have been 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 = = = = Main guns = = = = 
 The original design of the Lexington class called for ten 14 " / 50 caliber guns of either the Mark 4 , 5 , or 6 variety to be mounted in four turrets ( two triple superfiring over two double turrets ) for the main armament . Designed in 1916 and put into service by 1918 , these guns were installed on the <unk> and New Mexico @-@ class battleships . The guns were capable of firing a 1 @,@ 400 pounds ( 640 kg ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) projectile at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 800 fps ( 853 mps ) to a range of 24 @,@ 000 yards ( 22 km ) at a maximum angle of 15 degrees . 
 Later designs called for eight 16 " / 50 caliber Mark 2 gun , also slated to be used on the South Dakota @-@ class battleship of 1920 . Like the 14 " / 50 caliber gun , the 16 " gun was designed in 1916 . Basically an extended version of the 16 " / 45 caliber Mark 1 gun used on the Colorado class , it fired the same 2 @,@ 100 @-@ pound ( 950 kg ) shell as the Mark 1 at a muzzle <unk> of 2 @,@ 800 fps ( 853 mps ) and rate of two rounds per minute to a range of 44 @,@ 500 yards ( 40 @,@ 700 m ) at an elevation of 45 degrees . 
 A prototype Mark 2 was tested and proven on 8 April 1918 , and the gun was scheduled to go into naval service in 1923 . However , with the cancellation of both the Lexington and the South Dakota classes , no guns were installed on any ships even though 71 had been built and 44 were under construction . In 1922 – 24 , twenty of the guns were given to the Army for use as coastal defense guns along with the Army 's 16 " / 50 caliber M1919 guns . Later planning called for the use of these guns in the Iowa @-@ class battleships , but miscommunication between design bureaus led to the 16 " / 50 caliber Mark 7 gun being used instead . As a result , all but three of the Navy 's remaining Mark 2 and 3 guns were sent to the Army to also be used as coastal defense guns . 
 = = = = Secondary guns = = = = 
 The original design called for eighteen 5 " / 51 caliber guns . These guns were originally mounted on the <unk> and Wyoming @-@ class battleships , but they found their way into the secondary armament of every U.S. battleship that was built prior to the Washington Naval Treaty . Also , many of the destroyers , submarines , and auxiliaries that were built during this time mounted this gun as their main gun . They fired a 50 @-@ pound ( 23 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 3 @,@ 150 fps ( 960 mps ) and a rate of eight or nine rounds per minute to a range of 18 @,@ 880 yards ( 17 @,@ 260 m ) at an elevation of 25 degrees . 
 The secondary armament was later upped to fourteen 6 " / 53 caliber guns in Mark 13 casemate mountings during one of the redesigns . Designed in 1920 and in service by 1923 , these guns became the main armament on the Omaha @-@ class light cruisers , Narwhal , Nautilus , and Argonaut submarines , and they were intended as secondary armament on the South Dakota @-@ class battleships . They fired a 105 @-@ pound ( 48 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 3 @,@ 000 fps ( 914 mps ) and a rate of six or seven rounds per minute to a range of 25 @,@ 300 yards ( 23 @,@ 100 m ) at an elevation of 30 degrees . 
 = = = = Anti @-@ aircraft guns = = = = 
 Four 3 " / 23 caliber Mark 11 anti @-@ aircraft guns were planned for the original and first redesigned versions of the Lexingtons . This was increased to eight guns in the final version . These could depress to − 10 degrees and elevate to 85 degrees . They fired a 13 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 9 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 650 fps ( 503 mps ) and rate of between eight and nine rounds per minute to a range of 8 @,@ 800 yards ( 8 @,@ 000 m ) and a height of 18 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) . 
 = = = = Torpedo tubes = = = = 
 Eight 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes were to be carried . Four of these would be mounted inside the hull below the waterline , two at either side of the bow ; the others would be above the waterline at the stern , two at either side . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The waterline belt of the Lexington @-@ class ships tapered 7 – 5 inches ( 178 – 127 mm ) in thickness from top to bottom and was angled 11 ° outwards at the top to increase the armor 's relative thickness to horizontal , close @-@ range fire ( a concept taken from HMS Hood ) . The down side to this practice was a reduction of the relative height of the belt , which increased the chance of plunging shellfire going over or under it . The belt covered the middle 530 feet ( 161 @.@ 5 m ) of the ships . Forward , the belt ended in a bulkhead also tapered from seven to five inches in thickness . Aft , it terminated at a seven @-@ inch bulkhead . This belt had a height of 9 feet 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 8 m ) . The upper deck was 2 @.@ 25 inches ( 57 mm ) thick in two layers . The third deck over the ships ' machinery and magazine was armored with two layers of Special treatment steel ( STS ) totaling 2 inches ( 51 mm ) in thickness . The steering gear , however , was protected by two layers of STS that totaled 3 inches ( 76 mm ) on the slope and 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) on the slope . 
 The turret faces were 11 inches ( 279 mm ) thick while their sides were 6 inches ( 152 mm ) in thickness , and the roof was five inches thick . The barbettes had a maximum of 9 inches ( 229 mm ) of armor , but were reduced in thickness in stages below decks to a minimum thickness of five inches . The conning tower armor was 12 inches ( 305 mm ) thick , and it had a communications tube with 10 inches ( 254 mm ) sides ran from the conning tower down to the lower conning position on the 1st platform deck . The torpedo defense system of the Lexington @-@ class ships consisted of three to six medium steel protective bulkheads that ranged from .375 to .75 inches ( 10 to 19 mm ) in thickness . The spaces between them could be left empty or used as fuel tanks to absorb the detonation of a torpedo 's warhead . 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 None of the designs made provision for aircraft . However , the Navy planned to adapt the poop deck of these vessels to accommodate aircraft at a later date . 
 = = Conversion = = 
 Construction finally began upon the battlecruisers in 1920 and 1921 , after a delay of almost five months . However , that July , U.S. Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes called for a conference in Washington D.C. to be held that November . The stated goal was to curb the rapidly growing and extremely expensive naval construction programs . It was obvious to the General Board that the expensive new battlecruisers , which some thought were already obsolete , would be very attractive targets for cancellation . Accordingly , studies were done exploring the possibilities of converting one or more of the battlecruisers to different uses : one looked at a conversion to an aircraft carrier , while another contemplated a conversion to an Atlantic ocean liner . 
 Conversion of a Lexington to an aircraft carrier had both positive and negative aspects when compared with a " specifically designed carrier " . While the conversion would have better anti @-@ torpedo protection , larger magazines for aircraft bombs than a keel @-@ up carrier and a more room for aircraft landings ( the after elevator would be 28 feet farther up ) , it would also be a half @-@ knot slower with less hangar space ( about 16 percent less ) , less emergency fuel and " narrower lines " aft ( pilots landing on the converted battlecruiser would not have as wide of a runway to aim for ) . Comparing costs , a brand @-@ new aircraft carrier would cost $ 27 @.@ 1 million , while a conversion of one of the Lexington class , not counting the $ 6 @.@ 7 million already sunk into them , would cost $ 22 @.@ 4 million . 
 Any debate over converting them was quelled by the signing of the Washington Naval Treaty . Under the terms of the treaty , any capital ships that were under construction by the five signatories ( the United States , Great Britain , France , Italy and Japan ) had to be canceled and scrapped . For battlecruisers , this encompassed the United States ' Lexington class , Japan 's Amagi class , and Great Britain 's G3 battlecruisers . However , the treaty did allow the participating nations to take two of the capital ships they had under construction and convert them to aircraft carriers ; the U.S. Navy decided to complete the two Lexingtons that were closest to completion , Lexington and Saratoga . 
 The problem was that the tonnage cap for new carrier construction had been set at 27 @,@ 000 tons , which was too low for any practical conversion of the battlecruisers . An exception , spearheaded by Assistant Secretary of the Navy Theodore Roosevelt Jr . , was added to the treaty . This gave the five nations the option to convert no more than two capital ships that were under construction to 33 @,@ 000 ton aircraft carriers . But even that increase of 6 @,@ 000 tons ( from 27 @,@ 000 to 33 @,@ 000 ) was almost not enough for a conversion — it took creative interpreting of a clause in the treaty to allow for the conversion without removing half of the power plant , which the General Board did not want to do . The clause ( Chapter II , Part III , Section I , ( d ) ) : 
 No retained capital ships or aircraft carriers shall be reconstructed except for the purpose of providing means of defense against air and submarine attack , and subject to the following rules : The Contracting Powers may , for that purpose , equip existing tonnage with bulge or blister or anti @-@ air attack deck protection , providing the increase of displacement thus effected does not exceed 3 @,@ 000 tons ( 3 @,@ 048 metric tons ) displacement for each ship . 
 Without this clause , the two carriers would have likely been in serious trouble — 1928 estimates for the two ships put Lexington at an actual tonnage of 35 @,@ 689 tons and Saratoga at 35 @,@ 544 , though on official lists the number given was 33 @,@ 000 tons with a footnote that stated " [ this number ] does not include weight allowance under Ch . 11 , pt . 3 , Sec . 1 , art . ( d ) of Washington Treaty for providing means against air and submarine attack " . This tonnage was used by these ships for their entire careers . 
 = = Ships = = 
 Following adoption of the Washington Naval Treaty , construction on all the ships was stopped in February 1922 . Two of the battlecruiser hulls were reordered as the Lexington @-@ class aircraft carriers Lexington ( CV @-@ 2 ) and Saratoga ( CV @-@ 3 ) under the terms of the Treaty , while the other four ships were formally cancelled and scrapped in place . 
 = Augustus Jones = 
 Augustus Jones ( c . 1757 – November 16 , 1836 ) was an American @-@ born Upper Canadian farmer , land speculator , magistrate , militia captain and surveyor . Jones trained as a surveyor in New York City , and fled as a United Empire Loyalist to Upper Canada . In Upper Canada , he worked as a crown surveyor in the Nassau District , where he quickly rose to the position of Deputy Surveyor General , the highest position in a district of Upper Canada . He occupied that position from 1789 informally , and 1791 formally , until his retirement in 1799 . During that time he laid down many of the township boundaries in the Niagara Peninsula and on the north shore of Lake Ontario . He led various teams that cut many of the first <unk> and concession roads into these areas , facilitating their settlement by European and American immigrants . Jones also surveyed the routes for Dundas Street and Yonge Street , and supervised their construction . After his retirement , Jones farmed first in Saltfleet Township , later moving to Brantford and finally an estate outside Paris named Cold Springs , where he died in 1836 . 
 = = Youth = = 
 Augustus Jones was born around 1757 in the Hudson River Valley of the Province of New York , the son of Ebenezer Jones , a Welsh immigrant . He trained as a land surveyor in New York City in his youth . After his training , he worked for some time in New York , and his name appears in paperwork for land transfers in Newburgh , New York in 1783 and 1784 . Sometime in the 1780s , Jones fled the United States with his family as loyalists during the American Revolution . Jones was sent ahead of the rest of his family , and obtained 300 acres ( 1 @.@ 2 km2 ) of land in Saltfleet Township . Soon after this Jones ' father Ebenezer , his brother Stephen and Stephen 's family , and his sisters , Mary Jones Gage , widow of James Gage and Susannah Gage , wife of William Gage followed . The fields around his sister 's farmhouses would later be the scene of the Battle of Stoney Creek . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Crown surveyor = = = 
 Jones met Major Archibald Campbell , the commanding officer of Fort Niagara on June 9 , 1787 . He presented the Major with a letter of recommendation from Cadwallader Colden Junior , which attested to Jones ' good character and surveying capability . Two days later , Jones was hired as a land surveyor for the Crown . Jones ' first assignments were working as a chain bearer for various teams surveying the Niagara region . 
 After a short while , Jones was given command of his own surveying team . His first assignment was the surveying of Stamford Township , a task they began on November 5 , 1787 and completed on January 8 , 1788 . That January , Jones was appointed to the position of assistant to Philip Frey , the deputy surveyor of the Nassau District . Starting on January 15 , 1788 and running until March 12 , 1788 , Jones surveyed Barton Township . From April 1 , 1788 – April 24 , 1788 Jones surveyed Clinton Township . From May 1 , 1788 until July 28 , 1788 Jones led the survey of Bertie Township . Jones ' team had started surveying Saltfleet Township on July 24 , 1788 and they finished August 24 , 1788 . 
