 Surveying of Thorold Township began the same day , August 24 , 1788 and continued until October 25 , 1788 . In Thorold , Jones was receiving a pay of four shillings a day , and his two primary assistants , Joseph Jones and Benjamin Stanton , received the same . All worked the full 54 days of the survey . Local men were hired as woodcutters and <unk> for shorter periods , and typically earnt two shillings a day . 
 On October 25 , 1788 Jones ' team began their survey of Grimsby Township ; it was completed November 13 , 1788 . Saltfleet Township was surveyed from November 14 , 1788 to December 25 , 1788 and Binbrook Township was surveyed from December 24 , 1788 until February 12 , 1789 . All of these townships were surveyed using the Front and Rear system , except Binbrook , which was surveyed with the Single Front system . During this time , Frey had assigned two other surveyors to lead surveys in the Nassau district . Daniel Hazen and Jesse Pawling both led teams , but neither group was as busy as Jones ' group . Hazen 's group surveyed only four townships , and incompletely , and Pawling 's three , also incompletely . In November 1789 Jones began acting as the deputy surveyor in Nassau District as Frey had left Upper Canada , and he officially received the position in early 1791 on the order of Deputy Surveyor General John Collins . 
 = = = Deputy surveyor for Nassau District = = = 
 In 1791 and 1792 , Jones surveyed the lakeshore of townships east from York , Upper Canada , to the Trent River , from the lakeshore to a distance of one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Lake Ontario . Jones and his team had set out from Scarborough to the eastern boundary of the Nassau District , the approximate area of the mouth of the Trent River . From there , they began surveying townships along Lake Ontario travelling westwards . They surveyed in turn Murray Township , then Cramahe Township , Haldimand Township , Hamilton Township , Hope Township , Clarke Township , Darlington Township , Pickering Township , Glasgow Township , York Township and Etobicoke Township . <unk> were then run north to the first concession road . Clarke township had previously been unnamed , Jones was the one to name it . The survey of the west end of the Nassau district finalised the boundary of the Toronto Purchase , which had been agreed upon in principle , but could not be completed because the land areas involved were not well known . On June 13 , 1792 Jones submitted a town plan for Newark , Upper Canada to the Land Board . 
 Around this time , Jones began to acquire significant tracts of land across southern Ontario . He obtained large sections of land in Saltfleet Township and Barton Township with various petitions and grants , and small lots in Newark and York . From Mohawk chief Joseph Brant , he received leases on ten square miles of land in return for his surveys of land along the Grand River . 
 In 1793 , Lieutenant Governor John Graves Simcoe charged Jones with the surveying and construction of a new road from Lake Ontario to the Thames River . Simcoe employed the Queen 's Rangers led by Captain Samuel Smith for the road 's construction , from Hamilton to Woodstock . This road would become Dundas Street . The same year , he surveyed Flamborough Township , Beverley Township , Ancaster Township and York Township . Jones spent 1794 surveying Flamborough , Glanford , Binbrook , Delaware , Oxford , Dorchester , Burford , Grimsby and Windham . 
 In 1795 , Jones surveyed Ancaster , Thorold , Grantham , Beverley , Southwold , Whitby , York , Scarboro , Pickering , the lands of Joseph Brant and Lake Simcoe . On December 24 , 1795 Jones was directed by Lieutenant Governor John Graves Simcoe to survey and open a cart road from the newly planned settlement of York , Upper Canada to Lake Simcoe . Jones began the planning work the next day . On the 29th of that December , Jones was given the assistance of thirty of the Queen 's Rangers for the road 's construction . The work began January 4 , 1796 on this road , which would become Yonge Street . Jones worked as the effective master builder in addition to his title as surveyor . The road reached Holland Landing on February 16 , 1796 , and Jones returned to York on February 20 to inform the Lieutenant Governor that the road was completed . This first incarnation of Yonge Street measured some 34 miles and 53 chains . For the rest of 1796 , Jones spent his time surveying Newark , Flamborough , Grimsby , Saltfleet , Beverley , York and Coot 's Paradise . 
 Working as the Deputy Surveyor , Jones began to build good relations with the Mississauga Ojibwa Indians and Mohawk Indians of the area . He became fluent in the languages of these groups and earned the trust of many members of the tribes , including influential members like Joseph Brant , of whom he became a good friend . In 1797 the head chief of the Mississaugas in the Credit River area Wabakinine , as well as his wife , were murdered by a member of the Queen 's Rangers . Wabakinine had been a very beloved chief and seen as a firm ally of the British . His murder shocked the members of his band and other local Ojibwa bands . Charles McEwan , the killer was charged and tried , but the Indian witnesses did not attend the trial and he was subsequently acquitted for lack of evidence . <unk> , a local Indian chief , met with Augustus Jones on February 15 , 1797 and confessed to Jones that he and the local Indian bands were inclined to wage open war against the British over the event . Jones relayed this information to British administrator Peter Russell . The town of York had about 675 white settlers and 135 soldiers , a number that Russell believed might not be sufficient to address an Indian rebellion . If a winter rebellion transpired York would be cut off from large garrisons at the Bay of Quinte and the Niagara Peninsula . Russell and John Graves Simcoe both anticipated rebellion for the next year or so , but it never came . Joseph Brant , a Mohawk chief who had travelled to England cautioned the tribes against rebellion as he knew the military strength of the British was likely to render any war a losing one . Russell , however , set out to undermine alliances and friendships between the Indian bands of southern Ontario , fearing such an uprising . 
 Jones spent 1797 surveying Pickering , Glanford , Oxford and Blenheim . His survives duties in 1798 included Burford , Lake Shore Road , the Humber River , the Grand River , Uxbridge , <unk> and the de <unk> settlement . In 1799 , Jones conducted a census of the residents of Hope Township , Hamilton Township , Haldimand Township , Cramahe Township and Percy Township . The census include the names of all residents and details on the conditions of their lots . That year , he also surveyed the Humber Mill Reserve , Yarmouth , Gore , Newark and Stamford . 
 = = = Farmer , magistrate and militia captain = = = 
 Jones retired from his surveying work in 1800 , for reasons unknown . Various reasons have been suggested ; Jones was known as an extremely hard worker , and may have wanted less strenuous work as a farmer , his ties to Joseph Brant may have been politically problematic as Brant was frequently in conflict with Upper Canada authorities , and his status as a loyalist to the British Empire may have come into question as it became known his brother in law , James Gage , had fought with the Americans during the revolution , and his brother Ebenezer may have as well . Whatever the cause of his retirement , Jones returned to his farm in Saltfleet Township and began life as a farmer . 
 Jones was already a prominent citizen in Saltfleet Township . He had been a militia captain there since 1794 . He also became a local magistrate . In 1801 , he and his wife joined the Methodist Episcopal church in the area . Jones retired from the militia in 1811 , but remained in Saltfleet Township until 1817 , when he moved with his family to Brantford to live with the Mohawk community and his wife 's extended family . During the War of 1812 , his farm had suffered £ 250 in damages . On May 27 , 1815 arsonists set fire to his barn , which Jones believed was an effort to force him to cease his investigation into a local murder of three Indians . These financial losses , coupled with prejudice from his white neighbours towards Jones due to his Indian wife and children and their knowledge he had previously been married to two Indian women simultaneously led to the move . Jones made one last survey in 1825 , <unk> the line of Dundas street between Ancaster Township and West Flamborough Township . In Brantford he supported his family both by farming , and by selling of bits of land he had accumulated in his youth . After several years in Brantford , he moved to his estate Cold Springs on Dundas Street east of Paris , Ontario , where he farmed until his death . 
 = = Family life = = 
 On April 27 , 1798 , Jones married Sarah Tekarihogen ( <unk> ) , the daughter of Mohawk chief Tekarihogen . The couple would have a total of eight children . Their children were named Catherine , Rachel , Mary , Henry , Joseph , Sally , Lucretia and Augustus Junior ( born 1818 ) . 
 While married to Sarah Tekarihogen , Jones maintained a relationship with Tuhbenahneequay ( Sarah Henry ) , the daughter of Mississauga chief Wahbanosay . Jones had previously hired Wahbanosay as a guide during some of his surveying expeditions in the area , including the surveying of Yonge Street . Their relationship had begun in the mid @-@ 1790s , and Jones had previously married Tuhbenahneequay in a Mississauga ceremony . Their first son , John ( anglicised as <unk> , written in Ojibwa as <unk> , after Joseph Brant ) was born in 1798 . Their second son , Peter Jones ( Kahkewaquonaby ) was born January 1 , 1802 to Tuhbenahneequay in the area of Burlington Heights . Due to Jones ' marriage to Sarah Tekarihogen , the task of raising Peter and John was left to Tuhbenahneequay . It was soon after their second son 's birth that the relationship between Jones and Tuhbenahneequay ended . Jones wanted the respect of his Christian neighbours , who disapproved of polygamy , and so Jones settled permanently with Sarah Tekarihogen , who had converted to Christianity . 
 Although Jones took no part in the raising of his children by Tuhbenahneequay , he did take an active interest in their welfare . In 1805 , he secured a pair of two @-@ square @-@ mile plots of land near the mouth of the Credit River for his two sons from the local Mississauga Indians , but the government of Upper Canada would not recognise the title . In 1816 , Jones feared that the Mississauga band his sons John and Peter lived with would fall apart , in the aftermath of the War of 1812 , the famine of 1816 's harvest and the influx of settlers to the area in recent years . Jones travelled to find the boys , and brought them to his farm in Stoney Creek . He arranged for the boys to be schooled in Stoney Creek , as neither spoke much English . After nine months , Jones felt that Peter 's command of English was sufficient , and took him out of school to teach him the farming craft . The next year , Jones and his family relocated to land along the Grand River , and Jones brought his son Peter with them . Peter lived with his father for seven years there . 
 Jones died on November 16 , 1836 near Paris , Ontario . He was buried at Cold Springs , where his farm was located . After the death of his son Peter in 1856 , Jones ' remains were moved to Greenwood Cemetery in Brantford , Ontario and interred beside Peter 's . His grave was unmarked . 
 = = Honours = = 
 On September 10 , 2005 the city of Hamilton , Ontario unveiled a statue of Jones in Stoney Creek Town Square . 
 = Peace dollar = 
 The Peace dollar is a United States dollar coin minted from 1921 to 1928 , and again in 1934 and 1935 . Designed by Anthony de Francisci , the coin was the result of a competition to find designs emblematic of peace . Its obverse represents the head and neck of the Goddess of Liberty in profile , and the reverse depicts a bald eagle at rest clutching an olive branch , with the legend " Peace " . It was the last United States dollar coin to be struck for circulation in silver . 
 With the passage of the Pittman Act in 1918 , the United States Mint was required to strike millions of silver dollars , and began to do so in 1921 , using the Morgan dollar design . Numismatists began to lobby the Mint to issue a coin that memorialized the peace following World War I ; although they failed to get Congress to pass a bill requiring the redesign , they were able to persuade government officials to take action . The Peace dollar was approved by Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon in December 1921 , completing the redesign of United States coinage that had begun in 1907 . 
 The public believed the announced design , which included a broken sword , was illustrative of defeat , and the Mint hastily acted to remove the sword . The Peace dollar was first struck on December 28 , 1921 ; just over a million were coined bearing a 1921 date . When the Pittman Act requirements were met in 1928 , the mint ceased to strike the coins , but more were struck in 1934 and 1935 as a result of other legislation . In 1965 , the mint struck over 300 @,@ 000 Peace dollars bearing a 1964 date , but these were never issued , and all are believed to have been melted . 
 = = Background and preparations = = 
 = = = Statutory history = = = 
 The Bland – Allison Act , passed by Congress on February 28 , 1878 , required the Treasury to purchase a minimum of $ 2 million in domestically mined silver per month and coin it into silver dollars . The Mint used a new design by engraver George T. Morgan , and struck what became known as the Morgan dollar . Many of the pieces quickly vanished into bank vaults for use as backing for paper currency redeemable in silver coin , known as silver certificates . In 1890 , the purchases required under the Bland – Allison Act were greatly increased under the terms of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act . Although the Sherman Act was repealed in 1893 , it was not until 1904 that the government struck the last of the purchased silver into dollars . Once it did , production of the coin ceased . 
 During World War I , the German government hoped to destabilize British rule over India by spreading rumors that the British were unable to redeem for silver all of the paper currency they had printed . These rumors , and hoarding of silver , caused the price of silver to rise and risked damaging the British war effort . The British turned to their war ally , the United States , asking to purchase silver to increase the supply and lower the price . In response , Congress passed the Pittman Act of April 23 , 1918 . This statute gave the United States authority to sell metal to the British government from up to 350 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 silver dollars at $ 1 per ounce of silver plus the value of the copper in the coins , and handling and transportation fees . Only 270 @,@ 232 @,@ 722 coins were melted for sale to the British , but this represented 47 % of all Morgan dollars struck to that point . The Treasury was required by the terms of the Act to strike new silver dollars to replace the coins that were melted , and to strike them from silver purchased from American mining companies . 
 = = = Idea and attempted legislation = = = 
 It is uncertain who originated the idea for a US coin to commemorate the peace following World War I ; the genesis is usually traced to an article by Frank Duffield published in the November 1918 issue of The Numismatist . Duffield suggested that a victory coin should be " issued in such quantities it will never become rare " . In August 1920 , a paper by numismatist Farran Zerbe was read to that year 's American Numismatic Association ( ANA ) convention in Chicago . In the paper , entitled <unk> the Peace with a Coin for Circulation , Zerbe called for the issuance of a coin to celebrate peace , stating , 
 I do not want to be misunderstood as favoring the silver dollar for the Peace Coin , but if coinage of silver dollars is to be resumed in the immediate future , a new design is probable and desirable , bullion for the purpose is being provided , law for the coinage exists and limitation of the quantity is fixed — all factors that help pave the way for Peace Coin advocates . And then — we gave our silver dollars to help win the war , we restore them in commemoration of victory and peace . 
 Zerbe 's proposal led to the appointment of a committee to transmit the proposal to Congress and urge its adoption . According to numismatic historian Walter Breen , " Apparently , this was the first time that a coin collector ever wielded enough political clout to influence not only the Bureau of the Mint , but Congress as well . " The committee included noted coin collector and Congressman William A. Ashbrook ( Democrat – Ohio ) , who had chaired the House Committee on Coinage , Weights , and Measures until the Republicans gained control following the 1918 elections . 
 Ashbrook was defeated for re @-@ election in the 1920 elections ; at that time congressional terms did not end until March 4 of the following year . He was friendly with the new committee chairman Albert Henry Vestal ( Republican – Indiana ) , and persuaded him to schedule a hearing on the peace coin proposal for December 14 , 1920 . Though no bill was put before it , the committee heard from the ANA delegates , discussed the matter , and favored the use of the silver dollar , which as a large coin had the most room for an artistic design . The committee took no immediate action ; in March 1921 , after the Harding administration took office , Vestal met with the new Secretary of the Treasury , Andrew W. Mellon , and Mint Director Raymond T. Baker about the matter , finding them supportive so long as the redesign involved no expense . 
 On May 9 , 1921 , striking of the Morgan dollar resumed at the Philadelphia Mint under the recoinage called for by the Pittman Act . The same day , Congressman Vestal introduced the Peace dollar authorization bill as a joint resolution . Vestal placed his bill on the Unanimous Consent Calendar , but Congress adjourned for a lengthy recess without taking any action . When Congress returned , Vestal asked for unanimous consent that the bill pass on August 1 , 1921 . However , one representative , former Republican leader James R. Mann ( Illinois ) objected , and numismatic historian Roger Burdette suggests that Mann 's stature in the House ensured that the bill would not pass . Nevertheless , Vestal met with the ANA and told them that he hoped Congress would reconsider when it met again in December 1921 . 
 = = = Competition = = = 
 Sometime after the December 1920 hearing requested by the ANA , the chairman of the U.S. Commission of Fine Arts , Charles Moore , became aware of the proposed congressional action , and decided to investigate . Moore , together with Commission member and Buffalo nickel designer James Earle Fraser , met with Mint Director Baker on May 26 , 1921 , and they agreed that it would be appropriate to hold a design competition for the proposed dollar , under the auspices of the Commission . This was formalized on July 26 with the Commission 's written recommendation to the Mint that a competition , open only to invited sculptors , be used to select designs . The winner of the competition was to receive $ 1 @,@ 500 prize money , while all other participants would be given $ 100 . On July 28 , President Harding issued Executive Order <unk> , requiring that coin designs be submitted to the Commission before approval by the Treasury Secretary . In early September , following the failure of the bill , Baker contacted Moore , putting the matter aside pending congressional action . 
 By November , proponents of the peace coin had realized that congressional approval was not necessary — as the Morgan dollar had been struck for more than 25 years , it was eligible for replacement at the discretion of the Secretary of the Treasury under an 1890 act . The Morgan design was then being used for large quantities of silver dollars as the Mint struck replacements for the melted coins under the Pittman Act . Though Congress had not yet convened , Baker contacted Fraser in early November to discuss details of the design competition . According to Burdette , Baker 's newfound enthusiasm came from the fact that President Harding was about to formally declare an end to the war with Germany — a declaration needed because the US had not ratified the Treaty of Versailles . In addition , the Washington Conference on disarmament , for which the administration had great hopes , was soon to convene . On November 19 , Fraser notified competition participants by personal letter , sending official rules and requirements four days later , with submissions due by December 12 . Competition participants included Hermon MacNeil , Victor D. Brenner , and Adolph Weinman , all of whom had designed previous U.S. coins . 
 The artists were instructed to depict the head of Liberty on the obverse , to be made " as beautiful and full of character as possible " . The reverse would depict an eagle , as prescribed by the Coinage Act of 1792 , but otherwise was left to the discretion of the artist . The piece also had to bear the denomination , the name of the country , " E pluribus unum " , the motto " In God We Trust " , and the word " Liberty " . 
 On December 13 , the commission assembled to review the submitted designs , as well as a set produced by Mint Chief Engraver Morgan at Baker 's request , and a set , unrequested , from a Mr. Folio of New York City . It is not known how the designs were displayed for the Commission . After considerable discussion among Fraser , Moore , and Herbert Adams ( a sculptor and former member of the Commission ) , a design by Anthony de Francisci was unanimously selected . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 At age 34 , de Francisci was the youngest of the competitors ; he was also among the least experienced in the realm of coin design . While most of the others had designed regular or commemorative coins for the Mint , de Francisci 's sole effort had been the conversion of drawings for the 1920 Maine commemorative half dollar to the finished design . De Francisci had had little discretion in that project , and later said of the work , " I do not consider it very favorably . " 
 The sculptor based the obverse design of Liberty on the features of his wife , Teresa de Francisci . Due to the short length of the competition , he lacked the time to hire a model with the features he envisioned . Teresa de Francisci was born Teresa <unk> in Naples , Italy . In interviews , she related that when she was five years old and the steamer on which she and her family were immigrating passed the Statue of Liberty , she was fascinated by the statue , called her family over , and struck a pose in imitation . She later wrote to her brother Rocco , 
 You remember how I was always posing as Liberty , and how brokenhearted I was when some other little girl was selected to play the role in the patriotic exercises in school ? I thought of those days often while sitting as a model for Tony 's design , and now seeing myself as Miss Liberty on the new coin , it seems like the realization of my fondest childhood dream . 
 Breen wrote that the radiate crown that the Liberty head bears is not dissimilar to those on certain Roman coins , but is " more explicitly intended to recall that on the Statue of Liberty " . Anthony de Francisci recalled that he opened the window of the studio and let the wind blow on his wife 's hair as he worked . However , he did not feel that the design depicted her exclusively . He noted that " the nose , the fullness of the mouth are much like my wife 's , although the whole face has been elongated " . De Francisci submitted two reverse designs ; one showed a warlike eagle , aggressively breaking a sword ; the other an eagle at rest , holding an olive branch . The latter design , which would form the basis for the reverse of the Peace dollar , recalled de Francisci 's failed entry for the Verdun City medal . The submitted obverse is almost identical to the coin as struck , excepting certain details of the face , and that the submitted design used Roman rather than Arabic numerals for the date . 
 Baker , de Francisci , and Moore met in Washington on December 15 . At that time , Baker , who hoped to start Peace dollar production in 1921 , outlined the tight schedule for this to be accomplished , and requested certain design changes . Among these was the inclusion of the broken sword from the sculptor 's alternate reverse design , to be placed under the eagle , on the mountaintop on which it stands , in addition to the olive branch . Baker approved the designs , subject to these changes . The revised designs were presented to President Harding on December 19 . Harding insisted on the removal of a small feature of Liberty 's face , which seemed to him to suggest a dimple , something he did not consider suggestive of peace , and the sculptor then did so . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 The Treasury announced the new design on December 19 , 1921 . Photographs of Baker and de Francisci examining the final plaster model appeared in newspapers , along with written descriptions of the designs , since the Treasury at that time took the position that it was illegal for photographs of a United States coin to be printed in a newspaper . Secretary Mellon gave formal approval to the design on December 20 . As it would take the Mint several days to produce working dies , the first strike of the new coins was scheduled for December 29 . 
 The new design was widely reported in newspapers , and was the source of intense public attention . A Mint press release described the reverse as " a large figure of an eagle perched on a broken sword , and clutching an olive branch bearing the word , ' peace ' " . On December 21 , the New York Herald ran a scathing editorial against the new design , 
 If the artist had sheathed the blade or blunted it there could be no objection . <unk> is symbolic of peace , of course ; the blunted sword implies mercy . But a broken sword carries with it only unpleasant associations . 
 A sword is broken when its owner has disgraced himself . It is broken when a battle is lost and breaking is the alternative to surrendering . A sword is broken when the man who wears it can no longer render allegiance to his sovereign . But America has not broken its sword . It has not been cashiered or beaten ; it has not lost allegiance to itself . The blade is bright and keen and wholly dependable . It is regrettable that the artist should have made such an error in symbolism . The sword is emblematic of Justice as well as of Strength . Let not the world be deceived by this new dollar . The American effort to limit armament and to prevent war or at least reduce its horror does not mean that our sword is broken . 
 At the time , according to Burdette , given the traumas of the Great War , Americans were highly sensitive about their national symbols , and unwilling to allow artists any leeway in interpretation . The Mint , the Treasury , and the Fine Arts Commission began to receive large numbers of letters from the public objecting to the design . De Francisci attempted to defend his design , stating , " with the sword there is the olive branch of peace and the combination of the two renders it impossible to conceive of the sword as a <unk> of defeat " . Baker had left Washington to visit the San Francisco Mint , a transcontinental journey of three days . Acting Mint Director Mary Margaret O 'Reilly sent him a telegram on December 23 , urgently seeking his approval to remove the sword from the reverse , as had been recommended by Moore and Fraser at a meeting the previous afternoon . Due to the tight timeline for 1921 strikings of the dollar , it was not possible to await Baker 's response , so on the authority of Treasury Undersecretary Seymour Parker Gilbert , who was approached by O 'Reilly , the Mint proceeded with the redesign . To satisfy Harding 's executive order , the Fine Arts Commission quickly approved the change , and by the time Baker wired his approval on December 24 , without being able to see the revisions , Gilbert had already approved the revised design in Secretary Mellon 's absence . A press release was issued late on December 24 , stating that the broken sword which had appeared on de Francisci 's alternate reverse would not appear on the issued coin . In its December 25 edition , the Herald took full credit for the deletion of the broken sword from the coin 's design . 
 Farran Zerbe , whose paper to the ANA convention helped launch the dollar proposal , saw de Francisci 's defense and the press release , and suggested that the sculptor had mistakenly thought his alternate design had been approved . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Initial release = = = 
 The removal of the sword from the coinage hub , which had already been produced by reduction from the plaster models , was accomplished by painstaking work by Mint Chief Engraver Morgan , using extremely fine engraving tools under magnification . Morgan did the work on December 23 in the presence of de Francisci , who had been summoned to the Philadelphia Mint to ensure the work met with his approval . It was insufficient merely to remove the sword , as the rest of the design had to be adjusted . Morgan had to hide the excision ; he did so by extending the olive branch , previously half @-@ hidden by the sword , but had to remove a small length of stem that showed to the left of the eagle 's talons . Morgan also strengthened the rays , and sharpened the appearance of the eagle 's leg . The chief engraver did his work with such skill that the work on the dollar was not known for over 85 years . 
 On December 28 , Philadelphia Mint Superintendent Freas Styer wired Baker in San Francisco , reporting the first striking of the Peace dollar . The Mint later reported that 1 @,@ 006 @,@ 473 pieces were struck in 1921 , a rate of output for the four days remaining in the year that Burdette calls " amazing " ; he speculates that minting of 1921 Peace dollars continued into 1922 . The first coin struck was to be sent to President Harding , but what became of it is something of a mystery : O 'Reilly indicated that she had the coin sent to Harding , but the inventory of Harding 's estate , prepared after the President died in office less than two years later , does not mention it , nor is there any mention of the coin in Harding 's papers . Breen , in his earlier book on U.S. coins , stated that the coin was delivered to Harding by messenger on January 3 , 1922 , but does not state the source of his information . A few proofs of the 1921 production were struck early in the run , in both satin and matte finishes , but it is unknown exactly how many with either finish were created ; numismatic historians Leroy Van Allen and A. George Mallis estimate the mintage totals at 24 of the former and five of the latter . 
 The Peace dollar was released into circulation on January 3 , 1922 . In common with all silver and copper @-@ nickel dollar coins struck from 1840 to 1978 , the Peace dollar had a diameter of 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) , which was larger than the Mint 's subsequently struck modern dollar coins . Its issuance completed the redesign of United States coinage that had begun with issues in 1907 . Long lines formed at the Sub @-@ Treasury Building in New York the following day when that city 's Federal Reserve Bank received a shipment ; the 75 @,@ 000 coins initially sent by the Mint were " practically exhausted " by the end of the day . Rumors that the coins did not stack well were contradicted by bank cashiers , who demonstrated for The New York Times that the coins stacked about as well as the Morgan dollars . De Francisci had paid Morgan for 50 of the new dollars ; on January 3 , Morgan sent him the pieces . According to his wife , de Francisci had bet several people that he would lose the design competition ; he used the pieces to pay off the bets and did not keep any . 
 According to one Philadelphia newspaper , 
 Liberty is getting younger . Take it from the new ' Peace Dollar , ' put in circulation yesterday , the young woman who has been adorning silver currency for many years , never looked better than in the ' cart wheel ' that the Philadelphia Mint has just started to turn out . The young lady , moreover , has lost her Greek profile . <unk> [ sic ] beauty seems to have been superseded by the newer ' flapper ' type . 
 = = = Modification and production = = = 
 From the start , the Mint found that excessive pressure had to be applied to fully bring out the design of the coin , and the dies broke rapidly . On January 10 , 1922 , O 'Reilly , still serving as Acting Mint Director in Baker 's absence , ordered production halted . Dies had been sent to the Denver and San Francisco mints in anticipation of beginning coinage there ; they were ordered not to begin work until the difficulties had been resolved . The Commission of Fine Arts was asked to advise what changes might solve the problems . Both Fraser and de Francisci were called to Philadelphia , and after repeated attempts to solve the problem without reducing the relief failed , de Francisci agreed to modify his design to reduce the relief . The plaster models he prepared were reduced to coin size using the Mint 's Janvier reducing lathe . However , even after 15 years of possessing the pantograph @-@ like device , the Mint had no expert in its use on its staff , and , according to Burdette , " [ h ] ad a technician from Tiffany 's or Medallic Art [ Company ] been called in , the 1922 low relief coins might have turned out noticeably better than they did " . 
 Approximately 32 @,@ 400 coins on which Morgan had tried to keep a higher relief were struck in January 1922 . While all were believed to have been melted , one circulated example has surfaced . Also , high relief 1922 proof dollars occasionally appear on the market and it is believed that about six to 10 of them exist . The new low @-@ relief coins , which Fraser accepted on behalf of the Commission , though under protest , were given limited production runs in Philadelphia in early February . When the results proved satisfactory , San Francisco began striking its first Peace dollars using the low @-@ relief design on February 13 , with Denver initiating production on February 21 , and Philadelphia on February 23 . The three mints together struck over 84 million pieces in 1922 . 
 The 1926 Peace dollar , from all mints , has on the obverse the word " God " , slightly <unk> . The Peace dollar 's lettering tended to strike indistinctly , and Burdette suggests that the new chief engraver , John R. Sinnock ( who succeeded Morgan after his 1925 death ) , may have begun work in the middle of the motto " In God We Trust " , and for reasons unknown , only the one word was <unk> . No Mint records discuss the matter , which was not discovered until 1999 . 
 The Peace dollar circulated mainly in the Western United States , where coins were preferred over paper money , and saw little circulation elsewhere . Aside from this use , the coins were retained in vaults as part of bank reserves . They would commonly be obtained from banks as Christmas presents , with most deposited again in January . With the last of the Pittman Act silver struck into coins in 1928 , the Mint ceased production of Peace dollars . 
 Production resumed in 1934 , due to another congressional act ; this one requiring the Mint to purchase large quantities of domestic silver , a commodity whose price was at a historic low . This Act assured producers of a ready market for their product , with the Mint gaining a large profit in seigniorage , through monetizing cheaply purchased silver — the Mint in fact paid for some shipments of silver bullion in silver dollars . Pursuant to this authorization , over seven million silver Peace dollars were struck in 1934 and 1935 . Mint officials gave consideration to striking 1936 silver dollars , and in fact prepared working dies , but as there was no commercial demand for them , none were actually struck . With Mint Chief Engraver Sinnock thinking it unlikely that there would be future demand for the denomination , the master dies were ordered destroyed in January 1937 . 
 = = Striking of 1964 @-@ D dollars = = 
 On August 3 , 1964 , Congress passed legislation providing for the striking of 45 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 silver dollars . Coins , including the silver dollar , had become scarce due to hoarding as the price of silver rose past the point at which a silver dollar was worth more as bullion than as currency . The new pieces were intended to be used at Nevada casinos and elsewhere in the West where " hard money " was popular . Many in the numismatic press complained that the issue would only satisfy a small special interest , and would do nothing to alleviate the general coin shortage . Much of the pressure for the coins to be struck was being applied by the Senate Majority Leader , Mike Mansfield ( Democrat – Montana ) , who represented a state that heavily used silver dollars . Preparations for the striking proceeded at a reluctant Mint Bureau . Some working dies had survived Sinnock 's 1937 destruction order , but were found to be in poor condition , and Mint Assistant Engraver ( later Chief Engraver ) Frank Gasparro was authorized to produce new ones . Mint officials had also considered using Morgan 's design ; this idea was dropped and Gasparro replicated the Peace dollar dies . The reverse dies all bore Denver mintmarks ; as the coins were slated for circulation in the West , it was deemed logical to strike them nearby . 
 In early 1965 , Treasury Secretary C. Douglas Dillon wrote to President Lyndon Johnson , opposing the coin issue and pointing out that the pieces would be unlikely to circulate in Montana or anywhere else ; they would simply be hoarded . Nevertheless , Dillon concluded that as Senator Mansfield insisted , the coins would have to be struck . Dillon resigned on April 1 ; his successor , Henry H. Fowler , was immediately questioned by Mansfield about the dollars , and he assured the senator that things would be worked out to his satisfaction . Mint Director Eva Adams hoped to avoid striking the silver dollars , but wanted to keep the $ 600 @,@ 000 appropriated for that expense . Senator Mansfield refused to consider any cancellation or delay and on May 12 , 1965 , the Denver Mint began trial strikes of the 1964 @-@ D Peace dollar — the Mint had obtained congressional authorization to continue striking 1964 @-@ dated coins into 1965 . 
 The new pieces were publicly announced on May 15 , 1965 , and coin dealers immediately offered $ 7 @.@ 50 each for them , ensuring that they would not circulate . The public announcement prompted a storm of objections . Both the public and many congressmen saw the issue as a poor use of Mint resources at a time of severe coin shortages , which would only benefit coin dealers . On May 24 , one day before a hastily called congressional hearing , Adams announced that the pieces were deemed trial strikes , never intended for circulation . The Mint later stated that 316 @,@ 076 pieces had been struck ; all were reported melted amid heavy security . To ensure that there would be no repetition , Congress inserted a provision in the Coinage Act of 1965 forbidding the coinage of silver dollars for five years . No 1964 @-@ D Peace dollars are known to exist in either public or private hands . Two specimens were discovered in a Treasury vault in 1970 and were destroyed , but rumors and speculation about others in illegal private possession continue to appear . The issue has also been privately restruck using unofficial dies and genuine , earlier @-@ date Peace dollars resulting in an altered date . 
 Some Peace dollars using a base metal composition were struck as experimental pieces in 1970 in anticipation of the approval of the Eisenhower dollar ; they are all presumed destroyed . This new dollar coin was approved by an act signed by President Richard Nixon on December 31 , 1970 , with the obverse to depict President Dwight D. Eisenhower , who had died in March , 1969 . Circulating Eisenhower dollars contained no precious metal , though some for collectors were struck in 40 % silver . 
 = = Mintage figures = = 
 None of the Peace dollar mintages are particularly rare , and A Guide Book of United States Coins ( or Red Book ) lists low @-@ grade circulated specimens for most years for little more than the coin 's bullion value . Two exceptions are the first year of issue 1921 Peace dollar , minted only at the Philadelphia mint and issued in high relief , and the low @-@ mintage 1928 @-@ P Peace dollar . The prices for the 1928 @-@ P dollar are much lower than its mintage of 360 @,@ 649 would suggest , because the U.S. mint announced that limited quantities would be produced and many were saved . In contrast the 1934 @-@ S dollar was not saved in great numbers so that prices for circulated specimens are fairly inexpensive but mid @-@ grade uncirculated specimens can cost thousands of dollars . 
 = All the Way ( Eddie Vedder song ) = 
 " All the Way " ( also known as " ( Someday We 'll Go ) All the Way " and referred to as " Go All the Way " ) is a song written and performed by Evanston , Illinois native and Pearl Jam vocalist Eddie Vedder about the Chicago Cubs . It was first performed in public on August 2 , 2007 , recorded on August 21 , 2008 and August 22 , 2008 , and released as a single on September 18 , 2008 . 
 The Cubs franchise last won the World Series in 1908 , and Vedder has been a lifelong Cubs fan . The song , which fondly looks forward to the Cubs ' next World Series victory , was written with the encouragement of certain Chicago Cubs , most notably Ernie Banks . The song was first performed in Chicago and was recorded over two nights in 2008 at the end Vedder 's first solo tour . 
 = = Origin and recording = = 
 Although Pearl Jam vocalist Eddie Vedder , who was raised in Evanston , Illinois and later San Diego County , California , is closely associated with Seattle grunge music , he has been a lifelong Chicago Cubs fan . He has performed the song " Take Me Out to the Ball Game " during the seventh @-@ inning stretch at several Cubs games and thrown out the ceremonial first pitch at Wrigley Field . His first seventh @-@ inning stretch performance had been on Independence Day ( July 4 ) 1998 . 
 Vedder has attended the Cubs fantasy camp for several years . While attending the camp one year , former Cubs shortstop and first baseman Ernie Banks requested that Vedder write a song about the Cubs . Vedder wrote " All the Way " the night before the camp started and first performed it at Pearl Jam 's August 2 , 2007 concert at The Vic Theatre in Chicago with Cubs pitcher Kerry Wood and other Cubs players in attendance . On August 3 , 2007 , one day after " All the Way " was premiered live , Vedder performed " Take Me Out to the Ball Game " during the seventh @-@ inning stretch at Wrigley Field for the fourth time and threw out the first pitch for the first time . Vedder 's band , Pearl Jam , was in Chicago that week to perform at Lollapalooza , where the band was the headlining act for the three @-@ day festival that ended on August 5 , 2007 . 
 The version of " All the Way " heard on the commercial single release is mixed from recordings of the August 21 , 2008 and August 22 , 2008 solo performances of the song by Vedder at the Auditorium Theatre in Chicago . Vedder performed at the Auditorium Theatre on August 21 and August 22 , 2008 on a three @-@ week extension of his solo tour that began in Boston , Massachusetts at the Boston Opera House ( 1980 ) and ended in Chicago . The solo tour had originally begun in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada at The Centre on April 2 , 2008 . This tour was Vedder 's first solo tour . 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 The 3 : 39 song is in the folk music genre , and it is perceived as a sing @-@ along sea <unk> or drinking song . The lyrics to the song include lines such as " Our heroes wear pinstripes / <unk> in blue / Give us a chance to feel like heroes , too . " The song makes references to Ernie Banks , Wrigley Field , and a specific reference to Banks ' catch phrase of " Let 's play two ! " The refrain includes the phrase " Someday we 'll go all the way , Yeah , someday we 'll go all the way , " which anticipates the day the Cubs win the World Series , gives the song its name . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 On September 18 , 2008 , " All the Way " was made available for digital download via Pearl Jam 's official website for US $ 0 @.@ 99 . On approximately September 30 , 2008 , a CD single version was made available for purchase at select stores in the Chicago area . A souvenir 45 single format version is also a possibility . The digital download and CD single have been released with an associated single cover art image that is a modified version of the Wrigley Field outfield wall . 
 Philip K. Wrigley had employee Bill Veeck , Jr. add ivy to the outfield walls of Wrigley Field in September 1937 . Wrigley Field is the home stadium for the Chicago Cubs , and its wall is well known for being covered in ivy except for a few select places where signs are present as well as doors to locker rooms and such . The brick is visible under the ivy at the stadium in locations where the signs designate the distance from the wall to home plate measured in feet . The cover art image replaces the distance with the words " All the Way " . 
 By the time of the single release , local Chicago radio stations and sports bars had begun to play the song in anticipation of the 2008 Cubs ' playoff run . The song is considered to be an earnest tribute to the Cubs . According to at least one source , the song is reminiscent of " A Hard Rain 's a @-@ Gonna Fall " by American singer @-@ songwriter Bob Dylan and much less upbeat than the song " Go , Cubs , Go " by American folk music singer @-@ songwriter Steve Goodman . The Huffington Post encourages listeners to compare the song to Goodman 's " Go , Cubs , Go " . Another source compares the song to American country @-@ folk singer @-@ songwriter John Prine 's 1974 song " Dear Abby " in terms of melody and cadence as well as the theme of Goodman 's " A Dying Cubs Fan ’ s Last Request " . 
 At The Smashing Pumpkins ' November 20 , 2008 concert at the Chicago Theatre , frontman Billy Corgan criticized Vedder and the song . Corgan stated , " If the Cubs did have a chance this last year that just passed , fuckin ’ Eddie Vedder killed that shit dead . Last I checked Eddie ain ’ t living here , okay ? Eddie ain ’ t living here to write a song about my fuckin ’ team . " 
 = Dr. Mario = 
 Dr. Mario ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> Mario , often stylized as D <unk> . Mario ) is a 1990 Mario arcade @-@ style action puzzle video game designed by Gunpei Yokoi and produced by Takahiro Harada . Nintendo developed and published the game for the Nintendo Entertainment System and Game Boy consoles . The game 's soundtrack was composed by Hirokazu Tanaka . 
 The game focuses on the player character Mario , who assumes the role of a doctor and is tasked with eradicating deadly viruses . In this falling block puzzle game , the player 's objective is to destroy the viruses populating the on @-@ screen playing field by using colored capsules that are dropped into the field . The player manipulates the capsules as they fall so that they are aligned with viruses of matching colors , which removes them from play . The player progresses through the game by eliminating all the viruses on the screen in each level . 
 Dr. Mario received positive reception , appearing on several " Best Nintendo Games of All Time " lists . The game has been ported , remade , or has had a sequel on every Nintendo home console since the NES as well as most portable consoles , including a re @-@ release in 2004 on the Game Boy Advance as part of the Classic NES Series . Modified versions of Dr. Mario exist as minigames in WarioWare , Inc . : Mega Microgames ! , Brain Age 2 : More Training in Minutes a Day ! , and Brain Age : Concentration Training . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dr. Mario is a falling block tile @-@ matching video game , in which Mario assumes the role of a doctor , dropping two @-@ colored medical capsules into a medicine bottle representing the playing field . This area is populated by viruses of three colors : red , yellow , and blue . In a manner and style considered similar to Tetris , the player manipulates each capsule as it falls , moving it left or right and rotating it such that it is positioned alongside the viruses and any existing capsules . When four or more capsule halves or viruses of matching color are aligned in vertical or horizontal configurations , they are removed from play . The main objective is to complete levels , which is accomplished by eliminating all viruses from the playing field . A game over occurs if capsules fill up the playing field in a way that obstructs the bottle 's narrow neck . 
 Players can select the degree of starting difficulty any time a new game is started . The initial level chosen is a value between zero and twenty that determines the number of viruses to clear , and the three game speed options change how fast the capsules fall in the bottle . The player 's score is based solely on the elimination of viruses , not on the time taken to complete the level or the number of capsules used . If players complete the highest difficulty level , they can continue playing to accumulate a higher score , but the number of viruses to clear remains the same . Additional points are awarded when multiple viruses are eliminated at once , but no additional points are awarded for initiating chain reactions , in which the elimination of one set of objects triggers the elimination of another set . The game speed is also a factor in how the game calculates scoring ; higher speed levels yield more points . 
 Dr. Mario offers a multiplayer gaming mode in which two players compete against each other in separate playing fields . In this mode , the player 's goal is to clear their own playing field of viruses before the other player does . Eliminating multiple viruses or initiating chain reactions can cause additional capsules to fall onto the opponent 's playing field . A player wins a single game upon eliminating all the viruses or if the other playing field fills up . The first player to win three games wins overall . 
 = = Development and releases = = 
 Dr. Mario was designed by Gunpei Yokoi , creator of the Game Boy and Game & Watch handheld systems , and produced by Takahiro Harada , who also acted as producer of the Metroid series . The game 's music , later re @-@ used and arranged in games such as Super Smash Bros. Melee , was composed by Hirokazu Tanaka , who later became president of Creatures Inc . , an affiliate of Nintendo that owns one @-@ third of the copyright regarding the Pokémon franchise . 
 = = = Re @-@ releases = = = 
 Dr. Mario spawned a number of remakes and ports that were released on various Nintendo consoles . The original version 's multiplayer portion was ported to two Nintendo arcade systems in 1990 : the Nintendo Vs . System ( under the title Vs . Dr. Mario ) and the PlayChoice @-@ 10 . 
 An enhanced remake of Dr. Mario was paired with Tetris in the Super Nintendo Entertainment System compilation game Tetris & Dr. Mario , released on 30 December 1994 . This version of Dr. Mario was re @-@ released in Japan on 30 March 1997 , as a downloadable title for the Super Famicom 's Satellaview peripheral , under the name Dr. Mario BS Version ( <unk> , <unk> Mario Bī Esu Ban ) . It was re @-@ released again in Japan as a downloadable game for the Super Famicom 's and Game Boy 's Nintendo Power cartridges . 
 The NES version was ported twice to the Game Boy Advance : first in 2004 as one of thirty games in the Classic NES Series ( known as the Famicom Mini Series in Japan ) , then bundled with a version of the Puzzle League series in 2005 under the title Dr. Mario & Puzzle League , this time with updated graphics and new music to choose from . On 20 May 2003 , Nintendo released the " Nintendo GameCube Preview Disc " for the Nintendo GameCube , which allows players to download the NES version of Dr. Mario to their Game Boy Advance consoles using the Nintendo GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable . 
 The original Game Boy version was made available on the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console in 2011 and 2012 . The NES version was released on the Wii U Virtual Console in 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dr. Mario and its re @-@ releases received generally positive reviews , although some parents were critical of its premise due to its inclusion of medicine in a children 's game . One notably negative review , by ACE , scored the Game Boy version 510 / 1000 . It criticized the game 's uninspiring graphics and repetitive play . The review also said the game " reeks of plagiarism " , stating it is worse than the original games it is modeled after . 
 Reviewing the NES version , Allgame praised it , stating that on its release , " when puzzle games were flooding the market , Dr. Mario stands out as one of the best , combining a smooth learning curve , playful graphics and memorable tunes " and " fundamental concepts may be simple , but the addictive gameplay becomes progressively more complex as the speed increases and additional viruses are added . " 
 GamePro gave the Tetris & Dr. Mario compilation a rave review . They praised the Mixed Match mode and the SNES enhanced graphics and sounds , and concluded " Sharp controls and absorbing action are what make these two classics even better as a pair than they were alone . " Next Generation , in contrast , said the compilation was only significant for being the first appearance of Tetris on the SNES , summarizing that " Yeah , it 's great , but chances are you own a copy of one or both of these games already . " They did , however , praise Nintendo for having the " <unk> " to package their Tetris @-@ inspired game with Tetris itself . 
 Dr. Mario was rated the 134th best game released on a Nintendo system in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list , by ScrewAttack as the seventh best Mario game of all time , and by IGN as the 51st best NES game of all time . IGN also rated the game 's soundtrack , composed by Hirokazu Tanaka , as seventh in its list of the top ten greatest 8 @-@ Bit soundtracks . GamesRadar ranked it the 13th best NES game ever made . The staff called it " one of the most celebrated of the [ puzzle ] genre . " Game Informer 's Ben Reeves called it the seventh best Game Boy game . 
 The Game Boy Advance re @-@ release as part of the Classic NES series holds a rating of 66 % on Metacritic based on 10 reviews . Most reviews pointed out the game 's addictiveness and praise the addition of wireless multiplayer , but some questioned the relevance of the game 's re @-@ release as a standalone title . Eurogamer said the game was " still as playable , addictive and maddening as it was back in 1990 " but criticized Nintendo for re @-@ releasing classic games as standalone titles in the Classic NES Series instead of as a compilation , like Atari 's Atari Anthology or Midway 's Midway Arcade Treasures . Craig Harris , in his review for IGN , sarcastically expressed unease over the game 's use of medicine . He enjoyed the addictive gameplay , but criticized the black @-@ and @-@ white manual which made it difficult to understand the color @-@ based gameplay mechanics . While 1UP.com noted that the game 's " color @-@ matching action is more engrossing than Mario Bros. ' turtle @-@ punching platform hopping " , the reviewer strongly questioned whether this re @-@ release is worth its sale price by itself when a version of Dr. Mario was included in another Game Boy Advance game , WarioWare , Inc . : Mega Microgames ! . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Following the commercial success of this game , Nintendo released several follow @-@ up titles in the Dr. Mario series . Dr. Mario 64 , released in 2001 for the Nintendo 64 , features Wario and several Wario Land 3 characters , and offers numerous game modes , including a story @-@ focused single @-@ player mode . The game also supports simultaneous multiplayer for up to four players at once . Dr. Mario 64 was subsequently released in Japan in the compilation game Nintendo Puzzle Collection on the Nintendo GameCube . Dr. Mario Online Rx , released in 2008 on WiiWare , offers online multiplayer via Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection . Dr. Mario Express , released in 2009 for the Nintendo DSi , does not support multiplayer gameplay . Dr. Luigi , released in 2013 , features Luigi as a playable character and has all the modes in Dr. Mario Online Rx , as well as a new mode with L @-@ shaped capsules . The latest installment , Dr. Mario : Miracle Cure , was released 2015 and introduced power @-@ ups to the series . 
 The character of Dr. Mario appears as an unlockable playable character in the 2001 fighting game Super Smash Bros. Melee , where he attacks by throwing capsules known as " <unk> " . There are two ways to unlock Dr. Mario as a playable character , either by completing Classic , Adventure or All @-@ Star mode with Mario ( using no continues ) or by completing 100 melee battles . The game 's sequel , Super Smash Bros. Brawl , does not feature Dr. Mario as a playable character , but it includes the Melee remix of Dr. Mario 's " Fever " background music theme and a version of the " Chill " theme music arranged by Masaaki Iwasaki , who had previously composed for Magical Drop as part of the Data East Sound Team . Dr. Mario characters also appear in the game as collectible stickers . Dr. Mario would later return as an unlockable playable character in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. 
 A version of the game called Dr. Wario , which replaces Mario with Wario , is included as an unlockable minigame in WarioWare , Inc . : Mega Microgames ! . A simplified version of Dr. Mario also appears in Brain Age 2 : More Training in Minutes a Day ! as a minigame called " Virus Buster " , which is played by using the system 's touch screen to drag the capsules around the playing field . 
 The viruses appear as enemies in Mario & Luigi : Superstar Saga and Mario & Luigi : Dream Team . In that game , they change colors every time they are attacked , and they are all defeated when they are all the same color , in a similar fashion to how they are defeated by the same color of the capsules in Dr. Mario . 
 The characters of Dr. Mario and the viruses appeared in print media numerous times : Valiant published a volume of Nintendo Comics System 's entitled The Doctor Is In ... Over His Head , Dr. Mario also makes a brief appearance in the first volume of Super Mario @-@ Kun , and the viruses also appear at the end of Super Mario Adventures . 
 = Weather front = 
 A weather front is a boundary separating two masses of air of different densities , and is the principal cause of meteorological phenomena . In surface weather analyses , fronts are depicted using various colored triangles and half @-@ circles , depending on the type of front . The air masses separated by a front usually differ in temperature and humidity . Cold fronts may feature narrow bands of thunderstorms and severe weather , and may on occasion be preceded by squall lines or dry lines . Warm fronts are usually preceded by stratiform precipitation and fog . The weather usually clears quickly after a front 's passage . Some fronts produce no precipitation and little cloudiness , although there is invariably a wind shift . 
 Cold fronts and occluded fronts generally move from west to east , while warm fronts move poleward . Because of the greater density of air in their wake , cold fronts and cold occlusions move faster than warm fronts and warm occlusions . Mountains and warm bodies of water can slow the movement of fronts . When a front becomes stationary , and the density contrast across the frontal boundary vanishes , the front can degenerate into a line which separates regions of differing wind velocity , known as a shearline . This is most common over the open ocean . 
 = = Bergeron classification of air masses = = 
 The Bergeron classification is the most widely accepted form of air mass classification . Air mass classification involves three letters . The first letter describes its moisture properties , with c used for continental air masses ( dry ) and m for maritime air masses ( moist ) . The second letter describes the thermal characteristic of its source region : T for tropical , P for polar , A for arctic or Antarctic , M for monsoon , E for equatorial , and S for superior air ( dry air formed by significant upward motion in the atmosphere ) . The third letter is used to designate the stability of the atmosphere . If the air mass is colder than the ground below it , it is labeled k . If the air mass is warmer than the ground below it , it is labeled w . Fronts separate air masses of different types or origins , and are located along troughs of lower pressure . 
 = = Surface weather analysis = = 
 A surface weather analysis is a special type of weather map which provides a view of weather elements over a geographical area at a specified time based on information from ground @-@ based weather stations . Weather maps are created by plotting or tracing the values of relevant quantities such as sea @-@ level pressure , temperature , and cloud cover onto a geographical map to help find synoptic scale features such as weather fronts . Surface weather analyses have special symbols which show frontal systems , cloud cover , precipitation , or other important information . For example , an H may represent high pressure , implying fair weather . An L on the other hand may represent low pressure , which frequently accompanies precipitation . Low pressure also creates surface winds deriving from high pressure zones . Various symbols are used not just for frontal zones and other surface boundaries on weather maps , but also to depict the present weather at various locations on the weather map . In addition , areas of precipitation help determine the frontal type and location . 
 = = Front types = = 
 There are two different words used within meteorology to describe weather around a frontal zone . The term " <unk> " describes boundaries which show instability , meaning air rises rapidly along and over the boundary to cause significant weather changes . A " <unk> " is weaker , bringing smaller changes in temperature and moisture , as well as limited rainfall . 
 = = = Cold front = = = 
 A cold front is located at the leading edge of the temperature drop off , which in an isotherm analysis shows up as the leading edge of the isotherm gradient , and it normally lies within a sharp surface trough . Cold fronts often bring heavy thunderstorms , rain and hail . Cold front can produce sharper changes in weather and move up to twice as quickly as warm fronts , since cold air is denser than warm air and rapidly replaces the warm air preceding the boundary . On weather maps , the surface position of the cold front is marked with the symbol of a blue line of triangle @-@ shaped pips pointing in the direction of travel , and it is placed at the leading edge of the cooler air mass . Cold fronts come in association with a low @-@ pressure area . The concept of colder , dense air " wedging " under the less dense warmer air is often used to depict how air is lifted along a frontal boundary . The cold air wedging underneath warmer air creates the strongest winds just above the ground surface , a phenomenon often associated with property @-@ damaging wind gusts . This lift would then form a narrow line of showers and thunderstorms if enough moisture were present . However , this concept isn 't an accurate description of the physical processes ; upward motion is not produced because of warm air " ramping up " cold , dense air , rather , <unk> circulation is behind the upward forcing . 
 = = = Warm front = = = 
 Warm fronts are at the leading edge of a homogeneous warm air mass , which is located on the equatorward edge of the gradient in isotherms , and lie within broader troughs of low pressure than cold fronts . A warm front moves more slowly than the cold front which usually follows because cold air is denser and harder to remove from the Earth 's surface . This also forces temperature differences across warm fronts to be broader in scale . Clouds ahead of the warm front are mostly stratiform , and rainfall gradually increases as the front approaches . Fog can also occur preceding a warm frontal passage . Clearing and warming is usually rapid after frontal passage . If the warm air mass is unstable , thunderstorms may be embedded among the stratiform clouds ahead of the front , and after frontal passage thundershowers may continue . On weather maps , the surface location of a warm front is marked with a red line of semicircles pointing in the direction of travel . 
 = = = Occluded front = = = 
 An occluded front is formed when a cold front overtakes a warm <unk> and usually form around mature low @-@ pressure areas . The cold and warm fronts curve naturally poleward into the point of occlusion , which is also known as the triple point . It lies within a sharp trough , but the air mass behind the boundary can be either warm or cold . In a cold occlusion , the air mass overtaking the warm front is cooler than the cool air ahead of the warm front and plows under both air masses . In a warm occlusion , the air mass overtaking the warm front is warmer than the cold air ahead of the warm front and rides over the colder air mass while lifting the warm air . 
 A wide variety of weather can be found along an occluded front , with thunderstorms possible , but usually their passage is associated with a drying of the air mass . Within the occlusion of the front , a circulation of air brings warm air upward and sends drafts of cold air downward , or vice @-@ versa depending on the occlusion the front is experiencing . <unk> and clouds are associated with the trowal , the projection on the Earth 's surface of the tongue of warm air aloft formed during the occlusion process of the depression . 
 Occluded fronts are indicated on a weather map by a purple line with alternating half @-@ circles and triangles pointing in direction of travel . The trowal is indicated by a series of blue and red junction lines . 
 = = = Stationary front = = = 
 A stationary front is a non @-@ moving ( or stalled ) boundary between two air masses , neither of which is strong enough to replace the other . They tend to remain essentially in the same area for extended periods of time , usually moving in waves . There is normally a broad temperature gradient behind the boundary with more widely spaced isotherm packing . 
 A wide variety of weather can be found along a stationary front , but usually clouds and prolonged precipitation are found there . Stationary fronts either dissipate after several days or devolve into shear lines , but they can transform into a cold or warm front if conditions aloft change . Stationary fronts are marked on weather maps with alternating red half @-@ circles and blue spikes pointing in opposite directions , indicating no significant movement . 
 When stationary fronts become smaller in scale , degenerating to a narrow zone where wind direction changes significantly over a relatively short distance , they become known as shearlines . A shearline is depicted as a line of red dots and dashes . 
 = = = Dry line = = = 
 A similar phenomenon to a weather front is the dry line , which is the boundary between air masses with significant moisture differences . When the westerlies increase on the north side of surface highs , areas of lowered pressure will form downwind of north – south oriented mountain chains , leading to the formation of a lee trough . Near the surface during daylight hours , warm moist air is denser than dry air of greater temperature , and thus the warm moist air wedges under the drier air like a cold front . At higher altitudes , the warm moist air is less dense than the dry air and the boundary slope reverses . In the vicinity of the reversal aloft , severe weather is possible , especially when a triple point is formed with a cold front . A weaker form of the dry line seen more commonly is the lee trough , which displays weaker differences in moisture . When moisture pools along the boundary during the warm season , it can be the focus of diurnal thunderstorms . 
 The dry line may occur anywhere on earth in regions intermediate between desert areas and warm seas . The southern plains west of the Mississippi River in the United States are a particularly favored location . The dry line normally moves eastward during the day and westward at night . A dry line is depicted on National Weather Service ( NWS ) surface analyses as an orange line with scallops facing into the moist sector . Dry lines are one of the few surface fronts where the pips indicated do not necessarily reflect the direction of motion . 
 = = = Squall line = = = 
 Organized areas of thunderstorm activity not only reinforce pre @-@ existing frontal zones , but can outrun cold fronts in a pattern where the upper level jet splits apart into two streams , with the resultant Mesoscale Convective System ( MCS ) forming at the point of the upper level split in the wind pattern running southeast into the warm sector parallel to low @-@ level thickness lines . When the convection is strong and linear or curved , the MCS is called a squall line , with the feature placed at the leading edge of the significant wind shift and pressure rise . Even weaker and less organized areas of thunderstorms lead to locally cooler air and higher pressures , and outflow boundaries exist ahead of this type of activity , which can act as foci for additional thunderstorm activity later in the day . 
 These features are often depicted in the warm season across the United States on surface analyses and lie within surface troughs . If outflow boundaries or squall lines form over arid regions , a haboob may result . Squall lines are depicted on NWS surface analyses as an alternating pattern of two red dots and a dash labelled SQLN or SQUALL LINE , while outflow boundaries are depicted as troughs with a label of OUTFLOW <unk> . 
 = = Precipitation produced = = 
 Fronts are the principal cause of significant weather . Convective precipitation ( showers , thundershowers , and related unstable weather ) is caused by air being lifted and condensing into clouds by the movement of the cold front or cold occlusion under a mass of warmer , moist air . If the temperature differences of the two air masses involved are large and the turbulence is extreme because of wind shear and the presence of a strong jet stream , " roll clouds " and tornadoes may occur . 
 In the warm season , lee troughs , breezes , outflow boundaries and occlusions can lead to convection if enough moisture is available . Orographic precipitation is precipitation created through the lifting action of air moving over terrain such as mountains and hills , which is most common behind cold fronts that move into mountainous areas . It may sometimes occur in advance of warm fronts moving northward to the east of mountainous terrain . However , precipitation along warm fronts is relatively steady , as in rain or drizzle . Fog , sometimes extensive and dense , often occurs in pre @-@ warm @-@ frontal areas . Although , not all fronts produce precipitation or even clouds because moisture must be present in the air mass which is being lifted . 
 = = Movement = = 
 Fronts are generally guided by winds aloft , but do not move as quickly . Cold fronts and occluded fronts in the Northern Hemisphere usually travel from the northwest to southeast , while warm fronts move more poleward with time . In the Northern Hemisphere a warm front moves from southwest to northeast . In the Southern Hemisphere , the reverse is true ; a cold front usually moves from southwest to northeast , and a warm front moves from northwest to southeast . Movement is largely caused by the pressure gradient force ( horizontal differences in atmospheric pressure ) and the Coriolis effect , which is caused by Earth 's spinning about its axis . Frontal zones can be slowed down by geographic features like mountains and large bodies of warm water . 
 = Faidherbe Bridge = 
 Faidherbe Bridge is a road bridge over the Sénégal River which links the island of the city of Saint @-@ Louis in Senegal to the African mainland . The metal bridge is 507 @.@ 35 metres ( 1 @,@ 664 @.@ 5 ft ) long and 10 @.@ 5 metres ( 34 ft ) wide , weighing 1 @,@ 500 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 500 long tons ; 1 @,@ 700 short tons ) . It has eight spans , of which the longest five are 78 @.@ 26 metres ( 256 @.@ 8 ft ) . 
 Until the 19th century , access to the island was made through boats . After the introduction of a ferry that could transport 150 passengers , Louis Faidherbe quickly saw that the system was clearly overrun and decided to construct the first bridge over the Sénégal River . The governor of Senegal , Henri de Lamothe decided to take a loan worth five million gold francs to construct a new metallic bridge in Saint @-@ Louis . After the construction company was selected , they all decided to construct a new metallic bridge with a section capable of turning 90 degrees to allow the passage of ships . The bridge was opened on July 14 , 1897 . In the 2000s , a US $ 27 million rehabilitation plan has been inaugurated . 
 = = The first bridge = = 
 The city of Saint @-@ Louis , the first capital of the French West Africa , is situated on an island near the estuary of the Sénégal River . It is separated from the Atlantic Ocean by a thin 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) strip of sand called the <unk> de Barbarie , which starts from <unk> in Mauritania and extends all the way to Saint @-@ Louis . The suburbs of Guet <unk> and <unk> @-@ Tout are situated in this area . Until the 19th century , access to the island was by boat . Troops , horses and the equipment of the French colonial army all had to be transported by small boats . 
 In 1858 , Louis Faidherbe , the governor of Senegal , inaugurated the <unk> boat that was capable of transporting 150 passengers , animals and all kinds of goods . The boat made ten crosses every day and the fares differed : five centimes for a person , 50 centimes for a horse , cow or camel , and two francs for a carriage . In less than a year it was obvious that this system was overrun and a second boat was introduced but with no success . 
 Seeing this , the frigate captain Robin , friend of Louis Faidherbe , asked Prince Jérôme Napoléon , Minister of Algeria and the African Colonies , for approval for construction of a floating bridge . Opened on July 2 , 1865 , the bridge had a total length of 680 metres ( 2 @,@ 230 ft ) ( the floating part of the bridge had a length of 350 metres or 1 @,@ 150 feet ) and a width of 4 metres ( 13 ft ) . The floating part was formed from 40 metal pontoons which supported a wooden deck . Three of these pontoons were specially designed so that it could be created a 20 metres ( 66 ft ) gap so that large vessels could pass . The bridge was named Faidherbe Bridge by a decree of Napoleon III of France . 
 The opening in 1885 of the Saint @-@ Louis – Dakar railway increased the traffic over the bridge . The railway reached all the way to Sor and all the goods hauled between the coast and the railway station had to cross over the bridge . To prevent the breakdown of the bridge a special decree was given so that the maximum weight for a vehicle that crosses the bridge to be less than one and a half tonnes . With all its difficulties the bridge remained in service 32 years , until 1897 when it was dismantled . 
 = = Construction of a new bridge = = 
 In the opening of his speech in the General Council of Senegal , governor Henri de Lamothe proposed that the country should take a loan for infrastructure development . The council agreed on a loan worth five million gold francs , much of the money being for the construction of a metallic bridge between Saint @-@ Louis and Sor . The loan was approved on November 2 , 1892 , by the French president Marie François Sadi Carnot . A French bank , CDG , agreed to give the loan with a low interest of only four percent . 
 The auction was organised by the Ministry of Colonies , which sent five officers to Senegal for evaluation . After examining each one these offers the Faidherbe Bridge Committee selected two of them , from Nouguier , Kessler et Cie , and from Société de Construction de Levallois @-@ Perret ( owned by Gustave Eiffel ) . The Faidherbe Bridge Committee and the technical committee in Paris agreed that the Société de Construction de Levallois @-@ Perret project was the best for the site . On the other hand , the president of the public works in Senegal and councilman Jean @-@ Jacques Crespin supported the Nouguier , Kessler et Cie project . In the end the contract was awarded to Nouguier , Kessler et Cie at a price of 1 @.@ 88 million gold francs . 
 = = Link with King Carol I Bridge = = 
 There are many myths regarding the construction of the Faidherbe Bridge which are present even today and are depicted in some tourist guides . The construction of the bridge is attributed to Gustave Eiffel . In general it says that the metallic parts of the bridge represents a gift from the French government and that the parts were originally designed for the King Carol I Bridge over the Danube River in Romania . Other sources say that the metallic parts were intended for a bridge in Austria – Hungary over the Danube River in Vienna or Budapest . Finally another myth regarding the beams of the bridge says that the parts were intended for an unspecified site but the vessel transporting mysteriously sunk and the authorities in Senegal took advantage of this situation and built a local bridge . 
 The information available in Romania for the King Carol I Bridge in Cernavodă , as well as the results of scientists in France , say that the myths are pure fiction . First of all the Romanian government never finalised the construction contract with the company of Gustave Eiffel or with another foreign company , making the decision to build the bridge only with local companies . The Cernavodă Bridge was made entirely by Romanians , fulfilling the design of Anghel <unk> , which was also the supervisor of the site . In these conditions , not knowing if the contract will be approved , it is unlikely that a foreign company would build the whole superstructure of the bridge . On the other hand , in Austria – Hungary there was no need to construct a low bridge like the Faidherbe because of the trade routes on the Danube River . 
 = = Construction of the metallic bridge = = 
 The new bridge has a metal deck formed with riveted girders . The bridge has in total eight spans of which one span of 42 @.@ 95 metres ( 140 @.@ 9 ft ) , two spans of 36 @.@ 55 metres ( 119 @.@ 9 ft ) and five spans of 78 @.@ 26 metres ( 256 @.@ 8 ft ) . The total length of the bridge is 507 @.@ 35 metres ( 1 @,@ 664 @.@ 5 ft ) and the width is 10 @.@ 5 metres ( 34 ft ) . The total weight of the deck is 1 @,@ 500 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 500 long tons ; 1 @,@ 700 short tons ) . The second span from the city is mobile , being capable of turning 45 degrees to let small ships to cross . 
 = = Opening = = 
 A first opening of the bridge took place in the same day with the ceremonies for the national day on July 14 , 1897 , in the presence of governor <unk> . The ribbon for the access zone was cut by the governor 's wife , then the officials walked a short distance to the mobile deck , which was opened to allow the passage of the military ship L <unk> . 21 cannon shots were fired at dusk and dawn to commemorate the construction of the bridge and on that day there were organised ceremonies including horse races and donkey races . The second opening was on October 19 , 1897 , in the presence of André <unk> , the prime minister of the French colonies . 
 = = Modernisation and rehabilitation works = = 
 After more than 100 years since it was opened the bridge has suffered from corrosion and was in need of urgent repair . The rehabilitation works are co @-@ financed by the French Development Agency ( AFD ) and by the Government of Senegal . The total cost of the works was estimated to be US $ 27 million , of which US $ 17 million is from AFD and US $ 10 million is from the government . 
 The spans of the bridge were replaced between November 2008 and 23 July 2011 . The total work is expected to finish in mid @-@ August and inaugurated in October 2011 . 
 = William Cooley = 
 William Cooley ( 1783 – 1863 ) was one of the first American settlers , and a regional leader , in what is now known as Broward County , in the US state of Florida . His family was killed by Seminoles in 1836 , during the Second Seminole War . The attack , known as the " New River Massacre " , caused immediate abandonment of the area by whites . 
 Cooley was born in Maryland , but little else is known about his life prior to 1813 , when he arrived in East Florida as part of a military expedition . He established himself as a farmer in the northern part of the territory before moving south , where he traded with local Indians and continued to farm . He sided with natives in a land dispute against a merchant who had received a large grant from the King of Spain and was evicting the Indians from their lands . Unhappy with the actions of the Spanish , he moved to the New River area in 1826 to get as far as possible from the Spanish influence . 
 In New River , Cooley sustained himself as a salvager and farmer , cultivating and milling arrowroot . His fortune and influence grew : he became the first lawman and judge in the settlement , besides being a land appraiser . Local Indians held him responsible for what they saw as a misjudgment involving the murder of one of their chiefs and attacked the settlement in revenge on January 4 , 1836 . 
 Cooley survived the attack and lived for a further twenty @-@ seven years . He held administrative positions in Dade County , moved to Tampa in 1837 , and had a short stint working for the U.S. Army as a guide and courier . He moved to the Homosassa River area in 1840 , where he became the first postmaster and was a Hernando County candidate for the Florida House of Representatives . Returning to Tampa in 1847 , he was one of the first city councilors , serving three terms before he died in 1863 . 
 = = Early life and arrival in East Florida = = 
 Cooley was born in Maryland in 1783 ; little else is known about him prior to 1813 . Cooley has been referred to as William Cooley Jr . , William Coolie , William Colee and William Cooly . 
 Cooley arrived in East Florida in 1813 , during a joint campaign of Tennessee and Georgia forces . Some sources give credit to the hypothesis that Cooley fought with the Tennessee Volunteers under Colonel John Williams ; other sources say he was a lieutenant in the Georgia Militia , fighting under Colonel Samuel Alexander from Georgia . Cooley acquired property in <unk> 's Landing on the St. Marys River , close to where the military units crossed East Florida that same year . Later , he went to the west bank of the St. Johns River , settling in an area 30 miles ( 48 km ) south of modern Jacksonville . 
 Cooley later moved to Alligator Pond ( near present @-@ day Lake City , Florida ) , where he set up a farm and traded with the local Seminole tribe led by Chief <unk> . The territory of East Florida was formally transferred from Spain to the United States in 1819 , under the Adams @-@ Onis Treaty . In 1820 , Spanish merchant Don Fernando de la Maza Arredondo began settlement of a 280 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 130 km2 ) claim in the Alachua territory , which had been granted to him by King Ferdinand VII of Spain . Cooley negotiated with Don Fernando on behalf of the displaced Indians but was unsuccessful . Cooley moved away in 1823 — possibly to escape the Spanish influence — to the north bank of the New River . 
 = = New River settlement = = 
 Like the other New River settlers , Cooley did not buy land ; he simply occupied the land in hope that the United States would eventually survey the area and grant ownership to the present settlers . The settlement was primarily populated by Bahamians , who survived by <unk> , fishing , shipbuilding and wrecking . 
 In 1830 , <unk> Lewis , who in 1788 had been one of the area 's first settlers , sold her business interests to Richard Fitzpatrick . After Fitzpatrick 's arrival , the settlement of approximately 70 people prospered with the introduction of a plantation regimen based on black slavery . 
 Cooley 's main occupation was gathering , processing and shipping arrowroot , a starch made from the root of the coontie plant . <unk> was used to make bread dough , wafers and biscuits ; its resistance to spoilage made it especially favored for use on ships . Pulp remaining after processing was used as a fertilizer or for animal rations . Favorable conditions for arrowroot cultivation contributed to the presence of several hundred Indians in the area — arrowroot being a staple of their diet . The market price for the starch was between 8 ¢ ( US ) and 16 ¢ per pound ( between 17 ¢ and 35 ¢ per kg ) , and the geography of the river and the good performance of his machinery — the output was close to 450 lb ( 200 kg ) per day — brought Cooley great prosperity . His good fortune allowed him to dedicate much of his time to exploration of the area as far north as Lake Okeechobee and brought him increasing political influence . It is likely that he married Nancy Dayton , a former Indian captive , on December 2 , 1830 . Richard Fitzpatrick , by that time the owner of a successful plantation with coconut and lime trees , plantains , and sugarcane , pressed for the appointment of Cooley as Justice of the Peace in 1831 , making Cooley responsible for adjudicating disputes of persons and property , punishment of minor offenders by fines and whippings , and oversight of the activities of wreckers . Serious offenders were jailed in Key West . By that time , Cooley owned a schooner and took trips not only to take prisoners but to trade coontie , sugarcane , and tropical fruit with Cape Florida , Indian Key , Key West and Havana . 
 While trade and farming activities were prominent , wrecking was the most important economic activity in the settlement . Northern newspapers started a campaign against wrecking in 1832 , claiming that the activity was just a disguise for piracy ; the 33 percent salvager 's fee underscored their claim . Cooley , already in charge of overseeing wrecking , received a territorial appointment as appraiser of the sunk vessels and their cargoes . The strength of hurricane seasons affected the activity , and the especially active 1835 season brought even bigger profits . 
 By 1835 , Cooley had two sons and one daughter . The boys were named <unk> and Montezuma , after two local Indian chiefs . His ten @-@ year @-@ old daughter and his nine @-@ year @-@ old son were tutored by the couple Mary E. Rigby and Joseph <unk> . 
 Cooley was appointed as an appraiser of property and slaves for Union Bank of Florida . His ally , Richard Fitzpatrick , purchased his coontie and citrus plantation on the Miami River for $ 2 @,@ 500 . Subsequently , Fitzpatrick was elected as representative for Monroe County to the Territorial Legislative Council . The unanimous vote for Fitzpatrick in New River was questioned by the Key West Inquirer . Cooley 's conduct was implicitly questioned as well , since as Justice of the Peace , Cooley conducted the non @-@ secret balloting . In Key West , Fitzpatrick lost to William Hackley . 
 The Cooley property in New River had a house that was " twenty feet by fifty feet [ 6 by 15 m ] , one story high , built of cypress logs , sealed and floored with 1 @-@ 1 / 2 inch [ 4 cm ] planks " . At least three black slaves and several Indians cultivated sugar cane , corn , potatoes , pumpkins and other vegetables on the twenty @-@ acre ( eight @-@ hectare ) property , which also had a pen with eighty hogs . The coontie watermill was twenty @-@ seven by fourteen feet ( eight by four meters ) . His Key West holdings included a factory , two storage houses , kitchen and slave quarters ; coconut , lime and orange trees ; and domesticated and wild fowl . 
 = = New River Massacre = = 
 = = = Buildup = = = 
 Cooley maintained friendly relations and trade with the Seminole Indians in the area . In the early nineteenth century , Creek Indians had moved from Alabama and joined the Seminoles . In 1835 , white settlers killed Creek chief <unk> and burned his hut in a dispute . As Justice of the Peace , Cooley jailed the settlers , but they were released due to insufficient evidence after a hearing at the Monroe County Court in Key West . The Creek people blamed Cooley , saying he withheld evidence . The growing uneasiness between the Creeks and the whites led to the Creeks ' emigration to the Okeechobee area . 
 Major Francis L. Dade , military commandant at Key West , received intelligence that Cuba and Spain were arming the Indians ; investigations did not confirm the rumor . Reports coming from Fort Brooke , near present @-@ day Tampa , noted that Indians in the area were resisting orders from the federal government to emigrate to Mississippi , contradicting the assertions made by the federal authorities that the Indians had agreed to emigrate peacefully . Dade , two companies of soldiers , and all of the available arms were sent to Fort Brooke at Tampa Bay , the port designated for the commencement of the Indians ' emigration . The Indians answered by concentrating all of their forces in the New River region . On December 28 , 1835 , Dade and 107 soldiers were ambushed en route from Tampa Bay to Fort King , near present @-@ day Ocala . Only three soldiers survived ; the attackers lost only three men . 
 = = = Attack = = = 
 Six days later , Cooley led a large expedition to free the Gil Blas , a ship that had beached the previous year . The scale of the operation required all of the settlement 's able men . On the next day , January 4 , 1836 , the Indians attacked the settlement . 
 Between fifteen and twenty Indians invaded the Cooley house , overpowering the tutor and scalping him . Cooley 's wife grabbed their infant son and tried to run to the river , but was shot about 170 yards ( 155 m ) from the house . The shot killed her and the baby . Cooley 's nine @-@ year @-@ old son died from a fractured skull , and his daughter was shot . Two of Cooley 's black slaves disappeared . 
 The tutor 's son heard the screams by the river and came back to retrieve his mother and two younger sisters . He managed to escape , going south by boat to the Cape Florida Lighthouse . Along the way , he warned the people at Arch Creek and Miami River of the attack , prompting them to flee as well . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 After the attack , the Indians torched the house and left without attacking other dwellings . The next day , Cooley came back to bury the dead ; it is unclear who alerted the salvager 's team to the attack . After staying at the settlement for three days , Cooley went to the Cape Florida Lighthouse . One of the missing slaves appeared , reporting that he recognized the assailants as having been acquaintances of the Cooley family . The slave had heard the Indians ascribing the massacre to an act of revenge for Cooley 's having failed to obtain the conviction of Chief <unk> 's murderers . 
 Cooley took charge of the lighthouse encampment . Richard Fitzpatrick sent sixty slaves from his Miami plantation to the lighthouse . Fearing more attacks and aware of the precarious safety of the lighthouse , the settlers and slaves boarded Cooley 's schooner and smaller boats and escaped to Indian Key , 100 miles ( 161 km ) north of Key West . Judge Marvin , a Key West justice , accused Seminole ( or Calusa , depending on the source ) chief Chakaika of leading the New River Settlement raiding group . This was not proved , but it is known that Chakaika was an important leader who coordinated the devastating attack on Indian Key in 1840 . 
 When Cooley arrived at Indian Key , he was informed that Indians had attempted to acquire arms and munition but had been repelled by the garrison in the island 's fort . Meanwhile , more than two hundred people from nearby sought refuge in the fort . Cannons were salvaged from the Gil Blas ; the ship was later burned to deny the Indians a chance to recover anything from it . Difficult sea conditions and fear of imminent attacks terrorized the islanders . Cooley asked for construction of forts at New River and Cape Sable , but news soon came from the Miami River reporting the total destruction of all white property , stalling all new initiatives . 
 Cooley went back to New River and discovered the Indians had returned to loot the settlement and had burned several other houses and plantations . A claim for restitution of his losses was denied in 1840 by the United States House of Representatives . Arriving at Key West on January 16 , 1836 , aboard the steamboat Champion , he was appointed temporary lighthouse keeper , staying until April of that year . 
 = = After New River = = 
 Cooley resumed his life as a wrecker . Later that same year , he worked again as justice of the peace and assumed a position as a legislatively @-@ appointed auctioneer . 
 Constant attacks and rumor @-@ spreading amplified the demands of Floridian community leaders , forcing the Navy to send Lieutenant Levin M. Powell to Key West . Lieutenant Powell built a small force of fifty seamen , ninety @-@ five marines , and eight officers , reinforced by two schooners and the United States Cutter Washington , commanded by Captain Day . Powell called Cooley to be his guide in the enterprise because of his knowledge of Indian leaders and customs . Powell had mixed success , although by December 1836 the situation was under control at the coasts . Cooley went back to his usual duties in Indian Key ( Dade County Seat ) ; not long after , he moved to Tampa but still worked occasionally as a guide . 
 General Thomas Jesup , headquartered in Fort Dade , made Cooley an express rider in early 1837 to deliver messages between Tampa Bay and Fort Heilman , a corridor of 170 miles ( 270 km ) . That same year , reports circulated that Cooley was spreading rumors about a Seminole chief leading a rebellion involving black slaves and Indians . Afraid that Cooley could be directly involved , the general had him interrogated . Afterwards , a disgusted Cooley resigned his position . 
 = = Politician = = 
 Cooley befriended Captain William Bunce , a retailer striving to keep Indians in the area , as they represented a source of cheap labor . He became involved again in local politics , this time against General Jesup , who wanted to remove all Indians from Florida . Judge Steele , a newcomer from Connecticut , was Cooley 's ally in this fight . 
 By 1840 , he lived in Leon County , Florida , with a single slave . Cooley was living near the Homosassa River , where the Armed Occupation Act of 1842 allowed the distribution of 160 @-@ acre ( 65 ha ) land grants . His leadership enabled him to get not only his own permit but permits for 28 other settlers . A lengthy correspondence with the General Land Office was eventually concluded satisfactorily for him and the other settlers . In 1843 , he was a candidate for a seat in the Florida House of Representatives for the newly created Hernando County , but he lost to James Gibbons . Two years later , he became the first postmaster in Homosassa and County Commissioner of Fisheries . He sold his land grant to Senator David Levy Yulee sequentially between 1846 and 1847 and moved back to Tampa . 
 From 1848 to 1860 , Cooley acquired several properties in the Tampa region , including one at Worth 's Harbor . By 1850 , he lived with seven slaves and was a Captain of the " Silver Grays " — a militia for the home defense of Tampa in the 1850s . He owned a general store in the city , eventually sold to a member of the Tampa Masonic Lodge . He was nominated Port Warden of Tampa in 1853 . By 1855 , Cooley had become a leader in local politics ; he was the chairman at a meeting of the Democratic Party in Tampa , with sixty @-@ five members enrolled , on August 4 , 1855 . He was brought in as an alternate councilman for two months in the first Tampa council , served a full @-@ year term beginning in February 1857 , and returned in 1861 for another full term . Cooley estimated his personal wealth at $ 10 @,@ 060 in 1860 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Cooley died in 1863 in Hillsborough County , Florida . His will was written in 1862 but recorded only after Cooley 's death , filed by Francis Matthews , who identified himself as his son @-@ in @-@ law . In the document , Cooley is referred to as William Cooly . Cooley left his estate to friends , charities , a woman called Fanny Anne listed as his daughter ( wife of Francis Matthews ) , and three grandsons and four granddaughters , but there is no evidence that they were his blood relatives . Colee Hammock Park in Fort Lauderdale is located near the site of his old home in the New River Settlement . 
 = Arthur Sifton = 
 Arthur Lewis Watkins Sifton , PC ( UK ) , PC ( Can ) , KC ( October 26 , 1858 – January 21 , 1921 ) , was a Canadian politician who served as the second Premier of Alberta from 1910 until 1917 . He became a minister in the Government of Canada thereafter . Born in Ontario , he grew up there and in Winnipeg , where he became a lawyer . He subsequently practised law with his brother Clifford Sifton in Brandon , Manitoba , where he was also active in municipal politics . He moved west to Prince Albert in 1885 and to Calgary in 1889 . There he was elected to the 4th and 5th North @-@ West Legislative Assemblies ; he later served as a minister in the government of Premier Frederick W. A. G. Haultain . In 1903 , the federal government , at the instigation of his brother who was now one of its ministers , made Arthur Sifton the Chief Justice of the Northwest Territories . When Alberta was created out of a portion of the Northwest Territories in 1905 , Sifton became its first chief justice . 
 In 1910 , the government of Alberta Premier Alexander Cameron Rutherford was embroiled in the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway scandal . The Liberal Lieutenant @-@ Governor of Alberta , George Bulyea , determined that for the sake of the Liberal Party of Alberta , Rutherford had to be pushed aside in favour of a new Premier . When other prominent Liberals declined it , the position was offered to Sifton . As Premier , he smoothed over the divisions in the party that had caused and been exacerbated by the railway scandal . He made attempts to break with the Rutherford railway policy ; when these were rebuffed by the courts , he adopted a course similar to Rutherford 's . He unsuccessfully pursued the transfer of rights over Alberta 's natural resources from the federal government , which had retained them by the terms of Alberta 's <unk> . 
 While Sifton was Premier , the United Farmers of Alberta rose as a political force . Sifton tried to accommodate many of their demands : his government constructed agricultural colleges , incorporated a farmer @-@ run grain elevator cooperative , and implemented a municipal system of hail insurance . Outside of agriculture , the UFA was instrumental in the Sifton government 's implementation of some direct democracy measures ( which resulted in prohibition ) and the extension of the vote to women . 
 During the conscription crisis of 1917 , Sifton supported the Conservative Prime Minister , Robert Borden , in his attempt to impose conscription to help win the First World War . He backed the creation of a Union government composed of Conservatives and pro @-@ conscription Liberals . In 1917 he left provincial politics and became a minister in this government . Over the next three and a half years he served briefly in four different ministries and was a delegate to the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 . He died in Ottawa in January 1921 after a brief illness . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Arthur Sifton was born October 26 , 1858 , in Arva , Ontario , to John Wright Sifton ( 1833 – 1912 ) and Catherine " Kate " Watkins ( 1832 – 1909 ) . He was the older brother of politician Clifford Sifton . He attended public schools across southern Ontario , culminating with a boys ' school in Dundas and high school in London . His father was a devout Methodist and a staunch Reformer and , later , Liberal . These allegiances permeated his home life ; the Sifton household was often visited by clergy , laity , businessmen , lawyers , and politicians . In 1874 or 1875 , John Sifton won contracts for preliminary construction work on the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) and moved the family to Winnipeg , where Arthur completed high school at Wesley College . Following his graduation , he and Clifford attended Victoria College , then located in Cobourg , Ontario . In 1880 , he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts . While in Cobourg , he was not a devoted student : he skipped many classes , and was judged by his classmates to be " intellectually , morally , physically and erratically preeminent in virtue and otherwise , especially otherwise " . 
 Upon graduation , Arthur Sifton returned to Winnipeg to article with Albert Monkman until 1881 , when he followed his father to Brandon . John hoped to take advantage of a local real estate boom ; nominally , Arthur was running a Brandon branch of Monkman 's law firm , though he had not yet finished his articling and was accordingly unqualified to practise law . On September 20 , 1882 , he married Mary Deering of Cobourg ; the pair would have two children , Nellie Louise Sifton ( born August 1883 ) and Lewis Raymond St Clair Sifton ( born February 1898 ) . In 1883 , he wrote and passed his bar exam and joined Clifford 's Brandon law firm , now styled Sifton and Sifton . 
 University of Alberta historian David Hall describes the next phase of Sifton 's life as " shrouded in mystery " . For reasons that are not clear , in 1885 Sifton dissolved his partnership with his brother and moved his family to Prince Albert . ( Hall speculates that the brothers had a falling out , but notes that their later working relationship appears to have been amicable . ) In 1885 , Prince Albert 's prospects did not appear bright , as it had been bypassed by the CPR line . Regardless , Sifton practised law and was in 1885 made a notary public . Three years later , he earned a Master of Arts from Victoria College and a Bachelor of Laws from the University of Toronto . In 1889 , he relocated again , to Calgary ; there is some suggestion that this move was for the sake of his wife 's health . There he opened a law office , worked in the office of the city solicitor , and became a partner in the firm of Sifton , Short , and Stuart . At one point he was a crown prosecutor . In 1892 , he was appointed Queen 's Counsel . 
 = = = Early political career = = = 
 Sifton 's first foray into politics was in 1878 , when he campaigned for the introduction of prohibition under the auspices of the Canada Temperance Act in the Manitoba electoral districts of Lisgar and Marquette . His first bid for elected office took place in 1882 , when he was elected to Brandon 's first city council . He was re @-@ elected in 1883 , and did not seek re @-@ election at the conclusion of this second term , though he did briefly consider running for mayor before concluding that he had insufficient support to be elected . He also served on the local school board . When his brother Clifford became Wilfrid Laurier 's Minister of the Interior in November 1896 , Sifton advised him on Liberal Party affairs in western Canada . This advice included suggested patronage appointments , one of which was an unimplemented proposal that Arthur himself be appointed chief justice of the Northwest Territories ( a position that did not at the time exist ) . In 1898 , Sifton re @-@ entered politics — Hall speculates to increase his chances at a judgeship — by challenging Robert Brett , the long @-@ time Member of the Legislative Assembly of the Northwest Territories for Banff , in the 1898 territorial election . Election day returns showed Sifton with a plurality of thirty @-@ six votes , but by the time contested ballots were dealt with this had turned into a majority of two votes for Brett . Sifton successfully challenged this result in court , and in the ensuing by @-@ election he defeated Brett by a comfortable margin . One oft @-@ repeated anecdote from the campaign involved a campaign forum for which Brett was late . After giving his own speech , Sifton offered to give the still @-@ absent Brett 's speech as well , since he had heard it so many times . He did so , and when Brett eventually arrived to give a speech nearly identical to the one Sifton had given on his behalf he was puzzled by the audience 's amusement . 
 Having defeated Brett , Sifton was immediately one of the area 's most prominent Liberals , and was named president of the District of Alberta Liberals shortly thereafter . In 1901 Clifford Sifton appointed James Hamilton Ross , Northwest Territories Treasurer and Minister of Public Works , Commissioner of Yukon . It fell to Northwest Territories Premier Frederick William Gordon Haultain to fill the ensuing vacancy and , to preserve the delicate non @-@ partisan balance of his administration , he had to pick a successor who was , like Ross , a Liberal . The role fell to Sifton . Soon after his appointment , Clifford offered him his sought @-@ after position of Northwest Territories Chief Justice ; Arthur declined on the basis of his recently assumed ministerial duties , but made it clear that he was still interested in receiving it eventually . 
 As minister , Sifton had to cope with increasing expenses and with grants from the federal government that did not keep pace . He dealt with this through support for territorial autonomy — the creation of one or more new provinces from the Northwest Territories . Campaigning on this position , he was re @-@ elected in the 1902 territorial election . Months later , however , T. H. Maguire retired as territorial chief justice , and this time Sifton accepted his brother 's offer of the position . He resigned his political offices in January 1903 . 
 = = = Career as a jurist = = = 
 Despite the accusations of nepotism that greeted his appointment on January 3 , 1903 , Sifton fast became a well @-@ respected judge . He served as chief justice of the Northwest Territories until September 16 , 1907 , when the Supreme Court of Alberta was established , whereupon he headed this new court , sitting in Calgary as the first Chief Justice of Alberta . He was notoriously difficult for barristers to read : he generally heard arguments <unk> smoking a cigar , and it was as a judge that he first acquired his long @-@ time nickname of the Sphinx for his inscrutability . In one trial , he sat apparently vigorously taking notes during both sides ' lengthy closing arguments and , once they concluded , immediately delivered his judgment . The bewildered lawyers wondered what he had been writing down , since he had obviously made up his mind before closing arguments ; once Sifton had left the courtroom , they found their answer in the form of page after page covered with the judge 's signature . He rarely recorded his ratio decidendi but , despite this , few of his decisions were overturned on appeal . It has also been argued that his fellow judges had difficulty ruling on appeals from his decisions specifically because he rarely provided reasons . Much of his work was in criminal law , dealing especially with theft of livestock ( in which cases he generally delivered a sentence of three years hard labour , severe by the standards of the day ) . By the end of his judicial career , he had convicted as many Americans as Canadians . His rulings were generally concerned with practicalities rather than legal theory , based more on social morality than legal precedent , and he did not establish any important precedents . 
 In 1907 , Sifton was one member of a three @-@ member commission assigned to investigate labour unrest between coal miners and mine operators . His colleagues were mining executive Lewis Stockett and miners ' union executive William <unk> . Miners ' demands included increased wages , a reduction in working hours to eight per day ( from ten ) , the posting of mine inspection reports , the isolated storage of explosives , the use of non @-@ freezing explosives , and semi @-@ monthly rather than monthly pay . The mine operators objected to this last point on the basis that many miners did not report to work the day after payday , and it was thus desirable to keep <unk> to a minimum . The commission recommended that children under sixteen should not be allowed to work in mines , that inspectors should post their reports , that mine sites should have bath houses , and that ventilation inspection should be improved . It also recommended that Albertans keep a supply of coal on hand during the summer for winter use . The commission was silent on wages ( except to say that these should not be fixed by legislation ) , the operation of company stores ( a sore point among the miners ) , and the incorporation of mine unions ( which was recommended by mines but opposed by the unions ) . It made no recommendation about working hours , but Premier Alexander Rutherford 's government legislated an eight @-@ hour day anyway . 
 He resigned from the bench on May 25 , 1910 to become Premier . 
 = = Premier = = 
 = = = Ascension and cabinet @-@ building = = = 
 In 1910 , the Liberal government of Alexander Cameron Rutherford was embroiled in the Alberta and Great Waterways ( A & GW ) Railway scandal . Accusations of favouritism by the government towards the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway had split the Liberal Party , and Rutherford 's ability to remain at its head was in doubt . Lieutenant @-@ Governor George Bulyea , a Liberal who had reluctantly asked Rutherford to form a government in 1905 , saw his doubts about the Premier 's leadership skills validated and quietly began looking for candidates to replace him and save the Liberal Party . Several possibilities — including William Henry Cushing , Peter Talbot , and Frank Oliver — were considered and either rejected or found to be uninterested in the job . As early as March 14 , Bulyea had concluded that Sifton might be " the only permanent solution " , though it was not until May that the Lieutenant @-@ Governor was able to secure Rutherford 's agreement to resign and the agreement of both major factions in the Liberal caucus to accept Sifton as Premier . Even up until the last minute , Members of the Legislative Assembly ( MLAs ) loyal to Charles Wilson Cross — the province 's Attorney @-@ General and a staunch Rutherford ally — threatened to scuttle the arrangement unless Cross was kept on as attorney @-@ general , to which Sifton refused to agree . On May 26 , Rutherford resigned and Arthur Sifton became the second Premier of Alberta . 
 One of his first challenges was to craft a cabinet satisfactory to all factions ; this he did by excluding the leaders of all sides . He himself took the portfolios of Public Works and Provincial Treasurer . Charles R. Mitchell , who like Sifton had been a judge during the scandal and had accordingly played no part in it , became Minister of Education and Attorney @-@ General . Archibald J. McLean was named Provincial Secretary . His support for the insurgents ( though not as one of their leaders ) was offset by the continuation of Rutherford 's Agriculture Minister Duncan Marshall , who had played no particular role during the scandal but had remained loyal to Rutherford . To the consternation of the opposition Conservatives , Bulyea prorogued the legislation before this new government 's strength could be tested by a vote of confidence . Still , its acceptance by the Liberal caucus can be measured by the fact that only one member , Ezra Riley , resigned in protest . Riley objected to the exclusion from cabinet of insurgency leader W. H. Cushing ; after his resignation he ran as an independent Liberal in the ensuing by @-@ election , but was defeated by Sifton supporter Archibald J. McArthur . As time began to heal old wounds , Sifton expanded his cabinet to include several of the old adversaries : in February 1912 Cross was re @-@ instated as Attorney @-@ General and rebel leader John R. Boyle was made Minister of Education ( Mitchell , who had previously held both of these posts , was transferred to the Public Works portfolio ) . The other new additions to cabinet — Malcolm McKenzie as Provincial Treasurer and Charles Stewart in the new position of Minister of Municipal Affairs — had voted with the Rutherford government during the scandal . 
 Another early challenge for the new Premier was to win a seat in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta . Although he lived and worked in Calgary , his first cabinet was composed mostly of southern members ( McLean represented Lethbridge District , Marshall represented Olds , and Mitchell would soon be elected in Medicine Hat ) , so Sifton had Archibald Campbell resign his Vermilion seat and sought election there . Sifton made few promises during the campaign , though he did identify as his priorities " the development of [ Alberta 's ] agricultural and mining resources and the transportation facilities " . Despite accusations by the Conservatives that the Liberals bought " the foreign vote " with beer , whiskey , and tobacco , he won a comfortable majority . 
 = = = Railway policy = = = 
 Before resigning , Rutherford 's government had called a Royal Commission into the Alberta and Great Waterways affair , and this commission had not reported by the time that Sifton took office . Between that and the proroguing of the legislature , the new Premier enjoyed a calm that lasted until November 10 , when the legislature reconvened . Conservative leader Edward Michener attacked the government 's speech from the throne for failing to commit itself on railway policy and attacked Sifton for failing to call a general election or seek the confidence of the legislature during his first half year in office . In the meantime , Sifton was facing a breach in his own party on the railway question . Many Liberals from the south of the province , including Sifton himself , felt inclined to abandon the construction of " pioneer " railways ( such as the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway ) designed to hasten the settlement of the province 's emptier areas , and concentrate only on those connecting major population centres . Members from the north of the province , who comprised most of the Liberal caucus , disagreed , and were vehement in their insistence that the A & GW be built . Even among this latter group there were divisions : some Liberals agreed with the Conservatives that the railway should be directly built by the government , while others , including Cross , favoured a partnership with a " responsible company " . These divisions were not calmed by the release of the commission 's report , whose majority condemned Rutherford and Cross for poor judgment even as it concluded that there was insufficient evidence to find that they had engaged in improper behaviour . 
 It was against this backdrop that Sifton announced his government 's policy with respect to the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway Company . Because it had failed to meet its construction obligations , Sifton introduced legislation to confiscate the proceeds of the sale of government @-@ guaranteed bonds sold to finance the railway 's construction . He gave no indication of how the money , which was being held in trust by several banks , would be used . Cross 's faction of ( primarily northern ) Liberals opposed the bill on the grounds that it did not commit the government to using the money to construct the railway , while the Conservatives opposed it as an unjustified confiscation of private property . As Conservative R. B. Bennett said , 
 [ The bill is ] an act of confiscation , an act such as never before has been carried out in the British Empire , an act such as has few equals in the pages of history . Similar acts have been carried out , once in Nicaragua and Virginia , and in South Carolina and only in times of war or revolution ... In my opinion the bargain was an improvident one , but that does not justify confiscation ... I did not think the new road would pay . But it is a new doctrine that because a bargain did not pay it should be repudiated and one should become a <unk> of bargains and a <unk> of private rights . 
 In speaking of A & GW President William Clarke ( an American ) , Bennett went on to say " Clarke I despise but Clarke I am bound to respect , because this province gave him a right by charter and if I know the United States I do not think it will allow this province to take his property without due process of the law . " The Conservatives , however , had not been expected to support the legislation ; the real question was whether Sifton could command enough support among Liberals to pass it . After all , during the Alberta and Great Waterways crisis only nine months earlier , a legislature of very similar makeup had endorsed the Rutherford government 's handling of railway policy by a vote of twenty @-@ three votes to fifteen ; would Sifton 's bill , effectively a repudiation of the Rutherford policy , convince enough Liberals to change sides ? The answer came in December , when the bill passed third reading by a vote of twenty @-@ five votes to fourteen . Nine Liberals had reversed themselves and saved Sifton 's government , though both Cross and Rutherford were among those to vote against it . 
 Despite calls from Clarke for the federal government to use its power of reservation to stop the legislation , Bulyea granted royal assent December 16 . Sifton , in his capacity as provincial treasurer , immediately tried to access the money ; the Royal , Dominion , and Union banks , where the funds were deposited , refused payment . Attorney @-@ General Mitchell sued the banks ; on November 4 , 1911 , Justice Charles Allen Stuart of the Supreme Court of Alberta found in the government 's favour . The Royal Bank appealed this ruling and unsuccessfully petitioned the federal government to use its powers of disallowance to strike down the provincial act . In the meantime , Sifton announced a new railway policy that would see eight new lines constructed by private companies with the assistance of provincial loan guarantees , including several pioneer lines ; this policy , in its resemblance to the Rutherford policy , met with the approval of the Cross faction , and the Liberals were once more united . 
 In 1912 , Justice Stuart 's ruling was upheld by the Supreme Court of Alberta en banc . Again the Royal Bank appealed , and on January 31 , 1913 , the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council , which was at the time Canada 's highest judicial authority , found for the Royal Bank , ruling that the provincial government did not have the right to confiscate money raised outside of the province . On September 22 Sifton announced new management of the AG & W agreeable to the bondholders , the government , and the banks . The Conservatives protested that other companies were prepared to construct the railroad for less than the sum agreed on with the A & GW , to which Sifton replied that the Privy Council 's ruling meant that the government could not use the money raised to deal with any other company . The Conservatives filibustered the legislation and moved a series of amendments ( including one calling for the scheme to be put to referendum ) , but the Liberals voted unanimously in its favour . The Alberta and Great Waterways saga had reached its end , and Sifton 's caucus was never more united . 
 = = = Natural resources = = = 
 When Alberta and Saskatchewan were made provinces in 1905 , the federal government retained control over their lands and natural resources , which made the new provinces unique in Canada . The Rutherford government acquiesced to this state of affairs ; because the terms of confederation had been drawn up by the Liberal government of Sir Wilfrid Laurier , it was natural for the provincial Liberal Party to cast itself as their defender . In this capacity , Rutherford pointed to the $ 375 @,@ 000 per year that the provincial government received from the federal government as compensation . In 1910 , however , Liberal MLA Alwyn Bramley @-@ Moore ( who was a staunch provincial rights advocate and who many years later would be called " Alberta 's first separatist " by the Edmonton Journal ) moved a resolution calling on the Sifton government to " take such steps as may be deemed necessary to acquire the control of all such natural resources as are of purely local concern " . Sifton responded that it was already the intention of his government to begin negotiations with the federal government to this end . He asserted " I have always believed ... that we should administer our mines and timber . The question is not now whether we would like to control our natural resources , but what is the best way to get them . " 
 Soon after , Sifton made a trip east and spoke on the subject of provincial resource control to the Canadian Club of Toronto , where his points were well received . In May 1910 , Sifton and Saskatchewan Premier Walter Scott met with Laurier in Ottawa , where he was able to secure the Prime Minister 's agreement that if the Liberals were re @-@ elected in the 1911 federal election they would transfer to Alberta control over its resources . This election was fought primarily on the issue of reciprocity , which was popular in Alberta , and Sifton campaigned actively for Laurier ( distinguishing himself from his brother , who broke with Laurier on reciprocity ) . Despite winning six of Alberta 's seven seats , the Liberals were defeated by Robert Borden 's Conservatives . 
 Initially , this did not appear to be a problem ; Borden had long called for the transfer of resource control to the prairie provinces , but when Sifton and Scott raised the issue with the new Prime Minister , little action resulted . Borden stalled for some time , and it emerged that he did not wish to buoy the fortunes of the provincial Liberal parties by giving them the political victory that would result from the transfer of resource control . Upon the outbreak of the First World War , the issue fell out of public prominence , and it was not until 1930 that Alberta would achieve this long @-@ time objective . 
 = = = Agricultural policy = = = 
 Sifton 's time as Premier corresponded with the rise of the United Farmers of Alberta ( UFA ) as a political force . Formed in 1909 by the merger of the Society of Equity and the Alberta Farmers ' Association , the UFA would later become a political party and govern Alberta from 1921 until 1935 . During Sifton 's tenure , however , its entry into direct politics was still several years away , and it confined itself to advocating for farmers ' interests . In a province in which 50 @,@ 004 people voted in the 1909 provincial election , the UFA claimed an initial membership of 2 @,@ 100 , which climbed to 9 @,@ 400 in 1913 . Moreover , these figures did not include the many farmers who were active in the organization without paying dues ; the UFA was a force to be reckoned with , and Sifton took notice . 
 The UFA 's first provincial victory took place in 1910 , and involved the construction of agricultural colleges . Premier Alexander Rutherford , always a stalwart ally of the University of Alberta , approved a plan to locate Alberta 's first agricultural college on the university 's campus , in Rutherford 's home town of Strathcona . At the 1910 UFA convention , a resolution proposed putting the college in southern Alberta , though it was supplanted by an Edward Michener motion calling for the UFA 's leadership to consult with the province on a mutually amenable location . After consultation with the UFA , Sifton agreed that , in addition to the college , agricultural schools would be built around the province , and that farmers would be guaranteed representation on the college 's board . In fact , Sifton held off on the establishment of the college all together in favour of the creation of seven demonstration farms in different regions of the province . In 1912 , the government announced the creation of agricultural colleges in connection with three of these farms ( all of them in the ridings of provincial cabinet ministers : Duncan Marshall 's Olds , <unk> in Archibald McLean 's Lethbridge District , and Sifton 's Vermilion ) . 
 Another of the UFA 's policies called for a single tax on land to replace most other forms of taxation . The farmers hoped that this tax would help replace tariffs , which made it harder for them to export their produce , and shift the tax burden towards cities , where land values were higher . They also called for a surtax on undeveloped land to curb land speculation and encourage the sale of land to farmers . On this demand too , Sifton acted : in 1911 – 1912 he allowed municipalities to levy property taxes and required that rural municipalities tax only land , and in 1914 he imposed a provincial tax on undeveloped land to discourage land speculation . Other UFA @-@ motivated acts by Sifton 's government included abandonment of a 1912 plan to privatize hail insurance ( it instead enacted a municipal insurance scheme ) and the prohibition of contract clauses that allowed farm machinery companies to avoid responsibility for their products . Perhaps the most important piece of farm legislation passed by Sifton 's government was the incorporation of the Alberta Farmers ' Co @-@ operative Elevator Company ( AFCEC ) . Though the UFA 's first preference was for government ownership and operation of grain elevators , which Sifton refused , it gladly accepted the AFCEC , in which only farmers could hold shares and which was supported by provincial startup loans . 
 Hall writes that " the Sifton government in effect responded wholly or in part to practically every resolution from the 1913 UFA convention related to provincial powers . " This rate could not sustain itself , however , especially once the First World War began to occupy an increasing share of the province 's attention and resources . During the 1916 legislative session , the government acted on only two of the UFA 's twenty @-@ three demands of that year — one to allow the sale of gopher poison by UFA locals , and one dealing with brand inspection . 
 = = = Democratic and moral reform = = = 
 It was not only in agricultural policy that the UFA spread its influence . The organization had a strong progressive bent , and advocated direct democracy , women 's suffrage , and prohibition . In response to the first of these , Sifton in 1913 introduced the Direct Democracy Act . Though it went somewhat less far than the UFA would have liked — for example , it made no provision for recall of elected officials — it did allow for Albertans to call a referendum directly by submitting a petition including the names of eligible voters totalling ten percent of the votes cast in the previous provincial election , including at least eight percent in each of eighty @-@ five percent of the province 's ridings . The Conservatives were on record as supporting direct democracy , and could therefore criticize the bill only in detail . 
 The large number of signatures required ( beginning with the 1913 election , 9 @,@ 399 signatures were required ) meant that only an issue capable of galvanizing much of the province could lead to a referendum . Prohibition was such an issue . The Conservatives were advocates of such a referendum ( during the 1st Alberta Legislative Assembly , Conservative Cornelius <unk> had advocated prohibition or , failing that , a government monopoly on alcohol sales ) , but Sifton and his Liberals were less enthusiastic . They knew the boon to government coffers that liquor sales represented , and were not eager to alienate either the UFA 's moral reformers or the province 's hoteliers and <unk> . Once the referendum legislation was in place , however , its advocates wasted no time : in 1914 the legislature accepted a petition bearing 23 @,@ 656 names , and duly called a referendum on the subject . The Alberta prohibition referendum passed resoundingly , and the legislature passed the Prohibition Act in the spring of 1916 . Initially the new Act appeared successful : in 1917 there were 5 @,@ 151 convictions for all crimes across Alberta , as compared to an annual average of 12 @,@ 706 over the preceding four years . By the time the province 's enforcement of the act was exposed as being either deliberately lax or merely futile , depending on the observer , Sifton had left office . 
 Alberta 's women , especially those of the UFA @-@ affiliated United Farm Women of Alberta , were active in the province 's moral reform movement . They were also active in seeking the vote : in 1913 a delegation of them arrived at the legislature demanding the vote ; Sifton asked them " did you ladies wash up your luncheon dishes before you came down here to ask me for the vote ? If you haven 't you 'd better go home because you 're not going to get any votes from me . " In October 1914 another delegation arrived , bearing the signatures of 40 @,@ 000 people . At that time , the Premier agreed that most traditional objections to extension of the franchise were " played out " , but expressed concern at the increases that would result to the cost of elections and uncertainty at whether most of the province 's women actually wanted suffrage . In February 1915 a larger delegation arrived at the legislature and occupied the MLAs ' seats , demanding that the franchise be extended quickly enough to allow women to vote in the upcoming prohibition referendum ; an angry Sifton refused and suggested to the women that if they wanted the vote , they should contact their MLAs and promise that they would use their votes to re @-@ elect them , " which is after all one of the strongest way in which you can appeal to male human nature , as represented in the legislature . " Even so , he committed to raising the issue in the legislature after the referendum . On September 17 , 1915 , he told UFA President James Speakman that he had given instructions for the preparation of a statute " placing men and women in Alberta on the basis of absolute equality so far as Provincial matters are concerned . " True to his word , he introduced legislation in the spring of 1916 giving women the vote in all provincial and municipal elections . The Conservatives supported it enthusiastically , and only St. Albert MLA Lucien Boudreau voted against it ( though <unk> Liberal James Gray Turgeon admitted that he was supporting his leader 's legislation against his own convictions ) . 
 = = = Style and political success = = = 
 Arthur Sifton 's political style was to remain aloof and detached , and to say no more than necessary ; this cemented his reputation as " the Sphinx " . He was authoritarian and , while he inspired respect , he was not loved ; historian L. G. Thomas credits him with holding the Liberal Party together through his strength , but blames him for failing to heal its underlying divisions . Sifton was originally selected as Premier in the hopes that he would lead the Liberal Party to continued dominance of provincial politics in Alberta . His success in this regard was mixed : although he led the party to victory in the 1913 and 1917 elections , its majorities declined each time . Moreover , his victories were marred by accusations of unethical electoral tactics . 
 In advance of the 1913 election , government @-@ sponsored redistribution legislation increased the number of ridings from 41 to 56 and left them of unequal size ; only 103 votes were cast in Clearwater in its first election . The Liberals argued that a model of straight representation by population was inappropriate in a province in which some districts were growing far more quickly than others . David Hall has called the bill a " flagrant gerrymander " and the ensuing election the " <unk> election in Alberta history " . There being few policy differences separating the Liberals from the Conservatives , the electoral battle was instead an organizational one , with the two sides accusing one another of bribing ethnic minorities with alcohol and importing elections workers from outside of the province to bribe , intimidate , and mislead rural voters . The Conservatives also accused the Liberals of using government @-@ paid civil servants to campaign for their re @-@ election . Sifton , not confident of victory in his own riding , sought election both there and in Macleod . In the event , he was defeated there but retained his Vermilion riding . 
 Since the 1917 election was held in the throes of the First World War , it was unlikely to be an election as usual — indeed , the Conservatives favoured prolonging the legislature until the end of the war . Sifton was not willing to go that far , but did introduce legislation to re @-@ elect , by act of the legislature , the twelve MLAs who had enlisted in the armed forces — of these , seven were Liberals and five Conservatives ; one of the Liberals , Joseph Stauffer of <unk> , was killed in action before the legislation took effect . The Conservatives supported this legislation , though they later cast aspersions on it by suggesting that of the Liberals re @-@ elected , two had never left Canada . A second piece of election legislation provided for two special MLAs to be elected by the 38 @,@ 000 Albertans serving overseas ; the Conservatives protested that two MLAs was not sufficient for such a large number of voters , especially since Clearwater by this time had only 116 eligible voters . 
 After a sedate election that the Liberals won by a slightly reduced majority , Sifton announced his resignation as Premier to enter federal politics . Sifton 's 1917 victory would be the Liberals ' last : his successor , Charles Stewart , would lose the 1921 election to the newly @-@ political UFA . In Thomas 's estimation , Sifton would have faced a similar fate in 1917 if the UFA had run candidates then . 
 = = Federal politics = = 
 The Conscription Crisis of 1917 divided the Liberal Party of Canada , and this division extended into the provincial camp . Federal Liberal leader Laurier opposed Prime Minister Borden 's proposal to implement wartime conscription , a stand which many Liberals , especially those outside Quebec , denounced as unpatriotic . Borden reached out to these Liberals to propose a coalition government , to be led by him and to include Conservatives and pro @-@ conscription Liberals . Clifford Sifton was a major broker of the resulting deal and , when the question of a suitable Alberta representative in the cabinet came up , Arthur Sifton was a natural choice . In 1914 , he had announced Alberta 's willingness to sacrifice " its last dollar and its last man " , and was a staunch supporter of conscription . He had agreed by August 1917 to join the Unionist government , and resigned as Premier in October . 
 Although he was only 58 at the time of joining government , his health was suffering . He was short of energy and required a car to transport him even the several hundred metres from his Ottawa residence to the Canadian House of Commons . Because of this , he was given relatively undemanding portfolios : Minister of Customs and Inland Revenue , Minister of Public Works , and Secretary of State . Hall has called him among the least visible of Borden 's ministers . Because of his health and his short tenure in each position , he made very little impact . Despite this , Sifton was highly regarded by his colleagues . Borden himself later stated " there was no one in whose judgment I placed firmer reliance " . Sifton was appointed to the Imperial Privy Council in the 1920 New Year Honours , entitling him to the style " The Right Honourable " . 
 Sifton was one of four Canadian delegates to the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 , along with Borden , Charles Doherty , and George <unk> Foster . There , he acted as vice chair of the Commission on Ports , Waterways , and Railways , and served on the Commission on Aerial Navigation . In these capacities he argued for Canada to be treated as an independent state at a time when its foreign policy was still managed by the United Kingdom . On June 28 , 1919 , Arthur Sifton was one of two Canadians to sign the Treaty of Versailles . 
 = = Death and Legacy = = 
 In January 1921 , Sifton became ill and took leave from his duties for a few days . Although his recovery seemed imminent , his condition suddenly worsened . He died at his home on January 21 at the age of 62 . Borden mourned the loss of " a public servant of the highest ability and of the most conspicuous patriotism " . He was buried in Ottawa 's Beechwood Cemetery , Canada 's historic national cemetery , joined by his wife Mary Horseman Deering Sifton ( whom he had married in 1882 ) in 1939 . 
 His public papers are in the Canadian archives , with some legal papers in a legal collection in Alberta , and others mixed in with those of his brother Clifford . 
 = = Electoral record = = 
 = = = As party leader = = = 
 = = = As MLA = = = 
 = = = As MP = = = 
 = Soccer kick = 
 A soccer kick , also known as a soccer ball kick in puroresu and shoot fighting , is a reference to a kick that is similar to kicks used in association football . It is the colloquial term for a kick performed against a prone , kneeling , rising or supine opponent by a fighter who is in a standing or semi @-@ standing position , to any part of a downed opponent . The soccer kick was used in the first match of the Ultimate Fighting Championship at UFC 1 in 1993 . Gerard <unk> defeated Teila Tuli with a soccer kick , which also knocked out one of Tuli 's teeth . The technique is banned under the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts however other rulesets , including the ones used by Pride Fighting Championships do permit them . Soccer kicks have been regularly discussed as to potential damage . There has been a regular debate on the usage of them within MMA . Some MMA fans and fighters support them while a fight doctor and politicians have opposed them . 
 = = Description = = 
 A soccer kick is performed when a fighter is standing to the side or in front of an opponent on the ground and kicks the grounded opponent 's head . This is done in a style similar to an association football player kicking a football . Most practitioners aim to use their shins for the point of impact rather than the foot . While soccer kicks are usually delivered to the head , kicks to other parts of the body in a similar style are also referred to as soccer kicks . 
 = = In mixed martial arts = = 
 The soccer kick has been a source of controversy in mixed martial arts since Gerard <unk> 's usage of one against Teila Tuli in UFC 1 . Dr. Johnny Benjamin stated his belief that soccer kicks could cause serious injury , based on the assumption that an MMA fighter would be able to generate the same amount of force in a soccer kick as a professional association football player . Some MMA fans argue that no @-@ one has ever been seriously injured from a soccer kick and stated that there were already equally dangerous moves allowed in MMA . Dr. Johnny Benjamin argued that soccer kicks could result in broken necks and paralysis if performed with the wrong positioning and high velocity . 
 In 2000 , the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts were written with the intention of making the sport of MMA appear more acceptable in a wider society . Under those rules , soccer kicks were explicitly banned and classed as a foul defined as " kicking the head of a grounded opponent " . It is noted that while soccer kicks to grounded opponents are fouls , axe kicks , downward strikes with the back of the heel , are not considered fouls if done to any part of a grounded opponent . In the years after the banning of soccer kicks under the Unified Rules , a number of fans and MMA fighters have argued for them to be permitted under the Unified Rules along with face and foot stomps . Their justification is that soccer kicks and foot stomps being disallowed hindered fighters who were used to using them under other MMA rule sets . Mauricio Rua , who mostly used soccer kicks to earn victories in Pride , argued that elbows caused more pain than soccer kicks and claimed that soccer kicks were safer than elbows . Rua also argued that elbows were more dangerous than soccer kicks and yet were allowed under the unified rules . Opponents of soccer kicks argued that they needed to be banned in order for the sport of MMA to move forward . They also argued that in the face of opposition to the sport from politicians such as John McCain , soccer kicks had to be banned in order to ensure that the sport was not viewed as illegal " human cockfighting " and could be sanctioned as legal in the United States by Athletic Commissions . 
 Although a soccer kick is a foul when delivered to the head in the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts which prevail in North America , the technique was commonly employed in Pride Fighting Championships in Japan . Fighters Wanderlei Silva and Mauricio Rua were notable practitioners of the soccer kick in MMA . Under the Unified Rules , some MMA fighters attempted to use tactics with the " kicking the head of a grounded opponent " rule , which defined a fighter as grounded if they had any part of their body apart from their feet on the ground . This meant that fighters , such as Jon Jones , would often try to provoke illegal soccer kicks by putting their hand on the ground or as a way to avoid strikes such as the soccer kick after a failed takedown . However , in 2013 , referees were encouraged to interpret the rules that if a fighter is deliberately intending to provoke an illegal soccer kick and one was used , then the referee could decide that it was a legal move . 
 There are still MMA organizations such as Singapore @-@ based ONE Fighting Championship that allow soccer kicks to the head of downed opponent . ONE Fighting Championship previously had an " open attack " rule , which required fighters to get permission from the referee to use soccer kicks . In 2012 , the company changed its rule set to the rules used by Pride Fighting Championship allowing fighters to use soccer kicks without asking for permission from the referee . 
 = = In professional wrestling = = 
 In professional wrestling , some wrestlers use the soccer kick is as a finishing move . A number of professional wrestlers prior to the 1980s professional wrestling boom were taught to use wrestling moves and strikes legitimately . This was due to the likelihood of attacks on the wrestlers from fans . This included the soccer kick , which former pro @-@ wrestler , CM Punk stated was the easiest tactic to use when a fan tried to get in the ring to confront a wrestler . High profile users of soccer kicks as a finishing move includes Katsuyori Shibata , and Randy Orton . In Japan within a 1977 puroresu match between Antonio Inoki and Great Antonio , Inoki started to shoot on Great Antonio after Great Antonio refused to sell Inoki 's offence . Inoki used a takedown on Great Antonio and then used soccer kicks to legitimately knock out Great Antonio . 
 = = In video games = = 
 In the 2010 video game , EA Sports MMA , soccer kicks were included in the game . In the 2012 video game UFC Undisputed 3 , soccer kicks are included in the game in the Pride mode . This mode was intended to replicate Pride Fighting Championships . This was different compared with the normal UFC mode which does not include soccer kicks due to UFC following the Unified Rules . 
 The soccer kick has also been used in professional wrestling video games . It was used in the 1999 Nintendo 64 game , WWF WrestleMania 2000 . 
 = Viralheat = 
 Viralheat is a subscription @-@ based software service for social media management that helps clients monitor and analyze consumer @-@ created content . It was first released in beta in May 2009 . Viralheat raised $ 75 @,@ 000 in seed capital in December 2009 and $ 4 @.@ 25 million of venture capital from the Mayfield Fund in 2011 . 
 = = Features = = 
 Viralheat is a social media management tool with features for account management , monitoring , analytics and publishing . It tracks the number of mentions an individual or company receives on digital properties and analyzes factors such as influence , sentiment and language . The influence of a Twitter handle is measured based on followers , mentions , and retweets Sentiment is assessed as positive , negative or neutral . Viralheat 's Human Intent tool labels social media participants as leads if it assesses that they are likely to consider purchasing a corresponding product . The software 's analytics and monitoring can be filtered by location . Data from Viralheat can be exported into PDF files , Excel spreadsheets or onto a publicly available dashboard . 
 The service charges users based on how many accounts , mentions and profiles they use . A free version can manage up to seven social media <unk> and developer accounts are free . In August 2012 , the company claimed to have 6 @,@ 500 users , one @-@ third of which were using a paid version of the service . 
 Viralheat also publishes free application programming interfaces ( APIs ) and two extensions for the Chrome browser . One extension adds a bar to the top of Twitter.com that displays a sentiment analysis of the mentions displayed on the page . A box is added to each tweet showing its assessed sentiment , which can be changed manually . Another extension called " Flint " adds a share button on the browser that can share content being viewed on the browser from sites like Twitter , Facebook or LinkedIn . 
 = = History = = 
 Viralheat was co @-@ founded by Raj Kadam and Vishal <unk> . The software was released in beta in May 2009 . That October location @-@ based filters were added . Additional updates were made to Viralheat 's user interface for reporting , alerts and importing . In December , the developer raised $ 75 @,@ 000 in seed capital . In March 2010 , Viralheat added features to track Facebook shares , likes and comments . The company raised $ 4 @.@ 25 million in series A funding from the Mayfield Fund in June 2011 . 
 The Human Intent application was released in beta in July 2011 . Viralheat 's Chrome extension for sentiment on Twitter.com was released that September . On March 27 , 2012 , version 2 @.@ 0 was introduced . Version 2 @.@ 0 added the ability to publish content to social media websites through the Viralheat interface . In August of that year , Pinterest monitoring was added , which was followed by the " Flint " extension in November . In February 2013 , Viralheat released a redesigned analytics dashboard called Smart Steam as well as other user interface improvements and multiple account features . Flint 2 @.@ 0 was released that March with support for Safari and Firefox . 
 In December 2013 , Viralheat released enterprise pricing and multi @-@ user features . That same month , it appointed a new CEO , Jeff <unk> , as a result of its new focus on the enterprise market . 
 = = Evaluations = = 
 In 2009 , Mashable reported that Viralheat has more features than free services , with a lower price than most paid options . A contributor review in PRWeek in 2012 said Viralheat 's strengths were its sentiment analysis , simplicity , price and customer service , but that its filtering tools were " a little rough around the edges . " 
 In March 2013 , Network World tested eight social media management tools . The reviewer found that Viralheat was the lowest cost , and supported more social media sites than competitors , but lacked the features to support multi @-@ user accounts needed for large ( enterprise ) customers . The reviewer also praised Viralheat for its user interface and easy cross @-@ posting across different social networks , but said its reporting and analytics were limited . For example , only three date @-@ ranges could be selected when generating a report . 
 = = Reported uses = = 
 The Viralheat software found there were 7 @,@ 000 tweets mentioning " Obama " on May 25 , 2009 and 32 @,@ 000 tweets for that week . On April 9 , 2010 , it assessed that 70 percent of comments about Tiger Woods were positive following his return to professional golf after a sex scandal in late 2009 . A sampling collected by the Viralheat software in July 2011 found that 79 percent of tweets about President Barack Obama were positive , while 54 percent of those on Speaker John Boehner were . 
 Near Thanksgiving 2012 , 150 @,@ 000 tweets were analyzed . Viralheat found that turkey stuffing was mentioned 38 @,@ 000 times . During the debut of Bravo 's TV show " Start @-@ ups : Silicon Valley , " the software determined that the character Hermione was mentioned on Twitter 350 times , while Sarah received 264 mentions . A March 2013 report published by Viralheat found that among major airlines American Airlines had the most positive sentiment on social media . It also found that the San Francisco Airport was the most frequently mentioned airport . During March Madness the same year , Viralheat Inc. ran an analysis with the software that found the most talked about team was the one from the University of Miami . 
 = Qinghe Special Steel Corporation disaster = 
 The Qinghe Special Steel Corporation disaster was an industrial disaster that occurred on April 18 , 2007 , in <unk> , Liaoning , China . Thirty @-@ two people were killed and six were injured when a ladle used to transport molten steel separated from an overhead rail in the Qinghe Special Steel Corporation factory . 
 A subsequent investigation by the Chinese authorities found that the plant had been lacking any major safety features and was severely below regulation benchmarks , with the direct cause of the accident being attributed to inappropriate use of substandard equipment . The investigation also concluded that the various other safety failings at the facility were contributing factors . The report went on to criticize safety standards all throughout the Chinese steel industry . 
 Sun <unk> , deputy head of the State Administration of Work Safety , said that it was " the most serious accident to hit China 's steel industry since 1949 . " 
 = = Background = = 
 The Qinghe Special Steel Corporation ltd , established in 1987 , had originally been a state @-@ owned enterprise , and had been restructured into a private business . According to the State Administration of Work Safety , the plant had about 300 employees at the time of the accident , although Xinhua gave the employment figure as 650 . In 2006 , the factory produced 70 @,@ 000 tonnes of steel and had hoped to increase production to 120 @,@ 000 tonnes in 2007 . 
 The building where the disaster occurred was used by the Qinghe Special Steel Corporation as a steel processing plant . The ladle which failed carried molten steel from a blast furnace to other processes , and had a diameter of two metres and a capacity of 30 tons ( 25 tonnes ) of liquid steel . It ran on a rail at a height of three metres above the factory floor . 
 = = Event = = 
 At 7 : 45 am local time , the ladle in question separated from the overhead iron rail that connected it to the blast furnace while it was being positioned over a <unk> in preparation to pour out its contents . All 30 tons of liquid steel , which was at a temperature of approximately 1 @,@ 500 degrees Celsius ( 2 @,@ 730 F ) , was spilt . This liquid steel then burst through the windows and door of an adjoining room five meters away where workers had gathered during a change of shifts , engulfing that room entirely . 
 When emergency services arrived , they were initially unable to provide assistance as the high temperatures of the molten steel prevented them from entering the area and they had to wait for the steel to cool . When they were eventually able to access the area , they discovered thirty @-@ two workers had been killed by the spill . Six others in the room survived and were rushed to the hospital with severe burns . According to doctors , five workers were initially listed as being in a stable condition , with the others listed as critical . They were said to be of risk of contracting infections through their burns . However , an earlier statement on the website of the State Administration of Work Safety published conflicting information , saying that the thirty @-@ two deceased represented everyone in the room at the time , and that only two people were injured - the operators of the ladle . The official Xinhua press agency also released a report stating that the ladle fell on workers below , but this was unclear as in to whether the workers were in fact crushed or whether this , too , conflicted with the other reports . 
 After retrieving the six survivors , rescuers then recovered the bodies of the thirty @-@ two deceased . 
 = = Reactions and survivor accounts = = 
 Sun <unk> , deputy head of the State Administration of Work Safety , held a press conference shortly after the disaster in which he stated " It is the most serious accident to hit China 's steel industry since 1949 " . There was a public outcry across China as news of the spill became known . 
 The survivors were interviewed for the media and by investigators about their experience . One gave the following account of the tragedy : " I was bending down to get some tools when I heard screaming . The ladle was falling ... [ The liquid ] fell on to the ground and then spilled onto my body and burnt [ my ] clothes . I just ran . " Another gave this description of being burned by the steel : " When the steel hit , it felt like being beaten by iron bars -- my brain went blank . I would be dead if I had turned my head " . 
 One survivor , Jiao <unk> , 38 and head of the company 's ingot casting section , explained why the steel had been spilled instead of remaining in an upright ladle : " As the ladle was falling , it hit a flatbed and tilted . The molten steel immediately flowed into the nearby conference room . " 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The Chinese authorities immediately launched a full investigation into the disaster , which concluded a week later on April 23 . The factory itself was sealed off for the course of the investigation , a common practice in China , but work continued in the site office . 
 The investigation concluded that the direct cause of the disaster was Qinghe using a standard hoist instead of one specifically designed for dangerous smelting work . Other contributing factors identified were lax safety measures and " chaotic " management . The official report also stated that " Equipment and materials inside the workshop were messy , the work space was narrow , and safety passages did not meet requirements . " 
 The report goes on to say that the accident highlights poor working conditions and safety measures in the Chinese steel industry , " Some firms cannot adapt to the demands of rapid expansion and ignore safety ... Safety inspection is not in place , leading to multiple accidents . " and concluding " Work safety conditions in the metallurgy sector are extremely grim , " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The bodies of the deceased were too badly burned to be recognizable , so DNA testing was used for identification . Within 24 hours of the disaster , officials had arrested the plant 's owner and three employees who were in charge of work safety issues , and had promised the families of the victims a minimum of 200 @,@ 000 yuan ( US $ 26 @,@ 000 ) each in compensation . According to Xinhua , the positions of those arrested were the manager of the mill , an operator , a technician and a workshop supervisor . The same statement from the work safety administration as had issued the conflicting injury count stated that those responsible were " under control " but did not elaborate further . 
 = Mulgrew Miller = 
 Mulgrew Miller ( August 13 , 1955 – May 29 , 2013 ) was an American jazz pianist , composer , and educator . As a child he played in churches and was influenced on piano by Ramsey Lewis and then Oscar Peterson . Aspects of their styles remained in his playing , but he added the greater harmonic freedom of McCoy Tyner and others in developing as a hard bop player and then in creating his own style , which influenced others from the 1980s on . 
 Miller 's style evolved through playing with a series of major jazz figures . After leaving university he was pianist with the Duke Ellington Orchestra for three years , then accompanied vocalist Betty Carter . Three @-@ year stints with trumpeter Woody Shaw and with drummer Art Blakey 's high profile Jazz Messengers followed , by the end of which Miller had formed his own bands and begun recording under his own name . He was then part of drummer Tony Williams ' quintet from its foundation , while continuing to play and record with numerous other leaders , mostly in small groups . Miller was Director of Jazz Studies at William Paterson University from 2005 , and continued to play and tour internationally with other high profile figures in the music until his death from a stroke at the age of 57 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mulgrew Miller was born in Greenwood , Mississippi , to parents who had been raised on plantations . He had three brothers and four sisters . His family was not musical , but they had a piano , which no @-@ one in the house could play . Miller , however , played tunes on the piano from the age of six , playing by ear . He had piano lessons from the age of eight . As a child , he played blues and rhythm and blues for dances , and gospel music in a church . His family was Methodist , but he played in churches of various denominations . His principal influence on piano at this stage was Ramsey Lewis . 
 While at high school , Miller formed a trio that played at cocktail parties . His elder brother recommended that he listen to pianist Oscar Peterson , but there was no way of doing this in Greenwood until Peterson appeared on The Joey Bishop Show on television when Miller was about 14 . After watching Peterson 's performance , Miller decided to become a pianist : " It was a life changing event . I knew right then that I would be a jazz pianist " . Miller later mentioned Art Tatum and Erroll Garner as piano influences during his teenage years . Miller reported years later that he always found that playing fast was easy , so playing slowly and with more control were what he had to work hardest on . 
 After graduating from Greenwood High School , Miller became a student at Memphis State University in 1973 , attending with a band scholarship . He played euphonium , but , during his two years at the university , Miller met pianists Donald Brown and James Williams , who introduced him to the music of well @-@ known players such as Wynton Kelly , Bud Powell , and McCoy Tyner . Still at Memphis State , Miller attended a jazz workshop , where one of the tutors was his future bandleader , Woody Shaw , who stated that they would meet again in two years . They did meet again two years later , and Shaw remembered the young pianist . After leaving university in 1975 , Miller took lessons privately in Boston with Madame Margaret <unk> , who had taught many of the pianists that Miller admired . He later commented that , " I should have stayed with her longer , [ ... ] but at that time I was so restless , constantly on the move . " Miller played with saxophonists Ricky Ford and Bill Pierce in Boston . That winter , Miller was invited to Los Angeles by a school friend and decided to go , to escape the northern cold . He stayed on the West Coast for a year , playing locally in clubs and a church . 
 = = Later life and career = = 
 = = = 1976 – 86 = = = 
 Towards the end of 1976 Miller was invited to substitute for the regular pianist in the Duke Ellington Orchestra ( led by the late bandleader 's son , Mercer Ellington ) . Miller had performed the same role for one weekend around a year earlier , and the new work was to be for only three weeks , but he ultimately toured with the orchestra for almost three years . His membership of the orchestra helped him , in the words of a piano magazine , to get " respect as a powerful , two @-@ fisted pianist adept at delivering <unk> lyrical and gracefully introspective runs as well as dazzling and buoyant passages . " He left in January 1980 , after being recruited by vocalist Betty Carter , with whom he toured for eight months that year . He was then part of Shaw 's band from 1981 to 1983 , thereby , in Miller 's view , fulfilling his destiny from their earlier meetings . In 1981 he made his studio recording debut , on Shaw 's United . During the early 1980s he also accompanied vocalist Carmen Lundy , and played and recorded with saxophonist Johnny Griffin . 
 Miller was recommended for Art Blakey 's Jazz Messengers by Blakey members Terence Blanchard and Donald Harrison , and he joined the drummer 's band in 1983 . Initially , he struggled to fit in with Blakey dominating the rhythm section , but Miller stated that , over his period with the band , " My playing just generally matured . I don 't think one single characteristic changed , but the experience certainly boosted my confidence " . At times during concert performances he was allotted a solo piano spot , which Miller used to play medleys . His presence in the Jazz Messengers cemented his reputation within jazz . His recording career as a leader began in 1985 , with Keys to the City , the first of Miller 's several recordings for Landmark Records . Jon Pareles ' review of a solo concert in 1986 noted that Miller 's playing showed the influence of Powell on some numbers and Kelly on others , but that , overall , he was developing " his own , authoritative style " . 
 = = = Later 1986 – 94 = = = 
 After leaving Blakey in 1986 , Miller was pianist in drummer Tony Williams ' quintet from its foundation that year until it disbanded around 1993 . Miller remained busy between tours with Williams ' band , in part by touring with his own groups . The first of these was formed in 1987 and named Wingspan , as , Miller explained , " sort of a dedication to the legacy of Charlie Parker – Bird , you know . " It became one of Miller 's main bands , enduring through changes of personnel , and featured a lot of his compositions in its performances . Another band was known as Trio Transition , which contained bassist Reggie Workman and drummer Freddie Waits . 
 Miller also played on Williams bandmate Wallace Roney 's first three recordings ( 1987 – 89 ) , and a large number of albums recorded by other leaders in the late 1980s . These included an album with long @-@ term collaborator Steve Nelson , a recording by trumpeter Donald Byrd , comeback albums from alto saxophonist Frank Morgan , and the first of a series of releases with tenor saxophonist Benny Golson . 
 Miller and his family moved to Palmer Township , Lehigh Valley , Pennsylvania in 1989 . In that year he joined three other pianists in recording a CD tribute to Memphis pianist Phineas Newborn , Jr . This group , the Contemporary Piano Ensemble , performed intermittently until 1996 , often playing together on four separate pianos . In 1990 Miller traveled to the Soviet Union to appear as pianist in Golson 's band at the first Moscow International Jazz Festival . In 1992 Miller also toured domestically and internationally with the New York Jazz Giants , a septet containing Jon <unk> , Tom Harrell , Lew <unk> , Bobby Watson , Ray Drummond , and Carl Allen . Miller continued to accompany vocalists , including on recordings with Dianne Reeves and Cassandra Wilson . Starting in 1993 , he also played and recorded with saxophonist Joe Lovano . 
 The influence of Williams continued into Miller 's own projects , including their compositions and arrangements : The Guardian reviewer of Miller 's 1992 Hand in Hand , his first for Novus Records , commented that " it 's his occasional boss , drummer Tony Williams , who has made the strongest impression on the way he organises the material . The opening " Grew 's Tune " and the bluesier numbers would slot unnoticed into the Williams library . " 
 = = = 1995 – 2013 = = = 
 For several years after he had turned 40 , Miller concentrated on composing and playing his own music . He therefore reduced his recording and club appearances , as well as one @-@ day associations . The stimulus for this change had built gradually from Miller 's first studio recording in 1981 : " my recording activity increased and by the time that it got into 1986 – 87 I was on so many records it was unbelievable until eventually it became rather overwhelming and stressful , so I had to cut back . " He did continue to record , often with musicians he had established relationships with : in 1996 he reunited with Williams to appear on what became the drummer 's final recording , Young at Heart ; further albums led by Kenny Garrett , Nelson , Reeves , and others were made in the period 1997 – 99 . 
 In 1997 Miller went on tour in Japan with 100 Golden Fingers , a troupe of 10 pianists . He joined bassist Niels @-@ Henning Ørsted Pedersen in 1999 to record duets based on 1940s performances by Duke Ellington and Jimmy Blanton . The pair toured Europe the following year , with drummer Alvin Queen added for some concerts . 
 In 2002 Miller 's discography as leader began to expand again , as <unk> started to release recordings . A series of four concert recordings were released over the following years : Live at The Kennedy Center Vol . 1 and Live at The Kennedy Center Vol . 2 ( recorded in 2002 ) , with Derrick Hodge ( bass ) and Rodney Green ( drums ) ; and Live at Yoshi 's Vol . 1 and Live at Yoshi 's Vol . 2 ( recorded in 2003 ) , with Hodge and Karriem Riggins ( drums ) . In 2002 Miller joined bassist Ron Carter 's Golden Striker Trio , with guitarist Russell Malone . The trio occasionally toured internationally for the next decade . In 2003 Miller was commissioned to write a score for the Dayton Contemporary Dance Company ; after writing The Clearing in the Woods and having it choreographed by Ronald K. Brown , Miller and his band played the piece for performances by the company . 
 In the mid @-@ 2000s Miller joined bassist Dave Holland 's band , changing it from a quintet to a sextet , and adding gospel and soul elements to the group 's sound . Around this time , Miller had two regular bands of his own : a piano trio , and a quintet featuring saxophone and vibraphone . He also became heavily involved in music education : Miller was the Director of Jazz Studies at William Paterson University from 2005 , and was the Artist in Residence at Lafayette College in 2008 , which was two years after it had awarded him an honorary doctorate in Performing Arts . 
 Miller 's only solo album , a 2000 concert recording entitled Solo , was released in 2010 and was well received by critics for the imagination and harmonic development in Miller 's playing . Also in 2010 , Miller joined guitarist John Scofield 's new band . That year , Miller had a minor stroke . After this , he took medicine , changed his diet and lost weight ; he also reduced his touring and recording . In February 2012 he traveled to Denmark to play with <unk> Big Band ; selections from one of the five concerts were released under Miller 's co @-@ leadership as Grew 's Tune . In autumn 2012 he performed as a piano duo with Kenny Barron , continuing an association that had begun some years earlier . In the winter of that year he toured Europe as part of a quintet led by reeds players Yusef Lateef and Archie Shepp . 
 On May 24 , 2013 , Miller was admitted to Lehigh Valley Hospital , near Allentown , Pennsylvania , having suffered another stroke . He died there on May 29 . Miller made more than 15 albums under his own name during his career , and appeared on more than 400 for other leaders . His last working trio consisted of Ivan Taylor on bass and Green on drums . Bassist Christian McBride commented on the loss to jazz on the day of Miller 's death : " I sincerely hope every self @-@ respecting jazz musician takes this day to reflect on all the music Mulgrew left us . " 
 = = Personal life and personality = = 
 Miller was survived by his wife , son , daughter , and grandson . Miller married on August 14 , 1982 . He was quiet and gentle , and was " a modest man , with a self @-@ deprecating sense of humour " . Miller described his own attitude towards music in a 2005 interview : 
 I worked hard to maintain a certain mental and emotional equilibrium . It 's mostly due to my faith in the Creator . I don 't put all my eggs in that basket of being a rich and famous jazz guy . That allows me a certain amount of freedom , because I don 't have to play music for money . I play music because I love it . 
 = = Style and influence = = 
 Ben Ratliff , writing for The New York Times , commented that , " As a composer , Mr. Miller is difficult to peg ; like his piano playing , he 's a bit of everything . " Critic Ted <unk> observed in 2004 that Miller the pianist " finds ways to conjure beauty from <unk> and odd intervals , infusing his lines with church and blues strains and propelling them with a joyous , incessant beat . " John Fordham commented that Miller 's " melodic fluency and percussive <unk> [ ... ] recalled Oscar Peterson [ ... but ] with glimpses of the harmonically freer methods of McCoy Tyner " , and that Miller was much more than the hard bop player that he was often stereotyped as being . The obituary writer for Down Beat observed that " Miller could swing hard but maintained grace and precision with a touch and facility that influenced generations of musicians . " 
 Miller had a strong reputation with fellow musicians . Pianist Geoffrey <unk> was convinced that he wanted to be a pianist after attending a performance by Miller in 1986 . <unk> Warren Wolf stated that Miller helped him early in his career , including by being a link to jazz history : " you 're getting that experience of playing with Art Blakey , that attitude of ' Yes , it 's my band , but you have to give other people a chance to shine . ' " Robert Glasper also cited Miller as an influence , and wrote and recorded " One for ' Grew " as a tribute . 
 Speaking in 2010 , Miller commented on his approach to playing standards , which was more conservative than that of many others : " I believe in giving due respect to the melody , playing it as true as possible , [ ... ] a solo is a creative process that improves the melody . " He almost never transcribed recordings ( something that jazz musicians are typically taught to do ) ; Miller credited this with slowing his learning process , but also with allowing him to express himself more freely , as he reached his own understanding of the compositions he played . 
 Miller explained the lack of critical attention he received as follows : " Guys who do what I am doing are viewed as passé . " He also contrasted his own approach with that of performers who produced " interview music " : " something that 's obviously different , and you get the interviews and a certain amount of attention . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Skerryvore = 
 Skerryvore ( from the Gaelic An Sgeir Mhòr meaning " The Great Skerry " ) is a remote reef that lies off the west coast of Scotland , 12 miles ( 19 kilometres ) south @-@ west of the island of Tiree . Skerryvore is best known as the name given to the lighthouse on the skerry , built with some difficulty between 1838 and 1844 by Alan Stevenson . 
 At a height of 156 feet ( 48 m ) it is the tallest lighthouse in Scotland . The shore station was at Hynish on Tiree ( which now houses the Skerryvore Lighthouse Museum ) ; operations were later transferred to Erraid , west of Mull . The remoteness of the location led to the keepers receiving additional payments in kind . The light shone without a break from 1844 until a fire in 1954 shut down operations for five years . The lighthouse was automated in 1994 . 
 = = Geology = = 
 In pre @-@ historic times the rocks that now form Skerryvore were covered by the ice sheets that spread from Scotland out into the Atlantic Ocean beyond the Outer Hebrides . After the last retreat of the ice around 20 @,@ 000 years ago , sea levels were up to 400 feet ( 122 m ) lower than at present . Although the isostatic rise of land makes estimating post @-@ glacial coastlines a complex task , circa 14 @,@ 000 BP it is likely that the reef was at the south western end of a large island consisting of the modern islands of Tiree and Coll and the surrounding land . 
 Steadily rising sea levels would then have slowly isolated and finally all but submerged the shoals of Skerryvore , a barrier of innumerable metamorphic remnants that stretch for 8 miles ( 13 kilometres ) lying in a south @-@ westerly direction . A detailed survey undertaken in 1834 listed more than 130 main rocks including Am Bonn <unk> ( <unk> ) ( Scottish Gaelic : The <unk> Bottom ) and Am <unk> Ruadh ( Scottish Gaelic : The Red Submerged Rock ) . 
 The rocks have been worn smooth by the action of the waves and are constantly affected by spray . Alan Stevenson wrote : " The effect of the jet d 'eau was at times extremely beautiful , the water being so broken as to form a snow @-@ white and opaque pillar , surrounded by a fine vapour in which , during sunshine , beautiful rainbows were observed " . 
 It is an isolated outpost of the Inner Hebrides archipelago composed of Lewisian gneiss , formed in the Precambrian eon , these rocks being amongst the most ancient rocks in Europe . A further hazard to shipping is a magnetic anomaly in the area . 
 = = Planning and construction of the lighthouse = = 
 = = = Surveys = = = 
 Between 1790 and 1844 more than thirty ships were known to have been wrecked in the area . Robert Stevenson , chief engineer of the Northern Lighthouse Board ( NLB ) landed on the reef in 1804 and reported on the need for a beacon of some kind there . In 1814 he returned in the company of Sir Walter Scott and a party of NLB Commissioners . Scott wrote : 
 Quiet perseverance on the part of Mr S , and great kicking , bouncing and squabbling upon that of the yacht , who seems to like the idea of Skerry <unk> as little as the Commissioners . At length , by dint of exertion , come in sight of this long ridge of rocks ( chiefly under water ) , on which the tide breaks in a most tremendous style . There appear a few low broad rocks at one end of the reef , which is about a mile in length . These are never entirely under water though the surf dashes over them .... It will be a most desolate position for a lighthouse , the Bell Rock and Eddystone a joke to it , for the nearest land is the wild island of Tyree , at 14 miles distance . So much for Skerry <unk> . 
 Later that year an Act of Parliament was passed enabling construction of a lighthouse , yet despite pleas for a light arriving almost weekly at the NLB , events proceeded only slowly . It was not until 1834 that Robert Stevenson returned in the company of his son Alan . A painstaking survey made it clear that there was little choice for a location . The single largest area was a rock that measured only 280 sq ft ( 26 m2 ) at low tide . Readings for wave pressure indicated that any tower would have to withstand forces of 6 @,@ 000 pounds per square foot ( 29 @,@ 000 kg / m2 ) . There were suggestions that a tower of cast iron or bronze might be sufficient , but Stevenson senior wrote that " no pecuniary consideration could in my opinion have justified the adoption of an iron lighthouse for Skerryvore . " On more than one occasion the surveyors had to warn passing vessels of the danger . A ship from Newcastle , whose charts showed only the main rock some miles away , was boarded near Bo Ruadh . The Master , oblivious to the dangers , was found lying at ease smoking a pipe with his wife beside him knitting stockings . 
 Still the Commissioners prevaricated , daunted by the potential costs , estimated by Robert Stevenson at £ 63 @,@ 000 . They set up a special Skerryvore Committee , whose members decided to visit the site by steamer to see for themselves . Just off Skerryvore a fire broke out in the boiler room crippling the ship . It was extinguished and no harm was done , but the experience may have been persuasive . 
 Alan Stevenson was duly appointed as the engineer for the project aged only 30 . He designed a tower 156 feet ( 48 m ) high with a base of 42 feet ( 13 m ) , narrowing to just 16 feet ( 5 m ) at the lantern gallery . The lowest sections would be solid , although at 26 feet ( 8 m ) feet high they were less than half the height of the base of the later light at nearby Dubh Artach . Nonetheless the structure would weigh 4 @,@ 308 long tons ( 4 @,@ 377 t ) and the volume of the base would be more than 4 times larger than the entire structure of the Eddystone light and twice that of the Bell Rock . With 151 steps to the top it would be the tallest and heaviest lighthouse yet built anywhere in the modern world , and today it is still one of the tallest lighthouse in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Shore station = = = 
 Hynish on Tiree was the initial shore station and construction site . Located on the south west corner of Tiree , its proximity to Skerryvore and the resulting abundance of bounty from the wrecks , led to rentals being higher here and on the rest of the west coast than elsewhere on the island . Work on the new facilities began in 1837 ; granite blocks were quarried from Mull and brought to the village to be cut and shaped before being shipped out to the reef . Several cottages for the keepers were built in 1844 from the same stone as well as a massive pier and a tall granite tower to enable signalling to and from Skerryvore itself . Stevenson remarked that the hive of activity there contrasted with the " desolation and misery " he imagined to be the lot of the surrounding population . 
 = = = Barrack and foundation = = = 
 In 1838 £ 15 @,@ 000 in wages alone was spent on constructing a 150 @-@ ton steamer in Leith to ferry workers and materials out to the reef . The difficulties should not be underestimated . Although Skerryvore is a dozen miles from Hynish it is 50 miles ( 80 km ) from the mainland . The first work to be undertaken on Skerryvore itself was the construction of a six @-@ legged frame on top of which a wooden barrack to house 40 men was placed . The building was created in Gourock before being dismantled and re @-@ built on site . 
 Initial work began on the rock on 7 August 1838 . Stevenson and 21 workmen arrived on board the sailing vessel Pharos and began to unload the barrack , whose massive legs were set into holes blasted out of the rock . After only two days the site had to be abandoned as a storm swept in from the Atlantic . It was a further six days before they could resume the punishing schedule of 16 hours a day work between 4 am and 8 pm . Fearing sea sickness , many of the man preferred to attempt to sleep on the damp rocks than on the ever @-@ rolling Pharos . 
 Work for the season lasted only until 11 September , by which time the barrack legs had been secured although not the main structure . Less than two months later Stevenson received a letter from the storekeeper at Hynish , Mr. Hogben . It began : " Dear Sir , I am extremely sorry to inform you that the barrack erected on Skerryvore Rock has totally disappeared . " The structure had been destroyed during in a gale on 3 November and four months effort had been wasted . Stevenson hired a boat to take him out to inspect the damage the same day he received this news . Firm in his self @-@ belief , he resolved to build a stronger but otherwise identical replacement . Work began in April 1839 and by early September the completed barrack stood 60 feet ( 18 m ) above the rock . Entry was via ladders attached to the legs that led into the lowest level containing a kitchen . The middle level contained two cabins , one for Stevenson , the other for his master of works , whilst the top level provided sleeping quarters for a further 30 to 40 men . 
 Work on the foundations for the lighthouse continued until 30 September . A total of 296 charges were used to remove 2 @,@ 000 tons of rock and Stevenson believed that the rock was so hard that the effort involved was four times that required for boring Aberdeenshire granite . The work went well but by the end of the second season , no blocks had yet been laid . However , between April 1839 and June 1840 4 @,@ 300 blocks had been fashioned , the stone donated by the Duke of Argyll from quarries on Mull . The roughly hewn rock was taken to Hynish where the blocks were hammered and chiselled into shape . The largest weighed over 2 @.@ 5 tons , the smallest 0 @.@ 75 tons and the precision required meant that a single block could take 320 man hours to complete . 
 = = = Tower = = = 
 The new barrack withstood the violence of the storms during the winter of 1839 – 40 . Work re @-@ commenced on the rock on 30 April 1840 , and after the arrival of the new steamer Skerryvore the carefully fashioned blocks began to arrive on site . The first one was laid by John Campbell , 7th Duke of Argyll on 4 July . His son George later wrote : 
 That sight is as fresh in my memory after an interval of 57 years as if I had seen it yesterday . The natural surfaces of the rock were irregular in the highest degree . Worn , broken , and battered by the unnumbered ages of the most tremendous surf , and by the splitting of the rock along lines of natural fissures , there did not seem to be one square foot of rock which was even tolerably level . Yet in the midst of this torn and fissured surface we suddenly came on a magnificent circular floor , 42 ft in diameter , as level as water , and as smooth as a billiard table . 
 Soon up to 95 blocks a day were arriving from Hynish , although the weather continued to play its part . During the summer of 1840 the steamer was unable to reach the reef for fourteen consecutive days , and on another occasion no landings were possible for seven weeks and supplies began to run low . When work ceased again in the autumn , 800 tons of granite standing 8 feet 2 ins ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) high stood on Skerryvore , and up to 80 craftsmen continued to labour on the blocks at Hynish all winter . The first three courses of the base are of hard Hynish gneiss , the remainder are granite from the Ross of Mull . 
 Work continued during 1841 – 42 , a crane being used to hoist the huge blocks as the tower rose . The last one was raised to the parapet in July 1842 . Robert Stevenson , then aged 70 , visited the site on his last annual voyage of inspection . The walls at the base are 9 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 9 m ) thick , and 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) thick at the top . The <unk> and lantern sit above nine apartments 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) in diameter . The total cost of the works undertaken by the Northern Lighthouse Board was £ 86 @,@ 977 , including the cost of establishing the shore station at Hynish , estimated at £ 13 @,@ 000 . It is a credit to Stevenson , his foreman Charles Stewart , and Captain <unk> the landing master , that not a single life was lost during the construction . 
 = = = Fitting out = = = 
 The final season of work in 1843 was spent in fitting out the interior . By then Alan had become chief engineer to the NLB and the final work was undertaken under the supervision of his brother Thomas . The light , which had eight lenses revolving around a four wick lamp with pyramidal lenses above and reflecting prisms below each one , was constructed by John Milne of Edinburgh . The machinery was ready by the beginning of 1844 , but it was seven weeks before a landing could be undertaken on the rock . The lamp was finally lit on 1 February and it shone without interruption for the next 110 years . 
 Skerryvore was Alan Stevenson 's greatest achievements from both an engineering and aesthetic perspective . No philistine , he chose a <unk> curve for the outline for stylistic reasons . His nephew Robert Louis described it as " the noblest of all extant deep @-@ sea lights " and according to the Northern Lighthouse Board it is " asserted by some that Skerryvore is the world 's most graceful lighthouse " . 
 = = Keepers = = 
 Such are the hazards of the surrounding reefs that the lighthouse is not normally approached by shipping . However , completion of the construction work did not result in an end to the difficulties for those involved in its operations . The easiest landing is at <unk> 's Gully , which intersects the rock near the tower . An unaided landing has been described as " like climbing up the side of a bottle " . A system of ropes attached to a derrick was installed to assist these dangerous operations . Statistics compiled for the two decades from 1881 – 1890 showed Skerryvore as having been the stormiest part of Scotland . There were a total of 542 storms lasting 14 @,@ 211 hours during that period . One keeper lost his hearing for several weeks , after a lightning strike had thrown him through the entrance door . 
 James <unk> , who became a keeper in 1861 , wrote of the bird migrations visible from the tower : " Hundreds of birds are flying about in all directions , crossing and re @-@ crossing one another 's flight , but never coming into collision , all seemingly of the opinion that the only way of escape out of the confusion into which they have got is through the windows of the lantern " . A fog bell had been installed by then , one of only two operating in Scotland at the time . 
 The adverse conditions faced by the keepers resulted in them receiving additional payments in kind , but the remote location suited some veterans . Archibald McEachern was assistant keeper for 14 years from 1870 – 84 and John Nicol was principal from 1890 – 1903 . The latter was involved in a dramatic rescue when the liner Labrador en route from Halifax , Nova Scotia to Liverpool ran aground on the nearby Mackenzie 's Rock in 1899 . The lifeboats were manned and two made it to Mull , but one with eighteen passengers reached the lighthouse where they were looked after for two and a half days before they could be taken to the mainland . No lives were lost and Nicol and his two assistants were commended by the NLB for their efforts . 
 John Muir , who served as a keeper with the NLB for 39 years all told , had a posting to Skerryvore from 1902 to 1914 . He helped complete a new " landing grating " , as the slender metal walkway was called , that made landings possible in conditions previously considered " hopeless " . He baked his own bread and scones and made an inlaid table and Iona marble inkstand . 
 = = Post @-@ construction events = = 
 Numerous dignitaries visited the light in the ensuing years . William Chambers , the Lord Provost of Edinburgh came in 1866 and wrote : 
 I was interested in knowing the method of intercourse by signals . Every morning between nine and ten o 'clock , a ball is hoisted at the lighthouse to signify that all is well at the Skerryvore . Should this signal fail to be given a ball is raised at Hynish to enquire if anything is wrong . Should no reply be made by the hoisting of the ball , the schooner , hurried from its wet dock , is put to sea and steers for the lighthouse .... I enquired how high the waves washed up the side of the tower during the most severe storms , and was told that they sometimes rose as high as the first window , or about 60 ft above the level of the rocks ; yet , that even in these frightful tumults of wind and waves the building never shook , and no apprehension of danger was entertained . 
 The visual similarity between Skerryvore and Dubh Artach 20 miles ( 32 kilometres ) to the south east , led to the NLB painting a distinctive red band round the middle section of the latter in 1890 . The Hynish Shore Station had the advantage of proximity to the site during the construction period . However the small harbour offered little shelter for shipping . The keepers operated from here until 1892 when operations were transferred to Erraid adjacent to the Isle of Mull . Other than the signal tower , the land and buildings on Tiree were sold to George Campbell , 8th Duke of Argyll who had witnessed the laying of the first stone on Skerryvore fifty @-@ two years previously . A paddle steamer , Signal , built by Laird of Greenock in 1883 was based at Erraid for relief operations . The shore station was moved to Oban in the 1950s . 
 In 1916 mines were laid in the vicinity of the rock by the German submarines SM U @-@ 71 and SM U @-@ 78 . In July 1940 during World War II a stick of bombs was dropped by a passing German plane . The explosion cracked two lantern panes and shattered one of the incandescent mantles . 
 A disastrous fire started on the seventh floor on the night of 16 March 1954 and spread downwards . The keepers had no time to raise the alarm and were driven out of the lighthouse onto the rocks but rescued the next day when the relief vessel arrived as part of its regular schedule . The heat of the fire caused damage to both the interior and the structure and a lightship and series of temporary lights were installed during reconstruction . Three new generators were placed in the lighthouse to provide an electric light source , the lantern being re @-@ lit on 6 August 1959 . 
 A helipad was constructed in 1972 to enable relief trips to be undertaken without the need for perilous sea landings . The lighthouse has been fully automated since 31 March 1994 and is monitored via a radio link to Ardnamurchan lighthouse . 
 The Hynish tower has been converted to house the Skerryvore Lighthouse Museum , run by the Hebridean Trust who have also restored the pier . It is now possible to visit Skerryvore with Tiree @-@ based <unk> Sea Tours . 
 = Harrison County , Indiana = 
 Harrison County is located in the far southern part of the U.S. state of Indiana along the Ohio River . The county was officially established in 1808 . As of the 2010 census , the county 's population was 39 @,@ 364 , an increase of 6 @.@ 6 % from 2000 . The county seat is Corydon , the former capital of Indiana . 
 Harrison County is part of the Louisville @-@ Jefferson County , KY @-@ IN Metropolitan Statistical Area . 
 The county has a diverse economy with no sector employing more than 13 % of the local workforce . Horseshoe Southern Indiana is the largest employer , followed by Tyson Foods and the Harrison County Hospital . Tourism also plays a significant role in the economy and is centered on the county 's many historic sites . County government is divided among several bodies including the boards of the county 's three school districts , three elected commissioners who exercise legislative and executive powers , an elected county council that controls the county budget , a circuit and superior court , and township trustees who oversee government function in the county 's 12 townships . The county has 10 incorporated towns with a total population of over 5 @,@ 000 , as well as many small unincorporated towns . One Interstate highway and one U. S. Route run through the county , as do eight Indiana State Roads and two railroad lines . 
 Migratory groups of Native Americans inhabited the area for thousands of years , but the first permanent settlements in what would become Harrison County were created by American settlers in the years after the American Revolutionary War . The population grew rapidly during first decade of the 19th century . Corydon was officially platted in 1808 and became the capital of the Indiana Territory in 1813 . Many of the state 's early important historic events occurred in the county , including the writing of Indiana 's first constitution . Corydon was the state capital until 1825 , but in the years afterward remained an important hub for southern Indiana . In 1859 there was a major meteorite strike . In 1863 the Battle of Corydon was fought , the only battle of the American Civil War to occur in Indiana . 
 = = History = = 
 Humans first entered what would become Indiana near the end of the last ice age . The region around Harrison County was of particular value to the early humans because of the abundance of flint . There is evidence of flint mining in local caves as early as 2000 BCE ; the stone was used to produce crude tools . Passing migratory tribes frequented the area which was influenced by succeeding groups of peoples including the Hopewells and Mississippians . One flint @-@ working and camping location is known as the Swan 's Landing Archeological Site ; it is among the most important Early Archaic archaeological sites anywhere in eastern North America . Permanent human settlements in the county began with the arrival of American settlers in the last decade of the 18th century . 
 The area became part of the United States following its conquest during the American Revolutionary War . Veterans of the revolution received land grants in the eastern part of the county as part of Clark 's Grant . Daniel Boone and his brother Squire Boone were early explorers of the county , entering from Kentucky in the 1780s . Harvey Heth , Spier Spencer , and Edward Smith were among the first to settle in the county beginning in the 1790s . Smith built the first home in what later became the county seat of Corydon . 
 Harrison County was originally part of Knox County and Clark County but was separated in 1808 . It was the first Indiana county formed by the Indiana territorial legislature and not the Governor . The county originally contained land that is now parts of Crawford , Floyd , Washington , Jackson , Clark , Lawrence , Perry , Scott and Orange Counties . The county was named for William Henry Harrison , the first governor of Indiana Territory , and later a General in War of 1812 , hero of Tippecanoe , and the 9th U.S. President . Harrison was the largest land holder in the county at the time and had a small estate at Harrison Spring . 
 Squire Boone settled permanently in what is now Boone Township in 1806 . He died in 1815 and is buried in a cave near his home , Squire Boone Caverns . James , Isaiah , and Daniel ( son of Squire ) Boone settled in Heth Township during the first decade of the 1800s . The county 's first church was built by Boone east of present @-@ day Laconia . The church , which has been reconstructed , is known as Old Goshen . Jacob Kintner settled near Corydon in about 1810 . He was one of the wealthiest settlers and amassed a 700 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 8 km2 ) tract of land around Corydon , built a large home , and maintained an inn . Paul and Susanna <unk> became Quakers and immigrated to Harrison County from North Carolina in 1814 , bringing with them 107 slaves they freed after arriving . Although some of the former slaves left , the group became one of the largest communities of free blacks in the state . 
 The first road was built in Harrison County in 1809 connecting Corydon with Mauckport on the Ohio River . A tow @-@ and @-@ ferry line was operated there by the <unk> family bringing settlers into the county from Kentucky . This road and ferry greatly expanded the county 's economic viability and ease of access to the outside world , leading to a rapid settlement of the area . The county 's population more than doubled in the following decade . 
 Dennis Pennington , who lived near Lanesville , became one of the county 's early leading citizens and speaker of the territory 's legislature . Corydon began competing with other southern Indiana settlements to become the new capital of the territory after its reorganization in 1809 . Hostilities broke out in 1811 with the Native American tribes on the frontier , and the territorial capital was moved to Corydon on May 1 , 1813 , after Pennington suggested it would be safer than Vincennes . For the next twelve years , Corydon was the political center of the territory and subsequent state . A state constitution was drafted in Corydon during June 1816 and after statehood the town served as the state capital until 1825 . 
 The first division of the county occurred in 1814 when the northern portion of the county was separated to become Washington County . The county was again divided in 1818 with the western part of the county being separated to become Crawford County . A third division occurred in 1819 when Floyd County was created out of the eastern part of the county . Harrison County 's eastern border has had minor adjustments through land transactions with Floyd County ; the last change occurred in 1968 . 
 The northern part of the county is known as the barrens , named by the early settlers for the lack timber there . For the first decades of settlement , settlers refused to purchase the land in the barrens because it was considered too far from the timber needed to build homes , fires , fences , and other necessities . The barrens were swept by annual wildfires that prevented the growth of trees . The largest barren ran from the northern edge of Corydon northward to Palmyra , and from the Floyd Knobs in the east , westward to the Blue River . The Central Barren covered most of the upper middle part of the county . As settlement expanded and farming grew in the early 19th century , settlers began to discover that the barrens were among the most fertile farmlands in the state , and they quickly filled up with landholders . As settlement increased , the wildfires were stopped and by the start of the 20th century the uninhabited parts of the barrens had become forested and have remained so until modern times . 
 A large meteorite fell near Buena Vista on March 28 , 1859 , causing some panic in the area . The site of the impact and a part of the meteorite have been preserved . 
 In 1860 the first Harrison County fair was held in Corydon . The county fair has been an annual event since then and is the longest continuously running fair in the state . The county fairgrounds were built in the southwest corner of Corydon where the home of Edward Smith formerly stood . The fair 's original grandstand burned in 1960 and the county purchased a new grandstand from the minor league baseball team at Parkway Field in Louisville , Kentucky . 
 The only Civil War battle fought in Indiana occurred in Harrison County on July 9 , 1863 , between the Harrison County Legion and Brigadier General John Hunt Morgan of the Confederate Army during Morgan 's Raid . Morgan crossed the Ohio River into Harrison County on the morning of July 9 . His crossing was contested by the Legion with artillery on the Indiana shore and an armed river boat . After Morgan opened fire with his own batteries from the opposite shore the legion quickly retreated towards Corydon . The citizens of Mauckport fled the town with most of their valuables . Morgan landed on the east side of Mauckport with two thousand cavalry and marched north burning homes , farms , and mills . The county militia made a stand to block his advance on the county seat and the resulting conflict is known as the Battle of Corydon . The battle was won by the Confederates and the town of Corydon was then sacked and stores were looted and ransomed . The battle left 4 dead , 12 wounded , and 355 captured . After the battle Morgan continued into northern Harrison County where he looted New Salisbury area with the main body of troops . Crandall and Palmyra were robbed and sacked by detachments . His forces left the county on July 10 ; they were eventually defeated and captured by Union Army . 
 The railroad reached Harrison County in 1869 . A line was completed across the northern half of county in 1874 running from Floyd County connecting Crandall and then continuing west into Crawford County . A southward extension connecting Corydon to Crandall was completed in 1882 . A train wreck killed three in 1902 . The southern extension connecting Corydon was purchased by the Corydon Scenic Railroad Company in 1989 and operated as a tourist attraction until 2003 when it was closed because of financial difficulties , ending passenger service in the county . 
 The first county courthouse was a small log building . When Corydon became the territory capital in 1813 , county and territorial officials shared the building . By 1816 a stone building had been constructed , and it served as both Harrison County Courthouse and the state capital building until the capital was moved . As more space was needed , other buildings were constructed to supplement the courthouse . In the 1920s , the latest of these office buildings was razed to make way for a new courthouse ; the old building was acquired by the State of Indiana and preserved as the first state capitol building . The new courthouse was built from 1927 to 1928 at a cost of about $ 250 @,@ 000 . The building was designed by Fowler and <unk> of Evansville and was constructed by J. Fred Beggs and Company of <unk> . 
 The Harrison @-@ Crawford State Forest was started in 1932 when the State of Indiana purchased land in western Harrison County . The 26 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 110 km2 ) park is the largest state forest in Indiana and surrounds the O 'Bannon Woods State Park and Wyandotte Caves , located in eastern Crawford County . 
 The Matthew E. Welsh Bridge was completed in 1966 in Mauckport . It connected Harrison County with neighboring Meade County . This is the only bridge over the Ohio River between Tell City and New Albany . In 1969 Dr. Samuel P. Hays donated the 311 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 26 km2 ) <unk> Nature Reserve to the county . It was developed in 1973 by the Harrison County Park Board by adding public facilities to the western part of the preserve . It is the second largest nature reserve in the county . 
 Caesars Indiana opened a casino river boat , hotel complex , and golf course in 1998 , boosting the county 's tourism industry . The casino complex was purchased and became Horseshoe Southern Indiana on July 11 , 2008 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Harrison County is located in the far southern part of Indiana , about halfway between the state 's east and west borders . The Ohio River defines the county 's southern border ; across the river lies the state of Kentucky and the city of Louisville . The Blue River runs along the county 's western border . Six counties are adjacent to Harrison County . Three are in Indiana : Washington County to the north , Floyd County to the east , and Crawford County to the west . The other three are in Kentucky : Jefferson County and Hardin County are to the southeast and Meade County is to the south . 
 According to the 2010 census , the county has a total area of 486 @.@ 52 square miles ( 1 @,@ 260 @.@ 1 km2 ) , of which 484 @.@ 52 square miles ( 1 @,@ 254 @.@ 9 km2 ) ( or 99 @.@ 59 % ) is land and 2 @.@ 00 square miles ( 5 @.@ 2 km2 ) ( or 0 @.@ 41 % ) is water . 
 Harrison Spring is located west of Corydon ; it is 60 feet ( 18 m ) in diameter and is over 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) deep , making it the largest and deepest spring in Indiana . It rises from a solid rock in a level spot of land , and it outputs enough water to have turned flour mills in the past . Is the largest spring by volume in Indiana producing over 3 million gallons of water daily . The spring derives its name from William Henry Harrison who once owned the land surrounding it . 
 Harrison County 's surface is covered by many hills and valleys . The Knobstone Escarpment begins in the southeastern part of the county , rising sharply at the Ohio River , and following a course roughly along the eastern edge of the county . The " knobs " are the most significant series of hills in Indiana , with the highest knobs near the Ohio River towering 610 feet ( 190 m ) over the surrounding valley . This is the greatest local relief difference in the state . The Ohio River borders the entire southeastern , southern , and southwestern part of the county . Blue River forms the western border with Indian Creek and Buck Creek as the primary internal drainage systems . 
 The western part of the county is preserved as the Harrison @-@ Crawford State Forest and the O 'Bannon Woods State Park . The county has extensive cave systems including Squire Boone Caverns , the Binkley Cave System ( Indiana Caverns ) and smaller , highly decorated caves such as Jewel Box and Devil 's Graveyard caves . 
 = = = Towns and communities = = = 
 Corydon , with a 2000 population of 2 @,@ 715 , is the largest town in the county , the county seat , and center of economic activity . Palmyra , located on the northern edge of the county , is the second largest town and had a 2000 population of 644 . Lanesville is the third largest town with a 2000 population of 615 . Milltown had a 2000 population of 932 ; the town sits on the western border of the county and a majority of its population lives in Crawford County . The county 's other incorporated towns , Crandall , Elizabeth , Laconia , Mauckport , New Middletown , and New Amsterdam all have populations under 150 . 
 There are several unincorporated and formerly @-@ incorporated communities . These include Bradford , <unk> , Central , Depauw , New Salisbury , Ramsey , Rosewood , <unk> and White Cloud . 
 The county is subdivided into 12 townships : Blue River , Boone , Franklin , Harrison , Heth , Jackson , Morgan , Posey , Spencer , Taylor , Washington , and Webster . 
 = = Climate and weather = = 
 Harrison County is in the humid subtropical climate region of the United States along with most of Southern Indiana . Its Köppen climate classification is Dfa , meaning that it is cold , has no dry season , and has a hot summer . However , it is close to the southern edge of this region . In recent years , average temperatures in Corydon have ranged from a low of 21 ° F ( − 6 ° C ) in January to a high of 88 ° F ( 31 ° C ) in July , although a record low of − 31 ° F ( − 35 ° C ) was recorded in January 1977 and a record high of 104 ° F ( 40 ° C ) was recorded in July 1983 . Average monthly precipitation ranged from 3 @.@ 13 inches ( 80 mm ) in October to 5 @.@ 06 inches ( 129 mm ) in May . 
 = = Government = = 
 The county government is a constitutional body and is granted specific powers by the Constitution of Indiana and by the Indiana Code . Executive and legislative power is vested in the Board of Commissioners , and fiscal power is vested in the County Council . 
 The seven member county council is the fiscal branch of the county government and controls all the spending and revenue collection in the county . Four representatives are elected from county districts and three are elected at @-@ large . The council members serve four @-@ year terms . They are responsible for setting salaries , the annual budget , and special spending . The council also has limited authority to impose local taxes in the form of an income tax , property tax , excise taxes , and service taxes . County income and property taxes are subject to state level approval . In 2013 the council members were Phil Smith , District 1 ( R ) ; Gary Davis , District 2 ( R ) ; Gordon Pendleton , District 3 ( D ) ; Ralph Sherman District 4 ( R ) ; Sherry Brown , At @-@ Large ( R ) ; Richard <unk> , At @-@ Large ( D ) ; Jim <unk> , At @-@ Large ( R ) . 
 The Board of Commissioners consists of three commissioners who are elected county @-@ wide in staggered terms . Each serves a four @-@ year term . One of the commissioners , typically the most senior , serves as president of the board . The commissioners manage the budget set forth by the council , the collection of revenue , enact and repeal ordinances , and managing the day @-@ to @-@ day functions of the county government . The commissioners hold public meetings twice each month to discuss issues affecting the public and receive community input . In 2013 the commissioners were George <unk> , District 1 ( R ) ; Kenny <unk> , District 2 ( R ) ; James <unk> , District 3 ( R ) . 
 Harrison County has a Circuit Court and a Superior Court . The Superior Court handles all adult criminal cases , small claims cases , traffic tickets , and infractions . The Circuit Court handles the rest of the cases in the county , including most of the divorce cases , juvenile matters , <unk> cases , civil proceedings , probate , estates , adoptions , civil commitments , and other civil cases . Judges in each court serve a six @-@ year term . The Judge of the Circuit Court appoints a referee to handle family law cases . 
 The county has several other elected offices , including sheriff , coroner , auditor , treasurer , recorder , surveyor and circuit court clerk . Each of these elected officers serves a term of four years and oversees a different part of county government . Members elected to county government positions are required to declare party affiliations and to be residents of the county . 
 Each of the townships has a trustee who administers rural fire protection and ambulance service , provides poor relief and manages cemetery care , among other duties . The trustee is assisted in these duties by a three @-@ member township board . The trustees and board members are elected to four @-@ year terms . 
 Most of Harrison County falls within State House District 70 , and is represented in Indiana House of Representatives by Republican Rhonda J. Rhoads . Blue River Township in the <unk> part of the county is part of State House District 73 , and is represented by Republican Steve Davisson . The entire county is part of State Senate District 47 , and is represented in the Indiana State Senate by Democrat Richard Young . The county is part of Indiana 's 9th congressional district and is represented in the United States Congress by Republican Todd Young . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Harrison County has a diverse economy . Manufacturing industry is centered in the Corydon Industrial Park where automobile @-@ related manufacturing is most prevalent . There is large scale farming throughout the rural areas of the county ; corn and soybeans are the county 's largest crops . A service and shopping district is centered in Corydon . There are several medical facilities in the county including the Harrison County Hospital , two nursing facilities operated by Kindred Healthcare , and a number of private practices . 
 The county has a developed tourism industry . The main attractions are the historic sites of Corydon , the county 's golf courses , the Horseshoe Riverboat Casino and Hotel , and the area 's two famous caves : Squire Boone Caverns near Mauckport and Wyandotte Caves in adjoining Crawford County . The casino is the county 's single largest source of tax revenue and produced $ 23 @.@ 5 million in tax revenue during 2007 . 
 Multiple utility companies serve the county . Electricity is provided by the Harrison Rural Electric Membership Cooperative ( <unk> ) and Duke Energy . Natural gas is provided by the Indiana Utilities Corporation in Corydon and several small distributors provide rural service . Land @-@ line telephone service is provided exclusively by Verizon . Cable television is provided by Insight Communications in some parts of the county . Water is pumped from a number of corporations , the largest being South Harrison Water Corporation and Ramsey Water Inc . 
 As of July 2009 , the county 's largest employer was the Horseshoe Southern Indiana casino with 1 @,@ 600 employees . Other large employers are Tyson Foods with 550 employees , Harrison County Hospital employs 504 , South Harrison Community School Corporation employs 425 , Blue River Services employs 405 , Wal @-@ Mart employs 400 , North Harrison Community School Corporation employs 311 , ICON Metal Forming employs 200 , <unk> Inc. employs 120 , Kindred Healthcare employs 115 , Smith Store Fixtures and Lucas Oil Products each employs 80 , <unk> <unk> employs 50 , and Speed Flex employs 41 . An additional 92 businesses employ 5 to 40 workers . In total , 13 % of the workforce is in retail , 12 % in government , 12 % in manufacturing , 11 % in services , 8 % in accommodations and food services , 8 % in agriculture , 7 % in construction , 7 % working for local utilities , 6 % in finance , insurance , and real estate , and 6 % in other trades . The Louisville , Jefferson County , KY @-@ IN Metropolitan statistical area to which Harrison County belongs has an unemployment rate of 10 @.@ 2 % in December 2009 . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Harrison County is bisected by the major east – west Interstate 64 . The highway has entrances and exits at Corydon and Lanesville . U.S. Route 150 crosses the northern part of the county following the route of the Buffalo Trace . 
 The north – south State Road 135 and east – west State Road 62 are roughly perpendicular and cross each other at Corydon near the center of the county . State Road 64 is an east – west route through the north central part of the county , crossing State Road 135 in New Salisbury . State Road 111 connects Elizabeth with New Albany in neighboring Floyd County ; the Horseshoe Riverboat Casino is located on the route . State Road 337 crosses the county from the northwest to the southeast , passing through Corydon in the center of the county . 
 There are two very short Indiana State Roads in the county . State Road 211 runs for about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of Elizabeth in the southeast part of county , connecting State Roads 11 and 111 . State Road 462 connects the Harrison @-@ Crawford State Forest with State Road 62 in the southwest part of the county , running for about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . 
 Two railroads operate in the county . Lucas Oil Rail Line is a 7 @-@ mile ( 11 km ) <unk> railroad beginning in downtown Corydon , moving northward through the industrial park where Lucas Oil 's bottling facilities are located , and thence northward to where it intersects with an east – west Norfolk Southern Railway line near New Salisbury . The Norfolk Southern line runs across the entire state and passes through the northern part of the county , through the towns of Crandall , Ramsey , and Depauw . It has a small depot in Ramsey . 
 = = Education = = 
 The county has 22 schools ; 15 are public schools in 3 school districts , and 7 are private . South Harrison Community Schools is the largest district with 3 @,@ 141 pupils in 2010 . The district covers the southern half of the county and includes Corydon Central High School , Corydon Central Junior High School , South Central Junior & Senior High School , Corydon Intermediate , Corydon Elementary , Heth @-@ Washington Elementary , and New Middletown Elementary . North Harrison Community School Corporation had 2 @,@ 324 pupils in 2010 enrolled in North Harrison High School , North Harrison Middle School , North Harrison Elementary , and Morgan Elementary . Lanesville Community School Corporation is the smallest district serving only Franklin Township . It consists of Lanesville Junior Senior High School and Lanesville Elementary . In 2010 , teachers in the North Harrison district averaged $ 50 @,@ 800 in annual salary ; South Harrison teachers averaged $ 48 @,@ 500 ; Lanesville teachers averaged $ 51 @,@ 500 . North Harrison had a 2010 graduation rate of 81 @.@ 5 % ; South Harrison 84 @.@ 6 % ; Lanesville 91 @.@ 5 % . Lanesville and North Harrison students performed above average on 2010 statewide <unk> + tests , while South Harrison students performed below average . 
 The county also has several private schools supported by local churches . St. John 's , a Lutheran school near Lanesville , has 77 pupils . St. Joseph 's , a Catholic school in Corydon , has 87 pupils . County high school students , including those in public , private , and home schools , may attend the vocational school C. A. Prosser school of Technology in neighboring Floyd County as part of their high school curriculum . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 James Best was born in 1926 in Kentucky ; at the age of three he went to an orphanage , then was adopted and was raised in Corydon . He joined the Army after World War II . In the 1950s he became an actor , appearing first in a western and then in a variety of film genres . He also appeared many times as a guest star in various television shows including The Andy Griffith Show and The Twilight Zone . He is best known for his role as Sheriff Rosco P. Coltrane on The Dukes of Hazzard . 
 <unk> Funk was born in Harrison County in 1929 and attended school in Corydon . He taught high school history for 10 years starting in 1955 . Like William <unk> , he studied law in New Albany , and returned to Corydon and practiced law ; in 1965 he joined a partnership with Frank O 'Bannon . He was also active with Indiana historical and genealogical societies , and wrote many books about Indiana history . He died in 1990 , and is buried in Corydon . 
 Frank O 'Bannon was born in 1930 and was raised in Corydon . He attended Indiana University , where he earned degrees in government and law ; he also served for two years in the Air Force . He was a state senator for 18 years and served as the lieutenant governor for 8 years before becoming governor in 1997 . In 2003 , he died in Chicago from complications from a stroke before his term was ended ; he was 73 years old . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the 2010 United States Census , there were 39 @,@ 364 people , 15 @,@ 192 households , and 11 @,@ 031 families residing in the county . The population density was 81 @.@ 2 inhabitants per square mile ( 31 @.@ 4 / km2 ) . There were 16 @,@ 534 housing units at an average density of 34 @.@ 1 per square mile ( 13 @.@ 2 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the county was 97 @.@ 4 % white , 0 @.@ 5 % black or African American , 0 @.@ 4 % Asian , 0 @.@ 2 % American Indian , 0 @.@ 5 % from other races , and 1 @.@ 0 % from two or more races . Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 1 @.@ 5 % of the population . In terms of ancestry , 31 @.@ 1 % were German , 16 @.@ 5 % were American , 12 @.@ 8 % were Irish , and 12 @.@ 8 % were English . 
 Of the 15 @,@ 192 households , 33 @.@ 7 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 58 @.@ 5 % were married couples living together , 9 @.@ 5 % had a female householder with no husband present , 27 @.@ 4 % were non @-@ families , and 22 @.@ 8 % of all households were made up of individuals . The average household size was 2 @.@ 56 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 99 . The median age was 40 @.@ 2 years . 
 The median income for a household in the county was $ 47 @,@ 697 and the median income for a family was $ 59 @,@ 316 . Males had a median income of $ 40 @,@ 884 versus $ 31 @,@ 808 for females . The per capita income for the county was $ 23 @,@ 539 . About 7 @.@ 8 % of families and 10 @.@ 0 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 15 @.@ 7 % of those under age 18 and 5 @.@ 1 % of those age 65 or over . 
 = Homer and Lisa Exchange Cross Words = 
 " Homer And Lisa Exchange Cross Words " is the sixth episode of The Simpsons ' twentieth season . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on November 16 , 2008 . In the episode , Lisa discovers that she has a talent for solving crossword puzzles , and she enters a crossword tournament . Lisa 's feelings are hurt when she discovers that Homer bet against her in the championship match . 
 The episode was inspired by Patrick Creadon 's 2006 documentary Wordplay , and was written by Tim Long , and directed by Michael Polcino . Crossword puzzle creators Merl Reagle and Will Shortz guest star as themselves in the episode while Scott Thompson has a cameo as Grady , a character he first voiced in " Three Gays of the Condo " . Reagle created all of the crossword puzzles that appear in the episode and as promotion for the episode , a special Simpsons @-@ related message ( dedicated to this episode ) that appeared in The New York Times Sunday crossword on November 16 , 2008 . The episode received generally positive reviews from critics , and finished fourth in its timeslot during its initial airing on Fox , with a 3 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart and Lisa start a lemonade stand , but it is quickly closed due to them not having a vending permit . They get in line at the licensing bureau , only to find that the long line is standing still due to the clerk doing a crossword puzzle . Impatient , Lisa completes the puzzle herself , only to find herself addicted to the puzzles . Eventually , she becomes so obsessed with them that Superintendent Chalmers hands her a pamphlet for the Crossword City Tournament . Meanwhile , at Moe 's , Edna Krabappel offers to buy a beer for anyone who breaks up with Principal Skinner for her . Homer ends their relationship , and decides to take a second job in which he helps break up romantic relationships . Grady , one of his old roommates , calls Homer and asks him to break up Grady 's and his boyfriend 's relationship because he found a new and " better " man in Duffman . Homer successfully manages to break up the couple . After making a good deal of money , he dreams that he is pestered by the " ghosts " of the jilted lovers and thus quits the trade . 
 At the crossword tournament , Homer bets his money from his breakup business on Lisa and wins big . However , upon hearing Lisa saying that she is wary of the final round , he bets on the other finalist , Gil Gunderson . Gil plays Lisa for her sympathy and cons her into losing the round , which in turn lets Homer win his final bet . Upon realizing that Homer has come into some money by betting against her in the tournament , Lisa gets angry at him and refuses to acknowledge herself as Homer 's daughter , even going so far as to take Marge 's maiden name and start calling herself " Lisa Bouvier " . Feeling guilty , Homer commissions Merl Reagle and Will Shortz to create a special puzzle for the New York Times , with his apology to Lisa hidden in the clues and solution . The two of them make up , and Lisa is happy to call herself a Simpson again . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Tim Long , and directed by Michael Polcino . James L. Brooks got the inspiration for the episode from the 2006 documentary Wordplay which chronicles the national crossword puzzle championships , and he thought that Lisa should go to a championship in the episode . Will Shortz and Merl Reagle , who both starred in the documentary , appear in the episode . " We felt both Will and Merl were very compelling , off @-@ the @-@ beaten @-@ track personalities [ in Wordplay ] , who would fit into our universe very well " , Brooks said . 
 Shortz was the first guest star the producers of The Simpsons approached . Long later asked Reagle to make puzzles for the episode . Reagle recorded his lines in a studio near his home . Reagle told the Arizona Daily Wildcat that " for me , to be such a total nut for animation since I was a kid , I never even dreamed [ of being in a cartoon ] . It 's like a dream I never had coming true . " He added that " you don 't see [ the crosswords ] in the episode for very long , but when crossword fans watch this show , we want them to think that we got it right . " Reagle designed every puzzle that appears in the episode , including one that appears in a hopscotch court in Lisa 's daydream . There were certain lines in the script that had to be incorporated into Reagle 's puzzles , including one where Gil says " I think I 'll throw some Q 's around , " , and he enters a number of Q 's onto the grid . Reagle therefore had to create a puzzle which used words that included the letter Q more frequently than would be usual . Reagle said he saw the early script of the episode , " but they change it right up to the last minute . In a lot of ways , I 'll be seeing it for the first time right along with everyone else . " Scott Thompson has a cameo in the episode as Grady , a character that he first voiced in the season 14 episode " Three Gays of the Condo " . 
 The episode features three musical montages : the sequence of Homer helping couples to break up features " Farewell to You , Baby " by Carl Martin , Homer 's gambling on Lisa 's puzzle solving is set to " Word Up ! " by Cameo and " Fanfare for the Common Man " plays in the background of the montage of words removed from the dictionary . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 In order to promote this episode , guest stars Reagle and Shortz collaborated with the episodes ' writer Tim Long to create a hidden Simpsons @-@ related message ( dedicated to this episode ) that appeared in The New York Times Sunday crossword on November 16 , 2008 . The crossword , which was titled " Sounds Like Somebody I Know " , also appears as a plot point in the episode . Harry Shearer recorded a clip of Mr. Burns and Smithers telling the winner of the National Public Radio 's Sundays Puzzle on November 16 , 2008 , what they had won . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On the night it aired , the episode was watched in 8 @,@ 520 @,@ 000 homes and had a 3 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating , finishing fourth in its timeslot . The episode did finish first in the 18 @-@ 34 demographic with a 4 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating and a 13 % share of the audience , narrowly beating an episode of 60 Minutes featuring Barack Obama in the demographic . Tim Long was nominated for Writers Guild of America Award in the animation category for writing the episode . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from critics . Robert Canning of IGN did not think there was anything " terrible " about the episode , but he did not think there was anything to get excited about , either . Canning thought there were a number of throwaway jokes in the episode that he felt worked well , " but the episode as a whole failed to grab me . As stated , there are a number of episodes that already fit this mold , and most of those are far superior . " Daniel <unk> of TV Guide thought the episode provided a " healthy balance " of humor , story and heart . " Exactly what makes a great Simpsons episode ! " <unk> would have liked to see Homer 's storyline explored as an A story in its own episode rather than cut short as a C story . 
 Erich <unk> of TV Verdict thought the puzzle @-@ solving storyline was " a lot of fun " , both for its references to the " highly entertaining " documentary Wordplay and the jokes it inspired . He thought the one problem with the final part of the storyline was that it took away from what could have been " one of the best Lisa @-@ centric episodes in a long time . Marrying her bookish sensibilities with <unk> skills is an inspired idea . They should have done more with it . At the very least , it would have left more screentime for Will Shortz and Merl Reagle . " 
 = Sweet Track = 
 The Sweet Track is an ancient causeway in the Somerset Levels , England . It was built in either 3807 or 3806 BC and was the oldest timber trackway discovered in Northern Europe until the 2009 discovery of a 6 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old trackway in Plumstead , London . It is now known that the Sweet Track was predominantly built over the course of an earlier structure , the Post Track . 
 The track extended across the now largely drained marsh between what was then an island at Westhay and a ridge of high ground at Shapwick , a distance close to 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) . The track is one of a network that once crossed the Somerset Levels . Various artefacts , including a <unk> ceremonial axe head , have been found along its length . 
 Construction was of crossed wooden poles , driven into the waterlogged soil to support a walkway that consisted mainly of planks of oak , laid end @-@ to @-@ end . The track was used for a period of only around 10 years and was then abandoned , probably due to rising water levels . Following its discovery in 1970 , most of the track has been left in its original location , with active conservation measures taken , including a water pumping and distribution system to maintain the wood in its damp condition . Some of the track is stored at the British Museum and a reconstruction of a section was built at the Peat Moors Centre near Glastonbury . 
 = = Location = = 
 In the early 4th millennium BC the track was built between an island at Westhay , and a ridge of high ground at Shapwick close to the River Brue . A group of mounds at Westhay mark the site of pre @-@ historic lake dwellings , which were likely to have been similar to those found in the iron age Glastonbury Lake Village near Godney , itself built on a morass on an artificial foundation of timber filled with brushwood , bracken , rubble and clay . 
 The remains of similar tracks have been uncovered nearby , connecting settlements on the peat bog ; they include the Honeygore , Abbotts Way , Bells , Bakers , Westhay , and Nidons trackways . Sites such as the nearby Meare Pool provide evidence that the purpose of these structures was to enable easier travel between the settlements . Investigation of the Meare Pool indicates that it was formed by the encroachment of raised peat bogs around it , particularly during the Subatlantic climatic period ( 1st millennium BC ) , and core sampling demonstrates that it is filled with at least 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) of detritus mud . 
 The two Meare Lake Villages within Meare Pool appear to originate from a collection of structures erected on the surface of the dried peat , such as tents , windbreaks and animal folds . Clay was later spread over the peat , providing raised stands for occupation , industry and movement , and in some areas thicker clay spreads accommodated hearths built of clay or stone . 
 = = Discovery and study = = 
 The track was discovered in 1970 during peat excavations , and is named after its finder , Ray Sweet . The company he worked for , E. J. Godwin , sent part of a plank from the track to John Coles , an assistant lecturer in archaeology at Cambridge University , who had carried out some excavations on nearby trackways . Coles ' interest in the trackways led to the Somerset Levels Project , which ran from 1973 to 1989 , funded by various donors including English Heritage . The project undertook a range of local archaeological activities , and established the economic and geographic significance of various trackways from the 3rd and 1st millennium BC . The work of John Coles , Bryony Coles and the Somerset Levels Project was recognised in 1996 when they won the Imperial Chemical Industries ( ICI ) Award for the best archaeological project offering a major contribution to knowledge , and in 2006 with the European Archaeological Heritage Prize . 
 Dendrochronology ( tree @-@ ring dating ) of the timbers has enabled precise dating of the track , showing it was built in 3807 or 3806 BC . This dating led to claims that the Sweet Track was the oldest roadway in the world , until the discovery in 2009 of a 6 @,@ 000 year @-@ old trackway in Plumstead , near Belmarsh prison . Analysis of the Sweet Track 's timbers has aided research into Neolithic Era dendrochronology ; comparisons with wood from the River Trent and a submerged forest at <unk> enabled a fuller mapping of the rings , and their relationship with the climate of the period . 
 The wood used to build the track is now classed as bog @-@ wood , the name given to wood ( of any source ) that for long periods ( sometimes hundreds of thousands of years ) has been buried in peat bogs , and kept from decaying by the acidic and anaerobic bog conditions . Bog @-@ wood is usually stained brown by tannins dissolved in the acidic water , and represents an early stage of fossilisation . The age of the track prompted large @-@ scale excavations in 1973 , funded by the Department of the Environment . 
 In 1973 a <unk> axehead was found alongside the track ; it is thought to have been placed there as an offering . One of over 100 similar axe heads found in Britain and Ireland , its good condition and its precious material suggest that it was a symbolic axe , rather than one used to cut wood . Because of the difficulty of working this material , which was derived from the Alpine area of Europe , all the axe heads of this type found in Great Britain are thought to have been non @-@ utilitarian and to have represented some form of currency or be the products of gift exchange . Radiocarbon dating of the peat in which the axe head was discovered suggests that it was deposited in about 3200 BC . Wooden artefacts found at the site include paddles , a dish , arrow shafts , parts of four hazel bows , a throwing axe , yew pins , digging sticks , a <unk> , a comb , toggles and a spoon fragment . Finds made from other materials , such as flint flakes , arrowheads and a chipped flint axe ( in mint condition ) have also been made . 
 A geophysical survey of the area in 2008 showed unclear magnetometer data ; the wood may be influencing the peat 's hydrology , causing the loss or collection of minerals within the pore water and peat matrix . 
 = = Builders = = 
 The community that constructed the trackway were Neolithic farmers who had colonised the area around 3900 BC and the evidence suggests that they were , by the time of construction , well organised and settled . Before this human incursion the uplands surrounding the levels were heavily wooded , but local inhabitants began to clear these forests about this time to make way for an economy that was predominately pastoral with small amounts of cultivation . During the winter the flooded areas of the levels would have provided this fishing , hunting , foraging and farming community with abundant fish and wildfowl ; in the summer , the drier areas provided rich , open grassland for grazing cattle and sheep , reeds , wood and timber for construction , and abundant wild animals , birds , fruit and seeds . The need to reach the islands in the bog was sufficiently pressing for them to mount the enormous communal activity required for the task of stockpiling the timber and building the trackway , presumably when the waters were at their lowest after a dry period . The work required for the construction of the track demonstrates that they had advanced woodworking skills and suggests some differentiation of occupation among the workers . They also appear to have been managing the surrounding woodland for at least 120 years . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Built in 3807 or 3806 BC , the track was a walkway consisting mainly of planks of oak laid end @-@ to @-@ end , supported by crossed pegs of ash , oak and lime , driven into the underlying peat . The planks , which were up to 40 centimetres ( 16 in ) wide , 3 metres ( 120 in ) long and less than 5 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick , were cut from trees up to 400 years old and 1 metre ( 39 in ) in diameter , felled and split using only stone axes , wooden wedges and mallets . The length , straightness , and lack of forks or branches in the pegs suggest that they were taken from coppiced woodland . Longitudinal log rails up to 6 @.@ 1 metres ( 20 ft ) long and 7 @.@ 6 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , made of mostly hazel and alder , were laid down and held in place with the pegs , which were driven at an angle across the rails and into the peat base of the bog . <unk> were then cut into the planks to fit the pegs , and the planks were laid along the X shapes to form the walkway . In some places a second rail was placed on top of the first one to bring the plank above it level with the rest of the walkway . Some of the planks were then stabilised with slender , vertical wooden pegs driven through holes cut near the end of the planks and into the peat , and sometimes the clay , beneath . At the southern end of the construction smaller trees were used , and the planks split across the grain to utilise the full diameter of the trunk . Fragments of other tree species including holly , willow , poplar , dogwood , ivy , birch , and apple have also been found . 
 The wetland setting indicates that the track components must have arrived prefabricated , before being assembled on site , although the presence of wood chips and chopped branches indicates that some trimming was performed locally . The track was constructed from about 200 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 440 @,@ 000 lb ) of timber , but Coles estimates that once the materials were transported to the site , ten men could have assembled it in one day . 
 The Sweet Track was used only for about ten years ; rising water levels may have engulfed it , and therefore curtailed its use . The variety of objects found alongside the track suggest that it was in daily use as part of the farming life of the community . Since its discovery , it has been determined that parts of the Sweet Track were built along the route of an even earlier track , the Post Track , which was constructed thirty years earlier in 3838 BC . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Most of the track remains in its original location , which is now within the Shapwick Heath biological Site of Special Scientific Interest and National Nature Reserve . Following purchase of land by the National Heritage Memorial Fund , and installation of a water pumping and distribution system along a 500 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) section , several hundred metres of the track 's length are now being actively conserved . This method of preserving wetland archaeological remains ( i.e. maintaining a high water table and saturating the site ) is rare . A 500 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) section , which lies within the land owned by the Nature Conservancy Council , has been surrounded by a clay bank to prevent drainage into surrounding lower peat fields , and water levels are regularly monitored . The viability of this method is demonstrated by comparing it with the nearby Abbot 's Way , which has not had similar treatment , and which in 1996 was found to have become dewatered and desiccated . Evaluation and maintenance of water levels in the Shapwick Heath Nature Reserve involves the Nature Conservancy Council , the Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs , and the Somerset Levels Project . 
 Although the wood recovered from the Levels was visually intact , it was extremely degraded and very soft . Where possible , pieces of wood in good condition , or the worked ends of pegs , were taken away and conserved for later analysis . The conservation process involved keeping the wood in heated tanks in a solution of polyethylene glycol and , by a process of evaporation , gradually replacing the water in the wood with the wax over a period of about nine months . After this treatment the wood was removed from the tank and wiped clean . As the wax cooled and hardened the artifact became firm and could be handled freely . 
 A section of the track on land owned by Fisons ( who extracted peat from the area ) was donated to the British Museum in London . Although this short section can be assembled for display purposes , it is currently kept in store , off site , and under controlled conditions . A reconstructed section was displayed at the Peat Moors Centre near Glastonbury . The centre was run by the Somerset Historic Environment Service , but was closed in October 2009 as a result of budget cuts imposed by Somerset County Council . The main exhibits are extant , but future public access is uncertain . Other samples of the track are held in the Museum of Somerset . 
 Sections of the track have been designated as a Scheduled Monument , meaning that it is a " nationally important " historic structure and archaeological site protected against unauthorised change . These sections are also included in English Heritage 's Heritage at Risk Register . 
 = Kwakiutl ( statue ) = 
 Kwakiutl ( or variously <unk> ) is a totem sculpture by Aboriginal Canadian artist Simon Charlie , which has caused controversy for its nudity over multiple decades of display in Chinguacousy Township , and later Brampton , both near Toronto in Ontario , Canada . Charlie , also known as <unk> ' , later received the Order of Canada . The 9 @-@ foot @-@ tall cedar wood sculpture is best known for its exposed male genitals . 
 = = Creation = = 
 Named after a native Canadian , Chinguacousy Township was rapidly growing due to the Bramalea development , initiated in the late 1950s and early 1960s . A statue was commissioned for a new township hall , with Simon Charlie as artist . Charlie was a sculptor of the Cowichan Tribes of the Coast Salish peoples . The Indians of Canada pavilion at Expo 67 included a totem pole and " welcome figure " carved by Charlie and two Kwakwaka 'wakw ( Kwakiutl ) artists . For the 1971 centennial of British Columbia , Charlie and thirteen other carvers were commissioned to carve totems presented to each of the other nine provinces , two territories , and the federal government . Internationally collected and displayed , he had already been awarded the Canadian Centennial Medal . 
 The figure depicted by the statue is that of a nearly @-@ naked Aboriginal man , and the name of the sculpture refers to a Pacific Northwest coast tribe . He wears a wide @-@ brimmed Kwakwaka 'wakw hat , and a cape . The sculpture features outstretched arms and exposed male genitals . The statue is made of cedar wood , and 9 @-@ foot tall . 
 = = Exhibition and reception = = 
 The Township of Chinguacousy unveiled the sculpture on July 19 , 1972 , in front of roughly 100 spectators . It was originally intended to be placed at the doors of the Chinguacousy Township municipal offices . 
 Reverend Edward Robinson of All People 's Church , in attendance , described the sculpture as " disgusting " . The Reverend insisted that the sculpture violated Christian principles , morality , and decency . According to The Globe and Mail : 
 He left the event relatively promptly . The Globe and Mail ran an editorial commenting they were " striving ( against the wicked odds that only Toronto can provide ) to view the situation with proper seriousness . But Mr. Robinson has not been making it easy for us . " The paper suggested that Robinson 's insights " doubtless would have stopped Michelangelo in his tracks and branded him as nothing more than a dirty <unk> . " 
 Reeve Robert Williams suggested ferns and flowers indigenous to British Columbia would be brought in , and planted around the statue . Williams insisted the flora would not obscure anatomy . Township Council voted to place the statue in a " suitable place " in the yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ opened municipal offices . The sculptor suggested that he was not even sure what a fig leaf looked like , an often suggested addition , and no coverage was requested during the commission . 
 By late August , the statue had developed a crack in its back . According to a Canadian Press report , " One civic official said it was probably the weight of the moral controversy , rather than the weather , which broke Kwakiutl ′ s back . " 
 On January 1 , 1974 , the Town of Brampton , some of the Township of Chinguacousy , a portion of Toronto Township , and most of Toronto Gore Township merged into the City of Brampton . Municipal offices for Brampton were moved to the Civic Centre , and the statue moved into the Chinguacousy branch of the Brampton Library , within the same building . Shirley Morriss was the curator of the facility , until 1991 . 
 Tom Drynan was named Executive Director of the Brampton Public Library system in July 1993 . In August that year , Drynan decided to evict the sculpture , after three years at the entrance of the art gallery at the Brampton Library branch . In a letter to community services commissioner Donald M. Gordon , Drynan wrote : " I am sure that the statue has artistic merit and needs to be preserved . However , it is quite inappropriate in its present location within the newly renovated gallery . Its presence dominates any other exhibits which are placed in the area . I hope we can find a solution without having yet another tempest in a teapot . " 
 A report was approved by Brampton City Council during a council meeting on August 16 , 1993 . The report suggested that in British Columbia , such sculptures are frequently displayed outdoors . As Chinguacousy Park bears an Aboriginal name , it was deemed appropriate for the sculpture to be used at the entrance of the nearby area . It was to be bolted to a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ metre high ( five @-@ foot high ) tree stump . 
 At some point before May 2010 , the sculpture was moved into the Chinguacousy Park greenhouse . Former mayor Peter Robertson questioned where the statue was located , during a 2011 meeting about the " Southwest Quadrant Renewal " , an expansion of Brampton 's City Hall . 
 = Galápagos tortoise = 
 The Galápagos tortoise or Galápagos giant tortoise ( Chelonoidis nigra ) is the largest living species of tortoise . Modern Galápagos tortoises can weigh up to 417 kg ( 919 lb ) . Today , giant tortoises exist only on two remote archipelagos : the Galápagos 1000 km due west of Ecuador , and Aldabra in the Indian Ocean , 700 km east of Tanzania . 
 The tortoise is native to seven of the Galápagos Islands , a volcanic archipelago about 1 @,@ 000 km ( 620 mi ) west of the Ecuadorian mainland . With lifespans in the wild of over 100 years , it is one of the longest @-@ lived vertebrates . A captive individual lived at least 170 years . Spanish explorers , who discovered the islands in the 16th century , named them after the Spanish <unk> , meaning saddle . 
 Shell size and shape vary between populations . On islands with humid highlands , the tortoises are larger , with domed shells and short necks ; on islands with dry lowlands , the tortoises are smaller , with " saddleback " shells and long necks . Charles Darwin 's observations of these differences on the second voyage of the Beagle in 1835 , contributed to the development of his theory of evolution . 
 Tortoise numbers declined from over 250 @,@ 000 in the 16th century to a low of around 3 @,@ 000 in the 1970s . This decline was caused by overexploitation of the species for meat and oil , habitat clearance for agriculture , and introduction of non @-@ native animals to the islands , such as rats , goats , and pigs . The extinction of most giant tortoise lineages is thought to have also been caused by predation by humans or human ancestors , as the tortoises themselves have no natural predators . Tortoise populations on at least three islands have become extinct in historical time due to human activities . Specimens of these extinct taxa exist in several museums and also are being subjected to DNA analysis . Ten subspecies of the original 15 survive in the wild ; an 11th subspecies ( C. n. abingdonii ) had only a single known living individual , kept in captivity and nicknamed Lonesome George until his death in June 2012 . Conservation efforts , beginning in the 20th century , have resulted in thousands of captive @-@ bred juveniles being released onto their ancestral home islands , and the total number of the species is estimated to have exceeded 19 @,@ 000 at the start of the 21st century . Despite this rebound , the species as a whole is classified as " vulnerable " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Early classification = = = 
 The Galápagos Islands were discovered in 1535 , but first appeared on the maps , of Gerardus Mercator and Abraham Ortelius , around 1570 . The islands were named " Insulae de los <unk> " ( Islands of the Tortoises ) in reference to the giant tortoises found there . 
 Initially , the giant tortoises of the Indian Ocean and those from the Galápagos were considered to be the same species . Naturalists thought that sailors had transported the tortoises there . In 1676 , the pre @-@ Linnaean authority Claude Perrault referred to both species as Tortue des Indes . In 1783 , Johann Gottlob Schneider classified all giant tortoises as Testudo indica ( " Indian tortoise " ) . In 1812 , August Friedrich <unk> named them Testudo gigantea ( " gigantic tortoise " ) . In 1834 , André Marie Constant Duméril and Gabriel Bibron classified the Galápagos tortoises as a separate species , which they named Testudo <unk> ( " black tortoise " ) . 
 = = = Recognition of subpopulations = = = 
 The first systematic survey of giant tortoises was by Albert Günther of the British Museum , in 1875 . Günther identified at least five distinct populations from the Galápagos , and three from the Indian Ocean islands . He expanded the list in 1877 to six from the Galápagos , four from the Seychelles , and four from the Mascarenes . Günther hypothesized that all the giant tortoises descended from a single ancestral population which spread by sunken land bridges . This hypothesis was later disproven by the understanding that the Galápagos , Seychelles , and Mascarene islands are all of recent volcanic origin and have never been linked to a continent by land bridges . Galápagos tortoises are now thought to have descended from a South American ancestor , while the Indian Ocean tortoises derived from ancestral populations on Madagascar . 
 At the end of the 19th century , Georg Baur and Walter Rothschild recognised five more populations of Galápagos tortoise . In 1905 @-@ 06 , an expedition by the California Academy of Sciences , with Joseph R. <unk> in charge of reptiles , collected specimens which were studied by Academy herpetologist John Van <unk> . He identified four additional populations , and proposed the existence of 15 species . Van <unk> 's list still guides the taxonomy of the Galápagos tortoise , though now 10 populations are thought to have existed . 
 = = = Current species and genus names = = = 
 The current specific designation of nigra ( " black " – Quoy & Gaimard , <unk> ) was resurrected in 1984 after it was discovered to be the senior synonym ( an older taxonomic synonym taking historical precedence ) for the then commonly used species name of <unk> ( " elephant @-@ footed " – Harlan , 1827 ) . Quoy and Gaimard 's Latin description explains the use of nigra : " Testudo toto corpore nigro " means " tortoise with completely black body " . Quoy and <unk> described nigra from a living specimen , but no evidence indicates they knew of its accurate provenance within the Galápagos – the locality was in fact given as California . Garman proposed the linking of nigra with the extinct Floreana subspecies . Later , Pritchard deemed it convenient to accept this designation , despite its <unk> , for minimal disruption to the already confused nomenclature of the species . The even more senior species synonym of <unk> ( " <unk> " – Quoy & Gaimard , <unk> ) is considered a nomen oblitum ( " forgotten name " ) . 
 Previously , the Galápagos tortoise was considered to belong to the genus Geochelone , known as ' typical tortoises ' or ' terrestrial turtles ' . In the 1990s , subgenus Chelonoidis was elevated to generic status based on phylogenetic evidence which grouped the South American members of Geochelone into an independent clade ( branch of the tree of life ) . This nomenclature has been adopted by several authorities . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Within the archipelago , up to 15 subspecies of Galapagos tortoises have been identified , although only 11 survive to this day . Six are found on separate islands ; five of them on the volcanoes of Isabela Island . Several of the surviving subspecies are seriously endangered . One of the subspecies , C. n. abingdonii from Pinta Island , is considered extinct . The last known specimen , named Lonesome George , died in captivity on 24 June 2012 ; George had been mated with female tortoises of several other subspecies , but none of the eggs from these pairings hatched . The subspecies inhabiting Floreana Island ( G. <unk> ) is thought to have been hunted to extinction by 1850 , only 15 years after Charles Darwin 's landmark visit of 1835 , when he saw shells , but no live tortoises there . The existence of the C. n. <unk> subspecies of Fernandina Island is disputed , as it was described from a single specimen that may have been an artificial introduction to the island . However , recent DNA testing shows that an intermixed , non @-@ native population currently existing on the island of Isabela is of genetic resemblance to the subspecies native to Floreana , suggesting that G. <unk> has not gone entirely extinct . 
 Prior to widespread knowledge of the differences between the populations ( sometimes called races ) from different islands and volcanoes , captive collections in zoos were indiscriminately mixed . Fertile offspring resulted from pairings of animals from different races . However , captive crosses between tortoises from different races have lower fertility and higher mortality than those between tortoises of the same race , and captives in mixed herds normally direct courtship only toward members of the same race . 
 The valid scientific names of each of the individual populations are not universally accepted , and some researchers consider each subspecies to be a full species . The taxonomic status of the various races is not fully resolved . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 All subspecies of Galápagos tortoises evolved from common ancestors that arrived from mainland South America by overwater dispersal . Genetic studies have shown that the Chaco tortoise of Argentina and Paraguay is their closest living relative . The minimal founding population was a pregnant female or a breeding pair . Survival on the 1000 @-@ km oceanic journey is accounted for because the tortoises are buoyant , can breathe by extending their necks above the water , and are able to survive months without food or fresh water . As they are poor swimmers , the journey was probably a passive one facilitated by the Humboldt Current , which diverts westwards towards the Galápagos Islands from the mainland . The ancestors of the genus Chelonoidis are believed to have similarly dispersed from Africa to South America during the Oligocene . 
 The closest living relative ( though not a direct ancestor ) of the Galápagos giant tortoise is the Chaco tortoise ( Chelonoidis chilensis ) , a much smaller species from South America . The divergence between C. chilensis and C. nigra probably occurred 6 – 12 million years ago , an evolutionary event preceding the volcanic formation of the oldest modern Galápagos Islands 5 million years ago . Mitochondrial DNA analysis indicates that the oldest existing islands ( Española and San Cristóbal ) were colonised first , and that these populations seeded the younger islands via dispersal in a " stepping stone " fashion via local currents . Restricted gene flow between isolated islands then resulted in the independent evolution of the populations into the divergent forms observed in the modern subspecies . The evolutionary relationships between the subspecies thus echo the volcanic history of the islands . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Modern DNA methods have revealed new information on the relationships between the subspecies : 
 Isabela Island 
 The five populations living on the largest island , Isabela , are the ones that are the subject of the most debate as to whether they are true subspecies or just distinct populations . It is widely accepted that the population living on the northernmost volcano , Volcan Wolf , is genetically independent from the four populations to the south and is therefore a separate subspecies . It is thought to be derived from a different colonization event than the others . A colonization from the island of Santiago apparently gave rise to the Volcan Wolf subspecies ( C. n. <unk> ) while the four southern populations are believed to be descended from a second colonization from the more southerly island of Santa Cruz . Tortoises from Santa Cruz are thought to have first colonized the Sierra Negra volcano , which was the first of the island 's volcanoes to form . The tortoises then spread north to each newly created volcano , resulting in the populations living on Volcan Alcedo and then Volcan Darwin . Recent genetic evidence shows that these two populations are genetically distinct from each other and from the population living on Sierra Negra ( C. n. guentheri ) and therefore form the subspecies C. n. <unk> ( Alcedo ) and C. n. <unk> ( Darwin ) . The fifth population living on the southernmost volcano ( C. n. <unk> ) is thought to have split off from the Sierra Negra population more recently and is therefore not as genetically different as the other two . Isabela is the most recently formed island tortoises inhabit , so its populations have had less time to evolve independently than populations on other islands , but according to some researchers , they are all genetically different and should each be considered as separate subspecies . 
 Floreana Island 
 Phylogenetic analysis may help to " resurrect " the extinct subspecies of Floreana ( C. n. nigra ) — a subspecies known only from subfossil remains . Some tortoises from Isabela were found to be a partial match for the genetic profile of Floreana specimens from museum collections , possibly indicating the presence of hybrids from a population transported by humans from Floreana to Isabela , resulting either from individuals deliberately transported between the islands , or from individuals thrown overboard from ships to lighten the load . Nine Floreana descendants have been identified in the captive population of the Fausto <unk> Breeding Center on Santa Cruz ; the genetic footprint was identified in the genomes of hybrid offspring . This allows the possibility of re @-@ establishing a reconstructed subspecies from selective breeding of the hybrid animals . Furthermore , individuals from the subspecies possibly are still extant . Genetic analysis from a sample of tortoises from Volcan Wolf found 84 first @-@ generation C. n. nigra hybrids , some less than 15 years old . The genetic diversity of these individuals is estimated to have required 38 C. n. nigra parents , many of which could still be alive on Isabela Island . 
 Pinta Island 
 The Pinta Island subspecies ( C. n. abingdonii , now extinct ) has been found to be most closely related to the subspecies on the islands of San Cristóbal ( C. n. chathamensis ) and Española ( C. n. <unk> ) which lie over 300 km ( 190 mi ) away , rather than that on the neighbouring island of Isabela as previously assumed . This relationship is attributable to dispersal by the strong local current from San Cristóbal towards Pinta . This discovery informed further attempts to preserve the C. n. abingdonii lineage and the search for an appropriate mate for Lonesome George , which had been penned with females from Isabela . Hope was bolstered by the discovery of a C. n. abingdonii hybrid male in the Volcán Wolf population on northern Isabela , raising the possibility that more undiscovered living Pinta descendants exist . 
 Santa Cruz Island 
 Mitochondrial DNA studies of tortoises on Santa Cruz show up to three genetically distinct lineages found in nonoverlapping population distributions around the regions of Cerro <unk> , Cerro Fatal , and La Caseta . Although traditionally grouped into a single subspecies ( C. n. <unk> ) , the lineages are all more closely related to tortoises on other islands than to each other : Cerro <unk> tortoises are most closely related to G. n. <unk> from Pinzón , Cerro Fatal to G. n. chathamensis from San Cristóbal , and La Caseta to the four southern races of Isabela as well as Floreana tortoises . 
 In 2015 , the Cerro Fatal tortoises were described as a distinct taxon , <unk> . Prior to the identification of this subspecies through genetic analysis , it was noted that there existed differences in shells between the Cerro Fatal tortoises and other tortoises on Santa Cruz . By classifying the Cerro Fatal tortoises into a new taxon , greater attention can be paid to protecting its habitat , according to <unk> <unk> , who is a member of the team making this classification . 
 Pinzón Island 
 When it was discovered that the central , small island of Pinzón had only 100 – 200 very old adults and no young tortoises had survived into adulthood for perhaps more than 70 years , the resident scientists initiated what would eventually become the Giant Tortoise Breeding and Rearing Program . Over the next 50 years , this program resulted in major successes in the recovery of giant tortoise populations throughout the archipelago . 
 In 1965 , the first tortoise eggs collected from natural nests on Pinzón Island were brought to the Charles Darwin Research Station , where they would complete the period of incubation and then hatch , becoming the first young tortoises to be reared in captivity . The introduction of black rats onto Pinzón sometime in the latter half of the 19th century had resulted in the complete eradication of all young tortoises . Black rats had been eating both tortoise eggs and hatchlings , effectively destroying the future of the tortoise population . Only the longevity of giant tortoises allowed them to survive until conservation scientists and managers began to focus on Galapagos and the long path back to ecosystem restoration . 
 Española 
 On the southern island of Española , only 14 adult tortoises were found , two males and 12 females . The tortoises apparently were not encountering one another , so no reproduction was occurring . Between 1963 and 1974 , all 14 adult tortoises discovered on the island were brought to the tortoise center on Santa Cruz and a tortoise breeding program was initiated . In 1977 , a third Española male tortoise was returned to Galapagos from the San Diego Zoo and joined the breeding group . After 40 years ' work reintroducing captive animals , a detailed study of the island 's ecosystem has confirmed it has a stable , breeding population . Where once 15 were known , now more than 1 @,@ 000 giant tortoises inhabit the island of Española . One research team has found that more than half the tortoises released since the first reintroductions are still alive , and they are breeding well enough for the population to progress onward , unaided . 
 Subspecies of doubtful existence 
 Subspecies were described from three other islands , but their existence is based on scant evidence . The purported <unk> Island subspecies ( C. n. <unk> ) was described from a single specimen collected by the California Academy of Sciences in December 1905 , which has since been lost . This individual was probably an artificial introduction from another island that was originally penned on <unk> next to a good anchorage , as no contemporary whaling or sealing logs mention removing tortoises from this island . The C. n. <unk> subspecies from Fernandina is known from a single specimen — an old male from the voyage of 1905 @-@ 06 . No other tortoises or remains have been found on the island , suggesting the specimen was an artificial introduction from elsewhere . Fernandina has neither human settlements nor feral mammals , so if this subspecies ever did exist , its extinction must have been by natural means , such as volcanic activity . The Santa Fe subspecies has no binomial name , having been described from the limited evidence of bone fragments ( but no shells , the most durable part ) of 14 individuals , old eggs , and old dung found on the island in 1905 @-@ 06 . The island has never been inhabited by man nor had any introduced predators . The remains are considered artificial introductions , possibly from camping at the good anchorage on the island . 
 = = Description = = 
 The tortoises have a large bony carapace ( shell ) of a dull brown colour . The plates of the shell are fused with the ribs in a rigid protective structure that is integral to the skeleton . Lichens can grow on the shells of these slow @-@ moving animals . Tortoises keep a characteristic scute ( shell segment ) pattern on their shells throughout life , though the annual growth bands are not useful for determining age because the outer layers are worn off with time . A tortoise can withdraw its head , neck , and fore limbs into its shell for protection . The legs are large and stumpy , with dry , scaly skin and hard scales . The front legs have five claws , the back legs four . 
 = = = Gigantism = = = 
 The discoverer of the Galápagos Islands , Fray Tomás de <unk> , Bishop of Panama , wrote in 1535 of " such big tortoises that each could carry a man on top of himself . " Naturalist Charles Darwin remarked after his trip three centuries later in 1835 , " These animals grow to an immense size ... several so large that it required six or eight men to lift them from the ground " . The largest recorded individuals have reached weights of over 400 kg ( 880 lb ) and lengths of 1 @.@ 87 meters ( 6 @.@ 1 ft ) . Size overlap is extensive with the Aldabra giant tortoise however taken as a species , the Galápagos tortoise seems to average slightly larger , with weights in excess of 185 kg ( 408 lb ) being slightly more commonplace . Weights in the larger bodied subspecies range from 272 to 317 kg ( 600 to 699 lb ) in mature males and from 136 to 181 kg ( 300 to 399 lb ) in adult females . However , the size is variable across the islands and subspecies , those from Pinzón Island are relatively small with a maximum known weight of 76 kg ( 168 lb ) and carapace length of approximately 61 cm ( 24 in ) compared to 75 to 150 cm ( 30 to 59 in ) range in tortoises from Santa Cruz Island . The tortoises ' gigantism was probably a trait useful on continents that was fortuitously helpful for successful colonisation of these remote oceanic islands rather than an example of evolved insular gigantism . Large tortoises would have a greater chance of surviving the journey over water from the mainland as they can hold their heads a greater height above the water level and have a smaller surface area / volume ratio , which reduces osmotic water loss . Their significant water and fat reserves would allow the tortoises to survive long ocean crossings without food or fresh water , and to endure the drought @-@ prone climate of the islands . A larger size allowed them to better tolerate extremes of temperature due to gigantothermy . Fossil giant tortoises from mainland South America have been described that support this hypothesis of gigantism that pre @-@ existed the colonization of islands . 
 = = = Shell shape = = = 
 Galapagos tortoises possess two main shell forms that correlate with the biogeographic history of the species group . They exhibit a spectrum of carapace morphology ranging from " saddleback " ( denoting upward arching of the front edge of the shell resembling a saddle ) to " domed " ( denoting a rounded convex surface resembling a dome ) . When a saddleback tortoise withdraws its head and forelimbs into its shell , a large unprotected gap remains over the neck , evidence of the lack of predation during the evolution of this structure . Larger islands with humid highlands over 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) in elevation , such as Santa Cruz , have abundant vegetation near the ground . Tortoises native to these environments tend to have domed shells and are larger , with shorter necks and limbs . Saddleback tortoises originate from small islands less than 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) in elevation with dry habitats ( e.g. Española and Pinzón ) that are more limited in food and other resources . Two lineages of Galapagos tortoises possess the Island of Santa Cruz and when observed it is concluded that despite the shared similarities of growth patterns and morphological changes observed during growth , the two lineages and two sexes can be distinguished on the basis of distinct carapace features . Lineages differ by the shape of the vertebral and pleural scutes . Females have a more elongated and wider carapace shape than males . <unk> shape changes with growth , with vertebral scutes becoming narrower and pleural scutes becoming larger during late ontogeny . 
 Evolutionary implications 
 In combination with proportionally longer necks and limbs , the unusual saddleback carapace structure is thought to be an adaptation to increase vertical reach , which enables the tortoise to browse tall vegetation such as the Opuntia ( prickly pear ) cactus that grows in arid environments . <unk> are more territorial and smaller than domed varieties , possibly adaptations to limited resources . Alternatively , larger tortoises may be better @-@ suited to high elevations because they can resist the cooler temperatures that occur with cloud cover or fog . 
 A competing hypothesis is that , rather than being principally a feeding adaptation , the distinctive saddle shape and longer extremities might have been a secondary sexual characteristic of saddleback males . Male competition over mates is settled by dominance displays on the basis of vertical neck height rather than body size ( see below ) . This correlates with the observation that saddleback males are more aggressive than domed males . The shell distortion and elongation of the limbs and neck in saddlebacks is probably an evolutionary compromise between the need for a small body size in dry conditions and a high vertical reach for dominance displays . 
 The saddleback carapace probably evolved independently several times in dry habitats , since genetic similarity between populations does not correspond to carapace shape . Saddleback tortoises are , therefore , not necessarily more closely related to each other than to their domed counterparts , as shape is not determined by a similar genetic background , but by a similar ecological one . 
 Sexual dimorphism 
 Sexual dimorphism is most pronounced in saddleback populations in which males have more angled and higher front openings , giving a more extreme saddled appearance . Males of all varieties generally have longer tails and shorter , concave <unk> with thickened knobs at the back edge to facilitate mating . Males are larger than females — adult males weigh around 272 – 317 kg ( 600 – 699 lb ) while females are 136 – 181 kg ( 300 – 399 lb ) . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Routine = = = 
 The tortoises are ectothermic ( cold @-@ blooded ) , so bask for 1 – 2 hours after dawn to absorb the sun 's heat through their dark shells before actively foraging for 8 – 9 hours a day . They travel mostly in the early morning or late afternoon between resting and grazing areas . They have been observed to walk at a speed of 0 @.@ 3 km / h ( 0 @.@ 2 mph ) . 
 On the larger and more humid islands , the tortoises seasonally migrate between low elevations , which become grassy plains in the wet season , and <unk> areas of higher elevation ( up to 2 @,@ 000 ft ( 610 m ) ) in the dry season . The same routes have been used for many generations , creating well @-@ defined paths through the undergrowth known as " tortoise highways " . On these wetter islands , the domed tortoises are gregarious and often found in large herds , in contrast to the more solitary and territorial disposition of the saddleback tortoises . 
 Tortoises sometimes rest in mud wallows or rain @-@ formed pools , which may be both a thermoregulatory response during cool nights , and a protection from parasites such as mosquitoes and ticks . Parasites are countered by taking dust baths in loose soil . Some tortoises have been noted to shelter at night under overhanging rocks . - others have been observed sleeping in a snug depression in the earth or brush called a " pallet " . Local tortoises using the same pallet sites , such as on Volcán Alcedo , results in the formation of small , sandy pits . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The tortoises are herbivores that consume a diet of cacti , grasses , leaves , lichens , and berries . They have been documented feeding on Hippomane mancinella ( ' poison apple ' ) , the endemic guava <unk> <unk> , the water fern <unk> microphylla , and the bromeliad <unk> insularis . Juvenile tortoises eat an average of 16 @.@ 7 % of their own body weight in dry matter per day , with a digestive efficiency roughly equal to that of hindgut @-@ fermenting herbivorous mammals such as horses and rhinos . The tortoises are herbivores that consume a diet of cacti , grasses , leaves , lichens , berries , melons , oranges , and milkweed . 
 Tortoises acquire most of their moisture from the dew and sap in vegetation ( particularly the Opuntia cactus ) ; therefore , they can survive longer than 6 months without water . They can endure up to a year when deprived of all food and water , surviving by breaking down their body fat to produce water as a byproduct . Tortoises also have very slow metabolisms . When thirsty , they may drink large quantities of water very quickly , storing it in their bladders and the " root of the neck " ( the pericardium ) , both of which served to make them useful water sources on ships . On arid islands , tortoises lick morning dew from boulders , and the repeated action over many generations has formed half @-@ sphere depressions in the rock . 
 = = = Senses = = = 
 Regarding their senses , Charles Darwin observed , " The inhabitants believe that these animals are absolutely deaf ; certainly they do not overhear a person walking near behind them . I was always amused , when overtaking one of these great monsters as it was quietly pacing along , to see how suddenly , the instant I passed , it would draw in its head and legs , and uttering a deep hiss fall to the ground with a heavy sound , as if struck dead . " Although they are not deaf , tortoises depend far more on vision and smell as stimuli than hearing . 
 = = = Mutualism = = = 
 Tortoises share a mutualistic relationship with some species of Galápagos finch and mockingbirds . Small groups of finches initiate the process by hopping on the ground in an exaggerated fashion facing the tortoise . The tortoise signals it is ready by rising up and extending its neck and legs , enabling the birds to reach otherwise inaccessible spots on the tortoise 's body such as the neck , rear legs , cloacal opening , and skin between plastron and carapace . The birds benefit from the food source and the tortoises get rid of irritating ectoparasites . 
 Some tortoises have been observed to insidiously exploit this mutualistic relationship . After rising and extending its limbs , the bird may go beneath the tortoise to investigate , whereupon suddenly the tortoise withdraws its limbs to drop flat and kill the bird . It then steps back to eat the bird , presumably to supplement its diet with protein . 
 = = = Mating = = = 
 Mating occurs at any time of the year , although it does have seasonal peaks between February and June in the humid uplands during the rainy season . When mature males meet in the mating season , they face each other in a ritualised dominance display , rise up on their legs , and stretch up their necks with their mouths gaping open . Occasionally , head @-@ biting occurs , but usually the shorter tortoise backs off , conceding mating rights to the victor . The behaviour is most pronounced in saddleback subspecies , which are more aggressive and have longer necks . 
 The prelude to mating can be very aggressive , as the male forcefully rams the female 's shell with his own and nips her legs . Mounting is an awkward process and the male must stretch and tense to maintain equilibrium in a slanting position . The concave underside of the male 's shell helps him to balance when straddled over the female 's shell , and brings his cloacal vent ( which houses the penis ) closer to the female 's dilated cloaca . During mating , the male <unk> with hoarse bellows and grunts , described as " rhythmic groans " . This is one of the few vocalisations the tortoise makes ; other noises are made during aggressive encounters , when struggling to right themselves , and hissing as they withdraw into their shells due to the forceful expulsion of air . 
 = = = Egg @-@ laying = = = 
 Females journey up to several kilometres in July to November to reach nesting areas of dry , sandy coast . Nest digging is a tiring and elaborate task which may take the female several hours a day over many days to complete . It is carried out blindly using only the hind legs to dig a 30 cm ( 12 in ) -deep cylindrical hole , in which the tortoise then lays up to 16 spherical , hard @-@ shelled eggs ranging from 82 to 157 grams ( 2 @.@ 9 to 5 @.@ 5 oz ) in mass , and the size of a billiard ball . Some observations suggest that the average clutch size for domed populations ( 9 @.@ 6 per clutch for C. n. <unk> on Santa Cruz ) is larger than that of saddlebacks ( 4 @.@ 6 per clutch for C. n. <unk> on Pinzón ) . The female makes a muddy plug for the nest hole out of soil mixed with urine , seals the nest by pressing down firmly with her plastron , and leaves them to be incubated by the sun . Females may lay one to four clutches per season . Temperature plays a role in the sex of the hatchlings , with lower @-@ temperature nests producing more males and higher @-@ temperature nests producing more females . This is related closely to incubation time , since clutches laid early incubate during the cool season and have longer incubation periods ( producing more males ) , while eggs laid later incubate for a shorter period in the hot season ( producing more females ) . 
 = = = Early life and maturation = = = 
 Young animals emerge from the nest after four to eight months and may weigh only 50 g ( 1 @.@ 8 oz ) and measure 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) . When the young tortoises emerge from their shells , they must dig their way to the surface , which can take several weeks , though their yolk sac can sustain them up to seven months . In particularly dry conditions , the hatchlings may die underground if they are encased by hardened soil , while flooding of the nest area can drown them . Subspecies are initially indistinguishable as they all have domed carapaces . The young stay in warmer lowland areas for their first 10 – 15 years , encountering hazards such as falling into cracks , being crushed by falling rocks , or excessive heat stress . The Galápagos hawk was formerly the sole native predator of the tortoise hatchlings ; Darwin wrote : " The young tortoises , as soon as they are hatched , fall prey in great numbers to the buzzard " . The hawk is now much rarer , but introduced feral pigs , dogs , cats , and black rats have become predators of eggs and young tortoises . The adult tortoises have no natural predators apart from humans ; Darwin noted : " The old ones seem generally to die from accidents , as from falling down precipices . At least several of the inhabitants told me , they had never found one dead without some such apparent cause " . 
 Sexual maturity is reached at around 20 – 25 years in captivity , possibly 40 years in the wild . Life expectancy in the wild is thought to be over 100 years , making it one of the longest @-@ lived species in the animal kingdom . Harriet , a specimen kept in Australia Zoo , was the oldest known Galápagos tortoise , having reached an estimated age of more than 170 years before her death in 2006 . Chambers notes that Harriet was probably 169 years old in 2004 , although media outlets claimed the greater age of 175 at death based on a less reliable timeline . 
 = = Darwin 's development of theory of evolution = = 
 Charles Darwin visited the Galápagos for five weeks on the second voyage of HMS Beagle in 1835 and saw Galápagos tortoises on San Cristobal ( Chatham ) and Santiago ( James ) Islands . They appeared several times in his writings and journals , and played a role in the development of the theory of evolution . 
 Darwin wrote in his account of the voyage : 
 " I have not as yet noticed by far the most remarkable feature in the natural history of this archipelago ; it is , that the different islands to a considerable extent are inhabited by a different set of beings . My attention was first called to this fact by the Vice @-@ Governor , Mr. Lawson , declaring that the tortoises differed from the different islands , and that he could with certainty tell from which island any one was brought ... The inhabitants , as I have said , state that they can distinguish the tortoises from the different islands ; and that they differ not only in size , but in other characters . Captain Porter has described * those from Charles and from the nearest island to it , namely , Hood Island , as having their shells in front thick and turned up like a Spanish saddle , while the tortoises from James Island are rounder , blacker , and have a better taste when cooked . " 
 The significance of the differences in tortoises between islands did not strike him as important until it was too late , as he continued , 
 " I did not for some time pay sufficient attention to this statement , and I had already partially mingled together the collections from two of the islands . I never dreamed that islands , about fifty or sixty miles apart , and most of them in sight of each other , formed of precisely the same rocks , placed under a quite similar climate , rising to a nearly equal height , would have been differently tenanted " . 
 Though the Beagle departed from the Galápagos with over 30 adult tortoises on deck , these were not for scientific study , but a source of fresh meat for the Pacific crossing . Their shells and bones were thrown overboard , leaving no remains with which to test any hypotheses . It has been suggested that this oversight was made because Darwin only reported seeing tortoises on San Cristóbal ( C. n. chathamensis ) and Santiago ( C. n. <unk> ) , both of which have an intermediate type of shell shape and are not particularly morphologically distinct from each other . Though he did visit Floreana , the C. n. nigra subspecies found there was already nearly extinct and he was unlikely to have seen any mature animals . 
 However , Darwin did have four live juvenile specimens to compare from different islands . These were pet tortoises taken by himself ( from San Salvador ) , his captain FitzRoy ( two from Española ) and his servant Syms Covington ( from Floreana ) . Unfortunately , they could not help to determine whether each island had its own variety because the specimens were not mature enough to exhibit morphological differences . Although the British Museum had a few specimens , their provenance within the Galápagos was unknown . However , conversations with the naturalist Gabriel Bibron , who had seen the mature tortoises of the Paris Natural History Museum confirmed to Darwin that distinct varieties occurred . 
 Darwin later compared the different tortoise forms with those of mockingbirds , in the first tentative statement linking his observations from the Galapagos with the possibility of species transmuting : 
 " When I recollect the fact that [ from ] the form of the body , shape of scales and general size , the Spaniards can at once pronounce from which island any tortoise may have been brought ; when I see these islands in sight of each other and possessed of but a scanty stock of animals , tenanted by these birds , but slightly differing in structure and filling the same place in nature ; I must suspect they are only varieties ... If there is the slightest foundation for these remarks , the zoology of archipelagos will be well worth examining ; for such facts would undermine the stability of species . " 
 His views on the mutability of species were restated in his notebooks : " animals on separate islands ought to become different if kept long enough apart with slightly differing circumstances . – Now Galapagos Tortoises , Mocking birds , Falkland Fox , <unk> fox , – Inglish and Irish Hare . " These observations served as counterexamples to the prevailing contemporary view that species were individually created . 
 Darwin also found these " antediluvian animals " to be a source of diversion : " I frequently got on their backs , and then giving a few raps on the hinder part of their shells , they would rise up and walk away ; — but I found it very difficult to keep my balance " . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Several waves of human exploitation of the tortoises as a food source caused a decline in the total wild population from around 250 @,@ 000 when first discovered in the 16th century to a low of 3 @,@ 060 individuals in a 1974 census . Modern conservation efforts have subsequently brought tortoise numbers up to 19 @,@ 317 ( estimate for 1995 – 2009 ) . 
 The subspecies C. n. nigra became extinct by human exploitation in the 19th century . Another subspecies , C. n. abingdonii , became extinct on 24 June 2012 with the death in captivity of the last remaining specimen , a male named Lonesome George , the world 's " rarest living creature " . All the other surviving subspecies are listed by the IUCN as at least " Vulnerable " in conservation status , if not worse . 
 = = = Historical exploitation = = = 
 An estimated 200 @,@ 000 animals were taken before the 20th century . The relatively immobile and defenceless tortoises were collected and stored live on board ships , where they could survive for at least a year without food or water ( some anecdotal reports suggest individuals surviving two years ) , providing valuable fresh meat , while their diluted urine and the water stored in their neck bags could be used as drinking water . The 17th @-@ century British pirate , explorer , and naturalist William Dampier wrote , " They are so extraordinarily large and fat , and so sweet , that no pullet eats more pleasantly , " while Captain James Colnett of the British Navy wrote of " the land tortoise which in whatever way it was dressed , was considered by all of us as the most delicious food we had ever tasted . " US Navy captain David Porter declared , " after once tasting the Galapagos tortoises , every other animal food fell off greatly in our estimation ... The meat of this animal is the easiest of digestion , and a quantity of it , exceeding that of any other food , can be eaten without experiencing the slightest of inconvenience . " Darwin was less enthusiastic about the meat , writing " the breast @-@ plate roasted ( as the Gauchos do " carne con <unk> " ) , with the flesh on it , is very good ; and the young tortoises make excellent soup ; but otherwise the meat to my taste is indifferent . " 
 In the 17th century , pirates started to use the Galápagos Islands as a base for resupply , restocking on food and water , and repairing vessels before attacking Spanish colonies on the South American mainland . However , the Galápagos tortoises did not struggle for survival at this point because the islands were distant from busy shipping routes and harboured few valuable natural resources . As such , they remained unclaimed by any nation , uninhabited and uncharted . In comparison , the tortoises of the islands in the Indian Ocean were already facing extinction by the late 17th century . Between the 1790s and the 1860s , whaling ships and fur sealers systematically collected tortoises in far greater numbers than the buccaneers preceding them . Some were used for food and many more were killed for high @-@ grade " turtle oil " from the late 19th century onward for lucrative sale to continental Ecuador . A total of over 13 @,@ 000 tortoises is recorded in the logs of whaling ships between 1831 and 1868 , and an estimated 100 @,@ 000 were taken before 1830 . Since it was easiest to collect tortoises around coastal zones , females were most vulnerable to depletion during the nesting season . The collection by whalers came to a halt eventually through a combination of the scarcity of tortoises that they had created and the competition from crude oil as a cheaper energy source . 
 Population decline accelerated with the early settlement of the islands in the early 19th century , leading to unregulated hunting for meat , habitat clearance for agriculture , and the introduction of alien mammal species . Feral pigs , dogs , cats , and black rats have become predators of eggs and young tortoises , whilst goats , donkeys , and cattle compete for grazing and trample nest sites . The extinction of the Floreana subspecies in the mid @-@ 19th century has been attributed to the combined pressures of hunting for the penal colony on the relatively small island , the conversion of the grazing highlands into land for farming and fruit plantations , and the introduction of feral mammals . 
 Scientific collection expeditions took 661 tortoises between 1888 and 1930 , and more than 120 tortoises have been taken by poachers since 1990 . Threats continue today with the rapid expansion of the tourist industry and increasing size of human settlements on the islands . The Tortoises are down from 15 different types of species when Darwin first arrived down to 11 . 
 Threats 
 Introduced mammals 
 Galapagos Hawk prey on eggs and hatchlings 
 Poachers 
 Destruction of habitat 
 Characteristics that make vulnerable 
 Slow growth rate 
 Late Sexual maturity 
 Can only be found on Galapagos Island 
 Large size and slow moving 
 Collection 
 The tortoises of the Galápagos ’ island were not only hunted for the oil that they held for fuel but also once they were becoming more and more extinct people began to pay to have them in their collections , as well as being put into museums . 
 = = = Modern conservation = = = 
 The remaining subspecies of tortoise range in IUCN classification from extinct in the wild to vulnerable . Slow growth rate , late sexual maturity , and island endemism make the tortoises particularly prone to extinction without help from conservationists . The Galápagos giant tortoise has become a flagship species for conservation efforts throughout the Galápagos . 
 Legal protection 
 The Galápagos giant tortoise is now strictly protected and is listed on Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora . The listing requires that trade in the taxon and its products is subject to strict regulation by ratifying states , and international trade for primarily commercial purposes is prohibited . In 1936 , the Ecuadorian government listed the giant tortoise as a protected species . In 1959 , it declared all uninhabited areas in the Galápagos to be a national park and established the Charles Darwin Foundation . In 1970 , capturing or removing many species from the islands ( including tortoises and their eggs ) was banned . To halt trade in the tortoises altogether , it became illegal to export the tortoises from Ecuador , captive or wild , continental , or insular in provenance . The banning of their exportation resulted in automatic prohibition of importation to the United States under Public Law 91 @-@ 135 ( 1969 ) . A 1971 Ecuadorian decree made it illegal to damage , remove , alter , or disturb any organism , rock , or other natural object in the National Park . 
 Captive breeding 
 With the establishment of the Galapagos National Park and the CDF in 1959 , a review of the status of the tortoise populations began . Only 11 of the 14 original populations remained and most of these were endangered if not already on the brink of extinction . The breeding and rearing program for giant tortoises began in response to the condition of the population on Pinzón , where fewer than 200 old adults were found . All of the hatchlings had been killed by introduced black rats , for perhaps more than a century . Without help , this population would eventually disappear . The only thing saving it was the longevity of the tortoise . 
 Breeding and release programs began in 1965 and have successfully brought seven of the eight endangered subspecies up to less perilous population levels . Young tortoises are raised at several breeding centres across the islands to improve their survival during their vulnerable early development . Eggs are collected from threatened nesting sites , and the hatched young are given a head start by being kept in captivity for four to five years to reach a size with a much better chance of survival to adulthood , before release onto their native ranges . 
 The most significant population recovery was that of the Española tortoise ( C. n. <unk> ) , which was saved from near @-@ certain extinction . The population had been depleted to three males and 12 females that had been so widely dispersed that no mating in the wild had occurred . <unk> attempts to breed one of the tortoises , Lonesome George for example , is speculated to be attributed to a lack of postnatal cues , and confusion over which would be the most appropriate genetic subspecies would be the most appropriate to mate him with on the islands . The 15 remaining tortoises were brought to the Charles Darwin Research Station in 1971 for a captive breeding program and , in the following 33 years , they gave rise to over 1 @,@ 200 progeny which were released onto their home island and have since begun to reproduce naturally . 
 Island restoration 
 The Galápagos National Park Service systematically culls feral predators and competitors . Goat eradication on islands , including Pinta , was achieved by the technique of using " Judas " goats with radio location collars to find the herds . Marksmen then shot all the goats except the Judas , and then returned weeks later to find the " Judas " and shoot the herd to which it had relocated . Goats were removed from Pinta Island after a 30 @-@ year eradication campaign , the largest removal of an insular goat population using ground @-@ based methods . Over 41 @,@ 000 goats were removed during the initial hunting effort ( 1971 – 82 ) . This process was repeated until only the " Judas " goat remained , which was then killed . Other measures have included dog eradication from San Cristóbal , and fencing off nests to protect them from feral pigs . 
 Efforts are now underway to repopulate islands formerly inhabited by tortoises to restore their ecosystems ( island restoration ) to their condition before humans arrived . The tortoises are a keystone species , acting as ecosystem engineers which help in plant seed dispersal and trampling down brush and thinning the understory of vegetation ( allowing light to penetrate and germination to occur ) . Birds such as flycatchers perch on and fly around tortoises to hunt the insects they displace from the brush . In May 2010 , 39 sterilised tortoises of hybrid origin were introduced to Pinta Island , the first tortoises there since the evacuation of Lonesome George 38 years before . Sterile tortoises were released so the problem of interbreeding between subspecies would be avoided if any fertile tortoises were to be released in the future . It is hoped that with the recent identification of a hybrid C. n. abingdonii tortoise , the approximate genetic constitution of the original inhabitants of Pinta may eventually be restored with the identification and relocation of appropriate specimens to this island . This approach may be used to " <unk> " Floreana in the future , since captive individuals have been found to be descended from the extinct original stock . 
 Escape from extinction 
 Tortoises did not go extinct due to their mutations and adaptions through Darwin ’ s theory . While having a low number in the islands they were able to maintain and be able to repopulate due to genetics and their low @-@ fecundity stress , which allows inbreeding with little to no affect of inbreeding as humans see . 
 Farming 
 Due to the Tortoises being a low @-@ fecundity stress animal and being able to inbreeding without complications this also allowed them to be farmed in small areas . It also revealed their ability to be able to breed in captivity , which is common for most animals to be under heavy stress and have trouble breeding while in captivity . Also this brings them into more a domestic role in society and able to farm for their eggs and become apart of a community and bring food to the people in that area . 
 Applied science 
 The Galapagos Tortoise Movement Ecology Programme is a collaborative project coordinated by Dr Stephen Blake of the Max Planck Institute for Ornithology . Its goal is to assist the Galapagos National Park to effectively conserve giant tortoises by conducting cutting @-@ edge applied science , and developing an inspirational tortoise @-@ based outreach and education programme . Since 2009 , the project team have been analysing the movements of giant tortoises by tracking them via satellite tags . As of November 2014 , the team have tagged 83 tortoises from four species on three islands . They have established that giant tortoises conduct migrations up and down volcanoes , primarily in response to seasonal changes in the availability and quality of vegetation . In 2015 they will start to track the movements of hatchling and juvenile tortoises , supported by the UK 's Galapagos Conservation Trust . 
 = Texas A & M University = 
 Texas A & M University ( Texas A & M , TAMU / <unk> / , or A & M ) is a coeducational public research university located in College Station , Texas , United States . It is the flagship institution of the Texas A & M University System , the fourth @-@ largest university in the United States and the largest university in Texas . The university enjoys a strong athletic program and fan following , known as the twelfth man , and is a member of the Southeastern Conference . It is consistently ranked among the top 20 public universities in the United States ; most notably , its engineering school ranks in the top 10 of public schools . Texas A & M 's designation as a land , sea , and space grant institution reflects a range of research with ongoing projects funded by agencies such as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) , the National Institutes of Health , the National Science Foundation , and the Office of Naval Research . The school ranks in the top 20 American research institutes in funding and has made contributions to such fields as animal cloning and petroleum engineering . 
 The first public institution of higher education in Texas , the school opened on October 4 , 1876 as the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas under the provisions of the Morrill Land @-@ Grant Acts . Originally , the college taught no classes in agriculture , instead concentrating on classical studies , languages , literature , and applied mathematics . After four years , students could attain degrees in scientific agriculture , civil and mechanical engineering , and language and literature . Under the leadership of President James Earl Rudder in the 1960s , A & M desegregated , became coeducational , and dropped the requirement for participation in the Corps of Cadets . To reflect the institution 's expanded roles and academic offerings , the Texas Legislature renamed the school to Texas A & M University in 1963 . The letters " A & M " , originally short for " Agricultural and Mechanical " , are retained only as a link to the university 's past . The school 's students , alumni , and sports teams are known as Aggies . 
 The main campus is one of the largest in the United States , spanning 5 @,@ 200 acres ( 21 km2 ) , and includes the George Bush Presidential Library . About one @-@ fifth of the student body lives on campus . Texas A & M has approximately 1 @,@ 000 officially recognized student organizations . Many students also observe the traditions of Texas A & M University , which govern daily life , as well as special occasions , including sports events . On July 1 , 2012 , the school joined the Southeastern Conference . A & M operates two branches : Texas A & M at Qatar and Texas A & M University at Galveston . Working with agencies such as the Texas <unk> Research and Texas <unk> Extension Service , Texas A & M has a direct presence in each of the 254 counties in Texas . The university offers degrees in over 150 courses of study through ten colleges and houses 18 research institutes . Texas A & M has awarded over 320 @,@ 000 degrees , including 70 @,@ 000 graduate and professional degrees . 
 As a Senior Military College , Texas A & M is one of six American public universities with a full @-@ time , volunteer Corps of Cadets who study alongside civilian undergraduate students . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginning years = = = 
 The U.S. Congress laid the groundwork for the establishment of Texas A & M in 1862 with the adoption of the Morrill Act . The act auctioned land grants of public lands to establish endowments for colleges where the " leading object shall be , without excluding other scientific and classical studies and including military tactics , to teach such branches of learning as are related to agriculture and mechanical arts ... to promote the liberal and practical education of the industrial classes in the several pursuits and professions in life " . In 1871 , the Texas Legislature used these funds to establish the state 's first public institution of higher education , the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas , then known as Texas A.M.C. Brazos County donated 2 @,@ 416 acres ( 10 km2 ) near Bryan , Texas , for the school 's campus . 
 Enrollment began on October 2 , 1876 . Six students enrolled on the first day , and classes officially began on October 4 , 1876 , with six faculty members . During the first semester , enrollment increased to 48 students , and by the end of the spring 1877 semester , 106 students had enrolled . Admission was limited to white males , and all students were required to participate in the Corps of Cadets and receive military training . Although traditional Texas A & M University Corps of Cadets " <unk> " indicate 40 students began classes on October 4 , 1876 , the exact number of students enrolled on that day is unknown . Enrollment climbed to 258 students before declining to 108 students in 1883 , the year the University of Texas opened in Austin , Texas . Though originally envisioned and annotated in the Texas Constitution as a branch of the University of Texas , Texas A.M.C. had a separate Board of Directors from the University of Texas from the first day of classes and was never enveloped into the University of Texas System . 
 In the late 1880s , many Texas residents saw no need for two colleges in Texas and clamored for an end of Texas A.M.C. In 1891 , Texas A & M was saved from potential closure by its new president Lawrence Sullivan Ross , former governor of Texas , and well @-@ respected Confederate Brigadier General . Ross made many improvements to the school and enrollment doubled to 467 cadets as parents sent their sons to Texas A & M " to learn to be like Ross " . During his tenure , many enduring Aggie traditions were born , including the creation of the first Aggie Ring . After his death in 1898 , a statue was erected in front of what is now Academic Plaza to honor Ross and his achievements in the history of the school . 
 Under pressure from the legislature , in 1911 the school began allowing women to attend classes during the summer semester . At the same time , A & M began expanding its academic pursuits with the establishment of the School of Veterinary Medicine in 1915 . 
 = = = World Wars era = = = 
 Many Texas A & M graduates served during World War I. By 1918 , 49 % of all graduates of the college were in military service , more than any other school . In early September 1918 , the entire senior class enlisted , with plans to send the younger students at staggered dates throughout the next year . Many of the seniors were fighting in France when the war ended two months later . Over 1 @,@ 200 alumni served as commissioned officers . After the war , Texas A & M grew rapidly and became nationally recognized for its programs in agriculture , engineering , and military science . The first graduate school was organized in 1924 and the school awarded its first PhD in 1940 . In 1925 , Mary Evelyn Crawford Locke became the first female to receive a diploma from Texas A & M , although she was not allowed to participate in the graduation ceremony . The following month the Board of Directors officially prohibited all women from enrolling . 
 Many Aggies again served in the military during World War II , with the college producing 20 @,@ 229 combat troops . Of those , 14 @,@ 123 Aggies served as officers , more than any other school and more than the combined total of the United States Naval Academy and the United States Military Academy . During the war , 29 A & M graduates reached the rank of general . 
 At the start of World War II , Texas A & M was selected as one of six engineering colleges to participate in the Electronics Training Program , a ten @-@ month activity of 12 @-@ hour study days to train Navy personnel who were urgently needed to maintain the then @-@ new , highly complex electronic equipment such as radar . These colleges provided the Primary School , wherein the key topics of the first two years of a college electrical engineering curriculum were condensed into three months . The instructional effort at College Station was developed and led by Frank Bolton , EE department head and future Texas A & M president . At a given time , some 500 Navy students were on the campus , a significant fraction of the then @-@ years enrollment . Students graduating from the Primary Schools then went to a secondary school , one of which was at Ward Island , Texas ( the future location of Texas A & M University @-@ Corpus Christi ) . 
 Enrollment soared after the war as many former soldiers used the G.I. Bill to further their education . In 1948 , the state legislature formally recognized Texas A & M as a separate university system from the University of Texas System , codifying the de facto arrangement between the schools . 
 = = = University era = = = 
 On March 26 , 1960 , Major General James Earl Rudder , class of 1932 , became the 16th president of the college . Rudder 's tenure ( 1959 – 1970 ) marked a critical turning point in the school 's history . Under his leadership , Texas A & M underwent a dramatic expansion in its physical plant construction , but more importantly , it diversified and expanded its student body by admitting women and minorities . The Corps of Cadets became voluntary . In the face of growing student activism during the 1960s , Rudder worked diligently to ensure that the school continue to fulfill its mission of providing a quality education for all Aggies . By his death in 1970 , Rudder had overseen the growth of the school from 7 @,@ 500 to 14 @,@ 000 students from all 50 states and 75 nations . 
 In 1963 , the 58th Legislature of Texas approved of Rudder 's changes , and officially renamed the school " Texas A & M University " , specifying that the " A " and the " M " were purely symbolic , reflecting the school 's past , and no longer stood for " Agricultural and Mechanical " . In the following 35 years , Texas A & M more than tripled its enrollment from 14 @,@ 000 students to over 45 @,@ 000 . 
 Much of the legislative work allowing the expansion of Texas A & M and the admission of women was pushed by State Senator William T. " Bill " Moore , who served from 1949 to 1981 . Known as " the Bull of the Brazos " and " the father of the modern Texas A & M University " , Moore was a Bryan attorney and businessman originally from Wheelock in Robertson County . He also taught economics at TAMU before his entry into World War II . 
 Texas A & M became one of the first four universities given the designation sea @-@ grant for its achievements in oceanography and marine resources development in 1971 . In 1989 , the university earned the title space @-@ grant by NASA , to recognize its commitment to space research and participation in the Texas Space Grant Consortium . 
 In 1997 , the school became the home of the George Bush Presidential Library . Operated by the National Archives and Records Administration , it is one of thirteen American presidential libraries . Former President George Bush remains actively involved with the university , frequently visiting the campus and participating in special events . 
 In 1998 , activists on campus ( including Professor Patrick Slattery ) suggested the statue of Lawrence Sullivan Ross should be removed on the basis that he was a member of the Ku Klux Klan . Instead , Slattery and others wanted to create a " diversity plaza " , with a statue of Matthew Gaines , an African @-@ American politician . The project was abandoned in the wake of the Aggie Bonfire tragedy , in 1999 . 
 Texas A & M received national media attention on November 18 , 1999 , when Aggie Bonfire , a ninety @-@ year @-@ old student tradition , collapsed during construction . Twelve enrolled students and alumni died and twenty @-@ seven others were injured . The accident was later attributed to improper design and poor construction practices . The victims ' family members filed six lawsuits against Texas A & M officials , the Aggie Bonfire officials and the university . Half of the defendants settled their portion of the case in 2005 , and a federal appeals court dismissed the remaining lawsuits against the university in 2007 . 
 With strong support from Rice University and the University of Texas at Austin , the Association of American Universities inducted Texas A & M in May 2001 , on the basis of the depth of the university 's research and academic programs . 
 Texas A & M left the Big 12 Conference for the Southeastern Conference on July 1 , 2012 . This ended Texas A & M 's scheduled NCAA athletic competitions with three former Southwest Conference rivals – UT Austin , Baylor , and Texas Tech – for the foreseeable future . 
 The university underwent several large expansions in 2013 . On July 12 , 2013 , Texas A & M Health Science Center was formally merged into the university . On August 12 , 2013 the university purchased the Texas Wesleyan University School of Law and renamed it the Texas A & M School of Law . Texas A & M on October 23 , 2013 announced plans to build a new branch campus , Texas A & M University at Nazareth - Peace Campus , in Israel . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Student body = = = 
