 Mushroom poisoning is more common in Europe than in America . Up to the mid @-@ 20th century , the mortality rate was around 60 – 70 % , but this has been greatly reduced with advances in medical care . A review of death cap poisoning throughout Europe from 1971 to 1980 found the overall mortality rate to be 22 @.@ 4 % ( 51 @.@ 3 % in children under ten and 16 @.@ 5 % in those older than ten ) . This has fallen further in more recent surveys to around 10 – 15 % . 
 = = = Treatment = = = 
 Consumption of the death cap is a medical emergency requiring hospitalization . The four main categories of therapy for poisoning are preliminary medical care , supportive measures , specific treatments , and liver transplantation . 
 Preliminary care consists of gastric decontamination with either activated carbon or gastric lavage ; due to the delay between ingestion and the first symptoms of poisoning , it is common for patients to arrive for treatment many hours after ingestion , potentially reducing the efficacy of these interventions . Supportive measures are directed towards treating the dehydration which results from fluid loss during the gastrointestinal phase of intoxication and correction of metabolic acidosis , hypoglycemia , electrolyte imbalances , and impaired coagulation . 
 No definitive antidote is available , but some specific treatments have been shown to improve survivability . High @-@ dose continuous intravenous penicillin G has been reported to be of benefit , though the exact mechanism is unknown , and trials with cephalosporins show promise . Some evidence indicates intravenous silibinin , an extract from the blessed milk thistle ( <unk> <unk> ) , may be beneficial in reducing the effects of death cap poisoning . A long @-@ term clinical trial of intravenous silibinin began in the US in 2010 . <unk> prevents the uptake of amatoxins by liver cells , thereby protecting undamaged liver tissue ; it also stimulates DNA @-@ dependent RNA polymerases , leading to an increase in RNA synthesis . According to one report based on a treatment of 60 patients with silibinin , the patients who have started the drug within 96 hours of ingesting the mushroom and who have still had kidney function intact have all survived . As of February 2014 supporting research hasn ’ t yet been published . 
 <unk> has been identified as the human hepatic uptake transporter for amatoxins ; moreover , substrates and inhibitors of that protein — among others rifampicin , penicillin , silibinin , <unk> , paclitaxel , ciclosporin and <unk> — may be useful for the treatment of human amatoxin poisoning . 
 N @-@ Acetylcysteine has shown promise in combination with other therapies . Animal studies indicate the amatoxins deplete hepatic glutathione ; N @-@ acetylcysteine serves as a glutathione precursor and may therefore prevent reduced glutathione levels and subsequent liver damage . None of the antidotes used have undergone prospective , randomized clinical trials , and only anecdotal support is available . <unk> and N @-@ acetylcysteine appear to be the therapies with the most potential benefit . Repeated doses of activated carbon may be helpful by absorbing any toxins returned to the gastrointestinal tract following enterohepatic circulation . Other methods of enhancing the elimination of the toxins have been trialed ; techniques such as hemodialysis , hemoperfusion , plasmapheresis , and peritoneal dialysis have occasionally yielded success , but overall do not appear to improve outcome . 
 In patients developing liver failure , a liver transplant is often the only option to prevent death . Liver transplants have become a well @-@ established option in amatoxin poisoning . This is a complicated issue , however , as transplants themselves may have significant complications and mortality ; patients require long @-@ term immunosuppression to maintain the transplant . That being the case , the criteria have been reassessed , such as onset of symptoms , prothrombin time ( PTT ) , serum bilirubin , and presence of encephalopathy , for determining at what point a transplant becomes necessary for survival . Evidence suggests , although survival rates have improved with modern medical treatment , in patients with moderate to severe poisoning , up to half of those who did recover suffered permanent liver damage . A follow @-@ up study has shown most survivors recover completely without any sequelae if treated within 36 hours of mushroom ingestion . 
 = = Notable victims = = 
 Several historical figures may have died from A. phalloides poisoning ( or other similar , toxic Amanita species ) . These were either accidental poisonings or assassination plots . Alleged victims of this kind of poisoning include Roman Emperor Claudius , Pope Clement VII , the Russian tsaritsa Natalia Naryshkina , and Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI . 
 R. Gordon Wasson recounted the details of these deaths , noting the likelihood of Amanita poisoning . In the case of Clement VII , the illness that led to his death lasted five months , making the case inconsistent with amatoxin poisoning ( p . 110 ) . Natalia Naryshkina is said to have consumed a large quantity of pickled mushrooms prior to her death . It is unclear whether the mushrooms themselves were poisonous or if she succumbed to food poisoning . 
 Charles VI experienced indigestion after eating a dish of sautéed mushrooms . This led to an illness from which he died 10 days later — symptomatology consistent with amatoxin poisoning . His death led to the War of the Austrian Succession . Noted Voltaire , " this dish of mushrooms changed the destiny of Europe . " 
 The case of Claudius ' poisoning is more complex . Claudius was known to have been very fond of eating Caesar 's mushroom . Following his death , many sources have attributed it to his being fed a meal of death caps instead of Caesar 's mushrooms . Ancient authors , such as Tacitus and Suetonius , are unanimous about poison having been added to the mushroom dish , rather than the dish having been prepared from poisonous mushrooms . Wasson speculated the poison used to kill Claudius was derived from death caps , with a fatal dose of an unknown poison ( possibly a variety of nightshade ) being administered later during his illness . 
 = Islamic geometric patterns = 
 Islamic decoration , which tends to avoid using figurative images , makes frequent use of geometric patterns which have developed over the centuries . 
 The geometric designs in Islamic art are often built on combinations of repeated squares and circles , which may be overlapped and interlaced , as can arabesques ( with which they are often combined ) , to form intricate and complex patterns , including a wide variety of tessellations . These may constitute the entire decoration , may form a framework for floral or calligraphic embellishments , or may retreat into the background around other motifs . The complexity and variety of patterns used evolved from simple stars and lozenges in the ninth century , through a variety of 6- to 13 @-@ point patterns by the 13th century , and finally to include also 14- and 16 @-@ point stars in the sixteenth century . 
 Geometric patterns occur in a variety of forms in Islamic art and architecture including kilim carpets , Persian girih and Moroccan zellige tilework , muqarnas decorative vaulting , jali pierced stone screens , ceramics , leather , stained glass , woodwork , and metalwork . 
 Interest in Islamic geometric patterns is increasing in the West , both among craftsmen and artists including M. C. Escher in the twentieth century , and among mathematicians and physicists including Peter J. Lu and Paul Steinhardt who controversially claimed in 2007 that tilings at the Darb @-@ e Imam shrine in Isfahan could generate quasi @-@ periodic patterns like Penrose tilings . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Islamic decoration = = = 
 Islamic art mostly avoids figurative images to avoid becoming objects of worship . Islamic geometric patterns derived from simpler designs used in earlier cultures : Greek , Roman , and Sasanian . They are one of three forms of Islamic decoration , the others being the arabesque based on curving and branching plant forms , and Islamic calligraphy ; all three are frequently used together . Geometric designs and arabesques are forms of Islamic interlace patterns . 
 = = = Purpose = = = 
 Authors such as Keith Critchlow argue that Islamic patterns are created to lead the viewer to an understanding of the underlying reality , rather than being mere decoration , as writers interested only in pattern sometimes imply . David Wade states that " Much of the art of Islam , whether in architecture , ceramics , textiles or books , is the art of decoration – which is to say , of transformation . " Wade argues that the aim is to transfigure , turning mosques " into lightness and pattern " , while " the decorated pages of a Qur ’ an can become windows onto the infinite . " Against this , Doris Behrens @-@ <unk> states in her book Beauty in Arabic Culture that a " major difference " between the philosophical thinking of Medieval Europe and the Islamic world is exactly that the concepts of the good and the beautiful are separated in Arabic culture . She argues that beauty , whether in poetry or in the visual arts , was enjoyed " for its own sake , without commitment to religious or moral criteria " . 
 = = Pattern formation = = 
 Many Islamic designs are built on squares and circles , typically repeated , overlapped and interlaced to form intricate and complex patterns . A recurring motif is the 8 @-@ pointed star , often seen in Islamic tilework ; it is made of two squares , one rotated 45 degrees with respect to the other . The fourth basic shape is the polygon , including pentagons and octagons . All of these can be combined and reworked to form complicated patterns with a variety of symmetries including reflections and rotations . Such patterns can be seen as mathematical tessellations , which can extend indefinitely and thus suggest infinity . They are constructed on grids that require only ruler and compasses to draw . Artist and educator Roman <unk> argues that such constructions are in effect algorithms , making Islamic geometric patterns forerunners of modern algorithmic art . 
 The circle symbolizes unity and diversity in nature , and many Islamic patterns are drawn starting with a circle . For example , the decoration of the 15th century mosque in Yazd , Iran is based on a circle , divided into six by six circles drawn around it , all touching at its centre and each touching its two neighbours ' centres to form a regular hexagon . On this basis is constructed a six @-@ pointed star surrounded by six smaller irregular hexagons to form a <unk> star pattern . This forms the basic design which is outlined in white on the wall of the mosque . That design , however , is overlaid with an intersecting tracery in blue around tiles of other colours , forming an elaborate pattern that partially conceals the original and underlying design . A similar design forms the logo of the Mohammed Ali Research Center . 
 One of the early Western students of Islamic patterns , Ernest Hanbury Hankin , defined a " geometrical arabesque " as a pattern formed " with the help of construction lines consisting of polygons in contact . " He observed that many different combinations of polygons can be used as long as the residual spaces between the polygons are reasonably symmetrical . For example , a grid of octagons in contact has squares ( of the same side as the octagons ) as the residual spaces . Every octagon is the basis for an 8 @-@ point star , as seen at Akbar 's tomb , Sikandra ( 1605 – 1613 ) . Hankin considered the " skill of the Arabian artists in discovering suitable combinations of polygons .. almost astounding . " He further records that if a star occurs in a corner , exactly one quarter of it should be shown ; if along an edge , exactly one half of it . 
 The Topkapı Scroll , made in Timurid dynasty Iran in the late 15th century or beginning of the 16th century , contains 114 patterns including coloured designs for girih tilings and muqarnas quarter or semidomes . 
 The mathematical properties of the decorative tile and stucco patterns of the Alhambra palace in Granada , Spain have been extensively studied . Some authors have claimed on dubious grounds to have found most or all of the 17 wallpaper groups there . Moroccan geometric woodwork from the 14th to 19th centuries makes use of only 5 wallpaper groups , mainly <unk> and <unk> , with <unk> and <unk> occasionally and <unk> rarely ; it is claimed that the " <unk> " method of construction can however generate all 17 groups . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 = = = Early stage = = = 
 The earliest geometrical forms in Islamic art were occasional isolated geometric shapes such as 8 @-@ pointed stars and lozenges containing squares . These date from 836 in the Great Mosque of Kairouan , Tunisia , and since then have spread all across the Islamic world . 
 = = = Middle stage = = = 
 The next development , marking the middle stage of Islamic geometric pattern usage , was of 6- and 8 @-@ point stars , which appear in 879 at the Ibn Tulun Mosque , Cairo , and then became widespread . 
 A wider variety of patterns were used from the 11th century . Abstract 6- and 8 @-@ point shapes appear in the Tower of <unk> at Qazvin , Persia in 1067 , and the Al @-@ Juyushi Mosque , Egypt in 1085 , again becoming widespread from there , though 6 @-@ point patterns are rare in Turkey . 
 In 1086 , 7- and 10 @-@ point girih patterns ( with <unk> , 5- and 6 @-@ pointed stars , triangles and irregular hexagons ) appear in the Friday Mosque at Isfahan . 10 @-@ point girih became widespread in the Islamic world , except in the Spanish Al @-@ Andalus . Soon afterwards , sweeping 9- , 11- , and 13 @-@ point girih patterns were used in the <unk> Mosque , also in Persia , in 1098 ; these , like 7 @-@ point geometrical patterns , are rarely used outside Persia and central Asia . 
 Finally , marking the end of the middle stage , 8- and 12 @-@ point girih rosette patterns appear in the Alaeddin Mosque at Konya , Turkey in 1220 , and in the Abbasid palace in Baghdad in 1230 , going on to become widespread across the Islamic world . 
 = = = Late stage = = = 
 The beginning of the late stage is marked by the use of simple 16 @-@ point patterns at the Hasan <unk> mausoleum in Cairo in 1321 , and in the Alhambra in Spain in 1338 – 1390 . These patterns are rarely found outside these two regions . More elaborate combined 16 @-@ point geometrical patterns are found in the Sultan Hasan complex in Cairo in 1363 , but rarely elsewhere . Finally , 14 @-@ point patterns appear in the Jama Masjid at Fatehpur Sikri in India in 1571 – 1596 , but in few other places . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Several artforms in different parts of the Islamic world make use of geometric patterns . These include ceramics , girih strapwork , jali pierced stone screens , kilim rugs , leather , metalwork , muqarnas vaulting , <unk> stained glass , woodwork , and zellige tiling . 
 = = = Ceramics = = = 
 Ceramics lend themselves to circular motifs , whether radial or tangential . Bowls or plates can be decorated inside or out with radial stripes ; these may be partly figurative , representing stylised leaves or flower petals , while circular bands can run around a bowl or jug . Patterns of these types were employed on Islamic ceramics from the Ayyubid period , 13th century AD . <unk> symmetric flowers with , say , 6 petals lend themselves to increasingly stylised geometric designs which can combine geometric simplicity with recognisably naturalistic motifs , brightly coloured glazes , and a radial composition that ideally suits circular crockery . Potters often chose patterns suited to the shape of the vessel they were making . Thus an unglazed earthenware water flask from Aleppo in the shape of a vertical circle ( with handles and neck above ) is decorated with a ring of moulded braiding around an Arabic inscription with a small 8 @-@ petalled flower at the centre . 
 = = = Girih tilings and woodwork = = = 
 Girih are elaborate interlacing patterns formed of five standardized shapes . The style is used in Persian Islamic architecture and also in decorative woodwork . Girih designs are traditionally made in different media including cut brickwork , stucco , and mosaic faience tilework . In woodwork , especially in the Safavid period , it could be applied either as lattice frames , left plain or inset with panels such as of coloured glass ; or as mosaic panels used to decorate walls and ceilings , whether sacred or secular . In architecture , girih forms decorative interlaced strapwork surfaces from the 15th century to the 20th century . Most designs are based on a partially hidden geometric grid which provides a regular array of points ; this is made into a pattern using 2- , 3- , 4- , and 6 @-@ fold rotational symmetries which can fill the plane . The visible pattern superimposed on the grid is also geometric , with 6- , 8- , 10- and 12 @-@ pointed stars and a variety of convex polygons , joined by straps which typically seem to weave over and under each other . The visible pattern does not coincide with the underlying tiling . 
 = = = Jali = = = 
 Jali are pierced stone screens with regularly repeating patterns . They are characteristic of Indo @-@ Islamic architecture , for example in the Mughal dynasty buildings at Fatehpur Sikri and the Taj Mahal . The geometric designs combine polygons such as octagons and pentagons with other shapes such as 5- and 8 @-@ pointed stars . The patterns emphasized symmetries and suggested infinity by repetition . Jali functioned as windows or room dividers , providing privacy but allowing in air and light . Jali forms a prominent element of the architecture of India . The use of perforated walls has declined with modern building standards and the need for security . Modern , simplified jali walls , for example made with pre @-@ moulded clay or cement blocks , have been popularised by the architect Laurie Baker . Pierced windows in girih style are sometimes found elsewhere in the Islamic world , such as in windows of the Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo . 
 = = = Kilim = = = 
 A kilim is an Islamic <unk> carpet ( without a pile ) , whether for household use or a prayer mat . The pattern is made by winding the weft threads back over the warp threads when a colour boundary is reached . This technique leaves a gap or vertical slit , so kilims are sometimes called slit @-@ woven textiles . <unk> are often decorated with geometric patterns with 2- or 4 @-@ fold mirror or rotational symmetries . Because weaving uses vertical and horizontal threads , curves are difficult to generate , and patterns are accordingly formed mainly with straight edges . Kilim patterns are often characteristic of specific regions . Kilim motifs are often symbolic as well as decorative . For example , the wolf 's mouth or wolf 's foot motif ( Turkish : Kurt <unk> , Kurt <unk> ) expresses the tribal weavers ' desires for protection of their families ' flocks from wolves . 
 = = = Leather = = = 
 Islamic leather is often embossed with patterns similar to those already described . Leather book covers , starting with the Quran where figurative artwork was excluded , were decorated with a combination of <unk> script , medallions and geometric patterns , typically bordered by geometric braiding . 
 = = = Metalwork = = = 
 Metal artefacts share the same geometric designs that are used in other forms of Islamic art . However , in the view of Hamilton Gibb , the emphasis differs : geometric patterns tend to be used for borders , and if they are in the main decorative area they are most often used in combination with other motifs such as floral designs , arabesques , animal motifs , or calligraphic script . Geometric designs in Islamic metalwork can form a grid decorated with these other motifs , or they can form the background pattern . 
 Even where metal objects such as bowls and dishes do not seem to have geometric decoration , still the designs , such as arabesques , are often set in octagonal compartments or arranged in concentric bands around the object . Both closed designs ( which do not repeat ) and open or repetitive patterns are used . Patterns such as interlaced six @-@ pointed stars were especially popular from the twelfth century . Eva Baer notes that while this design was essentially simple , it was elaborated by metalworkers into intricate patterns interlaced with arabesques , sometimes organised around further basic Islamic patterns , such as the hexagonal pattern of six overlapping circles . 
 = = = Muqarnas = = = 
 Muqarnas are elaborately carved ceilings to semidomes , often used in mosques . They are typically made of stucco ( and thus do not have a structural function ) , but can also be of wood , brick , and stone . They are characteristic of Islamic architecture of the Middle Ages from Spain and Morocco in the west to Persia in the east . Architecturally they form multiple tiers of squinches , diminishing in size as they rise . They are often elaborately decorated . 
 = = = Stained glass = = = 
 Geometrically patterned stained glass is used in a variety of settings in Islamic architecture . It is found in the surviving summer residence of the Palace of Shaki Khans , Azerbaijan , constructed in 1797 . Patterns in the " <unk> " windows include 6- , 8- , and 12 @-@ point stars . These wood @-@ framed decorative windows are distinctive features of the palace 's architecture . Shabaka are still constructed the traditional way in <unk> in the 21st century . Traditions of stained glass set in wooden frames ( not lead as in Europe ) survive in workshops in Iran as well as Azerbaijan . Glazed windows set in stucco arranged in girih @-@ like patterns are found both in Turkey and the Arab lands ; a late example , without the traditional balance of design elements , was made in Tunisia for the International Colonial Exhibition in Amsterdam in 1883 . The old city of Sana 'a in Yemen has stained glass windows in its tall buildings . 
 = = = Zellige = = = 
 Zellige are glazed terracotta tiles set into plaster , forming colourful mosaic patterns including regular and semiregular tessellations . The tradition is characteristic of Morocco , but is also found in Moorish Spain . Zellige is used to decorate mosques , public buildings and wealthy private houses . 
 = = = Illustrations = = = 
 = = In Western culture = = 
 It is sometimes supposed in Western society that mistakes in repetitive Islamic patterns such as those on carpets were intentionally introduced as a show of humility by artists who believed only Allah can produce perfection , but this theory is denied . 
 Major Western collections hold many objects of widely varying materials with Islamic geometric patterns . The Victoria and Albert Museum in London holds at least 283 such objects , of materials including wallpaper , carved wood , inlaid wood , <unk> or lead @-@ glazed earthenware , brass , stucco , glass , woven silk , ivory , and pen or pencil drawings . The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York has among other relevant holdings 124 mediaeval ( 1000 – 1400 A.D. ) objects bearing Islamic geometric patterns , including a pair of Egyptian minbar ( pulpit ) doors almost 2 m. high in rosewood and mulberry inlaid with ivory and ebony ; and an entire mihrab ( prayer niche ) from Isfahan , decorated with polychrome mosaic , and weighing over 2 @,@ 000 kg . 
 The Dutch artist M. C. Escher was inspired by the Alhambra 's intricate decorative designs to study the mathematics of tessellation , transforming his style and influencing the rest of his artistic career . In his own words it was " the richest source of inspiration I have ever tapped . " 
 Cultural organisations such as the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute and the Institute for Advanced Study run events on geometric patterns and related aspects of Islamic art . In 2013 the Istanbul Center of Design and the <unk> Foundation ran what they claimed was the first ever symposium of Islamic Arts and Geometric Patterns , in Istanbul . The panel included the experts on Islamic geometric pattern Carol Bier , Jay Bonner , Eric <unk> , <unk> <unk> and Reza <unk> . In Britain , The Prince 's School of Traditional Arts runs a range of courses in Islamic art including geometry , calligraphy , and arabesque ( vegetal forms ) , tile @-@ making , and plaster carving . 
 Computer graphics and computer @-@ aided manufacturing make it possible to design and produce Islamic geometric patterns effectively and economically . Craig S. Kaplan explains and illustrates in his Ph.D. thesis how Islamic star patterns can be generated algorithmically . 
 Two physicists , Peter J. Lu and Paul Steinhardt , attracted controversy in 2007 by claiming that girih designs such as that used on the Darb @-@ e Imam shrine in Isfahan were able to create quasi @-@ periodic tilings resembling those discovered by Roger Penrose in 1973 . They showed that rather than the traditional ruler and compass construction , it was possible to create girih designs using a set of five " girih tiles " , all equilateral polygons , secondarily decorated with lines ( for the strapwork ) . 
 In 2016 , Ahmad Rafsanjani described the use of Islamic geometric patterns from tomb towers in Iran to create <unk> materials from perforated rubber sheets . These are stable in either a contracted or an expanded state , and can switch between the two , which might be useful for surgical stents or for spacecraft components . When a conventional material is stretched along one axis , it contracts along other axes ( at right angles to the stretch ) . But <unk> materials expand at right angles to the pull . The internal structure that enables this unusual behaviour is inspired by two of the 70 Islamic patterns that Rafsanjani noted on the tomb towers . 
 = Jonathan Alder = 
 Jonathan Alder ( September 17 , 1773 – January 30 , 1849 ) was an American pioneer , and the first white settler in Madison County , Ohio . As a young child living in Virginia , Alder was kidnapped by Shawnee Indians , and later adopted by a Mingo chief in the Ohio Country . He lived with the Native Americans for many years before returning to the white community . 
 Alder settled near present @-@ day Plain City , Ohio , where he became a farmer . He was reunited with his birth family , which moved to Ohio with him , and also had a short career as a military officer during the War of 1812 . A middle school , high school , and school district in Plain City all bear his name . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Alder was born September 17 , 1773 , in Gloucester , New Jersey , to Bartholomew Alder and Hannah Worthington . The family moved in 1775 to Wythe County , Virginia , where Alder 's father died about a year later . In May 1782 , Jonathan , at eight years old , was sent out with his brother David to search for a couple horses that ran away . They were attacked by a small group of Shawnee Indians from Ohio . David saw the Indians first and tried to escape , but he was chased down , killed , and later scalped . The Indian group also captured Alder 's neighbor , Mrs. Martin , and her young child . 
 The group traveled north , passing present @-@ day Chillicothe , Ohio , on the way to a Mingo village on the north side of the Mad River , somewhere near present @-@ day Logan County , Ohio . During the trip the Indians killed and scalped Martin 's child , which they found burdensome . Martin responded by screaming in grief ; when the Indians ' threats to scalp her did not quiet her screams , they whipped her until she was silent . Alder 's life was spared due to his appearance . His captors thought his black hair would allow him to pass as an Indian . 
 When the group reached the village , Alder learned why his life had been spared . One of the Mingo chiefs , <unk> , and his wife , Whinecheoh , were an aging couple who had lost their son , and planned to adopt Alder as a replacement . Alder was forced to run the gauntlet , as a rite of passage , and after he exhibited bravery during the trial , he was adopted and cared for by Whinecheoh . The Indian 's other prisoner , Mrs. Martin , had been promised to a man in another village , and was taken away during Alder 's adoption ceremony . 
 = = Indian life = = 
 The first few years that Alder lived with the Indians he was very ill , a condition Alder attributed to the Indians ' diet . The other children in the village were friendly towards Alder , and worked together to teach him their language , customs , and traditions . In time , Alder fully adopted the Mingo way of life ; he lived , hunted , and fought as an Indian . When he was old enough he was given an English musket , which he used to hunt mud turtles , wild turkeys , and raccoons . He was praised in the village for his hunting skills . He grew attached to his new life and when , in 1783 , a trader from Kentucky offered to exchange him for a Shawnee prisoner , Alder refused . Alder was living in the Indian village of Mack @-@ a @-@ <unk> when it was destroyed by Benjamin Logan during his raid into Ohio Country in 1786 , and he accompanied the Indians on raids into Kentucky to steal horses from white settlers . 
 In 1790 , Whinecheoh died at the age of eighty , and <unk> died in 1792 at the age of ninety . After their deaths , Alder wandered from village to village , and began courting an Indian woman from Upper Sandusky named Barshaw . In the fall of 1793 , during the peak of the Northwest Indian War , he joined Shawnee chief Blue Jacket to defend against Anthony Wayne 's attacks in the Ohio Country , and also took part in the attack on Fort Recovery on June 30 , 1794 . Alder was asked for advice on the 1795 Treaty of Greenville on land reservations , and urged by the Indians to attend its signing . Alder , not realizing the treaty 's importance , chose not to attend . 
 = = Life as settler = = 
 In the summer after the signing of the Treaty of Greenville , which restored peace between Indians and settlers , Alder decided to return to the white community . He married Barshaw , and settled in Pleasant Valley , in the area of Jerome Township , about 5 miles ( 8 km ) north of present @-@ day Plain City , Ohio . He built a cabin , took up the lifestyle of a farmer , and raised hogs , cows and horses . He sold milk and butter he made to the Indians , and pork and horses to the whites . Alder began adopting the white community 's habits , and learned English from the other white settlers . While living in Pleasant Valley , Barshaw struggled to integrate with settler life . She gave birth to two of Alder 's children , but both died in infancy . The couple decided the Great Spirit was opposed to their marriage , and separated . Alder gave Barshaw most of the couple 's property , including the cabin , all of the cows , seven horses , and about $ 200 in silver . Alder kept only two horses and the hogs . 
 After some time Alder developed interest in his original family in Virginia . A companion , John Moore , learned that Alder had been taken prisoner near Greenbrier , and traveled to Wythe County to search for Alder 's family . Initial inquiries were unsuccessful , but one of a series of advertisements Moore placed in the district was seen by Alder 's surviving brother Paul . Paul then wrote Jonathan to inform him that the family was still alive . 
 Alder left for Paul 's house , with Moore , in November 1805 . He and Moore arrived in Virginia the Sunday after New Year , and Alder was reunited with his biological mother and siblings . Alder stayed with his family in Virginia for over a year , and while visiting his family he met and fell in love with Mary Ann <unk> , a woman from Virginia . The couple were married on January 6 , 1806 , and in August 1806 , Alder , <unk> , and the rest of Alder 's family returned to Pleasant Valley . Alder built another log cabin along the Big Darby Creek in 1806 , and he and Mary had 12 children between 1808 and 1830 . 
 = = Military career = = 
 During the War of 1812 , during the summer of 1812 or 1813 , Alder was elected captain of a company of 70 men formed in Plain City . With Frederick Loyd as his lieutenant , Alder 's company was ordered by the Governor to march about twenty miles north and build a blockhouse at Mill Creek , about three miles north of Marysville , Ohio , to protect the Darby settlements . The company built and garrisoned the blockhouse for a few weeks , but when a false alarm was sounded regarding Indians attacking the settlements , the men returned to their homes . This was the only fort ever constructed in Union County , and some of the foundation is still visible today . 
 After the war ended , Alder returned to the life of a farmer . He continued to visit the other former captives with whom he had become friends . In the fall of 1818 , Alder received a visit from Simon Kenton , to share and compare stories . The two discovered that they had much in common , and had been at many of the same battles , even if they had been on opposite sides . They met several times up until 1828 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Living out the rest of his days as a farmer , Jonathan Alder died on January 30 , 1849 , in Canaan Township , Madison County , Ohio , at the age of 75 . He had become a well @-@ known figure in the region , and is still remembered today with a school district , high school , and middle school named after him . A historical marker was erected by Ohio in front of Foster Chapel Cemetery at 39 ° 59 ′ 42 @.@ 31 ″ N 83 ° 15 ′ 48 @.@ 11 ″ W , near West Jefferson , where he is buried . The cabin Alder built in 1806 is now located at the Madison County Historical Society Museum in London . 
 = Ted Kaczynski = 
 Theodore John " Ted " Kaczynski ( / <unk> / ; born May 22 , 1942 ) , also known as the " Unabomber " , is an American domestic terrorist , anarchist , and mathematical prodigy . Between 1978 and 1995 , Kaczynski engaged in a nationwide bombing campaign against people involved with modern technology , planting or mailing numerous homemade bombs , ultimately killing a total of three people and injuring 23 others . He is also known for his wide @-@ ranging social critiques , which opposed industrialization and modern technology while advancing a nature @-@ centered form of anarchism . 
 Kaczynski was born and raised in Evergreen Park , Illinois . While growing up in Evergreen Park he was a child prodigy , excelling academically from an early age . Kaczynski was accepted into Harvard University at the age of 16 , where he earned an undergraduate degree . He subsequently earned a PhD in mathematics from the University of Michigan . He became an assistant professor at the University of California , Berkeley in 1967 at age 25 . He resigned two years later . 
 As a Harvard undergraduate , Kaczynski was among twenty @-@ two students who were research subjects in ethically questionable experiments conducted by psychology professor Henry Murray from late 1959 to early 1962 . 
 In 1971 , he moved to a remote cabin without electricity or running water , in Lincoln , Montana , where he lived as a recluse while learning survival skills in an attempt to become self @-@ sufficient . Seventeen years after beginning his mail bomb campaign , Kaczynski sent a letter to The New York Times on April 24 , 1995 and promised " to desist from terrorism " if the Times or the Washington Post published his manifesto , Industrial Society and Its Future ( the " Unabomber Manifesto " ) , in which he argued that his bombings were extreme but necessary to attract attention to the erosion of human freedom necessitated by modern technologies requiring large @-@ scale organization . 
 The Unabomber was the target of one of the Federal Bureau of Investigation 's costliest investigations . Before Kaczynski 's identity was known , the FBI used the title " UNABOM " ( <unk> & Airline <unk> ) to refer to his case , which resulted in the media calling him the Unabomber . The FBI ( as well as Attorney General Janet Reno ) pushed for the publication of Kaczynski 's " Manifesto " , which led to his sister @-@ in @-@ law , and then his brother , recognizing Kaczynski 's style of writing and beliefs from the manifesto , and tipping off the FBI . Kaczynski tried unsuccessfully to dismiss his court @-@ appointed lawyers because they wanted to plead insanity in order to avoid the death penalty , as Kaczynski did not believe he was insane . When it became clear that his pending trial would entail national television exposure for Kaczynski , the court entered a plea agreement , under which he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to life in prison with no possibility of parole . He has been designated a " domestic terrorist " by the FBI . Some anarcho @-@ primitivist authors , such as John Zerzan and John Moore , have come to his defense , while also holding some reservations about his actions and ideas . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kaczynski was born on May 22 , 1942 , in Evergreen Park , Illinois , to second @-@ generation Polish Americans Wanda ( née <unk> ) and Theodore Richard Kaczynski . At six months of age , Kaczynski 's body developed a severe case of hives . He was placed in isolation in a hospital where visitors were not allowed , as physicians were unsure of the cause of the hives . He was treated several times at the hospital over an eight @-@ month period . His mother wrote in March 1943 , " Baby home from hospital and is healthy but quite unresponsive after his experience . " 
 Kaczynski attended grades one through eight in Evergreen Park District 124 Schools . As a result of testing conducted in the fifth grade , which determined he had an IQ of 167 , he was allowed to skip the sixth grade and enroll in the seventh grade . Kaczynski described this as a pivotal event in his life . He recalled not fitting in with the older children and being subjected to their bullying . As a child , Kaczynski had a fear of people and buildings , and played beside other children rather than interacting with them . His mother was so worried by his poor social development that she considered entering him in a study for autistic children led by Bruno Bettelheim . 
 He attended high school at Evergreen Park Community High School . Kaczynski excelled academically , but found the mathematics too simple during his second year . Sometimes he would cut classes and write in his journal in his room . During this period of his life , Kaczynski became obsessed with mathematics , spending prolonged hours locked in his room practicing differential equations . Throughout secondary schooling , Kaczynski had far surpassed his classmates , able to solve advanced Laplace transforms before his senior year . He was subsequently placed in a more advanced mathematics class , yet still felt intellectually restricted . Kaczynski soon mastered the material and skipped the eleventh grade . With the help of a summer school course for English , he completed his high school education when he was 15 years old . He was encouraged to apply to Harvard University , and was subsequently accepted as a student beginning in 1958 at the age of 16 . While at Harvard , Kaczynski was taught by famed logician Willard Van Orman Quine , scoring at the top of Quine 's class with a 98 @.@ 9 % final grade . 
 In his sophomore year at Harvard , Kaczynski participated in a personality assessment study conducted by Henry Murray , an expert on stress interviews . Students in Murray 's study were told they would be debating personal philosophy with a fellow student . Instead , they were subjected to a " purposely brutalizing psychological experiment " . During the test , students were taken into a room and connected to electrodes that monitored their physiological reactions , while facing bright lights and a one @-@ way mirror . Each student had previously written an essay detailing their personal beliefs and aspirations : the essays were turned over to an anonymous attorney , who would enter the room and individually belittle each student based in part on the disclosures they had made . This was filmed , and students ' expressions of impotent rage were played back to them several times later in the study . According to author Alston Chase , Kaczynski 's records from that period suggest he was emotionally stable when the study began . Kaczynski 's lawyers attributed some of his emotional instability and dislike of mind control techniques to his participation in this study . Indeed , some have suggested that this experience may have been instrumental in Kaczynski 's future actions . 
 = = Career = = 
 Kaczynski graduated from Harvard University in 1962 , at age 20 , and subsequently enrolled at the University of Michigan , where he earned a PhD in mathematics . Kaczynski 's specialty was a branch of complex analysis known as geometric function theory . His professors at Michigan were impressed with his intellect and drive . " He was an unusual person . He was not like the other graduate students , " said Peter Duren , one of Kaczynski 's math professors at Michigan . " He was much more focused about his work . He had a drive to discover mathematical truth . " " It is not enough to say he was smart , " said George <unk> , another of his Michigan math professors . Kaczynski earned his PhD with his thesis entitled " Boundary Functions " by solving a problem so difficult that even <unk> could not solve it . Maxwell Reade , a retired math professor who served on Kaczynski 's dissertation committee , also commented on his thesis by noting , " I would guess that maybe 10 or 12 men in the country understood or appreciated it . " In 1967 , Kaczynski won the University of Michigan 's Sumner B. Myers Prize , which recognized his dissertation as the school 's best in mathematics that year . While a graduate student at Michigan , he held a National Science Foundation fellowship and taught undergraduates for three years . He also published two articles related to his dissertation in mathematical journals , and four more after leaving Michigan . 
 In late 1967 , Kaczynski became an assistant professor of mathematics at the University of California , Berkeley , where he taught undergraduate courses in geometry and calculus . He was also noted as the youngest professor ever hired by the university , but this position proved short @-@ lived . Kaczynski received numerous complaints and low ratings from the undergraduates he taught . Many students noted that he seemed quite uncomfortable in a teaching environment , often stuttering and mumbling during lectures , becoming excessively nervous in front of a class , and ignoring students during designated office hours . Without explanation , he resigned from his position in 1969 , at age 26 . At the time , the chairman of the mathematics department , J. W. Addison , called this a " sudden and unexpected " resignation . In 1996 , vice chairman Calvin Moore said that , given Kaczynski 's " impressive " thesis and record of publications , " He could have advanced up the ranks and been a senior member of the faculty today . " 
 = = Move to Montana = = 
 In mid @-@ 1969 , Kaczynski moved into his parents ' small residence in Lombard , Illinois . Two years later , he moved into a remote cabin he built himself just outside Lincoln , Montana , where he lived a simple life on very little money , without electricity or running water . Kaczynski worked odd jobs and received financial support from his family , which he used to purchase his land and , without their knowledge , would later use to fund his bombing campaign . In 1978 , he worked briefly with his father and brother at a foam rubber factory , where he was fired by his brother , David , for harassing a female supervisor he had previously dated and who had refused him as a boyfriend for not " sharing much in common . " 
 Kaczynski 's original goal was to move out to a secluded place and become self @-@ sufficient so that he could live autonomously . He began to teach himself survival skills such as tracking , edible plant identification , and how to construct primitive technologies such as bow drills . After watching the wild land around him be destroyed by development and industry , he decided it was impossible to live in nature . He performed isolated acts of sabotage and initially targeted the developments near his cabin . The ultimate catalyst which drove him to begin his campaign of bombings was when he went out for a walk to one of his favorite wild spots , only to find that it had been destroyed and replaced with a road . About this , he said : 
 The best place , to me , was the largest remnant of this plateau that dates from the tertiary age . It 's kind of rolling country , not flat , and when you get to the edge of it you find these ravines that cut very steeply in to cliff @-@ like drop @-@ offs and there was even a waterfall there . It was about a two days ' hike from my cabin . That was the best spot until the summer of 1983 . That summer there were too many people around my cabin so I decided I needed some peace . I went back to the plateau and when I got there I found they had put a road right through the middle of it ... You just can 't imagine how upset I was . It was from that point on I decided that , rather than trying to acquire further wilderness skills , I would work on getting back at the system . Revenge . 
 He began dedicating himself to reading about sociology and books on political philosophy , such as the works of Jacques Ellul , and also stepped up his campaign of sabotage . He soon came to the conclusion that more violent methods would be the only solution to what he saw as the problem of industrial civilization . He says that he lost faith in the idea of reform , and saw violent collapse as the only way to bring down the techno @-@ industrial system . Regarding his switch from being a reformer of the system to developing a means of taking it down , he said : 
 I don 't think it can be done . In part because of the human tendency , for most people , there are exceptions , to take the path of least resistance . They 'll take the easy way out , and giving up your car , your television set , your electricity , is not the path of least resistance for most people . As I see it , I don 't think there is any controlled or planned way in which we can dismantle the industrial system . I think that the only way we will get rid of it is if it breaks down and collapses ... The big problem is that people don 't believe a revolution is possible , and it is not possible precisely because they do not believe it is possible . To a large extent I think the eco @-@ anarchist movement is accomplishing a great deal , but I think they could do it better ... The real revolutionaries should separate themselves from the reformers ... And I think that it would be good if a conscious effort was being made to get as many people as possible introduced to the wilderness . In a general way , I think what has to be done is not to try and convince or persuade the majority of people that we are right , as much as try to increase tensions in society to the point where things start to break down . To create a situation where people get uncomfortable enough that they 're going to rebel . So the question is how do you increase those tensions ? 
 = = Bombings = = 
 = = = Initial bombings = = = 
 Kaczynski 's activities came to the attention of the FBI in 1978 with the explosion of his first , primitive homemade bomb . Over the next 17 years , he mailed or hand @-@ delivered a series of increasingly sophisticated explosive devices that killed three people and injured 23 more . 
 The first mail bomb was sent in May 1978 to materials engineering professor Buckley Crist at Northwestern University . On May 25 , the package was found in a parking lot at the University of Illinois at Chicago , with Crist 's return address . The package was " returned " to Crist , but when Crist received the package , he noticed that it was not addressed in his own handwriting . Suspicious of a package he had not sent , he contacted campus police officer Terry Marker , who opened the package , which exploded immediately . Marker required medical assistance at Evanston Hospital for injuries to his left hand . 
 The bomb was made of metal that could have come from a home workshop . The primary component was a piece of metal pipe , about 1 inch ( 25 mm ) in diameter and 9 inches ( 230 mm ) long . The bomb contained smokeless explosive powders , and the box and the plugs that sealed the pipe ends were handcrafted from wood . In comparison , most pipe bombs usually use threaded metal ends sold in many hardware stores . Wooden ends lack the strength to allow significant pressure to build within the pipe , explaining why the bomb did not cause severe damage . The primitive trigger device that the bomb employed was a nail , tensioned by rubber bands designed to slam into six common match heads when the box was opened . The match heads would burst into flame and ignite the explosive powders . When the trigger hit the match heads , only three ignited . A more efficient technique , later employed by Kaczynski , was to use batteries and heat filament wire to ignite the explosives faster and more effectively . 
 The initial 1978 bombing was followed by bombs sent to airline officials , and in 1979 , a bomb was placed in the cargo hold of American Airlines Flight 444 , a Boeing 727 flying from Chicago to Washington , D.C. The bomb began smoking , forcing the pilot to make an emergency landing . Some passengers were treated for smoke inhalation . Only a faulty timing mechanism prevented the bomb from exploding . Authorities said it had enough power to " obliterate the plane " . 
 As bombing an airliner is a federal crime in the United States , the FBI became involved after this incident and derived the code name UNABOM ( <unk> and Airline <unk> ) . U.S. Postal Inspectors , who initially had the case , labeled the suspect the " Junkyard Bomber " because of the material used to make the mail bombs . In 1979 , an FBI @-@ led task force that included the ATF and U.S. Postal Inspection Service was formed to investigate the case . The task force grew to more than 150 full @-@ time investigators , analysts , and others . This team made every possible forensic examination of recovered components of the explosives and studied the lives of victims in minute detail . These efforts proved of little use in identifying the suspect , who built his bombs essentially from " scrap " materials available almost anywhere . The victims , investigators later learned , were chosen irregularly from library research . 
 In 1980 , chief agent John Douglas , working with agents in the FBI 's Behavioral Sciences Unit , issued a psychological profile of the unidentified bomber which described the offender as a man with above @-@ average intelligence with connections to academia . This profile was later refined to characterize the offender as a neo @-@ Luddite holding an academic degree in the hard sciences , but this psychologically based profile was discarded in 1983 in favor of an alternative theory developed by FBI analysts concentrating on the physical evidence in recovered bomb fragments . In this rival profile , the bomber suspect was characterized as a blue @-@ collar airplane mechanic . A 1 @-@ 800 hotline was set up by the UNABOM Task Force to take any calls related to the Unabomber investigation , with a $ 1 million reward for anyone who could provide information leading to the Unabomber 's capture . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The first serious injury occurred in 1985 , when John Hauser , a graduate student and captain in the United States Air Force , lost four fingers and vision in one eye . The bomb , like others of Kaczynski 's , was handcrafted and made with wooden parts . 
 Hugh Scrutton , a 38 @-@ year @-@ old Sacramento , California computer store owner , was killed in 1985 by a nail @-@ and @-@ splinter @-@ loaded bomb placed in the parking lot of his store . A similar attack against a computer store occurred in Salt Lake City , Utah on February 20 , 1987 . The bomb , which was disguised as a piece of lumber , injured Gary Wright when he attempted to remove it from the store 's parking lot . The explosion severed nerves in Wright 's left arm and propelled more than 200 pieces of shrapnel into his body . Kaczynski 's brother , David — who would play a vital role in Kaczynski 's capture by alerting federal authorities to the prospect of his brother 's being involved in the Unabomber cases — sought out and became friends with Wright after Kaczynski was detained in 1996 . David Kaczynski and Wright have remained friends and occasionally speak together publicly about their relationship . 
 After a six @-@ year break , Kaczynski struck again in 1993 , mailing a bomb to David Gelernter , a computer science professor at Yale University . Though critically injured , Gelernter eventually recovered . Another bomb mailed in the same weekend was sent to the home of Charles Epstein from the University of California , San Francisco , who lost several fingers upon opening it . Kaczynski then called Gelernter 's brother , Joel Gelernter , a behavioral geneticist , and told him , " You are next . " Geneticist Phillip Sharp at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology also received a threatening letter two years later . Kaczynski wrote a letter to The New York Times claiming that his " group , " called FC ( an acronym that stood for " Freedom Club " ) was responsible for the attacks . 
 In 1994 , Burson @-@ Marsteller executive Thomas J. Mosser was killed by a mail bomb sent to his North Caldwell , New Jersey home . In another letter to The New York Times , Kaczynski claimed that FC " blew up Thomas Mosser because ... Burston @-@ Marsteller [ sic ] helped Exxon clean up its public image after the Exxon Valdez incident " and , more importantly , because " its business is the development of techniques for manipulating people 's attitudes . " This was followed by the 1995 murder of Gilbert Brent Murray , president of the timber industry lobbying group California Forestry Association , by a mail bomb addressed to previous president William Dennison , who had retired . 
 In all , 16 bombs — which injured 23 people and killed three — were attributed to Kaczynski . While the devices varied widely through the years , all but the first few contained the initials " FC . " Inside his bombs , certain parts carried the inscription " FC , " which Kaczynski later asserted stood for " Freedom Club . " Latent fingerprints on some of the devices did not match the fingerprints found on letters attributed to Kaczynski . As stated in the " Additional Findings " section of the FBI affidavit ( where a balanced listing of other uncorrelated evidence and contrary determinations also appeared ) : 
 203 . Latent fingerprints attributable to devices mailed and / or placed by the UNABOM subject were compared to those found on the letters attributed to Theodore Kaczynski . According to the FBI Laboratory no forensic correlation exists between those samples . 
 One of Kaczynski 's tactics was leaving false clues in every bomb . He would make them hard to find deliberately to mislead investigators into thinking they had a clue . The first clue was a metal plate stamped with the initials " FC " hidden somewhere ( usually in the pipe end cap ) in every bomb . One false clue he left was a note in a bomb that did not detonate which reads " Wu — It works ! I told you it would — RV " . A more obvious clue was the Eugene O 'Neill $ 1 stamps used to send his boxes . One of his bombs was sent embedded in a copy of Sloan Wilson 's novel Ice Brothers . 
 The FBI theorized that Kaczynski had a theme of nature , trees and wood in his crimes . He often included bits of tree branch and bark in his bombs . Targets selected included Percy Wood , Professor Leroy Wood <unk> and Thomas Mosser . Crime writer Robert Graysmith noted , " in the Unabomber 's case a large factor was his obsession with wood . " 
 = = = List of bombings = = = 
 = = Industrial Society and Its Future = = 
 In 1995 , Kaczynski mailed several letters , including some to his victims and others to major media outlets , outlining his goals and demanding that his 50 @-@ plus page , 35 @,@ 000 @-@ word essay Industrial Society and Its Future , abbreviated to " Unabomber Manifesto " by the FBI , be printed verbatim by a major newspaper or journal . He stated that if this demand were met , he would then end his bombing campaign . The document was a densely written manifesto that called for a worldwide revolution against the effects of modern society 's " industrial @-@ technological system " . There was a great deal of controversy as to whether the document should be published , but the United States Department of Justice , along with FBI Director Louis Freeh and Attorney General Janet Reno , recommended publication out of concern for public safety and in hopes that a reader could identify the author . Bob Guccione of Penthouse volunteered to publish it , but Kaczynski replied that , since Penthouse was less " respectable " than the other publications , he would in that case " reserve the right to plant one ( and only one ) bomb intended to kill , after our manuscript has been published . " The pamphlet was finally published by The New York Times and The Washington Post on September 19 , 1995 . Penthouse never published it . 
 Throughout the manuscript , produced on a typewriter without the capacity for italics , Kaczynski capitalizes entire words in order to show emphasis . He always refers to himself as either " we " or " FC " ( Freedom Club ) , though there is no evidence that he worked with others . Donald Foster , who analyzed the writing at the request of Kaczynski 's defense , notes that the manuscript contains instances of irregular spelling and hyphenation , as well as other consistent linguistic idiosyncrasies ( which led him to conclude that it was indeed Kaczynski who wrote it ) . 
 Industrial Society and Its Future begins with Kaczynski 's assertion that " the Industrial Revolution and its consequences have been a disaster for the human race . " The first sections of the text are devoted to a discussion of the psychology of leftists and the negative consequences on individuals and small groups within the " industrial @-@ technological system . " Kaczynski writes that the industrial system has robbed contemporary humans of their autonomy , diminished their rapport with nature , and forced them " to behave in ways that are increasingly remote from the natural pattern of human behavior . " The later sections speculate about the future evolution of this system , arguing that it will inevitably lead to the end of human freedom , call for a " revolution against technology , " and attempt to indicate how that might be accomplished . 
 = = = Political and social views = = = 
 In his opening and closing sections , Kaczynski addresses <unk> as a movement and analyzes the psychology of leftists , arguing that they are " True Believers in Eric Hoffer 's sense " who participate in powerful social movements to compensate for their insecurity and feelings of inferiority : 
 When someone interprets as derogatory almost anything that is said about him ( or about groups with whom he identifies ) we conclude that he has inferiority feelings or low self @-@ esteem . This tendency is pronounced among minority rights advocates , whether or not they belong to the minority groups whose rights they defend . They are hypersensitive about the words used to designate minorities . ... Those who are most sensitive about " politically incorrect " terminology are not the average black ghetto @-@ dweller , Asian immigrant , abused woman or disabled person , but a minority of activists , many of whom do not even belong to any " oppressed " group but come from privileged strata of society . Political correctness has its stronghold among university professors , who have secure employment with comfortable salaries , and the majority of whom are heterosexual , white males from middle @-@ class families . 
 He goes on to explain how the nature of leftism is determined by the psychological consequences of " <unk> . " Kaczynski " attribute [ s ] the social and psychological problems of modern society to the fact that society requires people to live under conditions radically different from those under which the human race evolved and to behave in ways that conflict with the patterns of behavior that the human race developed while living under the earlier conditions . " He further specifies the primary cause of a long list of social and psychological problems in modern society as the disruption of the " power process , " which he defines as having four elements : 
 The moral code of our society is so demanding that no one can think , feel and act in a completely moral way . ... Some people are so highly socialized that the attempt to think , feel and act morally imposes a severe burden on them . In order to avoid feelings of guilt , they continually have to deceive themselves about their own motives and find moral explanations for feelings and actions that in reality have a non @-@ moral origin . We use the term " <unk> " to describe such people . 
 The three most clear @-@ cut of these we call goal , effort and attainment of goal . ( Everyone needs to have goals whose attainment requires effort , and needs to succeed in attaining at least some of his goals . ) The fourth element is more difficult to define and may not be necessary for everyone . We call it autonomy and will discuss it later . ... We divide human drives into three groups : ( 1 ) those drives that can be satisfied with minimal effort ; ( 2 ) those that can be satisfied but only at the cost of serious effort ; ( 3 ) those that cannot be adequately satisfied no matter how much effort one makes . The power process is the process of satisfying the drives of the second group . 
 Kaczynski goes on to claim that " [ i ] n modern industrial society natural human drives tend to be pushed into the first and third groups , and the second group tends to consist increasingly of artificially created drives . " Among these drives are " surrogate activities " , activities " directed toward an artificial goal that people set up for themselves merely in order to have some goal to work toward , or let us say , merely for the sake of the ' fulfillment ' that they get from pursuing the goal " . He argues that these surrogate activities are not as satisfactory as the attainment of " real goals " for " many , if not most people " . 
 He claims that scientific research is a surrogate activity for scientists , and that for this reason " science marches on blindly , without regard to the real welfare of the human race or to any other standard , obedient only to the psychological needs of the scientists and of the government officials and corporation executives who provide the funds for research . " 
 Kaczynski developed his philosophical ideas early in life , and up to the moment of the bombings , carried on an extensive ongoing debate with his brother David . Ted identified strongly with positivism , meaning that he strongly believed in an objective reality and that through sensory experience and analysis of this , one can obtain authentic knowledge . Kaczynski , throughout most of his earlier years ( the 1960s , <unk> , a distrust of " the system " , a desire for revolution ) remained " the intellectual outsider " and considered himself more important than others . 
 = = = = Perceived control methods = = = = 
 As mentioned above , the result of the " disruption of the power process " is the primary cause of various maladies in society ( e.g. , crime , depression , etc . ) . Kaczynski maintains that rather than recognizing that humans currently live in " conditions that make them terribly unhappy , " " the system " ( i.e. , industrial society ) develops ways of controlling human responses to the overly stressful environment in which they find themselves . 
 The following are current examples ( according to Kaczynski ) of this trend : 
 Imagine a society that subjects people to conditions that make them terribly unhappy , then gives them the drugs to take away their unhappiness . Science fiction ? It is already happening to some extent in our own society . It is well known that the rate of clinical depression had been greatly increasing in recent decades . We believe that this is due to disruption of the power process ... 
 The entertainment industry serves as an important psychological tool of the system , possibly even when it is dishing out large amounts of sex and violence . Entertainment provides modern man with an essential means of escape . While absorbed in television , videos , etc . , he can forget stress , anxiety , frustration , dissatisfaction . 
 Sylvan Learning Centers , for example , have had great success in motivating children to study , and psychological techniques are also used with more or less success in many conventional schools . " Parenting " techniques that are taught to parents are designed to make children accept fundamental values of the system and behave in ways that the system finds desirable . 
 = = = Historical views and predictions = = = 
 In the last sections of the manifesto , Kaczynski carefully defines what he means by freedom and provides an argument that it would " be hopelessly difficult ... to reform the industrial system in such a way as to prevent it from progressively narrowing our sphere of freedom " . He says that " in spite of all its technical advances relating to human behavior the system to date has not been impressively successful in controlling human beings " and predicts that " [ i ] f the system succeeds in acquiring sufficient control over human behavior quickly enough , it will probably survive . Otherwise it will break down " and that " the issue will most likely be resolved within the next several decades , say 40 to 100 years . " He gives various dystopian possibilities for the type of society which would evolve in the former case . He claims that revolution , unlike reform , is possible , and calls on sympathetic readers to initiate such revolution using two strategies : to " heighten the social stresses within the system so as to increase the likelihood that it will break down " and to " develop and propagate an ideology that opposes technology . " He gives various tactical recommendations , including avoiding the assumption of political power , avoiding any collaboration with leftists , and supporting free trade agreements in order to bind the world economy into a more fragile , unified whole . 
 = = = Related works and influences = = = 
 As a critique of technological society , the manifesto echoed contemporary critics of technology and industrialization , such as John Zerzan , Herbert Marcuse , Fredy Perlman , Jacques Ellul ( whose book The Technological Society was referenced in an 1971 essay by Kaczynski ) , Lewis Mumford , and Neil Postman . Its idea of the " disruption of the power process " similarly echoed social critics emphasizing the lack of meaningful work as a primary cause of social problems , including Lewis Mumford , Paul Goodman , and Eric Hoffer ( whom Kaczynski explicitly references ) . The general theme was also addressed by Aldous Huxley in his dystopian novel Brave New World , which Kaczynski references . The ideas of " <unk> " and " surrogate activities " recall Freud 's Civilization and Its Discontents and his theories of rationalization and sublimation ( the latter term being used three times in the manifesto , twice in quotes , to describe surrogate activities ) . 
 In a Wired article on the dangers of technology , titled " Why The Future Doesn 't Need Us , " Bill Joy , cofounder of Sun Microsystems , quoted Ray Kurzweil 's The Age of Spiritual Machines , which quoted a passage by Kaczynski on types of society that might develop if human labor were entirely replaced by artificial intelligence . Joy wrote that , although Kaczynski 's actions were " murderous , and , in my view , criminally insane " , that , " as difficult as it is for me to acknowledge , I saw some merit in the reasoning in this single passage . I felt compelled to confront it . " 
 Anders Behring Breivik , the Norwegian admitted perpetrator of the July 22 , 2011 bombing and massacre in Norway , published a manifesto in which large chunks of text were copied and pasted from the manifesto of Kaczynski , with certain terms substituted ( e.g. , replacing " leftists " with " cultural Marxists " and " <unk> " ) . 
 Bombshell ( Southern Methodist University Press , 2001 ) , a novel by Liza Wieland , is a fictional depiction of Kaczynski 's life and activities . In Wieland 's version of events , a bomber named The Professor has a daughter who recognizes her father 's writing and struggles with her moral and familial obligations . 
 Ted 's brother , David Kaczynski published his memoir , Every Last Tie : The Story of the Unabomber and his Family detailing what it was like to grow up with Ted , as well as the difficult decision that he and his wife faced when they grew to suspect that Ted was the Unabomber . 
 = = Search = = 
 Before the publication of the manifesto , Ted Kaczynski 's brother , David Kaczynski , was encouraged by his wife Linda to follow up on suspicions that Ted was the Unabomber . David Kaczynski was at first dismissive , but progressively began to take the likelihood more seriously after reading the manifesto a week after it was published in September 1995 . David Kaczynski browsed through old family papers and found letters dating back to the 1970s written by Ted and sent to newspapers protesting the abuses of technology and which contained phrasing similar to what was found in the Unabomber Manifesto . 
 Prior to the publishing of the manifesto , the FBI held numerous press conferences requesting the help of the public in identifying the Unabomber . They were convinced that the bomber was from the Chicago area ( where he began his bombings ) , had worked or had some connection in Salt Lake City , and by the 1990s was associated with the San Francisco Bay Area . This geographical information , as well as the wording in excerpts from the manifesto that were released prior to the entire manifesto being published , was what had persuaded David Kaczynski 's wife , Linda , to urge her husband to read the manifesto . 
 After the manifesto was published , the FBI received over a thousand calls a day for months in response to the offer of a $ 1 million reward for information leading to the identity of the Unabomber . There were also large numbers of letters mailed to the UNABOM Task Force that purported to be from the Unabomber , and thousands of suspect leads were sifted through . While the FBI was occupied with new leads , David Kaczynski first hired private investigator Susan Swanson in Chicago to investigate Ted 's activities discreetly . The Kaczynski brothers had become estranged in 1990 , and David had not seen Ted for ten years . David later hired Washington , D.C. attorney Tony Bisceglie to organize evidence acquired by Swanson and make contact with the FBI , given the likely difficulty in attracting the FBI 's attention . He wanted to protect his brother from the danger of an FBI raid , such as the Ruby Ridge or the Waco Siege , since he assumed Ted would not take kindly to being contacted by the FBI and would likely react irrationally or violently . 
 In early 1996 , former FBI hostage negotiator and criminal profiler Clinton R. Van Zandt was contacted by an investigator working with Tony Bisceglie . Bisceglie asked Van Zandt to compare the manifesto to typewritten copies of handwritten letters David had received from his brother . Van Zandt 's initial analysis determined that there was better than a 60 percent chance that the same person had written the letters as well as the manifesto , which had been in public circulation for half a year . Van Zandt 's second analytical team determined an even higher likelihood that the letters and the manifesto were the product of the same author . He recommended that Bisceglie 's client immediately contact the FBI . 
 In February 1996 , Bisceglie provided a copy of the 1971 essay written by Ted Kaczynski to the FBI . At the UNABOM Task Force headquarters in San Francisco , Supervisory Special Agent Joel Moss immediately recognized similarities in the writings . Linguistic analysis determined that the author of the essay papers and the manifesto were almost certainly the same . When combined with facts gleaned from the bombings and Kaczynski 's life , that analysis provided the basis for a search warrant . 
 David Kaczynski had attempted to remain anonymous at the outset , but he was swiftly identified , and within a few days an FBI agent team was dispatched to interview David and his wife with their attorney in Washington , D.C. At this and subsequent meetings with the team , David provided letters written by his brother in their original envelopes , so the use of postmark dates enabled the enhancement of the timeline of Ted Kaczynski 's activities being developed by the Task Force . David developed a respectful relationship with the primary Task Force behavioral analyst , Special Agent Kathleen M. Puckett , with whom he met many times in Washington , D.C. , Texas , Chicago , and Schenectady , New York , over the nearly two months before the federal search warrant was served on Kaczynski 's cabin . 
 David Kaczynski had once admired and emulated his older brother , but had later decided to leave the survivalist lifestyle behind . He had received assurances from the FBI that he would remain anonymous and that his brother would not learn who had turned him in , but his identity was leaked to CBS News in early April 1996 . CBS anchorman Dan Rather called FBI director Louis Freeh , who requested 24 hours before CBS broke the story on the evening news . The FBI scrambled to finish the search warrant and have it issued by a federal judge in Montana ; afterwards , an internal leak investigation was conducted by the FBI , but the source of the leak was never identified . In 1996 the Evergreen Park Community High School District No. 231 was also placed on lockdown while FBI agents searched Kaczynski 's school records . At the end of that school day , students were greeted by reporters asking how they felt about going to the same high school the Unabomber had attended . That night the news story was released to public . 
 Paragraphs 204 and 205 of the FBI search and arrest warrant for Ted Kaczynski stated that " experts " — many of them academics consulted by the FBI — believed the manifesto had been written by " another individual , not Theodore Kaczynski " . As stated in the affidavit , only a handful of people believed Kaczynski was the Unabomber before the search warrant revealed the cornucopia of evidence in Kaczynski 's isolated cabin . The search warrant affidavit written by FBI Inspector Terry D. <unk> reflects this conflict , and is striking evidence of the opposition to <unk> and his small cadre of FBI agents that included Moss and Puckett — who were convinced Kaczynski was the Unabomber — from the rest of the UNABOM Task Force and the FBI in general : 
 204 . Your <unk> is aware that other individuals have conducted analyses of the UNABOM Manuscript _ _ determined that the Manuscript was written by another individual , not Kaczynski , who had also been a suspect in the investigation . 
 205 . Numerous other opinions from experts have been provided as to the identity of the <unk> subject . None of those opinions named Theodore Kaczynski as a possible author . 
 = = Arrest = = 
 FBI agents arrested Kaczynski on April 3 , 1996 , at his remote cabin outside Lincoln , Montana , where he was found in an unkempt state . <unk> his cabin , the investigators found a wealth of bomb components , 40 @,@ 000 handwritten journal pages that included bomb @-@ making experiments and descriptions of the Unabomber crimes ; and one live bomb , ready for mailing . They also found what appeared to be the original typed manuscript of the manifesto . By this point , the Unabomber had been the target of one of the most expensive investigations in the FBI 's history . 
 After his capture , Kaczynski was among the several individuals who had been suspected of being the unidentified Zodiac Killer . Among the links that raised suspicion were the fact that Kaczynski lived in the San Francisco Bay Area from 1967 to 1969 ( the same period that most of the Zodiac 's confirmed killings occurred in California ) , both individuals were highly intelligent with an interest in bombs and codes , and both wrote letters to newspapers demanding the publication of their words with the threat of continued violence toward others if the demand was not met . However , his whereabouts could not be verified for all of the killings , and the gun and knife murders committed by the Zodiac Killer differ from Kaczynski 's bombings , so he was not further pursued as a suspect . Robert Graysmith of San Francisco , author of the 1986 book Zodiac , said the similarities are " fascinating " but undoubtedly purely coincidental . 
 In 1996 , a docudrama was produced titled Unabomber : The True Story , featuring actors Dean Stockwell as Ben Jeffries , Robert Hays as David Kaczynski and Tobin Bell as Ted Kaczynski . In this film a determined postal inspector was followed as he tracked down the suspect and also centered on Kaczynski 's brother , who played a key role in the investigation . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Kaczynski 's lawyers , headed by Montana federal defender Michael Donahoe and Judy Clarke , attempted to enter an insanity defense to save Kaczynski 's life , but Kaczynski rejected this plea . A court @-@ appointed psychiatrist diagnosed Kaczynski as suffering from paranoid schizophrenia , but declared him competent to stand trial . Kaczynski 's family said Ted would psychologically " shut down " when pressured . In the book Technological Slavery , Kaczynski recalls two prison psychologists , Dr. James Watterson and Dr. Michael Morrison , who visited him almost every day for a period of four years , who told him that they saw no indication that he suffered from any such serious mental illness , and that the diagnosis of his being paranoid schizophrenic was " ridiculous " and a " political diagnosis . " Dr. Morrison made remarks to him about psychologists and psychiatrists providing any desired diagnosis if they are well paid for doing so . 
 A federal grand jury indicted Kaczynski in April 1996 on 10 counts of illegally transporting , mailing , and using bombs . He was also charged with killing Scrutton , Mosser , and Murray . Initially , the government prosecution team indicated that it would seek the death penalty for Kaczynski after it was authorized by United States Attorney General Janet Reno . David Kaczynski 's attorney asked the former FBI agent who made the match between the Unabomber 's manifesto and Kaczynski to ask for leniency — he was horrified to think that turning his brother in might result in his brother 's death . Eventually , Kaczynski was able to avoid the death penalty by pleading guilty to all the government 's charges , on January 22 , 1998 . Later , Kaczynski attempted to withdraw his guilty plea , arguing it was involuntary . Judge Garland Ellis Burrell Jr. denied his request . The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit upheld that decision . 
 The early hunt for the Unabomber in the United States portrayed a perpetrator far different from the eventual suspect . The Unabomber Manifesto consistently uses " we " and " our " throughout , and at one point in 1993 investigators sought an individual whose first name was " Nathan " , due to a fragment of a note found in one of the bombs . However , when the case was finally presented to the public , authorities denied that there was ever anyone other than Kaczynski involved in the crimes . Explanations were later presented as to why Kaczynski targeted some of the victims he selected . 
 On August 10 , 2006 , Judge Garland Burrell Jr. ordered that personal items seized in 1996 from Kaczynski 's Montana cabin should be sold at a " reasonably advertised Internet auction . " Items the government considers to be bomb @-@ making materials , such as writings that contain diagrams and " recipes " for bombs , were excluded from the sale . The auctioneer paid the cost and kept up to 10 % of the sale price , and the rest of the proceeds must be applied to the $ 15 million in restitution that Burrell ordered Kaczynski to pay his victims . 
 Included among Kaczynski 's holdings which were auctioned are his original writings , journals , correspondences , and other documents allegedly found in his cabin ( for example , a copy of Strunk & White 's The Elements of Style ) . The judge ordered that all references in those documents that allude to any of his victims must be removed before they were sold . Kaczynski challenged those ordered redactions in court on First Amendment grounds , arguing that any alteration of his writings is an unconstitutional violation of his freedom of speech . 
 The auction concluded in June 2011 , and raised over $ 232 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Prison sentence = = 
 Kaczynski is serving eight life sentences without the possibility of parole as Federal Bureau of Prisons register number <unk> @-@ 046 at ADX Florence , the federal Administrative Maximum Facility <unk> in Florence , Colorado . When asked if he was afraid of losing his mind in prison , Kaczynski replied : 
 No , what worries me is that I might in a sense adapt to this environment and come to be comfortable here and not resent it anymore . And I am afraid that as the years go by that I may forget , I may begin to lose my memories of the mountains and the woods and that 's what really worries me , that I might lose those memories , and lose that sense of contact with wild nature in general . But I am not afraid they are going to break my spirit . 
 Kaczynski has been an active writer in prison . The Labadie Collection , part of the University of Michigan 's Special Collections Library , houses Kaczynski 's correspondence from over 400 people since his arrest in April 1996 , including carbon copy replies , legal documents , publications , and clippings . The names of most correspondents will be kept sealed until 2049 . Kaczynski has also been battling in federal court in Northern California over the auction of his journals and other correspondence . On January 10 , 2009 , the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco rejected Kaczynski 's arguments that the government 's sale of his writings violates his freedom of expression . His writings , books , and other possessions were sold online , and the money raised was sent to several of his victims . 
 Kaczynski 's cabin was removed and was to be destroyed . Kaczynski said he gave it to Charlotte <unk> , an investigator on Kaczynski 's defense team . It was seized by the U.S. government and is on display at the Newseum in Washington , D.C. In a three @-@ page handwritten letter to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit , Kaczynski objected to the public exhibition of the cabin , claiming it was being exhibited despite victims ' objections to the generation of publicity connected with the UNABOM case . 
 In a letter dated October 7 , 2005 , Kaczynski offered to donate two rare books to the Melville J. <unk> Library of African Studies at Northwestern University 's campus in Evanston , Illinois , the location of the first two attacks . The recipient , David Easterbrook , turned the letter over to the university 's archives . Northwestern rejected the offer , noting that the library already owned the volumes in English and did not desire duplicates . 
 On May 24 , 2012 , Kaczynski submitted his current information to the Harvard University alumni association . He listed his eight life sentences as " awards " and his current occupation as " prisoner . " 
 = Savile Row = 
 Savile Row ( pronounced / <unk> <unk> / ) is a street in Mayfair , central London . Known principally for its traditional bespoke tailoring for men , the street has had a varied history that has included accommodating the headquarters of the Royal Geographical Society at 1 Savile Row , where significant British explorations to Africa and the South Pole were planned ; and more recently , the Apple office of the Beatles at 3 Savile Row , where the band 's final live performance was held on the roof of the building . 
 Originally named Savile Street , it was built between 1731 and 1735 as part of the development of the Burlington Estate . It was designed under the influence of Burlington 's interpretation of Palladian architecture , known as " Burlingtonian " . Henry Flitcroft , under the supervision of Daniel Garrett , appears to have been the main architect – though 1 and 22 – 23 Savile Row were designed by William Kent . Initially , the street was occupied mainly by military officers and their wives ; later William Pitt the Younger and Irish @-@ born playwright and MP , Richard Brinsley Sheridan were residents . 
 Tailors started doing business in the area in the late 18th century ; first in Cork Street , about 1790 , then by 1803 in Savile Row itself . In 1846 , Henry Poole , later credited as the creator of the dinner jacket or tuxedo , opened an entrance to Savile Row from his tailoring premises in Old Burlington Street . In 1969 , Nutters of Savile Row modernised the style and approach of traditional Savile Row tailoring ; a modernisation that continued in the 1990s with the " New Bespoke Movement " , involving the designers Richard James , Ozwald Boateng , and Timothy Everest . The term " bespoke " as applied to fine tailoring is understood to have originated in Savile Row , and came to mean a suit cut and made by hand . 
 = = Location = = 
 Savile Row runs parallel to Regent Street between Conduit Street at the northern end and Vigo Street at the southern . Linking roads include New Burlington Place , New Burlington Street , Boyle Street , and Clifford Street . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 The freehold is owned by the Pollen Estate , who work in partnership with Westminster City Council to protect the street 's tailoring heritage under the Savile Row SPA ( Special Policy Area ) . 
 As of August 2014 , Norway ’ s Oil Fund , the world ’ s largest sovereign wealth fund , had acquired a 57 @.@ 8 % interest in the Pollen Estate . This includes properties in Mayfair , among which is Savile Row . 
 = = History = = 
 The first house in what would become Savile Row was " a fine House and Ground " , built in 1674 on the site of what is now No. 1 , and occupied by a series of nobles until it was demolished in 1730 in preparation for the laying out of the houses on the east of Savile Row in 1731 . Savile Row was built between 1731 and 1735 , on freehold land known as Ten Acres belonging to a merchant tailor , William Maddox , as part of the development of the Burlington Estate , and is named after Lady Dorothy Savile , wife of the 3rd Earl of Burlington . Maddox 's land , consisting mainly of fruit and other trees covering what would become Savile Row and the streets around , some of which is still owned by his descendants as the Pollen Estate . When initially laid out – under the name Saville Street – Savile Row ran from Burlington Gardens ( then Vigo Lane ) to Boyle Street , with houses only on the east side , but in the 19th century , houses were built on the west side . 
 = = = Nineteenth century = = = 
 Initially , the street was occupied by military officers and their wives , along with politicians : William Pitt the Younger wrote letters from the street when it was called Savile Street ; Irish @-@ born playwright and MP , Richard Brinsley Sheridan lived at 14 Savile Row for a short time , before his death at 7 Savile Row in 1816 . Jules Verne had Phileas Fogg , his lead character in Around the World in Eighty Days , live at 7 Savile Row – a " fashionable address " and " the former home of Sheridan " . It may have been the affluent and influential nature of the residents of Savile Row that first attracted dealers in luxury goods to the area . Tailors started to take premises around Savile Row in the late 18th century , first in Cork Street , about 1790 , then by 1803 in Savile Row itself . In 1846 , Henry Poole , credited as creator of the dinner jacket or tuxedo , opened an entrance at 37 Savile Row from his late father 's tailoring premises at 4 Old Burlington Street . As tailoring moved into the street , the house frontages were altered to bring natural light into the tailors ' working area with the addition of glass frontages and light wells . The houses have been much altered over time ; the original Burlingtonian design has been mostly lost , though No. 14 still retains much of the original external features . 
 = = = Royal Geographical Society = = = 
 The Royal Geographical Society occupied No. 1 from 1870 to 1912 , from where significant British exploration was planned , including into Asia , Africa , and the South Pole ; and , according to the society , the address " became associated with adventure and travel " . David Livingstone was laid out in state at the society 's headquarters , before being buried in Westminster Abbey . In 1871 , shortly after the Royal Geographical Society moved into Savile Row , so did the Savile Club ; a gentlemen 's club founded in 1868 as the New Club , occupying rooms overlooking Trafalgar Square ; it changed to its current name during its residence at 12 Savile Row , retaining the name when it moved in 1882 to premises in Piccadilly . 
 = = = Twentieth century = = = 
 Savile Row was extended to Conduit Street in 1937 – 38 , and by 1939 , the Metropolitan Police Station was constructed on the corner of Boyle Street . This police station was damaged in another German bombing raid in September 1940 , during which the building opposite , No. 21a , was destroyed , as was No. 7 earlier that month . Fortress House , an eight @-@ storey block of offices faced with Portland stone , was constructed at 23 Savile Row in 1949 @-@ 50 and occupied by a series of government ministries , ending with a long period of occupation by English Heritage until 2006 . It was demolished in 2009 and replaced by a new mixed @-@ use development designed by Eric Parry , Architects . 
 In July 1968 , the Beatles moved Apple Corps , their multimedia corporation , into 3 Savile Row . A studio was built in the basement ; though it was poorly designed , the Beatles recorded Let It Be there before a new studio was constructed in 1971 at an estimated cost of $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Various artists , including Badfinger , Mary Hopkin , and Marc Bolan recorded in the basement studio until it closed in May 1975 . The Beatles ' final live performance , known as the " rooftop concert " , was held on the roof of the building , on 30 January 1969 , and was recorded for the documentary film Let It Be ; the last words of the band , spoken by John Lennon as the police stopped the performance , were " I hope we passed the audition . " 
 In 1969 , Nutters of Savile Row modernised the style and approach of the traditional tailors ; a modernisation which continued in the 1990s with the " New Bespoke Movement " , involving the designers Richard James , Ozwald Boateng , and Timothy Everest . With increasing rents and criticisms from Giorgio Armani of falling behind the times , the number of tailors in Savile Row had declined to 19 in 2006 , from approximately 40 in the 1950s . However , tailoring businesses have increased since 2006 ; as of October 2014 , a local online directory listed 44 tailoring and clothing businesses on and around Savile Row . Some tailors had expressed concern in 2005 that an increase in commercial development in the area could lead to the death of the business locally , as tailors , many of whom traditionally manufacture their suits in their premises , in basement studios , could be priced out of the local property market . The Savile Row Bespoke Association was founded in 2004 to protect and develop bespoke tailoring as practised in Savile Row and the surrounding streets . The member tailors are typically required to put at least 50 hours of hand labour into each two @-@ piece suit . The Association , along with the owners , the Pollen Estate , is working in partnership with Westminster Council to protect the street 's tailoring heritage under the Savile Row SPA ( Special Policy Area ) . 
 The Association objected to the American retailer Abercrombie & Fitch 's plan to open a children 's store at 3 Savile Row , concerned that chain stores entering the street would drive up rents , and took part in , what was then , a successful protest in 2012 . However , A & F were allowed to move in and set up a children 's store in 2013 . A & F again attracted criticism in January 2015 for its store 's colour scheme : brown . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The original architectural plan for Savile Row is believed to have been drawn up by Colen Campbell , with Henry Flitcroft as the main architect of the street , under the supervision of Daniel Garrett ; though 1 and 22 – 23 Savile Row were designed by William Kent , who moved into No. 2 . These architects were all under the influence of Burlington 's interpretation of Palladian architecture , known as " Burlingtonian " , which was to have some influence on English architecture in the 16th century . As tailoring moved into the street , the house frontages were altered to bring natural light into the tailors ' working area with the addition of glass frontages and light wells . The houses have been much altered over time ; the original Burlingtonian design has been mostly lost , though No. 14 still retains much of the original external features . When the Royal Geographical Society occupied No. 1 , they built a glass @-@ roofed map @-@ room in the courtyard , a small astronomical observatory on the roof , and a new portico – which may be the basis for the current appearance of the façade . 
 = = Tailoring = = 
 Savile Row 's reputation is built on bespoke tailoring , where each suit is made to individually fit . The term " bespoke " , which has an etymology developing from " to exclaim " through " discussed in advance " and is generally understood to mean " made to order " , became associated with fine tailoring , with tailors claiming that the term has been in common use for tailoring since the 17th century . Savile Row tailors argue that " bespoke " , in relation to tailoring , is understood to mean a suit cut and made by hand ; however , after a ruling by the Advertising Standards Authority in 2008 , the term may now also be applied to machine sewed garments , provided they are made @-@ to @-@ measure . Suits , at Kilgour & French , cost at least £ 5000 . The Creative Director Carlo <unk> makes no apologies for the cost . <unk> insists : " That the street ’ s tailors have been underselling themselves for generations , certainly compared to the couture houses of Paris . " 
 Customers of the " golden mile of tailoring " have included Lord Nelson , Napoleon III , Winston Churchill , Prince Charles , and Jude Law , but though it is sometimes reported that Ian Fleming and his character James Bond bought suits in Savile Row , there is no evidence for this in the novels ; both Fleming and the Bond film character wore suits designed by non @-@ Savile Row tailors , in particular Anthony Sinclair of nearby Conduit Street . 
 Tailors , attracted by the affluent and influential nature of the residents of Savile Row , started to open businesses in the area in the late 18th century , first in Cork Street , about 1790 , then by 1803 in Savile Row itself . None of those original tailors survive today , though Henry Poole & Co , who through Edward VII 's patronage , helped make the street fashionable , still have a presence in Savile Row . Poole moved the company into 32 Savile Row in 1846 , following the death of his father James Poole , and the company is now at No. 15 . Henry Poole is credited as creator of the dinner jacket , when he made a smoking jacket for the young Edward VII in 1860 . 
 Tailoring was softened in the early 20th century by Frederick <unk> when he developed the English drape for the Duke of Windsor . <unk> 's " dress soft " style was developed into the " London cut " , the house style of Anderson & Sheppard , by Per Anderson , a protégé of <unk> . The " London cut " is a high small armhole with a generous upper sleeve that permits the jacket to remain close to the neck while freeing the arm to move with comfort . 
 Though the reputation of tailoring on Savile Row is for made @-@ to @-@ measure suits , ready @-@ to @-@ wear clothes were introduced by <unk> & Hawkes , a company formed in 1974 by the merger of two separate businesses who both date from the late 19th century : <unk> , a Royal Navy tailor founded in Portsmouth ; and Hawkes , a London @-@ based cap @-@ maker and tailor to the British Army . Hardy Amies Ltd further broadened the scope and appeal of tailoring in Savile Row : in 1961 , he staged the first men 's ready @-@ to @-@ wear catwalk shows , at the Ritz Hotel in London , he designed costumes for the 1966 England World Cup team , and for the 1968 film 2001 : Space Odyssey , and dressed the Queen , designing the gown used for the Silver Jubilee portrait in 1977 . Hardy Amies founded the company in 1946 , converting the bombed out shell of No. 14 . Though Amies sold the business and retired in 2001 , the company is still operating from No. 14 , now under the control of Fung Capital . 
 Modernisation of tailoring continued in 1969 with Nutters of Savile Row . Nutters of Savile Row was opened on Valentine 's Day 1969 by Tommy Nutter and Edward Sexton , who had worked together at Donaldson , Williamson & Ward . Financially backed by Cilla Black and Peter Brown of the Beatles Apple Corps , Nutters used bold window displays , created by the then unknown Simon Doonan ; and clients included the Beatles , Mick Jagger , Elton John , and Andrew Lloyd Webber . Nutter left the company in 1976 and went to work at Kilgour . He died in 1992 . 
 Modernisation had slowed by the early 1990s ; Savile Row tailors were " struggling to find relevance with an audience that had grown increasingly disassociated " . Three tailors , Ozwald Boateng , Timothy Everest ( an apprentice of Nutter 's ) , and Richard James , then became known for revitalising the bespoke style for the modern market - having each broken away independently from the Savile Row mould . Public relations professional Alison Hargreaves coined the term " New Bespoke Movement " to describe collectively the work of this " new generation " of tailors . Interest reached a peak in 1997 when the three were featured together in Vanity Fair . The newcomers altered their shop fronts and used marketing and publicity to their advantage ; challenging the traditional Savile Row styling , they brought twists and " a fine sense of colour to bespoke suits . " They were seen to " push the envelope of modern suit making and bespoke active wear , creating more contemporary silhouettes with bolder fabrics , " and set out to attract celebrity clients , sell their clothing via supermarket chains , and attract wider national and international custom , raising the profile of their new tailoring style . 
 = Final Fantasy XII = 
 Final Fantasy XII ( <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī <unk> ) is a fantasy role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square Enix for the PlayStation 2 home video console . Released in 2006 , it is the twelfth title in the mainline Final Fantasy series . The game introduced several innovations to the series : an open world split into zones , a seamless battle system , a controllable camera , a customizable " gambit " system which lets the player control the artificial intelligence ( AI ) of characters in battle ; and a " license " system that determines which abilities and equipment are used by characters . Final Fantasy XII also includes elements from previous games in the series such as summoned monsters , Chocobos , and Moogles . 
 The game takes place in the fictional land of Ivalice , where the empires of Archadia and Rozarria are waging an endless war . Dalmasca , a small kingdom , is caught between the warring nations . When Dalmasca is annexed by Archadia , its princess , Ashe , creates a resistance movement . During the struggle , she meets Vaan , a young adventurer who dreams of becoming a sky pirate in command of an airship . They are quickly joined by a band of allies ; together , they rally against the tyranny of the Archadian Empire . 
 Final Fantasy XII received critical acclaim , earning numerous " Game of the Year " awards in various categories from noted video game publications . Selling more than two million copies in Japan , it became the fourth best @-@ selling PlayStation 2 game of 2006 worldwide . By November 2009 , over 6 million copies of the game were sold worldwide . A sequel , Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings , was released for the Nintendo DS in 2007 . A high @-@ definition remaster of the International Zodiac Job System version , subtitled The Zodiac Age , will be released worldwide for the PlayStation 4 in 2017 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Throughout the game , the player directly controls the on @-@ screen character from a third @-@ person perspective to interact with people , objects , and enemies . Unlike previous games in the series , the player can also control the camera with the right analog stick , allowing for a 360 ° view of the surroundings . While in towns and cities , the player may only see from the perspective of Vaan , but any character may be controlled in the field . The world of Final Fantasy XII is rendered to scale relative to the characters in it ; instead of a caricature of the character roaming around miniature terrain , as found in the earlier Final Fantasy games , every area is represented proportionally . The player navigates the overworld on foot , Chocobo , or by airship . Players may save their game to a memory card using save crystals or gate crystals , and may use the latter to teleport between gate crystals . An in @-@ game bestiary provides incidental information about the world of Final Fantasy XII . 
 Final Fantasy XII restructures the system of earning gil , the currency of the Final Fantasy games ; instead of gil , most enemies drop " loot " which can be sold at shops . This ties into a new battle mechanic which rewards the player with improved loot for slaying a particular type of enemy multiple times in a row . Selling different types of loot also unlocks a bazaar option in shops , which provides items at a lower cost , or items exclusive to the bazaar . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 Excluding the MMORPG Final Fantasy XI , Final Fantasy XII is the first entry in the main Final Fantasy series not to include random encounters . Instead , enemies are visible in the overworld and the player may choose to fight or avoid them . Battles unfold in real time using the " Active Dimension Battle " ( ADB ) system . Battles begin when the party comes within range of an aggressive enemy , the party attacks an enemy , or a story event initiates a confrontation . When a character or enemy begins an action , target lines connect characters to other party members or enemies ; different colors represent the different types of action . The player may swap to and issue commands to any of the three characters in the party , but guest characters are controlled by artificial intelligence ( AI ) . Battle commands are initiated through a series of menus , and include Attack , Magicks & <unk> , Mist , Gambits , and Items . The player may switch any active character with an inactive character at any time , unless the active character is targeted by an attack or ability . Characters who are knocked out may also be substituted . 
 A new feature in Final Fantasy XII is the " gambit " system , which allows the player to program each character to perform certain commands in battle in response to specified conditions . Using gambits , the player may set reactions to different stimuli for each character . Each gambit consists of three parts : a target , an action , and a priority . The target specifies which ally or foe to act on and the condition for applying the action . For example , the target " Ally : HP < 70 % " causes the character to target any ally whose hit points have fallen below 70 % . The action is the command to be performed on the target . The priority determines which gambit to perform when multiple gambits are triggered . These heuristics guide the characters when acting autonomously , though player @-@ directed commands are always given top priority . 
 In Final Fantasy XII , a mysterious phenomenon known as " Mist " is the key energy which allows characters to cast summoning magic and perform " Quickenings " . After defeating an Esper in combat , the player will be able to summon it to the battlefield . Similar to Final Fantasy X , the summoned creatures become active participants in battle , as opposed to the cinematic attacks seen in previous games in the series . Unlike Final Fantasy X , however , Espers follow hidden gambits , rather than the player 's direct command . The summoner remains an active member in the fight , able to attack and cast support magic , instead of leaving the party or standing idle while the summoned creature fights . An Esper will leave the battle if either the summoner or itself is knocked out , its time limit expires , or it executes its special attack . Some Espers have origins in Final Fantasy Tactics and Final Fantasy Tactics Advance and others are derived from the final bosses of previous Final Fantasy games such as Chaos , the final boss of the first Final Fantasy , and Zeromus , the final boss of Final Fantasy IV . 
 Final Fantasy XII introduces " Quickenings " , a new Limit Break system unique compared to those in previous games in the series . Characters learn Quickenings by progressing to specific panels on the License Board . Each character can learn three Quickenings , which are unique to that character . Characters may string together Quickenings into large combo attacks , called Mist Chains , via timed button presses . If a Mist Chain reaches a certain length , a final strike will be initiated at the end of the Quickening cycle , called a Concurrence . 
 = = = Growth system = = = 
 As in many role @-@ playing games , characters " level up " each time they earn a set number of experience points from defeating enemies ; each level gained increases the character 's statistics and improves performance in battle . Statistics include hit points , the amount of damage a character can receive ; strength , the power of the character 's physical attacks ; and magic , the potency of the character 's magical spells . 
 In addition to leveling up , players may improve their characters via the License Board . The License Board is an array of panels that contain " licenses " which allow a character to perform certain actions . The board is split into two parts ; the upper part comprises Magick , <unk> , Accessory , and Augment ( stat increases and other permanent buffs ) licenses , and the bottom part comprises mostly Weapon and Armor licenses . To use a Magick , <unk> , or piece of equipment , the character must obtain its corresponding license by spending the required amount of LP ( License Points ) . LP are earned in battle along with the experience points . Like the Sphere Grid in Final Fantasy X , all characters may obtain all licenses on the board ; however , each Quickening and Esper license may only be activated by a single character . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Final Fantasy XII is set within the land of Ivalice during an age when " magic was commonplace " and " airships plied the skies , crowding out the heavens " . At this time , magicite , a magic @-@ rich mineral , is commonly used in magic spells and in powering airships — a popular form of transportation in Ivalice . Ivalice is divided into three continents : Ordalia , Valendia , and Kerwon . Ordalia is located in the western part of Ivalice . The Rozarrian Empire makes its home in the vast inland plains of this continent as the eastern portion of it is largely desert or " <unk> " — lawless regions so rich in Mist , the ethereal manifestation of magicite , that airships cannot function . Valendia is the home of Imperial Archadia , where lush highlands dot the landscape . Central to the story is Dalmasca , a small kingdom between the two continents and empires . Located in the middle of the Galtean Peninsula of Ordalia , Dalmasca is surrounded by an expanse of desert . The temperate climate of Dalmasca differs from the cold environs of Kerwon to the south and the lush plains of Valendia and Ordalia . During this time , Ivalice is beset by the pending war between the forces of Rozarria and Archadia . Caught between the two powerful Empires , Dalmasca and a number of smaller nations have already been subjugated by Archadia two years before the game begins . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The six main playable characters in Final Fantasy XII are Vaan , an energetic orphan of Rabanastre who dreams of becoming a sky pirate ; Ashe , a determined princess of Dalmasca who lost her father and her husband in the Archadian invasion ; Basch , a disgraced knight of Dalmasca charged with treason for slaying the king ; Balthier , a gentlemanly sky pirate who pilots his airship , the Strahl ; Fran , Balthier 's partner and a Viera exile whose knowledge extends to legends and myths ; and Penelo , Vaan 's childhood friend who accompanies him on journeys to " keep an eye on him " . 
 The Archadian Empire is ruled by House Solidor , headed by Emperor Gramis . The emperor 's sons are Vayne and Larsa , the former a military genius and the latter a charismatic seeker of peace . Judge <unk> , upholders of Archadian law , protect House Solidor and execute every command issued by the ruling family . The technological marvels of airships and synthetic nethicite — a form of magicite that absorbs Mist — are thanks to Doctor Cid , a prominent researcher from Archadia . The Resistance against Archadia includes Dalmascan knight Vossler , an ally of Basch ; Marquis Halim Ondore IV , the game 's narrator and ruler of the <unk> Bhujerba ; Reddas , a sky pirate based in the port at Balfonheim ; and the Rozarrian Empire , of which Al @-@ Cid Margrace is a prince of the ruling family . The mythos of Final Fantasy XII revolves around a character known as Dynast @-@ King Raithwall , a man who once united Ivalice to create the Galtean Alliance in ages past . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In Dalmasca 's capital city of Rabanastre , Princess Ashe of Dalmasca and Prince Rasler of Nabradia have just wed , as the Archadian Empire invades the two countries . Rasler is killed in the war , the city of Nabudis destroyed in a single explosion , and the Dalmascan king Raminas is assassinated moments after signing a treaty of surrender . Marquis Ondore announces that the assassin was Dalmascan captain Basch , who has been sentenced to death , and that Princess Ashe has committed suicide . 
 Two years later , Vaan , a Rabanastre street urchin , ignores his friend Penelo 's objections and infiltrates the palace during a dinner celebrating the appointment of Archadian prince Vayne Solidor as consul . In the treasury he finds a piece of magicite , a powerful magical crystal . He is discovered by Balthier and Fran , a pair of sky pirates looking for the magicite . The three escape as Dalmascan Resistance forces assault the palace , and in the sewers they meet the Resistance leader , Amalia , before being captured by Archadian forces . Detained in the Nalbina dungeons , they meet Basch , who was imprisoned but not killed , and who claims his twin brother Gabranth was the one to kill the king . The four escape together with the help of Penelo , and flee to the floating city of Bhujerba . 
 In Bhujerba , they meet Lamont , a curious boy who is Vayne 's younger brother , Larsa , in disguise . Basch confronts the Marquis over his lies , but the party is captured and detained aboard the Archadian airship Leviathan , headed by Judge Ghis . On the Leviathan , the party is reunited with Amalia , who is revealed to be Princess Ashe . Ghis takes the magicite , which is revealed to be a royal Dalmascan artifact , " deifacted nethicite " , from Vaan to send to Archadia . The party escapes the airship , but as Ashe had planned to use the magicite as proof that she was the princess , the group makes plans to collect another of the pieces of nethicite , the Dawn Shard . They do so , but are again captured by Ghis ; when he tries to use the Dawn Shard in the Leviathan rather than the " manufacted " magicite it normally uses , his entire airship fleet is destroyed in a mirror of the destruction of Nabudis , and the party flees again . 
 The party encounters Larsa , who seeks a peace treaty between Dalmasca and the empire . Convinced , Ashe and the group go to Mt . Bur @-@ Omisace to seek the Gran Kiltias Anastasis , Ivalice 's religious leader , and beg his approval of her as queen of Dalmasca . There , they also meet Al @-@ Cid Margrace , a member of the Rozarrian Empire ruling family , who is seeking to avert a war between Rozarria and Archadia and is in talks with Larsa . Their plans are curtailed when Anastasis is killed by Archadia , and soon afterwards the Archadian emperor dies and Vayne ascends the throne . 
 After retrieving the Sword of Kings , which can destroy nethicite , the party journeys to Archadia to retrieve Larsa , who has been taken . There they discover Doctor Cid , who created manufacted magicite , and who directs them to go to Giruvegan as it is the source of nethicite . In Giruvegan , only Ashe can enter the final area , where she encounters the makers of nethicite , the immortal Occuria , who " pull the strings of history " ; they give her the Treaty Blade to cut new pieces of nethicite from the Sun @-@ cryst , the source of all nethicite and its power . She learns that one of the Occuria has defected to put the " reins of History back in the hands of Man " , and led Cid to create manufacted magicite to reduce the relative power of the Occuria . Archadia 's expansion campaign was a front to capture the existing shards of nethicite . 
 Ashe and the party journey to Pharos tower , the location of the Sun @-@ cryst , where she decides not to take her revenge by following the Occuria 's wishes , but instead destroy the Sun @-@ cryst . The party defeats Gabranth , who admits to having killed King Raminas , and then Cid , before destroying the crystal . The group later learns from Al @-@ Cid that the Dalmascan Resistance , led by Ondore , is about to fight Archadia in Rabanastre , but the Archadian forces now include the Sky Fortress Bahamut , powered by the Mist released by the destruction of the Sun @-@ Cryst . They infiltrate the Bahamut , and find Larsa attempting to dissuade his brother Vayne from his plans for war . They defeat Vayne and Venat , and Ashe and Larsa announce the end of the conflict to the battlefield . Larsa becomes the Archadian emperor and Ashe the Queen of Dalmasca ; Basch replaces his brother Gabranth as Larsa 's protector ; Vaan and Penelo fly an airship to meet Balthier and Fran for another adventure . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development for Final Fantasy XII began in December 2000 and was headed by Final Fantasy Tactics director Yasumi Matsuno and Final Fantasy IX director Hiroyuki Ito . Matsuno provided the original concept and plot but was forced to bow out of his roles midway through production due to health concerns . The team was restructured as a consequence : the new directorial duo consisted of Ito and Hiroshi Minagawa , while Akitoshi Kawazu of SaGa series fame became the game 's executive producer . Series creator Hironobu Sakaguchi was disappointed by Matsuno 's departure and declined to play the game beyond its introduction . 
 The desire to move away from random encounters was present since the beginning of development . This desire fueled the development of the Active Dimension Battle system so players could seamlessly move from battle to exploration . The gambit system was conceived early on as a way to facilitate this change . Battle system designer Hiroshi <unk> states that it gradually moved away from a complex and rigid formula to the more flexible form seen in the final version of the game . Ito drew inspiration for gambits from plays in American football where each team member has a specific job to do based on the conditions and desired outcome . As for the license system , he explained that needing " licenses " to perform certain actions was a natural extension of the rigid structured society of Archadia , as epitomized by its Judges . 
 At the early stages of development , Minagawa revealed that numerous ideas and features were planned for the game , but were dropped from the final stages due to certain constraints and hardware limitations . Some of these included the ability for a second player to join in the gameplay , enabling a two @-@ player mode . Another idea that was given a considerable amount of thought was the ability to recruit non @-@ player characters to join in the mob hunts . Due to the technical limitations of the console and multiple number of characters joining the fray , the development phase took longer than expected , causing delays . 
 Design inspiration came from a mix of medieval Mediterranean countries as demonstrated by the architectural styles found throughout Ivalice along with many of the races populating the region . The art team , led by art directors Hideo Minaba and Isamu <unk> , visited Turkey , which influenced the game 's Mediterranean @-@ style setting . The developers also used styles and deco from other sources including areas in India and New York City . Of note is the use of Sanskrit in the city of Bhujerba . Phrases such as " <unk> " ( welcome ) and titles like " <unk> " ( guide ) are lifted directly from Sanskrit . Minaba mentions that the team tried to bring out Arabic culture in the design of the game . War is a prominent theme of the game and the developers stated that the cutscene battles are influenced by Ancient Rome . When asked to comment on the fan observation of a Star Wars influence , Minaba replied that although he was a fan of the series , it was not necessarily an influence to the game 's designs . 
 Basch was initially meant to be the main protagonist of the story , but the focus was eventually shifted to Vaan and Penelo when the two characters were created later in development . The development team explained that their previous game , Vagrant Story , which featured a " strong man in his prime " as the protagonist had been unsuccessful and unpopular ; the change regarding Final Fantasy XII from a " big and tough " protagonist to a younger , youthful one was thus decided after targeting demographics were considered . With the casting of actor Kouhei Takeda for the voice acting and motion capture , Vaan became less feminine and more " active , upbeat bright and positive " . Comments were made about the similarity between main character designer and background design supervisor Akihiko Yoshida 's creations and those of Tetsuya Nomura , another Square Enix character designer . Yoshida feels this connection is sparked by the style of color used by both artists , which involves a color consistency between the characters and the environments . The designers stated that non @-@ human characters and races feature a prominent role in the game , which was influenced by an interest in history among the developers . 
 Miwa Shoda wrote a storyline for the game premised on the basis of the cutscenes and world setting that had already been finished when she joined the team . Scenario writer Daisuke Watanabe in turn fleshed out Shoda 's plot into a script . During the English localization process , Alexander O. Smith , who had previously worked on Vagrant Story and Final Fantasy X , acted as producer and translator . While still preserving the meaning behind the Japanese script , Smith made the decision to use different dialects of English to reproduce the regional differences in pronunciation found in the Japanese version . He also tried to distance the game from the " flat reads " found in other dubbed work by casting voice actors who had experience in theatre work . In terms of general changes , the localization team introduced widescreen 16 : 9 ratio support and reinserted scenes that were left out of the original Japanese version for political reasons and to preserve an " All Ages " CERO rating . 
 On November 15 , 2005 , a playable demo of the game was shipped with the North American release of Dragon Quest VIII . To commemorate the release of Final Fantasy XII , playable demos of the English version were available at <unk> 's Gaming Pavilion in New York on October 11 , 2006 , a day dubbed " Final Fantasy XII Gamer 's Day " . Additionally , Square Enix gave fans the chance to cosplay as characters from Final Fantasy XII . Each person was asked to show Square Enix three photos of his or her costume for a chance to win a trip to New York and participate in the Final Fantasy XII Gamer 's Day event . 
 As of July 30 , 2008 , Final Fantasy XII holds the Guinness World Record for longest development period in a video game production . The record states it took a total of five years , spanning from 2001 until its release in 2006 . At a Final Fantasy XII " postmortem " at MIT in March 2009 , Hiroshi Minagawa mentioned that several years of production were devoted to the creation of custom tools used for the development of the game . It was also listed as 8th on the Guinness top 50 games of all time in 2009 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Hitoshi Sakimoto composed and arranged most of the game 's soundtrack , with Hayato Matsuo and Masaharu Iwata creating seven and two tracks respectively . Nobuo Uematsu , following his departure from Square Enix in 2004 , only contributed the ending song , " Kiss Me Goodbye " . Sakimoto experienced difficulty following in Uematsu 's footsteps , but he decided to create a unique soundtrack in his own way . " Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye " was performed in both English and Japanese by Angela Aki . Uematsu noted Aki 's style of playing the keyboard while singing reminded him of his childhood idol , Elton John , which was one of the reasons he chose her . The English version of the song was featured in both the Japanese and North American versions of the game . In addition to the theme song , violinist Taro Hakase co @-@ composed , arranged , and performed the game 's ending credits theme , Symphonic Poem " Hope " , along with Yuji Toriyama . 
 Two promotional soundtracks were released before the original soundtrack , Symphonic Poem " Hope " and The Best of the Final Fantasy XII Soundtrack , on March 1 and 15 , 2006 , respectively . The former contains all the music used in the game 's trailer performed by Taro Hakase , including Symphonic Poem " Hope " . The original soundtrack itself was released in Japan on May 31 , 2006 . It consists of 4 CDs with 100 tracks , and includes promotional tracks not in the final version of the game . The CD single for " Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye " was released on the March 15 , 2006 . A limited edition was also released , featuring a DVD containing the music video for " Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye " . Tofu Records has released an abridged version of the original soundtrack , which contains 31 songs , including " Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye " . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 On March 16 , 2006 , Sony Computer Entertainment Japan released a special Final Fantasy XII package , which contained a PlayStation 2 game system , the Final Fantasy XII game , a standard DualShock controller , and a vertical console stand . The Japanese third @-@ party manufacturer Hori also released Final Fantasy XII memory cards on the day of the game 's release ; stickers of Final Fantasy XII characters are included . Game peripheral maker <unk> ( Logitech 's Japanese branch ) released a special edition Final Fantasy XII controller alongside the title on March 16 . Suntory produced " Final Fantasy XII Potion " — a drink containing such ingredients as royal jelly , chamomile , sage , thyme , and marjoram . The drinks became commercially available in Japan on March 7 , 2006 . Suntory also released a Final Fantasy XII Premium Box , which came with a Final Fantasy XII collector 's card . The Potion was a limited edition product and is no longer available . Final Fantasy XII was also adapted into a manga by Gin Amou . Square Enix published the series in a total of five tankōbon volumes from December 22 , 2006 to August 22 , 2009 . 
 Studio BentStuff published three Ultimania books : Final Fantasy XII Battle Ultimania and the Final Fantasy XII Scenario Ultimania on June 16 , 2006 , and Final Fantasy XII Ultimania Ω on November 24 , 2006 . The Battle Ultimania provides a description and analysis of the new battle system and its components , and developer interviews . The Scenario Ultimania describes the main scenarios in the game , profiles on the characters and areas in Ivalice , developer interviews , and details on each location . The last guide , the Ultimania Ω , includes voice actor interviews , the complete story of Final Fantasy XII including additional character profiles , a collection of artworks and illustrations , the complete play guide , and a novella written by Benny Matsuyama , author of Hoshi wo <unk> Otome from the Final Fantasy VII Ultimania Ω Guide . Another Ultimania edition , the Final Fantasy XII International Zodiac Job System Ultimania , was released on September 6 , 2007 , as a guide book for the international version of the game . On December 18 , 2012 the game was re @-@ released as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box Japanese package . 
 For the North American release , a " Collector 's Edition " was available through GameStop and EB Games . This edition includes the original game packaged in a metallic case along with a special bonus disc , which contains Final Fantasy XII developer interviews , an art gallery , U.S. and Japanese trailers , and a featurette entitled " History of Final Fantasy " , which gives a brief overview of most released and upcoming Final Fantasy games . On January 26 , 2007 , Square Enix Product Blog revealed full @-@ color Gabranth , Ashe , Balthier , and Vaan figures . 
 = = Sales = = 
 Final Fantasy XII sold more than 1 @,@ 764 @,@ 000 copies in its first week in Japan , almost equaling the sales of Final Fantasy X in its first week . A Square Enix conference report stated that Final Fantasy XII sold more than 2 @.@ 38 million copies in Japan in the two weeks since its March 16 , 2006 release . In North America , Final Fantasy XII shipped approximately 1 @.@ 5 million copies in its first week . It was the fourth best @-@ selling PlayStation 2 game of 2006 worldwide . As of March 2007 , the game has shipped over 5 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide . By November 2009 , over 6 million copies of the game were sold worldwide . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received critical acclaim , scoring a 92 on Metacritic . On March 16 , 2006 , Final Fantasy XII became the sixth game to receive a perfect score from the Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu , making it the first Final Fantasy game and the first PlayStation 2 title to do so . It is also the second Yasumi Matsuno title to garner a perfect score , the first being Vagrant Story . The game was praised for its graphics , scenarios , game system , and the freshness it brought to the Final Fantasy series . It was praised for its seamless transitions between full motion video segments and the in @-@ game engine , and was voted number one for Best Art Style on IGN 's weekly Top Ten . Newtype USA named Final Fantasy XII its " Game of the Month " for November 2006 , praised the gameplay , graphics , and story , and called it " the best RPG to have been released for any Sony platform " . 
 Although GameSpot lauded the gambit and license systems as an innovative and in @-@ depth way for the player to control the characters , it criticized them for being too complicated and difficult to adjust to , especially for newer players of the series . The reviewer also criticized the sometimes tedious back and forth travel . On the other hand , GameSpot took particular note of the " excellent " voice cast . IGN praised the game 's rich storyline and artistic direction , shown through its " sheer depth of character " . It also assuaged criticism that the gambit system would " let the game play itself " , countering that gambits do not function without a player . However , it noted that , while " still extremely strong " , Final Fantasy XII has one of the series ' weaker soundtracks . 
 Executive producer Akitoshi Kawazu was pleased by Famitsu 's rating but admitted that he thought the game was not perfect ; he felt that the storyline did not meet some fans ' expectations . Kawazu expressed his frustration and regrets regarding the storyline , citing creative differences between the PlayOnline and Final Fantasy Tactics members of the development team . 
 Final Fantasy XII was named best PlayStation 2 game and best role @-@ playing game by numerous video game journals and websites , including GameSpot , GameSpy and IGN . Both Edge and Famitsu awarded it Game of the Year 2006 . The Japan Game Awards 2006 honored Final Fantasy XII with their " Grand Award " and " Award for Excellence " and the PlayStation Awards 2006 bestowed the " Double Platinum Prize " . It was selected for the list " Top 100 New Japanese Styles " , a list of " products and services originating in Japan to serve as a mark of excellence " . Final Fantasy XII also received nominations in such categories as best role @-@ playing game , story , art direction , character design and original musical score at the Interactive Achievement Awards , Game Developers Choice Awards , BAFTA Video Games Awards , Spike Video Game Awards , and the Satellite Awards , but lost all to The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion , Okami , Gears of War and God of War II , respectively . 
 = = Sequels and rereleases = = 
 = = = International Zodiac Job System = = = 
 An international version of the game , Final Fantasy XII International Zodiac Job System , was announced on May 10 , 2007 . It was released in Japan on August 9 , 2007 as part of both Final Fantasy 20th anniversary and Ivalice Alliance . The game includes twelve License Boards ( instead of the original one ) , each corresponding to a different Zodiac sign and job . The battle system as a whole has been tweaked ; guest characters and summons are controllable by the player , and holding the L1 button doubles the game 's running speed . Additionally , the game features the English voices and the widescreen 16 : 9 ratio support of the North American version , along with a bonus disc based on the one initially released with the North American version . There is also a " New Game + " option , " New <unk> ( minus ) " ( where characters do not gain experience ) , and a " Trial Mode " which allows the player to hunt monsters in 100 different maps to gain items and money . 
 = = = Revenant Wings = = = 
 A sequel , Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings , was released for the Nintendo DS in 2007 . It takes place one year after the events of Final Fantasy XII , following the adventures of Vaan . The game became one of four titles in the Ivalice Alliance series , which also includes International Zodiac Job System . 
 = = = Fortress = = = 
 Fortress , a spin @-@ off action game developed by Grin , was to have been a " game with an epic scale both in story and production values " that took place in Ivalice following the events of Revenant Wings . Square Enix cancelled the project after six months of development . 
 = = = The Zodiac Age = = = 
 In June 2016 , Square Enix announced Final Fantasy XII : The Zodiac Age , a high @-@ definition remaster of the Japanese @-@ only International Zodiac Job System , scheduled for release worldwide in 2017 for the PlayStation 4 . The Zodiac Age also includes trophy support , a newly recorded soundtrack , and better technical performance . 
 = Robinson Crusoes of Warsaw = 
 Robinson Crusoes of Warsaw were people who , after the end of the 1944 Warsaw Uprising and the subsequent planned destruction of Warsaw by Nazi Germany , decided to stay and hide in the ruins of the German @-@ occupied city . The period of hiding spanned as long as three and a half months , from the day of the capitulation of the uprising , October 2 , 1944 , until the entry of the Red Army on January 17 , 1945 . Most of the Robinsons were Jews , although a considerable number of non @-@ Jewish Poles were also present . The hideaways lived in the ruins of houses , basements , and bunkers which had been prepared ahead of time . They lived in extremely dire circumstances , while the city was being destroyed around them . Some managed to escape Warsaw , many were captured and killed by the Germans , while others survived until the withdrawal of German troops . 
 The estimates of the number of hideaways vary from several hundred to about two thousand . Even though the majority of the Robinsons perished during the war , most of the information about their circumstances comes from those who survived . The largest group of hideaways consisted of probably around 36 individuals who were led by two medical doctors . The Robinsons also included a group of Jewish Combat Organization ( Polish : <unk> Organizacja <unk> , <unk> ) Warsaw ghetto fighters , who managed to leave the ruined city in mid @-@ November . 
 The terms " Robinson Crusoes " or " Robinsons " for the hideaways appeared almost immediately , and were popularized in many contemporary and later works , including memoirs , newspaper reports , and films , by both writers and the " Robinsons " themselves , the most famous of whom was the composer Władysław Szpilman , whose story was the subject of the film The Pianist ( 2002 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Warsaw Uprising , which began on August 1 , 1944 , was an attempt by the Polish Home Army ( Armia Krajowa , AK ) to liberate the capital of Poland from Nazi occupation in advance of approaching Soviet forces . The insurrectionists hoped for Soviet and Allied support , but in early August Joseph Stalin halted the Red Army on the right bank of the Vistula and denied British and American planes , which carried aid to the uprising , landing rights in Soviet controlled territory . Despite the fact that in September the Soviets captured the Praga suburb and allowed a few limited landings by Allied planes , the insurrection became more and more isolated and pushed into an ever shrinking area within the city . By early September , without Soviet aid , the uprising was doomed . While capitulation talks were already in progress , the Germans took the suburb of <unk> on September 30 . The final surrender agreement was concluded on October 2 , by the commander of the Home Army in Warsaw , Tadeusz Bór @-@ Komorowski , and the German general in charge of suppressing the uprising , Erich von dem Bach . 
 The provisions of the capitulation agreement stipulated that the Home Army soldiers were to be accorded full combatant status and treated as prisoners of war . The civilian population of Warsaw was to evacuate the city , be transferred to holding camps and then released . From the date of the surrender all civilians and soldiers had three days to leave the capital . 
 Another portion of the agreement , point # 10 , stated that the German command would ensure the preservation of remaining public and private property as well as the evacuation or protection of objects and buildings of " artistic , cultural or sacred value " . However , soon after the fighting was over at a conference held on October 9 , 1944 , Heinrich Himmler , Reichsführer of the SS , ordered the total destruction of the city . Himmler stated : " The city must completely disappear from the surface of the earth and serve only as a transport station for the Wehrmacht . No stone can remain standing . Every building must be razed to its foundation . " The task of carrying out the destruction was assigned to SS @-@ Brigadeführer Paul Otto <unk> . Subsequently , the buildings of the city were systematically reduced to ruin , one by one . 
 = = Origins and usage of the term = = 
 About two weeks after the fall of the Warsaw Uprising , on October 17 , 1944 , the commander of the German 9th Army stationed in Warsaw , Smilo von Lüttwitz , issued an order in which he informed his soldiers that there was a large number of " sneaky Poles " still hiding in the ruins of Warsaw . According to Smilo , they " posed a threat to the German forces " . Von Lüttwitz ordered a large scale <unk> ( police action / round @-@ up ) to " cleanse the city " of them . The order also sanctioned immediate execution of any individuals found hiding in the ruins . In some rare cases , those found were placed in a specially created concentration camp , and used as manual labor as the German army looted the remnants of the city . 
 The phenomenon of the hideaways was noticed soon after the Red Army captured Warsaw . On January 26 , 1945 , a bulletin of the <unk> Agencja <unk> ( Jewish News Agency ) reported that 48 individuals had emerged from hiding and referred to them as <unk> , or " cavemen " . The term " Robinsons " soon became common , a reference to the fictional castaway Robinson Crusoe in the Daniel Defoe novel . The Soviet writer and journalist , Vasily Grossman upon entering the ruined city , described finding four Jewish and six non @-@ Jewish Poles who had just left their hideouts . 
 The term and the analogy with the castaway has often been made by Robinsons in their own memoirs , as well as by other writers . Dawid Fogelman had been imprisoned at the Gęsiówka concentration camp . After the camp was liberated by the Polish Home Army , he joined its ranks and fought in the uprising . At the end of the fighting , Fogelman became a Robinson , hiding in a bunker on <unk> Street , where he began writing a diary . He wrote : " We lived like Robinson Crusoe , with the one difference that he was free , could move about freely , while we lived in hiding . " While Fogelman 's diary survived , his ultimate fate is unknown . 
 In his memoirs , Władysław Szpilman also compared himself to Crusoe and , like Fogelman , emphasized the isolation and hopelessness which characterized the Warsaw Crusoes . Szpilman 's memoir served as a basis for a screenplay , written as early as 1945 by the Polish writers Jerzy <unk> and Czesław Miłosz , entitled Robinson of Warsaw . The movie that was eventually filmed , Miasto <unk> ( " <unk> city " ) , was heavily censored by the communist authorities , and its original theme changed to such an extent that Miłosz requested his name be removed from the film 's credits . The experience with the film contributed to Miłosz 's disillusionment with cinema as an artistic medium . 
 Wacław Gluth @-@ Nowowiejski , a member of the Home Army who was wounded during the uprising and barely managed to escape the Wehrmacht 's Marymont massacre of civilians and wounded soldiers , hid in the basement of a destroyed house from mid @-@ September until mid @-@ November . Gluth @-@ Nowowiejski wrote several books about his experiences after the war , including Rzeczpospolita <unk> ( " The Commonwealth of Ruins " ) and <unk> <unk> : z <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " The capital of caves : memoirs of a Warsaw Robinson " ) . 
 Major Danuta <unk> of the Home Army , hid out with a group of wounded patients whom she had saved from a hospital that had been set on fire by the Germans during the last days of the uprising . After the war she wrote a book about her experiences , <unk> <unk> <unk> ( I was a Warsaw Robinson ) . A portion of her group left the hiding place after German troops called out for them to surrender and were immediately executed . The rest remained hidden and escaped detection . Eventually they used the corpses of their murdered companions to disguise the entry to their hiding place . 
 The name " Robinsons " has also been used to refer to those Jews who hid out in the ruins of the Warsaw Ghetto in the aftermath of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising . Uri <unk> 's ( Jerzy Orlowski ) children 's book The Island on Bird Street ( 1981 ) , adapted into a 1997 film , tells the story of an 11 @-@ year @-@ old boy who hides out in the ruins of the ghetto . <unk> also draws analogies with Robinson Crusoe in this work ; in fact one of the few things Alex , the story 's protagonist , possesses is a copy of Defoe 's novel . 
 Other memoirs by the Robinsons include <unk> ( The Bunker ) by Chaim Goldstein , <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Karski 's Bodyguard ) by Dawid Landau , <unk> się w <unk> : <unk> 1943 – <unk> 1945 ( I <unk> in Warsaw : January 1943 – January 1945 ) by Stefan <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ( My Fortunate Life ) by Szymon <unk> , and <unk> bez <unk> ( Angels Without Wings ) by <unk> <unk> . Many other testimonies and recollections are contained in the archives of the Emmanuel <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Jewish Historical Institute ) in Warsaw and Yad Vashem in Jerusalem . 
 = = Reasons for staying = = 
 The capitulation agreement between the Home Army and German forces stipulated that insurgents were to be treated as regular prisoners of war . The city 's civilians were to be transferred to transit camps and afterward released . 
 Although the agreement did not stipulate different treatment for Poles who were ethnically Jewish , many Jews feared that the agreement would not be honored in their case . In fact , the Nazis conducted a " medical examination " at the Pruszków internment camp , in order to " catch out " Jews from among Warsaw 's refugees . As a consequence , a large number of the Jews who were still in Warsaw at the time of the uprising , decided to remain in hiding rather than join the non @-@ Jewish civilians leaving the city . According to memoirs from the period , the choice often came down to whether a particular person " looked Aryan " and could pass for a non @-@ Jewish Pole . 
 A significant number of non @-@ Jewish Poles also did not trust the Germans and decided not to leave the city . Many wounded Home Army soldiers became stranded during the uprising and were simply not able to evacuate in time . For others , the choice to remain resulted from feelings of despair and hopelessness brought by the fall of the uprising ; at least initially , they simply did not have the motivation to leave . 
 = = Number and demographics = = 
 Between the end of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising ( May 1943 ) and beginning of 1944 , there were between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 Jews hiding in the Ghetto ruins . The number of Robinsons after the Warsaw Uprising has been estimated at between several hundred and two thousand , spread across all the suburbs of Warsaw . Another source gives the number as between 400 and 1 @,@ 000 . Most of those hiding were Jewish , including some who had been in hiding since the fall of the ghetto uprising , though a significant number were non @-@ Jewish Poles . Unlike Szpilman , whose case was somewhat unrepresentative , most of those in hiding remained in medium @-@ sized to large groups , often of mixed ethnicities . The majority of the Robinsons were men . 
 Many of the hiding places and makeshift bunkers were prepared in advance by those anticipating the fall of the uprising . As a result , the sequence whereby people became Robinsons closely followed the military developments of the insurrection . The first groups went into hiding in Wola during the Wola massacre and in <unk> ( Warsaw Old Town ) , while fighting was still taking place in other parts of the city . The majority of the Robinsons hid when German forces captured the <unk> and Śródmieście ( Warsaw City Centre ) districts from the insurgents . 
 The largest known group of Robinsons was composed of approximately 37 people under the leadership of Roman <unk> and medical doctors , Dr. Beer and Prof. Henryk Beck . Beck was the director of a makeshift insurgent hospital during the uprising . As it became clear that the insurrection was going to fail , he and Cpt . Władysław Kowalski , a Home Army soldier who also decided to stay , converted two adjacent basements into a well @-@ equipped and -supplied hiding place . The group stockpiled water , coffee , medicines , fuel , and various foodstuffs . Additionally , Beck kept a set of watercolors , crayons , ink , and paper , which he used to illustrate life in the bunker . As some of the members had fought in the uprising , the group also possessed a small cache of weapons , unusual for Robinsons . A dog , <unk> ( " bunker puppy " ) , also stayed with them and , according to the memoirs , did not bark or make any noise . 
 After their water ran out , the Beck / <unk> group developed a routine whereby some of the group worked to dig a well , while others watched out for approaching Germans , and yet others ventured outside the bunker to scavenge for useful items . The group eventually dug their way to two water canals and built a well . On November 17 , during an excursion outside the bunker , the group made contact with a small partisan unit , also in hiding , led by a Russian soldier POW who had been liberated during the uprising . Subsequently , several of the group would join the partisans for small scale attacks on German troops . The group survived until the entry of the Red Army in mid @-@ January . 
 = = Living conditions = = 
 Initially , the living conditions of the Robinsons varied according to whether or not they had had time to prepare . There were roughly three days between the signing of the capitulation and the deadline for civilians to leave the city , during which those who made the decision to stay could stockpile food and water , and camouflage their hiding places . As time passed , supplies ran out , and many Robinsons had to change their locations for security reasons . The situation soon became equally desperate for all who remained . 
 While food was extremely hard to come by , an even more pressing need was obtaining drinking water . Thirst and the search for water are mentioned in most of the Robinsons ' memoirs . The most common sources originally included toilet cisterns , boilers , and standing water found inside bathtubs . As these ran out , those in hiding were forced to risk sneaking access to wells , which were often guarded by German soldiers . Some memoirs describe long periods observing a particular well and waiting for a chance to obtain a quick drink . Another method involved obtaining polluted sewer water from the canals , and then filtering it through coals wrapped in rags . Generally , records indicate that whatever scant water supplies existed were shared fairly among individuals hiding as a group . In at least one instance , one person was unable to withstand the thirst and drank the whole group 's water supply . As a result , Jakub <unk> , a former Gęsiówka inmate and after its liberation , a Home Army soldier , was court @-@ martialed by his fellow group members and sentenced to death . The execution was to be postponed until after liberation , but when that occurred , the Robinsons were so overwhelmed with joy , the crime was forgiven and the sentence was never mentioned again . 
 There were numerous instances of death from drinking poisoned or fouled water ( there were still many unburied , decomposing corpses inside the ruins ) . In one instance , desperate Robinsons were driven to drink their own urine and subsequently died . 
 The coming of winter improved the water situation for some who had access to icicles , but the cold made living conditions worse . It was impossible for those in hiding to build fires to warm themselves , as smoke could reveal their location to the Germans . As a consequence , many died of cold . 
 Unlike the Robinson Crusoe of the novel , who craved human contact , most of the Warsaw Crusoes tried to avoid it at all cost . This contradiction was noted by both the Robinsons and those who wrote about them after the war . Being discovered by the Germans in almost all cases meant immediate death . There were , however , some exceptions , the best known being that of Szpilman 's encounter with <unk> <unk> , a captain of the Wehrmacht who helped to hide and feed him . In a few instances those captured were first forced to help the Germans with the looting of the city 's ruins , before being either executed or sent to the Pruszków camp . 
 A few of the Robinsons actually tried to actively take revenge on the occupying forces . The most famous of these , who became a local legend , was an individual known only as " Ares " ( after the Greek god of war ) , described by Gluth @-@ Nowowiejski , based on interviews with the Robinsons he conducted . Ares , active in the Śródmieście district , staged numerous ambushes of German soldiers , in at least one case using an improvised explosive device . According to Gluth @-@ Nowowiejski 's sources , he would leave behind graffiti of his name , as well as slogans such as " Hitler <unk> " . Other messages included communications to the German soldiers . In one case he dumped a body of a soldier he had killed with the note : " This awaits all of you in Warsaw " . In another he wrote : " Ares is a ghost , not matter – your search for him is useless " . Eventually , Ares met his demise when the Germans left some poisoned food for him to find . Soon they discovered a man in the ruins who was obviously sick from having eaten it . He shot at them before taking his own life . According to some sources , other individuals took on Ares ' struggle but used the names of other Greek Gods as their signature . 
 Within some of the destroyed suburbs , a limited postal system between various Robinson groups was established . Dawid Landau had served as a bodyguard to the courier of the Polish government in exile , Jan Karski , while Karski secretly entered the ghetto to gather information for a report on the extermination of Polish Jews by Nazi Germany for the Western allies , in 1943 . Later , Landau fought in both of the Warsaw uprising as part of <unk> Związek <unk> ( Jewish Military Union , <unk> ) and afterward decided to stay in the ruins . In his memoirs he reports that the post functioned through the use of empty electrical socket boxes . Various groups would leave notes for others informing them of who was alive and in hiding , news from the front that had been obtained , as well as requests for special forms of assistance . According to Landau , the most common pleas were for doctors or other forms of medical help . 
 = = Escape = = 
 Some of those who had initially remained in the ruins of the city after the uprising later made attempts to leave . This was particularly true of Robinsons who had stayed , not of their own choice , but due to unfavorable circumstances . 
 The best known case of post @-@ uprising departure involved a group of Jewish Combat Organization fighters under the leadership of <unk> Cukierman and Marek Edelman , who had taken part in both the Ghetto and the Warsaw Uprisings . Originally , the former Ghetto fighters stayed together in a large group , but in the second week of October , some of them moved to a different location . Those remaining stayed in the same place on <unk> Street until mid @-@ November , when they were contacted by Ala Margolis , a courier from the Home Army , who had previously managed to leave the city . Margolis and a " rescue squadron " of five people returned to get the rest of the group out . The Germans had begun a systematic search and destruction of ruined houses near the hiding place , which meant time was running out . Dressed as nurses and doctors , with clothes and Red Cross IDs provided by Dr. <unk> <unk> , director of the Home Army sanitation unit , the rescue squadron and the seven in hiding made their way out of the city through two German checkpoints . The group consisted of five men and two women : Edelman , Cukierman , <unk> <unk> ( later , Cukierman 's wife ) , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> Borzykowski , and Zygmunt Warman . The first checkpoint was crossed during dinner , and the Germans did not bother to examine the group , but at the second , an SS officer noticed that Warman , who was lying in a stretcher , was wearing combat boots . He yelled , " These are Polish bandits ! " , but one of the escorts dressed as a nurse quickly declared that the patients in the stretcher were ill with typhus . The SS soldiers backed off , and the group moved on its way . 
 In many cases , the opportunity to leave Warsaw came by chance . For example , the hiding diarist Wacław Gluth @-@ Nowowiejski was taken out , after he was accidentally found by a woman ( name unknown ) who had been given permission by the Germans to remove some of her property from the ruins . On their way out of the city the group also had to pass German checkpoints and encountered difficulties similar to those of the <unk> fighters . A Wehrmacht soldier accused the wounded and sick Gluth @-@ Nowowiejski of being a " bandit " but let him pass after protestations made by his escort . 
 = = Individual Robinsons = = 
 Of the total number of the Robinsons who hid in the ruins of the city only a portion 's names and locations are known . The recognized individuals are mostly the ones who either survived the war themselves or who came into contact with other survivors at some point . As such , the list of the known hideaways is not representative ; the majority of the Robinsons died while in hiding , and hence their identities , were never recorded . The table below lists some of those who have been mentioned in the memoirs or other written works on the subject . 
 Sources for table : 
 = SMS Medusa = 
 SMS Medusa was the seventh member of the ten @-@ ship Gazelle class , built by the Imperial German Navy . She was built by the AG Weser dockyard in Bremen , laid down in early 1900 , launched in December 1900 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in July 1901 . Armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , Medusa was capable of a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . 
 Medusa served in all three German navies over the span of over forty years . She served as a fleet scout in the period before World War I , and during the first two years of the conflict , she was used as a coastal defense ship . She was one of six cruisers Germany was allowed to keep by the Treaty of Versailles , and she served in the early 1920s in the Reichsmarine . She was withdrawn from service in 1924 and used in secondary duties , but in 1940 , the Kriegsmarine converted Medusa into a floating anti @-@ aircraft battery . She defended the port of Wilhelmshaven until the closing days of the war , when she was scuttled by her crew . The wreck was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1948 – 1950 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Medusa was ordered under the contract name " E " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in early 1900 and launched on 5 December 1900 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 26 July 1901 . The ship was 104 @.@ 8 meters ( 344 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 12 @.@ 2 m ( 40 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 84 m ( 15 @.@ 9 ft ) forward . She displaced 2 @,@ 972 t ( 2 @,@ 925 long tons ; 3 @,@ 276 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines . They were designed to give 8 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) , for a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . The engines were powered by ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . Medusa carried 560 tonnes ( 550 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 3 @,@ 560 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 590 km ; 4 @,@ 100 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 14 officers and 243 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition , for 100 shells per gun . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . They were submerged in the hull on the broadside . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 20 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick . The conning tower had 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Medusa was assigned to the fleet reconnaissance forces . In 1905 , she was assigned to the Cruiser Division , alongside her sisters Ariadne and Amazone and the armored cruiser Prinz Heinrich . She served in the fleet scout role up to the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , at which point she was employed as a coastal defense vessel . In 1917 , she had four of her guns removed , and she was used as an auxiliary ship for the old ironclad König Wilhelm , which was being used as a training ship for naval cadets . 
 Medusa survived the war and was one of six light cruisers Germany was permitted to keep in service by the Treaty of Versailles . The ship served in the Reichsmarine from 1920 to 1924 ; in 1922 , Medusa was assigned to the Active Squadron in the Baltic Station , alongside the battleship Hannover . In 1924 she was withdrawn from service . On 29 March 1929 , she was stricken from the naval register and thereafter used as a barracks ship in Wilhelmshaven . In July 1940 , during World War II , Medusa was converted into a floating anti @-@ aircraft battery in Wilhelmshaven . Her armament at that point consisted of one 10 @.@ 5 cm SK C / 32 gun , four 10 @.@ 5 cm SK C / 33 guns , two 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns , and four 2 cm guns . She was then assigned to Naval Anti @-@ aircraft Group 222 , and remained in the harbor at Wilhelmshaven for the duration of the war . Her crews scuttled the ship on 3 May 1945 , days before the end of the war in Europe . The wreck was ultimately salvaged in 1948 – 1950 and broken up for scrap . 
 = Microsoft Security Essentials = 
 Microsoft Security Essentials ( MSE ) is an antivirus software ( AV ) product that provides protection against different types of malicious software such as computer viruses , spyware , rootkits and Trojan horses . Before version 4 @.@ 5 , MSE ran on Windows XP , Windows Vista and Windows 7 , but not on Windows 8 and later , which have built @-@ in AV components . MSE 4 @.@ 5 and later do not run on Windows XP . The license agreement allows home users and small businesses to install and use the product free of charge . It replaces Windows Live OneCare , a discontinued commercial subscription @-@ based AV service , and the free Windows Defender , which until Windows 8 protected users from only adware and spyware . 
 Built upon the same virus definitions and scanning engine as other Microsoft antivirus products , MSE provides real @-@ time protection , constantly monitoring activities on the computer and scanning new files as they are downloaded or created and disabling detected threats . It lacks the personal firewall of OneCare or the centralized management features of <unk> <unk> Protection . 
 Microsoft 's announcement of its own AV software on 18 November 2008 was met with mixed reactions from the AV industry . Symantec , McAfee and Kaspersky Lab — three competing independent software vendors — dismissed it as an unworthy competitor , but AVG Technologies and Avast Software appreciated its potential to expand the consumers ' choice of AV software . AVG , McAfee , Sophos and Trend Micro claimed that the integration of the product into Microsoft Windows would be a violation of competition law . 
 The product received generally positive reviews praising its user interface , low resource usage and freeware license . It secured AV @-@ TEST certification on October 2009 , having demonstrated its ability to eliminate all widely encountered malware . However , it lost the certificate on October 2012 , having shown a constant decline in protection and repair scores . In June 2013 , MSE achieved the lowest possible protection score , zero . According to a March 2012 report by anti @-@ malware specialist OPSWAT , MSE was the most popular AV product in North America and the second most popular in the world , which has resulted in the appearance of several rogue antivirus programs that try to impersonate it . 
 = = Features = = 
 Microsoft Security Essentials is an antivirus software ( AV ) product that fights malicious software ( malware ) , including computer viruses , spyware , Trojan horses and rootkits . It replaces Windows Live OneCare , a discontinued commercial subscription @-@ based AV service , and the free Windows Defender , which until Windows 8 only protected users from adware and spyware . It automatically checks for and downloads the virus definitions it relies on from Microsoft Update , a web @-@ based software service updated three times a day . Users may alternatively download the updates manually from the Microsoft Security Portal website . On 30 September 2011 , a faulty definition update caused the product to incorrectly tag Google Chrome as malware . The issue was resolved within three hours . MSE originally ran on Windows XP , Windows Vista and Windows 7 , although versions 4 @.@ 5 and later do not run on Windows XP and Microsoft stopped producing definition updates for Windows XP on 14 July 2015 . 
 MSE is built upon the same foundation as other Microsoft security products ; all use the same virus definitions and anti @-@ malware engine , known as Microsoft Malware Protection Engine ( <unk> ) . It does not have the personal firewall of OneCare or the centralized management features of <unk> <unk> Protection . 
 MSE provides real @-@ time protection , constantly monitoring activities on the computer and scanning new files as they are downloaded or created . It disables detected threats and prompts for user input on how to deal with them . If no response is received within ten minutes , suspected threats are handled according to the default actions defined in the application 's settings . Depending on those settings , it may also create System Restore checkpoints before removing the detected malware . As a part of real @-@ time protection , by default , MSE reports all suspicious behaviors of monitored programs to Microsoft Active Protection Service ( MAPS , originally Microsoft <unk> ) , a web @-@ based service . If the report matches a newly discovered malware threat with an unreleased virus definition , the new definition is downloaded to remove the threat . 
 Hardware requirements for the product depend on the operating system ; on a computer running Windows Vista or Windows 7 , it requires a 1 GHz processor , 1 GB of RAM , a computer monitor with a display resolution of at least 800 × 600 pixels , 200 MB of free hard disk space and an Internet connection . 
 = = Development = = 
 On 18 November 2008 , Microsoft announced plans for a free consumer security product , codenamed Morro . This development marked a change in Microsoft 's consumer AV marketing strategy : instead of offering a subscription @-@ based security product with a host of other tools , such as backup and a personal firewall , Morro would offer free AV protection with a smaller impact on system resources . Amy <unk> , senior director of product management for the Online Services and Windows Division at Microsoft , announced that Morro would not directly compete with other commercial AV software ; rather it was focused on the 50 to 60 percent of PC users who did not have or would not pay for AV protection . By 17 June 2009 , the official name of Morro was revealed : Microsoft Security Essentials . 
 On 23 June 2009 , Microsoft released a public beta to 75 @,@ 000 users in the United States , Israel , China and Brazil . Anticipated to be available in 20 markets and 10 languages , the product was scheduled for release before the end of 2009 ; the final build was released on 29 September 2009 . 
 = = = Version 2 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Almost a year after the initial release , Microsoft quietly released the second version . It entered the technical preview stage on 19 July 2010 , and the final build was released on 16 December 2010 . It includes Network Inspection System ( NIS ) , a network intrusion detection system that works on Windows Vista and Windows 7 , as well as a new anti @-@ malware engine that employs heuristics in malware detection . Version 2 @.@ 0 integrates with Internet Explorer to protect users against web @-@ based threats . NIS requires a separate set of definition updates . 
 = = = Version 4 @.@ 0 = = = 
 Sixteen months after the release of version 2 @.@ 0 , Microsoft skipped version 3 @.@ 0 and released Microsoft Security Essentials 4 @.@ 0 . A public beta program started on 18 November 2011 , when Microsoft sent out invitations to potential participants without announcing a version number . The first beta version was released on 29 November 2011 , and the final build on 24 April 2012 . Microsoft subsequently initiated a pre @-@ release program that provides volunteers with the latest beta version and accepts feedback . 
 = = = Version 4 @.@ 5 = = = 
 On 21 February 2014 , version 4 @.@ 5 entered beta stage . On the same day , Microsoft announced that starting with this version , Windows XP would not be supported . Older versions would continue to receive virus definition updates until 14 July 2015 . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 Microsoft Security Essentials does not run on Windows 8 and later , which has its own security subsystem . On 13 September 2011 , at <unk> in Anaheim , California , Microsoft unveiled the developer preview of Windows 8 , which had a security component capable of preventing an infected USB flash memory from compromising the system during the boot process . On 15 September , Windows 8 developer 's blog confirmed that Windows Defender in Windows 8 would take over the role of virus protection . In an included video , Jason <unk> of Microsoft showed how Windows Defender is registered with Action Center as an AV and spyware protection tool , and how it blocks drive @-@ by malware . On 3 March 2012 , Softpedia reviewed the consumer preview of Windows 8 and noted the similarity in appearance of Windows Defender and Microsoft Security Essentials 4 @.@ 0 Beta . According to Softpedia , Windows 8 Setup requires Microsoft Security Essentials to be uninstalled before upgrading Windows 7 . 
 = = Licensing = = 
 The product 's license agreement allows home users to download , install and use it on an unlimited number of computers in their households free of charge , so long as each computer has a legitimately licensed copy of Microsoft Windows . Since October 2010 , small businesses have also been allowed to install the product on up to 10 devices , but use in academic institutions and governmental locations is forbidden , as is reverse @-@ engineering , <unk> or disassembling the product or working around its designed limitations . 
 MSE requires no registration or personal information to be submitted during installation ; however , the validity of the operating system 's license is verified during and after installation using the Windows Genuine Advantage system . If said license is found to be invalid , the software will notify the user and will cease to operate after a period of time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Industry response = = = 
 The announcement and debut of Microsoft Security Essentials was met with mixed responses from the AV industry . Symantec , McAfee and Kaspersky Lab , three competing vendors , claimed it to be inferior to their own software . Jens <unk> , Symantec 's vice president of engineering for Norton products , dismissed it as " very average – nothing outstanding " . Tom <unk> of Symantec urged his customers to be mindful of what protection they chose , bearing in mind that OneCare offered " substandard protection " and an " inferior user experience " . Joris Evers , director of worldwide public relations for McAfee stated " with OneCare 's market share of less than 2 % , we understand Microsoft 's decision to shift attention to their core business . " Justin Priestley of Kaspersky stated that Microsoft " continued to hold a very low market share in the consumer market , and we don 't expect the exit of OneCare to change the playing field drastically . " 
 Avast Software said that it had an ambivalent view towards the product . Vincent Steckler , Avast Software CEO said " MSE is not the silver bullet but it is also not the bad sequel to One Care that some claim . " A representative of AVG Technologies stated , " We view this as a positive step for the AV landscape . AVG has believed in the right to free antivirus software for the past eight years . " However , AVG raised the issue of distributing the software product and said , " Microsoft will have to do more than simply make the product available , " adding that integration of Microsoft Security Essentials with Microsoft Windows would be a violation of competition law . McAfee , Sophos and later Trend Micro affirmed that an antitrust lawsuit would surely have followed if Microsoft had bundled the product with Windows . 
 The announcement of Microsoft Security Essentials affected the stocks of AV vendors . On 19 November 2008 , after Microsoft announced codename Morro , Symantec and McAfee shares fell 9 @.@ 44 and 6 @.@ 62 percent respectively . On 10 June 2009 , after announcing an upcoming beta version , Microsoft shares rose 2 @.@ 1 percent . Symantec and McAfee shares , however , fell 0 @.@ 5 and 1 @.@ 3 percent respectively . Daniel Ives , an analyst with <unk> Capital Markets , said that Microsoft Security Essentials would be a " long @-@ term competitive threat " , although near @-@ term impact would be negligible . 
 = = = Reviews and awards = = = 
 The public beta version received several reviews , citing its low resource usage , straightforward user interface and price point . Brian Krebs of The Washington Post reported that a quick scan on a Windows 7 computer took about 10 minutes and a full scan about 45 minutes . Ars Technica reviewed it positively , citing its organized interface , low resource usage , and its status as freeware . 
 Nick <unk> of PCWorld noted MSE 's " clear @-@ cut " and " cleanly designed " tabbed user interface . He did , however , find some of the settings to be cryptic and confusing , defaulting to " recommended action " , with the only explanation of what that action is to be found in the help file . He was also initially confused because the user interface failed to mention that Microsoft Security Essentials automatically updates itself , rather than having to be manually updated via the Update tab ; an explanation of this feature was included in the final release . 
 Neil Rubenking of PC Magazine successfully installed the beta version on 12 malware @-@ infected systems and commented on its small installation package ( about 7 MB , depending on the operating system ) and speedy installation . But the initial virus definition update took between 5 and 15 minutes , and the full installation occupied about 110 MB of disk space . Rubenking noted that the beta version sets Windows Update into fully automatic mode , although it can be turned off again through Windows Control Panel . Some full scans took more than an hour on infected systems ; a scan on a clean system took 35 minutes . An on @-@ demand scan test Rubenking conducted in June 2009 with the beta version found 89 percent of all malware samples : 30 percent of the commercial keyloggers , 67 percent of rootkits , but only half of the <unk> samples . The product 's real @-@ time protection found 83 percent of all malware and blocked the majority of it : 40 percent of the commercial keyloggers and 78 percent of the rootkits were found . 
 On 7 January 2010 , Microsoft Security Essentials won the Best Free Software award from PC Advisor . In December the same year , it secured the Bronze award from AV @-@ <unk> for proactive detection of 55 percent of new or unknown malware , the Silver award for low false @-@ positives ( six occurrences ) and the Bronze award for overall performance . 
 In October 2009 , AV @-@ TEST conducted a series of trials on the final build of the product in which it detected and caught 98 @.@ 44 percent of 545 @,@ 034 computer viruses , computer worms and software Trojan horses as well as 90 @.@ 95 percent of 14 @,@ 222 spyware and adware samples . It also detected and eliminated all 25 tested rootkits , generating no false @-@ positives . Between June 2010 to January 2013 , AV @-@ TEST tested Microsoft Security Essentials 14 times ; in 11 out of 14 cases , MSE secured AV @-@ TEST certification of outperforming AV industry average ratings . Microsoft Security Essentials 2 @.@ 0 was tested and certified on March 2011 . The product achieved a protection score of 2 @.@ 5 out of 6 , a repair score of 3 @.@ 5 out of 6 and a usability score of 5 @.@ 5 out of 6 . Report details show that although version 2 @.@ 0 was able to find all malware samples of the <unk> ( widespread malware ) , it was not able to stop all Internet @-@ based attacks because it lacks personal firewall and anti @-@ spam capabilities . In an April 2012 test , version 2 @.@ 1 achieved scores of 3 @.@ 0 , 5 @.@ 5 and 5 @.@ 0 for protection , repair and usability . Version 4 @.@ 0 for Windows 7 <unk> ( x64 ) was tested in June 2012 and achieved scores of 2 @.@ 5 , 5 @.@ 5 and 5 @.@ 5 for protection , repair and usability . In October 2012 , the product lost its AV @-@ TEST certification when Microsoft Security Essentials 4 @.@ 1 achieved scores of 1 @.@ 5 , 3 @.@ 5 and 5 @.@ 5 for its protection , repair and usability . 
 In AV @-@ TEST 's 2011 annual review , Microsoft Security Essentials came last in protection , seventh in repair and fifth in usability . In the 2012 review , it came last in protection and best in usability ; however , having lost its certificate , it was not qualified for the usability award . In June 2013 , MSE achieved the lowest possible protection score , zero . In August 2015 for Windows 7 it was last , with 3 blobs out of 6 for protection . Performance — in the sense of speed — and usability were good . MSE found 99 @.@ 7 % of " widespread and prevalent malware discovered in the last 4 weeks " , slightly better than the industry average , but only 87 @.@ 2 % of " 0 @-@ day malware attacks , inclusive of web and e @-@ mail threats " , against an industry average of 98 @.@ 2 % . 
 = = Market share = = 
 On 29 September 2010 , a year after its initial release , Microsoft announced that MSE had more than 30 million users . The Security Industry Market Share Analysis report of June 2011 , published by OPSWAT , describes it as one of the most popular AV products in the world , with 10 @.@ 66 percent of the global market and 15 @.@ 68 percent of the North American market . The same report shows Microsoft as the number one AV vendor in North America with 17 @.@ 07 percent market share , and the number four AV vendor worldwide . 
 John Dunn of PCWorld , who analyzed the report , noted that the tendency to use free AV software is something new : " After all , free antivirus suites have been around for years but have tended to be seen as the poor relations to paid software . " He named Microsoft Security Essentials as an influence on PC users to adopt free AV software . 
 A September 2011 OPSWAT report found that MSE had further increased its market share to become the second most popular AV product in the world , and remained the most popular in North America . OPSWAT reported in March 2012 that the product had maintained its position , and that Microsoft 's market share had improved by 2 percent worldwide and 3 percent in North America . Seth Rosenblatt of CNET News commented on how the product 's share rose from 7 @.@ 27 in 2010 to 10 @.@ 08 in 2012 , stating that " use of the lightweight security suite exploded last year " . 
 = = <unk> by malware = = 
 The popularity of Microsoft Security Essentials has led to the appearance of malware abusing its name . In February 2010 , a rogue security package calling itself " Security Essentials 2010 " appeared on the Internet . Designated <unk> : Win32 / <unk> by Microsoft , it bears no visual resemblance to the Microsoft product . It reappeared in November 2010 , this time calling itself " Microsoft Security Essentials 2011 " . A more dangerous rogue appeared in August 2010 . Designated Rogue : Win32 / <unk> or Unknown Win32 / Trojan , it closely resembles Microsoft Security Essentials and uses sophisticated social engineering to deceive users and infect their systems , under the guise of five different fictional anti @-@ malware products . It also terminates and prevents the launch of 156 different programs , including Registry Editor , Windows Command Prompt , Internet Explorer , Mozilla Firefox , Opera , Safari and Google Chrome . 
 = The Office ( U.S. season 9 ) = 
 The ninth and final season of the American television comedy The Office premiered on NBC on September 20 , 2012 , and concluded on May 16 , 2013 , consisting of 25 episodes . The Office is an American adaptation of the British comedy series of the same name , and is presented in a mockumentary format , portraying the daily lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictitious Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . The ninth season of The Office aired on Thursdays at 9 : 00 p.m. ( Eastern ) in the United States , as part of the Comedy Night Done Right television block . This is the second season not to star Steve Carell as lead character Michael Scott , although he returned for a cameo appearance in the series finale . 
 The ninth season largely focuses on the relationship between Jim ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) . After Jim decides to follow his dream and start a sports marketing company in Philadelphia , Pam begins to worry about moving , and the couple 's relationship experiences stress . Meanwhile , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) abandons the office for a three @-@ month boating trip , and eventually quits his job to pursue his dream of becoming a star , although he soon becomes famous for a viral video . Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) is finally promoted to regional manager . The documentary airs , and a year later , the members of the office gather for Dwight and Angela 's marriage as well as a final round of interviews . 
 Following the decline in ratings from the previous year , the ninth season of The Office managed to stabilize around 4 million viewers per episode . The series finale , however , was watched by over 5 @.@ 69 million viewers , making it the highest @-@ rated episode that the show had aired in over a year . The season ranked as the ninety @-@ fourth most watched television series during the 2012 – 13 television year and saw a decrease in ratings from the previous season . Critical reception was moderately positive ; although some critics took issue with certain aspects , such as the reveal of the in @-@ series documentary crew , many argued that it was an improvement over the previous season . Others lauded the way the show was able to successfully wrap @-@ up its story arcs . " Finale " was nominated for three awards at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards , and won for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series . 
 = = Production = = 
 The ninth season of the show was produced by Reveille Productions and Deedle @-@ Dee Productions , both in association with Universal Television . The show is based on the British comedy series of the same name , which was created by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant for the BBC . In addition , the two are executive producers on the show . On May 11 , 2012 , NBC renewed The Office for a ninth season . Series developer Greg Daniels returned as showrunner this season . Daniels stated that the season would feature more big season arcs , saying " I 'll tell you that the last couple of years , I don 't think we did any big arc @-@ type things in the way that we used to in the beginning , I think the thing we 're going to do is bring back a lot of arcs . " Brent Forrester , who had been a consulting producer and writer since the third season was promoted to executive producer , alongside new series writer Dan Sterling . 
 In a conference call with reporters on August 21 , 2012 , Daniels announced that this would be the final season of the series . Daniels said , " This year feels like the last chance to really go out together and make an artistic ending for the show that pays off a lot of the stuff that matters most to fans . " Daniels also said all the questions would be answered , such as who was behind the documentary , and why they had been filming it for so long , as well as the reveal of the Scranton Strangler . A central point during the season was the romance between Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) and Pete Miller ( Jake Lacy ) . According to Michael Ausiello of TVLine , the nature of their relationship was heavily debated by the writers and producers ; he noted that " the triangle [ between Andy , Erin , and Pete ] has stirred up a number of debates in the writers room , which tells me even they don 't know at this point which guy Erin will choose . " According to Kemper , Daniels asked for her personal input due to her understanding of the character . 
 For the season , cast members John Krasinski , Jenna Fischer , Rainn Wilson , and Ed Helms were credited as producers . Krasinski also directed an episode . Guest directors for the season included noted actor Bryan Cranston , who directed the episode " Work Bus " , and filmmaker Jon Favreau , who directed the episode " Moving On " . Daniels directed the first episode , which he also wrote . This marked the first time that he had both written and directed an episode of The Office since the fourth season entry " Fun Run " . Ken Kwapis directed the series finale ; he also directed the show 's pilot episode . While The Office was mainly filmed on a studio set at Valley Center Studios in Van Nuys , California , the city of Scranton , Pennsylvania , where the show is set , was also used for shots of the opening theme . Angela Kinsey and Rainn Wilson , during an interview , expressed the hope to film an episode of the season in Scranton . Although this never came to fruition , exterior shots of the real Scranton bar The Bog were featured in the tenth episode " Lice " . 
 Originally , the season was supposed to contain 24 episodes , which would have meant that the series aired exactly 200 episodes . However , the series ' penultimate episode was elongated into 2 separate episodes , resulting in " Finale " — which was announced previously as an hour @-@ long special — being the 24th and 25th episodes of the season . This meant that the last part of " Finale " is the series ' 201st episode . On March 19 , 2013 , the official Office fansite OfficeTally launched a campaign on Change.org to " super @-@ size or extend " the finale ; this campaign was motivated by a statement made by Daniels , in which he mentioned he would " beg " the studio to air a longer episode . On May 2 , 2013 the petition amassed 20 @,@ 000 signatures . On May 7 , NBC announced the series finale would be extended , and air in a 75 minute time slot . A one @-@ hour retrospective of the series aired prior to the one @-@ hour series finale on May 16 . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The Office employs an ensemble cast . Most of the main characters , and some minor ones , are based on characters from the British version of The Office . While these characters normally have the same attitudes and perceptions as their British counterparts , the roles have been redesigned to better fit the American show . The show is known for its large cast size , many of whom are known particularly for their improvisational work . Rainn Wilson portrays Dwight Schrute , who , based upon Gareth Keenan , is the Assistant to the Regional Manager , although the character frequently fails to include " to the " in his title . John Krasinski portrays Jim Halpert , a sales representative and prankster , who is based upon Tim Canterbury , and is married to Pam Halpert , the office administrator . Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) , who is based on Dawn Tinsley , is shy , but is often a cohort with Jim in his pranks on Dwight . Ed Helms plays Andy Bernard , the preppy manager — who was previously a salesman — and boastful Cornell alumnus whose love for a cappella music and awkward social skills generates mixed feelings from his employees . 
 Krasinski and Helms appeared in fewer episodes in order to film several upcoming movies . Helms was temporarily written out the series with a storyline that saw his character travel to the Caribbean with his brother on a boat . As such , Helms made only a small appearance in " The Whale " and was absent from the following eight episodes . He returned in the episode " Couples Discount " . According to TVLine , he returned to work right before the show 's Christmas break . Wilson was initially slated to appear in only 13 episodes before leaving for a planned Dwight @-@ centric spin @-@ off , but the spin @-@ off was not picked up by NBC . Mindy Kaling and B. J. Novak have much lesser roles as Kelly Kapoor and Ryan Howard , respectively . Both Kaling and Novak appeared in the season opener " New Guys " , and both returned for the series finale . Actress Catherine Tate , who joined the series as a series regular midway through season eight portraying Nellie Bertram , continued with the series . Clark Duke and Lacy joined the cast as customer service representatives hired to deal with the many neglected customer service complaints Kelly has amassed over the years ; Lacy 's character , Pete , is also a love interest for Erin . 
 Kinsey and Wilson also noted that the cast and crew could neither " confirm nor deny " but were " hoping " for a return of Steve Carell as Michael Scott . In mid @-@ December , Krasinski later revealed that he was optimistic about a return ; in an interview with E ! Online Krasinski said that the producers were supposedly " still trying to figure out [ Carell 's ] schedule " and that the finale " just wouldn 't be the same without him " . However , NBC chairman Robert Greenblatt later admitted during an interview that while he is " hopeful " , he does not think Carell will return ; he noted that Carell was satisfied with his character 's exit and did not want to tarnish it . On January 16 , Daniels revealed that Carell would not appear in the finale in any capacity , a decision that Carell later reiterated . Three months later , however , the producers for The Office mounted " an 11th hour effort last month " to get Carell to make a cameo in the show 's final episode , according to TVLine . Carell 's personal representative confirmed that Carell was on the set for the final episode , but that he did not film any scenes . However , an anonymous source close to the show cryptically said " don 't rule anything out " . TVLine later reported on May 6 , that Carell would appear in a cameo , although NBC declined to comment and Carell 's representatives continued to deny the reports . Carell , however , did end up returning for the finale ; his character , Michael Scott , becomes Dwight 's best man at his wedding . A month after the episode aired , Carell explained in an interview with TVLine that he " lied for months to the press , to almost everyone , really " . He noted that he " felt terribly for the cast and for [ executive producer ] Greg Daniels , because they all lied , too . " Krasinski , on the other hand , explained that " It was so thrilling . We all just flat @-@ out lied … It was just one of those things that we all vowed and had to protect " . 
 In addition to Carell , the season also saw the return of several " veteran cast members " . Former series regular David Denman was the first to do so , appearing as Roy Anderson in the second episode of the season " Roy 's Wedding " ; he was last seen as part of the Threat Level Midnight film in season seven . Josh Groban reprised his role as Andy 's brother , Walter Jr , appearing in the episode " The Boat " . Melora Hardin returned as Jan Levinson in the episode " The Whale " and had a small vocal cameo in the episode " Couples Discount " . " Junior Salesman " saw the return of several minor characters , including Lance Krall as Sensei Ira ( who first appeared in the second season episode " The Fight " ) , Noel Petok as Troy Underbridge ( who first appeared in the fourth season episode " Night Out " ) , Beth Grant as Dwight 's babysitter ( who first appeared in the fourth season episode " Dinner Party " ) , and James Urbaniak as Rolf ( who first appeared in the fifth season episode " Company Picnic " ) . Although cast member Zach Woods ' series regular contract was not renewed for the season , he returned to the series as a guest star , in the episode " Moving On " . David Koechner returned as Todd Packer in " The Farm " . " Finale " also featured the return of several recurring characters , such as Nancy Carell as Carol Stills ( who played the recurring role of Michael 's real @-@ estate agent and short @-@ time girlfriend ) , Sendhil Ramamurthy as Ravi , Jackie Debatin as Elizabeth ( who first appeared in the third season episode " Ben Franklin " ) , Devon Abner as Devon ( who was a former Dunder Mifflin employee fired in " Halloween " ) , and Spencer Daniels as Jake Palmer ( who first played Meredith 's son in the season two episode " Take Your Daughter to Work Day " ) . 
 Stephen Colbert guest starred in the Halloween episode as Broccoli Rob , a former member of Here Comes Treble , Andy 's a cappella group . The episode " Lice " guest starred Julius Erving playing himself as an investor in Jim 's sports marketing business . Former NBC co @-@ chairman and The Office executive producer Ben Silverman had a minor recurring role as one of Jim 's colleagues . He appeared in the episodes " Here Comes Treble " , " Suit Warehouse " , " Customer Loyalty " , and " Moving On " . The fourteenth episode , " Junior Salesmen " , featured several guest stars . These included Eric Wareheim as Gabor , Matt L. Jones as Zeke , and Will McCormack as Wolf . In the episode " Promos " , athlete Ryan Howard played a version of himself . Comedian Roseanne Barr had a two @-@ episode arc as a talent agent named Carla Fern , and first appeared in the episode " Stairmageddon " . Michael Imperioli guest starred in the episode " Livin ' the Dream " as Sensei Billy , acting as a foil for Dwight . The episode " A.A.R.M. " guest starred Aaron Rodgers , Clay Aiken , Mark McGrath , Santigold , and Jessica St. Clair , all playing themselves . The series finale guest starred : Rachael Harris as Angela 's sister ; Joan Cusack and Ed Begley Jr. as Erin 's biological parents ; Malcolm Barrett as Stanley 's replacement ; and Bill Hader and Seth Meyers as themselves . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The season aired on Thursdays at 9 : 00 p.m. , as part of the Comedy Night Done Right programming block . The season premiere , " New Guys " received a 2 @.@ 1 / 6 percent share in the Nielsen ratings among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 2 @.@ 1 percent of viewers aged 18 to 49 watched the episode , and 6 percent of viewers watching television at the time watched the episode . The episode was viewed by 4 @.@ 28 million viewers and became the lowest @-@ rated season premiere for the series . In addition , it marked a 46 percent drop in viewership from the season eight premiere " The List " . For the first sixteen episodes , the series was able to maintain roughly 4 million viewers . However , starting with the seventeenth episode " The Farm " , ratings began to drop below this threshold . The series hit an all @-@ time low with the twentieth episode , " Paper Airplane " , which was viewed by only 3 @.@ 25 million viewers , and received a 1 @.@ 7 rating / 5 percent share . The series finale was viewed by 5 @.@ 69 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 0 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This made it the highest @-@ rated episode of the season ; it also marked an increase in the previous season finale , which garnered only 4 @.@ 49 million viewers . " Finale " was the most watched episode of The Office since the eighth season episode " Pool Party " , but ranked as the third @-@ least watched finale of the series , following the eighth and first season finales . Although in its ninth season , The Office no longer was NBC 's highest @-@ rated scripted comedy series — it was surpassed by Go On — it often ranked as the highest @-@ rated scripted NBC series on Thursday nights . Rainn Wilson argued that the show 's lower ratings were a combination of the overall trend in lower television ratings in 2012 , as well as the fact that " NBC didn 't promote [ the series ] one bit " . NBC increased their usual ad @-@ price by 200 percent for the finale , asking for $ 400 @,@ 000 dollars per commercial . This was largely due to the anticipated increase in viewership that the finale would bring . 
 The season ranked as the ninety @-@ fourth most watched television series during the 2012 – 13 season , with an average of 5 @.@ 061 million viewers . The season also tied with the CBS series Rules of Engagement and the Fox series American Dad ! to be the forty @-@ third most watched television series in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . In this category , the show received a 2 @.@ 6 rating . This meant that , on average , the season was viewed by 2 @.@ 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds . It was viewed by 3 @.@ 32 million in this demographic . In terms of viewers , the ninth season ranked as the lowest @-@ rated season of The Office , although it beat the first season 's ranking , which was the 102nd most watched program for the 2004 – 05 year . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The ninth season of The Office received moderately positive reviews from television critics . Based on seven critiques , review aggregation website Metacritic gave the ninth season of the show a 64 out of 100 rating , which denotes " generally favorable reviews " . Entertainment website Holy Moly named the series one of the best shows during the 2012 – 13 season , writing that " this final season of The Office has been great " largely due to the fact that " every single relationship in the show rings true with the audience . " Michael Tedder of Vulture commented that he was " willing to call it the fourth best season of the show overall , which is by no means faint praise . " He explained that this was largely due to the fact that the " final season was a chance to see how everyone else would end up " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club wrote that " the tension between Jim and Pam in the final season ended up being highly controversial for a number of reasons ... but it also provided the most hopeful moments of the series ' final stretch " , although he did note that it was clear that the writers had " blatantly " set it up . He felt that the finale was able to successfully return the series " to what had always been its heart — to have true fulfillment " . Roth Cornet of IGN awarded the season an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , denoting a " great " year . She felt that the character growth in the final few episodes was particularly well executed , and the last stretch of the season helped raise it after a rocky start ; ultimately , she felt that the writers were able to craft the proper ending for the show . She was , however , critical of Andy 's characterization , noting that he was merely used as a plot device when convenient . Many critics argued that the season was an improvement , in both writing and humor , over the previous season . 
 Several specific episodes received praise . Andrea Reiher of Zap2it named " Dwight Christmas " the best comedy TV episode of 2012 . She wrote that the episode " was not only funny but had a huge nostalgia factor " , and continued the show 's trend of strong Christmas episodes . Reiher also praised the episode 's two subplots , writing that " drunk Darryl and Die Hard " helped produce " a classic episode of The Office that brought back the warm and fuzzy feelings of the early seasons of the show . " The season 's penultimate entry , " A.A.R.M. " , received a glowing response from many critics . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix wrote that the episode was " surprisingly ... terrific in most areas . " Roth Cornet of IGN noted that " The interplay between Jim , Dwight , and Pam has been the core of the series since Michael Scott 's departure , and it was good to see the trio front and center once again as The Office comes to a close . " The series finale , in particular , was praised by critics . Sepinwall called it " a tremendously satisfying conclusion to a show that could make us gasp with laughter , but that could also make us cry or smile " . Cornet wrote that it " was a strong hour of television [ and ] the finale shone and delivered on all of its promise . " Nick Campbell of TV.com wrote that the episode was " just right " for the series . Other episodes were not received as positively . " Lice " , for instance , was called " terrible " by Campbell , as well as the " epitome of filler " by Brett Davinger of The California Literary Review . " The Farm " was largely derided due to its uneven nature , and the broad humor that was utilized in it . 
 The reveal of the in @-@ series documentary crew in " Customer Loyalty " received large amounts of critical attention . E ! Online named the reveal one of the " Best TV Moments of the Week " . Verne Gay of Newsday called the scene a " historic " moment for the show . Conversely , Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club wrote an article that argued that the mockumentary format made the camera " an audience surrogate " , and that by revealing the documentary crew , " the audience no longer felt welcome " . The subplot involving Brian ( played by Chris Diamantopoulos ) , a boom mic operator for the in @-@ series documentary , was met with mostly negative reviews . Michael Tedder of Vulture called it " the least interesting way this camera crew reveal could have gone " . Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic criticized the reintroduction of the character in the episode " Promos " , noting that his reappearance felt " forced " . McNutt called it " an abandoned novelty " . Daniels later revealed in an interview that the subplot was a red herring to keep viewers emotionally invested in Pam and Jim 's story . He explained , " we never intended him to actually [ interfere with Pam and Jim 's marriage ] , but wanted people to worry about it so they would be engaged in the story . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 On December 12 , 2012 , the series was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series , but lost to Modern Family . Michael Scott 's return was nominated and won the fan @-@ voted " Best TV Moment " at the 3rd Critics ' Choice Television Awards on June 10 , 2013 . Greg Daniels was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards for " Finale " . " Finale " was also nominated for an Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series Emmy and an Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series Emmy ; David Rogers and Claire Scanlon for " Finale " won the latter , marking the fifth win for The Office at the Emmys overall and the series ' first win since 2009 . Rogers and Scanlon also won an American Cinema Editors award for Best Edited Half @-@ Hour Series for Television . In addition , the web documentary " The Office : The Farewells " , which aired on NBC.com prior to the series ' conclusion , was nominated for an Outstanding Special Class Program Creative Arts Emmy Award . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In the following table , " U.S. viewers ( million ) " refers to the number of Americans who viewed the episode on the night of broadcast . Episodes are listed by the order in which they aired , and may not necessarily correspond to their production codes . ‡ denotes an hour @-@ long episode ( with advertisements ; actual runtime around 42 minutes ) , and <unk> denotes an extended 75 @-@ minute episode ( with advertisements ; actual runtime around 52 minutes ) 
 = = Home media release = = 
 = Starbreeze Studios = 
 Starbreeze Studios is a video game development studio and publisher , based in Stockholm , Sweden . Notable games developed include The Chronicles of Riddick : Escape from Butcher Bay , Payday 2 and Brothers : A Tale of Two Sons . 
 Founded by members of the <unk> Triton , the company was merged with O3 Games in 2002 but the name Starbreeze was retained . The company produced titles including Enclave and Knights of the Temple : Infernal Crusade . In the early 2000s , cancellations of their projects due to conflicts with publishers , and a failed acquisition , led to a severe financial crisis , resulting in staff lay @-@ offs during the development of Starbreeze 's fourth game , The Chronicles of Riddick : Escape from Butcher Bay . This game received critical acclaim and helped Starbreeze establish a reputation for producing a good licensed game . The company worked on The Darkness , whose sales were considered satisfactory . 
 Starbreeze partnered with Electronic Arts to develop a reboot to the Syndicate series , but it ended up being a commercial failure , and many staff members moved to rival company MachineGames , established by Starbreeze 's founders . As a result , the company shifted part of its focus on developing smaller games , such as Brothers : A Tale of Two Sons . Starbreeze began expanding the company in 2012 with its acquisition of Overkill Software . Overkill 's first title after the acquisition , Payday 2 , helped Starbreeze make a record profit after suffering an accumulated loss of $ 14 @.@ 4 million since its inception . In 2015 , the company announced that it would start publishing video games from independent developers , and that it had begun the development of a virtual reality headset named Project Star VR . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding and merger = = = 
 The company was founded by Swedish programmer Magnus Högdahl . Högdahl was a former member of the PC demoscene group Triton , and specialized in making tech demos . He decided to leave the company after his project , an action role @-@ playing game named Into the Shadows , was cancelled . He then decided to found his own studio and began crafting his own game engine . He actively recruited staff among his acquaintances and the studio was officially established in 1998 in <unk> , Sweden . 
 Högdahl serving as the company 's head and tech lead , was responsible for creating a new game engine for future games , and looking for publishers willing to help publish its games . At that time , the company had only about five employees , and had created a prototype for a video game and pitched it to publishers at E3 1998 . Gremlin Interactive agreed to publish the game , and the deal was finalized in late 1998 . The company grew to have roughly eleven staff members . The game was a first @-@ person action role @-@ playing game named Sorcery . With a high fantasy setting , the game featured 3D visuals and its gameplay was similar to that of Diablo and Quake . However , Gremlin Interactive was acquired by Infogrames in 2000 and the partnership with Starbreeze dissolved , resulting in the game 's cancellation . 
 O3 Games was founded by Lars Johansson , who also worked at a demoscene company . Its first game was The <unk> , a real @-@ time strategy space game that was released in 2000 and subsequently became a success for the company . O3 needed to expand so that it could continue video game development . After Sorcery 's cancellation , Starbreeze ran into financial difficulties . Unable to support itself financially , Starbreeze needed to merge with another developer to continue in business . The two companies discussed a merger in Uppsala and merged shortly afterwards , retaining the name Starbreeze Studios . 
 = = = Post @-@ merger = = = 
 After the merger , the company began working on Enclave , a medieval fantasy , multiplayer @-@ only video game inspired by Team Fortress . The game also became the company 's first project with international appeal , enabling Starbreeze to partner with various publishers including Swing Entertainment , Conspiracy Entertainment , and Vivendi . However , Swing Entertainment faced bankruptcy at that time , and decided to turn the game into a single @-@ player action @-@ adventure video game with the goal of sending it to market as soon as possible . The game was released in 2002 , and Starbreeze had to lay off staff after its release . Enclave II was also in development . The sequel was said to feature a more elaborate story , 28 different maps , 10 playable characters , and an improved fighting system . However , these features were axed when Starbreeze got into legal troubles with the publisher , resulting in the game 's cancellation . Another game , Knights of the Temple : Infernal Crusade , was successfully released with help from publisher TDK <unk> . However its sequel was shifted to another developer . Starbreeze attempted to acquire another studio , Rock Solid Games , but the agreement between the two fell apart and brought both companies financial problems . 
 Another project being worked on by Starbreeze at that time was The Chronicles of Riddick : Escape from Butcher Bay . Set in the The Chronicles of Riddick movie universe , the game was published by Vivendi . The team took inspiration from films such as Escape from Alcatraz and video games such as GoldenEye 007 and the Tom Clancy 's Splinter Cell series . However , the company was downsizing due to its financial problems and the number of employees dropped from 80 to 25 , and the entire development team moved away from the main Starbreeze floor to prevent it from being affected by low morale , and to allow it to focus on the game 's development . The game enjoyed an 18 @-@ month development cycle , which was significantly longer than typical licensed games . A PlayStation 2 version of the game was also in development , but was ultimately cancelled as the then head of Vivendi 's publishing division , Michael Pole , ordered its cancellation to " make his mark " . Universal Motion Pictures intervened and kept the game 's Xbox version . Escape from Butcher Bay received critical acclaim upon its launch , with many critics regarding it as one of the best licensed games ever made . Its gameplay element including the puzzle @-@ solving mechanics , the stealth segment , and its ahead @-@ of @-@ its @-@ time visuals , also received praise from critics . Despite receiving critical acclaim , it was not a commercial success for Starbreeze . 
 After the release of Escape from Butcher Bay , Starbreeze again encountered financial difficulties after having not received a significant royalty payment from Vivendi . It sold part of its motion capture and animation department to a British company , <unk> . However , the game helped set Starbreeze 's reputation as a studio capable of making good licensed titles . With the help of Union Entertainment , an intermediary company , Starbreeze signed an agreement with Majesco Entertainment for a new title set within the The Darkness universe owned by Top Cow Comics on July 16 , 2004 . Mid @-@ way through the game 's development , Majesco underwent restructuring because of financial difficulties , shifted its focus , and dropped the game . 2K Games stepped up and acquired the publishing rights . 2K extended the game 's development cycle , and asked Starbreeze to develop a multiplayer mode for the game . The Darkness was released in 2007 . It fared worse than the team expected critically , but its commercial performance was satisfactory , selling more than 1 million copies worldwide . 
 After working on two different licensed games , the team intended to develop its own games . A game named Kano , involving mind @-@ reading , was started but was never completed . After the release of The Darkness , the company signed a two @-@ project contract with Vivendi . One of the games was a new property known as Polaris . The game was set in a post @-@ apocalyptic environment . Players were tasked to overcome snowstorms , and defeat terrorists and monsters cooperatively with other players . Vivendi was not convinced the game would succeed and adjusted the contract to a remake of Escape from Butcher Bay , The Chronicles of Riddick : Assault on Dark Athena . Vivendi originally named the game Riddick 2 but Starbreeze disagreed claiming the name would raise expectations among gamers that the remake might not be able to deliver . Vivendi 's subsidiary Sierra Entertainment was set to publish the game . After the merger between Activision and Vivendi , the new company began streamlining Vivendi and put the game , along with Brütal Legend , and Ghostbusters : The Video Game up for sale . Atari eventually acquired the publishing rights and the game was released in 2009 . 
 = = = 2010 — 2016 = = = 
 Starbreeze then partnered with Electronic Arts for two different games , one was known as Project Redlime , while the other was an action @-@ adventure video game set within the Bourne universe . The Bourne game was cancelled as a direct result of Matt Damon and director Paul Greengrass not participating in the fourth Bourne film . Project Redlime had a larger scale than the Bourne game . It was said to be a reinvention of one of Electronic Arts ' franchises . The company shifted from a technology @-@ orientated company to focus more on the core gameplay mechanics of their new project . Syndicate was announced in September 2011 . The game suffered from a troubled development , with Starbreeze completely reworking the game one year after its initial development . There were also many creative differences between the developer and the publisher , and the two companies suffered from an inharmonious relationship . During the game 's development , seven senior members of the company , including Högdahl , left to form their own smaller studio . Some of them formed MachineGames to work on their own original games . With a budget that was less than other typical AAA video games , Syndicate received average reviews and was a commercial failure . <unk> left the company after the game 's completion , and 25 employees were laid off . 
 Many employees left Starbreeze when MachineGames recruited . Then CEO Johan <unk> also stepped down , and was replaced by Mikael <unk> . <unk> took the studio in a new direction . Besides focusing on AAA video games , it would also allocate resources to develop smaller , downloadable games in order to broaden the company 's portfolio . These new games would no longer use the engine created by Högdahl . In 2011 , Starbreeze announced that it was partnering with Epic Games to use their engine , Unreal Engine , for their first small titles . In 2012 , Starbreeze announced Cold Mercury , a free @-@ to @-@ play video game and a project codenamed <unk> . Prior to that , Josef Fares , an award winning Swedish director , had been unsuccessfully pitching game ideas to several Swedish developers . Starbreeze was in need of new , original properties , and accepted Fares ' pitch . <unk> later became Brothers : A Tale of Two Sons . Focusing on creating an emotional and " personal " experience , Starbreeze partnered with publisher 505 Games to publish the game . It was released in 2013 to critical acclaim and received numerous awards and accolades . The rights to the Brothers intellectual property was later acquired by 505 Games in 2015 . After the success of Brothers , Fares announced that he had established a new studio named <unk> and is working on a project with Electronic Arts . 
 In 2012 , Starbreeze also announced that they had acquired Overkill Software , the developer of Payday : The Heist , granting them rights to all of Overkill 's propriety technology and intellectual properties . At the time , Overkill was working on the sequel , Payday 2 , a game that was set to " broaden the Payday template " . The game was a massive commercial success , and was profitable from pre @-@ order sales alone . Payday 2 also became Starbreeze 's best selling game of all time , and helped the company to make a record profit for the first time after suffering an accumulated loss of $ 14 @.@ 4 million between 1998 and June 2013 . The game 's success also prompted publisher 505 Games to invest $ 5 million in Starbreeze in March 2015 to continue to improve and develop additional content for Payday 2 over twenty months . The game was ported to PlayStation 4 and Xbox One under the title Payday 2 : Crimewave Edition . 
 Starting in 2014 the company began broadening its business . On 25 September 2014 , Starbreeze Studios announced that they had acquired a Los Angeles @-@ based studio called <unk> for $ 7 million . The studio is currently working on a toys @-@ to @-@ life game . In May 2015 , Starbreeze announced that the company would start publishing video games from independent developers . The first independent title set to be published by Starbreeze is Raid : World War II , an upcoming four @-@ player , World War II shooter , being developed by Lion Game Lion . During E3 2015 , Starbreeze Studios announced Project <unk> , a virtual reality headset , which is currently under development by <unk> , a firm acquired by Starbreeze . The company also acquired Payday Productions and the film rights to Payday in July 2015 . In terms of projects , Starbreeze subsidiary Overkill is working on Overkill 's The Walking Dead , which is set to be released in 2017 with the help of publisher 505 Games , and Storm , which was merged from Starbreeze 's own Cold Mercury . Starbreeze is also set to publish a John Wick game developed by <unk> and Grab for virtual reality platforms . The core Starbreeze team also received investment from Korean publisher <unk> to develop a new first @-@ person cooperative game set within the Crossfire universe . Starbreeze also announced that it will be publishing Dead by Daylight , an asymmetrical , multiplayer , survival horror game developed by Behavior Interactive . 
 On 30 May 2016 , 505 Games announced that it had sold the Payday franchise and intellectual property to Starbreeze in exchange for US $ 30 million worth of stock . Starbreeze also announced that they had acquired the name and the franchises of <unk> a day later . 
 = = Developer = = 
 = = Publisher = = 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 According to Starbreeze , the studio both develops and produces intellectual properties and licensed projects which allow it to have creative control . According to Starbreeze 's CEO Johan <unk> , in 2008 the company did not wish to recruit numerous employees because of the time that is needed to integrate them into the company . After the 2012 departure of many employees , and the disappointing commercial sales of Syndicate , Mikael Nermark , the company 's CEO , decided to shift the company 's focus from producing standard licensed games to creating new and original intellectual properties . He stated that he believed strongly in Starbreeze 's ability to make games that are more than typical AAA games , and that its employees would consider making games their " daily work " , taking ownership of their projects . 
 As an independent company , Starbreeze believes that in addition to developing AAA games , it must develop some smaller @-@ scale projects like Brothers : A Tale of Two Sons , or free @-@ to @-@ play games like Cold Mercury to survive . Nermark added further that he is confident that the studio is capable of bringing its " style " and business model to all genres and that gameplay innovation is one of the most important elements when developing a game . 
 = Chelsea F.C. = 
 Chelsea Football Club ( / <unk> / ) are an English professional football club based in Fulham , London , that competes in the Premier League of England . Founded in 1905 , the club 's home ground since then has been Stamford Bridge . 
 Chelsea had their first major success in 1955 , when they won the league championship . They then won various cup competitions between 1965 and 1996 . The club 's greatest period of success has been during the last two decades , winning 17 major trophies since 1997 . Chelsea have won five national league titles , seven FA Cups , five League Cups and four FA Community Shields , one UEFA Champions League , two UEFA Cup Winners ' Cups , one UEFA Europa League and one UEFA Super Cup . Chelsea are the only London club to win the UEFA Champions League , and one of four clubs , and the only British club , to have won all three main UEFA club competitions . 
 Chelsea 's regular kit colours are royal blue shirts and shorts with white socks . The club 's crest has been changed several times in attempts to re @-@ brand the club and modernise its image . The current crest , featuring a ceremonial lion rampant <unk> holding a staff , is a modification of the one introduced in the early 1950s . The club have the sixth @-@ highest average all @-@ time attendance in English football . Their average home gate for the 2015 – 16 season was 41 @,@ 500 , the seventh highest in the Premier League . Since 2003 , Chelsea have been owned by Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich . In 2016 , they were ranked by Forbes magazine as the seventh most valuable football club in the world , at £ 1 @.@ 15 billion ( $ 1 @.@ 66 billion ) . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1904 , Gus Mears acquired the Stamford Bridge athletics stadium with the aim of turning it into a football ground . An offer to lease it to nearby Fulham was turned down , so Mears opted to found his own club to use the stadium . As there was already a team named Fulham in the borough , the name of the adjacent borough of Chelsea was chosen for the new club ; names like Kensington FC , Stamford Bridge FC and London FC were also considered . Chelsea were founded on 10 March 1905 at The Rising Sun pub ( now The Butcher 's Hook ) , opposite the present @-@ day main entrance to the ground on Fulham Road , and were elected to the Football League shortly afterwards . 
 The club won promotion to the First Division in their second season , and yo @-@ <unk> between the First and Second Divisions in their early years . They reached the 1915 FA Cup Final , where they lost to Sheffield United at Old Trafford , and finished third in the First Division in 1920 , the club 's best league campaign to that point . Chelsea attracted large crowds and had a reputation for signing big @-@ name players , but success continued to elude the club in the inter @-@ war years . 
 Former Arsenal and England centre @-@ forward Ted Drake became manager in 1952 and proceeded to modernise the club . He removed the club 's Chelsea pensioner crest , improved the youth set @-@ up and training regime , rebuilt the side with shrewd signings from the lower divisions and amateur leagues , and led Chelsea to their first major trophy success – the League championship – in 1954 – 55 . The following season saw UEFA create the European Champions ' Cup , but after objections from The Football League and the FA Chelsea were persuaded to withdraw from the competition before it started . Chelsea failed to build on this success , and spent the remainder of the 1950s in mid @-@ table . Drake was dismissed in 1961 and replaced by player @-@ coach Tommy Docherty . 
 Docherty built a new team around the group of talented young players emerging from the club 's youth set @-@ up and Chelsea challenged for honours throughout the 1960s , enduring several near @-@ misses . They were on course for a treble of League , FA Cup and League Cup going into the final stages of the 1964 – 65 season , winning the League Cup but faltering late on in the other two . In three seasons the side were beaten in three major semi @-@ finals and were FA Cup runners @-@ up . Under Docherty 's successor , Dave Sexton , Chelsea won the FA Cup in 1970 , beating Leeds United 2 – 1 in a final replay . Chelsea took their first European honour , a UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup triumph , the following year , with another replayed win , this time over Real Madrid in Athens . 
 The late 1970s through to the 1980s was a turbulent period for Chelsea . An ambitious redevelopment of Stamford Bridge threatened the financial stability of the club , star players were sold and the team were relegated . Further problems were caused by a notorious hooligan element among the support , which was to plague the club throughout the decade . In 1982 , Chelsea were , at the nadir of their fortunes , acquired by Ken Bates for the nominal sum of £ 1 , although by now the Stamford Bridge freehold had been sold to property developers , meaning the club faced losing their home . On the pitch , the team had fared little better , coming close to relegation to the Third Division for the first time , but in 1983 manager John Neal put together an impressive new team for minimal outlay . Chelsea won the Second Division title in 1983 – 84 and established themselves in the top division , before being relegated again in 1988 . The club bounced back immediately by winning the Second Division championship in 1988 – 89 . 
 After a long @-@ running legal battle , Bates reunited the stadium freehold with the club in 1992 by doing a deal with the banks of the property developers , who had been bankrupted by a market crash . Chelsea 's form in the new Premier League was unconvincing , although they did reach the 1994 FA Cup Final with Glenn Hoddle . It was not until the appointment of Ruud Gullit as player @-@ manager in 1996 that their fortunes changed . He added several top international players to the side , as the club won the FA Cup in 1997 and established themselves as one of England 's top sides again . Gullit was replaced by Gianluca Vialli , who led the team to victory in the League Cup Final , the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup Final and the UEFA Super Cup in 1998 , the FA Cup in 2000 and their first appearance in the UEFA Champions League . Vialli was sacked in favour of Claudio Ranieri , who guided Chelsea to the 2002 FA Cup Final and Champions League qualification in 2002 – 03 . 
 In June 2003 , Bates sold Chelsea to Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich for £ 140 million . Over £ 100 million was spent on new players , but Ranieri was unable to deliver any trophies , and was replaced by José Mourinho . Under Mourinho , Chelsea became the fifth English team to win back @-@ to @-@ back league championships since the Second World War ( 2004 – 05 and 2005 – 06 ) , in addition to winning an FA Cup ( 2007 ) and two League Cups ( 2005 and 2007 ) . Mourinho was replaced by Avram Grant , who led the club to their first UEFA Champions League final , which they lost on penalties to Manchester United . 
 In 2009 , Guus Hiddink guided Chelsea to another FA Cup success . In 2009 – 10 , his successor Carlo Ancelotti led them to their first Premier League and FA Cup " Double " , and becoming the first English top @-@ flight club to score 100 league goals in a season since 1963 . In 2012 , caretaker manager Roberto Di Matteo led Chelsea to their seventh FA Cup , and their first UEFA Champions League title , beating Bayern Munich 4 – 3 on penalties , the first London club to win the trophy . In 2013 , interim manager Rafael Benítez guided Chelsea to win the UEFA Europa League against Benfica , becoming the first club to hold two major European titles simultaneously and one of four clubs , and the only British club , to have won all three of UEFA 's major club competitions . In the summer of 2013 , Mourinho returned as manager , leading Chelsea to League Cup success in March 2015 , and their fifth league title two months later . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Chelsea have only had one home ground , Stamford Bridge , where they have played since the team 's foundation . It was officially opened on 28 April 1877 and for the first 28 years of its existence it was used almost exclusively by the London Athletic Club as an arena for athletics meetings and not at all for football . In 1904 the ground was acquired by businessman Gus Mears and his brother Joseph , who had also purchased nearby land ( formerly a large market garden ) with the aim of staging football matches on the now 12 @.@ 5 acre ( 51 @,@ 000 m ² ) site . Stamford Bridge was designed for the Mears family by the noted football architect Archibald Leitch , who had also designed Ibrox , Craven Cottage and Hampden Park . Most football clubs were founded first , and then sought grounds in which to play , but Chelsea were founded for Stamford Bridge . 
 Starting with an open bowl @-@ like design and one covered terrace , Stamford Bridge had an original capacity of around 100 @,@ 000 . The early 1930s saw the construction of a terrace on the southern part of the ground with a roof that covered around one fifth of the stand . It eventually became known as the " Shed End " , the home of Chelsea 's most loyal and vocal supporters , particularly during the 1960s , 70s and 80s . The exact origins of the name are unclear , but the fact that the roof looked like a corrugated iron shed roof played a part . 
 In the early 1970s , the club 's owners announced a modernisation of Stamford Bridge with plans for a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art 50 @,@ 000 all @-@ seater stadium . Work began on the East Stand in 1972 but the project was beset with problems and was never completed ; the cost brought the club close to bankruptcy , culminating in the freehold being sold to property developers . Following a long legal battle , it was not until the mid @-@ 1990s that Chelsea 's future at the stadium was secured and renovation work resumed . The north , west and southern parts of the ground were converted into all @-@ seater stands and moved closer to the pitch , a process completed by 2001 . 
 When Stamford Bridge was redeveloped in the Bates era many additional features were added to the complex including two hotels , apartments , bars , restaurants , the Chelsea Megastore , and an interactive visitor attraction called Chelsea World of Sport . The intention was that these facilities would provide extra revenue to support the football side of the business , but they were less successful than hoped and before the Abramovich takeover in 2003 the debt taken on to finance them was a major burden on the club . Soon after the takeover a decision was taken to drop the " Chelsea Village " brand and refocus on Chelsea as a football club . However , the stadium is sometimes still referred to as part of " Chelsea Village " or " The Village " . 
 The Stamford Bridge freehold , the pitch , the turnstiles and Chelsea 's naming rights are now owned by Chelsea Pitch Owners , a non @-@ profit organisation in which fans are the shareholders . The CPO was created to ensure the stadium could never again be sold to developers . As a condition for using the Chelsea FC name , the club has to play its first team matches at Stamford Bridge , which means that if the club moves to a new stadium , they may have to change their name . Chelsea 's training ground is located in Cobham , Surrey . Chelsea moved to Cobham in 2004 . Their previous training ground in Harlington was taken over by QPR in 2005 . The new training facilities in Cobham were completed in 2007 . 
 Stamford Bridge has been used for a variety of other sporting events since 1905 . It hosted the FA Cup Final from 1920 to 1922 , has held ten FA Cup semi @-@ finals ( most recently in 1978 ) , ten FA Charity Shield matches ( the last in 1970 ) , and three England international matches , the last in 1932 ; it was also the venue for an unofficial Victory International in 1946 . The 2013 UEFA Women 's Champions League Final was played at Stamford Bridge . 
 In October 1905 it hosted a rugby union match between the All Blacks and Middlesex , and in 1914 hosted a baseball match between the touring New York Giants and the Chicago White Sox . It was the venue for a boxing match between world flyweight champion Jimmy Wilde and Joe Conn in 1918 . The running track was used for dirt track racing between 1928 and 1932 , greyhound racing from 1933 to 1968 , and Midget car racing in 1948 . In 1980 , Stamford Bridge hosted the first international floodlit cricket match in the UK , between Essex and the West Indies . It was also the home stadium of the London Monarchs American Football team for the 1997 season . 
 The current club ownership have stated that a larger stadium is necessary in order for Chelsea to stay competitive with rival clubs who have significantly larger stadia , such as Arsenal and Manchester United . Owing to its location next to a main road and two railway lines , fans can only enter the ground via the Fulham Road exits , which places constraints on expansion due to health and safety regulations . The club have consistently affirmed their desire to keep Chelsea at their current home , but have nonetheless been linked with a move to various nearby sites , including the Earls Court Exhibition Centre , Battersea Power Station and the Chelsea Barracks . In October 2011 , a proposal from the club to buy back the freehold to the land on which Stamford Bridge sits was voted down by Chelsea Pitch Owners shareholders . In May 2012 , the club made a formal bid to purchase Battersea Power Station , with a view to developing the site into a new stadium , but lost out to a Malaysian consortium . The club subsequently announced plans to redevelop Stamford Bridge into a 60 @,@ 000 @-@ seater stadium . 
 = = Crest and colours = = 
 = = = Crest = = = 
 Chelsea have had four main crests , which all underwent minor variations . The first , adopted when the club was founded , was the image of a Chelsea pensioner , the army veterans who reside at the nearby Royal Hospital Chelsea . This contributed to the club 's original " pensioner " nickname , and remained for the next half @-@ century , though it never appeared on the shirts . When Ted Drake became Chelsea manager in 1952 , he began to modernise the club . Believing the Chelsea pensioner crest to be old @-@ fashioned , he insisted that it be replaced . A stop @-@ gap badge which comprised the initials <unk> was adopted for a year . In 1953 , the club crest was changed to an upright blue lion looking backwards and holding a staff . It was based on elements in the coat of arms of the Metropolitan Borough of Chelsea with the " lion rampant <unk> " taken from the arms of then club president Viscount Chelsea and the staff from the Abbots of Westminster , former Lords of the Manor of Chelsea . It also featured three red roses , to represent England , and two footballs . This was the first Chelsea crest to appear on the shirts , in the early 1960s . 
 In 1986 , with Ken Bates now owner of the club , Chelsea 's crest was changed again as part of another attempt to modernise and because the old rampant lion badge could not be trademarked . The new badge featured a more naturalistic non @-@ heraldic lion , in white and not blue , standing over the <unk> initials . This lasted for the next 19 years , with some modifications such as the use of different colours , including red from 1987 to 1995 , and yellow from 1995 until 1999 , before the white returned . With the new ownership of Roman Abramovich , and the club 's centenary approaching , combined with demands from fans for the popular 1950s badge to be restored , it was decided that the crest should be changed again in 2005 . The new crest was officially adopted for the start of the 2005 – 06 season and marked a return to the older design , used from 1953 to 1986 , featuring a blue heraldic lion holding a staff . For the centenary season this was accompanied by the words ' 100 <unk> ' and ' <unk> 2005 – 2006 ' on the top and bottom of the crest respectively . 
 = = = Colours = = = 
 Chelsea have always worn blue shirts , although they originally used the paler <unk> blue , which was taken from the racing colours of then club president , Earl Cadogan , and was worn with white shorts and dark blue or black socks . The light blue shirts were replaced by a royal blue version in around 1912 . In the 1960s Chelsea manager Tommy Docherty changed the kit again , switching to blue shorts ( which have remained ever since ) and white socks , believing it made the club 's colours more modern and distinctive , since no other major side used that combination ; this kit was first worn during the 1964 – 65 season . Since then Chelsea have always worn white socks with their home kit apart from a short spell from 1985 to 1992 , when blue socks were reintroduced . 
 Chelsea 's away colours are usually all yellow or all white with blue trim . More recently , the club have had a number of black or dark blue away kits . As with most teams , they have also had some more unusual ones . At Docherty 's behest , in the 1966 FA Cup semi @-@ final they wore blue and black stripes , based on Inter Milan 's kit . In the mid @-@ 1970s , the away strip was a red , white and green kit inspired by the Hungarian national side of the 1950s . Other memorable away kits include an all jade strip worn from 1986 – 89 , red and white diamonds from 1990 – 92 , graphite and tangerine from 1994 – 96 , and luminous yellow from 2007 – 08 . The graphite and tangerine strip often appears in lists of the worst football kits ever . 
 = = Support = = 
 Chelsea are one of the most widely supported football clubs in the world . They have the sixth highest average all @-@ time attendance in English football and regularly attract over 40 @,@ 000 fans to Stamford Bridge ; they were the seventh best @-@ supported Premier League team in the 2013 – 14 season , with an average gate of 41 @,@ 572 . Chelsea 's traditional fanbase comes from all over the Greater London area including working @-@ class parts such as Hammersmith and Battersea , wealthier areas like Chelsea and Kensington , and from the home counties . There are also numerous official supporters clubs in the United Kingdom and all over the world . Between 2007 and 2012 , Chelsea were ranked fourth worldwide in annual replica kit sales , with an average of 910 @,@ 000 . Chelsea 's official Twitter account has 6 @.@ 29 million followers , the fifth highest among football clubs . 
 At matches , Chelsea fans sing chants such as " Carefree " ( to the tune of Lord of the Dance , whose lyrics were probably written by supporter Mick Greenaway ) , " Ten Men Went to Mow " , " We All Follow the Chelsea " ( to the tune of " Land of Hope and Glory " ) , " <unk> <unk> " , and the celebratory " Celery " , with the latter often resulting in fans ritually throwing celery . The vegetable was banned inside Stamford Bridge after an incident involving Arsenal midfielder Cesc Fàbregas at the 2007 League Cup Final . 
 During the 1970s and 1980s in particular , Chelsea supporters were associated with football hooliganism . The club 's " football firm " , originally known as the Chelsea Shed Boys , and subsequently as the Chelsea Headhunters , were nationally notorious for football violence , alongside hooligan firms from other clubs such as West Ham United 's Inter City Firm and Millwall 's Bushwackers , before , during and after matches . The increase of hooligan incidents in the 1980s led chairman Ken Bates to propose erecting an electric fence to deter them from invading the pitch , a proposal that the Greater London Council rejected . 
 Since the 1990s , there has been a marked decline in crowd trouble at matches , as a result of stricter policing , CCTV in grounds and the advent of all @-@ seater stadia . In 2007 , the club launched the ' Back to the Shed ' campaign to improve the atmosphere at home matches , with notable success . According to Home Office statistics , 126 Chelsea fans were arrested for football @-@ related offences during the 2009 – 10 season , the third highest in the division , and 27 banning orders were issued , the fifth @-@ highest in the division . 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 Chelsea have long @-@ standing rivalries with North London clubs Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur . A strong rivalry with Leeds United dates back to several heated and controversial matches in the 1960s and 1970s , particularly the 1970 FA Cup Final . More recently a rivalry with Liverpool has grown following repeated clashes in cup competitions . Chelsea 's fellow West London sides Brentford , Fulham and Queens Park Rangers are generally not considered major rivals , as matches have only taken place intermittently due to the clubs often being in separate divisions . A 2004 survey by <unk> found that Chelsea fans consider their main rivalries to be with ( in order ) : Arsenal , Tottenham Hotspur and Manchester United . In the same survey , fans of six clubs ( Arsenal , Fulham , Leeds United , QPR , Tottenham and West Ham United ) named Chelsea as one of their three main rivals . In a 2008 poll conducted by the Football Fans Census , Chelsea fans named Liverpool , Arsenal and Manchester United as their most disliked clubs . 
 = = Records = = 
 Chelsea 's highest appearance @-@ maker is ex @-@ captain Ron Harris , who played in 795 competitive games for the club between 1961 and 1980 . The record for a Chelsea goalkeeper is held by Harris 's contemporary , Peter Bonetti , who made 729 appearances ( 1959 – 79 ) . With 103 caps ( 101 while at the club ) , Frank Lampard of England is Chelsea 's most capped international player . 
 Frank Lampard is Chelsea 's all @-@ time top goalscorer , with 211 goals in 648 games ( 2001 – 2014 ) ; he passed Bobby <unk> 's longstanding record of 202 in May 2013 . Seven other players have also scored over 100 goals for Chelsea : George <unk> ( 1906 – 12 ) , George Mills ( 1929 – 39 ) , Roy Bentley ( 1948 – 56 ) , Jimmy Greaves ( 1957 – 61 ) , Peter Osgood ( 1964 – 74 and 1978 – 79 ) , Kerry Dixon ( 1983 – 92 ) and Didier Drogba ( 2004 – 12 and 2014 – 2015 ) . Greaves holds the record for the most goals scored in one season ( 43 in 1960 – 61 ) . 
 Chelsea 's biggest winning scoreline in a competitive match is 13 – 0 , achieved against Jeunesse <unk> in the Cup Winners ' Cup in 1971 . The club 's biggest top @-@ flight win was an 8 – 0 victory against Wigan Athletic in 2010 , which was matched in 2012 against Aston Villa . Chelsea 's biggest loss was an 8 – 1 reverse against Wolverhampton Wanderers in 1953 . Officially , Chelsea 's highest home attendance is 82 @,@ 905 for a First Division match against Arsenal on 12 October 1935 . However , an estimated crowd of over 100 @,@ 000 attended a friendly match against Soviet team Dynamo Moscow on 13 November 1945 . The modernisation of Stamford Bridge during the 1990s and the introduction of all @-@ seater stands mean that neither record will be broken for the foreseeable future . The current legal capacity of Stamford Bridge is 41 @,@ 837 . Every starting player in Chelsea 's 57 games of the 2013 – 14 season was a full international – a new club record . 
 Chelsea hold the English record for the highest ever points total for a league season ( 95 ) , the fewest goals conceded during a league season ( 15 ) , the highest number of Premier League victories in a season ( 29 ) , the highest number of clean sheets overall in a Premier League season ( 25 ) ( all set during the 2004 – 05 season ) , and the most consecutive clean sheets from the start of a league season ( 6 , set during the 2005 – 06 season ) . The club 's 21 – 0 aggregate victory over Jeunesse <unk> in the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup in 1971 remains a record in European competition . Chelsea hold the record for the longest streak of unbeaten matches at home in the English top @-@ flight , which lasted 86 matches from 20 March 2004 to 26 October 2008 . They secured the record on 12 August 2007 , beating the previous record of 63 matches unbeaten set by Liverpool between 1978 and 1980 . Chelsea 's streak of eleven consecutive away league wins , set between 5 April 2008 and 6 December 2008 , is also a record for the English top flight . Their £ 50 million purchase of Fernando Torres from Liverpool in January 2011 was the record transfer fee paid by a British club until Ángel di María signed for Manchester United in August 2014 for £ 59 @.@ 7 million . 
 Chelsea , along with Arsenal , were the first club to play with shirt numbers , on 25 August 1928 in their match against Swansea Town . They were the first English side to travel by aeroplane to a domestic away match , when they visited Newcastle United on 19 April 1957 , and the first First Division side to play a match on a Sunday , when they faced Stoke City on 27 January 1974 . On 26 December 1999 , Chelsea became the first British side to field an entirely foreign starting line @-@ up ( no British or Irish players ) in a Premier League match against Southampton . 
 In May 2007 , Chelsea were the first team to win the FA Cup at the new Wembley Stadium , having also been the last to win it at the old Wembley . They were the first English club to be ranked # 1 under UEFA 's five @-@ year coefficient system in the 21st century . They were the first team in Premier League history to score at least 100 goals in a single season , reaching the milestone on the final day of the 2009 – 10 season . Chelsea are the only London club to win the UEFA Champions League , after beating Bayern Munich in the 2012 final . Upon winning the 2012 – 13 UEFA Europa League , Chelsea became the first English club to win all four European trophies and the only club to hold the Champions League and the Europa League at the same time . 
 = = Ownership and finances = = 
 Chelsea Football Club were founded by Gus Mears in 1905 . After his death in 1912 , his descendents continued to own the club until 1982 , when Ken Bates bought the club from Mears ' great @-@ nephew Brian Mears for £ 1 . Bates bought a controlling stake in the club and floated Chelsea on the AIM stock exchange in March 1996 . In July 2003 , Roman Abramovich purchased just over 50 % of Chelsea Village plc 's share capital , including Bates ' 29 @.@ 5 % stake , for £ 30 million and over the following weeks bought out most of the remaining 12 @,@ 000 shareholders at 35 pence per share , completing a £ 140 million takeover . Other shareholders at the time of the takeover included the Matthew Harding estate ( 21 % ) , BSkyB ( 9 @.@ 9 % ) and various anonymous offshore trusts . After passing the 90 % share threshold , Abramovich took the club back into private hands , delisting it from the AIM on 22 August 2003 . He also took on responsibility for the club 's debt of £ 80 million , quickly paying most of it . 
 Thereafter , Abramovich changed the ownership name to Chelsea FC plc , whose ultimate parent company is Fordstam Limited , which is controlled by him . Chelsea are additionally funded by Abramovich via interest free soft loans channelled through his holding company Fordstam Limited . The loans stood at £ 709 million in December 2009 , when they were all converted to equity by Abramovich , leaving the club themselves debt free , although the debt remains with Fordstam . Since 2008 the club have had no external debt . 
 Chelsea did not turn a profit in the first nine years of Abramovich 's ownership , and made record losses of £ <unk> in June 2005 . In November 2012 , Chelsea announced a profit of £ 1 @.@ 4 million for the year ending 30 June 2012 , the first time the club had made a profit under Abramovich 's ownership . This was followed by a loss in 2013 and then their highest ever profit of £ 18 @.@ 4 million for the year to June 2014 . 
 Chelsea have been described as a global brand ; a 2012 report by Brand Finance ranked Chelsea fifth among football brands and valued the club 's brand value at US $ 398 million – an increase of 27 % from the previous year , also valuing them at US $ 10 million more than the sixth best brand , London rivals Arsenal – and gave the brand a strength rating of AA ( very strong ) . In 2016 , Forbes magazine ranked Chelsea the seventh most valuable football club in the world , at £ 1 @.@ 15 billion ( $ 1 @.@ 66 billion ) . As of 2016 , Chelsea are ranked eighth in the Deloitte Football Money League with an annual commercial revenue of £ 322 @.@ 59 million . 
 = = = Sponsorship = = = 
 Chelsea 's kit has been manufactured by Adidas since 2006 , which is contracted to supply the club 's kit from 2006 to 2018 . The partnership was extended in October 2010 in a deal worth £ 160 million over eight years . This deal was again extended in June 2013 in a deal worth £ 300 million over another ten years . Previously , the kit was manufactured by Umbro ( 1975 – 81 ) , Le Coq Sportif ( 1981 – 86 ) , The Chelsea Collection ( 1986 – 87 ) and Umbro again ( 1987 – 2006 ) . 
 Chelsea 's first shirt sponsor was Gulf Air , agreed during the 1983 – 84 season . The club were then sponsored by Grange Farms , Bai Lin Tea and <unk> before a long @-@ term deal was signed with Commodore International in 1989 ; Amiga , an offshoot of Commodore , also appeared on the shirts . Chelsea were subsequently sponsored by Coors beer ( 1994 – 97 ) , <unk> ( 1997 – 2001 ) , Emirates ( 2001 – 05 ) , Samsung Mobile ( 2005 – 08 ) and Samsung ( 2008 – 15 ) . Chelsea 's current shirt sponsor is the Yokohama Rubber Company . Worth £ 40 million @-@ per @-@ year , the deal is second in English football to Chevrolet 's £ 50 million @-@ per @-@ year sponsorship of Manchester United . 
 The club has a variety of other sponsors and official partners , which include <unk> , Delta Air Lines , Sauber , Audi , Singha , EA Sports , Dolce & Gabbana , Barbados Tourism Authority , Atlas , <unk> Hotels , BNI , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> Tire , <unk> , Guangzhou R & F , Coca @-@ Cola , Grand Royal , <unk> , Lucozade Sport , and <unk> . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 In 1930 , Chelsea featured in one of the earliest football films , The Great Game . One @-@ time Chelsea centre forward , Jack Cock , who by then was playing for Millwall , was the star of the film and several scenes were shot at Stamford Bridge , including the pitch , the boardroom , and the dressing rooms . It included guest appearances by then @-@ Chelsea players Andrew Wilson , George Mills , and Sam Millington . Owing to the notoriety of the Chelsea Headhunters , a football firm associated with the club , Chelsea have also featured in films about football hooliganism , including 2004 's The Football Factory . Chelsea also appear in the Hindi film Jhoom Barabar Jhoom . In April 2011 , Montenegrin comedy series <unk> mi od <unk> made an episode in which Chelsea play against FK <unk> Nikšić for qualification of the UEFA Champions League . 
 Up until the 1950s , the club had a long @-@ running association with the music halls ; their underachievement often provided material for comedians such as George Robey . It culminated in comedian Norman Long 's release of a comic song in 1933 , ironically titled " On the Day That Chelsea Went and Won the Cup " , the lyrics of which describe a series of bizarre and improbable occurrences on the hypothetical day when Chelsea finally won a trophy . In Alfred Hitchcock 's 1935 film The 39 Steps , Mr Memory claims that Chelsea last won the Cup in 63 BC , " in the presence of the Emperor Nero . " Scenes in a 1980 episode of Minder were filmed during a real match at Stamford Bridge between Chelsea and Preston North End with Terry McCann ( played by Dennis Waterman ) standing on the terraces . 
 The song " Blue is the Colour " was released as a single in the build @-@ up to the 1972 League Cup Final , with all members of Chelsea 's first team squad singing ; it reached number five in the UK Singles Chart . The song has since been adopted as an anthem by a number of other sports teams around the world , including the Vancouver Whitecaps ( as " White is the Colour " ) and the Saskatchewan Roughriders ( as " Green is the Colour " ) . In the build @-@ up to the 1997 FA Cup Final , the song " Blue Day " , performed by Suggs and members of the Chelsea squad , reached number 22 in the UK charts . Bryan Adams , a fan of Chelsea , dedicated the song " We 're Gonna Win " from the album 18 Til I Die to the club . 
 = = Chelsea Ladies = = 
 Chelsea also operate a women 's football team , Chelsea Ladies . They have been affiliated to the men 's team since 2004 and are part of the club 's Community Development programme . They play their home games at Wheatsheaf Park , the home ground of Conference South club Staines Town . The club were promoted to the Premier Division for the first time in 2005 as Southern Division champions and won the Surrey County Cup in 2003 – 04 , 2006 – 10 , 2012 , and 2013 . In 2010 Chelsea Ladies were one of the eight founder members of the FA Women 's Super League . In 2015 , Chelsea Ladies won the FA Women 's Cup for the first time , beating Notts County Ladies at Wembley Stadium , and a month later clinched their first FA WSL title to complete a league and cup double . John Terry , the current captain of the Chelsea men 's team , is the President of Chelsea Ladies . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = First team squad = = = 
 As of 22 July 2016 . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = Daddy 's Double = 
 Daddy 's Double is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Film Corporation . The film focuses on Hal , a young man , who proposes to Sue , his love interest . Her father overhears and becomes furious before whisking his daughter away to a boarding school . Hal and Sue attempt to elope , but it is foiled . Hal then gets an idea to disguise himself as the father and reclaim Sue . The plan works , but the father follows in pursuit . He breaks into the wedding ceremony at the parson 's house and sees his double . He then laughs and approves of the marriage . The film was the fourth release by Thanhouser and it was met with favorable reviews by critics . In 2007 , a surviving print was released on DVD with a new original score composed and performed by Raymond A. Brubacher . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the Post 's home , Hal Dunton sits down with his love interest Sue Post , cautiously checking to see if they are alone . Hal then proposes to Sue and in the excitement , her father comes into the room . He is outraged and believes his daughter is too young to be married and promptly makes Hal leave before scolding his daughter . Before departing , Hal meets and pleads with the father as he takes the daughter away by car . The father refuses and Hal is knocked down before the father and daughter depart to a boarding school . The father meets with the mistress and leaves Sue in her care , much to Sue 's distress . 
 <unk> away from her home and her beloved , Sue is in despair until Hal appears outside her window with a ladder . The attempted elopement fails when the mistress catches Hal in the act and dismisses him . She awaits Sue to descend and round the corner before halting her and forcing her back inside . The father pulls up to a place of business and Hal , who is walking by , attempts to greet the father . The angry father ignores him , but Hal turns and sees the wigmaker 's store next to him . An idea strikes him and he pays a photographer to get a photo of the father on the way out , which further angers him . Hal then sends a message to Sue , that he will come and claim her the following day , disguised as her father . 
 Hal head to the wigmaker and is disguised as the father . So well is the disguise that the father 's chauffeur is convinced and takes Hal to the boarding school . The father quickly exits in time to see his chauffeur drive away and hails a taxi . Hal arrives at the boarding school and the disguise works , claims Sue and drives away . Seconds later the father arrives and confronts the mistress , departing to pursue in a fit of anger . Hal and Sue go to the parson 's house to be immediately wed . The father is delayed for a short time by car trouble , but quickly arrives before the two are wed . He bursts in and sees his double and both he and Hal laugh . The father relents and approves the marriage as Hal removes his disguise in front of the stunned Parson . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Frank H. Crane as Mr. Post or " Daddy " 
 Fred Santley as Hal Dunton or " Daddy 's double " 
 Isabelle Daintry as Sue Post 
 = = Production = = 
 The scenario was written by Lloyd F. Lonergan . Lonergan was the writer of all three previous productions of the Thanhouser company . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman still employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . The director of the film is not known for certain , but two Thanhouser directors are possible . Barry O 'Neil was the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy , who would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . Lloyd B. Carleton was the stage name of Carleton B. Little , a director who would stay with the Thanhouser Company for a short time , moving to Biograph Company by the summer of 1910 . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute either as the director for this particular production , but he does credit Blair Smith as the cameraman . The film is composed of 28 shots , 8 titles and 1 insert . 
 The cast for the film featured Thanhouser 's first leading male actor , Frank H. Crane , along with two stage actors , Isabelle Daintry and Fred Santley . Isabelle Daintry has one other known Thanhouser credit , but this marks Fred Santley 's only known credit . During this era , the players in the film were not credited and anonymity was the rule . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The one reel drama , approximately 960 feet , was released on Tuesday April 5 , 1910 . The film would also be released in the United Kingdom on October 16 , 1910 . The surviving feel reel says the Gaumont Company of London ( Gaumont British ) had exclusive rights to Thanhouser films outside of the United States . The film was shown across the United States , including theaters in Kansas , New York , Pennsylvania , Texas , and Indiana . One of the last advertisements for the film came three years after its release by the Neosho Picture Show Company of Neosho , Missouri . 
 The film received positive attention from film critics . The Morning Telegraph praised it as the best work from the new Thanhouser Company . The The New York Dramatic Mirror found it to have good acting which could still be more expressive , but was more indifferent to the use of unnecessary connecting scenes . The Moving Picture World stated , in a brief review , that the acting and photography was good . 
 In 2007 , the film was released by Thanhouser Company Film Preservation on a three @-@ disc DVD set along with eleven other surviving Thanhouser films . The surviving print was obtained from the British Film Institute and featured a new original score composed and performed by Raymond A. Brubacher . According to Silent Era , the archive holds the 35mm nitrate positive , the more stable 35mm safety negative and a 35mm reference positive . 
 = Italian ironclad Re d 'Italia = 
 Re d 'Italia ( King of Italy ) was the lead ship of the Re d 'Italia @-@ class armored frigates built in the United States for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the early 1860s . She was laid down at the William H. Webb Shipyard in New York in November 1861 , was launched in April 1863 , and was completed a year later in September 1864 ; the two Re d 'Italia @-@ class ships were the only Italian ironclads built in the United States . The ships were broadside ironclads , armed with a battery of six 72 @-@ pounder guns and thirty @-@ two 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns . 
 Re d 'Italia initially served as the flagship of the Italian fleet , though she was replaced by the turret ship Affondatore shortly before the Battle of Lissa in 1866 . During that battle , Re d 'Italia was at the center of the melee . After her rudder was disabled by an Austrian vessel , the Austrian flagship , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max rammed her and tore a large hole in her hull . Re d 'Italia quickly rolled over and sank , taking some 400 of her crew with the ship , including her captain , Emilio Faà di Bruno . 
 = = Design = = 
 Re d 'Italia was 99 @.@ 61 meters ( 326 @.@ 8 ft ) long overall ; she had a beam of 16 @.@ 76 m ( 55 @.@ 0 ft ) and an average draft of 6 @.@ 17 m ( 20 @.@ 2 ft ) . She displaced 5 @,@ 610 metric tons ( 5 @,@ 520 long tons ; 6 @,@ 180 short tons ) normally and up to 5 @,@ 869 t ( 5 @,@ 776 long tons ; 6 @,@ 469 short tons ) at full load . Her hull was built from green wood . She had a crew of 565 . The ship 's propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by four coal @-@ fired , rectangular boilers . Her engine produced a top speed of 10 @.@ 6 to 10 @.@ 8 knots ( 19 @.@ 6 to 20 @.@ 0 km / h ; 12 @.@ 2 to 12 @.@ 4 mph ) from 1 @,@ 812 to 1 @,@ 845 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 351 to 1 @,@ 376 kW ) . She could steam for about 1 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 @.@ 5 knots ( 19 @.@ 4 km / h ; 12 @.@ 1 mph ) . For long @-@ distance travel , Re d 'Italia was fitted with three masts and was barque @-@ rigged . 
 Re d 'Italia was a broadside ironclad , and she was armed with a main battery of six 72 @-@ pounder 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns and thirty @-@ two 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The ship was equipped with a spur @-@ shaped ram at the bow . The ship 's hull was sheathed with wrought iron armor that was 4 @.@ 75 in ( 121 mm ) thick . Her rudder and propellers , however , were not protected by her armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Re d 'Italia was built by William H. Webb at his shipyard in New York City . She was laid down on 21 November 1861 and launched on 18 April 1863 . The ship arrived in Italy in April 1864 and was commissioned into the Italian fleet on 18 September 1864 . Less than two years later , in June 1866 , Italy declared war on Austria , as part of the Third Italian War of Independence , which was fought concurrently with the Austro @-@ Prussian War . The Italian fleet commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , initially adopted a cautious course of action ; he was unwilling to risk battle with the Austrian Navy , despite the fact that the Austrian fleet was much weaker than his own . Persano claimed he was simply waiting on the ironclad ram Affondatore , en route from Britain , but his inaction weakened morale in the fleet , with many of his subordinates openly accusing him of cowardice . 
 Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on June 27 , in attempt to draw out the Italians . At the time , many of the Italian ships were in disarray ; several ships did not have their entire armament , and several others had problems with their engines . Re d 'Italia had a fire burning in her coal bunkers . Persano held a council of war aboard the ironclad Principe di Carignano to determine whether he should sortie to engage Tegetthoff , but by that time , the Austrians had withdrawn , making the decision moot . The Minister of the Navy , Agostino Depretis , urged Persano to act and suggested the island of Lissa , to restore Italian confidence after their defeat at the Battle of Custoza the previous month . On 7 July , Persano left Ancona and conducted a sweep into the Adriatic , but encountered no Austrian ships and returned on the 13th . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet out of Ancona , bound for Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers ; the Italian warships began bombarding the Austrian forts on the island , with the intention of landing the soldiers once the fortresses had been silenced . In response , the Austrian Navy sent the fleet under Tegetthoff to attack the Italian ships . At that time , Re d 'Italia was Persano 's flagship in the 2nd Division , along with the ironclad San Martino and the coastal defense ship Palestro . After arriving off Lissa on the 18th , Persano sent most of his ships to bombard the town of Vis , but he was unable to effect the landing . 
 The next morning , Persano ordered another attack ; four ironclads would force the harbor defenses at Vis while Re d 'Italia and the rest of the fleet would attempt to suppress the outer fortifications . This second attack also proved to be a failure , but Persano decided to make a third attempt the next day . Re d 'Italia and the bulk of the fleet would again try to disable the outer forts in preparation for the landing . Before the Italians could begin the attack , the dispatch boat Esploratore arrived , bringing news of Tegetthoff 's approach . Persano 's fleet was in disarray ; the three ships of Admiral Giovanni Vacca 's 1st Division were three miles to the northeast from Persano 's main force , and three other ironclads were further away to the west . Persano immediately ordered his ships to form up with Vacca 's , first in line abreast formation , and then in line ahead formation . Re d 'Italia was the fourth ship in the Italian line , behind only Vacca 's ships . 
 Shortly before the action began , Persano decided to leave Re d 'Italia and transfer to Affondatore , though none of his subordinates on the other ships were aware of the change . They were thus left to fight as individuals without direction . More dangerously , by stopping Re d 'Italia , he allowed a significant gap to open up between Vacca 's three ships and the rest of the fleet . Tegetthoff took his fleet through the gap between Vacca 's and Persano 's ships , though he failed to ram any Italian vessels on the first pass . The Austrians then turned back toward Persano 's ships , and took Re d 'Italia , San Martino , and Palestro under heavy fire . The Austrian ships concentrated their fire on Re d 'Italia , paying particular attention to her stern . In their attempts to ram her , one of the Austrian ships destroyed Re d 'Italia 's rudder , leaving her unmaneuverable . 
 Re d 'Italia 's captain , Emilio Faà di Bruno , attempted to escape from the melee , but he could only steer his ship using her engines . Blocked by another Austrian ironclad , Faà di Bruno ordered his ship to reverse course . She was almost stopped when she was rammed by the Austrian flagship , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max . The Austrian ship 's ram tore a gaping hole in Re d 'Italia 's hull . She quickly rolled over to port and sank . Out of her crew , only 166 men were saved ; the remaining 400 went down with the ship , including Faà di Bruno . 
 = Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 film ) = 
 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs is a 1937 American animated musical fantasy film produced by Walt Disney Productions and originally released by RKO Radio Pictures . Based on the German fairy tale by the Brothers Grimm , it is the first full @-@ length cel animated feature film and the earliest Disney animated feature film . The story was adapted by storyboard artists Dorothy Ann Blank , Richard Creedon , Merrill De Maris , Otto Englander , Earl Hurd , Dick Rickard , Ted Sears and Webb Smith . David Hand was the supervising director , while William Cottrell , Wilfred Jackson , Larry Morey , Perce Pearce , and Ben Sharpsteen directed the film 's individual sequences . 
 Snow White premiered at the Carthay Circle Theatre on December 21 , 1937 , followed by a nationwide release on February 4 , 1938 . It was a critical and commercial success , and with international earnings of $ 8 million during its initial release briefly assumed the record of highest grossing sound film at the time . The popularity of the film has led to it being re @-@ released theatrically many times , until its home video release in the 1990s . Adjusted for inflation , it is one of the top ten performers at the North American box office . 
 At the 11th Academy Awards , Walt Disney was awarded an honorary Oscar , and the film was nominated for Best Musical Score the year before . In 1989 , the United States Library of Congress deemed the film " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry and is ranked in the American Film Institute 's list of the 100 greatest American films , who also named the film as the greatest American animated film of all time in 2008 . Disney 's take on the fairytale has had a huge cultural impact , resulting in popular theme park attractions , a video game , and a Broadway musical . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Snow White is a lonely princess living with her stepmother , a vain and wicked Queen . The Queen fears that Snow White 's beauty surpasses her own , so she forces Snow White to work as a scullery maid and asks her Magic Mirror daily " who is the fairest one of all " . For several years the mirror always answered that the Queen was , pleasing her . 
 One day , the Magic Mirror informs the Queen that Snow White is now the fairest in the land . The jealous Queen orders her Huntsman to take Snow White into the forest and kill her . She further demands that the huntsman return with Snow White 's heart in a jeweled box as proof of the deed . However , the Huntsman cannot bring himself to kill Snow White . He tearfully begs for her forgiveness , revealing the Queen wants her dead , and urges her to flee into the woods and never look back . Lost and frightened , the princess is befriended by woodland creatures who lead her to a cottage deep in the woods . Finding seven small chairs in the cottage 's dining room , Snow White assumes the cottage is the untidy home of seven orphaned children . 
 In reality , the cottage belongs to seven adult dwarfs , named Doc , Grumpy , Happy , Sleepy , Bashful , Sneezy , and Dopey , who work in a nearby mine . Returning home , they are alarmed to find their cottage clean and suspect that an intruder has invaded their home . The dwarfs find Snow White upstairs , asleep across three of their beds . Snow White awakes to find the dwarfs at her bedside and introduces herself , and all of the dwarfs eventually welcome her into their home after they learn she can cook and clean beautifully . Snow White keeps house for the dwarfs while they mine for jewels during the day , and at night they all sing , play music and dance . 
 Meanwhile , the Queen discovers that Snow White is still alive when the mirror again answers that Snow White is the fairest in the land and reveals that the heart in the jeweled box is actually that of a pig . Using potion to disguise herself as an old hag , the Queen creates a poisoned apple that will put whoever eats it into the " Sleeping Death " , a curse that can only be broken by " love 's first kiss " , but dismisses that Snow White will be buried alive . The Queen goes to the cottage while the dwarfs are away , but the animals are wary of her and rush off to find the dwarfs . The Queen tricks Snow White into biting into the poisoned apple . As Snow White falls asleep the Queen proclaims that she is now the fairest of the land . The dwarfs return with the animals as the Queen leaves the cottage and give chase , trapping her on a cliff . She tries to roll a boulder over them but before she can do so , lightning strikes the cliff , causing her to fall to her death . 
 The dwarfs return to their cottage and find Snow White seemingly dead , being kept in a deathlike slumber by the poison . Unwilling to bury her out of sight in the ground , they instead place her in a glass coffin trimmed with gold in a clearing in the forest . Together with the woodland creatures , they keep watch over her . A year later , a prince , who had previously met and fallen in love with Snow White , learns of her eternal sleep and visits her coffin . Saddened by her apparent death , he kisses her , which breaks the spell and awakens her . The dwarfs and animals all rejoice as the Prince takes Snow White to his castle . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Adriana <unk> as Snow White : Snow White is a young princess . Her wicked stepmother has forced her to work as a scullery maid in the castle . Despite this , she retains a cheerful but naïve demeanor . 
 Lucille La Verne as Evil Queen Grimhilde / Witch : The Queen is the stepmother of Snow White . Once her magic mirror tells her that Snow White is fairer than she is , she immediately enlists Humbert the huntsman to kill her in the woods . After she discovers that Snow White did not die , she disguises herself as an old hag and uses a poisoned apple to remove Snow White from her path without killing her . 
 Harry Stockwell as The Prince . The prince first sees Snow White singing at her wishing well . He immediately falls in love with her and her voice . He later reappears to revive her . 
 Roy Atwell as Doc : The leader of the seven dwarfs , Doc wears glasses and often mixes up his words . He is self @-@ appointed and funny . 
 Pinto Colvig as Grumpy and Sleepy in a dual role : Grumpy initially disapproves of Snow White 's presence in the dwarfs ' home , but later warns her of the threat posed by the Queen and rushes to her aid upon realizing that she is in danger , leading the charge himself . He has the biggest nose of the dwarfs , and is frequently seen with one eye shut . Sleepy is always tired and appears laconic in most situations . Sterling Holloway , who would later voice many other characters for future Disney films was originally considered to voice Sleepy by Walt Disney . 
 Otis Harlan as Happy : Happy is the joyous dwarf and is usually portrayed laughing . 
 Scotty <unk> as Bashful : Bashful is the shyest of the dwarfs , and is often embarrassed by the presence of any attention directed at him . 
 Billy Gilbert as Sneezy : Sneezy 's name is earned by his extraordinarily powerful sneezes ( caused by hay fever ) , which are seen blowing even the heaviest of objects across a room . 
 Eddie Collins as Dopey ( vocal effects and live @-@ action reference only ) : Dopey is the only dwarf who does not have a beard . He is clumsy and mute , with Happy explaining that he has simply " never tried " to speak . In the movie 's trailer , Walt Disney describes Dopey as " nice , but sort of silly " . Mel Blanc was considered to voice Dopey by Walt Disney . 
 Moroni Olsen as The Magic Mirror : The Slave of the Magic Mirror appears as a green mask in clouds of smoke . The Queen regularly asks him who is the fairest in the land . 
 Stuart Buchanan as Humbert the Huntsman : Despite his status as the Queen 's assassin , the Huntsman cannot bear to kill Snow White , even when the Queen orders him to take the princess ' heart . 
 = = Production = = 
 Development on Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs began in early 1934 , and in June 1934 , Walt Disney announced the production of his first feature , to be released under Walt Disney Productions , to The New York Times . One evening that same year , Disney acted out the entire story of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs to his staff , announcing that the film would be produced as a feature @-@ length film . 
 Before Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , the Disney studio had been primarily involved in the production of animated short subjects in the Mickey Mouse and Silly Symphonies series . Disney hoped to expand his studio 's prestige and revenues by moving into features , and estimated that Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs could be produced for a budget of US $ 250 @,@ 000 ; this was ten times the budget of an average Silly Symphony . 
 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was to be the first full @-@ length cel animated feature in motion picture history , and as such Walt Disney had to fight to get the film produced . Both his brother and business partner Roy Disney and his wife Lillian attempted to talk him out of it , and the Hollywood movie industry referred to the film derisively as " Disney 's Folly " while it was in production . He had to mortgage his house to help finance the film 's production , which eventually ran up a total cost of $ 1 @,@ 488 @,@ 422 @.@ 74 , a massive sum for a feature film in 1937 . 
 = = = Story development = = = 
 On August 9 , 1934 , twenty @-@ one pages of notes — entitled " <unk> suggestions " — were compiled by staff writer Richard Creedon , suggesting the principal characters , as well as situations and ' gags ' for the story . As Disney had stated at the very beginning of the project , the main attraction of the story for him was the Seven Dwarfs , and their possibilities for " <unk> " and " gags " ; the three story meetings held in October and attended by Disney , Creedon , Larry Morey , Albert Hurter , Ted Sears and Pinto Colvig were dominated by such subjects . At this point , Disney felt that the story should begin with Snow White 's discovery of the Cottage of the Seven Dwarfs . Walt Disney had suggested from the beginning that each of the dwarfs , whose names and personalities are not stated in the original fairy tale , could have individual personalities . The dwarfs names were chosen from a pool of about fifty potentials , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Hickey , Wheezy , Baldy , Gabby , Nifty , <unk> , Swift , Lazy , Puffy , Stuffy , Tubby , Shorty and <unk> . The seven finalists were chosen through a process of elimination . The leader of the dwarfs , required to be pompous , self @-@ important and bumbling , was named Doc ; others were named for their distinguishing character traits . At the end of the October story meetings , however , only Doc , Grumpy , Bashful , Sleepy and Happy of the final seven were named ; at this point , Sneezy and Dopey were replaced by ' <unk> ' and an unnamed seventh dwarf . 
 Along with a focus on the characterizations and comedic possibilities of the dwarfs , Creedon 's eighteen @-@ page outline of the story written from the October meetings , featured a continuous flow of gags as well as the Queen 's attempt to kill Snow White with a poisoned comb , an element taken from the Grimms ' original story . After persuading Snow White to use the comb , the disguised Queen would have escaped alive , but the dwarfs would have arrived in time to remove it . After the failure of the comb , the Queen was to have the Prince captured and taken to her dungeon , where she would have come to him ( story sketches show this event both with the Queen and the Witch ) and used magic to bring the dungeon 's skeletons to life , making them dance for him and identifying one skeleton as " Prince Oswald " , an example of the more humorous atmosphere of this original story treatment . It is written in story notes that the Queen has such magical power only in her own domain , the castle . With the Prince refusing to marry her , the Queen leaves him to his death ( one sketch shows the Prince trapped in a subterranean chamber filling with water ) as she makes her way to the dwarfs ' cottage with the poisoned apple . The forest animals were to help the Prince escape the Queen 's minions and find his horse . The Prince was to ride to the cottage to save Snow White , but took the wrong road ( despite warnings from the forest animals and his horse , whom he , unlike Snow White , could not understand ) . He therefore would not have arrived in time to save her from the Queen , but would have been able to save her with love 's first kiss . This plot was not used in the final film , though many sketches of the scene in the dungeon were made by Ferdinand Hovarth . 
 Other examples of the more comical nature of the story at this point include suggestions for a " fat , batty , cartoon type , self @-@ satisfied " Queen . The Prince was also more of a clown , and was to serenade Snow White in a more comical fashion . Walt Disney encouraged all staff at the studio to contribute to the story , offering five dollars for every ' gag ' ; such gags included the dwarfs ' noses popping over the foot of the bed when they first meet Snow White . 
 Disney became concerned that such a comical approach would lessen the plausibility of the characters and , sensing that more time was needed for the development of the Queen , advised in an outline circulated on November 6 that attention be paid exclusively to " scenes in which only Snow White , the Dwarfs , and their bird and animal friends appear " . The names and personalities of the dwarfs , however , were still " open to change " . A meeting of November 16 resulted in another outline entitled ' Dwarfs Discover <unk> ' , which introduced the character of Dopey , who would ultimately prove to be the most successful and popular of the dwarf characterisations . For the rest of 1934 Disney further developed the story by himself , finding a dilemma in the characterization of the Queen , who he felt could no longer be " fat " and " batty " , but a " stately beautiful type " , a possibility already brought up in previous story meetings . Disney did not focus on the project again until the autumn of 1935 . It is thought that he may have doubted his , and his studio 's ability , and that his trip to Europe that summer restored his confidence . At this point Disney and his writers focused on the scenes in which Snow White and the dwarfs are introduced to the audience and each other . He laid out the likely assignments for everyone working on the film in a memorandum of November 25 , 1935 , and had decided on the personalities of the individual dwarfs . 
 It had first been thought that the dwarfs would be the main focus of the story , and many sequences were written for the seven characters . However , at a certain point , it was decided that the main thrust of the story was provided by the relationship between the Queen and Snow White . For this reason , several sequences featuring the dwarfs were cut from the film . The first , which was animated in its entirety before being cut , showed Doc and Grumpy arguing about whether Snow White should stay with them . Another , also completely animated , would have shown the dwarfs eating soup noisily and <unk> ; Snow White unsuccessfully attempts to teach them how to eat ' like gentlemen ' . A partially animated sequence involved the dwarfs holding a " lodge meeting " in which they try to think of a gift for Snow White ; this was to be followed by the elaborate ' bed building sequence ' , in which the dwarfs and the forest animals construct and carve a bed for the princess . This also was cut , as it was thought to slow down the movement of the story . The soup @-@ eating and bed @-@ building sequences were animated by Ward Kimball , who was sufficiently discouraged by their removal to consider leaving the studio , however Disney persuaded him to stay by promoting him to supervising animator of Jiminy Cricket in his next feature Pinocchio ( 1940 ) . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 The primary authority on the design of the film was concept artist Albert Hurter . All designs used in the film , from characters ' appearances to the look of the rocks in the background , had to meet Hurter 's approval before being finalized . Two other concept artists — Ferdinand Hovarth and Gustaf Tenggren — also contributed to the visual style of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs . Hovarth developed a number of dark concepts for the film , although many other designs he developed were ultimately rejected by Disney team as less easily translated into animation than Hurter 's . Tenggren was used as a color stylist and to determine the staging and atmosphere of many of the scenes in the film , as his style borrowed from the likes of Arthur Rackham and John Bauer and thus possessed the European illustration quality that Walt Disney sought . He also designed the posters for the film and illustrated the press book . However , Hovarth didn 't receive a credit for the film . Other artists to work on the film included Joe Grant , whose most significant contribution was the design for the Queen 's Witch form . 
 Art Babbit , an animator who joined the Disney studio in 1932 , invited seven of his colleagues ( who worked in the same room as him ) to come with him to an art class that he himself had set up at his home in the Hollywood Hills . Though there was no teacher , Babbit had recruited a model to pose for him and his fellow animators as they drew . These " classes " were held weekly ; each week , more animators would come . After three weeks , Walt Disney called Babbit to his office and offered to provide the supplies , working space and models required if the sessions were moved to the studio . Babbit ran the sessions for a month until animator Hardie <unk> suggested that they recruit Don Graham ; the art teacher from the Chouinard Institute taught his first class at the studio on November 15 , 1932 , and was joined by Phil Dike a few weeks later . These classes were principally concerned with human anatomy and movement , though instruction later included action analysis , animal anatomy and acting . 
 Though the classes were originally described as a " brutal battle " , with neither instructor nor students well @-@ versed in the other 's craft , the enthusiasm and energy of both parties made the classes stimulating and beneficial for all involved . Graham often screened Disney shorts and , along with the animators , provided critique featuring both strengths and weaknesses . For example , Graham criticised Babbit 's animation of Abner the mouse in The Country Cousin as " taking a few of the obvious actions of a drunk without coordinating the rest of the body " , while praising it for maintaining its humour without getting " dirty or mean or vulgar . The country mouse is always having a good time " . 
 Very few of the animators at the Disney studio had had artistic training ( most had been newspaper cartoonists ) ; among these few was Grim Natwick , who had trained in Europe . The animator 's success in designing and animating Betty Boop for Fleischer Studios showed an understanding of human female anatomy , and when Walt Disney hired Natwick he was given female characters to animate almost exclusively . Attempts to animate Persephone , the female lead of The Goddess of Spring , had proved largely unsuccessful ; Natwick 's animation of the heroine in Cookie Carnival showed greater promise , and the animator was eventually given the task of animating Snow White herself . Though live action footage of Snow White , the Prince and the Queen was shot as reference for the animators , the artists animators disapproved of rotoscoping , considering it to hinder the production of effective caricature . None of Babbit 's animation of the Queen was rotoscoped ; despite Graham and Natwick 's objections , however , some scenes of Snow White and the Prince were directly traced from the live @-@ action footage . 
 The studio 's new <unk> camera gave a three @-@ dimensional feeling in many sequences , and was also used to give a rotating effect in the scene where the Queen transforms into a witch . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The songs in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs were composed by Frank Churchill and Larry Morey . Paul J. Smith and Leigh Harline composed the incidental music score . Well @-@ known songs from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs include " Heigh @-@ Ho " , " Some Day My Prince Will Come " , and " Whistle While You Work " . Since Disney did not have its own music publishing company at the time , the publishing rights for the music and songs were administered through Bourne Co . Music Publishers , which continues to hold these rights . In later years , the studio was able to acquire back the rights to the music from many of the other films , but not Snow White . Snow White became the first American film to have a soundtrack album , released in conjunction with the feature film . Before Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , a film soundtrack recording was unheard of and of little value to a movie studio . 
 = = = Cinematic influences = = = 
 At this time , Disney also encouraged his staff to see a variety of films . These ranged from the mainstream , such as MGM 's Romeo and Juliet ( 1936 ) — to which Disney made direct reference in a story meeting pertaining to the scene in which Snow White lies in her glass coffin — to the more obscure , including European silent cinema . Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , as well as the two Disney films to follow it , were also influenced by such German expressionist films as Nosferatu ( 1922 ) and The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari ( 1919 ) , both of which were recommended by Disney to his staff . This influence is particularly evident in the scenes of Snow White fleeing through the forest and the Queen 's transformation into the Witch . The latter scene was also inspired by Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde ( 1931 ) , to which Disney made specific reference in story meetings . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Original theatrical run = = = 
 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs premiered at the Carthay Circle Theatre on December 21 , 1937 , to a wildly receptive audience , many of whom were the same naysayers who dubbed the film " Disney 's Folly " . The film received a standing ovation at its completion from an audience that included Judy Garland and Marlene Dietrich . Six days later , Walt Disney and the seven dwarfs appeared on the cover of Time magazine . The New York Times said " Thank you very much , Mr. Disney " . Variety suggested that " [ so ] perfect is the illusion , so tender the romance and fantasy , so emotional are certain portions when the acting of the characters strikes a depth comparable to the sincerity of human players , that the film approaches real greatness . " 
 Following successful exclusive runs at Radio City Music Hall in New York City and a theater in Miami in January 1938 , RKO Radio Pictures put the film into general release on February 4 . It became a major box @-@ office success , making four times more money than any other motion picture released in 1938 . In its original release , Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs grossed $ 3 @.@ 5 million in the United States and Canada , and by May 1939 its total international gross of $ 6 @.@ 5 million made it the most successful sound film of all time , displacing Al Jolson 's The Singing Fool ( 1928 ) ( Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was soon displaced from this position by Gone with the Wind in 1940 ) . By the end of its original run , Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs had earned $ 7 @,@ 846 @,@ 000 in international box office receipts . This earned RKO a profit of $ 380 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Re @-@ releases = = = 
 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was first re @-@ released in 1944 , to raise revenue for the Disney studio during the World War II period . This re @-@ release set a tradition of re @-@ releasing Disney animated features every seven to ten years , and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was re @-@ released to theaters in 1952 , 1958 , 1967 , 1975 , 1983 , 1987 , 1993 and 1997 . Coinciding with the fiftieth anniversary release in 1987 , Disney released an authorized novelization of the story , written by children 's author Suzanne <unk> . 
 In 1993 , Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs became the first film to be entirely scanned to digital files , manipulated , and recorded back to film . The restoration project was carried out entirely at 4K resolution and 10 @-@ bit color depth using the <unk> system to digitally remove dirt and scratches and restore faded colors . 
 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs has had a lifetime gross of $ 418 @.@ 2 million across its original release and several reissues . Adjusted for inflation , and incorporating subsequent releases , the film still registers one of the top ten American film moneymakers of all time . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The film was a tremendous critical success , with many reviewers hailing it as a genuine work of art , recommended for both children and adults . Although film histories often state that the animation of the human characters was criticized , more recent scholarship finds that most reviewers praised the realistic style of the human animation , with several stating that audiences will forget that they are watching animated humans rather than real ones . At the 11th Academy Awards , the film won an Academy Honorary Award for Walt Disney " as a significant screen innovation which has charmed millions and pioneered a great new entertainment field " . Disney received a full @-@ size Oscar statuette and seven miniature ones , presented to him by 10 @-@ year @-@ old child actress Shirley Temple . The film was also nominated for Best Musical Score . " Some Day My Prince Will Come " has become a jazz standard that has been performed by numerous artists , including Buddy Rich , Lee Wiley , Oscar Peterson , Frank Churchill , and Oliver Jones . Albums by Miles Davis , by Wynton Kelly , and Alexis Cole . 
 Noted filmmakers such as Sergei Eisenstein and Charlie Chaplin praised Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs as a notable achievement in cinema ; Eisenstein went so far as to call it the greatest film ever made . The film inspired Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer to produce its own fantasy film , The Wizard of Oz , in 1939 . Another animation pioneer , Max Fleischer , decided to produce his animated feature film Gulliver 's Travels in order to compete with Snow White . The 1941 parody Ball of Fire featured a nightclub singer disrupting the lives of seven scholars ( and Gary Cooper ) while hiding from the police . The 1943 Merrie Melodies short Coal Black and de <unk> Dwarfs , directed by Bob Clampett , parodies Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs by presenting the story with an all @-@ black cast singing a jazz score . 
 Snow White 's success led to Disney moving ahead with more feature @-@ film productions . Walt Disney used much of the profits from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs to finance a new $ 4 @.@ 5 million studio in Burbank – the location on which The Walt Disney Studios is located to this day . Within two years , the studio completed Pinocchio and Fantasia , and had begun production on features such as Dumbo , Bambi , Alice in Wonderland and Peter Pan . 
 American Film Institute recognition 
 The American Film Institute ( AFI ) , an independent non @-@ profit organization created in the United States by the National Endowment for the Arts , releases a variety of annual awards and film lists recognizing excellence in film making . The AFI 100 Years ... series , which ran from 1998 to 2008 , created categorized lists of America 's best movies as selected by juries composed from among over 1 @,@ 500 artists , scholars , critics and historians . A film 's inclusion in one of these lists was based on the film 's popularity over time , historical significance and cultural impact . Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was selected by juries for inclusion on many AFI lists , including the following : 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies - # 49 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) - # 34 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 - # 1 Animated film 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : The Queen - # 10 Villain 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : 
 " Someday My Prince Will Come " - # 19 
 " Whistle While You Work " - Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : " Magic Mirror on the wall , who is the fairest one of all ? " - Nominated 
 AFI 's Greatest Movie Musicals - Nominated 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 On October 28 , 1994 , the film was released as the first video in the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection and the first in the Walt Disney Animated Classics series . 
 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released on DVD on October 9 , 2001 , the first in Disney 's Platinum Editions , and featured , across two discs , the digitally restored film , a making @-@ of documentary narrated by Angela Lansbury , an audio commentary by John Canemaker and , via archived audio clips , Walt Disney . 
 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on October 6 , 2009 , the first of Disney 's Diamond Editions , and a new DVD edition was released on November 24 , 2009 . The Blu @-@ ray includes a high @-@ definition version of the movie sourced from a new restoration by Lowry Digital , a DVD copy of the film , and several bonus features not included on the 2001 DVD . This set returned to the Disney Vault on April 30 , 2011 . 
 Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment re @-@ released Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on February 2 , 2016 , as the first of the Walt Disney Signature Collection line . It was released on Digital HD on January 19 , 2016 with bonus material . 
 = = Appearances in other media = = 
 = = = Theme parks = = = 
 Snow White 's Scary Adventures is a popular theme park ride at Disneyland ( an opening day attraction dating from 1955 ) , Tokyo Disneyland , and Disneyland Paris . Fantasyland at Walt Disney World 's Magic Kingdom underwent an expansion from 2012 to 2014 . The Snow White 's Scary Adventures ride was replaced with Princess Fairytale Hall , where Snow White and other princesses are located for a meet and greet . Included in the 2013 expansion of Fantasyland is the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train roller coaster . Snow White , her Prince , the Queen , and the Seven Dwarfs are also featured in parades and character appearances throughout the parks . Disneyland 's Fantasyland Theater hosted Snow White : An Enchanting Musical from 2004 to 2006 . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 The first attempt at a Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs video game was for the Atari 2600 as part of their line of children 's games . It was never officially released , although a " homebrew " version was made available on a limited basis . 
 Walt Disney 's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released for the Game Boy Color system in 2001 . 
 Snow White also makes an appearance in the PlayStation 2 game Kingdom Hearts as one of the seven fabled Princesses of Heart . A world based on the movie , Dwarf Woodlands , appears in Kingdom Hearts : Birth by Sleep for the PSP . 
 In 2013 's free @-@ to @-@ play mobile game Snow White : Queen 's Return ( also known as Seven Dwarfs : The Queen 's Return ) , an uncanonical continuation of the film , the Queen has survived the fall at the climax of the film and then reverted to her youthful form to cast a curse on Snow White and the dwarfs and their entire forest . 
 = = = Broadway musical = = = 
 Unknown Mary Jo Salerno played Snow White in the Disney @-@ produced Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( also known as Snow White Live ! ) at the Radio City Music Hall . Music and lyrics for four new songs were created by Jay Blackton and Joe Cook , respectively ; titles included " Welcome to the Kingdom of Once Upon a Time " and " Will I Ever See Her Again ? " . It ran from October 18 to November 18 , 1979 and January 11 to March 9 , 1980 , a total of 106 performances . 
 = = = Canceled prequel = = = 
 In the 2000s , DisneyToon Studios began development on a computer @-@ animated prequel to Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , titled The Seven Dwarfs . Director Mike Disa and screenwriter Evan Spiliotopoulos pitched a story explaining how the Dwarfs met , and how the Evil Queen killed Snow White 's father and took the throne . According to Disa , DisneyToon management changed the prequel to center around how Dopey lost his voice upon witnessing the death of his mother . After Disney purchased Pixar in 2006 , John Lasseter , <unk> ' new Chief Creative Officer , canceled Dwarfs . 
 = = = Live @-@ action film = = = 
 In March of 2016 , the studio announced a new film in development titled , Rose Red ; a live @-@ action spin @-@ off film which will be told from the point @-@ of @-@ view of Snow White 's sister , Red Rose . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 The Seven Dwarfs made rare appearances in shorts , despite their popularity ; they simply were too numerous to animate efficiently . Commissioned shorts The Standard Parade ( 1939 ) , The Seven Wise Dwarfs ( 1941 , using mostly recycled footage ) , All Together ( 1942 ) and The Winged Scourge ( 1943 ) all include appearances . 
 The animated television series House of Mouse , which included many Disney character animated cameos , included the characters in the special Mickey 's Magical Christmas : Snowed in at the House of Mouse . The Evil Queen appeared in a starring role in the film Once Upon a Halloween as well . In the arena of live action , the fantasy television series Once Upon a Time ( produced by Disney @-@ owned ABC Studios ) regularly includes live @-@ action interpretations of these characters including Snow White , the Evil Queen and Grumpy . 
 A 1937 – 1938 newspaper comic strip adaptation was republished repeatedly as a comic book , most recently in 1995 . 
 = Rocket to Russia = 
 Rocket to Russia is the third studio album by the American punk rock band the Ramones , and was released on November 4 , 1977 , through Sire Records . Its origins date back to the summer of 1977 , when " Sheena Is a Punk Rocker " was released as a single . That summer was known as the peak of the punk rock genre , since many punk bands were offered recording contracts . The album 's recording began in August 1977 , and the band had a considerably larger budget with Sire allowing them $ 25 @,@ 000 and $ 30 @,@ 000 ; much of this money went toward the album 's production rather than recording . 
 The album 's cover art was directed by John Gillespie . John Holmstrom and guitarist Johnny Ramone both worked on illustration , with the entire back cover contemplating a military theme , while the inner sleeve artwork depicted many of the themes portrayed in songs . The subject matter of songs varied throughout the album , though nearly all the tracks on the album incorporated humor into the lyrics . The musical style showed more of a surf rock influence , and many songs had minimal structuring . 
 The album received positive reception , with many critics appreciating the matured production and sound quality as compared to Rocket to Russia 's predecessors . Music critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine called it his favorite Ramones album as it contained several hooks and featured more variety of tempos . The album was not as commercially successful as the band had hoped , peaking at number 49 on the Billboard 200 . Band members blamed the Sex Pistols ' for their lack of sales , saying that they changed the punk image for the worse . This is the last album to feature original drummer Tommy Ramone who left the band in 1978 to work solely on production . The album was ranked at number 106 in Rolling Stone 's " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " in 2012 . 
 = = Conception = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In the summer of 1977 , " Sheena Is a Punk Rocker " was released as a single , being an outtake from the band 's previous release , Leave Home . This period was extremely significant to the punk rock genre , as it was the initial wave of New York City 's underground punk bands retrieving recording contracts . New York based clubs CBGB and Max 's Kansas City began to see bigger audiences crowd in to hear these bands . Punk fans commonly believed that this musical style would soon top the market , to which author Tom Carson explains : " To be in New York that summer was to have some sense of what it might have been like to live in San Francisco in 1966 or ' 67 , or in London when the Beatles and the [ Rolling ] Stones first hit . " 
 = = = Recording and production = = = 
 Sire Records allowed the band between $ 25 @,@ 000 and $ 30 @,@ 000 to fully record and produce the album , which is a considerably larger budget compared to the band 's previous albums . The band spent most of the money Sire had given them on the album 's production value . The studio rent was $ 150 per hour , usually using the first take of a song as its final recording . Johnny explained that " it 's best to do it quickly ... You do not wanna sit there and bullshit . It 's your money they 're spending . " 
 The recording began on August 21 , 1977 and took place in Midtown Manhattan at Media Sound Studios , a premises of a former Episcopalian Church . On the first day of sessions , guitarist Johnny Ramone brought a copy of the Sex Pistols ' single " God Save the Queen " with him , remarking that their type of music " robbed " the band . He emphasized that the album 's sound engineer Ed Stasium needed to incorporate better production than that of the Sex Pistols , to which Stasium replied " no problem . " Johnny relates : " These guys ripped us off and I want to sound better than this . " 
 Though the album cites Tony Bongiovi and Tommy Ramone as the head producers , much of the album 's production was done by Stasium ; Johnny so far as to insist that Bongiovi was omnipresent during the band 's recording sessions . Rocket to Russia 's final mastering was mainly done in Bongiovi 's Power Station studio . Infamous record producer Phil Spector offered to fabricate Rocket to Russia , but the band denied , feeling as though the album would not be the same without Tommy and Bongiovi . 
 = = = Title and packaging = = = 
 The album was released on November 4 , 1977 under the name Rocket to Russia , though it had a working title of Get Well . John Gillespie directed the artwork on the album , and the cover photo was taken by Danny Fields . Arturo Vega is credited as Artistic Coordinator , and Punk magazine editor John Holmstrom illustrated for the album . Holmstrom and Johnny collaborated on the back cover 's concept , eventually conceiving a military theme with an anti @-@ communist cartoon drawing . The back cover art depicts a " pinhead " riding a rocket from the US to Russia . The drawing features many landmarks which pertain to their global position , including The Empire State Building and Capitol Building , and Saint Basil 's Cathedral in Moscow . The original artwork is now featured in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland , Ohio . The inside sleeve features cartoon illustrations of each song 's basic concept . 
 = = Lyrics and compositions = = 
 Compared to the band 's previous albums , the songs from Rocket to Russia were more surf music and bubblegum pop influenced . But similar to their previous releases , the lyrics integrated humor , specifically black comedy with themes circling mental disorders and psychiatry . 
 The album opens with " Cretin Hop , " which pays homage to Ramones fans , and was inspired by Cretin Avenue of St. Paul , Minnesota , named after former Bishop Joseph <unk> . When the piece was performed at concerts , the band would pogo dance on stage . " Rockaway Beach " was written by bassist Dee Dee Ramone , and was inspired by the Beach Boys along with other surf music bands . The title refers to a neighborhood and beach in Queens which Dee Dee was a fan of , as confirmed by Tommy and Joey . " I Don 't Care " is composed of three chords and features minimal text composition . The song is among the first pieces written by the band , and was originally recorded as a demo that was released on the 2001 expanded edition of the Ramones debut album . " Sheena Is a Punk Rocker " was written by Joey , who explains that the lyrics are about a young female outsider named Sheena who strayed away from the popular disco and surf music and instead visited nightclubs and listened to punk rock . The mid @-@ tempo song deviates from a three @-@ chord pattern and starts off with Joey shouting " Go ! " , followed guitar riffs deemed to have a " raucous " texture by author Tom Carson . The author also suggests that these chords " bump [ ed ] " into each other until the song 's fade @-@ out ending . 
 " We 're a Happy Family " is a caricature of the conditions which 20th century middle @-@ class American families lived in . The song 's lyrics depict a dysfunctional family where the father is a lying homosexual , the mother is addicted to prescription drugs , the infant has chills . The writing also tells of how the family are friends with the President of the United States and the Pope , and indicate that the family sells " dope , " which is slang for marijuana . The song fades out with various different lines taken from fake dialogue , which illustrate a side of Joey 's personality according to his brother Mickey Leigh . 
 Side B of the album begins with " Teenage Lobotomy , " which deals with the brain surgical operation lobotomy . The lyrics outlines how this procedure can cause serious consequences to the brain , with the line " Gonna get my Ph.D , I 'm a teenage lobotomy . " The composition features more complex melodies than that of other songs from the album , with Stasium proclaiming it to be a " mini @-@ Ramones Symphony . " Rocket to Russia is the first album to feature two cover songs : " Do You Wanna Dance ? " ( originally performed by Bobby Freeman ) and " Surfin ' Bird " ( originally performed by The Trashmen ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Rocket to Russia was well received by critics , and was often given a positive review . Many critics appreciated the band 's progression of sound quality and production value , as opposed to the album 's predecessors . Stephen Thomas Erlewine , a music critic at AllMusic said that the production " only gives the Ramones ' music more force . " He rewarded the album five out of five stars , stating that although it lacks the revolutionary impact that their debut had , Rocket to Russia is the band 's " most listenable and enjoyable album " because of its surplus of hooks and varying tempo . 
 Critic Robert Christgau reaffirms that the album 's content evolved significantly since previous releases . Christgau noted that the album had " something for everyone " and called it a " ready @-@ made punk @-@ rock classic . " Rolling Stone critic Dave Marsh began his review of the album by stating : " Rocket to Russia is the best American rock & roll of the year and possibly the funniest rock album ever made . " Like other critics , Marsh recognized the advanced sound quality , explaining that " the guitars still riff relentlessly , but they are freer within the murky sound , and the songs give them much more to work with . " 
 = = = Sales and aftermath = = = 
 Though the band expected the album to spawn a few hit songs , Rocket to Russia sold few records . The album charted on the US Billboard 200 at number 49 , making this album one of the most successful of the Ramones ' releases . It also debuted at number 31 on the Swedish charts , 36 on the Canadian charts , and 60 on the UK Albums Chart . 
 The lack of record sales was largely due to the fellow punk band Sex Pistols turning people off the genre " with their antisocial behavior , " as put by author Brian J. Bowe . Rock music historian Legs McNeil relates : " Safety pins , razor blades , chopped haircuts , snarling , <unk> that had nothing to do with the Ramones was suddenly in vogue , and it killed any chance Rocket to Russia had of getting any airplay . " Joey also insisted that the Sex Pistols were partially responsible for the low sale numbers , concluding that before 60 Minutes 's focused on the Sex Pistols , Rocket to Russia had decent airplay . After this , Joey asserted that " everyone flipped out and then things changed radically . It really kind of screwed things up for ourselves . " 
 = = = = Departure of Tommy = = = = 
 Drummer Tommy , who had also worked to co @-@ produce the album , was troubled by the lack of sales and began debating on continuing with the Ramones . He also considered touring to be " depressing , " and that the audience at unfamiliar gigs were " a bunch of very eccentric , high @-@ strung , crazy people , from one shit @-@ hole club to another . " The drummer left the band to continue on the album 's writing and mixing . 
 " I was thinking , ' What 's best for the Ramones ? ' There was all this tension between me and Johnny . I was trying to release the pressure , to keep the band going . I told Dee Dee and Joey first that I was leaving the band . They said , ' Oh no , don 't go , don 't go , blah , blah , blah . ' I told them we had to do something , because I was losing my mind . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs were written by the Ramones , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following personnel can be verified with AllMusic and the album 's liner notes . 
 Performing 
 Joey Ramone – lead vocals 
 Johnny Ramone – lead guitar 
 Dee Dee Ramone – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Tommy Ramone – drums , producer 
 Production 
 Tony Bongiovi – producer 
 Ed Stasium – engineer 
 Don Berman – assistant engineer 
 Greg Calbi – mastering 
 Danny Fields – photography 
 John Holmstrom – artwork 
 = One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e = 
