 One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e ( One ～ 輝く季節へ ～ , lit . One ~ To the Radiant Season ~ ) is a Japanese adult visual novel , developed by Tactics , a brand of Nexton , released on May 29 , 1998 playable on Windows PCs . The erotic content was later removed when the game was ported to the PlayStation . The story follows the life of Kōhei Orihara , a high school student who has fun spending time with several girls about his age , while at the same time he is gradually being drawn into a mystical alternate space known as the Eternal World . 
 The gameplay in One follows a branching plot line which offers pre @-@ determined scenarios with courses of interaction , and focuses on the appeal of the six female main characters by the player character . The game ranked several times in the national top 50 for best @-@ selling PC games sold in Japan . A sequel loosely based on One titled One2 : Eien no Yakusoku was produced by BaseSon , another brand under Nexton , and was released in April 2002 . 
 Much of the staff that created the game later became the founding members of the visual novel brand Key . KSS produced a four @-@ episode all ages original video animation ( OVA ) series between 2001 and 2002 titled One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e . Cherry Lips produced a three @-@ episode adult OVA series between 2003 and 2004 titled One : True Stories . One : True Stories was later licensed for English language distribution by Media Blasters . Comic anthologies and four novels were also published , as were audio dramas . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 One is a romance visual novel in which the player assumes the role of Kōhei Orihara . Much of its gameplay is spent on reading the story 's narrative and dialogue . One follows a branching plot line with multiple endings , and depending on the decisions that the player makes during the game , the plot will progress in a specific direction . 
 There are six main plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience , one for each of the heroines in the story . Throughout gameplay , the player is given multiple options to choose from , and text progression pauses at these points until a choice is made . To view all plot lines in their entirety , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and choose different choices to further the plot to an alternate direction . In the adult versions of the game , there are scenes with sexual CGs depicting Kōhei and a given heroine having sex . Later , ports of the game were released without the erotic content . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The main part One 's story takes place at a Japanese high school , though little is shown except for Kōhei 's classroom , the cafeteria , and a little of the surrounding area . The main school building is three @-@ stories , and the roof is accessible , albeit with a sign on the roof 's access door saying " No Entry " , but the door is never locked regardless . Adjacent to the main building is another which houses club rooms . The school borders a forest on one side with a chain link fence . Beyond the forest is a park with a fountain and a flight of stairs on a hill . Other than the school , the shopping district in town and the usual path Kōhei takes to school are shown , but otherwise the only other place depicted is Kōhei 's two @-@ story house . 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 Kōhei Orihara is a young man in high school living a normal life . He tends to tease the girls he knows , especially his childhood friend Mizuka Nagamori , but deep down he is generally nice to girls . Mizuka usually takes good care of him , and worries about Kōhei , wondering if he could suddenly get a girlfriend . She is constantly sighing , being made to go along with Kōhei 's meaningless jokes . Kōhei meets a transfer student named Rumi Nanase early in the story whose goal is to become a " true maiden " and to that end , she behaves <unk> toward those around her , but she shows her true character just to Kōhei , who leaves a terrible first impression . Kōhei gets to know a quiet classmate named Akane Satomura who does not readily open her heart up to those around her , and refuses any help Kōhei may offer . 
 Kōhei also meets a blind upperclassman named Misaki Kawana who has a sociable personality where she can be unreserved with anyone . A mute underclassman girl named Mio Kouzuki meets Kōhei one day and uses a sketchbook to carry on written conversations . She belongs to the drama club , and despite not being able to speak , can still show emotion through various abundant expressions . The last girl Kōhei gets to know is a childish junior high school student named Mayu Shiina who refuses to go to school . Her one and only friend she could trust in life , a ferret named Myū , dies shortly before she meets Kōhei and the other main characters . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The story revolves around Kōhei Orihara , the main protagonist . His father died when he was very young , followed by his younger sister Misao and finally his mother . Deeply depressed , he goes to live with his aunt Yukiko , his mother 's younger sister , about ten years before One 's story begins on November 30 , 1998 . After he meets Mizuka Nagamori as a child , Kōhei begins to <unk> himself in the Eternal World , a world within his mind . The game 's main recurring motif is a focus on the Eternal World , a mystical alternate space which is never clearly explained , and the details of which are unknown . Shun Hikami 's remarks in the original game are possible clues about the Eternal World . 
 The Eternal World is a place similar to the afterlife where a person 's " other self " awaits . Anyone can access it , though it is only accessible once one has lost his or her grounding in the real world . It may be necessary to form a pledge with someone in the real world as a guide to the Eternal World , but one 's memories surrounding the pledge become vague . A grace period can be granted between when the pledge is made and when someone goes to the Eternal World . Once the process has started , nothing can prevent someone from going to the Eternal World , and returning to the real world is difficult . Someone about to leave to the Eternal World starts to be forgotten approximately one week before going , and the amount of time before someone forgets differs based on how much someone thinks about the person leaving . However , he or she is remembered the moment that person returns . If a strong emotional bond is established in the real world before leaving , a person in the Eternal World can be returned after approximately one year . 
 Kōhei is living a normal life in high school with Mizuka , and gets to know five other girls throughout the story who he helps with their various personal problems . While Kōhei likes to joke and tease these girls , deep down he is nice to girls and genuinely wants to help them . In the story , Kōhei is able to form intimate relationships with the six heroines : Mizuka Nagamori , Rumi Nanase , Misaki Kawana , Mio Kouzuki , Mayu Shiina , and Akane Satomura . While a given relationship will start out well , before long those around him start to forget him as he begins to retreat further into the Eternal World . If Kōhei forms a strong bond with one of the girls , she alone remembers him even after he leaves to the Eternal World . This ensures his eventual return one year later when he and the girl reunite . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e is Tactics ' third title , after Moon and Dōsei . One 's production was headed by YET11 , the pseudonym of Tsutomu Yoshizawa , who also contributed to the music in the game . Planning was led by Jun Maeda , who worked on the scenario with fellow writer Naoki Hisaya . Maeda wrote the scenarios for Mizuka , Rumi and Mayu , while Hisaya wrote the routes for Misaki , Mio and Akane . Art direction was done by Itaru Hinoue who also worked on the computer graphics along with <unk> Miracle Mikipon and Shinory . In addition to YET11 , the soundtrack was composed by Shinji Orito , OdiakeS , M.S. and Ishisan . 
 One was first released on May 29 , 1998 in regular and limited edition versions playable on Windows PCs in CD @-@ ROM format ; the limited edition included the game 's first original soundtrack . Both the limited and regular editions of the original game contained no voice acting . On April 1 , 1999 , KID released an all ages version in regular and limited editions playable on the PlayStation under the title Kagayaku Kisetsu e ; the PS version contained full @-@ voice acting . On September 14 , 2000 , AI System released One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e Memorial Selection , which was essentially the original game , though the price was cheaper at a little less than half the original price . On January 1 , 2003 , a full voice version of the Windows game was released by Nexton . Kōhei was not voiced in any of the versions . 
 On February 9 , 2007 , One was released playable on FOMA cell phones via a Java program by NTT DoCoMo . A second mobile release playable on au mobile phones was released on March 1 , 2007 by KDDI . A third mobile release , also playable on FOMA cell phones , was released by SoftBank Mobile on July 2 , 2007 . The last release by Nexton was on June 1 , 2007 as a Windows Vista compatible edition for the PC . <unk> released the full @-@ voice , Vista @-@ compatible edition of One as a downloadable version on February 26 , 2010 . The version for the PlayStation , and the mobile versions released by KDDI and SoftBank Mobile did not contain adult material . A promotional video for the game is still available for download at Tactics ' One website . 
 = = Related media = = 
 = = = Printed media = = = 
 Four adult novels based on the series , written by Midori Tateyama , were published by Movic between August 1998 and April 2000 . Each volume focused on one of the main heroines in the story ; volumes one through four focused on Mizuka , Akane , Misaki , and Rumi , respectively . A 143 @-@ page official fan book , which focused on Moon and One , was released by the publisher Compass in October 1998 , titled Tactics Moon & One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e Creation Image Collection . Aspect released a 95 @-@ page official fan book for the PlayStation version of One in October 1999 . 
 Compass also released a manga anthology called Tactics Anthology Comic One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e Chapter in May 1999 . Movic released a two @-@ volume manga anthology called One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e Comic Anthology between October and December 1999 . Ohzora released five volumes of manga anthologies : three in one series , and the last two as stand @-@ alone volumes . The three @-@ volume series is titled One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e Anthology Comics and were released between May 2002 and February 2003 . The first stand @-@ alone volume called One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e Dōjin Selection was released in September 2003 , and the second stand @-@ alone volume titled Hidamari One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e was released in January 2004 . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 One was adapted twice into original video animation ( OVA ) series . The first was an all ages OVA titled One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e produced by KSS ; four DVD volumes were released in Japan between August 10 , 2001 and May 24 , 2002 . The all ages OVA is loosely based on the original One visual novel and is drawn with a different setting . The second series , produced by Cherry Lips , was an adult OVA under the title One : True Stories . Three DVD volumes containing a single episode each were released between November 21 , 2003 and May 28 , 2004 . One : True Stories was later licensed for English distribution by Media Blasters and the three episodes were released in a single volume on August 16 , 2005 . 
 = = = Music and audio CDs = = = 
 The visual novel 's one main piece of theme music is the ending theme " Kagayaku Kisetsu e " ( 輝く季節へ ) composed by Shinji Orito . Five of the heroines have background music leitmotifs , excluding Mayu Shiina . Mizuka Nagamori 's theme is " <unk> no Neko " ( <unk> , Eight Cats ) ; Rumi Nanase 's theme is " Otome Kibō " ( <unk> , Maiden 's Wish ) ; Misaki Kawana 's theme is " <unk> wa <unk> @-@ sama " ( <unk> , <unk> Appearance ) ; Mio Kouzuki 's theme is " <unk> ni Egao " ( <unk> , Innocent Smile ) ; lastly , Akane Satomura 's theme is " Niji o Mita <unk> " ( <unk> , Path of a Rainbow Sighting ) . The first original soundtrack for the game was released on December 6 , 1998 , and a second followed on September 24 , 1999 as a piano arrange album . A remix album titled Sea Roars came bundled with the full voice Windows edition of the game released on January 1 , 2003 . 
 Three drama CDs based on the original game were released by Movic between November 6 , 1999 and January 30 , 2000 . Two drama CDs based on the all ages OVA series were released by KSS between November 2001 and July 2002 . A soundtrack for the all ages OVA series titled One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e Music from the Animation ( also known as One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e Vocal Mini album ) was released on August 10 , 2001 by KSS . An original soundtrack for One : True Stories was released by <unk> / HOBiRECORDS on November 21 , 2003 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to a national ranking of how well bishōjo games sold nationally in Japan , the One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e Memorial Selection Windows release ranked in on seven separate occasions . The game premiered at number six in the rankings during the first two weeks of September 2000 . During the first two weeks of January 2001 , the Memorial Selection ranked in at number 30 , and a month later during the first two weeks of February 2001 , ranked in at number 38 . Memorial Selection ranked in again at 41 between the end of February and March 2001 , and the following two weeks ranked in at 32 . Memorial Selection ranked on the list again between May 7 – 20 , 2001 , ranking in at 47 , and then for a final time during the first two weeks of July 2001 , ranking in at 37 . The One full @-@ voice edition for Windows premiered at number 12 out of 50 in the ranking , and ranked the following two weeks at 40 . In the month that followed , the One full voice edition ranked first in 60th place , and then again in the following ranking at 44 . 
 The all ages OVA series was given a negative review by Carlos Ross of THEM Anime Reviews . Despite looking " kinda cute " , he criticized the characters as having " no personality beyond the standard cliches of [ a ] dating simulation . " However , Ross did praise the art style , commenting that it was " rather nice , being in traditional analog style rather than CG . " The One : True Stories adult OVA series was reviewed at Mania.com where the reviewer remarked , " One : True Stories is the perfect kind of entry level or couples type of show that focuses just as much on the story and emotions of the characters as the sex , if not more so . " The characters were found to be " appealing " , and the story is described as a " fantasy but it 's a nice fantasy . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 After the release of One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e , the game 's producer YET11 was the only staff member who worked on the game who was later credited for future titles produced by Tactics , such as Tactics ' next visual novel Suzu ga Utau Hi in 1999 . The rest of the main production staff for One , along with its predecessor Moon , were later credited with the creation of the visual novel Kanon under the brand name Key attached to VisualArt 's . 
 A sequel loosely based on the original One visual novel titled One2 : Eien no Yakusoku ( One2 ～ <unk> ～ , lit . One2 ~ The Eternal Promise ~ ) was produced by the visual novel studio BaseSon , another brand under Nexton . One2 was released first on April 26 , 2002 , and then again on April 25 , 2003 with added voice acting , scenario , CGs and music . One2 used the concept of the Eternal World established in One as a major motif as One had done . The Eternal World in One2 is better explained than in One , though the two versions of the world differ to a certain extent due to the scenario writers that worked on One not being credited on the production staff of One2 . 
 Characters from One have appeared in other media not directly based on the One series . The six heroines from One have appeared in the Eternal Fighter Zero dōjin games by Twilight Frontier . Additionally , Rumi Nanase can be seen as a background character in several episodes of the Kanon anime series by Kyoto Animation . Itaru Hinoue , the art director of One , included illustrations from One in her art book White Clover : Itaru Hinoue Art Works released in 2009 . 
 = You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) = 
 " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " is a song by Jamaican recording artist Dawn Penn from her debut studio album , No , No , No ( 1994 ) . The song 's lyrics are credited to Penn , Bo Diddley and Willie Cobbs , and production was handled by Steely and Clevie . Penn recorded a song in 1967 called " You Don 't Love Me " , which incorporates elements of the music and lyrics of Cobbs ' 1960 song " You Don 't Love Me " . The Cobbs song was , in turn , based on Diddley 's 1955 song " She 's Fine , She 's Mine " . Thus , both are credited as songwriters on Penn 's recording . In 1994 , after a 17 @-@ year break from the music industry , she re @-@ recorded a dancehall version of the song retitled " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " . 
 Penn 's 1994 version of the song became a commercial success worldwide . In the United Kingdom , it peaked at number three on the Singles Chart . The song also reached the top 20 in Austria and Switzerland , and the top 40 in the Netherlands and New Zealand . In the United States , the single also charted at number 58 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and at number 42 on the Hot R & B Singles chart . Multiple recording artists have performed cover versions and sampled " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " in their own works . Barbadian singer Rihanna remade the song for her debut studio album , Music of the Sun ( 2005 ) , and American entertainer Beyoncé performed the song on her I Am ... World Tour concert tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In Jamaica in 1967 , Penn recorded a song titled " You Don 't Love Me " , which " she first sang for Studio One , although the song itself originated in the American south , courtesy of R & B singer Willie Cobbs " . Cobb himself had based his song on blues singer Bo Diddley 's 1955 recording " She 's Fine , She 's Mine " . Penn 's cover of Cobb 's song was recorded at Kingston 's Studio One by influential producer Coxsone Dodd . Dodd , who had lived for a while in the United States , imported American rhythm and blues records to play for his sound system entertainment businesses . Penn 's song used lyrical and melodic elements of Cobbs ' song , but was performed in the emerging rocksteady style – a precursor to reggae . It starts out with a drum roll , " then a chugging bass line kicks in and Penn 's dreamy voice wails " : 
 No no no , you don 't love me and I know now ( 2 × ) 
 <unk> you left me baby , and I got no place to go now ... 
 Dawn Penn 's " You Don 't Love Me " was successful in Jamaica , where it was a major hit . She recorded some other songs due to the positive feedback and reviews of " You Don 't Love Me " , such as " Blue Yes Blue " and a reggae cover version of Scottish singer Lulu 's " To Sir , with Love " . Despite her initial success , Penn decided to take a break from singing , which lasted 17 years . In the late 1980s , after working for banks , accountant agencies , and airlines , she returned to Jamaica in the hopes of reviving her career . In the early 1990s , she re @-@ recorded a version of " You Don 't Love Me " with the new title " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " . The noted Jamaican production team Steely and Clevie produced it and it featured an updated dancehall arrangement . Songwriting is credited to Penn , Cobbs , and Diddley . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " peaked at number 58 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart ; it remained on the chart for 12 weeks . It also peaked at number 42 on the Hot R & B Singles chart , number 41 on the Hot R & B Airplay chart , and number 45 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart . In the Wallonia region of Belgium , " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " debuted at number 44 on the chart week of 23 July 1994 , and peaked at number eight in its eighth week ; it remained on the chart for a total of 13 weeks . The song placed within the top 20 in Austria and Switzerland , peaking at numbers 13 and 17 , respectively . " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " also reached number 25 in New Zealand and number 38 in the Netherlands , and peaked at number 41 in both France and Germany . In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number nine on the UK Singles Chart during the week of 11 June 1994 , later peaking at number three and remaining in the position for two consecutive weeks . 
 = = Formats = = 
 CD maxi single 
 " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " ( Extended Mix ) – 4 : 35 
 " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " ( Instrumental Dub ) – 3 : 02 
 " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " ( Original Radio Edit ) – 3 : 19 
 " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " ( Remix ) – 5 : 13 
 " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " ( Remix Instrumental ) – 6 : 07 
 Digital download 
 " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " ( Album version ) – 4 : 37 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Covers and other versions = = 
 Reggae group Aswad sampled " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " for their song " You 're No Good " , taken from their album Rise and Shine ( 1994 ) . " You 're No Good " peaked at number 35 on the UK Singles Chart on 2 February 1995 . British music DJ 's <unk> included a mix of the song on " Mr. <unk> 's Ninja Tune Megamix " ( <unk> Edit ) by DJ Food on their 2002 DJ mix album Listen & Learn . Barbadian recording artist Rihanna recorded a cover version of the song as a duet with dancehall recording artist Vybz Kartel , for her debut studio album Music of the Sun ( 2005 ) . It was produced by Evan Rogers , Carl Sturken and D. " Supa Dups " Chin @-@ quee . Jason Birchmeier , writing for AllMusic , described Rihanna 's cover as " catchy " , while Chantal <unk> , writing for The Jamaica Observer , labelled it as " hilarious " . English recording artist Lily Allen sampled the song for her " Shame for You " , included on her debut studio album , Alright , Still ( 2006 ) . Lucy Davies for the BBC reviewed the song , writing " Many of her reggae @-@ fused songs stick in your head whilst you desperately <unk> out why they 're familiar , but she rips off her influences with a comic acknowledgement , like ' Shame for You ' , which blatantly lifts the chorus hook from ' You Don 't Love Me ( No No No ) ' by Dawn Penn " . 
 In 2007 , American rapper Ghostface Killah covered the song on his compilation album , Hidden Darts : Special Edition , which consists of his rare album B @-@ sides , unreleased songs and mixtape tracks . American recording artist Beyoncé performed a part of the song on her I Am ... World Tour concert tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . After being lifted out of a 20 @-@ foot train by a harness and over the audience , she was lowered to the B @-@ stage , where she finished one song and continued with Penn 's " You Don 't Love Me ( No , No , No ) " . It was later included on the CD / DVD release of the tour . 
 = Burger King legal issues = 
 The legal issues of Burger King include several legal disputes and lawsuits , as both plaintiff and defendant , of the international fast food restaurant chain Burger King ( BK ) , in the years since its founding in 1954 . Situations involving these many legal topics have affected almost every aspect of the company 's operations . Depending on the ownership and executive staff at the time of these incidents , the company 's responses to these challenges have ranged from a conciliatory dialog with its critics and litigants to a more aggressive opposition with questionable tactics and negative consequences . The company 's response to these various issues has drawn praise , scorn , and accusations of political appeasement from different parties over the years . 
 Controversies and disputes have arisen from a diverse source of group such as People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) over the welfare of animals , governmental and social agencies over health issues and compliance with nutritional labeling laws , and unions and trade groups over labor relations and laws . These situations have touched on the concepts of animal rights , corporate responsibility and ethics , as well as social justice . While the majority of the disputes did not result in lawsuits , in many of the cases the situations raised legal questions , dealt with statutory compliance , or resulted in legal remedies such as changes in contractual procedure or binding agreements between parties . The resolutions to these legal matters have often altered the way the company interacts and negotiates contracts with its suppliers and franchisees or how it does business with the public . 
 Further controversies have occurred because of the company 's involvement in the Middle East . The opening of a Burger King location in the Israeli @-@ occupied territories lead to a breach of contract dispute between Burger King and its Israeli franchise ; the dispute eventually erupted into a geopolitical conflagration involving Muslim and Jewish groups on multiple continents over the application of and adherence to international law . The case eventually elicited reactions from the members of the 22 @-@ nation Arab League ; the Islamic countries within the League made a joint threat to the company of legal sanctions including the revocation of Burger King 's business licenses within the member states ' territories . A second issue involving members of the Islamic faith over the interpretation of the Muslim version of canon law , Shariah , regarding the promotional artwork on a dessert package in the United Kingdom raised issues of cultural sensitivity , and , with the former example , posed a larger question about the lengths that companies must go to insure the smooth operation of their businesses in the communities they serve . 
 A trademark dispute involving the owners of the identically named Burger King in Mattoon , Illinois led to a federal lawsuit ; the case 's outcome helped define the scope of the Lanham act and trademark law in the United States . An existing trademark held by a shop of the same name in South Australia forced the company to change its name in Australia , while another state trademark in Texas forced the company to abandon its signature product , the Whopper , in several counties around San Antonio . Legal decisions from other suits have set contractual law precedents in regards to long @-@ arm statutes , the limitations of franchise agreements , and ethical business practices ; many of these decisions have helped define general business dealings that continue to shape the entire marketplace . 
 = = Legal disputes & agreements = = 
 = = = Animal welfare = = = 
 In 2001 , the animal rights group PETA began targeting fast food chains in the United States regarding the treatment of chickens by suppliers such as Tyson Foods . Using parodies of corporate logos and slogans , the group sought to publicly embarrass the companies into changing their corporate policies in dealing with their poultry suppliers . After winning concessions from McDonald 's with its " McCruelty " campaign , the group targeted Burger King with a six @-@ month campaign it called Murder King . The group and its supporters , with the backing of celebrities including Alec Baldwin , James Cromwell , and Richard Pryor , staged protests outside Burger King restaurants across the United States , calling on the company to establish these new compliance guidelines . On June 28 , 2001 , Burger King entered into an agreement with the group and established a contractual framework that defined procedures to ensure that its suppliers were conforming to the agreed @-@ upon standards of animal welfare . These changes , along with the company 's new vegetarian offering , the BK Veggie sandwich , drew praise from the group . 
 In 2006 , PETA went before Burger King 's board of directors during its parent company 's annual corporate meeting to request that poultry suppliers switched to a more @-@ humane method of slaughter called controlled atmosphere killing ( CAK ) . Instead of using its previous tactic of stating that the procedure is more humane , the group claimed that CAK was economically more feasible as it reduces the chances of injury to workers in poultry factories and it produces better products by preventing injury to the animal . Responding to the proposal in March 2007 , Burger King announced it would make further changes to its animal @-@ welfare policies . The new policies favor suppliers of chickens that utilize CAK rather than electric shock to knock birds unconscious before slaughter , and require its pork and poultry suppliers to upgrade the living conditions of pigs and chickens . Under the agreement , 2 % of BK 's North American egg suppliers are to use cage @-@ free @-@ produced eggs and 10 % of pork suppliers are to use crate @-@ free pigs for its pork products . PETA and the Humane Society of the United States were quoted as saying that Burger King ’ s initiatives put it ahead of its competitors in terms of animal rights and welfare and that they were hopeful that the new initiatives would trigger reform throughout the fast food industry as a whole . 
 = = = Nutrition = = = 
 Since the 1980s , several parties , including the Center for Science in the Public Interest ( CSPI ) , the British Heart Foundation , the City of New York , and the Spanish government , have argued that Burger King has contributed to obesity and unhealthy eating behaviors in Western nations by producing products that contain large amounts of salt , fat , trans @-@ fat and calories . After its purchase by TPG Capital from former parent company Diageo in 2002 , the company introduced several large , over @-@ sized products including its European BK XXL line , the British Angus burger six @-@ pack , the Enormous Omelet Sandwich line and the BK Stacker line . These new offerings , and others like them , have resulted in further international scorn and negative attention due the large portion size and increased amounts of unhealthy fats and trans @-@ fats in these items . Many consumer groups have accused Burger King and other fast food restaurant chains of failing to provide healthier alternatives . 
 A 1985 agreement with the New York city public health commissioner 's office , over publication of nutritional data regarding the food it sells , helped define guidelines used by the city for the dissemination of nutritional information . In a five @-@ month negotiation with Burger King and its then parent Grand Metropolitan PLC ( now part of Diageo ) , the company agreed to post complete nutritional information that complied with the Federal Government 's guidelines for the maximum daily recommended intake of fat and sodium . Additionally the data was to be presented in a format easy for the general public to understand and use . On the basis of this agreement , New York public health commissioner Mark Green , with support of Mayor David Dinkins , proposed legislation that would require all fast food restaurants to display nutritional data as well . 
 In response to the 2006 introduction of the BK XXL product line in Spain , the Spanish Health Ministry publicly claimed that the company had violated a voluntary agreement between the company and the Spanish Federation of Hoteliers and Restaurateurs , a group to which Burger King belongs , that called on its members to refrain from advertising large portions of food . The Minister of Health , Elena Salgado , claimed that the new promotion and the new sandwiches , averaging over 970 calories each , violated the accord . The head of Spain 's food regulatory body , Felix Lobo , stated a legal case could be made against Burger King for " illegally failing to comply with a contract " . In a response to the Government 's allegations , the European offices of Burger King released this statement : " In this campaign , we are simply promoting a line of burgers that has formed part of our menu in recent years . Our philosophy can be summed up with the motto ' As you like it , ' in which our customers ' taste trumps all . " The company also explained that it had always worked " to reduce the risk of illness provoked by an inadequate diet and to promote a balanced ... diet . " A spokesperson for the company stated that customers have the choice of salads versus a Whopper , that they have the option to modify their sandwiches as they please , and that the company was going to continue to advertising the products . 
 In May 2007 , the Center for Science in the Public Interest ( CSPI ) sought a state @-@ level class action lawsuit against Burger King in the Superior Court for the District of Columbia over the inclusion of trans @-@ fats in foods served by Burger King and Burger King 's failure to set a definitive time line for their elimination from the company 's menu . The CSPI suit sought to require the company to place large heath warnings on Burger King 's food packaging that explained the dangers of trans @-@ fat and the levels of trans @-@ fat contained in its products . Burger King sought to move the case to the Federal courts and have the suit dismissed . The Federal Court denied the company 's motion for dismissal and sent the case back to the Superior Court for trial . To address the CSPI 's legal challenge , as well as several laws passed in New York City , Philadelphia and other cities regarding the issue of trans @-@ fats in its food , BK announced a plan in July 2007 to phase out all trans @-@ fats from its products by the end of 2008 . 
 In response to the issue of childhood obesity , Burger King announced in October 2007 that it was joining The Council of Better Business Bureau 's Children 's Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative . The program is a voluntary self @-@ regulation program designed to modify advertising messages aimed at children so as to encourage healthier eating habits and lifestyles . As part of its participation in the program , Burger King announced a series of steps in its advertising and children 's product lines to which it was committing itself : 
 ... In addition , Burger King Corp. will : 
 Restrict advertising to children under 12 that uses third @-@ party licensed characters to Kids Meals that meet its Nutrition Guidelines 
 Refrain from advertising in elementary schools and from product placement in media primarily aimed at children under 12 
 Promote Kids Meals that meet its Nutrition Guidelines on its Web site 
 Promote healthy lifestyles and healthy dietary choices in advertising 
 The modified Kid 's Meal line will include new products , such as broiled Chicken Tenders , apple " fries " ( French cut , raw apples served in a fry box ) , and Kraft macaroni and cheese . According to the statement by the company 's corporate parent , Burger King Brands , the meals will contain no more than 560 calories per meal , with less than 30 percent of the calories derived from fat , less than 10 percent of the calories from saturated fat , no added trans fats and no more than 10 percent of calories derived from added sugars . As of August 1 , 2008 , Burger King has introduced the product line in the United States , but not the broiled Chicken Tenders product available in the United Kingdom and Ireland . 
 = = = Labor = = = 
 A protracted South Florida labor dispute between the Coalition of Immokalee Workers ( CIW ) and growers of tomatoes in the region expanded to include Burger King and other major fast food companies , including McDonald 's and Yum ! Brands . In 2001 , the CIW sought a pay raise for tomato pickers in the region and , starting with its Boot the Bell campaign aimed at Yum ! subsidiary Taco Bell , began to target the chains with protests , letter writing campaigns , and petitions demanding that the companies purchase tomatoes only from suppliers who agree to the pay increase . The campaign , which eventually attracted the support of religious groups , labor organizations , student groups and anti @-@ slavery activists , became known as the Campaign for Fair Food with a stated goal to increase the wages of the pickers by 1 ¢ per pound picked above the 45 ¢ paid per bucket at the time , or about 77 ¢ for each 32 @-@ pound ( 14 @.@ 5 kg ) bucket in 2005 US dollars . In 2005 , McDonald 's Corporation and Yum ! signed agreements acquiescing to the group 's purchasing demands , although implementation was put on hold due to threats by the Florida Tomato Growers Exchange to fine its members $ 100 @,@ 000 if they complied ; however , Burger King corporate parent Burger King Brands declined to enter into a similar agreement with the group . 
 A December 2007 QSR Magazine article about the conflict claimed that Burger King Brands had devised a contingency plan to remove itself from the dispute . Citing internal company documents , the Associated Press stated BK had concerns that such agreements might prove to be a possible violation of anti @-@ trust laws , had possible tax implications , and that there were issues with third @-@ party oversight for the agreements . As part of the company 's plan , QSR Magazine claimed that the company was going to cease purchasing product from suppliers with whom the CIW was in disagreement . In response , the company issued a press release in February 2007 claiming that while it is a large purchaser , it is not responsible for the pay rates of it suppliers ' workers as wage disputes are the province of the producer . BK also pointed out that it has an open offer of employment for any dissatisfied CIW members and scholarships ( through its Have it Your Way Foundation ) for family members of CIW workers . 
 In the release , Steven Grover , BK Vice President of Global Food Safety , Quality Assurance , and Regulatory Compliance , confirmed the factuality of the QSR report and that if the dispute between the growers and the CIW continues , the company would go forward with its plans to stop purchasing tomatoes from farms in the Immokalee region . The company stated it would purchase only one percent of its tomatoes from that area and other suppliers could easily make up the difference . Speaking on the dispute , Grover stated , " We ’ re being asked to do something that we have legal questions about . We want to find a way to make sure that workers are protected and receive a decent wage . " CIW spokesperson Julia Perkins faulted this move , stating , " ... farm workers across the country and world face the same problems as those in the Immokalee region , but many do not have a human rights organization , such as the CIW , to stand up for their interests . Running away from the scene of the crime , does that make you any more innocent ? Are they really willing to pay an exorbitantly higher transportation cost [ s ] to bring in tomatoes from overseas or Mexico and pass that on to their customers rather than pay a penny more per pound ? " 
 In an April 2008 Senate hearing chaired by U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders ( I @-@ VT ) regarding farm conditions , Eric Schlosser , author of the best @-@ selling Fast Food Nation , commented on Burger King 's recalcitrance to sign an agreement with the CIW while Yum ! and McDonald 's had . Schlosser stated , " The admirable behavior of these two industry giants makes the behavior or Burger King ... seem completely unjustifiable . " 
 In May 2008 , several issues came to the fore that damaged the credibility of Burger King and its position on the topic . Steven Grover was found to be trolling websites that have posted pro @-@ CIW positions and opinions ; under an assumed screen name , Grover posted several comments disparaging the ethics and honesty of the leadership of the group . Besides the trolling incident , Grover was tied to several terse , stridently worded e @-@ mails sent from a possibly fictitious employee name at the BK global headquarters in Miami to supporters and media groups ; the company labeled these communications as unsanctioned and not reflecting official corporate positions . Additionally , Burger King was found to have hired an outside security company , Pembroke Pines , Florida based Diplomatic Tactical Services , to infiltrate the CIW and its supporting groups and spy on their members . After these issues came to light , BK terminated Grover and company spokesman Keva Silversmith , as well as its relationship with Diplomatic Tactical Services . Critics of the personnel action , such as PR Watch editor Sheldon Rampton , noted that it appeared that the two terminated employees were being made scapegoats by the company . Rampton went on to note that Silversmith had been , up to a few weeks before the story came to light , employed by the PR firm Edelman , which had been contracted by company parent Burger King Brands to provide PR services ; Edelman has employed tactics on the behalf of its other clients , Wal @-@ Mart and Microsoft , which Rampton and his organization termed " sleazy " . Sen. Sanders agreed with Rampton 's claim of scapegoating , and called for hearings into the incidents to investigate the company 's behaviors to see if other Burger King officers had instigated the attacks on the labor group as company policy . Sanders stated that he wished to " make sure that we find out how high up the corporate ladder this scheme went " . 
 The issue was resolved on May 23 , 2008 when BK CEO John Chidsey announced an agreement with the CIW granting the requested 1 ¢ pay increase to the workers . Chidsey also apologized on behalf of the company for the comments made about the pickers and the behavior of Grover and Silversmith . Additionally , the company agreed to provide a ½ ¢ per pound payment to the CIW to cover payroll taxes and administrative costs for the tomato growers . 
 = = = Israel , Palestine & the occupied territories = = = 
 In the summer of 1999 , a geopolitical dispute with the global Islamic community and Jewish groups in the United States and Israel arose over an Israeli franchisee opening stores in the Israeli @-@ occupied territories . When Burger King franchisee in Israel , Rikamor , Ltd . , opened a store in the West Bank settlement of Ma 'aleh Adumim in August of that year , Islamic groups , including the Arab League and American Muslims for Jerusalem , argued that international Burger King parent Burger King Corporation 's licensing of the store helped legitimize the illegal settlement . Beyond the called @-@ for Islamic boycott of the company , the Arab League also threatened the revocation of the business licenses of Burger King 's primary Middle Eastern franchise in the 22 countries that are part of the League 's membership . 
 Burger King Corporation quickly pulled the franchise license for that location and had the store shuttered explaining that Rikamor , Ltd. had violated its contract by opening the location in the West Bank . Several American @-@ based Jewish groups issued statements that denounced the decision as acceding to threats of boycotts by Islamic groups . Burger King Corporation issued a statement that it " made this decision purely on a commercial basis and in the best interests of thousands of people who depend on the Burger King reputation for their livelihood " . 
 = = = Islamic relations = = = 
 An issue of a religious nature arose in 2005 in the United Kingdom when Burger King introduced a new prepackaged ice cream product ; the label of the product included a silhouette of the ice cream that when rotated on its side bore a resemblance to the Islamic inscription for God , Allah ( الله ) . When a British Muslim named Rashad Akhtar , a resident of the community of High Wycombe , was presented with the ice cream cone in a Park Royal Burger King restaurant , he noticed the resemblance and became angered at what he felt was an offense to the Islamic faith . After being informed of the likeness , the local Islamic group Muslim Council of Britain pointed out the issue of the possible interpretation to Burger King and its relevance to Shariah , the Muslim version of canon law which governs the lives of members of the Islamic faith and carries the same weight as civil law in their belief structure . The company responded by voluntarily recalling the product and reissuing it with a new label . The Muslim Council praised the company for its " sensitive and prompt action " in resolving the matter ; however , Akhtar was not satisfied with the company 's withdrawal of the product . 
 In response to the perceived blasphemy , Akhtar declared it was his personal jihad to find those responsible for the packaging and destroy their professional status , personal life and the UK as a whole for having a culture allowing the insult to occur . This event , Akhtar 's reaction and other similar issues with companies such as Nike and Unilever have been used by conservative political critics , such as James Joyner , claiming that western nations and organizations are kowtowing in too easily to Muslims ' claims or threats and by commentators , including author Daniel C. Dennett , highlighting how factions of the Islamic faith gravitate towards iconoclasm . 
 = = Cases of note = = 
 = = = Burger King Corporation v. Hungry Jack 's Pty Limited = = = 
 When Burger King moved to expand its operations into Australia in the early 1970s , its business name was already trademarked by a takeaway food shop in Adelaide . As a result , Burger King provided the Australian franchisee , Jack Cowin , with a list of possible alternative names derived from pre @-@ existing trademarks already registered by Burger King and its then corporate parent Pillsbury that could be used to name the Australian restaurants . Cowin selected the Hungry Jack brand name , one of Pillsbury 's US pancake mixture products , and slightly changed the name to the possessive form , Hungry Jack 's . The first Australian franchise of Burger King Corporation was established in Perth in 1971 , under the auspices of Cowin 's new company Hungry Jack 's Pty , Limited . 
 In 1990 , Hungry Jack 's renewed its franchise agreement with then BK parent Burger King Corporation , which allowed Hungry Jack 's to license third party franchisee . One of the terms and conditions of the renewed agreement required Hungry Jack 's to open a minimum number of new locations each year for the duration of the contract . Shortly after the Australian trademark on the Burger King name lapsed in 1996 , Burger King requested that Cowin rebrand the Hungry Jack 's locations to Burger King , which Cowin declined . Burger King Corporation accused Hungry Jack 's of violating the conditions of the renewed franchise agreement by failing to expand the chain at the rate defined and sought to terminate the agreement . Under the aegis of this claim , Burger King Corporation , in partnership with Royal Dutch Shell 's Australian division Shell Company of Australia Ltd . , began to open its own stores in 1997 beginning in Sydney and extending throughout the regions of New South Wales , Australian Capital Territory and Victoria . In addition , BK sought to limit HJ 's ability to open new locations in the country , whether they were corporate locations or third @-@ party licensees . 
 As a result of Burger King 's actions , Hungry Jack 's owner Jack Cowin and his private holding company Competitive Foods Australia began legal proceedings in 2001 against Burger King 's parent Burger King Corporation with a counter @-@ claim that the company had violated the conditions of the master franchising agreement and was in breach of the contract . In a decision handed down by the Supreme Court of New South Wales that affirmed Cowin 's claims , Burger King was determined to have violated the terms of the contract and as a result was required to pay Cowin and Hungry Jack 's a A $ 46 @.@ 9 million ( US $ 41 @.@ 6 million 2001 ) award . The court 's decision was one of the first major cases in Australia that implied that the American legal concept of good faith negotiations existed with the framework of the Australian legal system , which until that verdict , had rarely been seen in the country 's courts . In its decision , the Court stated that Burger King had failed to act in good faith during contract negotiations by seeking to include standards and clauses that would engineer a default of the franchise agreement , allowing the company to limit the number of new Hungry Jack ’ s branded restaurants and ultimately claim the Australian market as its own , a purpose that was extraneous to the agreement . 
 After Burger King Corporation lost the case , it decided to terminate its operations in the country , and in July 2002 , the company transferred its assets to its New Zealand franchise group , Trans @-@ Pacific Foods ( TPF ) . The terms of the sale had TPF assume oversight of the Burger King franchises in the region as the Burger King brand 's master franchisee . Trans @-@ Pacific Foods administered the chain 's 81 locations until September 2003 when the new management team of Burger King Corporation reached an agreement with Hungry Jack 's Pty Ltd to re @-@ brand the existing Burger King locations to Hungry Jack 's and make HJP the sole master franchisee of both brands . An additional part of the agreement required Burger King Corporation to provide administrative and advertising support as to insure a common marketing scheme for the company and its products . Trans @-@ Pacific Foods transferred its control of the Burger King franchises to Hungry Jack 's Pty Ltd , which subsequently renamed the remaining Burger King locations as Hungry Jack 's . 
 = = = Burger King v. Rudzewicz = = = 
 In 1979 , two Michigan businessmen , John Rudzewicz and Brian MacShara , entered into a franchise agreement with Burger King to run a restaurant in Detroit , Michigan . After MacShara attended four months of training courses at the regional Burger King training facilities in Michigan and in the Florida headquarters on how to operate and administer a Burger King franchise , it was agreed that the partners would take over operation of an existing Burger King location in Drayton Plains , Michigan . However , during this time disagreements arose between the partners and BK over issues of rent , construction fees , building designs and the assignment of legal liabilities . MacShara and Ruzewicz finally signed their franchise agreement after gaining limited concessions over the issues , with Rudzewicz assuming a 20 @-@ year , $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 financial obligation over the life of the contract . 
 Due to a recessionary period in the United States beginning with the energy crisis in late 1979 , sales began to decline at the location and the partnership failed to pay their required franchise fees and rent service to Burger King Corporation . After attempts over the intervening months to negotiate a compromise with MacShara and Ruzewicz failed , Burger King terminated the franchise agreement and ordered the pair to vacate the property . Rudzewicz and MacShara refused to comply and continued operation of their restaurant even after they were served the notice . Burger King response was to file a lawsuit in May 1981 in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida claiming breach of contract and trademark infringement . Burger King sought an injunction against the pair preventing them from operating the restaurant and seeking damages because MacShara and Ruzewicz were " ... tortiously infringing its [ Burger King ] trademarks and service marks through their continued , unauthorized operation as a Burger King restaurant " . The company also sought reimbursement of all legal fees and costs associated with the filing . 
 The defendants , MacShara and Rudzewicz , filed a motion to dismiss the case on the argument as Michigan residents , the District Court of Southern Florida did not have jurisdiction . After a hearing , the Court ruled that Florida has personal jurisdiction under State of Florida 's long @-@ arm statute , stating that " ... a non @-@ resident Burger King franchise is subject to the personal jurisdiction of this Court in actions arising out of its franchise agreements " . The partners filed a counter claim and alleged Burger King had violated Michigan 's Franchise Investment Law and sought damages and fees . After a short trial , the Court found for Burger King and ordered Rudzewicz and MacShara to close the restaurant and awarded BK damages , fees , and costs . 
 After the loss , MacShara withdrew from the case but Rudzewicz appealed the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit . In the filing , Rudzewicz claimed that since they were residents of Michigan , and because the claims did not arise within the Southern District of Florida , that District Court lacked personal jurisdiction over them . Additionally Rudzewicz argued that the long @-@ arm statute violated the 14th Amendment and was unconstitutional . Citing a similar case , World @-@ Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson , the Appeals court agreed with the defendants and overturned the lower court 's decision . The court also agreed with Rudzewicz 's assertion of the constitutionality of Florida 's long arm statute in its application to the case . 
 In turn , Burger King Corporation asked for a rehearing , which was denied . Burger King then filed an appeal to the US Supreme Court , which agreed to hear the case on its merits , after which it would decide if it had jurisdiction to grant a writ of certiorari . In its decision , the Supreme Court overturned the Appellate Court and found that Florida does have jurisdiction in the case . The Court concluded that the defendants , Rudzewicz and MacShara , sought out their franchise in the state of Florida and were availed of the protections of that state and were , therefore , subject to jurisdiction there . Additionally , the Court reasoned that the defendants had a " substantial and continuing " relationship with Burger King in Florida and that due process would not be violated because the defendants should have reasonably anticipated being summoned into court in Florida for breach of contract . 
 The decision in Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz , has been criticized as complicating " personal jurisdiction jurisprudence by creating , in dicta , a new bifurcated test " that duplicates a venue analysis , adds little to the minimum contacts inquiry , hinders predictability , is a burdensome process , and potentially allows a plaintiff to manipulate a defendant 's constitutional rights . 
 = = = Burger King of Florida , Inc. v. Hoots = = = 
 As the company expanded , it was subject to several legal issues regarding trademarks . Because of its use as a case study in American law schools , one of the most prominent incidents of infringement in the United States occurred with the similarly named Burger King located in Mattoon , Illinois . Eugene and Elizabeth Hoots owned an ice cream shop in the city of Mattoon ; due to the success of the store , in 1957 they expanded it with an additional shop in a former garage next to the original operation . Keeping with theme related to the name of the ice cream shop , Frigid Queen , they named their burger stand Burger King and registered their trademark with the state of Illinois in 1959 . In 1962 The Hootses , with knowledge of the Federal trademark held by Burger King Corporation , added a second location in Charleston , Illinois . 
 In 1961 , with its first location in Skokie , Illinois , Burger King Corporation and its franchises began opening stores and by 1967 had over 20 locations spread throughout the state . The Hootses , claiming that their trademark gave them exclusive rights to the name in Illinois sued BK in the state , and later federal , courts under the case Burger King of Florida , Inc. v. Hoots 403 F.2d 904 ( 7th Cir . 1968 ) . The decision issued by United States District Court for the Central District of Illinois , and upheld by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit , stated that the BK federal trademark , applied for in 1961 and granted in 1963 , took precedence over the Hootses ' older , state trademark ; The Court granted the Hootses exclusive rights to the Burger King trademark within a circular area defined with a 20 @-@ mile ( 32 km ) radius centered on their original location . 
 The Burger King v. Hoots trademark dispute and its resulting decision went beyond the original case , it established a major legal precedent in the United States in regards to the Lanham Act . The ruling states that while the senior user of the state service mark or trademark has prior usage of the common law marks , federal statute overrides the earlier , state service mark and prohibits the senior user from preventing the junior user from exercising the use of the federally registered mark outside a defined geographic reach of the senior user . 
 The Hoots decision would again affect Burger King as it moved into the state of Texas . When Burger King expanded into the San Antonio area , it was prevented from utilizing the name of its signature product , the Whopper , in its local advertising and stores due to a prior state registered service mark owned by a local chain known as Whopper Burger . The chain , owned by Frank and Barbara Bates , prevented the company from using the name in Bexar County for several years until Mrs. Bates , the CEO of Whopper Burger after the death of her husband in 1983 , retired and sold the chain with its related trademarks to then @-@ corporate parent Pillsbury in the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 = Princess Theatre ( Edmonton ) = 
 The Princess Theatre is a two @-@ screen art @-@ house cinema located at 10337 Whyte Avenue in Edmonton ’ s historic Old Strathcona neighbourhood . The building was designed by prominent Edmonton architects Wilson and <unk> , a firm responsible for the design of many other Edmonton heritage sites . It became Edmonton 's oldest surviving theatre after the demolition of the Gem Theatre in 2006 . The building currently houses the main 400 @-@ seat theatre as well as the 100 @-@ seat Princess II , located in the basement . 
 It was originally known as the McKernan Block , after John W. McKernan , the building 's original financier , owner , and manager . McKernan was already a recognized theatre operator having previously run two other south side theatres before the Princess : the south side Gem and the South Side Bijou . Only the Princess was to survive the collapse of Strathcona ’ s building boom in 1913 . 
 The building and the theatre within has changed ownership several times , and its fortunes have largely depended on the current state of the Canadian theatre industry . It spent a dozen years as a retail space from 1958 – 1970 , and six years from 1970 @-@ 1976 mainly exhibiting mainstream pornographic films . The Princess was operated successfully as a repertory theatre from 1978 to late 1996 , after which it became a first run theatre . Until 2016 , the Princess was operated as a first run theatre by Edmonton ’ s native Magic Lantern Theatres . From January of 2016 the Cinema is being operated by Plaza Entertainment . 
 = = Silent era = = 
 = = = Early years under J.W. McKernan = = = 
 The Princess Block , was designed by Edmonton architects Wilson and <unk> , who also designed Whyte Avenue ’ s Douglas Block , the Strathcona Fire Hall , the Strathcona Public Library , and the University of Alberta ’ s Rutherford House . From the beginning , the building was designed to combine commercial and residential space , and featured a full basement , small multi @-@ use second floor apartments , and a full third floor in addition to the theatre space . 
 The building was originally known as the McKernan Block , after John W. McKernan , the Princess ’ s owner and manager until 1919 . The <unk> were a family of property developers in boomtown Strathcona ; John ’ s father developed and ran the historically important Dominion Hotel , also on Whyte Avenue . For his part , J.W. McKernan is considered an important trailblazer in Edmonton entertainment . He opened two other south side theatres before the Princess , the South Side Gem and the South Side Bijou , both of which failed during the collapse of Strathcona 's building boom in 1913 . 
 The Princess Theatre opened as a single @-@ screen cinema on March 8 , 1915 to rave reviews . It had cost McKernan CDN $ 75 @,@ 000 and had taken 10 months to build , longer than expected . The theatre opened with 660 seats and the largest live performance stage in a cinema west of Winnipeg . It was at the time the only cinema on Edmonton ’ s south side , and would keep that title until the opening of the Garneau Theatre in 1940 . Opening night was a benefit concert for The Imperial Order of the Daughters of the Empire , associated with the 19th Alberta Dragoons , B Squad . The program proudly included newsreels “ featuring actual war scenes ” . In audience were the Lt. Governor and Mayor W.T. Henry . The house ’ s first feature film , The Eagle ’ s Mate starring Mary Pickford , was screened the following night . 
 At the time , the Princess was considered a showpiece of elegance and modernity . It was the first building west of Winnipeg to be faced with marble . The Edmonton Journal remarked on the quality of the “ photoplay house ’ s ” finishings , remarking on the solid marble facade , frescoes , brass mirrors and the abundance of gold leaf decoration . On the technical side , two modern projectors were housed in their own fireproof machine room . The Princess was serviced by a freight elevator , which was an unusual feature for a building of its size , and the theatre lighting was indirect and gentle on theatregoers ’ eyes . The Journal was also impressed by three novel firsts for a movie theatre in Edmonton : an electric ticketing machine , an “ electric time @-@ projecting clock ” , and a refrigerated drinking fountain . Perhaps most importantly , the forced air ventilation system was capable of filtering , heating , and cooling air and featured dedicated intake and output fans making the Princess by far the most comfortable theatre in Edmonton . 
 By 1916 , the Princess had stopped booking live acts and was focusing exclusively on the more profitable cinema side of the business . Revenues from the rental spaces in the basement and upper floors had also begun to flow in . Notably , Hugh Morrow , a beat cop , had leased apartment 205 . His granddaughter Susan Morrow would manage the Princess from 1981 to 1994 . 
 Wartime proved hard on the film business . On September 23 , 1915 , Famous Players informed McKernan that “ On account of the boat Hesperian having been torpedoed by a German submarine , it will be necessary to skip two Weeklies ( short films ) , these having come forward to ourselves from our London representative via this boat . <unk> this occurrence , and trusting you will appreciate our position on this ... ” . McKernan ’ s supply of new films was decreased as the war dragged on , and McKernan advertised less and less frequently . Further complicating things , parts for the theatre ’ s Edison and Simplex projectors were difficult to come by at the best of times , and the complex machines proved difficult to maintain . McKernan did not live to see business pick up . He contracted Spanish Influenza and pneumonia in rapid succession , and died on February 18 , 1919 . 
 = = = Alexander Entwisle = = = 
 The McKernan family leased the theatre to Alexander Entwisle sometime in 1919 . Entwisle managed a chain of Edmonton vaudeville houses and cinemas on Jasper Avenue including the Pantages , Empress and Dreamland Theatres . 
 Around 1919 the basement was first leased to a pool hall , “ Dad ’ s Billiard Room ” . While this business was not present in 1920 , the basement would house a pool hall continuously from 1927 into the 1970s . 
 = = Arrival of the sound era = = 
 On January 7 , 1929 , The Capitol Theatre , a major Jasper Avenue competitor to the Princess , closed for renovations promising a change that “ will please every theatre @-@ goer in Edmonton ” . Almost three months later on March 27 , the theatre reopened with dual Movietone and Vitaphone sound systems . The availability of electronically indexed articles from the Edmonton Journal has caused the proliferation of a research error in several local histories . These histories claim that the first talkie screened in Edmonton was The Canary Murder Case , and that it was screened at the Princess . In fact , the first talkie in Edmonton was Mother Knows Best , screened at the Capitol . 
 The talkies were very well received and hugely successful . The Capitol 's business improved greatly in the weeks after re @-@ opening ; the size and volume of their advertising in the Journal and Bulletin increased in March , and by April 1929 was several times that of any of their competitors . Other theatres were pressured to modernize their equipment or close . 
 At the Princess , sound installation was completed by August 16 . An entire page of the Edmonton Bulletin was devoted to the reopening , including a congratulating ad from a local record store , an ad for the electrical contractors who installed the wiring , and a message congratulating the Princess placed by the managers of three other establishments already wired for sound : the Rialto , Empress and Capitol Theatres . The physical renovations necessary to accommodate the new wiring were carried out by S. H. <unk> , an important local builder and namesake of the <unk> Conservatory in Edmonton ’ s River Valley . The first talkie screened at the Princess was Close Harmony starring Buddy Rogers and Nancy Carroll . 
 = = Theatre closes = = 
 The arrival of television was a disruptive force for Edmonton ’ s cinemas . The theatre was forced to close in 1958 , and the McKernan family sold the Princess Block soon after . The Princess ’ s last advertisement ran on July 19 , 1958 advertising a double bill , Away All Boats and Day of Fury . There were no showtimes , articles or editorials printed in the following days . 
 The Princess Block disappeared from Henderson ’ s Directory , a local city directory , in 1956 , implying that its researchers thought it was completely vacant . The building was re @-@ included in 1960 , but the theatre 's former address at 10337 Whyte Avenue remained vacant and unlisted for another six years . By 1966 , the exterior doors had been removed entirely to create storefronts ( see photo ) , and the theatre itself had been occupied by Quick Cash Exchange , a pawnshop . The third floor was split into several apartments , while the second floor was entirely occupied by Strathcona TV and Columbia Photo Studio . The basement was still a pool hall , Princess Billiards . 
 = = Klondike Theatre = = 
 Towne Cinema Limited bought the Princess outright sometime in 1970 . The chain owned several theatres in Alberta , including the Towne Cinema on 118 Avenue . The theatre reopened on Christmas Day 1971 as the Klondike Theatre after almost a year of renovations . Towne Cinema restored the original function of the interior of the building , rebuilt sections of the exterior , and installed a new marquee at a cost of $ 270 @,@ 000 . Its first film was Man in the Wilderness , a family friendly feature starring Richard Harris . 
 But at some point in 1972 , family friendly programming began being interspersed with ( and was eventually replaced by ) “ blue movies ” , such as Swedish Fly Girls . The chain would come to be known for its generally risque material . In 1981 , prints of both Caligula and Dracula Sucks were confiscated from multiple Towne locations , and the company was sued by the Government of Alberta under obscenity laws . 
 The Klondike 's choice of programming earned it a negative reputation , and Towne Cinema was unable to run the Klondike profitably . The company sought buyers for the theatre as early as 1976 , asking $ 600 @,@ 000 . But , despite all of the theatre 's problems under Towne Cinema , it is unlikely that it would have been returned to its original use without the money they poured into its renovation . Their efforts to restore the building are a significant reason why the Princess is a cinema today . 
 = = Old Strathcona Foundation = = 
 The Old Strathcona Foundation , at that time a publicly funded community development initiative , leased the struggling Klondike in 1977 and began searching for ways to use the space . A member of the general public , Frank Grisdale , answered the solicitation , writing a paper outlining how the building could be successfully operated as a repertory theatre under its original name . The foundation was apparently impressed by his proposal , and Grisdale was installed as the Princess Theatre 's director upon completion of renovations in 1978 . 
 The theatre was profitable by its second year , and earned the Old Strathcona Foundation $ 1 million between 1979 and 1989 . This was in no small part due to Grisdale 's vision of a repertory film house dedicated to championing the independent film genre . During his tenure , Grisdale also introduced live performances , including touring acts such as Sneezy Water 's " Hank Williams - The Show He Never Gave " . After firmly establishing the Princess as a significant alternative arts establishment in Edmonton , Frank Grisdale resigned and Susan Morrow became the manager in 1981 . Morrow expanded the theatre ’ s program to a glossy monthly magazine . The theatre was offering Saturday morning cartoons , student pricing , and yearly memberships which all contributed to its steadily increasing attendance . 
 By 1982 , the Old Strathcona Foundation was confident enough in the theatre ’ s prospects to purchase the building outright from Towne Cinema . By this time , the asking price for the building had dropped to $ 425 @,@ 000 , which was estimated to be $ 8000 below its real market value . The Foundation began to make major upgrades and repairs to the interior of the building . A fundraising drive in 1987 allowed 422 modern sized plush seats to be installed , lowering the theatre ’ s original seating capacity by almost 240 . In 1989 , a soundproofed cry room was installed with an independent sound system , allowing patrons with small children to come to films without worry . 
 1992 was the theatre ’ s high @-@ water mark , with a record number of tickets and memberships sold . A state of the art video projection system was installed in June 1993 , but in that year revenue declined by $ 65 @,@ 000 , at least partly because of the growth of home video . The Old Strathcona Foundation began to see the theatre as a liability , and their confidence in the theatre was shaken when Susan Morrow quit her position as manager after having worked at the Princess for fifteen years . 
 = = Theatre in crisis = = 
 Brian Paisley became the manager in early 1994 . Paisley had a history with the Princess ; he operated the small , independent Chinook Theatre out of the basement from 1980 to 1983 . This organization was the seed of Paisley ’ s Fringe Theatre Event , which he founded while still working out of this space in 1982 . This event was the original Edmonton International Fringe Festival , now the largest event of its kind in North America . 
 Paisley quickly offered to buy the Princess , and reached an agreement with the Old Strathcona Foundation in October 1994 for an unspecified amount . The banks , however , refused to finance Paisley ’ s plan and the deal fell through in December . The Old Strathcona Foundation quickly pivoted , and attempted in early 1995 to transfer control of the cinema to the Princess Theatre Society , “ a small board made up of film experts and business people ” including Paisley . 
 The Princess Theatre Society , while promising , failed to convince the Old Strathcona Foundation that it was capable of profitably managing the theatre , and negotiations broke down in April 1996 . Paisley immediately resigned as director and ended his relationship with the theatre two months short of his contract expiring . Malcolm Parker became the new manager . 
 The Old Strathcona Foundation was running a major deficit by 1996 , and in April Edmonton City Council declined to renew a $ 100 @,@ 000 annual grant which the Foundation had received since 1985 . The Foundation needed cash , and quickly sold the theatre for $ 450 @,@ 000 to Calgary ’ s Brar family , owners of the Plaza Theatre in that city . The decision was not popular , and even Old Strathcona Foundation member Judy <unk> called the sale hasty . 
 The entire theatre staff was laid off in December 1996 once it became clear that the Brars were seriously considering purchasing the theatre , and the theatre ’ s projectionists began what would be a six @-@ month strike when it became clear the Brars would not respect a recently signed two @-@ year contract with the Old Strathcona Foundation . 
 Edmonton ’ s native Magic Lantern Theatres unexpectedly tried to buy the Princess for $ 500 @,@ 000 on Christmas Eve 1996 . A condition in the Brar 's contract stated that the sale could be voided if another party bid at least ten percent more for the building . However , the Brars exercised an option to match any higher bids , and the sale went through in early January 1997 . 
 The theatre reputedly fell into disrepair under the Brars . In 1998 , the Princess was called “ an absolutely lousy advertisement for late 20th century privatization ” by Magic Lantern Theatre ’ s Rick Ostapchuk , who said that the current owners had allowed the theatre to sink “ with the velocity , if not the sanitized H20 , of a waterslide ” . By his count , 170 of the marquee ’ s 330 lights were burnt out , and he did not believe the interior had been regularly washed or maintained . 
 = = Magic Lantern Theatres = = 
 The Brars handed over management of the theatre to Magic Lantern Theatres in June 1998 , merely 18 months after purchasing it . Rick Ostapchuk immediately took over double duty as the manager of the recently renovated Garneau Theatre , as well as the Princess . 
 Ostapchuk vowed to return the Princess to the stature it held under Susan Morrow . To that end , he hired a new film programmer , Leonard Schein of Vancouver ’ s Fifth Avenue Cinemas . The first film exhibited under new management was Michael Moore ’ s The Big One . Ostapchuk began major renovations to the theatre , and in 1999 unveiled The Princess II in Chinook Theatre ’ s old space . The basement theatre featured 100 seats , its own concession and washrooms , and a new 35mm projector . The renovations cost $ 200 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Whyte Avenue multiplex debate = = 
 By 1999 , Leonard Schein had become president of Alliance Atlantis , and had decided to build a six @-@ screen art house cinema on Whyte Avenue . Many Edmontonians supported the plan , including former Princess manager Malcolm Parker , <unk> Executive Director Helen <unk> , and Mayor Bill Smith . 
 Unsurprisingly , Ostapchuk was against Alliance Atlantis ’ s plans for Whyte Avenue , believing that it would put both the Garneau and the Princess out of business . The Old Strathcona Foundation sided with Magic Lantern , and fought the plans . The argument went all the way to Edmonton City Council , which was asked to waive Old Strathcona ’ s four @-@ story height limit for the six @-@ story multiplex . Council sided against Alliance Atlantis when Councillor Terry Cavanagh changed his vote at the last minute , defeating the motion 6 @-@ 5 . 
 = = Present day = = 
 The theatre was operated by Magic Lantern Theatres as a first run cinema until January , 2016 . At that point Plaza Entertainment , headed by Mike Brar , took it over again , ending Magic Lantern 's tenancy . In 2006 , after a lengthy dispute with a local developer , the City of Edmonton demolished the Gem Theatre ( constructed 1913 ) on Jasper Avenue , making the Princess the city ’ s oldest surviving cinema . 
 = National Register of Electors = 
 The National Register of Electors is a continuously @-@ updated permanent database of eligible electors for federal elections in Canada maintained by Elections Canada . It was established in December 1996 when Bill C @-@ 63 was granted royal assent by the Governor General of Canada , and the preliminary National Register of Electors was populated with data in April 1997 during the final Canada @-@ wide enumeration . It replaced a system which required door @-@ to @-@ door enumeration of eligible electors for each electoral event . The database contains basic information about electors : name , address , sex , and date of birth . An elector may register or update their personal information between elections , or may request to be excluded from it per the Canada Elections Act . 
 Elections Canada has data sharing arrangements with federal , provincial , territorial , municipal , and other agencies throughout Canada to update the National Register of Electors and ensure its currency , and to enable other jurisdictions to update their respective databases with information from the National Register of Electors . Obtaining data from other parties , and sharing of data with those parties , must be consistent with the Canada Elections Act or the Elections Act of the respective province or territory . Elections Canada has two @-@ way data sharing arrangements with the electoral agencies of each province and territory except Saskatchewan and Yukon , from which it may obtain but to which it cannot send information . 
 In conjunction with the National Geographic Database , the National Register of Electors is used to create preliminary voters lists for each electoral district in Canada for each election , byelection , and referendum . Each candidate from each electoral district is given a voters list for that district , which is a subset of the data in the National Register of Electors whose addresses are within the boundaries of the district as defined in the National Geographic Database . That data may only be used for election purposes ; any other use of that data subjects the user to penalties including fines , imprisonment , or both . The voter lists are updated by returning officers based on information received during an election campaign , ultimately resulting in final voters lists being distributed by election day . 
 Use of the National Register of Electors has allowed Elections Canada to avoid over $ 100 million in election @-@ related expenditures up to the 2006 federal election . 
 = = Creation = = 
 The creation of a national permanent register of electors was first proposed in the 1930s , but serious consideration for such a project was not established until the 1980s . In 1989 , the government of Canada appointed the Royal Commission on Electoral Reform and Party Financing , which in 1991 " recommended that provincial lists be used for federal purposes " . A working group was established in 1995 , which in March 1996 submitted the report The Register of Electors Project : A Report on Research and feasibility to the chief electoral officer of Elections Canada . It had six main conclusions : 
 a national register would be cost effective and feasible 
 the minimum election period could be reduced from 47 to 36 days 
 the best sources of information to update the register would be Revenue Canada , files from Citizenship and Immigration Canada , and provincial and territorial driver 's licence files and vital statistics files 
 there was support amongst provincial and territorial agencies 
 legislative changes to the Canada Elections Act and the Income Tax Act would be required 
 the registration of electors for the first electoral event to use the register would cost the same as previous enumeration methods , and subsequent elections would avoid costs of about $ 40 million 
 To that point , the federal government , through Elections Canada , assumed responsibility for ensuring that every eligible elector was registered for each electoral event . For the 1988 federal general election , this required about 110 @,@ 000 enumerators , who would canvass door @-@ to @-@ door so the cost and effort to the individual was minimal . 
 This post @-@ writ canvassing to enumerate electors ensured that a high proportion of those electors were registered for each election , up to 98 % for some elections , minimizing participation inequality which typically affects individuals who are poor , young , or have little formal education that tend to not take the initiative to participate in electoral and related events . State enumeration , such as was done in Canada before the implementation of the National Register of Electors , " worked to augment voter turnout among all segments of society and thus mitigated a natural tendency toward participation inequality in electoral politics " . 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 On 18 December 1996 , the Governor General of Canada Roméo LeBlanc granted Royal Assent to Bill C @-@ 63 for the creation of a permanent list of voters to be used for all federal elections and referendums in Canada , the National Register of Electors , to be maintained by Elections Canada . In April 1997 , Elections Canada conducted a final house @-@ to @-@ house enumeration throughout Canada to establish the preliminary National Register of Electors , which was used for the Canadian federal election that June . 
 It replaced a system in which voter enumeration was conducted for each election once a writ of election was issued in the respective jurisdiction . Bill C @-@ 63 also reduced the minimum length of election campaigns from 47 days to 36 days , as the time required for voter enumeration was significantly reduced . Five provinces adopted similar provincial registers in the 1990s , joining British Columbia , which had relied on a permanent register for a long time . 
 Passage of the legislation , based on the earlier recommendation of the working group , was " facilitated by the consensus surrounding a single alternative " for a national register . Moreover , Elections Canada presented the idea to elected officials " at an opportune time , when both government and the main opposition parties found the arguments for change especially compelling and indeed self @-@ serving " . 
 = = = Legislative changes = = = 
 The Elections Act as amended by Bill C @-@ 2 granted royal assent on 31 May 2000 contained thirteen clauses regarding the National Register of Electors , clauses 44 to 56 . Maintenance of the register is specified in clause 44 , and clause 45 specifies that " an electronic copy of the Register for each electoral district shall be sent to the MP for the constituency " by 15 October of each year Clause 55 permits the chief electoral officer of Elections Canada to " enter into agreements with provincial bodies responsible for establishing voters ’ lists " and that a payment may be issued to the provincial body . Prohibition of unauthorised use of the National Register of Electors is stipulated in clause 56 , which also prohibits electors from providing false information . 
 Legislation was later introduced to amend the type of data collected and stored in the National Register of Electors . On 17 May 2007 , the Privacy Commissioner of Canada Jennifer Stoddart appeared before the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs regarding Bill C @-@ 31 , An Act to amend the Canada Elections Act and the Public Service Employment Act submitting a letter in which she criticised the proposed changes to the Elections Act . One of the problems was the inclusion of an elector 's date of birth in the voter lists sent to polling stations on election day for use by polling clerks and scrutineers ; Stoddart stated that verification of an elector 's birth year would be sufficient . The second problem she raised was inclusion of the date of birth in the voter lists sent to each candidate for all electoral districts in Canada , and also to all political parties . 
 She stated that inclusion of this information in the voter lists sent to candidates does not " contribute to protecting or improving the integrity of the electoral process " . 
 Despite this , the committee recommended inclusion of an elector 's date of birth in the elector lists " on the grounds that this would provide a further safeguard against electoral fraud , especially in cases where a prospective voter presents himself or herself at a poll without adequate identification " , and this was included in the committee stage in the House of Commons . At the committee stage in the Senate , an amendment to Sections 107 ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) of Bill C @-@ 31 was made so that " lists provided to candidates will not include the elector ’ s date of birth or the elector ’ s sex " , which is the version that was ultimately granted royal assent . 
 Bill C @-@ 31 also introduced the use of a unique personal identifier for each elector in the National Register of Electors , and changed the date by which electronic elector lists are to be made available to Members of Parliament for an electoral district to 15 November from 15 October . 
 = = = Unauthorised use = = = 
 Unauthorised use of data contained in the National Register of Electors or the list of electors generated from it may result in the imposition of a maximum penalty of a $ 5 @,@ 000 fine or one year in prison . 
 = = Data sharing = = 
 The Elections Act permits Elections Canada to synchronize the data in the National Register of Electors with information obtained from external parties . These include federal agencies and Crown corporations including the Canada Revenue Agency , Canada Post ( via the National Change of Address service ) , and Citizenship and Immigration Canada . The Act also specifies that Elections Canada may obtain information from other jurisdictions , such as from provincial and territorial motor vehicle registrars , and provincial electoral agencies with permanent voters lists . Since 1999 , Elections Canada has convened the Advisory Committee of Electoral Partners annually ( known as the National Register of Electors Advisory Committee until 2008 ) , usually in November in Ottawa , to discuss the permanent elector databases , data sharing arrangements , and other related topics . 
 In July 1998 , Elections Canada signed a one @-@ year interim agreement with the Division of Driver and Vehicle Licensing in Manitoba to transfer driver licence records to Elections Canada every three months . In September 1998 , the first batch of data on storage tape contained in a plastic cartridge was sent to Elections Canada ; it had information about 675 @,@ 000 licensed drivers in Manitoba . In January 1999 , Elections Canada lost the tape . A report about the investigation stated that " the tape had been deposited inadvertently into Elections Canada 's non @-@ recyclable waste " ; before the investigation , there had been concern that the tape and its data had been stolen . It resulted in separate investigations by the Privacy Commissioner of Canada George <unk> , the Office of the Manitoba Ombudsman , and an audit commissioned by Elections Canada conducted by a private security firm . The interim agreement lapsed without renewal . 
 As a result of this incident , Elections Canada changed its practice so that " upon receipt ... these tapes are now sent directly to the secured computer room " . 
 Each province has an Elections Act which specifies how its provincial register of electors is created and maintained , the information it may release for external use ( such as integration into the National Register of Electors ) , and the information it may receive from external parties , such as the National Register of Electors , provincial driver 's licence records , and provincial vital statistics records . Section 55 of the national Elections Act permits the Chief Electoral Officer of Elections Canada " to enter into agreements with provincial election authorities to share information contained in the National Register with those provincial authorities " . A clause in Section 56 ensures that data shared in this manner may be used by the provincial or territorial agency , and " that it is not an offence to knowingly use personal information obtained from the Register in accordance with any conditions in an agreement entered into with the Chief Electoral Officer pursuant to section 55 " . 
 = = Voter registration = = 
 To register with the National Register of Electors , individuals who will be at least 18 years old at the next election must complete a form certifying Canadian citizenship and providing proof of identity and residential address . Registration will result in the assignment to the individual 's entry in the National Register of Electors of a unique identifier that is randomly generated , associating that identifier with the elector 's name , address , sex , and date of birth . That individual will then be eligible to cast a ballot in the electoral district in which the individual is normally resident . An elector may register or update their personal information between elections , or may request to be excluded from the National Register of Electors per section 44 ( 3 ) of the Canada Elections Act . 
 The National Register of Electors is updated to reflect various changes in the Canadian population , including address changes , reaching voting age , naturalisation , and death . Every year , about 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 address changes are processed by Elections Canada from information obtained from the Canada Revenue Agency , Canada Post , provincial and territorial motor vehicle registrars , and provincial electoral agencies with permanent voters lists . Every year , about 400 @,@ 000 Canadians reach voting age and 200 @,@ 000 Canadians die , resulting in changes to the National Register of Electors based on information obtained from the Canada Revenue Agency , provincial and territorial motor vehicle registrars , and provincial electoral agencies with permanent voters lists . Additionally , 120 @,@ 000 individuals a year become naturalised Canadians , and are added to the National Register of Electors by Elections Canada based on information obtained from Citizenship and Immigration Canada . Collectively , these represent about 20 % of the entries in the National Register of Electors . 
 Information provided by Canadian residents to the Canada Revenue Agency will only be shared with Elections Canada if the resident consents to such a transfer in their income tax and benefits return . If consent is granted , the Canada Revenue Agency will provide the resident 's " name , address , date of birth , and Canadian citizenship information " . Bill C @-@ 31 introduced an amendment to the Act to ensure that tax filers consenting to their personal information being included in the National Register of Electors are Canadian citizens ; before this change , it was possible for non @-@ citizen taxpayers to consent , and thus be included in the National Register of Electors , despite not being an eligible elector . 
 As part of the mandate of The Office of the Chief Electoral Officer , electoral event readiness was identified as a necessity in order to be consistent with the goal of an " electoral process that contributes to fairness , transparency and accessibility for all participants , in compliance with the legislative framework " . One element to achieve and maintain a state of readiness for " electoral events whenever they may be called " is the " currency and coverage of National Register of Electors " . 
 As part of the process , Elections Canada mails out letters to 18 @-@ year @-@ old citizens explaining how to register for inclusion on the voters list . The letters have been mistaken by some recipients as confirmation that they have been added to the voter list . 
 In the run @-@ up to each federal election , the National Register of Electors undergoes a comprehensive revision process , running for 28 days starting on the 33rd day before the election . Each federal electoral district is responsible for revising the list of electors in that district . Targeted revision involves sending pairs of " revising agents " to certain areas such as new residential developments , areas known for high population mobility , student residences , nursing homes and chronic care facilities . Electors may also be revised by using mail @-@ in forms , by visiting the returning office in that electoral district , or by registering on polling day . 
 = = Provincial and territorial voter lists = = 
 Provincial agencies which maintain permanent lists of voters include those in British Columbia and Quebec . Residents of Ontario may opt to have their personal information in the Permanent Register of Electors for Ontario not be shared with Elections Canada for inclusion in the National Register of Electors . By 2000 , Alberta , Ontario and Quebec had each conducted one election using a permanent voter register , Newfoundland and Labrador had established one , and New Brunswick had passed legislation to create one . 
 The Election Act of British Columbia permits the provincial chief electoral officer to " register as voters those individuals who appear to be qualified to register as voters " and to " update current voter registration information " based on the National Register of Electors without the involvement of the individual . Data collected may be used in accordance with the Canada Elections Act . This is possible as a result of changes to the British Columbia Election Act made on 20 May 2004 . Elections BC shares data with Elections Canada every six months . This coordination ensures that federally registered electors are also registered provincially , and vice versa . Because British Columbia has a six @-@ month residency requirement for an individual to become a registered elector , a criterion not required for the national register , the provincial register will filter updates received from the National Register of Electors to exclude individuals that do not meet that criterion . Before synchronisation with the National Register of Electors , the provincial voter list included 71 % of eligible electors ; after the 2005 provincial election in May 2005 , the first to use the synchronised system , it was expected to be 93 % , increasing voter registration from 2 @.@ 11 million to 2 @.@ 82 million electors from 2 @.@ 98 million eligible resident citizens . 
 Elections Alberta signed an agreement with Elections Canada in October 2000 to share data stored in their respective Register of Electors , and received $ 750 @,@ 000 as part of the contract . Despite the sharing agreement , Elections Alberta does not immediately integrate updates received from the National Register of Electors , as the provincial register includes only individuals who satisfy the " six @-@ month residency requirement in the provincial legislation which is not reflected in the federal legislation " , and thus excludes some electors from the national registry . 
 The Northwest Territories updates its voter list based on information in the National Register of Electors , as well as obtaining data from medical insurance data , the Student Financial Assistance program , and voter registration data held by municipal or Aboriginal governments . 
 As a result of changes to the provincial Elections Act , Nova Scotia first used the National Register of Electors in the 2003 general provincial election to elect members of the 59th General Assembly of Nova Scotia . 
 = = Voting = = 
 For a Canadian federal general election , an individual may cast a ballot if the individual is a Canadian citizen , is at least 18 years old on the day of the election , and is registered to vote . The latter is satisfied by inclusion in the National Register of Electors , in which case Elections Canada will mail the elector a voter information card listing locations for advance polls and election day polls , or by independently registering for each election at an advance poll or election day poll . 
 A revision period beginning 33 days before an election and ending six days before the election enables eligible electors to update their names and addresses on the National Register of Electors , to add their names to it , and request deletion of deceased and other individuals not qualified to vote from the list . An elector may also " file an objection against another elector " by filing an " affidavit of objection with the returning officer " after the issue of writs until 14 days before an election to dispute the eligibility of that individual as an elector . 
 The National Register of Electors is used to produce " lists of electors for election and referendum purposes " , and for by @-@ elections . Elections Canada prepares the preliminary elector lists for every polling station of each electoral district based on address information contained in the National Register of Electors . During the election period , returning officers for each electoral district use the lists to revise information for eligible electors . The lists are also used by candidates during their campaign in the election period , and by Elections Canada to " calculate election expense limits for political parties and candidates " . 
 The voter information card sent to each elector is meant to inform the elector of registration status , and to provide information about the location and date on which to cast a ballot . 
 = = Audit = = 
 A November 2005 report by the Auditor General of Canada stated that the data contained in the National Register of Electors as of May 2004 had " coverage rates of more than 95 percent and currency rates of more than 81 percent " , exceeding the stated goal of 92 percent for coverage ( the proportion of eligible voters who are included in the National Register of Electors ) and 77 percent for currency ( the proportion of all eligible voters whose address is correctly listed ) . 
 According to Elections Canada , from 1996 to 2008 the National Register of Electors allowed Elections Canada to avoid over $ 100 million in election @-@ related expenditures . From 2000 to 2005 , maintaining the National Register of Electors cost $ 19 @.@ 4 million , and required 40 full @-@ time employees . The system implemented by Elections Canada has been studied by other jurisdictions and agencies , including the Electoral Council of Australia ( whose members include the Electoral Commissioners of the federal and state governments ) in June 1999 . 
 = = National Geographic Database = = 
 Elections Canada and Statistics Canada used the National Register of Electors to generate the National Geographic Database ( NGD ) , a spatial database which contains roads and related attributes such as road " name , type , direction , and address ranges " , amongst other data . It was created in 1997 , and built from 1998 to 2000 using road data from Elections Canada , street network files from Statistics Canada , the National Topographic Database from Natural Resources Canada , and data from the Digital Chart of the World . The cost to Elections Canada to contribute to the NGD was $ 3 @.@ 6 million , and linking the National Register of Electors to the National Geographic Database cost $ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 Since 2001 , data quality improvements focussing on road and address range currency has been the primary area of updates to the National Geographic Database . It is used by Elections Canada to generate electoral district maps , and by Statistics Canada for census activities . The maintenance costs from the 2000 general election to 2005 was $ 16 @.@ 6 million , requiring 34 full @-@ time employees . 
 The National Geographic Database is used for electoral purposes to be " able to identify in which electoral district and in which polling division the elector 's residence is located " . An Electoral Geography Database which contains " the boundaries of the 308 electoral districts and about 58 @,@ 000 polling divisions " is combined with the NGD to " produce the various maps and other geographic products required to support electoral events " . 
 = 2000 North Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 2000 North Indian Ocean cyclone season was fairly quiet compared to its predecessor , with all of the activity originating in the Bay of Bengal . The basin comprises the Indian Ocean north of the equator , with warnings issued by the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) in New Delhi . There were six depressions throughout the year , of which five intensified into cyclonic storms – tropical cyclones with winds of 65 mph ( 40 km / h ) sustained over 3 minutes . Two of the storms strengthened into a very severe cyclonic storm , which has winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , equivalent to a minimal hurricane . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) also tracked storms in the basin on an unofficial basis , estimating winds sustained over 1 minute . 
 The first storm of the season originated toward the end of March in the Bay of Bengal , one of only five March storms at the time in that body of water . Strong wind shear , which plagued several storms during the season , caused the storm to rapidly dissipate over open waters . In August , a weak depression struck the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh , producing additional flooding after a deluge affected the area in July . There were 131 deaths in Andhra Pradesh , mostly by drownings or collapsed walls , while damage was estimated at ₹ 7 @.@ 76 billion rupees ( $ 170 million USD ) . There were two short @-@ lived storms in October – one dissipated offshore India in the middle of the month , and the other struck Bangladesh toward the end of the month . The latter storm destroyed many homes and boats , killing 77 in Bangladesh including 52 fishermen , and damage in the Indian state of Meghalaya was estimated at ₹ 600 million rupees ( $ 13 million USD ) . The strongest storm of the season struck Tamil Nadu in November , causing damages of ₹ 700 million rupees ( $ 15 million USD ) and 12 deaths . The final storm of the season hit eastern Sri Lanka , leaving 500 @,@ 000 homeless and killing nine . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) in New Delhi – the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the northern Indian Ocean as recognized by the World Meteorological Organization – issued warnings for tropical cyclones developing in the region , using satellite imagery and surface data to assess and predict storms . The basin 's activity is sub @-@ divided between the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal on opposite coasts of India , and is generally split before and after the monsoon season . Storms were also tracked on an unofficial basis by the American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center . 
 The season was much less active than the devastating 1999 season . Despite near normal water temperatures over the Arabian Sea , no storms developed in that portion of the basin . Convection was also lower than normal across the Bay of Bengal . The main factor against tropical cyclogenesis was persistently unfavorable wind shear . Overall , there were six depressions , five of which intensified into a cyclonic storm , which has maximum sustained winds of at least 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm BOB 01 = = = 
 Toward the end of March , an area of convection increased over the southern Bay of Bengal from an active equatorial trough . The system progressed northward , with a weak center between Sri Lanka and Sumatra by March 25 . On March 27 , a low pressure area developed , which the IMD designated as a depression by 12 : 00 UTC . The storm moved to the north @-@ northwest and failed to strengthen at first . However , the JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) on March 29 , a signal of further organization . That day , the IMD upgraded the system to a cyclonic storm , and early on March 30 the storm attained winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) while curving to the north @-@ northeast . Increased wind shear from the westerlies imparted rapid weakening , causing the convection to dwindle to the northeast . According to the IMD , the storm rapidly dissipated on March 30 . 
 A climatological outlier , the storm was one of only five cyclonic storms at the time in the month of March in the Bay of Bengal . It dropped heavy rainfall in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands , reaching 230 mm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) on Hut Bay . Although the storm dissipated over the Bay of Bengal according to the IMD , one analysis suggested the storm re @-@ intensified and made landfall on southeastern India between Chennai and Pondicherry on April 1 with winds potentially as high as 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . The storm did not receive advisories from the JTWC . 
 = = = Depression BOB 02 = = = 
 In late August , the monsoon trough spawned a series of disturbances in the Bay of Bengal , including one that developed on August 19 off the Odisha coast . It persisted and gradually organized , becoming a well @-@ marked low pressure area on August 22 . On the following day , the system became a depression , located about 150 km ( 90 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Visakhapatnam , Andhra Pradesh . Moving westward , the system soon moved ashore near Kakinada without intensifying beyond winds of 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) , and quickly weakened into a remnant low on August 24 . The low continued westward , eventually dissipating over Gujarat on August 28 . 
 While moving ashore , the depression produced torrential rainfall across Andhra Pradesh . The capital city of Hyderabad recorded 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) of rainfall on August 24 . During the last week of August , the state recorded the highest precipitation in 46 years , which overflowed lakes and flooded several towns . The rains followed deadly flooding in July and preceded another flood event in September . About 98 @,@ 000 people evacuated their houses to 189 shelters , aided by the military , including about 35 @,@ 000 people in Hyderabad and neighboring Secunderabad . Thousands were forced to ride out the floods on their roofs , and helicopters airdropped food and relief goods . The depression damaged 27 @,@ 026 houses and destroyed another 8 @,@ 651 in 2 @,@ 886 towns or villages . Widespread irrigation systems were damaged , and 177 @,@ 987 ha ( 439 @,@ 820 acres ) of crops were lost , in addition to 5 @,@ 368 killed cattle . Traffic was disrupted after 7 @,@ 435 km ( 4 @,@ 620 mi ) of roads were damaged , impacting 2 @,@ 389 roads . The rains also marred the electrical system , with 6 @,@ 000 power lines damaged . There were 131 deaths in Andhra Pradesh , mostly by drownings or collapsed walls , while damage was estimated at ₹ 7 @.@ 76 billion rupees ( $ 170 million USD ) . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm BOB 03 = = = 
 The active monsoon spawned a low pressure area in the central Bay of Bengal on October 12 . The system had an area of convection about 925 km ( 575 mi ) southeast of Kolkata , which moved slowly westward . By October 14 , there was an exposed circulation center east of the convection , although it organized enough for the IMD to classify it as a well @-@ marked low pressure area . On October 15 , the agency classified it as a depression as the circulation moved closer to the thunderstorms . Later that day , the JTWC issued a TCFA and the IMD upgraded it to a deep depression , based on improving outflow and organization . On October 16 , a nearby ship reported winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , and that day the JTWC began tracking the system as Tropical Cyclone 01B . Early the next day , the IMD followed suit and upgraded the deep depression to a cyclonic storm , estimating peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . However , the system persisted in an area of weak to moderate wind shear , preventing further development . The circulation became exposed from the convection , and the wind shear increased . On October 18 , the IMD downgraded the system to a deep depression , and the storm dissipated on the next day as it approached the eastern coast of India . 
 While the storm was active , officials issued warnings for fishermen not to venture out at sea . In Odisha , residents organized public prayers in hopes of avoiding a repeat of the deadly 1999 Odisha cyclone . Although it dissipated offshore , the storm brought rainfall to Andhra Pradesh and Odisha , but no damage was reported . Strong winds associated with the system killed 100 pelican chicks in Srikakulam after blowing them out of their nests . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm BOB 04 = = = 
 Similar to the previous storm , the active monsoon trough spawned a low pressure area over the Andaman Sea on October 24 . There was a weak center that had good outflow . On October 25 , the IMD classified the system as a depression about 925 km ( 575 mi ) southeast of Kolkata . The system moved to the northwest and developed more convection close to the center , although the thunderstorms were intermittent . Turning more to the north , the depression intensified into a deep depression and later cyclonic storm on October 27 , reaching peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) ; the JTWC also classified it as Tropical Cyclone 02B . That day , the wind shear increased , although the convection was able to increase over the center and organize into a comma @-@ shaped rainband . Early on October 28 , the storm made landfall in southern Bangladesh near Mongla , by which time the wind shear had displaced much of the convection to the northeast . It rapidly weakened over land , degenerating into a remnant low over northern Bangladesh early on October 29 . 
 The storm dropped heavy rainfall , both in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands as well as northeastern India . In Meghalaya state in northeastern India , the storm damaged hundreds of houses , leaving thousands homeless . Many livestock were lost , and crops were decimated . Damage in Meghalaya was estimated at ₹ 600 million rupees ( $ 13 million USD ) . While moving ashore in Bangladesh , the cyclone produced a storm tide of 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 1 m ( 4 – 7 ft ) , which wrecked hundreds of boats , and left 100 fishermen missing despite forewarning ; by a day after the storm , only eight fishermen were rescued from four boats , with 52 fishermen killed . Heavy rainfall , totaling 119 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) in Khulna , overflowed rivers and flooded houses after previous deadly flooding in September . High floods and wind gusts up to 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) damaged homes in Satkhira and Jessore districts , forcing thousands to evacuate to storm shelters . The storm knocked over trees , wrecked roads , and destroyed rice fields along its path through the low @-@ lying country . On land in Bangladesh , 25 people died due to the storm , with over 500 injured . After the storm , local governments provided relief goods to the worst affected areas . 
 = = = Extremely Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 05 = = = 
 An upper @-@ level low persisted over the Andaman Sea on November 24 . By the next day , a circulation center was present about 370 km ( 230 mi ) west of Thailand , although convection was dislocated to the west due to wind shear . After the thunderstorms concentrated over the center early on November 26 , the IMD classified the system as a depression . A ridge to the north steered the system generally westward . Outflow and convective organization gradually increased , and late on November 26 the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 03B . As the rainbands organized around the center , the winds increased ; the IMD upgraded the system to a cyclonic storm on November 27 , and to a severe and later a very severe cyclonic storm on November 28 . 
 By November 28 , a 20 km ( 12 mi ) wide eye was developing , prompting the JTWC to upgrade the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . By comparison , the IMD estimated peak winds of 190 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Wind shear in the region prevented further strengthening , and the storm weakened slightly before making landfall on November 29 in eastern India near Cuddalore . A station there recorded a pressure of 983 mbar ( 29 @.@ 0 inHg ) . The storm rapidly weakened over land , and degenerated into a remnant low on November 30 . The remnants emerged into the eastern Arabian Sea on December 1 , by which time most thunderstorms had dissipated over the deteriorating center . Two days later , the JTWC reissued advisories , based on an increase in outflow and convective organization . This was short @-@ lived , as the thunderstorms soon dwindled , and the JTWC ceased issuing advisories on December 5 . The remnants continued westward without development toward eastern Somalia . 
 Heavy rainfall , peaking at 450 mm ( 18 in ) in <unk> , spread across Tamil Nadu . During the passage of the eye , residents reported a period of calm lasting about 45 minutes . Across Tamil Nadu , high winds knocked over 30 @,@ 000 trees , and many coconuts , plantains , and rice paddy farms were damaged in nearby Puducherry . The winds also damaged about 41 @,@ 000 houses , about 1 @,@ 000 of which lost their roofs . Flooding washed away 14 brick buildings , while 300 others were inundated by the sea . Over 1 @,@ 000 power lines were damaged . Overall damages were estimated at ₹ 700 million rupees ( $ 15 million USD ) , and there were 12 deaths . 
 = = = Extremely Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 06 = = = 
 A near @-@ equatorial trough spawned a low pressure area on December 22 in the central Bay of Bengal . A circulation within the system developed into a depression on December 23 about 500 km ( 310 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Sri Lanka . A low @-@ latitude storm , the system organized while moving slowly westward . On December 24 , the depression strengthened into a deep depression , and the following day into a cyclonic storm , the same day that the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 04B . An eye developed in the center of the blossoming convection , and the system rapidly intensified into a very severe cyclonic storm on December 26 . According to the IMD , the cyclone attained peak winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) , and made landfall at that intensity along eastern Sri Lanka near Trincomalee around 12 : 00 UTC on December 26 . The JTWC assessed lower winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Weakening quickly over land , the storm emerged into the Gulf of Mannar on December 27 and failed to restrengthen . Later that day , it made a second landfall in extreme southern India near Thoothukudi as a cyclonic storm . Continuing westward , the system emerged into the Arabian Sea on December 28 as a depression , and degenerated into a remnant low the next day . The low merged with a trough and spread rainfall northward through India . 
 The strongest storm to threaten Sri Lanka since 1992 , the cyclone produced estimated wind gusts of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) near where it moved ashore . About 500 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , after the winds destroyed the roofs of many houses . One entire fishing village was destroyed , and about 20 @,@ 000 ha ( 49 @,@ 000 acres ) of rice fields were wrecked . While crossing the country , the cyclone dropped between 4 and 8 inches ( 100 to 200 mm ) of precipitation , compounding the effects of severe monsoonal flooding from the previous month . There were nine deaths in the country . Later , the storm brought heavy rainfall to southern India , with a peak 24 ‑ hour total of 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) in Nagapattinam . The storm damaged 480 houses and wrecked 95 fishing boats . 
 = Trafford = 
 Trafford is a metropolitan borough of Greater Manchester , England . With an estimated population of about 211 @,@ 800 in 2006 , it covers 41 square miles ( 106 km2 ) and includes the towns of Altrincham , Partington , Sale , Stretford , and Urmston . The borough was formed on 1 April 1974 by the Local Government Act 1972 as a merger of the municipal boroughs of Altrincham , Sale , and Stretford , the urban districts of Bowdon , Hale , and Urmston and part of Bucklow Rural District . All were previously in Cheshire , apart from Stretford and Urmston which were in Lancashire . The River Mersey flows through the borough , separating North Trafford from South Trafford . Historically the Mersey also acted as the boundary between the historic counties of Lancashire and Cheshire . 
 The Trafford area has a long heritage , with evidence of Neolithic , Bronze Age , and Roman activity . Amongst the relics of the past are two castles – one of them a Scheduled Ancient Monument – and over 200 listed buildings . The area underwent change in the late 19th century and the population rapidly expanded with the arrival of the railway . Trafford is the home of Manchester United F.C. and Lancashire County Cricket Club and since 2002 the Imperial War Museum North . 
 Trafford has a strong economy with low levels of unemployment and contains both Trafford Park industrial estate and the Trafford Centre , a large out @-@ of @-@ town shopping centre . Apart from the City of Manchester , Trafford is the only borough in Greater Manchester to be above the national average for weekly income . Socially , the area includes both working class areas like Old Trafford and Stretford and middle class ones such as Bowdon and Hale . Altrincham and Sale West is one of the five parliamentary constituencies in Greater Manchester to be held by the Conservative Party , the others being Bury North , Hazel Grove , Cheadle and Bolton West . 
 = = History = = 
 The choice of the name Trafford for the borough was a " compromise between Altrincham , Stretford and Sale " , and " seemed to have wide support " . A Liberal councillor for the Municipal Borough of Sale suggested " Crossford ... whilst " <unk> " was suggested by councillors in Hale , after the supposed name of an ancient Roman road in the district . Those names were rejected in favour of Trafford , because of the district 's " famous sports venue , a major employer as well as historic associations " , referring to Old Trafford ( cricket and football ) , Trafford Park and the de Trafford baronets respectively . 
 As a place name , Trafford is an Anglo @-@ French version of Stratford , deriving from the Old English words <unk> ( a street , more specifically a Roman road ) and ford ( a river crossing ) . The Metropolitan Borough of Trafford has existed since 1974 , but the area it covers has a long history . Neolithic arrowheads have been discovered in Altrincham and Sale , and there is evidence of Bronze Age habitation in Timperley . Fragments of Roman pottery have been found in Urmston , and Roman coins have been found in Sale . The Roman road between the legionary fortresses at Chester ( Deva Victrix ) and York ( Eboracum ) crosses Trafford , passing through Stretford , Sale , and Altrincham . The settlements in Trafford have been based largely around agriculture , although Altrincham was founded as a market town in the mid 13th century . Although the Industrial Revolution affected Trafford , the area did not experience the same rate of growth as the rest of Greater Manchester . A 100 % increase in population in the Trafford area between 1841 and 1861 was a direct result of an influx due to the construction of the Manchester , South Junction and Altrincham Railway , which allowed residents to more easily commute from Trafford into Manchester . The area developed its own centres of industry in Broadheath ( founded in 1885 ) and Trafford Park ( founded in 1897 ) . They have since declined , although Trafford Park still employs 40 – 50 @,@ 000 people . Today , Trafford is mostly a commuter area . The borough was formed on 1 April 1974 by the Local Government Act 1972 as one of the ten metropolitan districts of Greater Manchester . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The metropolitan boroughs of the City of Salford and the City of Manchester border Trafford to the north and east respectively ; the Cheshire East area of Cheshire lies to the south . The geology of South Trafford is Keuper marl with some Keuper <unk> and sandstone , whilst the geology of North Trafford is Bunter sandstone . The River Mersey runs east to west through the area , separating North Trafford from South Trafford ; other rivers in Trafford include the Bollin , the River Irwell , Sinderland Brook , and Crofts Bank Brook . The Bridgewater Canal , opened in 1761 and completed in 1776 , follows a course through Trafford roughly north to south and passes through Stretford , Sale , and Altrincham . The Manchester Ship Canal , opened in 1894 , forms part of Trafford 's northern and western boundaries with Salford . 
 Trafford is generally flat , with most of the land lying between 66 feet ( 20 m ) and 98 feet ( 30 m ) above sea level , apart from Bowdon Hill in South Trafford which rises 200 feet ( 60 m ) above sea level . The lowest point in Trafford , near Warburton , is 36 feet ( 11 m ) above sea level . There are areas of mossland in low @-@ lying areas : Warburton Moss , Dunham Moss , and Hale Moss . Greenspace accounts for 51 @.@ 8 % of Trafford 's total area , domestic buildings and gardens comprise 25 @.@ 6 % , the rest is made up of roads and non @-@ domestic buildings . 
 Localities within the boundaries of Trafford include : 
 North Trafford : Cornbrook , Davyhulme , Firswood , Flixton , Gorse Hill , Lostock , Old Trafford , Stretford , Trafford Park and Urmston . 
 South Trafford : Altrincham , Ashton @-@ Upon @-@ Mersey , Bowdon , Broadheath , Brooklands , Carrington , Dunham Massey , Hale , Hale Barns , Oldfield Brow , Partington , Sale , Sale Moor , Timperley , Warburton and West Timperley . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Westminster = = = 
 The residents of Trafford Metropolitan Borough are represented in the British Parliament by Members of Parliament ( MPs ) for three separate parliamentary constituencies . Altrincham and Sale West is represented by Graham Brady MP ( Conservative ) . This is one of only a small number of seats in the North West held by the Conservative Party , and one of only two in Greater Manchester . Stretford and Urmston is represented by Kate Green MP ( Labour ) . Wythenshawe and Sale East , which also covers parts of the City of Manchester , is represented by Mike Kane MP ( Labour ) . 
 = = = European Parliament = = = 
 Trafford is part of the North West England constituency in the European Parliament . North West England is represented by eight MEPs ; at the 2014 European elections , the region elected two Conservatives , three from the Labour Party , and three members of the United Kingdom Independence Party . 
 = = = Council = = = 
 ( See Trafford local elections and Healthcare in Greater Manchester ) 
 In 1974 , Trafford Council was created to administer the newly formed Trafford Metropolitan Borough and is headquartered at Trafford Town Hall , which was previously named Stretford Town Hall . On its formation in 1974 , the council was controlled by the Conservative Party ; the Conservatives have been in control 1973 – 85 , 1988 – 94 , and 2004 to the present . The only time the Labour Party was in control was 1996 – 2002 . The rest of the time were periods of no overall control . The council meets to decide policy and allocate budget . Its duties include setting levels of council tax , monitoring the health service in Trafford , providing social care , and funding schools . John Holden is Mayor of Trafford for 2015 – 16 . 
 In 2007 the Audit Commission judged Trafford Council to be " improving strongly " in providing services for local people . Overall the council was awarded " three star " status meaning it was " performing well " and " consistently above minimum requirements " , similar to 46 % of all local authorities . In 2008 – 09 , Trafford council had a budget of £ 150 @.@ 5 million . This was collected from council tax ( 57 % ) and government grants ( 43 % ) . The council spent £ 31 @.@ 8 million on children and young people 's services ( 21 % ) ; £ 60 @.@ 1 million on community services and social care ( 40 % ) ; £ 34 @.@ 4 million on " prosperity , planning , and development " ( 23 % ) ; and £ 33 @.@ 8 million on customer and corporate services ( 22 % ) . 
 Civil parishes form the bottom tier of local government ; the parish councils are involved in planning , management of town and parish centres , and promoting tourism . In 2001 , 8 @,@ 484 people ( 4 @.@ 0 % of the borough 's population ) lived in Trafford 's four civil parishes : Carrington , Dunham Massey , Partington , and Warburton . They were all previously part of Bucklow Rural District . A rural district was a type of local government district for the administration of predominantly rural areas . The rest of Trafford is unparished . The unparished areas are : Altrincham ( Municipal Borough ) , Bowdon ( Urban District ) , Hale ( Urban District ) , Sale ( Municipal Borough ) , Stretford ( Municipal Borough ) , and Urmston ( Urban District ) . The status of each area prior to 1974 is shown in brackets . An urban district was a type of local government district which covered an urbanised area . 
 = = = = Electoral wards = = = = 
 There are 21 electoral wards in Trafford , each with 3 councillors , giving a total of 63 councillors with one @-@ third elected three years out of four . In the following table , the populations for each ward are based on 2013 population estimates from the Office for National Statistics . 
 = = = = Coat of arms = = = = 
 The coat of arms of Trafford Council depicts a griffin on a shield flanked by two unicorns . The line bisecting the shield horizontally symbolises the River Mersey running through Trafford from east to west and the canals in the borough . The white legs of a lion on a red background represent the parts of Trafford previously controlled by the De Massey family , while the red body and head of an eagle on a white background represents the areas of Trafford previously controlled by the De Traffords . Both elements were taken from the coats of arms of the respective families . The fist holding bolts of lightning represents Stretford and the electrical industry ; the cog on the arm represents Altrincham 's engineering industry . The unicorns stand for Sale and Altrincham . The oak branches represent Urmston and the rural areas of Trafford . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford had a total population of 210 @,@ 145 . Of the 89 @,@ 313 households in the borough , 36 @.@ 5 % were married couples living together , 31 @.@ 6 % were one @-@ person households , 7 @.@ 8 % were co @-@ habiting couples and 9 @.@ 7 % were lone parents , following a similar trend to the rest of England . 
 The population density was 1 @,@ 982 / km2 ( 5 @,@ 130 / sq mi ) and for every 100 females , there were 94 @.@ 6 males . Of those aged 16 – 74 in Trafford , 24 @.@ 7 % had no academic qualifications , significantly lower than the 28 @.@ 9 % in all of England . 8 @.@ 2 % of Trafford 's residents were born outside the United Kingdom , lower than the English average of 9 @.@ 2 % . The largest minority group was Asian , at 4 @.@ 0 % of the population . 
 In 1841 , 12 % of Trafford 's population was middle class compared to 14 % in England and Wales ; this increased to 21 % in 1931 ( 15 % nationally ) and 55 % in 2001 ( 48 % nationally ) . From 1841 to 1951 , the working class population of Trafford and across the country was in decline , falling steadily from 43 % to 18 % ( 36 % to 29 % nationally ) . It has since increased slightly , up to 27 % ( 26 % nationwide ) . The rest of the population was made up of clerical workers and skilled manual workers . In the 2008 / 2009 financial year , the crime rates in Trafford for violence against a person and sexual offences were below the national averages . However , the rate of robberies and burglaries were above the national average . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 The table below details the population change since 1801 , including the percentage change since the last census 10 years earlier . Although Trafford was formed as a Metropolitan Borough in 1974 , figures have been generated by combining data from the towns , villages , and civil parishes that would later be constituent parts of Trafford . The greatest percentage change in the population occurred between 1851 and 1871 , and was a result of the construction of the Manchester , South Junction and Altrincham Railway in 1849 . The decrease by 7 @.@ 7 % in Trafford 's population since the 1971 census mirrors the trend for Greater Manchester , although on a smaller scale ; this has been accounted for by the decline of Greater Manchester 's industries , particularly those in Manchester and Salford but including those in Trafford , and residents leaving to seek new jobs . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Historically , the economy of the Trafford area has been dominated by agriculture . This continued to some extent even during the Industrial Revolution , as the textile industry in Trafford did not develop as quickly or to the same extent as it did in the rest of Greater Manchester . There are only two known 18th @-@ century mill sites in Trafford , compared with 69 known in Tameside and 51 in Manchester . After reaching a high of 43 % in 1812 , employment in the textile industry in Trafford declined to 12 % according to the 1851 census . The textile industry in Trafford could not compete with that in places such as Manchester , Oldham , and Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , partly because of a reluctance to invest in industry on the part of the two main land owners in the area : the <unk> and the de Traffords . 
 Trafford Park was founded in 1897 , and at its peak in 1945 employed 75 @,@ 000 people . As well as being the world 's first planned industrial estate , it is Europe 's largest business park . More than 1 @,@ 400 companies are within the park , employing between 40 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 people . The Trafford Centre , which opened on 10 September 1998 , is North West England 's largest indoor shopping complex . The centre has over 30 million visitors annually , and contains 235 stores , 55 restaurants , and the largest Odeon cinema in the UK . 
 Trafford is a prosperous area , with an average weekly income of £ 394 , and apart from Manchester it is the only borough in Greater Manchester to be above the national average for weekly income and is on average the highest in the county . Media , advertising and public relations have been identified as growth industries in Greater Manchester and are concentrated in Manchester and Trafford . Average house prices in Trafford are the highest out of all the metropolitan boroughs in Greater Manchester , 45 % higher than the average for the county . 
 At the 2001 UK census , Trafford had 151 @,@ 445 residents aged 16 to 74 . 2 @.@ 5 % of these people were students with jobs , 5 @.@ 7 % looking after home or family , 5 @.@ 4 % permanently sick or disabled and 2 @.@ 8 % economically inactive for other reasons . Trafford has a low rate of unemployment ( 2 @.@ 7 % ) compared with Greater Manchester ( 3 @.@ 6 % ) and England as a whole ( 3 @.@ 3 % ) . Trafford has the lowest number of unemployment benefit claimants compared to all the other boroughs in Greater Manchester ( 3 @.@ 7 % ) . 
 In 2001 , of 99 @,@ 146 residents of Trafford in employment , the industry of employment was 17 @.@ 1 % property and business services , 16 @.@ 5 % retail and wholesale , 12 @.@ 3 % manufacturing , 11 @.@ 9 % health and social work , 8 @.@ 2 % education , 8 @.@ 0 % transport and communications , 5 @.@ 9 % construction , 5 @.@ 5 % finance , 4 @.@ 5 % public administration and defence , 4 @.@ 0 % hotels and restaurants , 0 @.@ 8 % energy and water supply , 0 @.@ 6 % agriculture , and 4 @.@ 6 % other . This was roughly in line with national figures , except for the proportion of jobs in agriculture which is less than half the national average , reflecting Trafford 's suburban nature and its proximity to the centre of Manchester . 
 A study commissioned by <unk> rated Trafford as the strongest and most resilient borough in North West England to dealing with sudden changes in the economy . Trafford 's low reliance on vulnerable businesses in the current recession and its high proportion of multinational companies were two factors which give the borough its high ranking . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Landmarks = = = 
 As of March 2007 , Trafford has 6 Grade I , 11 Grade II * , and 228 Grade II listed buildings . Trafford has the equal second highest number of Grade I listed buildings out of the districts of Greater Manchester behind Manchester . Most of Trafford 's Grade I listed buildings are in the south of the borough : the old Church of St. Werburgh in Warburton ; Dunham Massey Hall itself , and the stables and carriage house belonging to the hall ; <unk> House in Hale ; and the Church of All Saints in Urmston in the north of the borough . Trafford has three of Greater Manchester 's 21 Sites of Special Scientific Interest . Brookheys Covert is a semi @-@ natural wood consisting mainly of ash , birch , and rowan , with a wetland habitat covering 5 @.@ 8 acres ( 2 @.@ 3 ha ) in Dunham Massey . Cotteril Clough is an area of woodland that is among the most diverse in Greater Manchester . Dunham Park is an area of " pasture @-@ woodland or park @-@ woodland " and has been since the Middle Ages , including many oak trees that date back to the 17th century , and covers 192 @.@ 7 acres ( 78 @.@ 0 ha ) . Also in Trafford are many parks and open spaces ; there are 21 @.@ 2 square miles ( 55 km2 ) of greenspace , 51 @.@ 8 % of the total area covered by the borough . Tourist attractions in Trafford include Old Trafford football ground and Old Trafford Cricket Ground . 
 Chill <unk> is an indoor ski slope in Trafford Park . It features the UK 's longest and widest real snow indoor slope , 100 metres ( 110 yd ) wide and 180 metres ( 200 yd ) long . 
 Dunham Massey Hall and Park is an 18th @-@ century hall with a 250 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 0 km2 ) deer park , both now owned by the National Trust and previously owned by the Earls of Stamford . The hall is early Georgian in style . The hall and grounds are open to the public and are a popular tourist attraction , with nearly 200 @,@ 000 visitors in 2010 . 
 Imperial War Museum North is a war museum in Trafford Park and was opened in 2002 . The museum won the 2003 British Construction Industry Building Award , and the title of Large Visitor Attraction of the Year at the 2006 Manchester Tourism Awards . 
 Sale Water Park is a 152 @-@ acre ( 62 ha ) area of countryside and parkland including a 52 @-@ acre ( 21 ha ) artificial lake created when the M60 motorway was built . The water park is the site of the Broad Ees Dole wildlife refuge , a Local Nature Reserve that provides a home for migratory birds . 
 Timperley Old Hall is a medieval moated site in Timperley near Altrincham Municipal Golf Course . Excavation on the site over a period of 18 years has shown Timperley to be inhabited since the Bronze Age . A grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund has been made to develop the site into a community project . 
 Trafford has two medieval castles . Dunham Castle is an early medieval castle in Dunham Massey . It belonged to Hamon de Massey , and was probably still standing in the early 14th century . The bailey was landscaped into the grounds of Dunham Massey Hall and its moat turned into an ornamental pond . Watch Hill Castle is an early medieval motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle on the border of Dunham Massey and Bowdon . It is listed as a Scheduled Ancient Monument . The motte and surrounding ditch still survives , although it had fallen out of use by the 13th century . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Trafford is the home of several major sports teams , including Manchester United Football Club and Lancashire County Cricket Club ( <unk> ) . Manchester United began as Newton Heath L & YR F.C. in 1878 . The team plays at Old Trafford football ground , which is sometimes used as a stadium for international matches . Manchester United have won the FA Cup 11 times and been the Premier League champions 13 times ( since the league was formed 20 seasons ago ) and were Football League champions seven times in the years prior to that . The club last won the Premier League in 2013 . <unk> started as the Manchester Cricket Club , and represents the historic county of Lancashire . The club contested the original 1890 County Championship . Old Trafford Cricket Ground – Lancashire 's home ground – stages international matches , including Test matches and One Day Internationals . The team has won the county championship eight times outright ( with one shared ) and were the county champions in 2011 - the county 's first outright triumph since 1934 , but were then relegated to the second division in 2012 . 
 Also in the top division of their sports are Sale Sharks , who play rugby union . From 2009 , Manchester Phoenix , who play home games at the Altrincham Ice Dome , are members of the English Premier Ice Hockey League . The club was formed in 2003 as the successor to Manchester Storm and was one of the founder members of the Elite Ice Hockey League . In 2008 – 09 they finished sixth in the Elite Ice Hockey League . The Trafford Metros are the Phoenix 's junior side and are also based at the Altrincham Ice Dome . Rugby Union side Sale Sharks were formerly based in Trafford and although they now play at the AJ Bell Stadium in Salford , they retain their name from when they were based at Heywood Road in Sale ; their former home @-@ ground Road is still used as the team 's training ground . Sale Sharks won the Guinness Premiership in 2006 ; in 2008 – 09 they finished fifth . 
 As well as being home to several clubs in the top echelon of their sports , Trafford plays host to smaller clubs , including Altrincham F.C. , Flixton F.C. , and Trafford F.C .. Both Flixton F.C. and Trafford F.C. play in the North West Counties Football League Division One . Flixton F.C. was formed in 1960 and earned promotion to NWCFL Division One at the end of the 2006 – 07 season . Trafford F.C. was formed in 1990 and finished fifth in the 2006 – 07 season . Altrincham F.C. was founded in 1903 and plays in the Football Conference . 
 Within Trafford two clubs play in the National Premier Division of the Adidas England Hockey League . The two clubs are represented in both the Men 's Premier Division as well as the Women 's Premier Division : Brooklands MU ( Men ) & Brooklands Poynton ( Women ) based at Brooklands Sports Club in Sale and Bowdon ( Men ) & Bowdon Hightown ( Women ) based at Bowdon Sports Club in Bowdon . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are 73 primary schools in Trafford , 17 secondary and grammar schools , and 6 special schools . Trafford maintains a selective education system , with grammar schools , assessed by the Eleven Plus exam . Trafford College , a £ <unk> " super college " in Stretford , is the only college of further education in Trafford . It was officially opened in 2008 , following a merger between South Trafford College and North Trafford College . Overall , Trafford was ranked 2nd out of all of the local education authorities in National Curriculum assessment performance in 2014 . Indeed , in 2014 Trafford was the first in the United Kingdom for Key Stage 2 results , with 87 % of Year 6 pupils achieving the expected standard of Level 4 or above in Reading , Writing and Arithmetic . Also in 2014 2nd for both GCSE and A @-@ Level results , with 72 @.@ 2 % of Year 11 pupils achieving the expected standard or above of 5 GCSE 's including English and Maths . For A @-@ Level results 25 % of students gained 3 A @-@ Levels at grades A * -A , which is twice the national average , whilst 33 % gained 3 A @-@ levels at grades A * -B . 
 Trafford has 7 Grammar schools and all 7 are in the top 10 best performing state schools in Greater Manchester . 
 = = Religion = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , 75 @.@ 8 % of Trafford 's residents reported themselves as being Christian , 3 @.@ 3 % Muslim , 1 @.@ 1 % Jewish , 0 @.@ 6 % Hindu , 0 @.@ 2 % Buddhist and 0 @.@ 5 % Sikh . The census recorded 12 @.@ 0 % as having no religion , 0 @.@ 2 % had an alternative religion and 6 @.@ 4 % did not state their religion . Trafford is covered by the Catholic Dioceses of Shrewsbury and Salford , and the Church of England Dioceses of Manchester and Chester . 
 There are two Grade I listed churches in Trafford : St. Werburgh 's Church , in Warburton , is a timber framed church and dates back to at least the 14th century ; All Saints ' Church , in Urmston , was constructed in 1868 by E. W. Pugin , and is considered to be one of his best works . Of the 11 Grade II * listed buildings in Trafford , seven are churches : Hale Chapel in Hale ; the Church of St John the Divine in Sale ; Church of St Mary the Virgin in Bowdon ; St. Martin 's Church in Sale ; St. Michael 's Church in Flixton ; St. Margaret 's Church in Altrincham ; St. George 's Church in Carrington . 
 In 2007 , the Church of Scientology bought the Old Trafford Essence Distillery on Chester Road for a reported £ <unk> The Church stated that it had plans to turn the 51 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 4 @,@ 700 m2 ) Victorian building into a place of worship and religious instruction . The original plans were rejected by Trafford Council , but the Church stated its intention to revise the proposals and resubmit . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The Manchester Metrolink runs generally north – south through Trafford , with its southern terminus in Altrincham ; it serves Cornbrook , Trafford Bar , Old Trafford , Stretford , Dane Road , Sale , Brooklands , Timperley , Navigation Road , and Altrincham . The line opened in 1992 and replaced the Manchester , South Junction and Altrincham Railway . The other railway in Trafford is the Liverpool to Manchester via Warrington Central line , built by the Cheshire Lines Committee . The 20 @-@ acre ( 8 ha ) Trafford Park Euroterminal rail freight terminal was opened in 1993 . It cost £ 11 million and has the capacity to deal with 100 @,@ 000 containers a year . 
 The council is responsible for the maintenance of Trafford 's public roads and pavements . Part of the M60 orbital motorway passes through Trafford , from junctions 6 – 10 inclusive . 
 A range of bus services provide connections between various towns in the borough and links to the city centre , and other urban areas of Greater Manchester and Cheshire . Operators include Stagecoach Manchester , Arriva North West , First Greater Manchester as well as smaller operators , who generally run services under contract to Transport for Greater Manchester . Trafford Cycle Forum was established to promote cycling in Trafford ; the group actively campaigns to raise money for cycling in the borough . 
 = = = Video clips = = = 
 Trafford Council YouTube channel 
 = UA 8699 = 
 UA 8699 ( University of Antananarivo specimen 8699 ) is a fossil mammalian tooth from the Cretaceous of Madagascar . A broken lower molar about 3 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 14 in ) long , it is from the Maastrichtian of the Maevarano Formation in northwestern Madagascar . Details of its crown morphology indicate that it is a <unk> , a member of the group that includes living marsupials and placentals . David W. Krause , who first described the tooth in 2001 , interpreted it as a marsupial on the basis of five shared characters , but in 2003 Averianov and others noted that all those are shared by zhelestid placentals and favored a close relationship between UA 8699 and the Spanish zhelestid Lainodon . Krause used the tooth as evidence that marsupials were present on the southern continents ( Gondwana ) as early as the late Cretaceous and Averianov and colleagues proposed that the tooth represented another example of faunal exchange between Africa and Europe at the time . 
 = = Discovery and context = = 
 UA 8699 was discovered in a joint study by Stony Brook University and the University of Antananarivo ( UA ) and placed in the collections of the latter as specimen 8699 . It was found at a locality named <unk> @-@ 95 in the <unk> Member of the Maevarano Formation , which is Maastrichtian ( latest Cretaceous ) in age . The locality is in the Mahajanga Basin of northwestern Madagascar . Several other mammals have been recovered from similarly aged Madagascar deposits , but most are also known from very limited material . These include the gondwanathere Lavanify , an indeterminate multituberculate , and a few other indeterminate teeth , as well as a nearly complete skeleton representing an otherwise unknown mammalian lineage . In a 2001 Nature paper , David Krause announced the discovery of UA 8699 and argued for marsupial affinities of the specimen . Because the specimen is so fragmentary , he refrained from assigning a new scientific name to the tooth . Two years later , Alexander Averianov , David Archibald , and Thomas Martin favored a placental interpretation in a paper in Acta Palaeontologica Polonica , noting that the specimen was essentially similar to the zhelestid Lainodon . In a 2006 review of some of the Cretaceous vertebrates of Madagascar , Krause and colleagues continued to consider the specimen as a marsupial and announced that an upcoming paper by Case would make the case for marsupial affinities more fully . 
 = = Description = = 
 UA 8699 is a worn and broken left lower molar . Part of the trigonid ( the front group of cusps ) , at the <unk> ( inner front ) corner of the tooth is missing . Krause estimated that the complete tooth would have been 3 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 14 in ) long and 2 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 09 in ) wide . The tooth is tribosphenic , like that of modern mammals , as indicated by a number of features , including the broad basin of the talonid ( the back group of cusps ) , and the acute angle ( 48 ° ) between the cusps of the trigonid . UA 8699 lacks a <unk> ( ridge ) resembling a shelf on the lingual ( inner ) side , indicating that is not a member of Australosphenida ( the proposed clade uniting monotremes and some ancient Gondwanan mammals , including the Jurassic Madagascan Ambondro ) ; thus , it can be identified as representing Boreosphenida , which includes marsupials , placentals , and their extinct relatives . 
 Krause listed five features that indicate that UA 8699 is a marsupial , not a placental or primitive therian . There is a well @-@ developed <unk> at the outer back margin ( <unk> ) , between the hypoconid ( one of the main cusps ) and the hypoconulid ( a smaller cuspule ) . The hypoconulid itself is located far lingually , relatively far from the hypoconid . The trigonid and talonid are about as broad , the trigonid is low @-@ crowned , and wear is mainly horizontal , resulting in broad , flat exposed wear facets . Averianov and colleagues noted that zhelestids , a placental group , share all those traits , though to varying degrees , and that the hypoconulid in similarly aged marsupials is even more lingually located , " twinned " to the entoconid ( the cusp on the back lingual corner of the tooth ) . They wrote that the specimen is on the whole more similar to zhelestids than to marsupials . 
 = = Interpretations = = 
 Krause wrote that UA 8699 was the first marsupial to be identified from Madagascar and the first from the Mesozoic of any part of Gondwana . Marsupials date back to the Eocene in Australia and Africa and to the Paleocene in South America ; although Cretaceous marsupials have been recorded there , none of the records are unambiguous . Marsupials were certainly present in the Northern Hemisphere during the late Cretaceous . He interpreted UA 8699 as evidence that marsupials must already have colonized the southern continents by the late Cretaceous , presumably having reached Madagascar through South America and Antarctica . By the late Cretaceous , boreosphenidans must already have been in the process of replacing archaic mammals like gondwanatheres on the southern continents , as suggested by the presence of <unk> , a placental , in the Cretaceous of India . 
 Averianov , Archibald , and Martin instead placed UA 8699 in the context of faunal similarity and exchange between the late Cretaceous faunas of Europe and Africa , noting the presence of similar animals , such as snakes ( <unk> ) and sauropods ( Lirainosaurus and <unk> ) , in the Cretaceous faunas of Madagascar and the Spanish locality <unk> . They proposed the relationship between Lainodon , which is from <unk> , and UA 8699 as another example of this relationship and cited a previous prediction by <unk> and <unk> that zhelestids similar to Lainodon would be found in Africa . 
 = No Jacket Required = 
 No Jacket Required is the third solo studio album by English singer @-@ songwriter Phil Collins , the lead vocalist and drummer for the rock band Genesis . The album was originally released on 18 February 1985 on Virgin ( UK and Ireland ) , Atlantic ( US and Canada ) , and WEA ( Rest of the world ) . It features guest backing vocalists , including Helen Terry , Peter Gabriel and Sting . Some of the songs , like " Don 't Lose My Number " and " Sussudio " , were based around improvisation . Other songs , like " Long Long Way to Go " , had a political message . " One More Night " , " Sussudio " , " Don 't Lose My Number " , and " Take Me Home " were released as singles , with corresponding music videos . All four singles were top ten hits on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , with " Sussudio " and " One More Night " reaching number one . The three singles that were released in the UK all reached the top 20 on the UK charts . 
 The album was received favourably by the majority of music critics , although opinions have become more negative in subsequent decades and it has rarely been featured in " Best Albums of the 1980s " lists since . It won three Grammy Awards including for Album of the Year in 1986 . Stephen Holden of The New York Times wrote that Collins was " quietly revolutionising and expanding the role of the drums in pop record making " . Rolling Stone reviewer David Fricke wrote that , " Like his ' 81 and ' 82 outings , Face Value and Hello , I Must Be Going ! , No Jacket Required is not an album that waits to be liked " . Collins ' most commercially successful solo album , it went on to peak at number one in several countries , including the US ( where it was at the top of the charts for seven weeks ) , the UK and Canada . According to the RIAA , the record sold over twelve million copies in the US , and in the UK , the album sold over two million copies , and was certified 6 × platinum . It was the second best @-@ selling album of 1985 in the UK , beaten to first place by Dire Straits ' Brothers in Arms . Worldwide , the album has sold over 25 million copies . 
 Many of the songs , including " Take Me Home " , and " Long Long Way to Go " , have been featured in episodes of Miami Vice and Cold Case , and " The Man with the Horn " was re @-@ written and re @-@ recorded for the episode " Phil the Shill " . " We Said Hello Goodbye " was remixed for the film Playing for Keeps . 
 Following the release of the album Collins embarked on the successful No Jacket Required World Tour . At the end of that tour , Collins received critical acclaim for performing at both the London and Philadelphia Live Aid concerts on 13 July 1985 . During the tour , Collins recorded a song with Marilyn Martin for the movie White Nights , called " Separate Lives " , which was a number one hit in the US , and a top ten hit in the UK . Remixes of six songs from the album were later included on the 12 " ers compilation album , released in 1987 . 
 = = Album title = = 
 The album is named after an incident at The Pump Room restaurant in Chicago , Illinois . Collins , entering the restaurant with former Led Zeppelin lead vocalist Robert Plant , was denied admittance because he did not meet the restaurant 's dress code of " jacket required " for dinner while Plant was allowed in . Collins was wearing a jacket and argued about it . The maître d ' argued that the jacket was not " proper " . Collins said in an interview with Playboy that he was , at that point , never so mad in his life . After the incident , the singer often appeared on shows such as Late Night with David Letterman and The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson , denouncing the restaurant and telling his story . The management of the restaurant later sent him a complimentary sport coat and an apology letter , stating that he could come to the restaurant wearing whatever he wanted . 
 = = Production and recording = = 
 Some of the songs from the album emerged from Collins ' improvisations with a drum machine , including the singles " One More Night " and " Sussudio " . Collins started singing " one more night " to an attempt of making a beat similar to The Jacksons , and improvised " sus @-@ <unk> " in another . Collins tried to replace the lyric with another phrase but decided to keep that way , leading to lyrics about a schoolboy crush on a girl at his school . Another song created mostly through improvisation , " Don 't Lose My Number " , was described by Collins as having been written mostly during the recordings for his first solo album , Face Value . Collins added that he does not fully understand the meaning of the lyrics , described by reviewer Stephen Holden of The New York Times as " vague , sketching the outlines of a melodrama but withholding the full story . " 
 Other songs were written with a more personal message . " Long Long Way to Go " is often considered one of Collins ' more popular songs never to be released as a single , and was at that point in his career his most political song . Former Police lead vocalist Sting provided backing vocals for the song . Sting and Collins first met through Band Aid , and became good friends after performing together in Live Aid . Collins was working on a song , and thought that Sting , having played at Band Aid , would relate to it very easily . Collins asked Sting to help him provide vocals for this song , and Sting accepted . 
 " Doesn 't Anybody Stay Together Anymore " is another song in which Collins was making a personal message . The song was made in response to everyone around him getting a divorce , including his manager , friends and himself years before . Collins later said that he sang this at Charles , Prince of Wales ' 40th birthday party , not knowing that the Prince 's divorce from his wife , Diana , Princess of Wales , would happen a short time later . The Phil Collins Big Band played this live on tour . In later years , Collins performed a re @-@ arranged version of the song as a ballad as part of his Serious Hits … Live ! tour , differing considerably from the original up @-@ beat album version . 
 " Take Me Home " is another song in which the meaning was originally very vague . At first listening , it appears that the song is about going home , but this is not true . Collins has stated that the song lyrics refer to a patient in a mental institution , and that it is very much based on the novel One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest . Peter Gabriel , Helen Terry , and Sting all provide backing vocals . While recording " Long Long Way to Go " , Collins asked Sting to provide backing vocals for this song . The music video ( shot during the <unk> tour ) features Collins in multiple cities around the world , including London , New York , Tokyo , Moscow , Sydney , Paris , St. Louis , Los Angeles ( Hollywood ) , San Francisco , and Memphis ( Graceland ) . At the end of the music video , Collins arrives home and hears a woman ( presumably his wife ) from inside the house asking him where he has been . He replies by saying he has been to some of the cities mentioned above . The woman replies " You 've been down at the pub , haven 't you ? " , as Collins grins at the camera . 
 " We Said Hello Goodbye " appeared as a B @-@ side to " Take Me Home " and " Don 't Lose My Number " originally , and as an " extra track " on the CD release of the album . Producer Arif Mardin composed the beginning portion of the song . A remix of the song with additional guitars and without an orchestra was released the following year ( 1986 ) on the soundtrack for the movie , Playing for Keeps . This remixed version received some radio airplay around the time of the soundtrack 's release ( which coincided with the No Jacket Required period ) , though it did not chart . Collins has mused that the song is unfairly classed as a " second class citizen " , stating that the song would have been looked at differently if it were added to the album . According to The New York Times reviewer Caryn James , the song is " a straightforward comment on leaving home " . 
 " The Man with the Horn " was originally recorded during sessions for Collins ' second solo album Hello , I Must Be Going ! in 1982 . However , the song was not released until it appeared as the B @-@ side to " Sussudio " in the UK , and as the B @-@ side to " One More Night " in the United States . Collins has said that he has " no emotional attachment " to the song . Music by The Jackson 5 inspired Collins to write the song " I Like the Way " , which also did not appear on the album , originally appearing as the B @-@ side to " One More Night " in the UK and " Sussudio " in the US . He called the song " dodgy " and has cited it among his least favourite songs . 
 = = Release and chart performance = = 
 No Jacket Required was released on 18 February 1985 . The lead singles were " Sussudio " in the UK and " One More Night " in the US . Both songs had music videos that were shot at a London pub owned by Richard Branson , featuring Collins playing both before and after the building closes . 
 In the first week of March , shortly after Collins won a Grammy for " Against All Odds " , the album debuted at the top spot of the UK Albums Chart and 24th in the Billboard 200 . It also got to tenth in the German charts and 15th in Canada . By the end of the month , it had climbed to number one in America as well . Collins had become the 15th British artist to top both the album and single Billboard charts , as " One More Night " was leading the Billboard Hot 100 that same week . The same thing was happening in the UK , where Collins ' duet with Philip Bailey , " Easy Lover " , was the UK Singles Chart number one . No Jacket Required was number one on the US charts for seven weeks , and on the British chart for five . 
 " Sussudio " was the first track to be released as a single in the UK , and the second to be released in the US . In the UK the song reached number 12 on the UK charts . In the US , the song entered frequent rotation on MTV in May , and by 6 July , both the single and the album had reached number one on their respective US Billboard charts . " One More Night " was Collins ' second US number @-@ one single , following " Against All Odds " , and was his fourth single to reach the top ten in the UK , peaking at number four on the singles chart . Its B @-@ side in the UK was " I Like the Way " , while the US version featured " The Man with the Horn " . 
 Meanwhile , " Don 't Lose My Number " , a single that Collins only released in the US , peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 charts during late September 1985 , and the B @-@ side of the single was " We Said Hello Goodbye " . Collins had difficulty conceptualising a plot for the corresponding music video . He decided to create a gag video based on this difficulty . In the video , he talks to clients and directors , all giving him crazy conceptual ideas . Collins parodies several other videos , including those by Michael Jackson , David Lee Roth , Elton John , The Cars , and The Police . The singer also filmed parodies of Mad Max , western films , and samurai movies . 
 " Take Me Home " , the final single released from the album , is often considered to be one of Collins ' most well known songs , and has been a part of all of his tours since The No Jacket Required World Tour . It reached number seven on the US Billboard charts , and number 19 on the UK charts . The song was not slated for a single release , but the label decided to do so after it became an airplay hit on several US radio stations who decided to play the track . " Take Me Home " also got a video where Collins sung in various locations around the world . 
 One song from the album would not reach chart success until it was released later . " Who Said I Would " was not released as a single from this album . However , a live version was released as a single from the Serious Hits ... Live ! album in the US , reaching number 73 on the Billboard Hot 100 . A music video of the original version was filmed , for the No Jacket Required home video . It featured Collins playing the song in a concert . Some of the songs that were not released as singles still charted on Billboard charts . " Inside Out " went to number nine on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart . " The Man with the Horn " , though not released as a single ( nor was it included on the album ) , charted at number 38 on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks . 
 No Jacket Required remains Collins ' highest selling album , having been certified diamond for US shipment of over 10 million copies . Twenty years after its release , No Jacket Required remains among the 50 highest selling albums in the US . In the UK , the album was certified 6x platinum , selling over 1 @.@ 8 million copies . It has also sold over 20 million copies worldwide . A video produced by Atlantic Video in 1986 was also released , and included the four original music videos of the four released singles , and a live performance of " Who Said I Would " . Alternate versions of six songs from No Jacket Required were included on the remix album 12 " ers , released in January 1988 . 
 The album was re @-@ released and remastered by Steve Hoffman for the Audio Fidelity label in 2011 . It was reissued as a deluxe edition on CD , vinyl and digital on 15 April 2016 , including a new second disc with bonus tracks . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The reception for the album was mostly positive . Geoff <unk> of AllMusic , in a review written years after the album 's release , said that while some of the songs are " dated " , the album contains " standout tracks " . He describes " Long Long Way to Go " as " one of Collins ' most effective ballads " , and " Take Me Home " as " pulsating " . <unk> went on to say " It 's not a completely satisfying recording , but it is the best example of one of the most dominating and influential styles of the 1980s . " Lori E. Pike of the Los Angeles Times gave the album a grade of an A- , saying that " Collins ' recipe of tense vocals spiced with saucy horns and splashy electro @-@ <unk> synthesisers often leaves little room for real feeling to squeeze through . When he slows down and lets his smoldering moodiness take over , the effect is magical . " 
 Stephen Holden of The New York Times said that the album was " refreshing " , and that Collins was " adept " at setting a suspenseful or menacing mood . Holden described " Only You Know and I Know " as an " angry love song " that had some sampling of " Motown " style music mixed in . " In ' One More Night ' , Mr. Collins 's recent number @-@ one hit , a ticking snare drum injects a whisper of lurking fear into a song that suggests a sweeter , tenderer reprise of ' Against All Odds ' " , says Holden . Holden concluded by saying " On the surface , No Jacket Required , is an album bursting with soulful hooks and bright peppy tunes . But beneath its shiny exterior , Mr. Collins 's drums and his voice carry on a disjunctive , enigmatic dialogue between heart and mind , obsession and repression . " 
 Rolling Stone reviewer David Fricke said " Phil Collins ' sudden transformation from the balding bantam drummer for a prosperous British art @-@ rock group into a mainstream pop heartthrob might seem one of the Eighties ' most improbable success stories . But judging from the sly craft and warm , low @-@ key humour of his solo records and his successful productions for Philip Bailey and Frida , Collins ' newfound fame was inevitable . " Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times originally disliked the song " One More Night " , but later praised the song , saying that " Collins ' soulful but polite vocal style is also capable of capturing the pain of going through yet one more night without her . " The Dallas Morning News writer Lennox Samuels said that " No Jacket Required ( Atlantic ) is what fans have come to expect from Phil Collins — lots of horns and syncopation , heavy rhythm . " 
 Even those who were not normally fans of Collins ' work liked the album . Michael R. Smith of The Daily Vault wrote " Anomaly or not , it is indeed the album that Phil deserves to be remembered for . " Stephen Williams of Newsday said that the album was " loaded with musical hooks and textured arrangements ... it also lacks the tense edge that was part of Collins ' work with Genesis . " Keegan Hamilton of the Riverfront Times said that the album was " The 80 's Dance Pop Special : A smooth synthesiser groove , with an order of keyboards , drum machines , and horns on the side , " adding that " Sussudio " was the best track on the album , saying that it 's " catchy gibberish . " Hamilton says that " One More Night " was the worst song on the album , saying that " The album 's introspective slow jam wallows in self @-@ pity . " 
 On the negative side , Marty Racine of the Houston Chronicle said that " I Don 't Wanna Know " and " Take Me Home " were the only songs to " rise above the crowd " , and that Collins focused too much on his singing and less on his drumming , " which can be captivating " . Racine also added that the album makes the listener feel a little " cold " , but admired that the singer was " playing the game as well as anyone " . Writing an article in defence of Collins in 2010 , Gary Mills of The Quietus described the album as " determined dross " which Collins did not deserve to have his career judged by . In 2013 , music critic Tom Service of The Guardian was similarly scathing , saying the album had not stood the test of time and was " unlistenable to today " , singling out " Sussudio " for particular criticism , arguing : " the production , the drum machine , the inane sincerity of the lyrics ; there 's no colder or more superficial sound in popular music , precisely because it takes itself so seriously . " He also compared it unfavourably with the enduring appeal of Collins 's 1980s contemporaries such as the Human League and — in particular — the Pet Shop Boys , saying the latter were " geniuses by comparison " . 
 At the 28th Annual Grammy Awards , Collins was nominated in five categories . The album won the award for Album of the Year , and Collins won Best Pop Vocal Performance , Male . Collins shared the Producer of the Year ( Non @-@ Classical ) award with co @-@ producer of the album , Hugh Padgham . In 1986 the album received two American Music Award nominations for Favorite Pop / Rock Album and Favorite Pop / Rock Male Artist . At the Brit Awards in 1986 the album received two awards for Best British Album and British Male Artist , while Producer Hugh Padgham was nominated for Best British Producer . At the Brit Awards in 2010 , the album was one of ten nominees for Brits Album of 30 Years in a poll of BBC Radio 2 listeners ; the winner was ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? by Collins 's frequent critics Oasis . 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 " Sussudio " is one of Collins ' most famous songs and is referenced in many different media , including books , stand @-@ up comedy acts and television shows . He has said that this is the song people most often sing to him when they spot him on the street . In the book and film adaptation of American Psycho , the main character ( Patrick Bateman ) briefly discusses it , amongst other work by Collins . The synthesizer riff was heavily criticised for sounding too much like Prince 's 1982 song " 1999 " , a similarity that Collins does not deny , citing that he is a big fan of Prince 's work . 
 Three songs recorded during the No Jacket Required sessions aired on episodes of the television show Miami Vice . " Take Me Home " appeared in " The Prodigal Son " , the premiere of the second season . " Long Long Way to Go " was played in the closing scene of the Season 2 finale " Sons and Lovers " , during the funeral for Ricardo Tubbs ' girlfriend and son . " The Man with the Horn " was re @-@ written for an episode of Vice in which Collins guest @-@ starred as a con @-@ artist who got in trouble with cocaine distributors . The re @-@ written version was titled " Life Is a Rat Race " . 
 " Take Me Home " was the closing theme song for the World Wrestling Federation 's television show , Saturday Night 's Main Event for several years in the late 1980s . In 2003 , the hip @-@ hop group Bone Thugs @-@ n @-@ Harmony based their song " Home " on this single . That version of the song featured the original song 's chorus , and hit number 19 on the UK charts . 
 In a 2016 interview with Rolling Stone , Phil Collins said No Jacket Required is among his least favourite albums . 
 = = Tour = = 
 The album was followed by a concert tour in 1985 named The No Jacket Required World Tour . For the tour , Collins retained his usual cast of musicians , including Chester Thompson , Leland Sklar and Daryl Stuermer . The band was nicknamed the " Hot Tub Club " . A television special was recorded in Dallas and aired on HBO , titled " No Jacket Required ... Sold Out " . Another television special was recorded for Cinemax for a show titled " Album Flash " , taped in London , England at the Royal Albert Hall . 
 Reception for the tour was positive as well . Rick Kogan of the Chicago Tribune said that " After hearing and observing Collins ' eminently satisfying and frequently spectacular two @-@ hour performance , one is left not with a series of niggling questions about his popularity but rather with renewed admiration for the forcefulness of well @-@ crafted songs played in a straightforward manner . " 
 In interviews during the tour , it was remarked by interviewers that the singer appeared similar to actors Bob Hoskins and Danny DeVito . Collins joked that all three of them could play the Three Bears from the story Goldilocks and the Three Bears . DeVito heard the idea , and contacted Collins and Hoskins about making a film . Collins researched bears , and a script was planned . Kim Basinger reportedly wished to play the role of " Goldilocks " . However , problems arose ( mostly involving the script ) , and all three actors abandoned the film . 
 While on the No Jacket Required tour , Collins recorded a song for the movie White Nights , titled " Separate Lives " . The song , which was written by Collins ' friend Stephen Bishop , was a duet that Collins performed with Marilyn Martin . In the US , the song went to number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , and it reached number four on the UK charts . 
 = = = Live Aid = = = 
 The No Jacket Required World Tour ended with Collins performing at both the Wembley Stadium and JFK Stadium Live Aid concerts . Collins claims that it all happened by accident , and that both he and Power Station were going to attend both Live Aid shows as well , but " they all chickened out . " " By default , I was the only one who did it , " he later claimed . Bob Geldof , the organiser of Live Aid , originally asked Collins to be part of Geldof 's first charity effort , Band Aid . Collins played the drums and performed backing vocals for Band Aid 's UK number one hit in 1984 , " Do They Know It 's Christmas ? " . 
 Collins first performed with Sting at Wembley , and together they performed " In the Air Tonight " , " Against All Odds " , " Long Long Way to Go " and " Every Breath You Take " , accompanied by saxophonist Branford Marsalis . After Collins finished performing , he flew on Concorde to the Live Aid show in Philadelphia . On the plane , he met Cher , and convinced her to be a part of the event . Once there he met Robert Plant , who had asked him if he would perform with him , Jimmy Page and Tony Thompson in a Led Zeppelin " reunion " of sorts . He first played drums on " Layla " , " White Room " and " She 's Waiting " for friend Eric Clapton . Then , Collins performed " Against All Odds " and " In the Air Tonight " , and finished the night playing drums for Led Zeppelin 's aforementioned act . The band has claimed that the performance was unspectacular , and critics place the blame on Collins . However , Collins says that " I would pledge to my dying day that it wasn 't me , " and that Thompson was racing through some of the performance . Collins later remarked , " ... I remember in the middle of the thing , I actually thought , How do I get out of here ? " Stephen Williams of Newsday commented that Collins ' performance of " In the Air Tonight " in Philadelphia " was one of the more moving moments of the day " . Live Aid raised $ 69 million in its effort . Collins later recalled the event as " extraordinary " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Phil Collins , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Musicians 
 Phil Collins – vocals , backing vocals , drums ( 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 @-@ 11 ) , keyboards ( 2 , 3 , 5 @-@ 11 ) , Roland TR @-@ 808 ( 3 , 5 ) , Roland TR @-@ 909 ( 1 , 10 ) , LinnDrum ( 2 , 6 ) , Simmons electronic drums ( credited on 2016 release as ' Simmonds ' ) ( 3 , 7 ) , vocoder ( 7 ) , kalimba ( 7 ) , synth bass ( 2 ) 
 Daryl Stuermer – guitars ( 1 @-@ 10 ) , keyboards ( 4 ) 
 David Frank – keyboards ( 1 , 6 , 7 ) , Mini Moog bass ( 1 , 7 ) , Oberheim DMX ( 1 ) 
 Lee Sklar – bass guitar ( 3 @-@ 6 , 8 @-@ 11 ) , Piccolo bass ( 3 , 10 ) 
 The Phenix Horns , arranged by Tom Tom 84 – horns ( 1 , 2 , 7 ) 
 Gary Barnacle – saxophone ( 4 , 7 ) 
 Don Myrick – saxophone ( 5 , 9 ) 
 Arif Mardin – string arrangement ( 5 ) , orchestral introduction ( 11 ) 
 Sting – backing vocals ( 3 , 10 ) 
 Peter Gabriel – backing vocals ( 10 ) 
 Helen Terry – backing vocals ( 10 ) 
 Nick Glennie @-@ Smith – keyboards ( 11 ) 
 Production 
 Produced and mixed by Phil Collins and Hugh Padgham 
 Engineered by Hugh Padgham 
 Assistant Engineer – Steve Chase 
 Recorded and digitally mixed at the Townhouse , London and Old Croft , Surrey 
 Cover Photography – Peter Ashworth 
 Album Design by Phil Collins 
 Strings recorded at Air Studios , London , engineered by John Jacobs 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Brother from the Same Planet = 
 " Brother from the Same Planet " is the fourteenth episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . After Homer is late to pick up Bart from soccer practice , Bart turns to the program The Bigger Brothers , and is assigned a man named Tom . Homer gets himself a little brother named Pepi . Homer and Tom fight , and Homer reconciles with Bart , and Tom becomes Pepi 's bigger brother . Meanwhile , Lisa becomes addicted to the Corey hotline — a phone service where television fans can listen to the voice of a fictional actor based on popular actors Corey Feldman and Corey Haim . 
 The episode originally aired in the United States on Fox on February 4 , 1993 and was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Jeffrey Lynch . The producers tried to cast Tom Cruise for the role of Tom , but Cruise refused , and they used Phil Hartman instead . " Brother from the Same Planet " received favorable reception in books and in the media , and was highlighted among the five best episodes of the series by the writers of the Fox program King of the Hill . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After soccer practice , Bart waits for Homer to pick him up , though his father has forgotten . When Homer finally remembers , he reasons to an angered Bart that they should just both admit they are wrong and try to put the issue behind them . Later , Bart views a commercial for a mentor program called The Bigger Brothers , which pairs up fatherless boys with positive male role models . Still angry at Homer , Bart goes to the agency pretending to be a young boy whose father was a drunken gambler who abandoned him . Barts story is so sad that the receptionist pairs him up with their best Bigger Brother , a military test pilot named Tom . The two spend time together doing a variety of activities , though Bart begins to feel guilty over taking up Tom 's time despite not actually being fatherless . Eventually , Homer finds out about Bart 's Bigger Brother and confronts Bart for it . Homer then decides to go to the Bigger Brothers Agency to get revenge by being assigned with a replacement son ; a young poor boy named Pepi . Just like Tom and Bart , Homer and Pepi spend time together doing activities . 
 Later on , it is Bigger Brothers Day in Marine World , where the Bigger Brothers and their boys attend to celebrate ( including Homer , Tom , Bart , and Pepi ) . After running into Homer , Tom begins to brawl with him , in a fight which rages across Springfield . In the end , Homer winds up getting poked on the back by a fire hydrant , breaking his spine , much to Tom 's shock . As a result , Homer is sent to a hospital on a stretcher , and Bart holds himself responsible for this . Later on , Tom sadly talks about how much he will miss being a Bigger Brother , while Pepi is sad over losing his Bigger Brother . Fortunately , Bart suggests Tom become Pepi 's big brother , to which they happily agree , and both Tom and Pepi walk out into the sunset holding hands . At the same time , Homer ( whose back is now fixed ) and Bart reconcile , as Homer teaches Bart how to brawl due to his experience with Tom . 
 In the subplot , Marge finds an anomalously high phone bill for calls made by Lisa to the Corey hotline — a premium rate phone service where television fans can listen to the voice of a fictional actor based on The Two <unk> . Lisa promises to stop increasing the family 's phone bill , but continues to make calls to the hotline from such places as Doctor Hibbert 's office and a telephone at Springfield Elementary . After Principal Skinner catches her , Marge suggests that Lisa try to go until midnight without calling the hotline ; if she can do so , she will have conquered her addiction . Although tempted throughout the rest of the day , Lisa beats her addiction . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Brother from the Same Planet " was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Jeffrey Lynch . It originally aired in the United States on February 4 , 1993 , on Fox . The writers wrote the role of Tom for actor Tom Cruise . However , when offered the part , Cruise repeatedly turned it down , so the producers used Phil Hartman instead . The writers based the Corey character on the actors Corey Feldman and Corey Haim , known as The Two <unk> . Pepi was based on the fictional character Dondi from the daily comic strip of the same name . 
 In the episode , Bart and Tom watch The Ren & Stimpy Show . The producers contacted Nickelodeon to get authorization to use the two characters for that sequence . Nickelodeon was strict about what The Simpsons was allowed to do , and the producers were not allowed to have the savageness that they wanted . The Ren & Stimpy Show 's animators offered to do the layouts of Ren and Stimpy for the episode . 
 The television show Bart watches , Tuesday Night Live , is a parody of NBC 's Saturday Night Live . Krusty appears in a sketch called " The Big Ear Family " , and says that the sketch goes on for twelve more minutes , even though the joke 's punchline has already been established . That was Jon Vitti 's way of criticizing Saturday Night Live for having overlong sketches with thin joke premises . The sequence originally had a longer version of the Tuesday Night Live band playing into the commercial break , but it was cut because Vitti , who was a writer on Saturday Night Live during the 1985 – 86 season along with fellow The Simpsons writers , George Meyer and John Swartzwelder , did not want to come off as being bitter . 
 The writing staff was looking for a way to end the episode and executive producer Sam Simon suggested that they watch the film The Quiet Man . The writers came in on a Saturday to watch the film together . They were inspired by the film 's fight scene between John Wayne and Victor McLaglen 's characters to do a fight scene between Homer and Tom in the episode . The scene was difficult for the producers to sound @-@ mix because they wanted it to be funny but not horrifying . They discovered that the more realistic the effects used sounded , the funnier the scene became . The producers tried all sorts of different sounds for when Homer cracks his back on the fire hydrant and chose the tiniest realistic sound , because they believed that it was the most painful and " hilarious " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The scene in which Milhouse writes " <unk> pu <unk> ! " <unk> pu <unk> ! " on the wall is a reference to " red rum " from Stanley Kubrick 's 1980 film The Shining . 
 The woman Bart mistakes for Homer is singing the Helen Reddy song " I Am Woman " . 
 While Bart is stuck in the storm waiting for Homer , a nun is lifted up by the wind , a reference to the TV series The Flying Nun . 
 Bart and Tom watch The Ren & Stimpy Show . 
 Homer watches an NFL Films production about Bart Starr , the quarterback on the Green Bay Packers who led the team to victory in the first two Super Bowls . 
 The scene where Homer accuses Bart of seeing his big brother is a reference to the 1966 film Who 's Afraid of Virginia Woolf ? , where Richard Burton accuses Elizabeth Taylor of adultery . 
 In a made @-@ up story Homer tells Pepi , Bart tells Homer to shut up and shoves half a grapefruit in his face , a reference to the 1931 film The Public Enemy . 
 Bart watches Tuesday Night Live , a parody of NBC 's Saturday Night Live . 
 The background music used for the fight scene is a knockoff of the music used in the fight scene in The Quiet Man . 
 Skinner 's creepy monologue about his mother watching him is a parody of Norman Bates ' similar dialogue from the 1960 Hitchcock film Psycho . 
 The title of the episode is a reference to the 1984 film The Brother from Another Planet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Brother from the Same Planet " finished 18th in ratings for the week of February 1 – 7 , 1993 , with a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 9 , equivalent to approximately 13 @.@ 9 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating Martin . 
 In their section on the episode in the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood comment : " We love Homer sitting at home trying to remember to pick up Bart — he 's watching a TV show about a baseball star called Bart , with pictures of Bart on all sides , and even Maggie seems to be calling her brother 's name . " Writing in the compilation work The Psychology of The Simpsons , Robert M. Arkin and Philip J. Mazzocco reference a scene from the episode where Homer " argues with his own brain about a desired course of action " to illustrate self @-@ discrepancy theory , the idea that " humans will go to great lengths to attain and preserve self @-@ esteem " . 
 The writers of the FOX program King of the Hill put " Brother from the Same Planet " among the five best episodes of The Simpsons , including " Homer the Heretic " , " Lisa 's Wedding " , " Lisa 's Substitute " , and " Behind the Laughter " . Mikey Cahill of the Herald Sun highlighted the quote " <unk> ? What the hell is <unk> ? " by Homer in his list of " Fab Fives " related to The Simpsons . When asked to pick his favorite season out of The Simpsons seasons one through twenty , Paul Lane of the Niagara Gazette picked season four and highlighted " Brother from the Same Planet " and " Mr. Plow " which he called " excellent " , along with " the sweetly funny " " Lisa 's First Word " , and " Homer the Heretic " . In a review of The Simpsons season four , Lyndsey Shinoda of Video Store cited " Brother from the Same Planet " and " I Love Lisa " among her " personal favorites " from the season . 
 = Lisa del Giocondo = 
 Lisa del Giocondo ( Italian pronunciation : [ <unk> del <unk> ] ; née Gherardini [ <unk> ] ; 15 June 1479 – 15 July 1542 or ca . 1551 ) , also known as Lisa Gherardini , Lisa di Antonio Maria ( or Antonmaria ) Gherardini and Mona Lisa , was a member of the Gherardini family of Florence and Tuscany in Italy . Her name was given to Mona Lisa , her portrait commissioned by her husband and painted by Leonardo da Vinci during the Italian Renaissance . 
 Little is known about Lisa 's life . Born in Florence and married in her teens to a cloth and silk merchant who later became a local official , she was a mother to five children and led what is thought to have been a comfortable and ordinary middle @-@ class life . Lisa outlived her husband , who was considerably her senior . 
 Centuries after Lisa 's death , Mona Lisa became the world 's most famous painting and took on a life separate from Lisa , the woman . Speculation by scholars and hobbyists made the work of art a globally recognized icon and an object of commercialization . In 2005 , Lisa was definitively identified as the model for the Mona Lisa . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Lisa 's Florentine family was old and aristocratic but over time had lost its influence . They were well off but not wealthy , and lived on farm income in a city that was among the largest in Europe and economically successful , while there were great disparities in wealth among its inhabitants . 
 Antonmaria di Noldo Gherardini , Lisa 's father , had lost two wives , Lisa di Giovanni Filippo de ' Carducci , whom he married in 1465 , and Caterina di Mariotto Rucellai , whom he married in 1473 . Both died in childbirth . Lisa 's mother was Lucrezia del Caccia , daughter of <unk> Spinelli , and Gherardini 's wife by his third marriage in 1476 . Gherardini at one time owned or rented six farms in Chianti that produced wheat , wine and olive oil and where livestock was raised . 
 Lisa was born in Florence on 15 June 1479 on Via Maggio , although for many years it was thought she was born on one of the family 's rural properties , Villa <unk> just outside <unk> . She is named for Lisa , a wife of her paternal grandfather . The eldest of seven children , Lisa had three sisters , one of whom was named Ginevra , and three brothers , <unk> , Francesco , and Noldo . 
 The family lived in Florence , originally near Santa Trinita and later in rented space near Santo Spirito , most likely because they were not able to afford repairs to their former house when it was damaged . Lisa 's family moved to what today is called Via dei Pepi and then near Santa Croce , where they lived near Ser Piero da Vinci , Leonardo 's father . They also owned a small country home in St. Donato in the village of Poggio about 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) south of the city . Noldo , Gherardini 's father and Lisa 's grandfather , had bequeathed a farm in Chianti to the Santa Maria Nuova hospital . Gherardini secured a lease for another of the hospital 's farms and , so that he could oversee the wheat harvest , the family spent summers there at the house named Ca ' di Pesa . 
 = = Marriage and later life = = 
 On 5 March 1495 , Lisa married Francesco di Bartolomeo di <unk> del Giocondo , a modestly successful cloth and silk merchant , becoming his third wife at age 15 . Lisa 's dowry was 170 florins and the San Silvestro farm near her family 's country home , a sign that the Gherardini family was not wealthy at the time and reason to think she and her husband loved each other . The property lies between Castellina and San Donato in Poggio , near two farms later owned by Michelangelo . Neither poor nor among the most well @-@ to @-@ do in Florence , the couple lived a middle @-@ class life . Lisa 's marriage may have increased her social status because her husband 's family may have been richer than her own . Francesco is thought to have benefited because Gherardini is an " old name " . They lived in shared accommodation until 5 March 1503 , when Francesco was able to buy a house next door to his family 's old home in the Via della <unk> . Leonardo is thought to have begun painting Lisa 's portrait the same year . 
 Lisa and Francesco had five children : Piero , Camilla , Andrea , Giocondo , and Marietta , four of them between 1496 and 1507 . Lisa lost a baby daughter in 1499 . Lisa also raised Bartolomeo , the son of Francesco and his second wife , Camilla di Mariotto Rucellai , who was about a year old when his mother died . Lisa 's stepmother , Caterina di Mariotto Rucellai , and Francesco 's first wife were sisters , members of the prominent Rucellai family . 
 Camilla and Marietta became Catholic nuns . Camilla took the name Suor Beatrice and entered the convent of San Domenico di <unk> , where she was entrusted to the care of Antonmaria 's sister , Suor <unk> and Lisa 's sisters , Suor Camilla ( who was acquitted in a scandalous visitation by four men at the convent ) and Suor Alessandra . Beatrice died at age 18 and was buried in the Basilica di Santa Maria Novella . Lisa developed a relationship with Sant <unk> , a convent held in high regard in Florence , where she was able to place Marietta in 1521 . Marietta took the name Suor <unk> and became a respected member of the convent in a position of some responsibility . 
 Francesco became an official in Florence . He was elected to the <unk> <unk> in 1499 and to the Signoria in 1512 , where he was confirmed as a <unk> in 1524 . He may have had ties to Medici family political or business interests . In 1512 when the government of Florence feared the return of the Medici from exile , Francesco was imprisoned and fined 1 @,@ 000 florins . He was released in September when the Medici returned . 
 In June 1537 in his will among many provisions , Francesco returned Lisa 's dowry to her , gave her personal clothing and jewelry and provided for her future . Upon entrusting her care to their daughter <unk> and , should she be incapable , his son Bartolomeo , Francesco wrote , " Given the affection and love of the testator towards Mona Lisa , his beloved wife ; in consideration of the fact that Lisa has always acted with a noble spirit and as a faithful wife ; wishing that she shall have all she needs … " . 
 Lisa del Giocondo spent her final years at Florence 's Sant <unk> convent where she died in July 1542 at the age of 63 . 
 = = Mona Lisa = = 
 Like other Florentines of their financial means , Francesco 's family members were art lovers and patrons . His son Bartolomeo asked Antonio di <unk> <unk> to paint a fresco at the family 's burial site in the Basilica della Santissima Annunziata di Firenze . Andrea del Sarto painted a Madonna for another member of his family . Francesco gave commissions to Leonardo for a portrait of his wife and to Domenico <unk> for a painting of Saint Francis of Assisi . He is thought to have commissioned Lisa 's portrait to celebrate both Andrea 's birth and the purchase of the family 's home . 
 Mona Lisa fulfilled 15th- and early 16th century requirements for portraying a woman of virtue . Lisa is portrayed as a faithful wife through gesture — her right hand rests over her left . Leonardo also presented Lisa as fashionable and successful , perhaps more well @-@ off than she was . Her dark garments and black veil were Spanish @-@ influenced high fashion ; they are not a depiction of mourning for her first daughter , as some scholars have proposed . The portrait is strikingly large ; its size is equal to that of commissions acquired by wealthier art patrons of the time . This extravagance has been explained as a sign of Francesco and Lisa 's social aspiration . 
 Leonardo had no income during the spring of 1503 , which may in part explain his interest in a private portrait . But later that year , he most likely had to delay his work on Mona Lisa when he received payment for starting The Battle of Anghiari , which was a more valuable commission and one he was contracted to complete by February 1505 . In 1506 Leonardo considered the portrait unfinished . He was not paid for the work and did not deliver it to his client . The artist 's paintings traveled with him throughout his life , and he may have completed Mona Lisa many years later in France , in one estimation by 1516 . 
 The painting 's title dates to 1550 . An acquaintance of at least some of Francesco 's family , Giorgio Vasari wrote , " Leonardo undertook to paint , for Francesco del Giocondo , the portrait of Mona Lisa , his wife " ( Italian : <unk> Lionardo a fare per Francesco del Giocondo il <unk> di mona Lisa sua moglie . ) . The portrait 's Italian name La Gioconda is the feminine form of her married name . In French it is known by the variant La <unk> . Though derived from Lisa 's married name they have the added significance that the name derives from the word for " happy " ( in English , " <unk> " ) or " the happy one " . 
 Speculation assigned Lisa 's name to at least four different paintings and her identity to at least ten different people . By the end of the 20th century , the painting was a global icon that had been used in more than 300 other paintings and in 2 @,@ 000 advertisements , appearing at an average of one new advertisement each week . 
 In 2005 , an expert at the University Library of Heidelberg discovered a margin note in the library 's collection that established with certainty the traditional view that the sitter was Lisa . The note , written by Agostino Vespucci in 1503 , states that Leonardo was working on a portrait of Lisa del Giocondo . The Mona Lisa has been in custody of France since the 16th century , when it was acquired by King Francis I ; after the French Revolution , however , it came into the possession of the people . Today about six million people visit the painting each year at the Louvre in Paris , where it is part of a French national collection . 
 = Berkhamsted Castle = 
 Berkhamsted Castle is a Norman motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle in Berkhamsted , Hertfordshire . The castle was built to obtain control of a key route between London and the Midlands during the Norman conquest of England in the 11th century . Robert of Mortain , William the Conqueror 's half brother , was probably responsible for managing its construction , after which he became the castle 's owner . The castle was surrounded by protective earthworks and a deer park for hunting . The castle became a new administrative centre , and the former Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement of Berkhamsted reorganised around it . Subsequent kings granted the castle to their chancellors . The castle was substantially expanded in the mid @-@ 12th century , probably by Thomas Becket . 
 The castle was besieged in 1216 during the civil war between King John and rebellious barons , who were supported by France . It was successfully captured after Prince Louis , the future Louis VIII , attacked it with siege engines for twenty days , forcing the garrison to surrender . After being retaken by royal forces the subsequent year , it was given to Richard , Earl of Cornwall , beginning a long association with the Earldom of Cornwall and the later duchy . Richard redeveloped the castle as a palatial residence , and made it the centre of the earldom 's administration . Edward III further developed the castle in the 14th century and gave it to his son , Edward , the Black Prince , who expanded the hunting grounds . The castle was also used to hold royal prisoners , including John II of France and rival claimants to the English throne . 
 In the late 15th century , the castle became increasingly unfashionable and was fell into decline . By the mid @-@ 16th century , it was in ruins and unsuitable for royal use . Stone was taken from the castle to build houses and other buildings in the town . The castle was almost destroyed during the construction of the London and Birmingham Railway in the 1830s . As a result , it became the first building in Britain to receive statutory protection from Parliament . In 1930 , the castle passed from the Duchy of Cornwall to the government 's control . It is maintained as a tourist attraction by English Heritage . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1066 – 1217 = = = 
 Berkhamsted Castle was built during the Norman conquest of England in 1066 . After William the Conqueror defeated the Anglo @-@ Saxons at the Battle of Hastings he advanced from the coast , across the Thames Valley and north into Hertfordshire . Chroniclers suggest that the Archbishop of York surrendered to William in Berkhamsted , and William probably ordered the construction of the castle before proceeding south into London . Berkhamsted was strategically significant , as it lay on a key route into the Midlands from London through the Chiltern Hills . The actual construction work was probably overseen by William 's half @-@ brother , Robert of Mortain , who owned it by the time of the writing of the Domesday Book . 
 The castle was located slightly away from the main road , to give additional space for the earthworks involved , and was positioned as to benefit from natural springs running down from under the hill . It had a motte and bailey design , with a 40 foot ( 12 m ) high motte , and a bailey around 500 foot ( 150 m ) by 300 foot ( 91 m ) , enclosing 0 @.@ 6 acres ( 0 @.@ 24 ha ) acres . A double bank and ditch ran around the whole castle , with both sets of ditches filled with water . In total , the wider earthworks occupy around 11 acres ( 4 @.@ 5 ha ) . A <unk> – a specialised ditch digger – was recorded as being employed maintained at the castle in 1086 . 
 A large deer park , owned by the Crown , was established around the castle to provide hunting grounds . The castle was carefully positioned next to the park , which was overlooked by the motte . A vineyard was also maintained alongside the castle . The old Anglo @-@ Saxon manorial centre was moved to the site , and as a result the Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement of Berkhamsted also shifted from the area now called Northchurch to the castle ; several mills , essential for grinding flour , were present there in 1086 . 
 Robert 's son , William rebelled against Henry I and the castle was confiscated . Henry granted Berkhamsted to his chancellor , Ranulf . In 1123 , however , when Ranulf was travelling to the castle with Henry , the chancellor rode over the nearby hill , became overly excited at the view ahead of him and fell off his horse , dying from his injuries . 
 The castle was subsequently given by Henry II to Thomas Becket when he became chancellor in 1155 . Becket extended the castle to accommodate his large household , but fell from favour in 1164 and the castle was confiscated by the king . Henry II liked Berkhamsted and subsequently used it himself extensively . By the mid @-@ 12th century , the castle had been rebuilt in stone , probably by Becket , with a shell keep and an outer stone wall ; the bailey was divided in two by a wall to form an inner and an outer bailey . A gatehouse led down into the town , meeting with Castle Street . Henry II also officially recognised the surrounding settlement of Berkhamsted as a town in 1156 . 
 Under King John the castle was part of the lands forming the jointure of his second wife Isabella . John entrusted the castle to Geoffrey Fitz Peter in 1206 , who rebuilt much of the town . Geoffrey died in 1213 and the castle passed to his son , John Fitzgeoffrey . 
 Political tensions in England began to rise , however , and a potential conflict between King John and an alliance of rebel barons opposed to his rule began to look likely . In early 1215 , King John installed a trusted German mercenary called Ranulph in charge of Berkhamsted Castle and reviewed the defensive arrangements there that April . Civil war broke out later that same year . Initially , the rebels were hampered by a lack of equipment – in particular , siege engines – but in May 1216 the future Louis VIII crossed over the English Channel and joined the rebel cause , bringing with him heavy siege equipment . 
 King John died in October , and in December Louis besieged Berkhamsted Castle . The prince deployed his siege engines , probably trebuchets , and attacked the castle repeatedly for twenty days , throwing what chroniclers termed innumerable " damnable stones " at the defenders . During the 13th century , a set of earthworks were built around the outside of the walls , which may have been the firing platforms for these trebuchets . Having put up a strong defence , the garrison was allowed to surrender and to leave with their weapons and armour . When the forces loyal to the young Henry III defeated the rebels the following year , the castle was returned to royal hands . 
 = = = 1218 – 1461 = = = 
 In subsequent years , Berkhamsted then became closely associated with the Earls and Dukes of Cornwall . Henry III 's brother , Richard , became the Earl of Cornwall and inherited the castle from his mother Isabella , and it became a permanent part of the earldom . Berkhamsted was Richard 's favourite castle , partially because it was conveniently close to London . Richard had an impressive , three @-@ storey tower built onto the property in 1254 , and restored much of the rest of the castle ; the chroniclers of nearby Dunstable complained that his building works required so many carts to carry the timber that local trade in other goods was badly affected . The castle was used for the central administration of the earldom and Richard 's nine stewards would submit their annual financial reports there . Meanwhile , the town of Berkhamsted itself became rich as a result of the growing wool trade . Richard died at the castle in 1272 , and it passed to his son Edmund . 
 The castle passed on through Edward I , who found the castle in an apparently poor condition , and his second wife , Margaret , to Edward II . Edward II gave it to his royal favourite , Piers Gaveston , whom he made Earl of Cornwall . Gaveston was married there in 1307 , with Edward in attendance . Edward II and Gaveston fell from power in 1327 and John , Edward 's second son , took possession as the new Earl of Cornwall . 
 When John died , Edward III reclaimed Berkhamsted Castle ; a survey showed it to be in need of substantial repairs . Edward had not yet improved Windsor Castle , so used Berkhamsted as his main property , investing considerable sums in renovating it . His son , Edward , the Black Prince , was created Duke of Cornwall and also made extensive use of the castle , which formed part of the new duchy . The Black Prince took advantage of the aftermath of the Black Death to extend the castle 's park by 65 acres ( 26 ha ) , including some woodland pasture stretching over the Chilterns , eventually producing a park covering 991 acres ( 401 ha ) . The castle was used to hold John II of France after he was taken prisoner at the Battle of Poitiers . When the Black Prince fell ill following his campaigning in France , he retired to Berkhamsted and died there in 1376 . 
 Richard II inherited <unk> Castle in 1377 ; initially the use of it was given to his favourite , Robert de Vere and , after de Vere 's fall from power and exile in 1388 , to John Holland . Henry IV lived in the castle after he deposed Richard in 1400 , and he used the property to detain rival applicants to the throne . During this period Geoffrey Chaucer , later famous for his Canterbury Tales , oversaw renovation work on the castle in his role as a clerk . Both Henry V and Henry VI owned the castle , the latter making use of it until his overthrow in 1461 . 
 = = = 1462 – 1900 = = = 
 Berkhamsted was confiscated by Edward IV when he came to power during Wars of the Roses . In the late 15th century , the castle was occupied by his mother , Cecily Neville , the Duchess of York . By now the castle had become increasingly unfashionable , however , and was abandoned after her death in 1495 . By the time that antiquarian John Leland visited in the mid @-@ 16th century , it was in " much ruine " and was unsuitable for royal use . 
 In 1580 , the estate , including the ruins and the park , was leased from Elizabeth I by Sir Edward Carey , for the nominal rent of one red rose each year . Stone from the castle was used to build Berkhamsted Place , a local school and other buildings in the late 16th century . The castle 's park , which had reached 1 @,@ 252 acres ( 507 ha ) in size by 1627 , was broken up in the next two decades , shrinking to only 376 acres ( 152 ha ) . The English Civil War of the 1640s largely passed Berkhamsted by , with the castle apparently playing no part in the conflict . 
 In 1761 the wider estate and the castle were separated , the former being leased to the Duke of Bridgewater , while the latter remained in the direct control of the Duchy of Cornwall . In 1863 , the surrounding estates and park were sold off altogether by the duchy to Earl Brownlow ; Brownlow also agreed to rent the castle from the duchy for a nominal rent . 
 In the 1830s , plans were drawn up to build the new London and Birmingham Railway . From an engineering perspective , the ideal route for the railway ran through the site of the castle , but concerns over the need to protect ancient monuments and buildings had been growing for several years , and the local Bridgwater estate were also keen to protect the local view from their buildings . The castle was ultimately specifically protected in the 1833 act that sanctioned the railway , forcing the track to take a route across the valley floor . Berkhamsted was the first building in Britain to receive statutory protection from development in this way . Nonetheless , the route still required the track to pass through the outer fortifications of the castle , a major engineering operation which was carried out in 1834 , destroying the castle gatehouse in the process . 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 The Office of Works acquired Berkhamsted Castle from the Duchy of Cornwall in 1930 . The inner ditch was subsequently drained of water in the 1950s . In the 21st century it is operated as a tourist attraction by English Heritage , and historian Isobel Thompson considers it " one of the best surviving motte and bailey castles " in England . The castle is protected by law as an ancient monument . 
 = Kill the DJ = 
 " Kill the DJ " is a song by American punk rock band Green Day . It was released as the second single from the band 's ninth studio album , ¡ Uno ! , on August 14 , 2012 . The song was recorded at Jingletown Studios from February 14 to June 26 , 2012 , and was released on the record labels Reprise Records and Warner Bros. A music video , directed by Samuel Bayer , was released on September 4 , 2012 . 
 The song takes influences from dance music , a departure for the band . " Kill the DJ " was compared to The Clash albums Sandinista ! ( 1980 ) and Combat Rock ( 1982 ) , as well as the output of the band The Rapture . " Kill the DJ " was based on " static and noise " ; it was an " imagery of waterboarding and torture straight into the dance club " . The song appeared on charts worldwide and received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 Green Day began to record material for the albums ¡ Uno ! , ¡ Dos ! and ¡ Tré ! on February 14 , 2012 . During the sessions , Mike Dirnt asked the frontman Billie Joe Armstrong to write a song with a " four @-@ on @-@ the @-@ floor " rhythm . After the release of " Oh Love " , the lead single from the album trilogy on July 16 , 2012 , the band revealed the artwork of " Kill the DJ " during a press release on July 30 , 2012 . The band performed the song eight days ahead of its release at a secret show held at the Echoplex on August 6 , 2012 . 
 BBC Radio 1 presenter Zane Lowe played the censored version of " Kill the DJ " on August 13 , 2012 . The next day , the single was made available on the iTunes Store . The song 's accompanying music video premiered on YouTube on September 4 , 2012 , to coincide with the release of the album trilogy 's third single " Let Yourself Go " on September 5 . A teaser was previously uploaded on the channel on August 29 , 2012 . 
 = = Theme and composition = = 
 " Kill the DJ " is a dance @-@ punk song that Armstrong states is close to " straight @-@ up dance music " with a " four @-@ on @-@ the @-@ floor " rhythm ; he compared the overall production of the song to The Clash 's 1980 album , Sandinista ! , Ian Dury 's " Sex & Drugs & Rock & Roll " by and Tom Tom Club 's " Genius of Love " . 
 The band said that while producing the song , they attempted to find out " how to make dance music " without turning themselves into a dance act . Armstrong said it was the first time the band had written a dance song . Michael Roffman of Consequence of Sound compared the song with the works of The Rapture and The Clash 's 1982 album , Combat Rock ; he said it was " strictly for basement dancefloors everywhere " . According to Armstrong , the lyrics of " Kill the DJ " can be considered as " a sweeping political statement " rather than being interpreted as " a comment on electronic music figures " . He told Rolling Stone the song is about " static and noise ... Like this government cannot , will not , agree with itself . They refuse to make it work . Right , left — it doesn ’ t matter . It blows your mind and pisses you off . It ’ s a song about being drunk , going through this chaos , feeling fucked up and all you want to do is get more drunk " . 
 Todd Martens of Los Angeles Times wrote that the word DJ in " Kill the DJ " does not signify a real DJ but another figure . He compared " Kill the DJ " to " The Static Age " , a song on Green Day 's album 21st Century Breakdown ( 2009 ) , which was " a foaming @-@ at @-@ the @-@ mouth guitar rant that everyone — pundits , politicians , celebrities — should stop babbling and shut up " . He added , " [ Kill the DJ ] drops some cursory nods to war and religion in the opening bars , but soon brings the imagery of waterboarding and torture straight into the dance club " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Kill the DJ " was directed by Green Day 's longtime collaborator Samuel Bayer , who previously directed the clip for the band 's previous single , " Oh Love " , and all the videos for their album American Idiot ( 2004 ) . The band announced the release of the clip with a teaser video which was uploaded to their YouTube channel on August 29 , 2012 . The teaser video featured several scenes from the video and a brief sample of the ending of the track . The full video premiered on September 4 , 2012 . The video starts with a black @-@ and @-@ white clip of the band riding motorcycles through a desert and finding their way into a nightclub . The band members walk through the club while others dance . As they perform in the club , two young women fight and some bottles are broken . Near the end , both women have a " bloodbath " ; they are depicted with blood on their faces and clothes while they continue to dance . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Kill the DJ " was included in Zane Lowe 's Hottest Tracks of 2012 ; it finished second , while " Calling ( Lose My Mind ) " by Sebastian Ingrosso and Alesso came first . Jack Brad , writing for Hive Magazine , said the song was a " fun and funky " track showcasing a different musical direction for the band . He also said it encompassed a " catchy melody and ... infectious chorus " that proves the band was capable of experimenting with new musical styles on every new production , citing Warning ( 2000 ) and Nimrod ( 1997 ) as examples . David Renshaw from Gigwise said " Kill the DJ " ' s music video was not as violent as previous clips by the band ; he said , " those who attended the band 's brilliant Reading Festival set in August will testify " that things can get more violent than scenes in the video . 
 David Greenwald of Billboard magazine described " Kill the DJ " as a " profanity @-@ laced and Clash @-@ channeling " track . Zara Golden of VH1 said of the video , " The hit is only a symbolic one , though , and the only real violence to be had here is a slaying guitar riff . Rather , this is an assault against the dubbed @-@ out sound that seems to be dominating today ’ s air waves , Green Day ’ s own and only pretend bloody dubstep demolition . " Todd Martens of Los Angeles Times , criticizing the single , said , " It 's all played rather straight . ' I 'll pick up what 's left in the club , ' Armstrong sings suspiciously , and the video released Tuesday doesn 't do much to present the song as a statement " . Alex Young , writing for Consequence of Sound said the opening clips of the band driving motorbikes were irrelevant . Young said , " There ’ s also a random scene of the band riding dirt bikes through the desert , which doesn 't really make sense in the context of the video but seems like a good way to spend an excess video budget " . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Charlie Gardiner ( ice hockey ) = 
 Charles Robert " Chuck " Gardiner ( December 31 , 1904 – June 13 , 1934 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey goaltender who played for the Chicago Black Hawks in the National Hockey League . Born in Edinburgh , Scotland , Gardiner moved with his family to Canada as a child . Playing all of his junior hockey in or around Winnipeg , Manitoba , Gardiner joined the Chicago Black Hawks in the 1927 – 28 season . He played seven seasons with Chicago , winning two Vezina Trophies , earning three berths to the First All @-@ Star team , and a berth to the Second All @-@ Star team . In 1934 , Gardiner became the only NHL goaltender to captain his team to a Stanley Cup win . A few months after winning the Cup , Gardiner died from a brain hemorrhage brought on by a tonsillar infection , at the age of 29 . He became posthumously a charter member of the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1945 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gardiner was born in Edinburgh , Scotland , the third son and fourth child of John and Janet Gardiner . Along with his parents , older brothers John and Alexander , older sister Edith and younger sister Christina , he emigrated to Winnipeg , Manitoba at age seven in 1911 . The family initially lived in a house on William Avenue before relocating to Alexander Street ; both streets were south of the railways , and were full of Scottish @-@ Irish working @-@ class families . John took a job as a rail car <unk> , and Gardiner took an early interest in the trains , often waiting up late at night to watch them arrive into the city . He was enrolled at the Albert School , and befriended Wilf <unk> , an immigrant child from Wales who would also go on to be a National Hockey League ( NHL ) goaltender . 
 When the First World War began in 1914 , both of Gardiner 's brothers enlisted in the military and were sent overseas . Gardiner 's father John also enlisted , but he died May 30 , 1916 before he was sent overseas . Both his brothers returned home after the war ended ; while Alex was unharmed , John had been involved in a poison gas attack , and was seriously ill . To help provide for the family Gardiner began working for the J.H. Ashdown Hardware Company at the age of twelve . In December 1928 John began to develop an illness as a result of his poison gas attack in the war , and died December 13 . Edith had planned to get married on December 31 , but wanted to delay the marriage because of John 's death , though her family convinced her to continue with the original plan . 
 Gardiner married Myrtle Brooks August 6 , 1927 at Grace United Church in Winnipeg . Their first son , Robert Roy , was born May 20 , 1929 . They also had a girl on May 7 , 1931 , but she died the same day . 
 While working at the hardware store , Gardiner first played organised sports as a member of the store 's baseball team . Gardiner quickly started playing ice hockey , with the same passion as the children who were born in Canada . As he didn 't learn to skate until he was eight @-@ years @-@ old , he couldn 't skate very fast and was forced to play as the goaltender . He had tried to play as a forward and defenceman , but was too slow for either position . Playing on Winnipeg 's frozen ponds , Gardiner employed an acrobatic style , instead of the nearly @-@ universal stand @-@ up style played in that era , to avoid having his hands and feet frostbitten . He joined the Victorias , a team in the Winnipeg City League , at the age of 13 . He recorded a shutout in his first game , but the team was shut out in their following game , so Gardiner was cut . By the age of 14 , Gardiner made the intermediate team of the Selkirk Fishermen . 
 Aside from hockey , Gardiner excelled in Canadian football , and had joined the Winnipeg Tammany Tigers junior club in 1920 . As a defender , Gardiner quickly gained attention for his skill , and helped the Tigers reach the Western Canadian junior rugby championship in Regina , Saskatchewan , though they lost the championship game . The following year he changed positions and played as a right outer wing ; the Tigers went through the season undefeated and again played in the Western Canadian championship game ; held in Regina like the previous year , the team again lost . 
 Played in the 13th Grey Cup with the Winnipeg Tammany Tigers , who lost to the Ottawa Senators 24 – 1 . 
 Gardiner attended church services at Grace United Church in Winnipeg , the same place where he was married . He was also a Freemason , and joined the St. John 's Lodge in Winnipeg on April 21 , 1926 . During the summer of 1933 , he was selected as a Shriner at the Lodge ; at the age of 29 he was the youngest Shriner in the city . 
 Outside of hockey , Gardiner enjoyed several different hobbies . During one off @-@ season from the Black Hawks , Gardiner began taking flying lessons from his former teammate Konrad Johannesson . He quickly learned how to fly solo and would buy shares in the Winnipeg Flying Club , which Johannesson had founded . He also enjoyed shooting rifles ; in the summer of 1931 he was recognised for this when he was elected Field Secretary of the Winnipeg Gun Club . The following summer Gardiner earned a certificate in business administration and sales from the International Correspondence Schools . He then became a partner in a sporting goods business and travelled across Western Canada in the summer to sell products to sports teams . 
 = = Pre @-@ NHL career = = 
 Gardiner played junior ice hockey with the Winnipeg Tigers of the Manitoba Junior Hockey League ( <unk> ) for three seasons , from 1921 to 1924 . He joined the Selkirk Fishermen senior team for the 1924 – 25 season . The Fishermen played in the highest amateur league in Manitoba and were finalists for the championship the year before . Gardiner appeared in 18 games for Selkirk , posting two shutouts and a 1 @.@ 83 goals against average . They again reached the finals but lost to the Port Arthur Bearcats . The loss made Gardiner feel dejected and ashamed , though people assured him he had played well and had several offers for different teams . He decided to join the professional Winnipeg Maroons of the Central Hockey League ( CHL ) . As he would be a professional , Gardiner was forced to give up his baseball career , which he was reluctant to do ; he finished with a career batting average of .300 . Playing two seasons in Winnipeg , Gardiner appeared in 74 games , posting 12 shutouts , and 2 @.@ 14 and 2 @.@ 16 goals @-@ against average in the two seasons , respectively . 
 = = Chicago Black Hawks = = 
 Gardiner joined the Chicago Black Hawks in the 1927 – 28 season . In his first season with the Black Hawks , Gardiner played in 40 out of 44 of Chicago 's games . Posting a 2 @.@ 83 goals average , Gardiner won or tied only eight games , with three of those games being shutouts . The following season , Gardiner appeared in all of 44 of Chicago 's games . Known as the NHL 's " goalless wonders " , Chicago scored only 33 goals the entire season , finishing with a 7 – 29 – 8 record . Gardiner posted five shutouts and a 1 @.@ 85 goals against average that season . During a game against the New York Rangers on February 3 , 1929 WJ Holmes , manager of the Maroons came to Chicago to watch Gardiner play . The Rangers won the game 3 – 2 though Gardiner played well . Even so Frederic McLaughlin , owner of the Hawks , offered to sell him back to Winnipeg for $ 3500 . Only after Barney Stanley and Hugh Lehman talked to McLaughlin did he back down on the deal . After being booed by the Chicago fans , Gardiner nearly retired , before being talked out of it by Duke Keats . 
 After the NHL changed its rules to allow forward passing in the offensive zone in the 1929 – 30 season , goal scoring increased league @-@ wide . While Chicago increased its goals scored to 117 , Gardiner 's goals against average rose by only 0 @.@ 57 , to 2 @.@ 42 . Gardiner 's total number of shutouts fell by two , from five to three . Chicago improved its regular season record to 21 – 18 – 15 , placing second in the American Division , and making the playoffs . In the playoffs , the Black Hawks lost to the Montreal Canadiens 3 – 2 in a two @-@ game , total @-@ goal series , losing and tying one game . In the 1930 – 31 season , Chicago placed , once more , second in the American Division , with a 24 – 17 – 3 record . Gardiner recorded one of his best statistical years , recording 12 shutouts to go with a 1 @.@ 73 goals against average . Late in December 1930 the New York Americans offered $ 10 @,@ 000 to the Hawks in exchange for Gardiner , double his salary ; McLaughlin refused the offer . He was also named , for the first time , to the First All @-@ Star team . In the playoffs , Chicago advanced to the Stanley Cup final , losing once more to the Montreal Canadiens , three games to two . Posting a 5 – 3 – 2 record in the playoffs , Gardiner had another two shutouts and a 1 @.@ 32 goals against average . 
 In the 1931 – 32 season , Chicago posted an 18 – 19 – 11 regular season record . Gardiner posted four shutouts and a 1 @.@ 85 goals against average . Gardiner was named to the First All @-@ Star Team , and won the Vezina Trophy for his first time . Placing second in the American Division for the third season in a row , the Black Hawks lost a two @-@ game , total @-@ goal series 6 – 2 to the Toronto Maple Leafs . Gardiner posted a 1 – 1 playoff record , with one shutout and a 3 @.@ 00 goals against average . In the 1932 – 33 season , Chicago missed the playoffs , with a 16 @-@ 20 @-@ 12 record , placing fourth in the American Division . Gardiner recorded five shutouts , with a 2 @.@ 01 goals against average . He was named , for his only time , to the Second All @-@ Star team . 
 Before the beginning of the 1933 – 34 season , Gardiner 's teammates unanimously elected him captain . During the regular season , Chicago posted a 20 – 17 – 11 record . Gardiner had 10 shutouts , and a 1 @.@ 63 goals against average . He was named for the third time to the First All @-@ Star team , and won the Vezina Trophy for the second time . On February 14 , 1934 , he was a participant of the Ace Bailey Benefit Game , playing goaltender for the All @-@ Stars , who played against the Toronto Maple Leafs . In the playoffs , Gardiner had a 6 – 1 – 1 record , with two shutouts and a 1 @.@ 33 goals against average , as Chicago won its first Stanley Cup in franchise history . During the Stanley Cup parade , Chicago defenseman Roger Jenkins carted Gardiner in a wheelbarrow around Chicago 's business district after a pre @-@ playoff bet . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 During the 1932 – 33 season Gardiner began to develop a tonsil infection that drained his strength . While he initially kept the infection private , Gardiner made his condition public on December 23 , 1932 . Even though he was ill , Gardiner played the next night in Toronto . Though his fifty @-@ five saves were the deciding factor in the Black Hawks win and his performance was so good that both league President Frank Calder and Maple Leafs star forward Charlie Conacher praised him , he was so sick he would collapse on the dressing room floor in between periods with a fever of over 100 degrees Fahrenheit ; after the game Gardiner was rushed to a local hospital . This was the first notable symptom of Gardiner 's health issues . 
 In January 1934 the Black Hawks were on a train back to Chicago when Gardiner felt an intense pain in his throat that spread to the rest of his body , notably his kidneys . When questioned by Tommy Gorman about his issue , Gardiner lied to Gorman and insisted it was only a minor headache . However when Gardiner woke up on the train in the morning , he had trouble seeing , as black spots obscured his vision . This was Gardiner 's first uremic convulsion . 
 Gardiner 's health continued to be an issue throughout the 1934 NHL playoffs . On March 29 , 1934 in a playoff game against the Montreal Maroons Gardiner had a shutout as the Black Hawks won 3 – 0 ; though he was named first star as the best player of the game , Gardiner was in extreme pain during the entire game with a fever of 102 Fahrenheit and was attended to by a doctor in the dressing room during intermissions . 
 Playing with a tonsillar infection for most of the season , Gardiner was often slumped over his crossbar during breaks in games , nearly blacking out . After leaving for a singing lesson in June 1934 , Gardiner , a baritone , collapsed . He went into a coma , from which he never woke . Gardiner died at age 29 , on Wednesday , June 13 , 1934 , from a brain hemorrhage brought on by the infection . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Gardiner was the first goaltender who caught with his right hand to win the Vezina Trophy . He is the only NHL goaltender to captain his team to a Stanley Cup victory . In 1945 , Gardiner became a charter member of the Hockey Hall of Fame . In 1998 , he was ranked number 76 on The Hockey News ' list of the 100 Greatest Hockey Players . Gardiner is an Honored Member of Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame , Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame and Museum , and the Manitoba Hockey Hall of Fame . Overall , he played 316 NHL games , winning 122 , with a goals against average of 2 @.@ 02 goals , and 42 shutouts . In the playoffs , Gardiner appeared in 21 games , with a 1 @.@ 43 goals against average and five shutouts . When the Elite Ice Hockey League introduced a conference system in the 2012 – 13 season , one of its two conferences was named in honour of Gardiner . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 NHL statistics are from NHL.com. 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = NHL = = = 
 = Dragons of Autumn Twilight = 
 Dragons of Autumn Twilight is a 1984 fantasy novel by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman , based on a series of Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) game modules . It was the first Dragonlance novel , and first in the Chronicles trilogy , which , along with the Dragonlance Legends trilogy , are generally regarded as the core novels of the Dragonlance world . The Chronicles trilogy came about because the designers wanted novels to tell the story of the game world they were creating , something to which TSR , Inc . ( TSR ) agreed only reluctantly . Dragons of Autumn Twilight details the meeting of the Companions and the early days of The War of the Lance . This novel corresponds with the first two Dragonlance game modules , Dragons of Despair and Dragons of Flame , but with a different ending . The novel introduces many of the characters that are the subject of other novels and short stories . 
 The title Dragons of Autumn Twilight follows a pattern with the other novels in the series , Dragons of Winter Night and Dragons of Spring Dawning , as they all start with Dragons , followed the names of the seasons , Autumn , Winter , and Spring , as well as a series of time , Twilight , Night , and Dawning . 
 Margaret Weis includes allusions to A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens , one of her favorite stories . References include But there was something disquieting about him — secret , silent , self @-@ contained , and solitary as an oyster and The fate of mankind is my business . This quote is turned from meaning good to meaning harm . 
 = = Setting = = 
 The novels take place on the fantasy world of Krynn , created specifically for the gameplay . The world once worshiped the True Gods , a pantheon unique to the Dragonlance saga , but has come to believe that the True Gods have abandoned the world and those in it . The world is just starting to recover from the loss of the True Gods and a group has sprung up seeking to replace the True Gods ( the Seekers ) . The main focus of the novels is the continent Ansalon and the characters Tanis Half @-@ Elven , Sturm Brightblade , Caramon Majere , Raistlin Majere , Flint Fireforge , Tasslehoff Burrfoot , Goldmoon , and Riverwind . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The book begins with the return of a group of friends , consisting of Tanis , Sturm , Caramon , Raistlin , Flint , and Tasslehoff , who had separated to pursue their own quests and pledged to return in five years . Kitiara Uth Matar , the half sister of the twins Caramon and Raistlin , was supposed to be there as well , but only sent a mysterious note . 
 On the eve of their reunion , the Companions discover that the village where they are meeting has been taken over by a religious order called the Seekers . They are collaborating with the Dragon <unk> , who are preparing for the conquest of the continent of Ansalon . 
 The Companions soon discover that the Seekers are searching for a Blue Crystal Staff . When Goldmoon , a <unk> in the same pub as the companions , heals a Seeker with her staff , the Companions are confronted by Highlord forces and are forced to flee the village . 
 The next day , the group is attacked by Draconians , reptilian creatures that serve as foot soldiers in the <unk> ' army . The Companions are driven into the woods , where they are attacked by undead and rescued by a centaur . The group is charged to go to the ruined city of Xak Tsaroth to retrieve the Disks of Mishakal , an object containing the teaching of the True Gods that will be instrumental for the restoration of the faith in the True Gods . 
 After a lengthy trip on the backs of <unk> and several encounters with the forces of darkness , the companions enter Xak Tsaroth and meet some gully dwarves , diminutive and stupid creatures . One of the dwarves , <unk> , leads them to the dragon Khisanth , who is killed by the holy power of the Blue Crystal Staff . When this happens , Goldmoon is consumed by its flame and presumed dead . However , they later find her resting at the foot of a statue of Mishakal ( the Goddess of Healing ) , which now bears the Blue Crystal Staff , and Goldmoon is blessed with true clerical powers . The Companions leave with the Disks of Mishakal . <unk> gives an ancient spellbook ( formerly belonging to the archmage <unk> ) to Raistlin . When they return to the village to regroup they find it occupied . The Companions are captured by the Highlord armies and are chained in a slave caravan along with an elf named Gilthanas , the son of the leader of the elven nation of <unk> . 
 The group is freed by Gilthanas 's brother , <unk> . They flee to <unk> , where Tanis is reunited with his childhood sweetheart , the exceptionally beautiful elven princess , Laurana Kanan . Laurana is still in love with Tanis and wants to marry him , but Tanis breaks her heart by telling her he is now in love with Kitiara . 
 The Elven King <unk> convinces the Companions to lead an attack on the slave @-@ mine Pax Tharkas to free the slaves from the control of the local Dragon Highlord . The Companions journey through a secret passage underground to Pax Tharkas and devise a plan to free the slaves . Laurana , desperate to win Tanis back , secretly follows the Companions . When Tanis discovers Laurana has followed them he angrily rebukes her for acting like a spoiled child . Laurana resolves to try to prove she is more than that . 
 The Companions infiltrate Pax Tharkas and Goldmoon heals <unk> , a dying Seeker , and converts him to the faith of the true gods . He becomes the first cleric of Paladine , and Goldmoon turns the Disks of Mishakal over to him . The Companions help the slaves break free . Laurana proves her worth in the battle by fighting bravely . The Dragon Highlord Verminaard and his red dragon Ember arrive to crush the revolt , but the insane red dragon <unk> kills Ember , while the Companions cut down Verminaard . A mysterious figure called " The Everman ” later appears at a celebration following the freeing of the slaves , but flees after being spotted . 
 According to Tracy Hickman , " The restoration of truth and faith are ... to a great extent , the theme of this first book in the series . " 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Heroes of the Lance = = = 
 Tanis Half @-@ Elven , a half @-@ elf and de facto leader of the companions , torn between the human woman Kitiara and the <unk> Laurana 
 Sturm Brightblade , a squire to the Knights of <unk> and deeply honorable man 
 Goldmoon , daughter of the chief of the Que @-@ Shu tribe , bearer of the Blue Crystal Staff , and first true cleric of good since the Cataclysm 
 Riverwind , bodyguard and romantic interest of Goldmoon . Outcast of their tribe 
 Caramon Majere , a huge , muscular , sometimes slow @-@ thinking warrior , with a deep affection for his brother , Raistlin , and a romantic interest in Tika 
 Raistlin Majere , a powerful , sarcastic , cynical , frail mage of the Red Robes , and the twin brother of Caramon 
 Flint Fireforge , a gruff old dwarf and old friend of Tanis 
 Tasslehoff Burrfoot , a happy @-@ go @-@ lucky , not @-@ so @-@ innocent , and genial kender 
 = = = Other major characters = = = 
 Laurana Kanan , an elven princess and romantic interest of Tanis 
 Gilthanas Kanan , elven prince and brother of Laurana , dislikes Tanis 
 <unk> , a muddled old wizard 
 Tika Waylan , a red @-@ haired barmaid turned warrior and romantic interest of Caramon 
 <unk> , leader of the refugees who becomes the first cleric of the good god , Paladine 
 Dragon Highlord Verminaard , the leader of the Red <unk> and a priest of the evil goddess , Takhisis 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Comic = = = 
 Devil 's Due Publishing adapted the novel into comic format . A trade paperback collecting the issues was released in May 2006 . It was ranked 33 in the top 100 graphic novels in sales with an estimated preorder quantity of 2 @,@ 634 . 
 = = = Movie = = = 
 A movie adaptation of the novel was released on 15 January 2008 . It is the first direct @-@ to @-@ video movie release based on the Dragonlance campaign setting of Dungeons & Dragons . The screenplay adaptation was completed by George <unk> , with creative assistance by Weis and Hickman , and Will <unk> directed . The movie used both 2D and 3D animation , and was made by Paramount Pictures . 
 = = Importance to Dragonlance = = 
 The storyline of the original Dragonlance series had been plotted and outlined before either the novel trilogy or the games were written . Dragons of Autumn Twilight was the first novel of the Dragonlance series . It was based upon a Dungeons & Dragons session played by the authors with some of their friends , some of whom later became Dragonlance writers . The novel was written after the completion of the first Dragonlance game modules . Weis and Hickman felt this was constraining and made the novel feel too episodic , so they reversed the process for the next books and completed the novels before the related modules were written . 
 This book sets up many of the most important characters , the group known as the Heroes of the Lance . According to the Dragonlance Nexus fansite , the Chronicles Trilogy sets the foundation for the rest of the novels . A Wizards of the Coast interview stated that Hickman and Weis make a good team because Hickman is better at writing about good characters , and Weis is better at writing about dark characters , evidenced by her love of Raistlin . Dragons of Autumn Twilight was the debut novel for both Weis and Hickman . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dave Langford reviewed Dragons of Autumn Twilight for White Dwarf , suggesting that it was " inspired by an AD & D campaign full of chunks ripped bleeding from Tolkien " and complained about the " Deadly predictable questing , with stock D & D characters in familiar encounters " and ultimately reported that he " Couldn 't finish this one . " 
 Jason Heller , of The A.V. Club , stated a positive review of Dragonlance Chronicles , remarking that Dragons of Autumn Twilight is still widely read , although he noted the clichés of the series : " In Dragons Of Autumn Twilight , the adventurers meet up in a tavern — even if it is a tavern that ’ s nestled in the branches of a giant tree , something my 12 @-@ year @-@ old self thought was super cool . ( My 42 @-@ year @-@ old self agrees , although my days of getting drunk way up high up in a tree are starting to wind down . ) " . 
 = = Release details = = 
 Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman ; poetry by Michael Williams ; interior art by Denis Beauvais ( 1984 ) . Dragons of Autumn Twilight ( Paperback ) . Lake Geneva , WI ; New York , United States : TSR . ISBN 0 @-@ 88038 @-@ 173 @-@ 6 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Weis , Margaret ; Hickman , Tracy ( 1986 ) . Dragons of Autumn Twilight ( Paperback ) . Harmondsworth , United Kingdom : Penguin . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Weis , Margaret ; Hickman , Tracy ( March 1990 ) . Dragons of Autumn Twilight ( Paperback ) . Lake Geneva , WI ; New York : TSR . ISBN 0 @-@ 88038 @-@ 173 @-@ 6 . 
 Dragons of Autumn Twilight ( Library Binding ) . Topeka , Kansas : Rebound by Sagebrush . October 1999 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman ; poetry by Michael Williams ; cover art by Matt <unk> ; interior art by Valerie <unk> ( 1 February 2000 ) . Dragons of Autumn Twilight ( Paperback ) . United States : Wizards of the Coast . ISBN 0 @-@ 7869 @-@ 1574 @-@ 9 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Weis , Margaret ; Hickman , Tracy ( 1 April 2003 ) . Dragons of Autumn Twilight ( Hardcover ) . Lake Geneva , WI : Wizards of the Coast . ISBN 0 @-@ 7869 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Weis , Margaret ; Hickman , Tracy ( 5 May 2006 ) . Dragons of Autumn Twilight ( Paperback ) . Chicago ; London : Devil 's Due Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 50 @-@ 9 . 
 writers , Margaret Weis , Tracy Hickman , Andrew <unk> ; artists , Steve Kurth , Stefano Raffaele ( 26 July 2006 ) . Dragons of Autumn Twilight ( Hardcover ) . Chicago ; London : Devil 's Due Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 70 @-@ 3 . 
 = = = Other Books = = = 
 Weis , Margaret ; Hickman , Tracy ( 2000 ) . The Annotated Chronicles . Renton , WA : Wizards of the Coast . ISBN 0 @-@ 7869 @-@ 1609 @-@ 5 . 
 = History of Gaza = 
 The known history of Gaza spans 4 @,@ 000 years . Gaza was ruled , destroyed and repopulated by various dynasties , empires , and peoples . Originally a Canaanite settlement , it came under the control of the ancient Egyptians for roughly 350 years before being conquered and becoming one of the Philistines ' principal cities . Gaza fell to the Israelites in about 1000 BCE but became part of the Assyrian Empire around 730 BCE . Alexander the Great besieged and captured the city in 332 BCE . Most of the inhabitants were killed during the assault , and the city , which became a center for Hellenistic learning and philosophy , was resettled by nearby Bedouins . The area changed hands regularly between two Greek successor @-@ kingdoms , the Seleucids of Syria and the Ptolemies of Egypt , until it was besieged and taken by the <unk> in 96 BCE . 
 Gaza was rebuilt by Roman General Pompey Magnus , and granted to Herod the Great thirty years later . Throughout the Roman period , Gaza maintained its prosperity , receiving grants from several different emperors . A 500 @-@ member senate governed the city , which had a diverse population of Greeks , Romans , Jews , Egyptians , Persians and Nabateans . Conversion to Christianity in the city was spearheaded and completed under Saint Porphyrius , who destroyed its eight pagan temples between 396 and 420 CE . Gaza was conquered by the Muslim general Amr ibn al- ' As in 637 CE , and most Gazans adopted Islam during early Muslim rule . Thereafter , the city went through periods of prosperity and decline . The Crusaders wrested control of Gaza from the Fatimids in 1100 , but were driven out by Saladin . Gaza was in Mamluk hands by the late 13th @-@ century , and became the capital of a province that stretched from the Sinai Peninsula to Caesarea . It witnessed a golden age under the Ottoman @-@ appointed Ridwan dynasty in the 16th century . 
 Gaza experienced destructive earthquakes in 1903 and 1914 . In 1917 , during World War I , British forces captured the city . Gaza grew significantly in the first half of the 20th @-@ century under Mandatory rule . The population of the city swelled as a result of the Palestinian exodus during the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War . Gaza came under Egyptian rule until it was occupied by Israel during the 1967 Six Day War . Gaza became a center of political resistance during the First Intifada , and under the Oslo Accords of 1993 , it was assigned to be under the direct control of the newly established Palestinian Authority . Israel unilaterally withdrew from Gaza in 2005 . By 2007 , Hamas emerged both as the victor in Palestinian elections and in factional fighting with rival Fatah in the city and in the wider Gaza Strip and has since been the sole governing authority . Israel subsequently blockaded the Strip and launched assaults against it in 2008 – 2009 , 2012 and 2014 , as a response to rocket attacks . 
 = = Bronze Age = = 
 Settlement in the region of Gaza dates back to 3300 – 3000 BCE at Tell as @-@ Sakan , a site located south of the present @-@ day city , which began as an Ancient Egyptian fortress built in Canaanite territory . Tell as @-@ Sakan prospered as Canaanite cities began to trade agricultural goods with the Egyptians . However , when Egypt 's economic interests shifted to the cedar trade with Lebanon , Gaza 's role was reduced to that of a port for ships carrying goods and it declined economically . The site was virtually abandoned and remained so throughout the Early Bronze Age II . 
 Gaza enjoyed demographic and economic growth again when the local Canaanite population began to resettle Tell as @-@ Sakan around 2500 , but in 2250 , the area experienced a total collapse of civilization and all of the cities in the Gaza region were abandoned by the 23rd century BCE . In its place emerged semi @-@ nomadic cultures with pastoral camps made up of rustic family dwellings which continued to exist throughout the Early Bronze Age IV . An urban center known as Tell al @-@ Ajjul began to arise inland along the Wadi Ghazza riverbed . During the Middle Bronze Age , Tell as @-@ Sakan was the southernmost locality in Canaanite territory , serving as a fort , and by 1650 BCE , while Egypt was occupied by the Canaanite Hyksos , a second city developed on the ruins of the first Tell as @-@ Sakan . This city was destroyed about a century later , when the Hyksos were routed from Egypt . Egypt settled Gaza once again and Tell al @-@ Ajjul rose for the third time in the 15th century BCE . The city finally ceased to exist in the 14th century , at the end of the Bronze Age . 
 = = Ancient period = = 
 A city which would become present @-@ day Gaza began to develop on the site of Tell al @-@ Ajjul . This city served as Egypt ’ s administrative capital in Canaan , and was the residence of the Egyptian governor of the region . A caravan point of strategic importance from the earliest times , it was constantly involved in the wars between Egypt and Syria and the Mesopotamian powers , and appeared frequently in Egyptian and Assyrian records . Under Tuthmosis III , it is mentioned on the Syrian @-@ Egyptian caravan route and in the Amarna letters as " <unk> " . Gaza was in Egyptian hands for 350 years , until it was settled by the Philistines , a seafaring people with cultural links to the Aegean , in the 12th century BCE . It then became a part of the pentapolis ; a league of the Philistines ' five most important city @-@ states . 
 The Hebrew Bible mentions the <unk> occupying an area that extended as far as Gaza , and that these people were dispossessed by the <unk> from the island of <unk> ( modern Crete ) . Some scholars speculate that the Philistines were descendants of the <unk> . 
 Gaza is also mentioned in the Hebrew Bible as the place where Samson was imprisoned and met his death . The prophets Amos and Zephaniah are believed to have prophesied that Gaza would be deserted . According to biblical accounts , Gaza fell to Israelite rule , from the reign of King David in the early 11th century BCE . When the United Monarchy split in about 930 BCE , Gaza became a part of the northern Kingdom of Israel . When the Kingdom of Israel fell to the Assyrians under Tiglath @-@ Pileser III and Sargon II around 730 BCE , Gaza came under Assyrian rule . In the 7th century , it again came under Egyptian control , but during the Persian period ( 6th @-@ 4th centuries BCE ) it enjoyed a certain independence and flourished . In 529 BCE , Cambyses I unsuccessfully attacked Gaza and later , around 520 BCE , the Greeks established a trading post in Gaza . The first coins were minted on the Athens model around 380 BCE . 
 Alexander the Great besieged Gaza — the last city to resist his conquest on his path to Egypt — for five months , finally capturing it 332 BCE . Led by a eunuch named <unk> and defended by Arab mercenaries , Gaza withstood the siege for two months , until it was overcome by storm . The defenders , mostly local elements , fought to the death and the women and children were taken as captives . The city was resettled by neighboring Bedouins , who were sympathetic to Alexander 's rule . He then organized the city into a polis or " city @-@ state " and Greek culture took root in Gaza which gained a reputation as a flourishing center of Hellenic learning and philosophy . Belonging at first to the Ptolemaic kingdom , it passed after 200 BCE to the Seleucids . 
 In the 1st century BCE and the first half of that century , it was the Mediterranean port of the Nabateans , whose caravans arrived there from Petra or from <unk> on the Red Sea . In 96 BCE , the Hasmonean king Alexander Jannaeus besieged the city for a year . The inhabitants , who had hoped for help from the Nabatean king Aretas II , were killed and their city destroyed by Jannaeus when Aretas did not come to their aid . 
 = = Classical antiquity = = 
 = = = Roman rule = = = 
 Gaza was rebuilt by consul Aulus Gabinius after it was incorporated into the Roman Empire in 63 BCE , under the command of Pompey Magnus . Roman rule brought six centuries of relative peace and prosperity to the city — which became a busy port and locus of trade between the Middle East and Africa . 
 In the Acts of the Apostles , Gaza is mentioned as being on the desert route from Jerusalem to Ethiopia . The Christian gospel was explained to an Ethiopian eunuch along this road by Philip the Evangelist , and he was baptised in some nearby water . 
 Gaza was granted to Herod the Great by Roman emperor Augustus in 30 BCE , where it formed a separate unit within his kingdom ; and <unk> , the governor of Idumea , was in charge of the city 's affairs . On the division of Herod 's kingdom , it was placed under the proconsul of Syria . After Herod 's death in 4 BCE , Augustus annexed it to the Province of Syria . In 66 CE , Gaza was burned down by Jews during their rebellion against the Romans . However , it remained an important city ; even more so after the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus the following year . Titus passed through Gaza on his march toward to Jerusalem , and again in his return . The establishment of the Roman province of Arabia <unk> restored trade links with Petra and <unk> . 
 Throughout the Roman period , Gaza was a prosperous city and received grants and attention from several emperors . A 500 @-@ member senate governed Gaza , and a diverse variety of Philistines , Greeks , Romans , Canaanites , Phoenicians , Jews , Egyptians , Persians and Bedouin populated the city . Gaza 's mint stamped out coins adorned with the busts of gods and emperors . During his visit in 130 CE , Emperor Hadrian , who favored Gaza , personally inaugurated wrestling , boxing and oratorical competitions in Gaza 's new stadium , which soon became known from Alexandria to Damascus . The city was adorned with many pagan temples — the main cult being that of Marnas . Other temples were dedicated to Zeus , Helios , Aphrodite , Apollo , Athena and the local deity Tyche . 
 The spread of Christianity in Gaza was initiated by Philip the Arab around 250 CE ; first in the port of Maiuma , but later into the city . The religion faced obstacles as it spread through the inland population because pagan worship was strong . In 299 , an unverified number of local Christians who assembled in Gaza to hear the Scriptures read were seized and mutilated by the Romans . Also , its Christians were harshly repressed during the Diocletianic Persecution in 303 . The first bishop of Gaza was Philemon , believed to have been one of the 72 disciples , but the first cleric was Saint Silvanus who , during the persecution by <unk> in 310 , was arrested along with about 30 other Christians , and condemned to death . 
 = = = Byzantine rule and advent of Christianity = = = 
 On the breakup of the Roman Empire , Gaza became part of the Byzantine Empire as part of the Palaestina Prima province . The official recognition of Christianity by Constantine I did not increase sympathy of the religion in Gaza . Although Gaza was represented by Bishop <unk> in the First Council of Nicaea in 325 , the vast majority of its inhabitants continued to worship the native gods . As the Roman Empire was crumbling at this time , Gaza remained unaffected . At this time , the inhabitants of Maiuma converted to Christianity en masse . Constantine II decided to separate it from pagan Gaza in 331 , giving Maiuma its own episcopal see . Julian reversed the process during his reign in the latter half of the 4th century . Although Maiuma had its own bishop , clergy , and diocesan territory , it shared its magistrates and administration with Gaza . Upon Julian 's death , Maiuma 's independence was restored and the rivalry between it and Gaza intensified . 
 During most of the 4th century , the Christian community was small , poor , and carried no influence in the city . The church was insignificant and its members were not allowed to hold political office . However , conversion to Christianity in Gaza was spearheaded under Saint Porphyrius between 396 and 420 . In 402 , after obtaining a decree from the emperor , he ordered all eight of the city 's pagan temples destroyed and idol worship was forbidden by the Byzantine government . Paganism continued and Christians were still persecuted in the city , forcing St. Porphyrius to undertake more measures . As a result of his persuasion , Empress Aelia Eudocia commissioned the construction of a church atop the ruins of the Temple of Marnas in 406 . ( Note that according to MacMullen it is likely that Porphyrius did not even exist . ) Persecution against Christians did not cease , but it was less harsh and frequent than previously . A large 6th century synagogue with a mosaic tile floor depicting King David was discovered in Gaza . An inscription states that the floor was donated in 508 – 509 CE by two merchant brothers . Around 540 , Gaza became the starting point for pilgrimages to the Sinai Peninsula . It was an important city in the early Christian world and many famous scholars taught at its academy of rhetoric , including 6th @-@ century scholar Procopius of Gaza . The celebrated Church of Saint Sergius was built in this century . 
 Depicted in the mosaic Map of Madaba of 600 , Gaza was the most important political and commercial center on the southern coast of Palestine . Its northern municipal border was marked by Wadi al @-@ Hesi , just before Ashkelon , and its southern boundary is unknown , but Gaza 's jurisdiction did not reach Raphia . The towns of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> were included in Gaza 's territories . Its large representation , approximately half of which is preserved , cannot be easily explained , mainly because only small tentative excavations have been made there and because Byzantine Gaza is covered by the still inhabited Old City . 
 = = Arab caliphates = = 
 = = = Rashidun rule = = = 
 There were already converts to Islam among the city 's Greek @-@ speaking Christian population before Gaza 's capitulation to the Muslims . At the near end of the Byzantine era , Gaza had become the home of an increasingly influential group of Arab traders from Mecca , including Umar ibn al @-@ Khattab , who later became the second ruler of the Islamic Caliphate . Muhammad visited the city more than once before being a prophet of Islam . 
 In 634 , Gaza was besieged by the Rashidun army under general ' Amr ibn al- ' As , with assistance from Khalid ibn al @-@ Walid , following the Battle of Ajnadayn between the Byzantine Empire and the Rashidun Caliphate in central Palestine . The Muslims ' victory at Ajnadayn gave them control over much of Palestine 's countryside , but not the major cities with garrisons such as Gaza . With Umar succeeding Abu Bakr as caliph ( head of the Caliphate ) , the Rashidun forces began to make stronger efforts at conquering Byzantine territory . During the three @-@ year siege of Gaza , the city 's Jewish community fought alongside the Byzantine garrison . In the summer of 637 , Amr 's forces broke the siege and captured Gaza , killing its Byzantine garrison , but not attacking its inhabitants . Amr 's victory is attributed to a combination of Arab strategy , Byzantine weakness , and the influence of Gaza ’ s Arab residents . Believed to be the site where Muhammad 's great grandfather Hashim ibn Abd Manaf — who also lived as a merchant in Gaza — was buried , the city was not destroyed by the victorious Arab army . 
 The arrival of the Muslim Arabs brought drastic changes to Gaza ; its churches were transformed into mosques , including the Cathedral of John the Baptist ( previously the Temple of Marnas ) which became the Great Mosque of Gaza . Gaza 's population adopted Islam as their religion relatively quick in contrast with the city 's countryside . Eventually , Arabic became the official language . The Christian population was reduced to an insignificant minority and the Samaritan residents deposited their property with their high priest and fled the city east upon the Muslim conquest . Gaza was placed under the administration of Jund Filastin ( " District of Palestine " ) of Bilad al @-@ Sham province during Rashidun rule , and continued to be a part of the district under the successive caliphates of the Umayyads and Abbasids . 
 = = = Arab dynasties = = = 
 Under the Umayyads Gaza served as a minor administrative center . In 672 an earthquake struck the city but there are few details of its effects . Under the caliph @-@ appointed governors , Christians and Jews were taxed , though their worship and trade continued , as noted in the writings of the bishop Saint Willibald , who visited the city in 723 . The year 750 saw the end of Umayyad rule in Palestine and the arrival of the Abbasids , with Gaza becoming a center for the writing of Islamic law . In 767 , Muhammad ibn Idris ash @-@ Shafi 'i was born in Gaza and lived his early childhood there ; al @-@ Shafi 'i founded one of the prominent <unk> ( schools of law ) of Sunni Islam , named Shafi 'i after him . 
 In 796 the city was laid waste during a civil war by the Arab tribes of the area . Gaza apparently recovered by the 9th century according to Persian geographer Istakhri who wrote that merchants grew rich there " for this place was a great market for the people of the Hejaz . " A Christian writer , writing in 867 , described it as " rich in all things " . Gaza 's port , however , occasionally succumbed to neglect under Arab rule and an overall decline in commerce followed because of infighting among Palestine 's rulers and Bedouin bandits who disrupted overland trade routes towards the city . 
 From 868 to 905 the Tulunids ruled Gaza , and around 909 , the influence of the Fatimids from Egypt started to grow , leading to a slow decline of the city . The orange was introduced to the area , arriving from India in 943 . In 977 , the Fatimids established an agreement with the Seljuk Turks , whereby the Fatimids would control Gaza and the land south of it , including Egypt . By the 985 CE , while under Fatimid rule , the Arab geographer al @-@ Muqaddasi described Gaza as " a large town lying on the <unk> to Egypt on the border of the desert . There is here a beautiful mosque , also to be seen is the monument for the Khalif Umar . " The Arabic language poet , Abu Ishaq Ibrahim al @-@ Ghazzi was born in the city in 1049 . 
 = = Crusader and Ayyubid rule = = 
 The Crusaders wrested control of Gaza from the Fatimids in 1100 . According to the chronicler William of Tyre , the Crusaders found it uninhabited and in ruins . Unable to totally refortify the hilltop on which Gaza was built , due to a lack of resources , King Baldwin III built a small castle there in 1149 . The possession of Gaza completed the military encirclement of the Fatimid @-@ held city of Ascalon to the north . After the castle 's construction , Baldwin granted it and the surrounding region to the Knights Templar . He also had the Great Mosque converted into the Cathedral of Saint John . 
 In 1154 , the Arab traveler al @-@ Idrisi wrote Gaza " is today very populous and in the hands of the Crusaders . " William of Tyre confirms that in 1170 , a civilian population was persuaded to occupy the area outside the castle and establish feeble fortifications and gates surrounding the community . That same year , King Amalric I of Jerusalem withdrew Gaza 's Templars to assist him against an Egypt @-@ based Ayyubid force led by Saladin at nearby Darum . However , Saladin evaded the Crusader force and assaulted Gaza instead , destroying the town built outside the castle 's walls and killing its inhabitants after they were refused refuge in the castle , managed by Miles of Plancy at the time . Seven years later , the Templars prepared for another defense of Gaza against Saladin , but this time his forces fell on Ascalon . In 1187 , following Ascalon 's capitulation , the Templars surrendered Gaza in return for the release of their master Gerard of Ridefort . Saladin then ordered the destruction of the city 's fortifications in 1191 . A year later , after recapturing it , Richard the Lionheart apparently refortified the city , but the walls were dismantled as a result of the Treaty of Ramla agreed upon months later in 1193 . 
 According to geographer Abu al @-@ Fida , Gaza was a medium @-@ sized city , possessing gardens and a seashore in the early 13th century . The Ayyubids constructed the Shuja 'iyya neighborhood — the first extension of Gaza beyond the Old City . 
 = = Mamluk rule = = 
 Ayyubid rule virtually ended in 1260 , after the Mongols under Hulagu Khan completely destroyed Gaza — Hulagu 's southernmost point of conquest . Hulagu left his army in Gaza after being recalled due to the death of the Mongol emperor , and Mamluk general az @-@ Zahir Baybars subsequently drove the Mongols out of the city and again defeated them at Baysan in the Galilee . He was proclaimed sultan of Egypt on his way back from the battlefield after the assassination of Sultan Qutuz . Baibars passed through Gaza six times during his expeditions against the remnants of the Crusader states and the Mongols between 1263 and 1269 . Mamluk domination started in 1277 , with Gaza initially being a small village in the territory of Ramla . In 1279 , Sultan al @-@ Mansur Qalawun encamped in Gaza for fifty days while on a march against the Mongols . 
 In 1293 , Qalawun 's son an @-@ Nasir Muhammad instituted Gaza as the capital of the province that bore its name , Mamlakat Ghazzah ( the Governorship of Gaza ) . This province covered the coastal plain from Rafah in the south to just north of Caesarea , extending in the east to the western slopes of Samaria and the Hebron Hills ; its major towns were Qaqun , Ludd , and Ramla . In 1294 , an earthquake devastated Gaza , and five years later the Mongols again destroyed all that was restored by the Mamluks . That same year , Gaza was the center of a conspiracy against Sultan al @-@ Adil Kitbugha , but the plot was detected and crushed before being carried out . 
 The Syrian geographer al @-@ Dimashqi described Gaza in 1300 as " so rich in trees it looks like a cloth of brocade spread out upon the land " . He accounted to Gaza the cities and towns of Ascalon , Jaffa , Caesarea , Arsuf , Deir al @-@ Balah , al @-@ Arish ( in north @-@ central the Sinai ) , Bayt Jibrin , <unk> , Hebron and Jerusalem — all of which had their own sub @-@ governors . Emir Baibars al @-@ Ala 'i ruled Mamlakat Ghazzah between 1307 @-@ 1310 , during the second reign of an @-@ Nasir Muhammad until the latter was briefly overthrown by Baybars al @-@ <unk> . Gaza was one of the places that returned to the allegiance of the exiled sultan ; in 1310 , an @-@ Nasir Muhammad defeated Sultan Baybars in Gaza , forcing the latter to surrender his throne to him . Baybars was imprisoned in the city . 
 Emir Sanjar al @-@ Jawli acquired the governorship of Gaza and central Palestine in 1311 . He highly favored Gaza and transformed it into a flourishing city , having built in it a horse @-@ race course , a madrasa ( college ) , a mosque , a khan ( caravansary ) , a <unk> ( hospital ) , and a castle . In late 1332 , coinciding with the appointment of Emir <unk> al @-@ <unk> as governor , some of the provincial privileges of Gaza , such as the governor 's direct subordination to the sultan in Cairo , were removed by an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's decree . From then , and until 1341 when Sanjar al @-@ Jawli served a second term as governor , Gaza became subordinate to the na 'ib as @-@ saltana ( viceroy ) of Syria , Emir <unk> al @-@ <unk> . 
 In 1348 the Bubonic Plague spread to the city , killing the majority of its inhabitants , and in 1352 , Gaza suffered a destructive flood — which was rare in that arid part of Palestine . However , by 1355 , the Berber traveler Ibn Batutta visited the city and noted that it was " large and populous , and has many mosques . But there were no walls round it . There was here of old a fine Jami ' Mosque ( the Great Mosque ) , but the one present [ ly ] used was built by Amir Jawli [ Sanjar al @-@ Jawli ] . " 
 In the early 1380s , the governor of Gaza , <unk> <unk> , plotted to commit treason against Sultan az @-@ Zahir Barquq . The plot was detected and <unk> was exiled to al @-@ Karak , and replaced by Husam al @-@ Din ibn <unk> . Soon after , the city fell into the hands of Emir Yalbugha an @-@ Nasiri who revolted against Barquq . Gaza was retaken without violence , and Ibn <unk> met Yalbugha at its gates with gifts and proposals of peace . The unseated Barquq regained his throne in 1389 , and retook Gaza the next year . In 1401 a swarm of locusts destroyed Gaza 's crops . A battle between the rival Mamluk emirs <unk> and <unk> <unk> occurred in Gaza ; <unk> had failed in usurping the Mamluk throne and fled to Gaza where he made his unsuccessful last stand . Between 1428 and 1433 , Gaza was governed by Emir Sayf ad @-@ Din Inal , who would later become sultan in 1453 . During his sultanate , in 1455 , Inal 's <unk> ( executive secretary ) had the Madrasa of <unk> built in the Shuja 'iyya neighborhood . 
 = = Ottoman era = = 
 = = = Early Ottoman rule and the Ridwan dynasty = = = 
 In 1516 , Gaza — by now a small town with an inactive port , ruined buildings and reduced trade — was incorporated into the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman army quickly and efficiently crushed a small @-@ scale uprising , and the local population generally welcomed them as fellow Sunni Muslims . Shortly after Palestine 's quick submission to the Ottomans , it was divided into six districts , including the Gaza Sanjak ( District of Gaza ) which stretched from Jaffa in the north to Bayt Jibrin in the east and Rafah in the south . The sanjak was a part of the larger Damascus Eyalet or the " Province of Damascus " . 
 An early governor of Gaza Sanjak was Kara Shahin Mustafa , a former <unk> ( member of a military corps ) who rose to become an elite military officer and state minister and eventually a vizier and trusted aide of Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent . He received the governorship of Gaza apparently as an interim appointment before he was appointed Governor of Egypt , although he was deposed three years later by Sultan Selim II . Mustafa died a short while later and his son Ridwan Pasha , who was the treasurer of Yemen , became governor shortly before Mustafa 's death . The Ridwan dynasty , which would rule Gaza for over a century , derives its name from Ridwan Pasha . He was later appointed Governor of Yemen , but was deposed two years later and returned to the governorship of Gaza . After becoming governor of Ethiopia , Basra , and Diyarbakir in that order , he successfully led an Ottoman contingent against Safavid Persia in 1579 . The sultan then awarded him the province of Anatolia where he died in 1585 . 
 Although no explanation is provided in the biographies of the Ridwan family , it is evident they chose Gaza as their home and the place for their castle . Ridwan Pasha 's son Ahmad Pasha succeeded him and governed Gaza for thirty years , sometimes incorporating the sanjaks of Nablus and Jerusalem . He became Governor of Damascus Eyalet in 1601 after bribing several viziers and bureaucrats in Istanbul and died in 1607 . Next in line was Hasan Pasha ibn Ahmad who became known ' Arab Hasan ( " Hasan the Bedouin " ) because by then , the Ridwans were identified with the control and knowledge of the Bedouin . He successfully led his pro @-@ Ottoman Bedouin troops against the army of the rebel Fakhr ad @-@ Din in a series of battles . He was later appointed Governor of Tripoli in Lebanon , but he was deposed in 1644 . ' Arab Hasan had many wives and concubines and 85 children . He led the Ridwans successfully militarily , however , he burdened the dynasty with heavy debt . 
 <unk> Hasan 's son Husayn Pasha was governor of Nablus and Jerusalem , and inherited the impoverished governorship of Gaza when his father died . He borrowed a large sum from the French in order to meet the heavy taxes imposed on the city by Hassan Aga , governor Sidon Eyalet — the province that Gaza briefly belonged to . Husayn 's period in office was peaceful and prosperous for the city , and he gained a good reputation for considerably reducing the strife between the nearby Bedouins and the settled population . He appointed his son Ibrahim to be governor of the Gaza and Jerusalem sanjaks , but when Ibrahim was killed during an expedition against the Druze in Mount Lebanon in 1660 , Husayn resumed control of Gaza . That year , Gaza was designated the capital of Palestine , indicating the city 's rapid recovery . The Great Mosque was restored , and six other mosques constructed , while Turkish baths and market stalls proliferated . Anonymous petitions from Damascus sent to Istanbul complaining about Husayn 's failure to protect the Hajj caravan and his alleged pro @-@ Christian tendencies , however , served as an excuse for the Ottoman government to depose him . He was soon imprisoned in Damascus and his assets confiscated by provincial authorities . He was later sent to Istanbul and died in prison there in 1663 . 
 Husayn 's brother Musa Pasha then governed Gaza into the early 1670s , implementing an anti @-@ French and anti @-@ Christian regime to appease the Ottoman government . Soon after his reign ended , Ottomans officials were appointed to govern . The Ridwan period is considered Gaza 's last golden age during Ottoman rule and the city gradually dwindled after they were removed from office . 
 In 1723 , the Ottomans appointed Salih Pasha Tuqan of the Nablus @-@ based Tuqan family to govern Gaza and two other sanjaks until his death in 1742 . In the 1750s , a local Bedouin tribes disposed of the plunder from a Meccan caravan , consisting of 13 @,@ 000 camel @-@ loads of goods , into Gaza 's markets , boosting the city 's wealth . The attack on the caravan was a reprisal to the Ottomans who had recently replaced the governor of Damascus . In 1763 , there was a revolt in Gaza against the Ottomans . Then , in November 1770 , Ali Bey al @-@ Kabir , the rebellious Mamluk sultan of Egypt , sent troops to Gaza to aid Zahir al @-@ Umar in the Galilee , helping him check the power of the Ottomans in the Levant . Gaza was briefly occupied by the French Army under Napoleon Bonaparte , who referred to it as " the outpost of Africa , the door to Asia " , in 1799 . Most of its inhabitants fled as a result . His forces easily razed the remains of the city walls ( which had not been rebuilt since their destruction by Saladin ) , but abandoned the city after their failed siege of Acre that same year . The duration of French influence in Gaza was too short to have a palpable effect . 
 = = = Egyptian rule and Ottoman revival = = = 
 Gaza was culturally dominated by neighboring Egypt from the early 19th century ; Muhammad Ali of Egypt conquered it and most of Palestine in 1832 . Strangely , in 1833 , Muhammad Ali instructed his son Ibrahim Pasha not to purchase Gaza 's cotton harvest ( cotton production was Ali 's main source of wealth and Egypt 's production was low that year ) , instead allowing its residents to dispose of it how they wished . 
 American scholar Edward Robinson visited Gaza in 1838 , describing it as a " thickly populated " town larger than Jerusalem , with its Old City lying upon a hilltop , while its suburbs laid on the nearby plain . He further stated that its soil was rich and supported groves of " delicious and abundant " apricots and mulberries . Although Gaza 's port was by then inactive , it benefited from trade and commerce because of its position on the caravan route between Egypt and Syria , as well as from the production of soap and cotton for trade with the Bedouin . The governor of Gaza at the time was Sheikh Sa 'id . Robinson noted that virtually all of Gaza 's vestiges of ancient history and antiquity had disappeared due to constant conflict and occupation . 
 The Bubonic Plague struck again in 1839 and the city stagnated , as it lacked political and economic stability . In 1840 , Egyptian and Ottoman troops battled outside of Gaza , with the Ottomans emerging victorious , effectively ending Egyptian rule over Palestine . The battles brought about more death and destruction , just barely after the city began to recover from the plague . The Church of Saint Porphyrius was renovated in 1856 , and in 1874 , French orientalist Charles Clermont @-@ <unk> visited Gaza , gathering and cataloging a sizable collection of Byzantine inscriptions and describing the city 's Great Mosque in detail . Sultan Abdul Hamid II had the wells of Gaza restored in 1893 . 
 Although the first municipal council of Gaza was formed in 1893 under the chairmanship of Ali Khalil Shawa , modern mayorship began in 1906 with his son Said al @-@ Shawa , who was appointed mayor by Ottoman authorities . Like other regions and cities in Palestine at the time , Gaza was economically and politically dominated by a number of powerful clans , particularly the Shawa , Husseini , and <unk> families . Two destructive earthquakes occurred in 1903 and 1914 . 
 When World War I erupted in 1917 , British forces were defeated by the Ottomans in the first and second Battle of Gaza . General Edmund Allenby , leading the Allied Forces , finally conquered Gaza in a third battle . 
 = = British rule = = 
 After the war , the League of Nations granted quasi @-@ colonial authority over former Ottoman territories to Great Britain and France ; Gaza was included in the British Mandate of Palestine . 
 The Jewish Quarter of Gaza was destroyed in the 1929 Palestine riots and most of Gaza 's fifty Jewish families fled the city . In the 1930s and 1940s , Gaza underwent major expansion , with new neighborhoods , such as Rimal and Zeitoun being built along the coast , and the southern and eastern plains . Areas damaged in the riots also went through reconstruction . Most of the funding for these developments came from international organizations and missionary groups . 
 = = Egyptian control = = 
 As a result of the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War , Egypt obtained control of Gaza and the surrounding area . Gaza 's growing population was augmented by an influx of refugees fleeing nearby cities , towns and villages that were captured by Israel . From 1948 through 1959 , Gaza was nominally under the jurisdiction of the All @-@ Palestine Government , an entity established by the Arab League during the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War , purportedly to provide a Palestinian government for Palestine . However , the members of the Government were removed to Cairo , and had little or no influence over events in Gaza . Egyptian occupation of the Gaza Strip was interrupted for four months during the 1956 Suez Crisis . 
 Upon the withdrawal of Israeli forces , Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser issued several reforms in Gaza , including the expansion of educational opportunities and civil services , provision of housing and the establishment of local security forces . As in Egypt , political activity in Gaza was severely curtailed , but the government @-@ sponsored Arab National Union was established in place of the All @-@ Palestine Government that Nasser abolished in 1959 , which gave the city 's citizens a greater voice in national politics . In 1959 , with the abolishment of the All @-@ Palestine Government , Gaza had officially become a part of the United Arab Republic , a union of Syria and Egypt , under the pan @-@ Arab policy of Nasser . In reality however , Gaza turned to be under direct Egyptian military governorship , which also continued upon the withdrawal of Syria from the UAR shortly afterwards . When the Palestinian Liberation Organization ( PLO ) was founded in 1964 , Nasser formally , but not practically , proclaimed that it would hold authority over Gaza , and a year later , conscription was instituted for the Palestinian Liberation Army . 
 = = Israeli control = = 
 Gaza was occupied by Israel in the 1967 Six Day War after the defeat of a coalition of Arab armies . Under Israeli occupation , existing structures of administration in Gaza would be maintained and administrative tasks would continue to be executed by Palestinian civil servants . Although this policy of " government but not administration " was declared , some felt that the Israeli military frequently interfered in the city 's administration in order to control local resistance to the occupation . In the immediate aftermath of the 1967 War , the military governor of Gaza threatened to dismiss the municipal council and cut off utility services if the local leadership was unable to force the residents of the city to turn in their weapons . This action was deemed excessive and was revoked by the Israeli military governor of the Gaza Strip , however . Organized armed struggle against Israel peaked between 1969 and 1971 , but was largely crushed by the Israel Defense Forces ( IDF ) under the command of Ariel Sharon . 
 In 1971 , the Israeli Army attempted to disperse the high concentration of Palestinian refugees in al @-@ Shati camp and developed new housing schemes that resulted in the establishment of the northern Sheikh Radwan district . The United Nations Relief and Works Agency ( UNRWA ) and the PLO were vociferous in their opposition to the move , claiming it was forced resettlement . In 1972 , Gaza 's military governor dismissed the city 's mayor , Rashad al @-@ Shawa , for refusing to annex al @-@ Shati camp to the municipality of Gaza . Since the 1970s , frequent conflicts erupted between Palestinians and the Israeli authorities in the city , leading to the First Intifada in 1987 . Gaza became a center of confrontation during this uprising , and consequently , economic conditions in the city worsened . 
 = = Palestinian control = = 
 = = = Palestinian Authority = = = 
 In September 1993 , leaders of Israel and the PLO signed the Oslo Accords calling for Palestinian administration of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho , which was implemented in May 1994 . Israeli forces withdrew from Gaza , leaving a new Palestinian National Authority ( PNA ) to administer and police the city . Led by Yasser Arafat , the PNA chose Gaza as its first provincial headquarters . The newly established Palestinian National Council held its inaugural session in Gaza in March 1996 . 
 In 2005 the Israeli cabinet withdrew its military and settlements from the Gaza Strip including the <unk> Route , a narrow strip adjacent to the border with Egypt , as part of its unilateral disengagement plan . Since the Palestinian organization , Hamas won a surprise victory in the Palestinian elections of 2006 , it has been engaged in a violent power struggle with rival Palestinian organization Fatah . 
 = = = Hamas administration = = = 
 In 2007 , Hamas overthrew Fatah forces in the Gaza Strip and Hamas members were dismissed from the PNA government in the West Bank in response . Currently , Hamas has de facto control of the city and Strip . Israel bombarded Gaza and nearby cities in the Gaza Strip in an air and ground assault codenamed " Operation Summer Rains " with the aim to end continued Qassam rocket attacks launched by Hamas and Islamic Jihad , and to secure the release of an Israeli soldier captured by Palestinian militants . 
 In March 2008 , a human rights coalition charged that the humanitarian situation in Gaza had reached its worst point since Israel occupied the territory in the 1967 Six @-@ Day War . On December 27 – 28 , 2008 Israel commenced air strikes against Gaza , codenamed " Operation Cast Lead " . Israel stated the strikes were in response to repetitive rocket and mortar attacks from the Gaza Strip into Israel since 2005 , while the Palestinians stated that they were responding to Israel 's military excursions and the blockade of the Gaza Strip . By January 3 , 2009 , Israeli tanks and infantry were invading Gaza with air and naval support . Thirteen Israelis , including ten soldiers were killed , while , according to Palestinian sources , a total of more than 1 @,@ 300 Palestinians were killed and 5 @,@ 500 injured . In addition 4 @,@ 000 buildings were destroyed and 20 @,@ 000 damaged throughout the Gaza Strip . Israel began an operation in Gaza on 14 November 2012 , lasting eight days . On 7 July 2014 , Hamas took responsibility for rocket attacks against Israel after several of their members where killed , leading to Israel launching an operation the next day . 
 = 2003 Chicago balcony collapse = 
 On June 29 , 2003 , the deadliest porch collapse in United States history occurred in Chicago . An overloaded balcony collapsed during a party in an apartment building , killing thirteen people and seriously injuring fifty @-@ seven others . The ensuing investigation was highly critical of the way the balcony was built , finding a large number of errors in its construction which ultimately resulted in the collapse . However , the building 's owner continues to blame overcrowding on the balcony for its complete structural failure , although he has taken steps to strengthen the balconies at his properties to prevent a recurrence of the disaster . The accident resulted in sweeping inspections of similar structures across Chicago , with 1 @,@ 260 cases being actioned by the city authorities . 
 = = Background = = 
 The porch was attached to the rear of an apartment building located in the Lincoln Park neighborhood of the city 's North Side . The second and third floors were being used as a party venue at the time of the collapse . Most of the party @-@ goers were in their early 20s , and knew each other from their days at New Trier High School and Lake Forest High School of Chicago 's North Shore suburbs . One witness says she warned other people in the building that the balconies were unsafe , but another later said that " it looked like it was newly built . It looked sturdy . " 
 = = Collapse = = 
 About fifty people were on the top wooden balcony at the time of the collapse . According to one witness , the sound of splintering wood was heard immediately before the collapse , which occurred shortly after midnight local time . The collapse started on the third floor , pulling down other balconies below . The first , second , and third floor balconies all collapsed into the basement below , carrying a total of approximately one hundred people among them . Several people were also trapped in a basement stairwell . Survivors helped to pull victims out from under the debris of the balconies , and rescue workers had to use chainsaws to free others . One of the survivors was a nurse , and had started a rescue effort before the emergency services arrived . The Chicago Fire Department supplied the main rescue effort . Eleven people were killed in the collapse , with two more subsequently dying while hospitalized ; fifty @-@ seven people were injured . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Initial inquiries suggested that the collapse was probably due to overcrowding . This was backed up by neighbors , who told authorities that the balconies were designed to hold only between twenty and thirty people . Chicago 's fire chief said that " It appears to be a case of too many people in a small space . " Norma Reyes , the city ’ s building commissioner , said " I have no indication of any substandard problems or insufficiencies with the porch at this time . The buildings are not made for large assemblies and parties . " 
 However , it was ultimately determined that poor construction was to blame . In 1998 , a permit was issued to owner LG Properties to install furnaces , air conditioners and water heaters in the building , but not to build the balcony . The balcony jutted out eleven feet from the building , one foot further than permitted by city codes , and had an area of 231 square feet ( 21 @.@ 5 m2 ) , 81 square feet ( 7 @.@ 5 m2 ) larger than permitted . The balcony also had inadequate supports , was floored with undersized lengths of wood , and was attached to the walls with screws that were too short . However , the City of Chicago 's <unk> Services Department visited this site over 5 times and never noticed or cited the code violations noted above . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
