 Three days after the disaster , the city sued the owners and managers of the building in the Housing Court due to a number of breaches in building regulations . Those named in the complaint included LG Properties , the company 's president Philip Pappas , and George <unk> , the contractor who built the balcony . The city was reportedly seeking $ 500 per violation for each day the structure was in existence , totaling hundreds of thousands of dollars , and a court order for the replacement of the balcony . The apartment block was legally uninhabitable until the balconies were replaced , as they provided mandatory emergency exits . The city 's Buildings Department inspected forty @-@ two other buildings owned or managed by Pappas and / or LG Properties for similar violations . The city also claimed that twenty @-@ one other buildings owned by Pappas had similar problems . They did , however , note the fact that he had since made " dramatic improvements " to all twenty @-@ one porches . 
 In the aftermath of the disaster , Chicago inspected a huge number of similar structures to ensure they were safe , with 500 cases being turned over to the city 's Law Department for court action , and 760 cases referred to administrative hearing officers . 
 Pappas continued to blame overcrowding for the disaster . However , an undercover press investigation discovered all his properties now display notices forbidding parties on the balconies . Pappas also claims that a police report says two unnamed witnesses informed a paramedic that they saw several people " jumping up and down " on the balconies shortly prior to the collapse . 
 In 2005 , the city of Chicago filed a negligence lawsuit against two of the survivors , William Fenton @-@ Hathaway and John Koranda . The city alleged that the balcony collapse occurred after defendants Fenton @-@ Hathaway and Koranda " intentionally and negligently " began jumping up and down on the porch . Koranda 's brother , Robert Koranda , was killed in the collapse . The charges against Fenton @-@ Hathaway and Koranda were later dropped . 
 No criminal charges were filed and Pappas was fined a total of $ 108 @,@ 000 as a result of the collapse . Twenty @-@ seven families sued Pappas and the city over the accident . The balcony was rebuilt afterwards , this time with metal . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The disaster inspired the 2005 season finale of the ER television show , titled " The Show Must Go On " . 
 = Hardanger Line = 
 The Hardanger Line ( Norwegian : <unk> or <unk> ) was a 27 @.@ 45 @-@ kilometre ( 17 @.@ 06 mi ) railway between Voss and Granvin in Hordaland , Norway . The line connected to the Bergen Line in Voss , and ran to the Hardangerfjord and the district of Hardanger . Construction started in 1921 , but the line did not open until 1 April 1935 . Owned and operated by the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) , the passenger transport was provided by three NSB Class 64 electric multiple units . They remained in use until 1985 , when passenger transport was terminated . All transport ceased in 1988 , and 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) of the line was demolished in 1991 . The 3 kilometres ( 2 mi ) from Voss to Palmafoss remains , and is owned by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . The line featured six stations , fourteen halts , four tunnels and was among Norway 's steepest railways . It was NSB 's first line to open electrified . The line was known as the Granvin Line ( <unk> ) until February 1936 . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Hardanger Line ran 27 @.@ 45 kilometres ( 17 @.@ 06 mi ) from Voss to Granvin in Hardanger . From Voss to Skjervet , the line ran in relatively flat terrain , with easy construction . Along this section the route followed what is now Norwegian National Road 13 . At Skjervet , the two split ; towards Nesheim the gradient increased and the topography became more difficult . On this section there were four tunnels , named Skjervet Tunnel I through IV , the longest being 1 @,@ 101 metres ( 3 @,@ 612 ft ) . Between the two longest tunnels , the line was built on a shelf . Later , the tunnel was extended from 630 metres ( 2 @,@ 070 ft ) to also include that portion in the tunnel . From Skjervet , the railway ran on the west side of the river <unk> , while the road ran on the east side . 
 The Hardanger Line was built with a minimum curve radius of 180 metres ( 590 ft ) , a maximum gradient of 4 @.@ 5 percent and built with standard gauge tracks weighing 25 kilograms per meter ( 50 lb / yd ) , later increased to 30 kilograms per meter ( 60 lb / yd ) . In 1980 , the 3 kilometres ( 2 mi ) section from Voss to Palmafoss had a permitted axle load of 18 tonnes ( 18 long tons ; 20 short tons ) and a maximum speed of 40 km / h ( 25 mph ) . From Palmafoss to Granvin , the permitted axle load was 12 tonnes ( 12 long tons ; 13 short tons ) and the maximum speed was 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) . The system had stations with buildings at Voss , Palmafoss , <unk> , Skjervet , Nesheim and Granvin . In addition , there were halts at <unk> , Kinne , <unk> , Mala , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Granvin is a port on the Hardangerfjord and was the center for freight transport in Hardanger . Hardanger is dominated by a small number of large industrial companies , primarily smelters , which were responsible for more than 80 percent of the line 's cargo volume . While Hardanger in the 1980s had a population of 40 @,@ 000 , Granvin had a population of 1 @,@ 000 and was the smallest municipality in Hardanger . Granvin served as a ferry hub for services by Hardanger <unk> <unk> ( HSD ) , and in 1980 there up to two daily services with the local ferry services in Hardanger , in addition to fast ferries to both Bergen and Stavanger . Buses operated to Granvin from <unk> and <unk> . 
 The line and power system is intact for 3 kilometres ( 2 mi ) from Voss to Palmafoss and is retained by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . From there to Skjervet , the line has been asphalted , and is used as a hiking and bicycle path . The section from Skjervet to Nesheim is disused , although it has been proposed used as a road . From Nesheim the hiking and bicycle path continues , although the last kilometer before Granvin the right @-@ of @-@ way is disused . The station buildings at Nesheim and Granvin remain , but the ones at Palmafoss , <unk> and Skjervet has been demolished . 
 = = History = = 
 During construction of the Voss Line from Bergen to Voss , there was a proposal to extend the line from Voss to Granvin on the Hardangerfjord . The plans were again taken up to consideration with the construction of the Bergen Line , but also this time the plans were scrapped . Some people wanted the line to be a tramway and when it was passed by the Parliament of Norway on 12 July 1919 ; the plans incorporated some elements of a tramway , giving the line a lower standard than the mainline . The railway was to be built electrified , and construction started in 1921 . However , there was a lack of engineers , forcing a slow pace . On 5 November 1923 , parliament passed the final plans for the railway , and the pace of construction was accelerated . 
 In 1927 , Minister of Labour Worm Hirsch <unk> @-@ Jenssen of the Conservative Party stopped the work on the railway , stating that time had run out and that there instead should be built a road . By then , NOK 5 million had been invested and parliament decided that construction should continue . However , <unk> @-@ Jenssen convinced Hordaland County Council to make a statement against the Hardanger Line , the Flåm Line and the Namsos Line , without this stopping construction . In 1931 , parliament reconsidered the electrification of the line , and there was consensus for electrification . The Hardanger Line opened on 1 April 1935 and became NSB 's first line to be electrified at the time of opening . In February 1936 , the line changed name from the Granvin Line to the Hardanger Line . 
 Three Class 64 electric multiple units ( EMU ) were delivered from Strømmens Værksted in 1934 . Only 16 metres ( 52 ft ) long , they were the smallest EMUs ever operated by NSB . In addition , four passenger cars were delivered , with each multiple unit able to haul two passenger cars . Occasionally , Class 64 trains were used on the Flåm Line , after it was electrified in 1944 , and El 9 @-@ hauled trains from the Flåm Line used on the Hardanger Line . 
 In the first year of operation , the line had 60 @,@ 850 passengers , significantly over expectations . After the opening , there were five daily round trips . In 1939 , the extension of the longest tunnel started , because the nearby section was subject to landslides . It was completed by the German occupational forces during World War II , but not taken into use by the railway until 1945 because of the German military 's use of the tunnel as an ammunition depot . Because of the electric traction , the line was not affected by the lack of coal during World War II , and in 1945 it had 285 @,@ 900 passengers . After the end of the war , the number of daily round trips increased to seven , but this was reduced to six in the 1950s . In 1955 , a morning and evening coach service started between Granvin and Voss . It was further extended in 1968 , when it started corresponding with services on the Bergen Line . 
 Initially , the freight transport was small . During the war , transport increased many @-@ fold , particularly because of export of lumber . In 1966 , a spur was built just south of Palmafoss to Voss <unk> . By the end of the 1960s , the line was transporting 30 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 30 @,@ 000 long tons ; 33 @,@ 000 short tons ) . During the late 1970s , the amount of transport fel dramatically , and reached 11 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 000 long tons ; 12 @,@ 000 short tons ) in 1980 . Nearly half of this was import of lumber to three sawmills and manufacturing companies . In 1972 , Linjegods established a daily scheduled truck service to Granvin . Although Linjegods used train to and from Voss , the service from Voss to Granvin was operated parallel to the railway . In 1975 , <unk> Globe also established a similar service between Voss and Granvin . During the late 1970s , the manufacturer <unk> experienced a large drop in the demand of ferroalloys , reducing production — and thus transport on the line — by 10 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 9 @,@ 800 long tons ; 11 @,@ 000 short tons ) . Another issue for the line was that it has a permitted axle load of only 12 tonnes ( 12 long tons ; 13 short tons ) ; this either <unk> optimal wagon weights on the main lines , or causing transshipment at Voss , both causing increased costs . In 1977 , the average distance for cargo shipped from the Hardanger Line was 444 kilometres ( 276 mi ) by rail . 
 In 1980 , the line had NOK 2 @.@ 1 million in income , of which NOK 1 @.@ 6 million was from freight ( representing all revenue from freight that ran on the Hardanger Line ) . Operating expenses were NOK 4 @.@ 8 million , and the deficit was covered by the national government . The line employed 21 people . In 1980 , the estimated cost of upgrading the line to 18 tonnes ( 18 long tons ; 20 short tons ) axle load was NOK 9 @.@ 6 million . Freight volume was then estimated to increase between 100 and 300 percent , and an upgrade was calculated to give a positive net present value , although it would not be sufficient to cover the full existing deficit . The plans included introduction of a refrigerated depot at Granvin . At the same time , it was estimated that the cost of retaining a 12 @-@ tonne ( 12 @-@ long @-@ ton ; 13 @-@ short @-@ ton ) axle load would require investments of NOK 6 million . 
 In 1979 , the concession for passenger transport between Voss and Granvin was transferred from NSB 's bus division to HSD and Bergen – Hardanger – Voss Billag . At the same time , the number of weekly services increased from 14 to 34 . This was largely a result of the 1975 declaration by Hordaland County Council to support the closure of the line . In 1980 , the railway had 60 @,@ 000 passengers . A halt was opened at Mala in 1981 , but then all passenger traffic was terminated on 2 June 1985 . Class 64 had remained in use until the end , and there existed no political desire to invest in new rolling stock . Freight transport was retained , at first using El 9 , and later shunting locomotives because of the lack of maintenance . From 1 March 1989 , all transport on the line was terminated . NSB wanted to renovate the line and continue operations . Among the plans were to transport metal from the smelters in Hardanger via the Hardanger Line to Continental Europe . This would have required the axle load to be increased . Other plans were to extend some of the departures of the Bergen Commuter Rail from Voss to Granvin or operate commercially profitable tourist trains similar to the service provided on the Flåm Line . 
 The municipalities of Voss and Granvin wanted to use the right @-@ of @-@ way for a hiking and bicycle path , and NSB canceled their plans . Demolish started on 10 December 1991 , although the section from Voss to Palmafoss was kept to serve a cement factory . Two of the Class 64 trains have been preserved by the Norwegian Railway Association and are based at the Old Voss Line in Bergen . 
 = Christmas truce = 
 The Christmas truce ( German : <unk> ; French : <unk> de Noël ) was a series of widespread but unofficial ceasefires along the Western Front around Christmas 1914 . In the week leading up to the holiday , German and British soldiers crossed trenches to exchange seasonal greetings and talk . In areas , men from both sides ventured into no man 's land on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day to mingle and exchange food and souvenirs . There were joint burial ceremonies and prisoner swaps , while several meetings ended in carol @-@ singing . Men played games of football with one another , giving one of the most memorable images of the truce . Peaceful behaviour was not ubiquitous ; fighting continued in some sectors , while in others the sides settled on little more than arrangements to recover bodies . 
 The following year , a few units arranged ceasefires but the truces were not nearly as widespread as in 1914 ; this was , in part , due to strongly worded orders from the high commands of both sides prohibiting fraternisation . Soldiers were no longer amenable to truce by 1916 . The war had become increasingly bitter after devastating human losses suffered during the battles of the Somme and Verdun , and the incorporation of poison gas . 
 The truces were not unique to the Christmas period , and reflected a growing mood of " live and let live " , where infantry close together would stop overtly aggressive behaviour and often engage in small @-@ scale fraternisation , engaging in conversation or bartering for cigarettes . In some sectors , there would be occasional ceasefires to allow soldiers to go between the lines and recover wounded or dead comrades , while in others , there would be a tacit agreement not to shoot while men rested , exercised or worked in full view of the enemy . The Christmas truces were particularly significant due to the number of men involved and the level of their participation — even in very peaceful sectors , dozens of men openly congregating in daylight was remarkable — and are often seen as a symbolic moment of peace and humanity amidst one of the most violent events of human history . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first five months of World War I had seen an initial German attack through Belgium into France , which had been repulsed outside Paris by French and British troops at the Battle of the Marne in early September 1914 . The Germans fell back to the Aisne valley , where they prepared defensive positions . In the subsequent Battle of the Aisne , the Allied forces were unable to push through the German line , and the fighting quickly degenerated into a stalemate ; neither side was willing to give ground , and both started to develop fortified systems of trenches . To the north , on the right of the German army , there had been no defined front line , and both sides quickly began to try to use this gap to outflank one another . In the ensuing " Race to the Sea " , the two sides repeatedly clashed , each trying to push forward and threaten the end of the other 's line . After several months of fighting , during which the British forces were withdrawn from the Aisne and sent north into Flanders , the northern flank had developed into a similar stalemate . By November , there was a continuous front line running from the North Sea to the Swiss frontier , occupied on both sides by armies in prepared defensive positions . 
 In the lead up to Christmas 1914 , there were several peace initiatives . The Open Christmas Letter was a public message for peace addressed " To the Women of Germany and Austria " , signed by a group of 101 British women suffragettes at the end of 1914 as the first Christmas of World War I approached . Pope Benedict XV , on 7 December 1914 , had begged for an official truce between the warring governments . He asked " that the guns may fall silent at least upon the night the angels sang . " This attempt was officially rebuffed . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 <unk> — peaceful and sometimes friendly interactions between opposing forces — was a regular feature in quiet front @-@ line sectors of the Western Front . In some areas , it manifested simply as a passive inactivity , where both sides would refrain from overtly aggressive or threatening behaviour , while in other cases it extended to regular conversation or even visits from one trench to another . 
 Truces between British and German units can be dated to early November 1914 , around the time opposing armies had begun static trench warfare . At this time , both sides ' rations were brought up to the front line after dusk , and soldiers on both sides noted a period of peace while they collected their food . By 1 December , a British soldier could record a friendly visit from a German sergeant one morning " to see how we were getting on " . Relations between French and German units were generally more tense , but the same phenomenon began to emerge . In early December , a German surgeon recorded a regular half @-@ hourly truce each evening to recover dead soldiers for burial , during which French and German soldiers exchanged newspapers . This behaviour was often challenged by both junior and senior officers ; the young Charles de Gaulle wrote on 7 December of the " lamentable " desire of French infantrymen to leave the enemy in peace , while the commander of 10th Army , Victor d <unk> , wrote of the " unfortunate consequences " when men " become familiar with their neighbours opposite " . Other truces could be enforced on both sides by weather conditions , especially when trench lines flooded in low @-@ lying areas , though these often lasted after the weather had cleared . 
 The proximity of trench lines made it easy for soldiers to shout greetings to each other , and this may have been the most common method of arranging informal truces during 1914 . Men would frequently exchange news or greetings , helped by a common language ; many German soldiers had lived in England , particularly London , and were familiar with the language and the culture . Several British soldiers recorded instances of Germans asking about news from the football leagues , while other conversations could be as banal as discussions of the weather or as plaintive as messages for a sweetheart . One unusual phenomenon that grew in intensity was music ; in peaceful sectors , it was not uncommon for units to sing in the evenings , sometimes deliberately with an eye towards entertaining or gently taunting their opposite numbers . This shaded gently into more festive activity ; in early December , Sir Edward Hulse of the Scots Guards wrote that he was planning to organise a concert party for Christmas Day , which would " give the enemy every conceivable form of song in harmony " in response to frequent choruses of Deutschland Über Alles . 
 = = Christmas 1914 = = 
 Roughly 100 @,@ 000 British and German troops were involved in the unofficial <unk> of hostility along the Western Front . The first truce started on Christmas Eve 1914 , when German troops decorated the area around their trenches in the region of Ypres , Belgium and particularly in Saint @-@ Yvon ( called Saint @-@ Yves , in Plugstreet / Ploegsteert – Comines @-@ Warneton ) , where Capt. Bruce <unk> described the truce . 
 The Germans placed candles on their trenches and on Christmas trees , then continued the celebration by singing Christmas carols . The British responded by singing carols of their own . The two sides continued by shouting Christmas greetings to each other . Soon thereafter , there were excursions across No Man 's Land , where small gifts were exchanged , such as food , tobacco and alcohol , and souvenirs such as buttons and hats . The artillery in the region fell silent . The truce also allowed a breathing spell where recently killed soldiers could be brought back behind their lines by burial parties . Joint services were held . In many sectors , the truce lasted through Christmas night , continuing until New Year 's Day in others . 
 On the day itself , Brigadier @-@ General Walter Congreve , then commanding 18 Infantry Brigade , stationed near Neuve Chapelle , wrote a letter recalling the Germans initiated by calling a truce for the day . One of his brigade 's men bravely lifted his head above the parapet and others from both sides walked onto no man 's land . Officers and men shook hands and exchanged cigarettes and cigars , one of his Captains " smoked a cigar with the best shot in the German army " , the latter no more than 18 years old . Congreve admitted he was reluctant to personally witness the scene of the truce for fear he would be a prime target for German snipers . 
 Bruce <unk> , who served throughout the war , wrote : 
 I wouldn 't have missed that unique and weird Christmas Day for anything . ... I spotted a German officer , some sort of lieutenant I should think , and being a bit of a collector , I intimated to him that I had taken a fancy to some of his buttons . ... I brought out my wire clippers and , with a few deft snips , removed a couple of his buttons and put them in my pocket . I then gave him two of mine in exchange . ... The last I saw was one of my machine gunners , who was a bit of an amateur hairdresser in civil life , cutting the unnaturally long hair of a docile Boche , who was patiently kneeling on the ground whilst the automatic clippers crept up the back of his neck . 
 Future nature writer Henry Williamson , then a nineteen @-@ year @-@ old private in the London Rifle Brigade , wrote to his mother on Boxing Day : " Dear Mother , I am writing from the trenches . It is 11 o 'clock in the morning . Beside me is a coke fire , opposite me a ' dug @-@ out ' ( wet ) with straw in it . The ground is sloppy in the actual trench , but frozen elsewhere . In my mouth is a pipe presented by the Princess Mary . In the pipe is tobacco . Of course , you say . But wait . In the pipe is German tobacco . Haha , you say , from a prisoner or found in a captured trench . Oh dear , no ! From a German soldier . Yes a live German soldier from his own trench . Yesterday the British & Germans met & shook hands in the Ground between the trenches , & exchanged souvenirs , & shook hands . Yes , all day Xmas day , & as I write . Marvellous , isn 't it ? " 
 Captain Sir Edward Hulse reported how the first interpreter he met from the German lines was from Suffolk where he had left his girlfriend and a 3 @.@ 5 hp motorcycle . Hulse went on to describe a sing @-@ song which " ended up with ' Auld lang <unk> ' which we all , English , Scots , Irish , Prussians , <unk> , etc , joined in . It was absolutely astounding , and if I had seen it on a <unk> film I should have sworn that it was faked ! " 
 Captain Robert Patrick Miles , King 's Shropshire Light Infantry , who was attached to the Royal Irish Rifles recalled in an edited letter that was published in both the Daily Mail and the Wellington Journal & Shrewsbury News in January 1915 , following his death in action on 30 December 1914 : 
 Friday ( Christmas Day ) . We are having the most extraordinary Christmas Day imaginable . A sort of <unk> and quite unauthorized but perfectly understood and scrupulously observed truce exists between us and our friends in front . The funny thing is it only seems to exist in this part of the battle line – on our right and left we can all hear them firing away as cheerfully as ever . The thing started last night – a bitter cold night , with white frost – soon after dusk when the Germans started shouting ' Merry Christmas , Englishmen ' to us . Of course our fellows shouted back and presently large numbers of both sides had left their trenches , unarmed , and met in the debatable , shot @-@ riddled , no man 's land between the lines . Here the agreement – all on their own – came to be made that we should not fire at each other until after midnight tonight . The men were all fraternizing in the middle ( we naturally did not allow them too close to our line ) and swapped cigarettes and lies in the utmost good fellowship . Not a shot was fired all night . 
 Of the Germans he wrote : " They are distinctly bored with the war ... In fact , one of them wanted to know what on earth we were doing here fighting them . " The truce in that sector continued into Boxing Day ; he commented about the Germans , " The beggars simply disregard all our warnings to get down from off their parapet , so things are at a deadlock . We can 't shoot them in cold blood ... I cannot see how we can get them to return to business . " 
 On Christmas Eve and Christmas Day ( 24 and 25 December ) 1914 , Alfred Anderson ’ s unit of the 1st / 5th Battalion of the Black Watch was billeted in a farmhouse away from the front line . In a later interview ( 2003 ) , Anderson , the last known surviving Scottish veteran of the war , vividly recalled Christmas Day and said : 
 I remember the silence , the eerie sound of silence . Only the guards were on duty . We all went outside the farm buildings and just stood listening . And , of course , thinking of people back home . All I ’ d heard for two months in the trenches was the hissing , cracking and whining of bullets in flight , machinegun fire and distant German voices . But there was a dead silence that morning , right across the land as far as you could see . We shouted ‘ Merry Christmas ’ , even though nobody felt merry . The silence ended early in the afternoon and the killing started again . It was a short peace in a terrible war . 
 Nor were the observations confined to the British . French Leutnant Johannes Niemann wrote : " grabbed my binoculars and looking cautiously over the parapet saw the incredible sight of our soldiers exchanging cigarettes , schnapps and chocolate with the enemy . " 
 General Sir Horace Smith @-@ Dorrien , commander of the British II Corps , issued orders forbidding friendly communication with the opposing German troops . Adolf Hitler , then a young corporal of the 16th Bavarian Reserve Infantry , was also an opponent of the truce . 
 In the Comines sector of the front there was an early fraternisation between German and French soldiers in December 1914 , during a short truce , and there are at least two other testimonials , from French soldiers , of similar behaviours in sectors where German and French companies opposed each other . Gervais Morillon wrote to his parents : ‘ The Boches waved a white flag and shouted " <unk> , <unk> , rendez @-@ vous . " When we didn ’ t move they came towards us unarmed , led by an officer . Although we are not clean they are disgustingly filthy . I am telling you this but don ’ t speak of it to anyone . We must not mention it even to other soldiers . ’ Gustave Berthier wrote : ‘ On Christmas day the Boches made a sign showing they wished to speak to us . They said they didn ’ t want to shoot ... They were tired of making war , they were married like me , they didn ’ t have any differences with the French but with the English . ’ 
 In sections of the front where German and Belgian troops faced each other in December 1914 , there was at least one such instance when a truce was achieved at the request of Belgian soldiers who wished to send letters back to their families , over the German @-@ occupied parts of their own country . 
 Richard <unk> , who was in a German regiment holding a position on the <unk> , one of the mountains of the Vosges , wrote an account of events in December 1915 : " When the Christmas bells sounded in the villages of the Vosges behind the lines ..... something fantastically <unk> occurred . German and French troops spontaneously made peace and ceased hostilities ; they visited each other through disused trench tunnels , and exchanged wine , cognac and cigarettes for Westphalian black bread , biscuits and ham . This suited them so well that they remained good friends even after Christmas was over . " He was separated from the French troops by a narrow No Man 's Land and described the landscape as : " <unk> with shattered trees , the ground ploughed up by shellfire , a wilderness of earth , tree @-@ roots and tattered uniforms . " Military discipline was soon restored , but <unk> pondered over the incident , and whether " thoughtful young people of all countries could be provided with suitable meeting places where they could get to know each other . " He went on to found the German Youth Hostel Association in 1919 . 
 = = = Football matches = = = 
 Many accounts of the truce involve one or more football matches played in no @-@ man 's land . This was mentioned in some of the earliest reports , with a letter written by a doctor attached to the Rifle Brigade , published in The Times on 1 January 1915 , reported " a football match ... played between them and us in front of the trench . " A wide range of similar stories have been told over the years , often naming specific units or a precise score . Some accounts of the game bring in elements of fiction by Robert Graves , a British poet and writer who reconstructed the encounter in a story published in 1962 ; in Graves 's version , the score was 3 – 2 to the Germans . 
 However , the truth of the accounts has been disputed by some historians ; in 1984 , Malcolm Brown and Shirley Seaton concluded that there were probably attempts to play organised matches which failed due to the state of the ground , but that the contemporary reports were either hearsay or refer to ' kick @-@ about ' matches with ' made @-@ up footballs ' such as a bully @-@ beef tin . Chris Baker , former chairman of The Western Front Association and author of The Truce : The Day the War Stopped is also skeptical , but says that although there is little hard evidence , the most likely place that an organised match could have taken place was near the village of Messines : " There are two references to a game being played on the British side , but nothing from the Germans . If somebody one day found a letter from a German soldier who was in that area , then we would have something credible . " In fact , there is a German reference . Leutnant Kurt <unk> of Germany 's 134th Saxons Infantry Regiment said that the English " brought a soccer ball from their trenches , and pretty soon a lively game ensued . How marvelously wonderful , yet how strange it was . " In 2011 , Mike Dash concluded that " there is plenty of evidence that football was played that Christmas Day — mostly by men of the same nationality , but in at least three or four places between troops from the opposing armies " . 
 A wide variety of units were reported in contemporary accounts to have taken part in games ; Dash listed the 133rd Royal Saxon Regiment pitched against " Scottish troops " ; the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders against unidentified Germans ( with the Scots reported to have won 4 – 1 ) ; the Royal Field Artillery against " Prussians and <unk> " near Ypres ; and the Lancashire Fusiliers , based near Le Touquet , with the specific detail of a bully beef ration tin as the " ball " . One recent writer has identified 29 separate reports of football , though does not give substantive details . 
 = = = Eastern Front = = = 
 A separate manifestation of the Christmas truce in December 1914 occurred on the Eastern front , where the first move originated from the Austrian commanders , at some uncertain level of the military hierarchy . The Russians responded positively and soldiers eventually met in no man ’ s land . 
 = = Public awareness = = 
 The events of the truce were not reported for a week , in an unofficial press embargo which was eventually broken by the New York Times , published in the then @-@ neutral United States , on 31 December . The British papers quickly followed , printing numerous first @-@ hand accounts from soldiers in the field , taken from letters home to their families , and editorials on " one of the greatest surprises of a surprising war " . By 8 January pictures had made their way to the press , and both the Mirror and Sketch printed front @-@ page photographs of British and German troops mingling and singing between the lines . The tone of the reporting was strongly positive , with the Times endorsing the " lack of malice " felt by both sides and the Mirror regretting that the " absurdity and the tragedy " would begin again . 
 Coverage in Germany was more muted , with some newspapers strongly criticising those who had taken part , and no pictures published . In France , meanwhile , the greater level of press censorship ensured that the only word that spread of the truce came from soldiers at the front or first @-@ hand accounts told by wounded men in hospitals . The press was eventually forced to respond to the growing rumours by reprinting a government notice that <unk> with the enemy constituted treason , and in early January an official statement on the truce was published , claiming it had happened on restricted sectors of the British front , and amounted to little more than an exchange of songs which quickly degenerated into shooting . 
 = = Later truces = = 
 After Christmas 1914 , sporadic attempts were made at seasonal truces ; a German unit attempted to leave their trenches under a flag of truce on Easter Sunday 1915 , but were warned off by the British opposite them , and later in the year , in November , a Saxon unit briefly <unk> with a Liverpool battalion . In December 1915 , there were explicit orders by the Allied commanders to forestall any repeat of the previous Christmas truce . Individual units were encouraged to mount raids and harass the enemy line , whilst communicating with the enemy was discouraged by artillery barrages along the front line throughout the day . The prohibition was not completely effective , however , and a small number of brief truces occurred . 
 An eyewitness account of one truce , by Llewelyn Wyn Griffith , recorded that after a night of exchanging carols , dawn on Christmas Day saw a " rush of men from both sides ... [ and ] a feverish exchange of souvenirs " before the men were quickly called back by their officers , with offers to hold a ceasefire for the day and to play a football match . It came to nothing , as the brigade commander threatened repercussions for the lack of discipline , and insisted on a resumption of firing in the afternoon . Another member of Griffith 's battalion , Bertie Felstead , later recalled that one man had produced a football , resulting in " a free @-@ for @-@ all ; there could have been 50 on each side " , before they were ordered back . 
 In an adjacent sector , a short truce to bury the dead between the lines led to official repercussions ; a company commander , Sir Iain Colquhoun of the Scots Guards , was court @-@ martialled for defying standing orders to the contrary . While he was found guilty and reprimanded , the punishment was annulled by General Haig and Colquhoun remained in his position ; the official leniency may perhaps have been because he was related to H. H. Asquith , the Prime Minister . 
 In the Decembers of 1916 and 1917 , German overtures to the British for truces were recorded without any success . In some French sectors , singing and an exchange of thrown gifts was occasionally recorded , though these may simply have reflected a seasonal extension of the live @-@ and @-@ let @-@ live approach common in the trenches . 
 At Easter 1915 there were recorded instances of truces between Orthodox troops of opposing sides on the Eastern front . The Bulgarian writer Yordan <unk> , serving as an officer near the Greek border at the Mesta river , witnessed one such truce . It inspired his short story ' Holy Night ' , translated into English in 2013 by <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Legacy and historical significance = = 
 Although the popular tendency has been to see the December 1914 Christmas Truces as unique and therefore of romantic rather than political significance , they have also been interpreted as part of the widespread non @-@ cooperation with the war spirit and conduct by serving soldiers . In his book on trench warfare , historian Tony Ashworth describes what he calls the ' live and let live system . ' Complicated local truces and agreements not to fire at each other were developed by men along the front throughout the war . These often began with agreement not to attack each other at tea , meal or washing times , and in some places became so developed that whole sections of the front would see few casualties for extended periods of time . This system , Ashworth argues , ' gave soldiers some control over the conditions of their existence . ' The December 1914 Christmas Truces then can be seen as not unique , but as the most dramatic example of non @-@ cooperation with the war spirit that included refusal to fight , unofficial truces , mutinies , strikes , and peace protests . 
 In the 1933 play Petermann <unk> <unk> oder Das <unk> vom deutschen <unk> ( Petermann makes peace : or , the parable of German sacrifice ) , written by Nazi writer and World War I veteran Heinz <unk> ( German ) , a German soldier , accompanied by Christmas carols sung by his comrades , erects an illuminated Christmas tree between the trenches , but is shot dead by the enemy . Later , when the fellow soldiers find his body , they notice in horror that enemy snipers have shot down every single Christmas light from the tree . 
 The 1967 song " Snoopy 's Christmas " by the Royal Guardsmen was based on the Christmas truce . As in real life , it is the Red Baron , Germany 's ace pilot and war hero , who initiates the truce with the fictitious Snoopy . 
 The 1969 film Oh ! What a Lovely War includes a scene of a Christmas truce with British and German soldiers sharing jokes , alcohol and songs . 
 The video for the 1983 song " Pipes of Peace " by Paul McCartney depicts a fictionalized version of the Christmas truce . 
 The final episode of the BBC television series Blackadder Goes Forth references the Christmas truce , with the main character Edmund Blackadder having played in a football match . He is also seen being annoyed at having had a goal disallowed for offside . 
 The song " All Together Now " by Liverpool band The Farm took its inspiration from the Christmas Day Truce of 1914 . The song has been re @-@ recorded by The Peace Collective for release in December 2014 to mark the centenary of the event . 
 The truce is dramatized in the 2005 French film Joyeux Noël ( English : Merry Christmas ) , depicted through the eyes of French , British and German soldiers . The film , written and directed by Christian <unk> , was screened out of competition at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival . 
 In 2008 , the truce was depicted on stage at the Pantages Theater in Minneapolis , in the radio musical drama All Is Calm : The Christmas Truce of 1914 . It was created and directed by Peter Rothstein , and co @-@ produced by Theater <unk> Da and the vocal ensemble Cantus , both Minneapolis @-@ based organizations . It has continued to play at the Pantages Theater each December since its premiere . 
 Ahead of the centenary of the truce ( December 2014 ) , English composer Chris Eaton and singer Abby Scott produced the song , 1914 – The Carol of Christmas , to benefit British armed forces charities . At 5 December 2014 , it had reached top of the iTunes Christmas chart . 
 In 2014 , the Northumbria and Newcastle Universities Martin Luther King Peace Committee produced resources to enable schools and churches to mark the December 1914 Christmas Truces . These included lesson plans , hand @-@ outs , <unk> , PowerPoint slide shows , and full plans for assemblies , and carol services / Christmas productions . The authors explained that their purpose was both to enable schoolteachers to help children learn about the remarkable events of December 1914 , but also to use the theme of Christmas to provide a counterpoint to the UK government 's glorification of the First World War as heroic . As the Peace Committee argues , " These spontaneous acts of festive goodwill directly contradicted orders from high command , and offered an evocative and hopeful – albeit brief – recognition of shared humanity " – and thereby , they argue , give a rereading of the traditional Christmas message of " on earth peace , good will toward men . " 
 The grocery chain Sainsbury 's produced a short film for the 2014 Christmas season as an advertisement re @-@ enacting the events of the Christmas truce , primarily following a young English soldier in the trenches . 
 = = = Monuments = = = 
 A Christmas truce memorial was unveiled in <unk> , France , on 11 November 2008 . Also on that day , at the spot where , on Christmas Day 1914 , their regimental ancestors came out from their trenches to play football , men from the 1st Battalion , The Royal Welch Fusiliers played a football match with the German Battalion 371 . The Germans won 2 – 1 . 
 On 12 December 2014 , a memorial was unveiled at the National Memorial Arboretum in Staffordshire , England by Prince William , Duke of Cambridge and the England national football team manager Roy Hodgson . The Football Remembers memorial was designed by ten @-@ year @-@ old schoolboy Spencer Turner after a UK @-@ wide competition . 
 = = = Annual reenactments = = = 
 The Midway Village in Rockford , Illinois has hosted reenactments of the Christmas Truce . 
 = Billie Jean = 
 " Billie Jean " is a song by American singer Michael Jackson . It is the second single from the singer 's sixth solo album , Thriller ( 1982 ) . It was written and composed by Jackson and produced by Jackson and Quincy Jones . There are contradictory claims on the meaning of the song 's lyrics . One suggests that they are derived from a real @-@ life experience , in which a female fan claimed that Jackson ( or one of his brothers ) had fathered one of her twins . However , Jackson himself stated that " Billie Jean " was based on groupies he had encountered . The song is well known for its distinctive bassline played by Louis Johnson and Jackson 's vocal hiccups . The song was mixed 91 times by audio engineer Bruce Swedien before it was finalized , though he reportedly went with the 2nd mix as the final product . 
 The song became a success ; it was one of the best @-@ selling singles of 1983 and is one of the best @-@ selling singles worldwide . The song topped both the US and UK charts simultaneously . In other countries , it topped the charts of Switzerland and reached the top ten in Austria , Italy , New Zealand , Norway and Sweden . " Billie Jean " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in 1989 . Rolling Stone magazine placed the song in the 58th spot on its list of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . 
 Awarded numerous honours — including two Grammy Awards , one American Music Award , and an induction into the Music Video Producers Hall of Fame — the song and corresponding music video helped propel Thriller to the status of best @-@ selling album of all time . The song was promoted with a short film that broke down MTV 's racial barrier as the first video by a black artist to be aired in heavy rotation . Also , Jackson 's Emmy @-@ nominated performance on Motown 25 : Yesterday , Today , Forever , in which Jackson premiered his " moonwalk " , helped to popularize the song . It was additionally promoted through Jackson 's Pepsi commercials ; during the filming of one commercial , Jackson 's scalp was severely burned . Covered by modern artists , " Billie Jean " sealed Jackson 's status as an international pop icon . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jackson stated several times that " Billie Jean " was based on the groupies he and his brothers encountered while part of The Jackson 5 . " Billie Jean is kind of anonymous . It represents a lot of girls . They used to call them groupies in the ' 60s . " He added : " They would hang around backstage doors , and any band that would come to town they would have a relationship with , and I think I wrote this out of experience with my brothers when I was little . There were a lot of Billie Jeans out there . Every girl claimed that their son was related to one of my brothers . " 
 Jackson 's biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli promoted the theory that " Billie Jean " was derived from a real life experience the singer faced in 1981 . The Magic & The Madness documents how a young woman wrote Jackson a letter , which informed the singer that he was the father of one of her twins . Jackson , who regularly received letters of this kind , had never met the woman in question and ignored it . The woman , however , continued to send Jackson more letters , which stated that she loved him and wanted to be with him . She wrote of how happy they would be if they raised the child together . She pondered how Jackson could ignore his own flesh and blood . The letters disturbed the singer to the extent that he suffered nightmares . 
 Following the letters , Jackson received a parcel containing a photograph of the fan , as well as a letter and a gun . Jackson was horrified ; the letter asked that the pop singer kill himself on a certain day and at a specific time . The fan would do the same once she had killed their baby . She wrote that if they could not be together in this life , then they would be in the next . To his mother 's dismay , Jackson had the photograph of the woman framed and hung above the dining room table of their family home . Afterwards , the Jacksons discovered that the fan had been sent to a psychiatric hospital . 
 = = Production = = 
 Michael Jackson wrote " Billie Jean " with his female fans in mind , and later stated that when he wrote the song , he knew it would be a success : " A musician knows hit material . Everything has to feel in place . It fulfills you and it makes you feel good . That 's how I felt about ' Billie Jean ' . I knew it was going to be big when I was writing it . " The singer explained that he was so absorbed by the song that , in one instance , he did not notice that his car had caught fire as he drove down a freeway with a friend until a passing motorcyclist informed him . Jackson noted : " The kid probably saved our lives . " 
 Jackson faced numerous disagreements with the song 's co @-@ producer . It has been reported that Quincy Jones did not want the song to appear on Thriller and that he felt that the song was too weak to be part of the collection , but Jones has stated this is a false rumor . The producer disliked the demo and did not care for the song 's bassline . Jones wanted to cut Jackson 's 29 @-@ second introduction , which was the longest one ever created at the time . The entertainer , however , insisted that it be kept . " I said , ' Michael we 've got to cut that intro ' " Jones later recalled . " He said : ' But that 's the jelly ! ' [ ... ] ' That 's what makes me want to dance ' . And when Michael Jackson tells you , ' That 's what makes me want to dance ' , well , the rest of us just have to shut up . " Jones also wanted to change the track 's title to " Not My Lover " , as he believed that people would think the song referred to the tennis player Billie Jean King . Jackson refused to change the title and asked Jones to give him co @-@ producing credits for the track , as he felt that the demo tape sounded exactly like the finished product . In addition , Jackson wanted extra royalties . Jones granted neither and the two fell out for several days . 
 Having resolved their differences , Jones had Jackson sing his vocal overdubs through a six @-@ foot @-@ long cardboard tube . Jackson 's entire lead vocal was performed in one take ; he had received vocal training every morning throughout the production of the song . Jazz saxophonist Tom Scott played the <unk> . Bass guitarist Louis Johnson was then brought in and he played his part on every guitar he owned , before Jackson finally settled for a Yamaha bass . Greg Phillinganes was also drafted in and he played the keyboard . He later said of the song , " ' Billie Jean ' is hot on every level . It 's ( sic ) hot rhythmically moving action got Michael excited . It 's hot sonically , because the instrumentation is so minimal , you can really hear everything . It 's hot melodically [ ... ] lyrically [ and ] vocally . It affects you physically , emotionally , even spiritually . " 
 The song was mixed by Bruce Swedien ninety @-@ one times — unusual for Swedien , who usually mixed a song just once . Jones had told Swedien to create a drum sound that no one had ever heard before . The audio engineer was also told to add a different element : " sonic personality " . " What I ended up doing was building a drum platform and designing some special little things , like a bass drum cover and a flat piece of wood that goes between the snare and the hi @-@ hat " Swedien later wrote . " The bottom line is that there aren 't many pieces of music where you can hear the first three or four notes of the drums , and immediately tell what the piece of music is . " He concluded , " But I think that is the case with ' Billie Jean ' — and that I attribute to sonic personality . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Billie Jean " blends sounds of post @-@ disco , rhythm and blues , funk , and dance @-@ pop . The song opens with a standard drum beat along with a standard hi @-@ hat , and it contains hardly any reverberation . After two bars , another standard open hi @-@ hat enters . After two more bars , a repetitive bassline enters . Each time it passes through the tonic , the note is doubled by a distorted synth bass . This accompaniment is followed by a repetitive three @-@ note synth , played staccato with a deep reverb . The defining chord progression is then established . Jackson 's quiet vocals enter , accompanied by a finger @-@ snap , which comes and goes during the verses , as the rhythm and chord progression repeats . 
 According to Daryl Hall , when Jackson was recording " We Are the World " , Jackson approached him and admitted to lifting the bassline for " Billie Jean " from a Hall & Oates song ( apparently referring to Hall 's " I Can 't Go for That ( No Can Do ) " from the 1981 album Private Eyes ) : " Michael Jackson once said directly to me that he hoped I didn 't mind that he copied that groove . " Hall says he told Jackson that he had lifted the bassline himself , remarking , " it 's something we all do . " 
 According to Inside the Hits , the lyrics refer to the commotion created by Billie Jean on a dance floor . She entices the crowd with a seductive come @-@ on before luring Jackson to her bedroom , through the fragrance of her perfume . Jackson 's vocal range spanned from a high baritone to a falsetto and he usually wrote melodies to show this range . However , in the verses of " Billie Jean " , the singer 's vocals range from a tenor to a low falsetto . A four note falsetto is showcased in the chorus and , during the last line , Jackson peaks at a full octave . The song has a tempo of 117 beats per minute and is in the key of F ♯ minor . Following the first chorus , a cello @-@ like synth eases in at the beginnings of both the third , and later , the fourth , verses . Upon the announcement that the baby 's eyes resemble Jackson 's , a voice laments , " oh no " . This is met with Jackson 's signature falsetto " hee hee " . The bridge debuts the strings , and holds a pedal tone tonic with the exception of two lines and a chord leading into the chorus . Violins are then played , followed by a four @-@ note minor guitar solo . During the solo , vocal shouts , screams and laughs are added . Throughout this , the chord progression remains unaltered and is laced with Jackson 's vocal hiccups . All the musical and vocal elements are then brought together in the final chorus . In the fade , Jackson repeats the denial of fathering Billie Jean 's child . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 On December 1 , 1982 , Thriller was released to critical and commercial success . A month later , on January 2 , 1983 , " Billie Jean " was released as the album 's second single ; it follows Jackson 's successful duet with Paul McCartney on " The Girl Is Mine " . The song reached number one on Billboard 's Hot 100 chart , where it remained for seven weeks . After seven weeks at number one , the song fell to number 5 , and stayed in the top ten for 11 weeks . Billboard ranked it at the No. 2 song for 1983 . " Billie Jean " topped the R & B chart within three weeks , and became Jackson 's fastest @-@ rising number one single since " ABC " , " The Love You Save " and " I 'll Be There " in 1970 . It remained at number one for nine weeks , before the single was eventually replaced by The Gap Band 's " Outstanding " . " Billie Jean " peaked at number 9 on the Adult Contemporary chart . It was also number one in the UK Singles Chart . " Billie Jean " and Thriller topped both the singles and album charts in the same week . This occurred on both sides of the Atlantic simultaneously , a feat very few acts have ever achieved . The song was the third best selling single of 1983 in the US and ninth in the UK . " Billie Jean " also reached number one in Switzerland , the top ten in Austria , Italy , New Zealand , Norway and Sweden . 
 In a Rolling Stone review , Christopher Connelly described " Billie Jean " as a " lean , insistent funk number whose message couldn 't be more blunt : ' She says I am the one / But the kid is not my son ' " . He added that the track was a " sad , almost mournful song , but a thumping resolve underlies [ Jackson 's ] feelings " . Blender stated that the song was " one of the most sonically eccentric , psychologically fraught , downright bizarre things ever to land on Top 40 radio " . They added that it was " frighteningly stark , with a pulsing , cat @-@ on @-@ the @-@ prowl bass figure , whip @-@ crack downbeat and eerie multi @-@ tracked vocals ricocheting in the vast spaces between keyboards and strings " . Overall , the magazine described the track as " a five @-@ minute @-@ long nervous breakdown , set to a beat " . Stylus said of the song , " It 's one of the best representations of film noir in pop music , ending with no resolution except a single mother and selfish , careless <unk> . " In a review of Thriller 25 , AllMusic observed that " Billie Jean " was " startling " in its " futuristic funk " . The track also won praise from Jackson biographers . Nelson George stated that Jerry Hey 's string arrangement added danger to " Billie Jean " , while J. Randy Taraborrelli added that it was " dark and sparse " by Quincy Jones ' production standards . 
 " Billie Jean " has been recognized with numerous awards and honors . At the 1984 Grammy Awards the song earned Jackson two of a record eight awards ; Best R & B Song and Best R & B Male Vocal Performance . It won the Billboard Music Award for favorite dance / disco 12 " LP , and the magazine 's 1980 's poll named " Billie Jean " as the " Black Single of the Decade " . The American Music Awards recognized the track as the Favorite Pop / Rock Single , while Cash Box honored the song with the awards for Top Pop Single and Top Black Single . The track was recognised with the Top International Single award by the Canadian Black Music Awards , and awarded the Black Gold Award for Single of the Year . " Billie Jean " has also been awarded for its sales . It won the National Association of Recording Merchandisers Gift of Music award for best selling single in 1984 . By 1989 , the standard format single was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America , for shipments of at least one million units . The digital sales of " Billie Jean " were certified gold in 2005 , for shipments of at least 500 @,@ 000 units . The digital sales of " Billie Jean " were certified 2x Platinum in US on May 9 , 2013 . The total number of digital downloads of the song in the US , as of October 2014 , stands at 2 @.@ 9 million . In May 2014 , a viral video of a high school @-@ aged teenager imitating Jackson 's Motown 25 performance of the song helped the song re @-@ enter the Billboard Hot 100 at number 14 , with much of its chart performance was 95 % credited to streams of the viral video . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The short film for " Billie Jean " is considered the video that brought MTV , until then a fairly new and unknown music channel , into mainstream attention . It was one of the first videos by a black artist to be aired regularly by the channel , as the network 's executives felt black music wasn 't " rock " enough . Directed by Steve Barron , the video shows a photographer who follows Jackson . The paparazzo never catches the singer , and when photographed Jackson fails to materialize on the developed picture . The entertainer dances his way to Billie Jean 's hotel room and as he walks along a sidewalk , each tile lights up at his touch . 
 After he performs a quick spin , Jackson jumps and lands , freeze framed , on his toes . Upon arrival at the hotel , Jackson climbs the staircase to Billie Jean 's room . Each step lights up as he touches it and a burnt out " Hotel " sign illuminates as he passes . The paparazzo then arrives at the scene and watches as Jackson vanishes under the covers of Billie Jean 's bed . <unk> by the police , the paparazzo is then arrested for spying on Billie Jean . Jackson sported a new look for the video ; <unk> curled hair . Jackson 's clothes , a black leather suit with a pink shirt and a red bow tie , were copied by children around the US . Imitation became so severe that , despite pupil protests , Bound Brook High School banned students from wearing a single white glove like Jackson had on during the performance of " Billie Jean " at Motown 25 : Yesterday , Today , Forever . 
 Walter <unk> , the president of Jackson 's record label CBS , approached MTV to play the " Billie Jean " video . He became enraged when MTV refused to play the video , and threatened to go public with MTV 's stance on black musicians . " I said to MTV , ' I 'm pulling everything we have off the air , all our product . I 'm not going to give you any more videos . And I 'm going to go public and fucking tell them about the fact you don 't want to play music by a black guy . ' " MTV relented and played the " Billie Jean " video in heavy rotation along with Prince 's " Little Red Corvette " . After the video was aired , Thriller went on to sell an additional 10 million copies . The short film was inducted into the Music Video Producers Hall of Fame in 1992 . In a 2005 poll of 31 pop stars , video directors , agents and journalists conducted by telecommunications company 3 , the music video was ranked fifth in their " Top 20 Music Videos Ever " . The video was also ranked as the 35th greatest music video in a list compiled by MTV and TV Guide at the millennium . 
 The music video is featured on the DVDs Video Greatest Hits – HIStory , Number Ones , on the bonus DVD of Thriller 25 and Michael Jackson 's Vision . 
 = = = Motown 25 = = = 
 On March 25 , 1983 , Michael Jackson performed " Billie Jean " to critical and popular acclaim . Staged at the Pasadena Civic Auditorium , Motown 25 : Yesterday , Today , Forever was a celebration of Motown Records ' twenty @-@ fifth anniversary ( despite the fact that Motown , launched in 1959 , was only 24 years old in 1983 ) . Organized by Suzanne de Passe , the event was to feature all of the most popular Motown acts , both past and present . The Motown stars were to reunite for one evening , to pay tribute to Berry Gordy and acknowledge his effect on their lives . Jackson initially refused the invitation , but reconsidered after a personal visit from Gordy , for whom the singer had great respect . It was decided that the singer would perform " Billie Jean " . 
 Following performances by Marvin Gaye , Smokey Robinson , and Mary Wells , The Jacksons took to the stage for their first group performance together in eight years . The brothers sang a medley of their old hits . After they finished with " I 'll Be There " , they left Michael alone on stage . He addressed the audience and then went into his routine . He wore black pants , leather penny loafers , a black sequined jacket , and a single white rhinestone glove . To begin his performance , Jackson snapped a fedora to his head and struck a pose — his right hand on his hat and his left leg bent . During a musical interlude , the singer executed a move which many believe to have sealed his status as a pop icon . Jackson glided backwards to perform the moonwalk , before he spun on his heels and landed en pointe . It was the first time Jackson had performed the moonwalk in public ; he had practiced it in his kitchen prior to the show . 
 Motown 25 : Yesterday , Today , Forever was watched by 50 million people and Jackson 's routine earned him an Emmy nomination . With the performance , Jackson reached a new audience and increased the sales of Thriller , which eventually became the best @-@ selling album of all @-@ time . The day after the show aired , Jackson was called by his childhood idol Fred Astaire , who commended the singer . Another childhood idol , Sammy Davis , Jr . , had admired Jackson 's black sequined jacket during the performance and later received it as a gift . 
 Jackson stated at the time that he was disappointed in his performance ; he had wanted to remain on his toes longer than he had . Jackson subsequently said that " Billie Jean " was one of his favorite songs to perform live , but only when he did not have to do it the way he had on Motown 25 : Yesterday , Today , Forever . " The audience wants a certain thing — I have to do the moonwalk in that spot , " he later said . " I 'd like to do a different version . " 
 In a Top 100 list compiled by VH1 and Entertainment Weekly in 2000 , Jackson 's performance was ranked as the sixth greatest rock ' n ' roll TV moment . Five years later , Entertainment Weekly named Jackson 's Motown 25 performance as one of the most important pop culture moments in history . " It was a moment that crossed over in a way that no live musical performance ever had . There was a messianic quality to it " , Entertainment Weekly editor Steve Daly commented . The performance has been shown on television numerous times . It is also featured on the DVDs : HIStory on Film , Volume II and the bonus DVD of Thriller 25 . 
 = = = Pepsi commercials = = = 
 In 1984 , Pepsi sponsored the Jacksons ' Victory Tour . In return , Michael and his brothers were to star in two commercials for the company . Jackson had reworked " Billie Jean " for the commercial and entitled it " Pepsi Generation " . The song was used as the official jingle for the commercials and released as a 7 " promo single . The launch of " The Choice of a New Generation " campaign in February 1984 was attended by 1 @,@ 600 people who were issued with a programme and the 7 " single . During the filming of the second commercial , a firework exploded and Jackson 's hair caught fire . The incident left the singer in need of reconstructive surgery . The commercials were premiered at the Grammy Awards , the same night he collected a record eight awards . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Along with " Thriller " , " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " , and " Beat It " , " Billie Jean " was performed for all of Michael Jackson 's tour concerts . After the ending chorus , the drum solo is always extended for a period of time as Jackson dances under one spotlight . The song almost always ends with Jackson singing " Billie Jean is not my lover " and throwing his hat towards the audience . Exceptions are some of the concerts in the Victory Tour , where he held his hat up and threw it afterwards . Since the Victory Tour , the performance has evolved in terms of dance moves and overall song length . 
 Victory Tour – Performance just over six minutes in length ; only about 30 @-@ 45 seconds in the spotlight dance ending . 
 Bad tour – Flashing lights and sounds transition Beat It to Billie Jean . The first and second leg performances are considerably different , as the first leg was more like the " Victory Tour " , and Jackson did more dance moves in the second leg and the ending was therefore longer in the second leg , around seven minutes in length . 
 In the Dangerous World Tour , an illusion was made for Jackson to appear on the upper floor the moment " Thriller " ended through the use of a masked dancer posing as Jackson who he had switched with in the middle of the song . Jackson performed the song at a slightly slower speed than the Victory and Bad tours , but still faster than the studio version . 
 1993 Super Bowl – Jackson performed a part of Billie Jean consisting of only the first refrain , second chorus and instrumental bridge where he did the moonwalk before ending with a pose . 
 1995 MTV VMA & 1999 MJ & Friends – Shortened studio remix performed as part of a medley during the 1995 MTV Awards . <unk> from " Why You Wanna Trip On Me " were added in the solo , in addition to the Billie Jean Bassline . 
 Royal Brunei Concert 1996 – Similar tempo and instrumentation to the HIStory <unk> and the snare sample from " Why You Wanna Trip On Me " is repeatedly played throughout the spotlight ending along with the main drumbeat , but there is no bassline . 
 HIStory Tour – Performances of the song were usually eight minutes with some up to nine minutes , always preceded by the two- or three @-@ minute " suitcase " intro , in which Jackson pulls his jacket , glove and hat out from a suitcase . Similar tempo and arrangement to the studio version . 
 Madison Square Garden – Very similar to the HIStory Tour in instrumentation and vocal mixing , but some verses before the moonwalk are sung live and switches back and forth with playback . The " suitcase " intro is seen here as well . 
 This Is It – One of these rehearsals was filmed completely and shown in the film This Is It . Here , the song is approximately 6 minutes in length . 
 Performances of the song are available on the HIStory on Film , Volume II , HIStory World Tour , Live in Bucharest : The Dangerous Tour , and Live at Wembley July 16 , 1988 video albums . 
 = = Billie Jean 2008 = = 
 Michael Jackson 's original version of " Billie Jean " was remixed by Kanye West for Thriller 25 , a 25th anniversary reissue of Jackson 's Thriller . Entitled " Billie Jean 2008 " , the remix garnered a mixed reception ; most critics felt that it was impossible to improve upon the original . Pitchfork Media 's Tom Ewing explained that a guest verse " might have added dynamics to the mix 's clumsy claustrophobia " . 
 Mike Joseph , in review of Thriller 25 for PopMatters , described the track listing of the reissue as " pleasant " but West 's " lazy " remix was the only exception . He added , " You 've been given the opportunity to remix the most iconic single from one of the most iconic albums of all time , and all you can do is stick a drum machine on top of the song 's original arrangement ? " . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone disliked the removal of the original bassline , and compared it to " putting Bobby Orr on the ice without a hockey stick " . IGN 's Todd Gilchrist praised West 's remix and stated that it was a " pretty great track " . He added , " it almost overplays the track 's originally understated drama , his additions enhance the song and demonstrate that in a contemporary context . " 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 = = = The Bates version = = = 
 In 1995 German punk rock band The Bates covered " Billie Jean " on their album Pleasure + Pain . The cover was also successful although intricacies of the original were not included in the cover . The music video parodies Alfred Hitchcock 's Psycho . 
 = = = = Track listing = = = = 
 Maxi @-@ CD 
 Billie Jean – 4 : 25 
 Tonight ( Remix ) – 3 : 45 
 Love Is Dead ( Part II ) – 3 : 22 
 Yeah ( Acoustic Version ) – 1 : 06 
 = = = = Charts = = = = 
 = = = The Sound <unk> version = = = 
 Canadian dance group The Sound <unk> also recorded a cover which peaked at No. 17 on the Australian charts during March 2003 . It also reached No. 17 in Belgium , No. 14 in Finland , and No. 53 in the Netherlands . 
 = = = = Track listing = = = = 
 CD @-@ Maxi <unk> <unk> @-@ 5 ( Edel ) 
 Billie Jean ( Beat Radio Mix ) – 4 : 00 
 Billie Jean ( Beat Clubb Mix ) – 6 : 50 
 Billie Jean ( Full Effect Mix ) – 7 : 34 
 Dura Dura ( Reprise ) – 1 : 36 
 = = = = Charts = = = = 
 = = = Other notable cover versions = = = 
 In 1983 , Slingshot hit number one on the Billboard Dance / Disco charts with " Do It again / Billie Jean Medley " . British funk group Linx recorded the track in 1997 and retitled it " Billie Jean Got Soul " . Their cover peaked at number 34 in Sweden . 
 English musician Ian Brown took " Billie Jean " to number 5 on the UK charts in 2000 . It was the B @-@ side of " Dolphins Were Monkeys " . Brown later commented , " I love Jackson . I want to do a Jackson EP with ' Thriller ' , ' Beat It ' , ' Billie Jean ' and ' Rockin ' Robin ' or ' ABC ' on it . Hopefully I 'll get it done " . The singer later covered " Thriller " on Golden Gaze , from his second solo album , Golden Greats . 
 " Billie Jean " was recorded by American rock musician Chris Cornell for his Carry On album in 2007 . Cornell said of his cover , " I didn 't plan on it . It just sort of happened organically . I changed the music quite a bit , I didn 't touch the lyrics . " He added , " And it 's not a joke . I took a completely different approach to it , musically . " Cornell had previously performed the song live in Europe , including an acoustic set in Stockholm , Sweden in September 2006 . He later said , " I was getting ready to do some acoustic shows on a promotional tour for Revelations and I just wanted to have fun with it . " The cover received favorable reviews from critics . MTV noted the " bluesier , more pained and impassioned feel " which stripped away " any pop elements of the original " . Los Angeles Times described the track as " a grim , spooky take " on Jackson 's " Billie Jean " , and added that it was " amusing enough , even if it sounds a lot more like Metallica 's ' Nothing Else Matters ' " . The newspaper concluded that " Jacko 's mega hit [ survived ] the stunt translation " . In 2008 , Cornell 's version was performed live by David Cook on the seventh season of American Idol , and this version charted on Billboard 's Hot 100 at No. 47 . In May of the same year , dance act Signature used " <unk> Onda Nei " on Britain 's Got Talent in their audition and again in their final performance . In 2011 , Patrick Stump covered the song in an a cappella mash @-@ up tribute to Jackson along with several other songs over pre @-@ recorded backing vocals . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 " Billie Jean " aided Thriller in becoming the biggest selling album of all time and has been referenced by performers such as Justin Timberlake , Chris Brown and Usher . The Guardian reflected that " more thought went into the production of this single than would go into the entire recording careers of Axl Rose , Coldplay , Shania Twain or Gwen Stefani . " The song and accompanying performances contributed to Jackson 's status as a legendary pop icon . 
 It was popularly believed that " Billie Jean " was an autobiographical song , referring to someone who claimed Jackson was the father of her child . Based on this theory , Lydia Murdock wrote the song " Superstar " , which was a minor hit in 1983 , intending this song as a criticism of Jackson 's purported denial of paternity . 
 Frequently listed in magazine polls of the best songs ever made , " Billie Jean " was named the greatest dance record of all time by BBC Radio 2 listeners . In a list compiled by Rolling Stone and MTV in 2000 , the song was ranked as the sixth greatest pop song since 1963 . 
 Rolling Stone placed the song at # 58 on its list of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time ( 2010 ) . Billie Jean was voted number 2 in the ' The Nation 's Favourite Number 1 Single " , a British TV programme airing on ITV on 21 July 2012 . The British public had to choose their favourite number one from the past 60 years of music . " Bohemian Rhapsody " by Queen was voted the favourite . In a similar poll in 2015 the song was voted by the British public as the nation 's second favourite 1980s number one , being beaten to first place by " Every Breath You Take " by The Police . 
 In 2013 , WatchMojo.com ranked " Billie Jean " as the best Michael Jackson song . Users of the site cast their votes online . According to the host Rebecca Brayton she commented , " Its perfect blend of dance , pop and R & B cemented Jackson 's place in music history while its video helped popularize MTV and shatter racial boundaries . " 
 In an interview , Pharrell Williams stated that " Billie Jean " was one of his favorite songs . " It is hard to say if there is a greater song than " Billie Jean " . I think there will never be a song like this one again , with this bassline , with this kind of effect , this <unk> , this perfection . " The song has featured in the film Charlie 's Angels and the 2002 video game Grand Theft Auto : Vice City . When re @-@ released as part of the Visionary campaign in 2006 , " Billie Jean " charted at No. 11 in the UK . It remained in the top 200 for over 40 weeks and was the most successful reissue by some distance . To this day , " Billie Jean " is still in heavy rotation ; it is played on over 90 % of the world 's radios and receives more than 250 @,@ 000 spins per week in clubs around the world . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Michael Jackson – songwriting , composition , vocals arrangement , rhythm arrangement , lead vocals , background vocals . 
 Leon <unk> Chancler – drums 
 Louis Johnson – bass guitar 
 David Williams – guitar 
 Michael Boddicker – E @-@ mu Emulator 
 Greg Smith – synthesizer 
 Bill Wolfer – synthesizer and synthesizer programming 
 Jerry Hey – string arrangement 
 Jeremy Lubbock – string conducting 
 Bruce Swedien – mixing 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = Lajjun = 
 Lajjun ( Arabic : <unk> , al @-@ <unk> ) was a Palestinian Arab village located 16 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) in Mandatory Palestine , northwest of Jenin and 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) south of the remains of the biblical city of Megiddo . Named after an early Roman legion camp in Syria Palaestina province called " Legio " , located at the village site , Lajjun 's history of habitation spanned some 2 @,@ 000 years . Under Abbasid rule it was the capital of a subdistrict , during Mamluk rule , it served as an important station in the postal route and during Ottoman rule , it was the capital of a district that bore its name . After the collapse of the Ottoman Empire towards the end of World War I , Lajjun and all of Palestine was placed under the administration of the British Mandate . The village was depopulated during the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War , when it was captured by Israel . Most of its residents subsequently fled and settled in the nearby city of Umm al @-@ Fahm . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Lajjun derives from the Roman name Legio , referring to the Roman legion stationed there . In the 3rd century , the town was renamed <unk> ( " City of Maximian " ) by Diocletian in honor of Maximian , his co @-@ emperor , but the inhabitants continued to use the old name . Under the Caliphate , the name was Arabicized into al @-@ <unk> or el @-@ <unk> , which was used until the Crusaders conquered Palestine in 1099 . The Crusaders restored the Roman name " Legio " , and introduced new names such as <unk> and le Lyon , but after the town was reconquered by the Muslims in 1187 , " al @-@ Lajjun " once again became its name . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Antiquity = = = 
 Lajjun is about 1 kilometer ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) south of Tel Megiddo , also called Tell al @-@ <unk> , which is identified with ancient Megiddo . During the rule of the Canaanites and then the Israelites , Megiddo , located on the military road leading from Asia to Egypt and in a commanding situation , was heavily fortified by both peoples . After the Bar Kochba Revolt — a Jewish uprising against the Roman — had been suppressed in 135 CE , the Roman emperor Hadrian ordered a second Roman legion , Legio VI Ferrata , ( " Ironclad " ) , to be stationed in the north of the country to guard the Wadi Ara region , a crucial line of communication between the coastal plain of Palestine and the Jezreel Valley . The place where it established its camp was known as Legio . Then in the 3rd century CE , when the army was removed , Legio became a city and its name was augmented with the adjectival <unk> . 
 = = = Early Muslim period = = = 
 Some Muslim historians believe the site of the Battle of Ajnadayn between the Muslim Arabs and the Byzantines in 634 CE was at Lajjun . Following the Muslim victory , Lajjun , along with most of Palestine , and southern Syria were incorporated into the Caliphate . According to medieval geographers <unk> and Ibn Hawqal , Lajjun was the northernmost town of Jund Filastin ( military district of Palestine ) . 
 The 10th @-@ century Persian geographer Ibn al @-@ Faqih wrote of a local legend related by the people of Lajjun regarding the source of the abundant spring used as the town 's primary water source over the ages : 
 there is just outside al @-@ Lajjun a large stone of round form , over which is built a dome , which they call the Mosque of Abraham . A copious stream of water flows from under the stone and it is reported that Abraham struck the stone with his staff , and there immediately flowed from it water enough to suffice for the supply of the people of the town , and also to water their lands . The spring continues to flow down to the present day . 
 In 940 , Ibn Ra 'iq , during his conflict over control of Syria with the Ikhshidids of Egypt , fought against them in an indecisive battle at Lajjun . During the battle , Abu Nasr al @-@ Husayn — the Ikhshidid general and brother of the Ikhshidid ruler , Muhammad ibn Tughj — was killed . Ibn Ra 'iq was remorseful at the sight of Husayn 's dead body and offered his seventeen @-@ year @-@ old son , Abu 'l @-@ Fath Muzahim , to Ibn Tughj " to do with him whatever they saw fit " . Ibn Tughj was honored by Ibn Ra 'iq 's gesture ; instead of executing Muzahim , he gave the latter several gifts and robes , then married him to his daughter Fatima . 
 In 945 , the Hamdanids of Aleppo and the Ikhshidids fought a battle in Lajjun . It resulted in an Ikhshidid victory putting a halt to Hamdanid expansion southward under the leadership of Sayf al @-@ Dawla . The Jerusalemite geographer , al @-@ Muqaddasi , wrote in 985 that Lajjun was " a city on the frontier of Palestine , and in the mountain country ... it is well situated and is a pleasant place " . Moreover , it was the center of a nahiya ( subdistrict ) of Jund al @-@ Urdunn , which also included the towns of Nazareth and Jenin . 
 = = = Crusader , Ayyubid and Mamluk periods = = = 
 When the Crusaders invaded and conquered the Levant from the Fatimids in 1099 , al @-@ Lajjun 's Roman name , " Legio " , was restored and the town formed a part of the lordship of Caesarea . During this time , Christian settlement in Legio grew significantly . John of Ibelin records that the community " owed the service of 100 sergeants " . Bernard , the archbishop of Nazareth granted some of the tithes of Legio to the hospital of the monastery of St. Mary in 1115 , then in 1121 , he extended the grant to include all of Legio , including its church as well as the nearby village of Ti <unk> . By 1147 , the de Lyon family controlled Legio , but by 1168 , the town was held by <unk> , the lord of Haifa . Legio had markets , a town oven and held other economic activities during this era . In 1182 , the Ayyubids raided Legio , and in 1187 , it was captured by them under the leadership of Saladin 's nephew Husam ad @-@ Din ' Amr and consequently its Arabic name was restored . 
 In 1226 , Arab geographer Yaqut al @-@ Hamawi writes of the Mosque of Abraham in Lajjun , the town 's " copious stream " , and that it was a " part of the Jordan Province " . A number of Muslim kings and prominent persons passed through the village , including Ayyubid sultan al @-@ Kamil , who gave his daughter ' Ashura ' in marriage to his nephew while visiting the town in 1231 . The Ayyubids ceded Lajjun to the Crusaders in 1241 , but it fell to the Mamluks under Baibars in 1263 . A year later , a party of Templars and Hospitallers raided Lajjun and took 300 men and women captives to Acre . In the treaty between Sultan Qalawun and the Crusaders on 4 June 1283 , Lajjun was listed as the Mamluk territory . 
 By 1300 , the the Levant was entirely in Mamluk hands and divided into several provinces . Lajjun became the center of a nahiya ( subdistrict ) in the province of Safad , encompassing the villages of al @-@ <unk> , Kawkab al @-@ Hawa , and Jenin . The Mamluks fortified it in the 15th century and the town became a major staging post on the postal route ( braid ) between Egypt and Damascus . 
 = = = Ottoman era = = = 
 = = = = Early rule and the Tarabay family = = = = 
 The Ottoman Empire conquered most of Palestine from the Mamluks after the Battle of Marj Dabiq in 1517 . As the army of Sultan Selim I moved south towards Egypt , Tarabay ibn <unk> , chieftain of the Bani <unk> , a Bedouin tribe from the Hejaz , supported them by contributing guides and scouts . When the Mamluks were completely uprooted and Selim returned to Istanbul , the Tarabays were granted the territory of Lajjun . The town eventually became the capital of the Sanjak ( " District " ) of Lajjun , which was a part of the province of Damascus , and encompassed the Jezreel Valley , northern Samaria , and a part of the north @-@ central coastline of Palestine as its territory . It was composed of four <unk> ( " sub @-@ districts " ) ( <unk> , Sahel Atlit , Sa 'ra , and <unk> ) , and encompassed a total of 55 villages , including Haifa , Jenin , and Baysan . 
 After a short period in which the Tarabays were in a state of rebellion , tensions suddenly died down and the Ottomans appointed Ali ibn Tarabay as the governor of Lajjun in 1559 . His son Assaf Tarabay ruled Lajjun from 1571 to 1583 . During his reign , he extended Tarabay power and influence to Sanjak Nablus . In 1579 , Assaf , referred to as the " <unk> of al @-@ Lajjun , " is mentioned as the builder of a mosque in the nearby village of al @-@ <unk> . Assaf was deposed and banished in 1583 to the island of Rhodes . Six years later , in 1589 , he was pardoned and resettled in the town . At the time , an impostor also named Assaf , had attempted to seize control of Sanjak Lajjun . Known later as Assaf al @-@ <unk> ( " Assaf the Liar " ) , he was arrested and executed in Damascus where he traveled in attempt to confirm his appointment as governor of the district . In 1596 , Lajjun was a part of the nahiya of Sha 'ra and paid taxes on a number of crops , including wheat , barley , as well as goats , beehives and water buffaloes . 
 Assaf Tarabay was not reinstated as governor , but Lajjun remained in Tarabay hands , under the rule of Governor Tarabay ibn Ali who was succeeded upon his death by his son Ahmad in 1601 , who also ruled until his death in 1657 . Ahmad , known for his courage and hospitality , helped the Ottomans defeat the rebel <unk> and gave shelter to Yusuf Sayfa — <unk> 's principal rival . Ahmad , in coordination with the governors of Gaza ( the Ridwan family ) and Jerusalem ( the Farrukh family ) , also fought against Fakhr ad @-@ Din II in a prolonged series of battles , which ended with the victory of the Tarabay @-@ Ridwan @-@ Farrukh alliance after their forces routed Fakhr ad @-@ Din 's army at the al @-@ Auja river in central Palestine in 1623 . 
 The Ottoman authorities of Damascus expanded Ahmad 's fief as a token of gratitude . Ahmad 's son Zayn Tarabay ruled Lajjun for a brief period until his death in 1660 . He was succeeded by Ahmad 's brother Muhammad Tarabay , who — according to his French secretary — had good intentions for governing Lajjun , but was addicted to opium and as a result had been a weak leader . After his death in 1671 , other members of the Tarabay family ruled Lajjun until 1677 when the Ottomans replaced them with a government officer . The main reason behind the Ottoman abandonment of the Tarabays was that their larger tribe , the Bani <unk> , migrated east of Lajjun to the eastern banks of the Jordan River . Later during this century , Sheikh <unk> , ancestor to the <unk> @-@ based Abd al @-@ Hadi clan , became the leader of Sanjak Lajjun . When Henry Maundrell visited in 1697 , he described the place as " an old village near which was a good khan . 
 = = = = Later Ottoman rule = = = = 
 By the 18th @-@ century , Lajjun was replaced by Jenin as the administrative capital of the sanjak which now included the Sanjak of Ajlun . By the 19th @-@ century it was renamed Sanjak Jenin , although Ajlun was separated from it . Zahir al @-@ Umar , who became the effective ruler of the Galilee for a short period during the second half of the 18th @-@ century , was reported to have used cannons against Lajjun in the course of his campaign between 1771 @-@ 1773 to capture Nablus . It is possible that this attack led to the village 's decline in the years that followed . By that time , Lajjun 's influence was diminished by the increasing strength of Acre 's political power and Nablus 's economic muscle . 
 Edward Robinson visited in 1838 , and noted that the khan , which Maundrell commented on , was for the accommodation of the caravans passing on the great road between Egypt and Damascus which Lajjun comes over the hills from the western plain along the coast and enters that of Esdraelon . When the British consul James Finn visited the area in the mid @-@ 19th century , he did not see a village . The authors of the Survey of Western Palestine also noticed a khan , however , south of the ruins of Lajjun in the early 1880s . 
 In the late 19th @-@ century , Arabs from Umm al @-@ Fahm migrated to al @-@ Lajjun to make use of its farmland . Gradually , they settled in the village , building their houses around the springs , especially next to the khan . When the massive mound at nearby Tall al @-@ <unk> ( ancient Megiddo ) was excavated by German archaeologists in 1903 , some of the inhabitants of Lajjun reused stones from the ancient structure that had been unearthed to build new housing . 
 = = = British Mandate period = = = 
 More people moved to Lajjun during the British mandate period , particularly in the late thirties , due to the British crackdown on participants in the 1936 – 1939 Arab revolt in Palestine . The tomb of Yusuf Hamdan , a local leader of the revolt , is located in the village . Lajjun 's economy grew rapidly as a result of the influx of the additional population . As the village expanded , it was divided into three quarters , one to the east , one to the west , and another known as Khirbat al @-@ Khan . Each quarter was inhabited by one or more <unk> ( " clans " ) ; the al @-@ Mahajina al @-@ <unk> and al @-@ <unk> clans , the al @-@ <unk> and al @-@ Mahamid clans , and the al @-@ Mahajina al @-@ <unk> clan . 
 Lajjun had a school that was founded in 1937 and that had an enrollment of 83 in 1944 . It was located in the quarter belonging to the al @-@ Mahajina al @-@ <unk> clan , that is , in Khirbat al @-@ Khan . In 1943 one of the large landowners in the village financed the construction of a mosque , built of white stone , in the al @-@ <unk> ( eastern ) quarter . Another mosque was also established in the al @-@ Mahamid quarter during the same period , and was financed by the residents themselves . 
 There was a small market place in the village , as well as six grain mills ( powered by the numerous springs and wadis in the vicinity ) , and a health center . The various quarters of Lajjun had many shops . A bus company was established in Lajjun by a villager from Umm al @-@ Fahm ; the bus line served Umm al @-@ Fahm , Haifa , and a number of villages , such as Zir 'in . In 1937 , the line had seven buses . Subsequently , the company was licensed to serve Jenin also , and acquired the name of " al @-@ Lajjun Bus Company " . 
 = = = 1948 War = = = 
 Lajjun was allotted to the Arab state in the 1947 United Nations Partition Plan . The village was defended by the Arab Liberation Army ( ALA ) . It was first assaulted by the Haganah on April 13 , during the battle around kibbutz Mishmar <unk> . ALA commander Fawzi al @-@ Qawuqji claimed Jewish forces ( " Haganah " ) had attempted to reach the crossroads at Lajjun in an outflanking operation , but the attack failed . The New York Times reported that twelve Arabs were killed and fifteen wounded during that Haganah offensive . Palmach units of the Haganah raided and blew up most of Lajjun on the night of April 15 – 16 . 
 On April 17 , it was occupied by the Haganah . According to the newspaper , Lajjun was the " most important place taken by the Jews , whose offensive has carried them through ten villages south and east of Mishmar Ha <unk> . " The report added that women and children had been removed from the village and that 27 buildings in the village were blown up by the Haganah . However , al @-@ Qawuqji states that attacks resumed on May 6 , when ALA positions in the area of Lajjun were attacked by Haganah forces . The ALA 's Yarmouk Battalion and other ALA units drove back their forces , but two days later , the ALA commander reported that the Haganah was " trying to cut off the Lajjun area from Tulkarm in preparation of seizing Lajjun and Jenin ... " 
 On May 30 , 1948 , in the first stage of the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War , Lajjun was captured by Israel 's Golani Brigade in Operation Gideon . The capture was particularly important for the Israelis because of its strategic location at the entrance of the Wadi Ara , which thus , brought their forces closer to Jenin . During the second truce between Israel and the Arab coalition , in early September , a United Nations official fixed the permanent truce line in the area of Lajjun , according to press reports . A 500 @-@ yard strip was established on both sides of the line in which Arabs and Jews were allowed to harvest their crops . Lajjun was used as transit place by the Israel Defense Forces to transfer 1 @,@ 400 Arab women , children and elderly from <unk> , who then were sent on foot to Jenin . 
 Walid Khalidi describes the remains of Lajjun : 
 Only the white stone mosque , one village mill , the village health center , and a few partially destroyed houses remain on the site . The mosque has been converted into a carpentry workshop and one of the houses has been made into a chicken coop . The health center and grain mill are deserted , and the school is gone . The cemetery remains , but it is in a neglected state ; the tomb of Yusuf al @-@ Hamdan , a prominent nationalist who fell in the 1936 revolt , is clearly visible . The surrounding lands are planted with almond trees , wheat , and barley ; they also contain animal sheds , a fodder plant , and a pump installed on the spring of ' Ayn al @-@ Hajja . The site is tightly fenced in and entry is blocked . 
 = = = Post @-@ 1948 = = = 
 Kibbutz Megiddo was built on some of Lajjun 's village lands . A few of the buildings from Lajjun still stand within the kibbutz grounds , including the mosque known as the " White " which was built in 1943 . Today the building is a carpentry shop . Andrew Petersen , inspecting the place in 1993 , noted that the principal extant buildings at the site are the khan and a bridge . The bridge , which crosses a major tributary of the Kishon River , is approximately 4 meters ( 13 ft ) wide and 16 meters ( 52 ft ) to 20 meters ( 66 ft ) long . It is carried on three arches , the north side has been robbed of its outer face , while the south side is heavily overgrown with vegetation . According to Petersen , the bridge was already in ruins when drawn by William Charles Wilson in the 1870s . The khan is located on a low hill 150 meters ( 490 ft ) to the southwest of the bridge . It is a square enclosure measuring approximately 30 meters ( 98 ft ) per side with a central courtyard . The ruins are covered with vegetation , and only the remains of one room is visible . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Lajjun is situated on an elevated hill with an altitude of 150 meters above sea level , located on the southwestern edge of the Jezreel Valley ( Marj ibn Amer ) . The village is located on both the banks of Wadi al @-@ Lajjun , with Jenin and the entire valley visible from it . It is bordered by Tall al @-@ <unk> to the northeast , and by Tall al @-@ Asmar to the northwest . Lajjun , which was linked by secondary roads to the Jenin @-@ Haifa road , and the road that led southwest to the town of Umm al @-@ Fahm , laid close to the junctions of the two highways . The main spring that supplied the village with water was Ayn al @-@ Hajja . 
 Lajjun was located 16 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) northwest of Jenin and according to al @-@ Hamawi , roughly 32 kilometers ( 20 mi ) southwest of <unk> and 64 kilometers ( 40 mi ) north of Ramla . Nearby localities included , the destroyed village of Ayn al @-@ Mansi to the northwest , and the surviving villages of <unk> to the south , <unk> and <unk> to the southwest , and <unk> ( part of the Palestinian territories ) to the southeast . The largest town near al @-@ Lajjun was Umm al @-@ Fahm , to the south . 
 Lajjun , Umm al @-@ Fahm and seven hamlets had a total land area of 77 @.@ 24 square kilometres ( 29 @.@ 82 sq mi ) , of which 68 @.@ 3 square kilometres ( 26 @.@ 4 sq mi ) was Arab @-@ owned , and the remainder being public property . There was a total of 50 km2 ( 12 @,@ 000 acres ) of land that was cultivated ; 4 @.@ 3 km2 ( 1 @,@ 100 acres ) were used for plantations and irrigated , and 44 @.@ 6 km2 ( 11 @,@ 000 acres ) were planted with cereals ( wheat and barley ) . The built @-@ up area of the villages was 0 @.@ 128 km2 ( 32 acres ) , most of it being in Umm al @-@ Fahm and Lajjun . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 During early Ottoman rule , in 1596 , Lajjun had a population of 226 people . In the British Mandate census in 1922 , there were 417 inhabitants . In the 1931 census of Palestine , the population had more than doubled to 857 , of which 829 were Muslims , 26 were Christians , as well as two Jews . In that year , there were 162 houses in the village . At the end of 1940 , Lajjun had 1 @,@ 103 inhabitants . 
 The prominent families of al @-@ Lajjun were the <unk> , <unk> , Mahamid and the Mahajina . Around 80 % of its inhabitants fled to Umm al @-@ Fahm , where they currently live as Arab citizens of Israel and internally displaced Palestinians . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Local tradition centered on Ayn al @-@ Hajja , the spring of Lajjun , date back to the 10th century CE when the village was under Islamic rule . According to geographers of that century , as well as the 12th century , the legend was that under the Mosque of Abraham , a " copious stream flowed " which formed immediately after the prophet Abraham struck the stone with his staff . Abraham had entered the town with his flock of sheep on his way towards Egypt , and the people of the village informed him that the village possessed only small quantities of water , thus Abraham should pass on the village to another . According to the legend , Abraham was commanded to strike the rock , resulting in water " bursting out copiously " . From then , the village orchards and crops were well @-@ irrigated and the people satisfied with a surplus of drinking water from the spring . 
 In Lajjun there are tombs for two Mamluk @-@ era Muslim relics who were from the village . The holy men were Ali Shafi 'i who died in 1310 and Ali ibn Jalal who died in 1400 . 
 = John S. Clark = 
 John S. Clark ( 21 March 1885 – 1 June 1956 ) was a Scottish @-@ born Australian entomologist and myrmecologist known for his study of Australian ants . Born in Glasgow , he developed an interest in entomology at a young age . Clark first arrived in Australia in 1905 and originally worked for the state railways in Queensland . He developed an interest in ants shortly afterwards , collecting his first specimens in North Queensland . He married his first wife , Maggie Forbes in 1908 , bearing four children , until her death in 1935 . He married his second wife , Phyllis Marjorie <unk> in 1939 and had two daughters with her until she committed suicide in 1943 . As a result , Clark sent his daughters to an orphanage . 
 In 1919 , Clark worked as the assistant to the entomologist on probation in the Western Australian Department of Agriculture , but in 1920 , he took on this position full @-@ time . He started to publish his first articles about pest insects and ants from 1921 ; in 1926 he became an entomologist at the National Museum in Melbourne , remaining there for 20 years . Clark continued to publish more articles until he resigned from the National Museum of Victoria in 1944 . Living in poverty , Clark lived a reclusive life , publishing his last book in 1951 . He died on 1 June 1956 at the age of 71 , survived by his six children . One of Clark 's most notable achievements was describing Nothomyrmecia macrops , the most primitive living ant . Several ants have been named after him in recognition of his contributions . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 John S. Clark was born on 21 March 1885 in Glasgow , Scotland , to parents James Souttar Clark , a coach @-@ painter , and Maggie Clark ( née Scott ) . At an early age , Clark had an interest in entomology throughout his years in Glasgow and adult life in Australia . Clark migrated to Australia in 1905 with little formal education but found himself working for the state railways in Queensland . There , he found an interest in ants and made his first collection of specimens in North Queensland . In May 1908 , Clark married his first wife , Maggie Forbes , at the Cairns Presbyterian Church . After their marriage , they moved to Geraldton in Western Australia , where Clark worked for the railways as a wheelwright . He had one son and three daughters with Forbes ; Forbes would later die from heart disease in 1935 . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Australian entomologist Leslie John William Newman of the Western Australian Department of Agriculture noticed Clark 's enthusiasm for natural history , and on probation , took Clark in as the assistant to the entomologist in 1919 . In 1920 , Clark 's position in the Department of Agriculture was confirmed ; due to this , Clark and his family moved to Perth . He began publishing his first papers discussing the history of entomology in Western Australia in 1921 , and also basic articles about ants , insect pests in Australian forests and myrmecophilous beetles . Three years after his articles were first published , Clark was promoted to assistant @-@ entomologist . Scientists attending the 1926 Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science suggested that Clark should apply for a position as " entomologist " at the National Museum of Victoria , in which he was appointed in late 1926 and began working there in 1927 . After working for the museum , he found museum work " not to his liking " and tried to apply for the post of " economic entomologist " in New Guinea , which at the time was an Australian administered @-@ territory . However , this was unsuccessful for Clark , who would remain at the National Museum of Victoria for nearly 20 years . In 1933 , Clark sold 8 @,@ 000 ant specimens he collected to the museum for about £ 200 . 
 Following the death of his first wife in 1935 , Clark moved from Hawthorn to <unk> Gully in Melbourne . A couple of years later in 1939 , he married his second wife , Phyllis Marjorie <unk> , at the Office of the Government Statist , bearing two more daughters . <unk> committed suicide in 1943 , three months after she gave birth to her second daughter ; Clark would later send them to an orphanage as he was unable to look after them . Clark 's intemperate attitude to his peers and superiors and lack of qualifications <unk> his career , although he was welcoming to amateurs . In 1944 , Clark resigned from the National Museum of Victoria after Australian botanist Richard <unk> became the director of the museum . As a result , he moved to <unk> and lived in poverty , losing all of his entitlements . Due to his reputable view as an authority on ants , Clark worked on a monograph of ants in Australia , supported by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation through grants . His first volume was published in 1951 , which covered the Australian bulldog ants ( subfamily Myrmeciinae ) . However , the first volume received poor reviews , and no further volume was released . In fact , it is unknown whether or not any further volume will be released . 
 = = Research = = 
 Aside from some papers published discussing myrmecophilous beetles and insect pests in forests , Clark predominately researched and published articles about the taxonomy of Australian ants . All of his articles and monographs were published in Australia . Throughout his career , Clark described around 200 different species of ants , but half of these may be synonyms . He worked and researched with all of the main groups of Australian ants , but his research and revisionary efforts were extensive with members of the former subfamily <unk> ( now <unk> ) , especially those of <unk> , the Myrmeciinae , Rhytidoponera and members of the tribe <unk> . 
 Clark is most notable for describing the dinosaur ant ( Nothomyrmecia macrops ) , which is the most primitive living ant in the world and second most primitive when the fossil record is included . The first collection of Nothomyrmecia was made in December 1931 by Amy Crocker who collected specimens of two worker ants , reportedly near the Russell Range from Israelite Bay in Western Australia . Crocker sent the two specimens to Clark at the museum for study ; in 1934 , Clark published a formal description of Nothomyrmecia as a completely new genus of the Myrmeciinae . He did so because the two specimens ( which then became the syntypes ) bore no resemblance to any ant species he knew of , although they did share similar morphological characteristics with the extinct genus Prionomyrmex . This unusual ant remained unknown to scientists , causing intense scientific interest in the early 1950s . Over three decades , however , teams of Australian and American collectors failed to re @-@ find it after they initiated a series of searches . Then , in 1977 , entomologist Robert Taylor and his party of entomologists from Canberra found a solitary worker ant at Poochera , southeast of Ceduna , some 1 @,@ 300 km ( 810 mi ) from the reported site of the 1931 discovery . After 46 years of searching for it , entomologists have dubbed the ant the " Holy Grail " of myrmecology . Such discovery of Nothomyrmecia and its general nature marks it as one of Clark 's most notable achievements . 
 = = Death and recognition = = 
 Clark died at his <unk> home on 1 June 1956 , at the age of 71 . American entomologist William Brown Jr. notes that Clark was living the life of a " recluse " during his declining years . Survived by six children , Clark was buried in Burwood Cemetery . At the time of his death , the majority of his ant collection were housed in the National Museum of Victoria , the Natural History Museum in London and the Museum of Comparative Zoology in Cambridge . One of Clark 's daughters , Ellen Clark , was a renowned naturalist . She had worked with her father at the museum in 1940 and was the secretary of the virus department of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research . As well as that , she worked for the Argus and Australasian and published papers on influenza virus research and crustaceans . 
 A number of ants have been named after Clark . The holotype of Polyrhachis clarki was originally collected by Clark , but it was not described until 2013 . There , the author of the article named the ant after him . <unk> clarki is another ant named after Clark for his contributions towards Australian ants , being described by American entomologist William Morton Wheeler in 1933 . Ants he collected that bear his name include Dolichoderus clarki , <unk> clarki and <unk> clarki . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Over the course of his career , Clark published over 35 entomological papers . The following publications are found at the Hymenoptera Online Database : 
 Books 
 Clark , J.S. ( 1951 ) . The Formicidae of Australia ( Volume 1 ) . Subfamily Myrmeciinae . ( PDF ) . Melbourne , Victoria : CSIRO Publishing. pp. 1 – 230 . 
 Journals 
 = The Boat Race 1909 = 
 The 66th Boat Race took place on 3 April 1909 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Cambridge were reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race , while Oxford 's heavier crew contained three Olympic gold medallists . In a race umpired by Frederick I. Pitman , Oxford won by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 50 seconds . It was their first win in four races and took the overall record to 35 – 30 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2015 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1908 race by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , while Oxford led overall with 34 victories to Cambridge 's 30 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were G. C. Bourne who had rowed for the university in the 1882 and 1883 races , Francis Escombe ( for the sixth consecutive year ) , Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) , W. F. C. Holland who had rowed for Oxford four times between 1887 and 1890 , and Felix Warre ( who had rowed in 1898 and 1899 ) . Cambridge were coached by Stanley Muttlebury , five @-@ time Blue between 1886 and 1890 , and David Alexander Wauchope ( who had rowed in the 1895 race ) . For the sixth year the umpire was old Etonian Frederick I. Pitman who rowed for Cambridge in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 Former rower and author George Drinkwater noted that Oxford had " a considerable wealth of material " at their disposal , while Cambridge had " very good Trial Eights " . He went on to describe Oxford as " a very rough crew " upon arrival at Putney . Conversely , Cambridge " rapidly got together " and despite a late replacement at bow , Cambridge were favourites to win the race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 8 @.@ 25 lb ( 79 @.@ 8 kg ) , 3 @.@ 25 pounds ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge 's crew contained three rowers with Boat Race experience , including H. E. Kitching , Edward Williams and Douglas Stuart . Oxford saw six crew members return to the boat , including Alister Kirby and Albert Gladstone , both of whom were making their fourth consecutive appearances . Six occupants of the Dark Blue boat were educated at Eton College . Oxford 's number three , Australian Collier Cudmore , was the only non @-@ British participant registered in the race . Three of the Oxford crew who were studying at Magdalen College , Duncan Mackinnon , James Angus Gillan and Cudmore , were gold medallists in the men 's coxless four at the 1908 Summer Olympics . Cambridge 's number five , Edward Gordon Williams , won a bronze medal in the men 's eight in the same Olympiad . Six of the Oxford crew were studying at Magdalen College , while five of Cambridge 's were matriculated at Trinity Hall . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Drinkwater described the conditions as " perfect " and umpire Pitman started the race at 12 : 38 p.m. Both crews made strong starts but Oxford edged ahead and held a third of a length lead after a minute which they extended to a half @-@ length after two minutes . The Cambridge stroke Stuart kept the Light Blue stroke rate high round the bend to the Mile Post and his counterpart Bourne allowed them to draw level by Harrods Furniture Depository . 
 As the crews passed below Hammersmith Bridge , Cambridge held a slender lead . Despite a number of spurts from Oxford , the Light Blues held on to the lead , but relinquished it briefly before Stuart spurted once again as the crews passed into Corney Reach to re @-@ take the lead . Oxford pushed on 300 yards ( 270 m ) before Barnes Bridge and left Cambridge behind " as if standing " . Clear at Barnes Bridge , Oxford extended their lead with every stroke and won by three and a half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 50 seconds . It was Oxford 's first victory in four years and took the overall record in the event to 35 – 30 in their favour . 
 = SpongeBob SquarePants = 
 SpongeBob SquarePants is an American animated television series created by marine biologist and animator Stephen Hillenburg for Nickelodeon . The series chronicles the adventures and endeavors of the title character and his various friends in the fictional underwater city of Bikini Bottom . The series ' popularity has made it a media franchise , as well as the highest rated series to ever air on Nickelodeon , and the most distributed property of MTV Networks . The media franchise has generated $ 8 billion in merchandising revenue for Nickelodeon . 
 Many of the ideas for the series originated in an unpublished educational comic book titled The Intertidal Zone , which Hillenburg created in 1989 . He began developing SpongeBob SquarePants into a television series in 1996 upon the cancellation of Rocko 's Modern Life , and turned to Tom Kenny , who had worked with him on that series , to voice the title character . SpongeBob was originally going to be named SpongeBoy , and the series was to be called SpongeBoy Ahoy ! , but these were both changed , as the name was already trademarked . 
 Nickelodeon held a preview for the series in the United States on May 1 , 1999 , following the television airing of the 1999 Kids ' Choice Awards . The series officially premiered on July 17 , 1999 . It has received worldwide critical acclaim since its premiere and gained enormous popularity by its second season . A feature film , The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , was released in theaters on November 19 , 2004 , and a sequel was released on February 6 , 2015 . On July 21 , 2012 , the series was renewed and aired its ninth season , beginning with the episode " Extreme Spots " . 
 The series has won a variety of awards , including six Annie Awards , eight Golden Reel Awards , two Emmy Awards , 12 Kids ' Choice Awards , and two BAFTA Children 's Awards . Despite its widespread popularity , the series has been involved in several public controversies , including one centered on speculation over SpongeBob 's intended sexual orientation , and another focusing on the perceived declining quality of the show 's content since the release of the first film . In 2011 , a newly described species of mushroom , Spongiforma squarepantsii , was named after the cartoon 's title character . 
 = = Premise = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The series revolves around its title character and his various friends . SpongeBob SquarePants is an energetic and optimistic sea sponge ( although his appearance more closely resembles a kitchen sponge ) who lives in a sea pineapple and loves his job as a fry cook at the Krusty Krab . He has a pet snail , Gary , who meows like a cat . Living two houses down from SpongeBob is his best friend Patrick Star , a dim @-@ witted yet friendly pink starfish who lives under a rock . Despite his " mental setbacks " , Patrick still sees himself as intelligent . Squidward Tentacles is SpongeBob 's next @-@ door neighbor and co @-@ worker at the Krusty Krab . Squidward is an arrogant and ill @-@ tempered octopus who lives in an Easter Island moai and dislikes his neighbors ( especially SpongeBob ) for their childlike behavior . He enjoys playing the clarinet and painting self @-@ portraits , but hates his job as a cashier . 
 Another close friend of SpongeBob is Sandy Cheeks , a squirrel from Texas . She is a scientist and an expert in karate . She lives in an underwater tree dome ( a tree Sandy brought with her that is entrapped in a clear glass dome locked by a tight , hand @-@ turned seal ) . When outside of her dwelling , she wears an astronaut @-@ like suit because she cannot breathe underwater . Mr. Krabs , a miserly crab obsessed with money , is the owner of the Krusty Krab restaurant and SpongeBob 's boss . His rival , Plankton , is a small green copepod who owns a low @-@ rank fast @-@ food restaurant called the Chum Bucket , located across the street from the Krusty Krab . Plankton spends most of his time planning to steal the secret recipe for Mr. Krabs ' popular Krabby Patty burgers , so as to gain the upper hand and put the Krusty Krab out of business . 
 Other recurring characters appear throughout the series , such as SpongeBob 's ever @-@ suffering driving teacher Mrs. Puff ; Mr. Krabs ' whiney teenage whale daughter Pearl ; Plankton 's intelligent yet sarcastic computer wife Karen ; the muscular lifeguard of Goo Lagoon , Larry the Lobster ; a pirate specter known as The Flying Dutchman ; and retired superheroes Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy , who are idolized by SpongeBob and Patrick . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The series predominantly takes place in the benthic underwater city of Bikini Bottom which , according to some third @-@ party sources , is located in the Pacific Ocean beneath the real @-@ life coral reef known as Bikini Atoll . In 2015 , Tom Kenny confirmed that the fictitious city was named after Bikini Atoll , but denied an Internet fan theory that connected the series ' characters to actual nuclear testing that occurred in the atoll . 
 The citizens live in mostly aquatic @-@ themed buildings and use " <unk> " , amalgamations of cars and boats , as a mode of transportation . Recurring establishments present in Bikini Bottom include two competing restaurants , the Krusty Krab and the Chum Bucket ; Mrs. Puff 's Boating School ; and Shady Shoals Rest Home . Goo Lagoon , a popular beach hangout , is within the vicinity of the city , as is Jellyfish Fields . There are also a few episodes with businesses such as the grocery store , joke store , and mattress store . 
 When the crew began production on the pilot , they were tasked with designing the stock locations where " ... the show would return to again and again , and in which most of the action would take place , such as the Krusty Krab and SpongeBob 's pineapple house " . The idea for the series was " to keep everything nautical " , so the crew used a great amount of rope , wooden planks , ships ' wheels , netting , anchors , <unk> , and rivets in creating the show 's setting . Bubbles filing up the screen is also a nautical technique used to transition from scene to scene . 
 The series features " sky flowers " as a main setting material . They first appeared in the pilot and have since become a common feature throughout the series . When series background designer Kenny Pittenger was asked what they were , he answered , " They function as clouds in a way , but since the show takes place underwater , they aren 't really clouds " . Since the series was influenced by tiki , the background painters have to use a lot of pattern . Pittenger said that the sky flowers were meant to " evoke the look of a flower @-@ print Hawaiian shirt " . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Early inspirations = = = 
 Series creator Stephen Hillenburg first became fascinated with the ocean as a child . Also at a young age , he began developing his artistic abilities . However , these two interests would not coincide for a long time — the idea of drawing fish seemed boring to him . During college , he majored in marine biology and minored in art . After graduating in 1984 , he joined the Ocean Institute , an organization in Dana Point , California , dedicated to educating the public about marine science and maritime history . 
 While Hillenburg was there , he created a precursor to SpongeBob SquarePants : a comic book titled The Intertidal Zone , which was used by the institute to teach visiting students about the animal life of tide pools . The comic starred various anthropomorphic sea lifeforms , many of which would evolve into SpongeBob characters . Hillenburg tried to get the comic professionally published , but none of the companies to which he sent it were interested . 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 During his time of employment at the Ocean Institute , Hillenburg attended an animation festival and determined that he wanted to pursue a career in that field . He had already been planning on returning to college for a master 's degree in art . Instead , he chose to study experimental animation at the California Institute of the Arts . His thesis film , Wormholes , is about the theory of relativity . It was screened at festivals , and at one of these , Hillenburg met Joe Murray , creator of the popular Nickelodeon animated series , Rocko 's Modern Life . Murray was impressed by the style of the film and offered Hillenburg a job . Hillenburg joined the series as a director and later , during the fourth season , he took on the roles of producer and creative director . 
 Martin Olson , one of the writers for Rocko 's Modern Life , read The Intertidal Zone and encouraged Hillenburg to create a television series with a similar concept . At that point , Hillenburg had not even considered creating his own series . However , he realized that if he ever did , this would be the best approach . He began to further develop some of the characters from The Intertidal Zone , including the comic 's " announcer " , Bob the Sponge . He wanted his series to stand out from most popular cartoons of the time , which he felt were exemplified by buddy comedies such as The Ren & Stimpy Show . As a result , Hillenburg decided to focus on one main character : the weirdest sea creature that he could think of . This led him to the sponge . Bob the Sponge resembles an actual sea sponge , and at first Hillenburg continued this design . In determining the new character 's personality , Hillenburg drew inspiration from innocent , childlike figures that he enjoyed , such as Charlie Chaplin , Laurel and Hardy , Jerry Lewis , and Pee @-@ wee Herman . He then considered modeling the character after a kitchen sponge and realized that this idea would perfectly match the character 's square personality . 
 To voice the central character of the series , Hillenburg turned to Tom Kenny , whose career in animation had started alongside Hillenburg 's on Rocko 's Modern Life . Elements of Kenny 's own personality were employed in further developing the character . Initially , Hillenburg wanted to use the name SpongeBoy — the character would have had no last name , and the series would have been called SpongeBoy Ahoy ! However , the Nickelodeon legal department discovered — after voice acting had been completed for the original seven @-@ minute pilot episode — that the name " SpongeBoy " was already in use for a mop product . Flaming Carrot Comics creator Bob Burden also owned the trademark to a character of the same name . In choosing a replacement name , Hillenburg felt that he still had to use the word " Sponge " , so that viewers would not mistake the character for a " Cheese Man " . He settled on the name " SpongeBob " . " SquarePants " was then chosen as a family name after Kenny saw a picture of the character and remarked , " Boy , look at this sponge in square pants , thinking he can get a job in a fast food place . " Hillenburg loved the phrase upon hearing Kenny say it and felt that it would reinforce the character 's nerdiness . 
 = = = Pitching = = = 
 In 1997 , while pitching the cartoon to Nickelodeon executives , Hillenburg donned a Hawaiian shirt , brought along an " underwater terrarium with models of the characters " , and played Hawaiian music to set the theme . The setup was described by Nickelodeon executive Eric Coleman as " pretty amazing " . When they were given money and two weeks to write the pilot episode " Help Wanted " , Derek Drymon , Stephen <unk> , and Nick Jennings returned with what was described by Nickelodeon official Albie Hecht as , " a performance [ he ] wished [ he ] had on tape " . Although executive producer Derek Drymon described the pitch as stressful , he said it went " very well " . Kevin Kay and Hecht had to step outside because they were " exhausted from laughing " , which worried the cartoonists . 
 In an interview , Cyma Zarghami , the current president of Nickelodeon , said , " their [ Nickelodeon executives ' ] immediate reaction was to see it again , both because they liked it and it was unlike anything they 'd ever seen before " . Zarghami was one of four executives in the room when SpongeBob SquarePants was screened for the first time . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Executive producers and showrunners = = = 
 Series creator Stephen Hillenburg has served as the executive producer over the course of the series ' entire history , and functioned as the showrunner from the series ' debut in 1999 until 2004 . The series went on hiatus in 2002 , after Hillenburg halted production to work on a feature film of the series , The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie . Once the film was finalized and the third season finished , Hillenburg resigned as the series ' showrunner . Although he no longer has a direct role in the production of the series , he still maintains an advisory role and reviews each episode . 
 When the film was completed , Hillenburg intended for it to be the series finale , " so [ the show ] wouldn 't jump the shark . " However , Nickelodeon wanted more episodes , so Hillenburg appointed Paul Tibbitt , who previously served on the show as a writer , director , and storyboard artist , to take over his role as showrunner and produce further seasons . Hillenburg considered Tibbitt one of his favorite members of the show 's crew , and " totally trusted him " . Tibbitt still holds the showrunner position , and has also functioned as a supervising producer since 2005 and an executive producer since 2008 . 
 On December 13 , 2014 , it was announced that Hillenburg would return to the series in an unspecified position . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 For SpongeBob SquarePants a team of five outline and premise writers creates the initial storylines . Writer Luke Brookshier said , " SpongeBob is written differently than many television shows " . Writing for an episode of the series starts with a two @-@ page outline . A storyboard director then takes the outline and develops it into a full episode — jokes and dialogue are added during this stage . Another writer for the series , Merriwether Williams , described in an interview that she and Mr. Lawrence would write a draft for an episode in an afternoon and be done at 4 o 'clock . 
 Hillenburg decided early on , prior to starting the production of the series , that he wanted SpongeBob SquarePants to be storyboard @-@ driven , rather than script @-@ driven . This required an approach in which artists " would take a skeletal story outline and flesh it out with sight gags , dialogue and a structure that would strike a balance between narrative and whimsy " . Hillenburg originally wanted " a team of young and hungry people " to work on the series . The primary figures , who had previously worked with Hillenburg on Rocko 's Modern Life , consisted of Alan Smart , Nick Jennings , and Derek Drymon . Head writer Steven Banks said , " The writers come up with an idea and write premises and outlines describing the story , and the storyboarders ( who are also writers ) write the dialogue while they draw the storyboard panels . Most other shows are script @-@ driven . We don 't write scripts and that has made all the difference ! " 
 The writing staff often used their individual life experiences for inspirations to come up with the storylines of the series ' episodes . For example , the episode " Sailor Mouth " , in which SpongeBob and Patrick learn profanity , was inspired by creative director Derek Drymon 's experience of getting in trouble as a child for using the f @-@ word in front of his mother . Drymon said , " The scene where Patrick is running to Mr. Krabs to tattle , with SpongeBob chasing him , is pretty much how it happened in real life " . The end of the episode , in which Mr. Krabs uses even more profanity than SpongeBob and Patrick , was inspired " by the fact that my [ Drymon 's ] mother has a sailor mouth herself " . The idea for the episode " The Secret Box " also came from one of Drymon 's childhood experiences . Hillenburg explained , " Drymon had a secret box [ as a kid ] and started telling us about it . We wanted to make fun of him and use it . " 
 Almost every episode is divided into two 11 @-@ minute segments . Hillenburg explained that " [ I ] never really wanted to deliberately try to write a half @-@ hour show " . He added , " I wrote the shows to where they felt right " . Each 11 @-@ minute segment takes about five months to produce . 
 = = = Voice actors = = = 
 SpongeBob SquarePants has six main cast members : Tom Kenny , Bill Fagerbakke , Rodger Bumpass , Clancy Brown , Carolyn Lawrence , and Mr. Lawrence . 
 Kenny provides the voices of SpongeBob SquarePants , his pet snail Gary , the French Narrator , Harold SquarePants , Patchy the Pirate , and the Dirty Bubble . Kenny previously worked with Hillenburg on Rocko 's Modern Life and , when Hillenburg created SpongeBob SquarePants , he approached Kenny to voice the character . The voice of SpongeBob was originally used by Kenny for a minor background character in Rocko 's Modern Life . Kenny says that SpongeBob 's high @-@ pitched laugh was specifically created to be unique . They wanted an annoying laugh in the tradition of Popeye and Woody Woodpecker . 
 Fagerbakke voices Patrick Star and other miscellaneous characters . At the same time when Hillenburg , Derek Drymon , and Tim Hill were writing the pilot " Help Wanted " , Hillenburg was also conducting auditions to find voices for the characters . Fagerbakke auditioned for the role of Patrick after Kenny had been cast . In an interview , Fagerbakke compared himself to the character and said , " It 's extremely gratifying " . Fagerbakke modeled his performance whenever Patrick is angry after that of American actress Shelley Winters . 
 Bumpass performs the voice of Squidward Tentacles and other miscellaneous characters . Arthur Brown , author of Everything I Need to Know , I Learned from Cartoons ! , has compared Squidward 's voice to that of Jack Benny 's . Hillenburg originally had Mr. Lawrence in mind for the role of voicing Squidward . 
 Clancy Brown provides the voice of Mr. Krabs . 
 Carolyn Lawrence provides the voice of Sandy Cheeks . Lawrence got the role of Sandy when she was in the Los Feliz neighborhood in Los Angeles . She met Donna Grillo , a casting director , on a sidewalk . Lawrence was with a friend who knew Grillo , and she said Lawrence had an interesting voice . Grillo brought in Lawrence to audition and she got the part of Sandy . Lawrence modeled her performance of Sandy after that of American actress Holly Hunter . 
 Mr. Lawrence voices Plankton . Drymon said , " We knew Doug [ Lawrence ] from Rocko , where he was a storyboard director and where he also did the voice of <unk> . We were showing Doug the storyboard , and he started reading back to us in his Tony the Tiger / Gregory Peck voice . It was really funny , and we wound up having SpongeBob use a deep voice when he entered the Krusty Krab for the first time " . Hillenburg loved the voice and decided to give Lawrence the part of series villain , Plankton . Aside from Plankton , Mr. Lawrence also voices recurring characters like Larry Lobster . 
 Karen , Mrs. Puff , Pearl , and the Flying Dutchman are voiced by Kenny 's wife Jill Talley , Mary Jo Catlett , Lori Alan and Brian Doyle @-@ Murray , respectively . Mr. Krabs ' mother , Mama Krabs , who debuted in the episode " Sailor Mouth " , was voiced by writer Paul Tibbitt . However , voice actress Sirena Irwin overtook Tibbitt 's role as the character reappeared in the fourth season episode " Enemy In @-@ Law " in 2005 . Tom Kenny portrays Patchy the Pirate , the president of the fictional SpongeBob SquarePants fan club , while series creator Hillenburg voiced the character of Potty the Parrot . After Hillenburg 's departure as showrunner in 2004 , Tibbitt was given the role in voicing Potty the Parrot . 
 In addition to the regular cast , episodes feature guest voices from many ranges of professions , including actors , athletes , authors , musicians , and artists . Recurring guest voices include : Ernest Borgnine , who voiced Mermaid Man from 1999 until his death in 2012 ; Tim Conway as the voice of Barnacle Boy ; and Marion Ross as Grandma SquarePants . Notable guests who have provided vocal cameo appearances includes David Bowie as Lord Royal Highness in the television film Atlantis SquarePantis , Johnny Depp as the voice of the surf guru , Jack Kahuna Laguna , in the episode " SpongeBob SquarePants vs. The Big One " , and Victoria Beckham as the voice of Queen Amphitrite in the episode " The Clash of Triton " . 
 Voice recording sessions always include a full cast of actors , which Kenny describes as " getting more unusual " . Kenny said , " That 's another thing that 's given SpongeBob its special feel . Everybody 's in the same room , doing it old radio @-@ show style . It 's how the stuff we like was recorded " . Series writer Jay Lender said , " The recording sessions were always fun ... " For the first three seasons , Hillenburg and Drymon sat in on the record studio , and they directed the actors . In the fourth season , Andrea Romano took over the role as the voice director . Wednesday is recording day , the same schedule followed by the crew since 1999 . Casting supervisor Jennie Monica Hammond said , " I loved Wednesdays " . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Approximately 50 people work together in animating and producing an episode of SpongeBob SquarePants . Throughout its run , production of the series has been handled domestically at Nickelodeon Animation Studio in Burbank , California , while the finished animation has been created overseas at Rough Draft Studios in South Korea . Storyboarding for each episode is done by the crew in California . The storyboards are then used as templates by the crew in Korea , who animate by hand , color cels on computers , and paint backgrounds . Episodes are finished in California , where they are edited and have music added . Every season , character designs are updated or modified to solve technical issues in the animation . 
 During the first season , the series used cel animation . A shift was made the following year to digital ink and paint animation . In 2009 , executive producer Paul Tibbitt said " The first season of SpongeBob was done the old @-@ fashioned way on cells , and every cell had to be part @-@ painted , left to dry , paint some other colours . It 's still a time @-@ consuming aspect of the process now , but the digital way of doing things means it doesn 't take long to correct " . 
 In 2008 , the crew shifted to using Wacom Cintiqs for the drawings instead of pencils . The fifth season episode " Pest of the West " was the first episode in the series to which the crew applied this method . Series background designer Kenny Pittenger said , " The only real difference between the way we draw now and the way we drew then is that we abandoned pencil and paper during the fifth season " . The crew began the shift while they were working on the episode . Pittenger said , " It was while we were working on ' Pest of the West ' , one of the half @-@ hour specials , that we made the switch ... did you notice ? " The shift to Wacom Cintiqs let the designers and animators draw on computer screens and make immediate changes or undo mistakes . Pittenger said , " Many neo @-@ Luddites — er ... I mean , many of my cohorts — don 't like working on them , but I find them useful . There 's no substitute for the immediacy of drawing on a piece of paper , of course , but digital nautical nonsense is still pretty fun " . 
 A stop @-@ motion opening sequence for the series ' 10th anniversary special was created by LA @-@ based animation studio Screen Novelties . The group was re @-@ enlisted a few years later to produce the eighth season episode " It 's a SpongeBob Christmas ! " This was the first full @-@ length episode in the series to be produced in stop motion animation . Mark Caballero , Seamus Walsh , and Christopher Finnegan of Screen Novelties animated the episode , and Caballero and Walsh also served as its directors . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The theme song was composed by Mark Harrison and Blaise Smith , while the lyrics to the song were written by series creator Stephen Hillenburg and the series ' original creative director Derek Drymon . The melody was inspired by the sea shanty " Blow the Man Down " . An old oil painting of a pirate is used in the opening sequence . It has been dubbed " Painty the Pirate " , and according to Tom Kenny , Hillenburg found it in a thrift shop " years ago " . Patrick Pinney gives voice to Painty the Pirate , singing the theme song as the character . Hillenburg 's lips were imposed onto the painting and move along with the lyrics . Kenny joked that this is " about as close of a glimpse as most SpongeBob fans are ever going to get of Steve Hillenburg " , because of Hillenburg 's private nature . 
 A cover of the song by Avril Lavigne can be found on the SpongeBob SquarePants Movie soundtrack . Another cover by the Violent Femmes aired on Nickelodeon as a promotion for the series moving to prime time . 
 Steve Belfer , one of Hillenburg 's friends from CalArts , wrote and performed the music that is played over the end credits . This theme includes ukulele music , per Hillenburg 's request . Drymon said , " It 's so long ago , it 's hard to be sure , but I remember Hillenburg having the Belfer music early on , maybe before the pilot " . 
 The series ' music editor and main composer is Nicolas Carr . After working with Hillenburg on Rocko 's Modern Life , Carr struggled to find a new job in his field . He had been considering a career change when Hillenburg offered him the job . The first season 's score primarily featured selections from the Associated Production Music Library , which Carr has said includes " lots of great old corny Hawaiian music and big , full , dramatic orchestral scores . " Rocko 's Modern Life also used music from this library . It was Hillenburg 's decision to adopt the approach . The selections for SpongeBob SquarePants have been described by Carr as being " more over @-@ the @-@ top " than those for Rocko 's Modern Life . 
 Hillenburg also felt that it was important for the series to develop its own music library , consisting of scores that could be reused and re @-@ edited throughout the years . He wanted these scores to be composed by unknowns , and a group of twelve was assembled . They formed " The Sponge Divers Orchestra " , which includes Carr and Belfer . This group went on to provide the majority of the music for later seasons , although Carr still draws from the Associated Production Music Library , as well as another library that he founded himself — Animation Music Inc . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 = = = Tenth anniversary = = = 
 Nickelodeon began celebrating the 10th anniversary of the series on January 18 , 2009 with a live cast reading of the episode " SpongeBob vs. The Big One " . The reading — a first for the series — was held at that year 's Sundance Film Festival . The episode , which would not premiere on TV until April 17 , featured Johnny Depp as a guest star . Other celebratory actions taken by the network included the launching of a new website for the series ( <unk> ) and the introduction of new merchandising . A " SpongeBob and water conservation @-@ themed element " was also added to Nickelodeon 's pro @-@ social campaign The Big Green Help . In an interview , Tom Kenny said , " What I 'm most proud of is that kids still really like [ SpongeBob SquarePants ] and care about it ... They eagerly await new episodes . People who were young children when it started 10 years ago are still watching it and digging it and think it 's funny . That 's the loving cup for me " . 
 Three nights before the official anniversary date , an hour @-@ long documentary of the series , Square Roots : The Story of SpongeBob SquarePants , premiered on VH1 . Critically acclaimed duo Patrick Creadon and Christine O 'Malley created the film as a followup to <unk> – a documentary on America 's financial situation . Creadon remarked , " After spending two years examining the financial health of the United States , Christine and I were ready to tackle something a little more upbeat . Telling the SpongeBob story feels like the perfect fit . " On Friday July 17 , Nickelodeon marked the official anniversary of the series , with a 50 @-@ hour television marathon titled " The Ultimate SpongeBob SpongeBash Weekend " . The marathon began with a new episode , " To SquarePants or Not to SquarePants " . Saturday saw a countdown of the top ten episodes as picked by fans , as well as an airing of The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie . The marathon finished on Sunday , which saw a countdown of episodes as picked by celebrities , as well as the premiere of ten new episodes . 
 Nickelodeon continued celebrating the anniversary through the rest of the year . An eight @-@ episode DVD set featuring " To SquarePants or Not to SquarePants " shortly followed the marathon , with a July 21 release . Next a 2 @,@ 200 minute , 14 @-@ disc DVD set titled The First 100 Episodes was released on September 22 . Finally , on November 6 , an hour @-@ long television film , titled Truth or Square , debuted on Nickelodeon . The film is narrated by Ricky Gervais and features live action cameo appearances by Rosario Dawson , Craig Ferguson , Will Ferrell , Tina Fey , LeBron James , P ! nk , Triumph the Insult Comic Dog , and Robin Williams . It was released as part of a five @-@ episode DVD set on November 10 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings and run @-@ length achievements = = = 
 Within its first month on air , SpongeBob SquarePants overtook Pokémon 's position as the highest rated Saturday @-@ morning children 's series . It held an average national Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 9 among children aged two through eleven , denoting 1 @.@ 9 million viewers . Two years later , the series had firmly established itself as Nickelodeon 's second highest rated children 's program , after Rugrats . It had gained a significant adult audience by that point – nearly 40 percent of the series ' 2 @.@ 2 million viewers were aged 18 to 34 . That year , 2001 , Nickelodeon took the " Saturday @-@ morning ratings crown " for the fourth straight season . In response to this weekend @-@ found success , the studio gave SpongeBob SquarePants time slots at 6 PM and 8 PM , Monday through Thursday , to increase exposure of the series . By the end of that year SpongeBob SquarePants boasted the highest ratings for any children 's series , not only on Nickelodeon , but on all of television . Weekly viewership of the series had reached around fifteen million , at least five million of which were adults . 
 In October 2002 , another Nickelodeon series titled The Fairly OddParents ranked as the No. 2 program for children between 2 and 11 years old . Its ratings at that time were almost equal to SpongeBob SquarePants ' then @-@ average of 2 @.@ 2 million viewers per episode . The Fairly OddParents even briefly surpassed SpongeBob SquarePants , causing the latter series to drop into second place — at this time The Fairly OddParents had a 6 @.@ 2 rating and nearly 2 @.@ 5 million child viewers , while SpongeBob SquarePants had a 6 @.@ 0 rating and 2 @.@ 4 million kids 2 – 11 . Nickelodeon " recognized " The Fairly OddParents for its climbing ratings and installed it into a new 8 P.M. time slot , previously occupied by SpongeBob SquarePants . In an interview , Cyma Zarghami , then @-@ general manager and executive vice president of Nickelodeon , said , " Are we banking on the fact that Fairly OddParents will be the next SpongeBob ? ... We are hoping . But SpongeBob is so unique , it 's hard to say if it will ever be repeated " . 
 However , in 2012 , it was reported that the series ' ratings were declining . The average number of viewers aged 2 to 11 watching SpongeBob at any given time dropped 29 % in the first quarter from a year earlier , according to Nielsen . Wall Street Journal business writer John <unk> suggested that the age of the series and oversaturation of the series might be contributing to the decline of the series ' ratings , and might also be directly responsible for the decline in Nickelodeon 's overall ratings . Media analyst Todd Juenger directly attributes the decline in Nickelodeon 's ratings to the availability of streaming video content on services like Netflix , a provider of on @-@ demand Internet streaming media . 
 Philippe Dauman , the president and CEO of Viacom , contradicted the notion , saying he did not think " the limited amount of Nick library content on Netflix ... has had a significant impact " . A Nickelodeon spokesman said SpongeBob is performing consistently well and remains the number one rated animated series in all of children 's television . He added , " There is nothing that we have seen that points to SpongeBob as a problem " . Dauman blamed the drop on " some ratings systemic issues " at Nielsen , citing extensive set @-@ top @-@ box data that " does in no way reflect " the Nielsen data . 
 Juenger noted that SpongeBob could affect the ratings of other Nickelodeon programming because children often change channels to find their favorite programs , then stay tuned into that network . Nickelodeon recently reduced its exposure in television . In the first quarter of 2012 , the network cut back on the number of episodes it aired by 16 % compared with a year earlier . 
 On April 22 , 2013 , Netflix CEO Reed Hastings announced their intentions not to renew their existing deal with Viacom . Since then , Viacom 's deal with Netflix expired , and shows such as SpongeBob and Dora the Explorer were removed . On June 4 , 2013 , Viacom announced a multi @-@ year licensing agreement which would move its programs , such as SpongeBob and Dora the Explorer , to Amazon.com , Netflix 's top competitor . Amazon agreed to pay more than $ 200 million to Viacom for the license , its largest subscription streaming transaction ever . 
 SpongeBob SquarePants is one of the longest @-@ running series on Nickelodeon . It became the Nickelodeon series with the most episodes , during its eighth season , surpassing the 172 episodes of Rugrats with 178 . In its ninth season , a total of 26 episodes pushed the series over the 200th episode mark , reaching 204 produced episodes . In a statement , Brown Johnson , animation president for Nickelodeon , said , " SpongeBob 's success in reaching over 200 episodes is a testament to creator Stephen Hillenburg 's vision , comedic sensibility and his dynamic , lovable characters . The series now joins the club of contemporary classic Nicktoons that have hit this benchmark , so we 're incredibly proud " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 SpongeBob SquarePants has received generally positive reviews from critics , and it has been noted for its appeal towards different age groups . James Poniewozik of Time magazine described the title character as " the anti @-@ Bart Simpson , temperamentally and physically : his head is as squared @-@ off and neat as Bart 's is unruly , and he has a personality to match — conscientious , optimistic and blind to the faults in the world and those around him " . According to Laura Fries of Variety magazine , the series is " a thoughtful and inventive cartoon about a hopelessly optimistic and resilient sea sponge ... Devoid of the double entendres rife in today 's animated TV shows , this is purely kid 's stuff ... However , that 's not to say that SpongeBob is simplistic or even juvenile . It 's charming and whimsical , but clever enough to appeal to teens and college @-@ aged kids , as well " . The New York Times critic Joyce Millman said SpongeBob " is clever without being impenetrable to young viewers and goofy without boring grown @-@ ups to tears . It 's the most charming toon on television , and one of the weirdest . And it 's also good , clean fun , which makes sense because it is , after all , about a sponge " . Millman wrote , " His relentless good cheer would be irritating if he weren 't so darned lovable and his world so excellently strange ... Like Pee @-@ wee 's Playhouse , SpongeBob joyfully dances on the fine line between childhood and adulthood , guilelessness and camp , the warped and the sweet " . 
 Robert Thompson , a professor of communications and director of the Center for the Study of Popular Television at Syracuse University , told The New York Times , " There is something kind of unique about [ SpongeBob ] . It seems to be a refreshing breath from the pre @-@ irony era . There 's no sense of the elbow @-@ in @-@ rib , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek aesthetic that so permeates the rest of American culture – including kids ' shows like the Rugrats . I think what 's subversive about it is it 's so incredibly naive – deliberately . Because there 's nothing in it that 's trying to be hip or cool or anything else , hipness can be grafted onto it " . In a 2007 interview , Barack Obama named SpongeBob his favorite TV character and admitted that SpongeBob SquarePants is " the show I watch with my daughters " . British Prime Minister Gordon Brown has also said he watches the series with his children . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 SpongeBob SquarePants has received many awards and nominations ; among these are two Emmy Awards ( " Outstanding Special Class Animated Program " in 2010 and " Outstanding Sound Editing – Animation " in 2014 ) ; six Annie Awards ; and two BAFTA Children 's Awards . In 2006 , IGN ranked SpongeBob SquarePants 15th on its list , " Top 25 Animated Series of All Time " , and in 2013 , it ranked the series 12th on its list , " The Top 25 Animated Series for Adults " . Additionally , the website 's UK division ran a " Top 100 Animated Series " list , and like its US counterpart , ranked SpongeBob SquarePants 15th . 
 The series is among the " All @-@ TIME 100 TV Shows " as chosen by Time television critic James Poniewozik in 2007 . He said , " It 's the most funny , surreal , inventive example of the explosion in creative kids ' ( and adult ) entertainment that Nick , Cartoon Network and their ilk made possible " . Viewers of the UK television network Channel 4 voted SpongeBob SquarePants the 28th " Greatest Cartoon " in a 2004 poll . TV Guide listed the character of SpongeBob SquarePants at No. 9 for its " 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters of All Time " . In 2013 , the publication ranked SpongeBob SquarePants the eighth " Greatest TV Cartoon of All Time " . In June 2010 , Entertainment Weekly named SpongeBob one of the " 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In July 2009 , Madame Tussauds wax museum in New York launched a wax sculpture of SpongeBob in celebration of the series ' 10th anniversary . This made SpongeBob the first animated character to ever receive a statue made entirely out of wax . In May 2011 , a new species of mushroom , Spongiforma squarepantsii , was described , named after the series ' title character . 
 The character has also become a trend in Egypt at Cairo 's Tahrir Square . After the Egyptian Revolution of 2011 , SpongeBob became a fashion phenomenon , appearing on various items of merchandise from <unk> to boxer shorts . The phenomenon led to the creation of the Tumblr project called " SpongeBob on the Nile " . The project was founded by American students Andrew Leber and Elisabeth <unk> and attempts to document every appearance of SpongeBob in Egypt . <unk> <unk> cited the phenomenon in an essay about the incoherent state of politics in Egypt in an independent monthly paper titled Midan Masr . He wrote , " Why isn 't he [ SpongeBob ] at least holding a Molotov cocktail ? Or raising a fist ? " The phenomenon has even spread to Libya , where a Libyan rebel in SpongeBob dress was photographed celebrating the revolution . Although The Guardian and Vice have asserted that the trend has little to no political significance , " joke " presidential campaigns have been undertaken for SpongeBob in Egypt and Syria . 
 A clip was posted to YouTube in February 2013 that features soldiers in the Russian army and navy singing the SpongeBob SquarePants theme song as they march . According to the website that uploaded the video , this is one of the " most popular marching songs " in the Russian military . The video garnered nearly 50 @,@ 000 views within its first week . 
 = = = Criticism and controversy = = = 
 In 2005 , a promotional video which showed SpongeBob and other characters from children 's shows singing together to promote diversity and tolerance was attacked by an evangelical group in the United States because they saw SpongeBob as being used to " advocate homosexuality " . James Dobson of Focus on the Family accused the video of promoting homosexuality , due to it being sponsored by a pro @-@ tolerance group . The incident accentuated questions as to whether or not SpongeBob is gay . Although the character has enjoyed popularity with gay viewers , series creator Stephen Hillenburg had already denied the issue three years earlier , clarifying at the time that he considers the character to be " somewhat asexual " . After Dobson 's comments , Hillenburg reasserted his position , stating that sexual preference does not play a part in what they are " trying to do " with the series . Tom Kenny and other production members were distraught that such an issue had arisen . 
 Dobson later stated that his comments were taken out of context , and that his original complaints were not with SpongeBob , the video , or any of the characters in the video , but rather with the organization that sponsored the video , the We Are Family Foundation . Dobson indicated that the We Are Family Foundation posted pro @-@ gay material on their website , but later removed it . After the controversy , John H. Thomas , the United Church of Christ 's general minister and president , said they would welcome SpongeBob into their ministry . He said " Jesus didn 't turn people away . Neither do we " . 
 Jeffery P. Dennis , author of the journal article " <unk> " , argued that SpongeBob and Sandy are not romantically in love , while adding that he believed that SpongeBob and Patrick " are paired with arguably erotic intensity " . Martin Goodman of Animation World Magazine described Dennis ' comments regarding SpongeBob and Patrick as " interesting " . Ukrainian website Family Under the Protection of the Holy Virgin , which has been described as a " fringe Catholic " group by The Wall Street Journal , levied criticism against SpongeBob SquarePants for its alleged " promotion of homosexuality " . The group sought to have the series banned , along with several other popular children 's properties . The National Expert Commission of Ukraine on the Protection of Public Morality took up the matter for review in August 2012 . 
 On April 2009 , Burger King released a SpongeBob @-@ themed advertisement featuring a parody of Sir Mix @-@ a @-@ Lot 's song " Baby Got Back " . The Campaign for a Commercial @-@ Free Childhood protested the ad for being sexist and inappropriately sexual , especially contemplating that SpongeBob 's fan base includes young children . In official statements released by Burger King and Nickelodeon , both companies claimed that the campaign was aimed at parents . 
 A 2011 study conducted at the University of Virginia and published in the journal Pediatrics suggested that allowing preschool @-@ aged audiences to watch the series caused short @-@ term disruptions in mental function and attention span due to frequent shot changes . A Nickelodeon executive responded in an interview that the series was not intended for an audience of that age and that the study used " questionable methodology and could not possibly provide the basis for any valid findings that parents could trust " . 
 = = = Criticism of declining quality = = = 
 Critics ' reviews of early SpongeBob episodes praised the show for its wit , clever humor , and " uncanny brilliance " . However , in 2007 , around the airing of season five , the tone and emphasis of the show began to change . Some fans " began to turn away from the show " , causing online fansites to " [ become ] deserted " . They pointed to a shift from clever humor to what they perceived as " boring , unfunny humor [ ... ] geared too much towards children " . 
 Paul Tibbitt , showrunner from season four to the season 9 episode , " Spongebob , You 're Fired ! " has been the subject of criticism . While The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie was generally well received by fans of the show , it is also considered a turning point in the show 's history , as many fans believe the decline occurred after the film 's release , when Stephen Hillenburg resigned as showrunner and Tibbitt was appointed to replace him . Episodes produced since the movie have been variously categorized as " kid @-@ pandering attention @-@ waster [ s ] " , " tedious " , " boring " and " dreck " , a " depressing plateau of mediocrity " , and " laugh @-@ skimpy " . 
 Many believe the show 's ratings decline as of 2012 correlates with the alleged decline in quality , and " whatever fan support [ the show ] enjoys is not enough " to save it from its ratings slide . 
 Many fans claimed that show quality increased after Paul Tibbitt resigned as showrunner / supervising producer . Vincent Waller , creative director for season 4 to the first half of season 9 , and Marc <unk> , a writer and storyboard director for season 8 , have taken Tibbitt 's place as showrunner / supervising producers starting with the second half of season 9 . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 = = = Comic books = = = 
 In February 2011 , creator Hillenburg first announced the release of the 32 @-@ page bimonthly comic book series , SpongeBob Comics , based on the show . The release marked the first time Hillenburg authored his own books . He said , " I 'm hoping that fans will enjoy finally having a SpongeBob comic book from me " . The comic book series is published by Hillenburg 's production company , United Plankton Pictures , and distributed by Bongo Comics Group . Although the characters of the series had previously appeared in Nickelodeon Magazine and in Cine @-@ Manga , the first issue of SpongeBob Comics marked the first time the characters have appeared in their own comic books in the United States . Hillenburg described the stories from the comic books as " original and always true to the humor , characters , and universe of the SpongeBob SquarePants series " . 
 Chris Duffy , the former senior editor of Nickelodeon Magazine , serves as managing editor of SpongeBob Comics . Hillenburg and Duffy met with various comic book writers and artists — including James <unk> , Hilary Barta , Graham Annable , Gregg <unk> , and Jacob Chabot — to contribute to each issues . Retired horror comics writer and artist Stephen R. Bissette returned to write a special Halloween issue in 2012 , with Tony Millionaire and Al Jaffee . In an interview with Tom Spurgeon , Bissette said , " I 've even broken my retirement to do one work @-@ for @-@ hire gig [ for SpongeBob Comics ] so I could share everything about that kind of current job " . 
 In the United Kingdom , Titan Magazines publishes comics based on SpongeBob SquarePants every four weeks . These comics were first published on February 3 , 2005 . Titan Magazines teamed @-@ up with Lego to release a limited edition SpongeBob @-@ themed comic . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Paramount Pictures and Nickelodeon Movies produced The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , an animated film adaptation of the series that was released on November 19 , 2004 . The film was directed by creator Stephen Hillenburg , and was written by long @-@ time series writers comprising Hillenburg , Derek Drymon , Tim Hill , Kent Osborne , Aaron Springer , and Paul Tibbitt . Hillenburg and Julia Pistor produced the film , while the film score was composed by Gregor Narholz . The film is about Plankton 's evil plan to steal King Neptune 's crown and send it to Shell City . SpongeBob and Patrick must retrieve it and save Mr. Krabs ' life from Neptune 's raft and their home , Bikini Bottom , from Plankton 's plan . The film features guest appearances by Jeffrey Tambor as King Neptune , Scarlett Johansson as the King 's daughter Mindy , Alec Baldwin as Dennis , and David Hasselhoff as himself . It received positive critical reception , and grossed over $ 140 million worldwide . 
 Two television films were released . The two television films are SpongeBob 's Atlantis SquarePantis released in 2007 and SpongeBob 's Truth or Square released in 2009 . 
 A sequel to the 2004 film was released in theaters on February 6 , 2015 . The series ' main cast members are reprise their roles , and the underwater parts are traditionally animated in the manner of the series and the live @-@ action parts uses CGI animation with the SpongeBob characters . The film has a budget similar to the previous film and did not cost more than $ 100 million to produce . 
 On April 30 , 2015 , Viacom announced a third movie was in development . On August 3 , 2015 , via Twitter , Vincent Waller confirmed that the sequel is in pre @-@ production and that Paul Tibbitt will once again direct . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Collections of original music featured in the series have been released on the albums SpongeBob SquarePants : Original Theme Highlights ( 2001 ) , SpongeBob 's Greatest Hits ( 2009 ) , and The Yellow Album ( 2005 ) . The first two charted on the US Billboard 200 , reaching number 171 and 122 , respectively . Several songs have been recorded with the purpose of a single or album release , and have not been featured on the show . For example , the song " My Tidy <unk> " written by Tom Kenny and Andy Paley was released only for the album The Best Day Ever ( 2006 ) . Kenny 's inspiration for the song was " underwear humor " . Kenny said , " Underwear humor is always a surefire laugh @-@ getter with kids ... Just seeing a character that odd wearing really prosaic , normal , Kmart , three @-@ to @-@ a @-@ pack underwear is a funny drawing ... We thought it was funny to make a really lush , beautiful love song to his underwear " . The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie – Music from the Movie and More ... , a soundtrack album featuring the score of The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , was released along with the feature @-@ length film in November 2004 . Various artists including the Flaming Lips , Wilco , Ween , Motörhead , the Shins , and Avril Lavigne contributed to the soundtrack that reached number 76 on the US Billboard 200 . 
 = = = Theme park rides = = = 
 SpongeBob SquarePants 4 @-@ D film and ride opened in various locations , including Six Flags Over Texas , Flamingo Land Resort , and the Shedd Aquarium . The ride features water squirts , real bubbles , and other sensory enhancements . In 2012 , Nickelodeon teamed up again with <unk> @-@ Iwerks Entertainment and Super 78 to produce SpongeBob SquarePants 4 @-@ D : The Great Jelly Rescue . The attraction opened in early 2013 at the Mystic Aquarium & Institute for Exploration . The attraction was also released at the Nickelodeon Suites Resort Orlando in Orlando , Florida . The seven @-@ minute film follows SpongeBob , Patrick and Sandy to their old hijinks while rescuing the jellyfish of Jellyfish Fields from Plankton 's evil clutches . 
 SpongeBob SquarePants appears at the Mall of America 's Nickelodeon theme park re @-@ branded from the Mall of America 's Park at MOA , formerly Camp Snoopy , to Nickelodeon Universe in the Minneapolis @-@ St. Paul suburb of Bloomington , Minnesota . The new theme park features a SpongeBob @-@ themed Gerstlauer Euro @-@ Fighter custom roller coaster , the SpongeBob SquarePants Rock Bottom Plunge , which has replaced the Mystery Mine Ride and Olde Time Photo store on the west end of the theme park , which opened March 15 , 2008 . 
 On May 23 , 2015 , an interactive 3D show titled " SpongeBob <unk> Adventure " opened in Texas at Moody Gardens . According to Moody Gardens President and CEO John <unk> , " Visitors will be able to interact with the Nickelodeon characters on a digital stage as they have never been able to do before . " 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Numerous video games based on the series have been produced . Some of the early games include Legend of the Lost Spatula ( 2001 ) and SpongeBob SquarePants : Battle for Bikini Bottom ( 2003 ) . The 2003 video game was added to the Greatest Hits by Sony . It also served as the engine basis for a video game based on the The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie . Heavy Iron Studios , the game 's developers , tweaked the graphics to give the game a sharper and more imaginative look than that of Battle for Bikini Bottom . They also increased the polygon count , added several racing levels , and incorporated many of the creatures seen in the film . In 2013 , Nickelodeon published and distributed SpongeBob Moves In , a freemium city @-@ building game app developed by Kung Fu Factory for iOS . 
 = = = SpongeBob SquareShorts = = = 
 Nickelodeon launched the first global SpongeBob SquarePants @-@ themed short film competition , SpongeBob SquareShorts : Original Fan Tributes , in 2013 . The contest encourages fans and filmmakers around the world to create original short films inspired by SpongeBob for a chance to win a prize and a trip for four people to a screening event in Hollywood . The contest opened on May 6 and ran through June 28 , 2013 . On July 19 , 2013 , Nickelodeon announced the finalists for the competition , and , on August 13 , 2013 , the " under 18 years of age " category was won by David of the United States for his " The Krabby Commercial " , while the " Finally Home " short by Nicole of South Africa won the " 18 and over " category . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 The popularity of SpongeBob SquarePants inspired merchandise from T @-@ shirts to posters . It was reported that the franchise generated an estimated $ 8 billion merchandising revenue for Nickelodeon . It is also the most distributed property of MTV Networks . SpongeBob is viewed in 170 countries speaking 24 languages , and has also become " a killer merchandising app " . The title character and his friends have been used as a theme for special editions of well @-@ known family board games , including Monopoly , Life , and Operation , as well as a SpongeBob SquarePants edition of Ants in the Pants , and Yahtzee . 
 In 2001 , SpongeBob SquarePants signed a marketing deal with Target Corporation and Burger King , expanding its merchandising . The popularity of SpongeBob has translated well into sales figures . In 2002 , SpongeBob SquarePants dolls sold at a rate of 75 @,@ 000 per week , which was faster than Tickle Me Elmo dolls were selling at the time . SpongeBob has gained popularity in Japan , specifically with Japanese women . Nickelodeon 's parent company Viacom purposefully targeted marketing at women in the country . Skeptics initially doubted that SpongeBob could be popular in Japan , as the character 's design is very different from already popular designs for Hello Kitty and Pikachu . Ratings and merchandise sales showed SpongeBob SquarePants has caught on with parents and with college audiences . In a recent promotion , college @-@ oriented website <unk> gave away 80 @,@ 000 SpongeBob T @-@ shirts , four times more than during a similar promotion for Comedy Central 's South Park . 
 Kids ' meal tie @-@ ins have been released in snacks and fast food restaurants in many parts of the world , including Burger King in Europe and North America , as well as Wendy 's in North America , and Hungry Jack 's in Australia . A McDonald 's Happy Meal tie @-@ in with SpongeBob @-@ themed Happy Meal boxes and toys was released in Europe and other international markets in the summer of 2007 . In Australia , the advertisement for the McDonald 's SpongeBob Happy Meal won the Pester Power Award because the ads are entice young children to want its food because of the free toy . As a tie @-@ in beverage for the DVD release of The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , 7 @-@ Eleven released the limited edition " Under @-@ the @-@ Sea Pineapple Slurpee " in March 2004 . Pirate 's Booty released limited edition SpongeBob SquarePants Pirate 's Booty snacks in 2013 . 
 In 2007 , high @-@ end SpongeBob @-@ themed electronics have been introduced by <unk> Electronics Products under the Npower brand , including MP3 players , digital cameras , a DVD player , and a flatscreen television . Pictures of SpongeBob SquarePants also began to appear on the labels of 8 oz. cans of Green Giant cut green beans and frozen packages of Green Giant green beans and butter sauce , which featured free stickers in 2007 as part of an initiative to encourage kids to eat their vegetables . The Simmons Jewelry Co. released a $ 75 @,@ 000 diamond pendant as part of a SpongeBob collection . In New Zealand , the UK @-@ based <unk> Group unveiled the SpongeBob SquarePants Vanilla Ice Cream character product as part of a licence deal with Nickelodeon . NZ Drinks launched the SpongeBob SquarePants bottled water . 
 Build @-@ A @-@ Bear Workshop introduced the new SpongeBob <unk> collection in stores and online in North America on May 17 , 2013 . Shoppers can dress their SpongeBob and Patrick plush in a variety of clothing and accessories . Sandy Cheeks and Gary the Snail are also available as pre @-@ stuffed minis . Build @-@ A @-@ Bear Workshop stores nationwide celebrated the arrival of SpongeBob with a series of special events from May 17 through May 19 . 
 On July 13 , 2013 , Toyota , with Nickelodeon , unveiled a SpongeBob @-@ inspired Toyota Highlander . The 2014 Toyota Highlander was launched on SpongeBob Day at the San Diego 's Giants v. Padres game . The SpongeBob Toyota Highlander visited seven U.S. locations during its release , including the Nickelodeon Suites Resort Orlando in Florida . 
 = Washington State Route 27 = 
 State Route 27 ( SR 27 ) is a 90 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 145 km ) state highway serving Whitman and Spokane counties , located in the eastern region of the U.S. state of Washington . The highway travels generally north from U.S. Route 195 ( US 195 ) through Pullman , Palouse , Tekoa , and Spokane Valley to SR 290 north of an interchange with Interstate 90 ( I @-@ 90 ) . SR 27 serves the Palouse region as part of the Palouse Scenic Byway and travels between US 195 to the west and US 95 to the east in Idaho , with several auxiliary routes connecting to the two other highways . The highway has been part of the state highway system since 1913 , as a part of the Second Division of the Eastern Route of the Inland Empire Highway between Pullman and Oakesdale that later became a branch of Primary State Highway 3 ( PSH 3 ) , as well as Secondary State Highway 3H ( SSH 3H ) in 1937 . Both highways were combined to form SR 27 during the 1964 highway renumbering and the designation was extended south to the US 195 bypass of Pullman in 1975 and north to SR 290 in 1991 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 27 begins its 90 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 145 km ) route as Grand Avenue and part of the Palouse Scenic Byway at an intersection with US 195 south of Pullman . The highway travels through downtown Pullman and becomes concurrent with SR 270 as it passes west of the Washington State University main campus . Grand Avenue crosses the South Fork Palouse River and leaves the city of Pullman , parallel to a Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) rail line as it travels into the Palouse . SR 27 travels northeast to the city of Palouse and crosses the Palouse River before a short concurrency with SR 272 . The highway continues northwest alongside the WSDOT rail line through the town of Garfield and Oakesdale before serving as the southern terminus of SR 271 west of Oakesdale Airport . SR 27 travels northeast and crosses Hangman Creek into Tekoa as Crosby Street before it intersects SR 274 , locally known as Poplar Street , at the north end of the city . The highway turns west onto Poplar Street and travels under a bridge carrying the John Wayne Pioneer Trail before leaving Tekoa and Whitman County for Spokane County . 
 SR 27 continues north along a Union Pacific rail line through Latah and Fairfield toward Rockford , where it serves as the western terminus of SR 278 and the Palouse Scenic Byway ends . The highway travels north out of the Palouse and to the Spokane Valley neighborhood of Opportunity , and widens to four lanes as Pines Road . SR 27 intersects I @-@ 90 in a diamond interchange that utilizes Indiana Avenue and Montgomery Drive as exit ramps . The highway continues north and crosses two rail lines , belonging to the Spokane International branch of Union Pacific and BNSF , before the designation ends at Trent Avenue , signed as SR 290 . 
 Every year , WSDOT conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that the busiest section of SR 27 was its interchange with I @-@ 90 in Spokane Valley , serving 27 @,@ 000 vehicles , while the least busy section was between Tekoa and Latah , serving 640 vehicles . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 27 was first codified as part of the Second Division of the Eastern Route of the Inland Empire Highway between Pullman and Oakesdale in 1913 and later became a paved branch of PSH 3 during the creation of the primary and secondary state highways in 1937 . The branch route traveled 68 @.@ 71 miles ( 110 @.@ 58 km ) north from US 195 at the Idaho state border through Pullman and Oakesdale to PSH 3 and US 195 south of Rosalia . SSH 3H was also established in 1937 , traveling 38 @.@ 69 miles ( 62 @.@ 27 km ) north from the PSH 3 branch in Oakesdale through the Palouse to PSH 2 and US 10 in Spokane Valley . The two highways were combined to form SR 27 during the 1964 highway renumbering , part of a new state highway system still in place today . A western bypass of Pullman for US 195 was originally planned in the late 1960s and was opened in 1974 as part of a proposed ring road around the city . US 195 was routed onto the completed segment and SR 27 was extended south over its former route to intersect the new highway in 1975 , while the rest of the bypass would become the un @-@ built SR 276 . The highway was extended north within Spokane Valley from its interchange with I @-@ 90 to Trent Avenue , signed as SR 290 , in 1991 . The highway between Pullman and Tekoa was designated as part of the Palouse Scenic Byway on December 19 , 2002 , as part of the Washington State Scenic and Recreational Highways program . The scenic byway was extended north in 2011 to SR 278 in Rockford . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Drowning Girl = 
 Drowning Girl ( also known as Secret Hearts or I Don 't Care ! I 'd Rather Sink ) is a 1963 painting in oil and synthetic polymer paint on canvas by Roy Lichtenstein . Using the conventions of comic book art , a thought bubble conveys the thoughts of the figure , while Ben @-@ Day dots echo the effect of the mechanized printing process . It is one of the most representative paintings of the pop art movement , and part of the Museum of Modern Art 's permanent collection since 1971 . The painting is considered among Lichtenstein 's most significant works , perhaps on a par with his acclaimed 1963 diptych Whaam ! . Drowning Girl has been described as a " masterpiece of melodrama " , and is one of the artist 's earliest images depicting women in tragic situations , a theme to which he often returned in the mid @-@ 1960s . 
 The painting shows a teary @-@ eyed woman on a turbulent sea . She is emotionally distressed , seemingly from a romance . A thought bubble reads : " I Don 't Care ! I 'd Rather Sink — Than Call Brad For Help ! " This narrative element highlights the clichéd melodrama , while its graphics reiterate Lichtenstein 's theme of painterly work imitating mechanized reproduction . The work is derived from a 1962 DC Comics panel , while also borrowing from Hokusai 's The Great Wave off Kanagawa and from elements of modernist artists Jean Arp and Joan Miró . It is one of several Lichtenstein works that mention a character named Brad who is absent from the picture . Both the graphical and narrative elements of the work are cropped from the source image . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the late 1950s and early 1960s a number of American painters began to adapt the imagery and motifs of comic strips . Roy Lichtenstein made drawings of comic strip characters in 1958 . Andy Warhol produced his earliest paintings in the style in 1960 . Lichtenstein , unaware of Warhol 's work , produced Look Mickey and Popeye in 1961 . Although Warhol had produced silkscreens of comic strips and of other pop art subjects , he supposedly relegated himself to Campbell 's Soup Cans as a subject at the time to avoid competing with the more finished style of comics by Lichtenstein . He once said " I 've got to do something that really will have a lot of impact that will be different enough from Lichtenstein and James Rosenquist , that will be very personal , that won 't look like I 'm doing exactly what they 're doing . " 
 Drowning Girl depicted the advancement of Lichtenstein 's cartoon work , which represented his 1961 departure from his abstract expressionism period , from animated cartoons to more serious themes such as romance and wartime armed forces . Lichtenstein said that , at the time , " I was very excited about , and very interested in , the highly emotional content yet detached impersonal handling of love , hate , war , etc . , in these cartoon images . " Lichtenstein parodied four Picassos between 1962 and 1963 . Picasso 's depictions of weeping women may have influenced Lichtenstein to produce portrayals of vulnerable teary @-@ eyed women , such as the subjects of Hopeless and Drowning Girl . Another possible influence on his emphasis on depicting distressed women in the early- to mid @-@ 1960s was that his first marriage was dissolving at the time . Lichtenstein 's first marriage to Isabel Wilson , which resulted in two sons , lasted from 1949 to 1965 ; the couple separated in 1963 . 
 When Lichtenstein made his transition to comic @-@ based work , he began to mimic the style while adapting the subject matter . He applied simplified color schemes and commercial printing @-@ like techniques . The style he adopted was " simple , well @-@ framed images comprised of solid fields of bold color often bounded by thick , stark border lines . " The borrowed technique was " representing tonal variations with patterns of colored circles that imitated the half @-@ tone screens of Ben Day dots used in newspaper printing " . PBS asserts that this is an adaptation of the ligne claire style associated with Hergé . Lichtenstein once said of his technique : " I take a cliche and try to organize its forms to make it monumental . " 
 The subject of Drowning Girl is an example of Lichtenstein 's post @-@ 1963 comics @-@ based women who " look hard , crisp , brittle , and uniformly modish in appearance , as if they all came out of the same pot of makeup . " In the early 1960s , Lichtenstein produced several " fantasy drama " paintings of women in love affairs with domineering men causing women to be miserable , such as Drowning Girl , Hopeless and In the Car . These works served as prelude to 1964 paintings of innocent " girls next door " in a variety of tenuous emotional states . " In Hopeless and Drowning Girl , for example , the heroines appear as victims of unhappy love affairs , with one displaying helplessness ... and the other defiance ( she would rather drown than ask for her lover 's help ) . " Drowning Girl , the aforementioned works and Oh , Jeff ... I Love You , Too ... But ... are among those tragedies that make the author a popular draw at museums . 
 = = History = = 
 Drowning Girl is derived from the splash page from " Run for Love ! " , illustrated by Tony Abruzzo and lettered by Ira <unk> , in Secret Hearts # 83 ( November 1962 ) , DC Comics . This is the same comic book issue that inspired Hopeless . 
 In 1963 , Lichtenstein was parodying various types of sources such as commercial illustrations , comic imagery and even modern masterpieces . The masterpieces represented what could have been dubbed the " canon " of art and was thought of as " high art , " while the " low @-@ art " subject matter included comic strip images . His masterworks sources included the likes of Cézanne , Mondrian and Picasso . During this time in his career , Lichtenstein noted that " the things that I have apparently parodied I actually admire . " At the time , Lichtenstein was exploring the theme of " industrialization of emotion " . In Lichtenstein 's obituary , Los Angeles Times critic Christopher Knight said the work was " a witty rejoinder to De Kooning 's famously brushy paintings of women " . His comic romances often depicted stereotypical representations of thwarted passions . Although the Lichtenstein Foundation website claims that Lichtenstein did not begin using his opaque projector technique until the fall of 1963 , Lichtenstein described his process for producing comics based art , including Drowning Girl : 
 As directly as possible ... From a cartoon , photograph or whatever , I draw a small picture — the size that will fit into my opaque projector ... I don 't draw a picture to reproduce it — I do it in order to recompose it ... I project the drawing onto the canvas and pencil it in and then I play around with the drawing until it satisfies me . 
 When Lichtenstein had his first solo show at the Leo Castelli Gallery in New York City in February 1962 , it sold out before the opening . In addition to Drowning Girl , the exhibition included Look Mickey , Engagement Ring , Blam and The Refrigerator . The show ran from February 10 through March 3 , 1962 . According to the Lichtenstein Foundation website , Drowning Girl was part of Lichtenstein 's first exhibition at Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles from April 1 – April 27 , 1963 , featuring Masterpiece , Portrait of Madame Cézanne and other works from 1962 and 1963 . It was also part of his second solo exhibition at the Leo Castelli Gallery from September 28 – October 24 , 1963 that included Torpedo ... Los ! , Baseball Manager , In the Car , Conversation , and Whaam ! . Marketing materials for the show included the lithograph Crak ! The Museum of Modern Art acquired Drowning Girl in 1971 , and their webpage for this work credits Philip Johnson and Mr. and Mrs. Bagley Wright for the acquisition . 
 = = Description = = 
 Some sources describe the subjects of Lichtenstein 's tragic girls series as heroines ( in the sense that they are the counterparts to the heroes ) , and others do not ( in the sense that they are not heroic ) . Drowning Girl is a painting of a female subject who would prefer to give in to the power of the ocean than call for aid . Lichtenstein 's version of the scene eliminates everything but the sea and a few body parts of the subject : her head , shoulder and hand , which are barely above the water . As her face is presented her eyes are shut with drops of what appear to be tears flowing from them . Because Lichtenstein only presents a single frame , the viewer does not know what happened before this moment and what is going to happen after it . Furthermore , the viewer has no way to know who Brad is and why she is so reluctant to call him . 
 According to The Grove Encyclopedia of American Art , the most important element of Lichtenstein 's procedure in the early 1960s was " the enlargement and unification of his source material " . Although , according to some sources , the changes made to produce Drowning Girl are not regarded as significant , Lichtenstein made several notable changes from the original source : " In the original illustration , the drowning girl 's boyfriend appears in the background , clinging to a capsized boat . Lichtenstein cropped the image dramatically , showing the girl alone and encircled by a threatening wave . He changed the caption from ' I don 't care if I have a cramp ! ' to ' I don 't care ! ' and the boyfriend 's name from Mal to Brad . " With the former narrative change , Lichtenstein removed evidence that the drowning girl has a cramp in her leg . With the latter narrative change , Lichtenstein attempted to change the perception of the boyfriend . When discussing another work ( I Know ... Brad ) , Lichtenstein stated that the name Brad sounded heroic to him and was used with the aim of clichéd oversimplification . 
 Lichtenstein 's method entailed " strengthening of the formal aspects of the composition , a stylization of motif , and a ' freezing ' of both emotion and actions " . Although comic @-@ book panels depict a moment in time , Drowning Girl is borrowed from an example of a comic @-@ book panel depiction of a moment relatively more " pregnant " with <unk> and future @-@ dependent drama than most moments . This work also marks a phase in Lichtenstein 's career when many of his works were given present @-@ participial titles such as Sleeping Girl , Crying Girl and Blonde Waiting , which accentuates the works ' " relation to process and action . " According to The Grove Encyclopedia of American Art , during this phase of Lichtenstein 's career " a constant if restrained and a gentle sense of humor contribute just as much to the cheerful lightness of Lichtenstein 's work as the balanced , completely harmonious composition . " 
 Narrative content was in the forefront of much of Lichtenstein 's work as a means to engage the viewer . Measuring 171 @.@ 6 cm × 169 @.@ 5 cm ( 67 @.@ 625 in × 66 @.@ 75 in ) , Drowning Girl presents " a young woman who seems to have cried herself a river ... literally drowning in emotion , " according to Janis Hendrickson . The melodrama makes it clear that she has been hurt by a " Brad " , the name given to several of Lichtenstein 's heroes . Vian <unk> Borchert says that the caption makes it clear that the subject is practically " drowning in a sea of tears " . 
 In typical Lichtenstein fashion , the tragic female is presented " in a suspended state of distress . " According to Janis Hendrickson , the subject 's head appears to rest on a wave as if it were a pillow and lies in the water as if it were a bed , creating a blend of " eroticism and final resting place " . The waters of the sea swirl around the subject 's waves of hair creating the perception of a whirlpool . The painting is representative of Lichtenstein 's affinity for single @-@ frame drama that reduces the viewer 's ability to identify with it and that abstracts emotion . His use of industrial and mechanical appearance further trivialize the sentiments , although the painterly touches add to its simplification . 
 = = General context = = 
 In the early 1960s Lichtenstein 's theme of comics @-@ based work was hotly debated . In a 1963 New York Times article , Brian O 'Doherty wrote that Lichtenstein 's work was not art , saying Lichtenstein was " one of the worst artists in America " who " briskly went about making a sow 's ear out of a sow 's ear . " This was part of a widespread debate about the merits of Lichtenstein 's comic blow @-@ ups as true art . In January 1964 Life ran a story under the title " Is He the Worst Artist in the U.S. ? " on this controversy . Later reviews were much kinder and Todd Brewster noted that this may have been motivated by popular demand saying in Life in 1986 that " Those cartoon <unk> may have disturbed the critics , but collectors , tired of the solemnity of abstract expressionism , were ready for some comic relief . Why couldn 't the funny pages be fine art ? " Although his work is now widely accepted , there remain critics who continue to raise issues about it such as the claim that every comic @-@ based work was done without attributing the original creators , nor paying any royalties or seeking permission from the original copyright holders . David <unk> has dedicated decades to identifying all of Lichtenstein 's source materials and has posted over 1000 images on Flickr detailing Lichtenstein 's unrecognized sources . 
 Today some critics question Lichtenstein 's artistic skills as it relates to comics . Everett <unk> notes that , although today Lichtenstein is closely associated with romance comics due to his teary " mannered close @-@ ups " , in his day " no comics publisher would have hired Lichtenstein — he wasn 't good enough . " He felt Lichtenstein lacked the ability to portray the emotional range of the story through facial expressions and body language independently . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Many sources describe Whaam ! and Drowning Girl as Lichtenstein 's most famous works . The Daily Mail listed it along with Whaam ! and Oh , Jeff ... I Love You , Too ... But ... as one of his most famous at the time of its 2013 Lichtenstein Retrospective display at the Tate Modern . It is also regarded as one of his most influential works along with Whaam ! and Look Mickey . John <unk> , Museum of Modern Art chief curator noted that the 2004 " MoMA in Berlin " exhibition held during the Museum 's renovation was a " synoptic overview of 20th @-@ century art " . Highlights from the 212 @-@ piece exhibition according to various publications such as The New York Times and <unk> were van Gogh 's Starry Night , Matisse 's Dance and Lichtenstein 's Drowning Girl , all of which were touring outside the United States for the first time . 
 Drowning Girl was part of the largest ever retrospective of Lichtenstein that visited the Art Institute of Chicago from May 16 to September 3 , 2012 , the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. from October 14 , 2012 to January 13 , 2013 , the Tate Modern in London from February 21 to May 27 , 2013 and The Centre Pompidou from July 3 to November 4 , 2013 . During the 2012 – 13 retrospective , The Huffington Post described Drowning Girl as Lichtenstein 's " masterpiece of melodrama " . Danish art critic and Louisiana Museum of Modern Art director Poul Erik Tøjner called the work an example of Lichtenstein 's " post @-@ coital perdition " pieces , describing it as the " star witness " of this genre of his works . He notes that the subject is reaching far @-@ flung depths as she acts out of pride . Tøjner perceived eroticism in this painting , likening the open mouth to a vaginal feature and noting the singularity of Lichtenstein using an open mouth . With that in mind , he compares the tears to ejaculate residue . 
 This was painted at the apex of Lichtenstein 's use of enlarged dots , cropping and magnification of the original source . Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum curator Diane Waldman notes that Lichtenstein made Drowning Girl a cornerstone of his career because of " his extraordinary sense of organization , his ability to use a sweeping curve and manipulate it into an <unk> pattern " . According to The Oxford Dictionary of American Art and Artists , the work is " a mix of cliché , melodrama , pathos , and absurdity ... " The result is described by art scholar Jonathan Fineberg as " a remarkably impassive style " . The image is typical of Lichtenstein 's depiction of comic subjects responding to a situation in a clichéd manner . 
 Lichtenstein 's tinkering with the source material resulted in a recomposition with sharper focus after he eliminated several elements that distract from the depiction of the woman , such as the capsized boat , troubled male subject and the general seascape . The result was swirling , swooping waves and " animate white foam " that envelope the subject with a " pictorial buoyancy " that form an " aquatic continuum " . 
 Drowning Girl presents an " unmistakeable acknowledgement to the flamboyant <unk> of Art Nouveau " . The waves are intended to " recall Hokusai as well as the biomorphic forms of Arp and Miró ; " just as the source comics may have intended to . Lichtenstein has claimed a strong relation between the original comic book source panel and Hokusai 's The Great Wave off Kanagawa , making this work a bridge between the two . The adaptation of the wave print is said to add a decorative look and feel to the painting , without which the work might be much more alarming to the viewer . Lichtenstein even made the connection between Drowning Girl 's arabesque waves and " the Art Nouveau aesthetic " . Regarding this work , Lichtenstein stated : 
 In the Drowning Girl the water is not only Art Nouveau , but it can also be seen as Hokusai . I don 't do it just because it is another reference . Cartooning itself sometimes resembles other periods in art – perhaps unknowingly ... They do things like the little Hokusai waves in the Drowning Girl . But the original wasn 't very clear in this regard – why should it be ? I saw it and then pushed it a little further until it was a reference that most people will get ... it is a way of crystallizing the style by exaggeration . 
 Tøjner describes the work as " Lichtenstein 's finest formulation of a counter @-@ image to the many explosions in his universe " , noting that the drama is past its peak although it may seem to be at a crescendo . He also notes that " the tears are drawn with classic Lichtenstein waxy fullness " despite the surrounding water , which must be significant since " naturalistic justification " is absent . A November 1963 Art Magazine review stated that this was one of the " broad and powerful paintings " of the 1963 exhibition at Castelli 's Gallery . Nonetheless , the name of the work was not universally known . In a December 1964 Art Magazine review of his October 24 – September 19 , 1964 Castelli Gallery show , Lichtenstein was referred to as the author of I Don 't Care , I 'd Rather Sink ( Drowning Girl ) . According to Gary Garrels of the Museum of Modern Art , the work is a " poetics of the utterly banal , of displaced ordinariness " resulting in an " image frozen in time and space " , making it " iconic " . Comparing this to the source , Garrels says it is a rendering " in a simplified vocabulary " produced while Lichtenstein put aside his mechanical objectivity . According to The Grove Encyclopedia of American Art , extreme examples of his formalization become " virtual abstraction " when the viewer recalls that the motif is an element of a larger work . Thus , Lichtenstein reinforced a non @-@ realist view of comic strips and advertisements , presenting them as artificial images with minimalistic graphic techniques . Lichtenstein 's magnification of his source material stressed the plainness of his motifs as an equivalent to mechanical commercial drawing , leading to implications about his statements on modern industrial America . Nonetheless , Lichtenstein appears to have accepted the American capitalist industrial culture . 
 <unk> wrote of how Lichtenstein 's translation of a " highly charged " content with coolly handled presentation intensified the contrast between the two . While contrasting Lichtenstein 's Ben @-@ Day dots use in Drowning Girl with another artist 's work , Sarah Rich and Joyce Henri Robinson note that the work " satirizes the melodrama of soap operas and serial comics , turning the drama of the title figure 's potential suicide into a high camp performance " . 
 = Defeated Sanity = 
 Defeated Sanity is a German technical death metal band from <unk> , Bavaria , that was formed in 1994 , originally as a side project of guitarist Wolfgang Teske and his son , drummer Lille Gruber . Gruber is the only original remaining member left in the band , following the departure of Teske in July 2008 . The other members are Christian Kühn ( guitar ) , and Jacob Schmidt ( bass guitar ) . For almost a year the band was looking for a new vocalist , due to Jens Staschel leaving the band shortly before Teske ; Staschel 's replacement , A.J. Magana from Disgorge , was announced in June 2009 . 
 Since their formation , Defeated Sanity has released four studio albums : Prelude to the Tragedy ( 2004 ) , and Psalms of the Moribund ( 2007 ) , both through the United Kingdom @-@ based label Grindethic Records ; and Chapters of Repugnance ( 2010 ) and Passages into Deformity ( 2013 ) through Willowtip Records . Defeated Sanity also released numerous promos , demos and splits . Influenced by bands such as Cannibal Corpse and Suffocation , their music is mostly based on the American death metal style . On 2 May 2009 , the band announced their signing to Willowtip Records . 
 = = History = = 
 Defeated Sanity was formed in <unk> , Germany in 1994 by guitarist Wolfgang Teske and drummer Lille Gruber , initially as a side project . In 1996 , bassist Jonas Gruber and vocalist Robert Colnik joined the band as session musicians . This line @-@ up recorded the first two demos , <unk> by the Black in the same year , followed by Withdrawn from Beauty in 1998 . After undergoing a line @-@ up change , Defeated Sanity eventually recruited guitarist Christian <unk> and bassist Tino Köhler . Colnik departed the band shortly after recording a demo in 2000 . He was replaced by Markus Keller , who re @-@ recorded a track from the demo ; the track was included on the split with Poppy Seed Grinder , released through the Czech label <unk> in 2001 . Later that year , <unk> left the band to join <unk> . Defeated Sanity released a 7 @-@ inch split EP with Brazilian death metal band <unk> <unk> through Merciless Records in 2003 . 
 = = = Prelude to the Tragedy = = = 
 In 2004 , Defeated Sanity signed with UK label Grindethic Records to release their full @-@ length debut . The album was recorded at <unk> Studios in <unk> , Germany . The band produced the record and Andreas Hilbert handled the engineering and mastering . Prelude to the Tragedy was released in November that same year . The album received mixed reviews . Diabolical Conquest said , " Prelude to the Tragedy is a gleaming chrome harpoon of immaculate technical death metal , deftly interweaving cryptic riff @-@ tangles with <unk> percussive violence to surprisingly comprehensible and utterly enjoyable results . <unk> , relentless in its complexity , enhances both the progressive and barbaric elements of the tracks , nailing ambitious patterns to them with satisfying snare punch , lucid cymbals and expert fills . " Negative criticism of the album was mostly about the higher technical style of their music . Lords of Metal said , " This is only interesting for the real die hard trash ( not thrash ! ) lovers , and mathematicians , of course . " To promote the album , the band toured during 2005 , appearing at Rotterdam Deathfest ( an extreme metal festival in The Netherlands ) , along with bands such as Suffocation , Visceral Bleeding , and Vomit Remnants . 
 = = = Psalms of the Moribund and Chapters of Repugnance = = = 
 Defeated Sanity underwent further line @-@ up changes with Jens Staschel joining on vocals , Christian Kuehn on guitar and Jacob Schmidt filling in on bass . In August 2006 , the band recorded their second studio album at <unk> Studios . It was produced and engineered by Jörg <unk> , and mastered by <unk> Kok of <unk> . In the meantime , Gruber played drums for Austrian blackened death metal band <unk> on their North American tour with Unleashed and <unk> . Psalms of the Moribund was released through Grindethic Records in March 2007 . Like its predecessor , the album received mixed reviews , with Erik Thomas of webzine Teeth of the Divine saying , " With ultra deep , almost grindcore styled burps layered over complex yet savage riffs , Defeated Sanity , unlike some of their US peers , do manage to throw in some nice grooves and lurches amid the blasting carnage , hence the Suffocation and Devourment comparisons , but otherwise , Psalms of the Moribund is a pretty breakneck assault of squealing , pinch harmonics and ravenous blast beats . " Chronicles of Chaos reviewer Kostas <unk> criticized the vocal style of Jens Staschel , stating , " The constant low guttural growling is completely unintelligible , used more like a ( very blunt ) instrument rather than a means to convey lyrics . " 
 The band played at Maryland Deathfest at the Sonar in Baltimore , Maryland in May 2008 , along with <unk> <unk> and Monstrosity . In July 2008 , two members left Defeated Sanity : first Staschel , and shortly afterward Teske . Defeated Sanity brought in vocalist A.J. Magana from Disgorge , who recorded the vocals on the band 's third full @-@ length album , Chapters of Repugnance , released through Willowtip Records on 4 May 2010 . The album was recorded at <unk> Studios in Berlin . According to Cosmo Lee of Decibel magazine , Chapters of Repugnance is the first album cover on Willowtip that the printer has refused to print . " It 's a so @-@ bad @-@ it 's @-@ good Hieronymus Bosch @-@ esque depiction of hell in which everyone is nude and bald . " Beginning in late 2015 , Defeated Sanity embarked on a headline U.S. tour , performing their first concert shows in the United States since 2008 . 
 = = = Disposal of the Dead / Dharmata = = = 
 Before the summer of 2016 , Defeated Sanity confirmed work on a new release , which is a two part full @-@ length album with one side titled Disposal of the Dead and the other titled Dharmata . These two parts represent two EPs compiled onto a full @-@ length , with each part carrying a sound unique to it . 
 = = Style and influences = = 
 Although the band is of German origin , their music is based on the American style of death metal . Drummer Lille Gruber explained , " Blues and rock music was developed in the U.S. , that means it all goes back to this country . The roots are there and I think the best musicians will always be there . " When asked about the difference in terms of sound and direction between Psalms of the Moribund and Prelude to the Tragedy , Gruber stated , " We got our own style on Psalms to the Moribund where Prelude to the Tragedy had very obvious hints of the bands we idolized . Psalms of the Moribund splits in two extremes , it went more chunky , brutal , thick and deep , but at the same time that math @-@ approach and the technicality went up a lot ! " 
 Defeated Sanity 's main influences are the early work of Cannibal Corpse , <unk> , and Suffocation . Gruber also cited newer bands like Disgorge and Devourment as a source of inspiration . Defeated Sanity 's lyrics are influenced by <unk> 's " awesome concept " . Gruber described the band 's lyrics as " dark and brutal " , which fit with Defeated Sanity 's gore imagery . 
 = = Members = = 
 Lille Gruber – drums ( 1994 – present ) 
 Christian Kühn – guitar ( 2005 – present ) 
 Jacob Schmidt – bass ( 2005 – present ) 
 Konstantin <unk> – vocals ( 2011 – present ) 
 = = = Former members = = = 
 A.J. Magana - vocals ( 2009 – 2011 ) 
 Jens Staschel – vocals ( 2004 – 2008 ) 
 Markus Keller – vocals ( 2000 – 2004 ) 
 Robert Colnik – vocals ( 1998 – 2000 ) 
 Wolfgang Teske – guitar ( 1994 – 2008 ) 
 Christian <unk> – guitar ( 1999 – 2002 ) 
 Tino Köhler – bass ( 1998 – 2005 ) 
 Jonas Gruber – bass ( 1996 – 1998 ) 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Prelude to the Tragedy ( 2004 ) , Grindethic Records 
 Psalms of the Moribund ( 2007 ) , Grindethic Records 
 Chapters of Repugnance ( 2010 ) , Willowtip 
 Passages into Deformity ( 2013 ) , Willowtip 
 Disposal of the Dead / Dharmata ( 2016 ) , Willowtip 
 = = = Demos / EP = = = 
 <unk> by the Black ( 1996 ) 
 Withdrawn from Beauty ( 1998 ) 
 Prelude to the Tragedy EP ( 2004 ) 
 Promo 2000 ( 2000 ) 
 Promo 2005 ( 2005 ) 
 Promo 2007 ( 2008 ) 
 = = = Split albums = = = 
 Talk Evolution / The Parasite ( split with Poppy Seed Grinder ) ( 2002 ) 
 Live in Germany ( split with <unk> <unk> ) ( 2003 ) 
 <unk> Turmoil / Defeated Sanity ( 2008 ) 
 Unleashing the Seed of <unk> ( 4 @-@ way split with <unk> , <unk> Orgasm and <unk> ) ( 2010 ) 
 = = = Compilations = = = 
 Collected Demolition ( 2010 ) , Sick Chainsaw 
 = Sai Baba of Shirdi = 
 Sai Baba of Shirdi , also known as Shirdi Sai Baba , was an Indian spiritual master who was regarded by his devotees as a saint , fakir , and <unk> , according to their individual proclivities and beliefs . He was revered by both his Hindu and Muslim devotees , and during , as well as after , his life it remained uncertain if he was a Hindu or a Muslim . This , however , was of no consequence to Sai Baba . He stressed the importance of surrender to the true Satguru or Murshid , who , having trod the path to divine consciousness , will lead the disciple through the jungle of spiritual training . 
 Sai Baba is worshipped by people around the world . He had no love for perishable things and his sole concern was realization of the self . He taught a moral code of love , forgiveness , helping others , charity , contentment , inner peace , and devotion to God and guru . He gave no distinction based on religion or caste . Sai Baba 's teaching combined elements of Hinduism and Islam : he gave the Hindu name <unk> to the mosque in which he lived , practised Muslim rituals , taught using words and figures that drew from both traditions , and was buried in Shirdi . One of his well known epigrams , " <unk> Malik Ek " ( " One God governs all " ) , is associated with Hinduism , Islam and Sufism . He also said , " Trust in me and your prayer shall be answered " . He always uttered " Allah Malik " ( " God is King " ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Baba 's dress will be always simple Sai Baba 's real name , his birthplace and date of birth are unknown . When asked about his past , he often gave elusive responses . The name " Sai " was given to him upon his arrival at Shirdi , a town in the West Indian state of Maharashtra . The word " Sai " refers to a religious mendicant . In several Indian and Middle Eastern languages the term " Baba " is an honorific signifying grandfather , father , old man or sir . Thus Sai Baba denotes holy father , saintly father or ( venerable ) poor old man . Some of Sai Baba 's disciples became famous as spiritual figures and saints , such as <unk> , a priest of the Khandoba temple in Shirdi , and Upasni Maharaj . He was revered by other saints , such as Saint <unk> Maharaj , Saint <unk> , Saint <unk> Maharaj , and Sati Godavari Mataji . Sai Baba referred to several saints as ' my brothers ' , especially the disciples of Swami Samartha of <unk> . 
 = = Early years = = 
 According to the book Sai Satcharita , Sai Baba arrived at the village of Shirdi in the Ahmednagar District of Maharashtra , British India , when he was about 16 years old . He led an ascetic life , sitting motionless under a neem tree and meditating while sitting in an asana . The Shri Sai Satcharita recounts the reaction of the villagers : 
 The people of the village were wonder @-@ struck to see such a young lad practising hard penance , not minding heat or cold . By day he associated with no one , by night he was afraid of nobody . 
 His presence attracted the curiosity of the villagers , and he was regularly visited by the religiously inclined , including <unk> , Appa <unk> and <unk> . Some considered him mad and threw stones at him . Sai Baba left the village , and little is known about him after that . 
 There are some indications that he met with many saints and fakirs , and worked as a weaver . He claimed to have been with the army of Rani <unk> of Jhansi during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . It is generally accepted that Sai Baba stayed in Shirdi for three years , disappeared for a year , and returned permanently around 1858 , which suggests a birth year of 1838 . 
 = = Return to Shirdi = = 
 In the year 1858 Sai Baba returned to Shirdi . Around this time he adopted his famous style of dress consisting of a knee @-@ length one @-@ piece <unk> robe and a cloth cap . <unk> Bua , a devotee , testified that Sai Baba was dressed like an athlete and sported ' long hair flowing down to the end of his spine ' when he arrived in Shirdi , and that he never had his head shaved . It was only after Baba forfeited a wrestling match with one <unk> <unk> that he took up the <unk> and cloth cap , articles of typical Sufi clothing . This attire contributed to Baba 's identification as a Muslim fakir and was a reason for initial indifference and hostility against him in a predominantly Hindu village . 
 For four to five years Baba lived under a neem tree and often wandered for long periods in the jungle around Shirdi . His manner was said to be withdrawn and uncommunicative as he undertook long periods of meditation . He was eventually persuaded to take up residence in an old and dilapidated mosque and lived a solitary life there , surviving by begging for alms , and receiving itinerant Hindu or Muslim visitors . In the mosque he maintained a sacred fire which is referred to as a <unk> , from which he gave sacred ashes ( ' <unk> ' ) to his guests before they left . The ash was believed to have healing and apotropaic powers . He performed the function of a local <unk> and treated the sick by application of ashes . Sai Baba also delivered spiritual teachings to his visitors , recommending the reading of sacred Hindu texts along with the Qur 'an . He insisted on the indispensability of the unbroken remembrance of God 's name ( dhikr , japa ) , and often expressed himself in a cryptic manner with the use of parables , symbols and allegories . 
 After 1910 Sai Baba 's fame began to spread in Mumbai . Numerous people started visiting him , because they regarded him as a saint with the power of performing miracles or even as an Avatar . They built his first temple at <unk> , <unk> . 
 = = Teachings and practices = = 
 Sai Baba opposed all persecution based on religion or caste . He was an opponent of religious orthodoxy — Christian , Hindu and Muslim . 
 Sai Baba encouraged his devotees to pray , chant God 's name , and read holy scriptures . He told Muslims to study the Qur 'an and Hindus to study texts such as the Ramayana , Bhagavad Gita , and Yoga Vasistha . He was impressed by the philosophy of the Bhagavad Gita and encouraged people to follow it in their own lives . He advised his devotees and followers to lead a moral life , help others , love every living being without any discrimination , and develop two important features of character : devotion to the Guru ( <unk> ) and waiting cheerfully with patience and love ( <unk> ) . He criticised atheism . 
 In his teachings , Sai Baba emphasised the importance of performing one 's duties without attachment to earthly matters and of being content regardless of the situation . In his personal practice , Sai Baba observed worship procedures belonging to Hinduism and Islam ; he shunned any kind of regular rituals but allowed the practice of <unk> , chanting of Al @-@ Fatiha , and Qur 'an readings at Muslim festival times . Occasionally reciting the Al @-@ Fatiha , Baba enjoyed listening to <unk> and qawwali accompanied with the tabla and sarangi twice daily . 
 Sai Baba interpreted the religious texts of both Islam and Hinduism . He explained the meaning of the Hindu scriptures in the spirit of Advaita Vedanta . His philosophy also had numerous elements of bhakti . The three main Hindu spiritual paths — Bhakti Yoga , Jnana Yoga , and Karma Yoga — influenced his teachings . 
 Sai Baba encouraged charity , and stressed the importance of sharing . He said : " Unless there is some relationship or connection , nobody goes anywhere . If any men or creatures come to you , do not <unk> drive them away , but receive them well and treat them with due respect . Shri Hari ( God ) will certainly be pleased if you give water to the thirsty , bread to the hungry , clothes to the naked , and your verandah to strangers for sitting and resting . If anybody wants any money from you and you are not inclined to give , do not give , but do not bark at him like a dog . " 
 = = Worship and devotees = = 
 The Shirdi Sai Baba movement began in the 19th century , while he was living in Shirdi . A local Khandoba priest , <unk> <unk> , is believed to have been his first devotee . In the 19th century Sai Baba 's followers were only a small group of Shirdi inhabitants and a few people from other parts of India . 
 Because of Sai Baba , Shirdi has become a place of importance and is counted among the major Hindu places of pilgrimage . The first Sai Baba temple is situated at Kudal , <unk> . This temple was built in 1922 . It is believed that Sai Baba gave one Rupee to Dada <unk> ji with which he built the temple in Kudal . The Sai Baba Mandir in Shirdi is visited by around 20 @,@ 000 pilgrims a day and during religious festivals this number can reach up to 100 @,@ 000 . Shirdi Sai Baba is especially revered and worshiped in the states of Maharashtra , Odisha , Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka , Tamil Nadu and Gujarat . In August 2012 , an unidentified devotee for the first time donated two costly diamonds valuing Rs 11 @.@ 8 million at the Shirdi temple , <unk> trust officials revealed . 
 The Shirdi Sai movement has spread to the Caribbean and to countries such as the Nepal , Canada , United States , Australia , United Arab Emirates , Malaysia , United Kingdom , Germany , France and Singapore . 
 = = = Notable disciples = = = 
 Sai Baba left behind no spiritual heirs , appointed no disciples , and did not even provide formal initiation ( diksha ) , despite requests . Some disciples of Sai Baba achieved fame as spiritual figures , such as Upasni Maharaj of <unk> . After Sai Baba died , his devotees offered the daily Aarti to Upasni Maharaj when he paid a visit to Shirdi , two times within 10 years . 
 = = Claimed miracles = = 
 Sai Baba 's disciples and devotees claim that he performed many miracles such as bilocation , levitation , <unk> , <unk> , exorcisms , making the river Yamuna , entering a state of <unk> at will , lighting lamps with water , removing his limbs or intestines and sticking them back to his body ( <unk> yoga ) , curing the incurably sick , appearing beaten when another was beaten , preventing a mosque from falling down on people , and helping his devotees in a miraculous way . He also gave Darshan ( vision ) to people in the form of Sri Rama , Krishna , Vithoba , Shiva and many other gods depending on the faith of devotees . 
 According to his followers he appeared to them in dreams and gave them advice . His devotees have documented many stories . 
 On 15 April 2010 , in Wellington 's Lower Hutt Suburb , <unk> in New Zealand , 
 a Sri Lankan Christian Developer was developing a new Subdivision , in his 10 acres of land . 
 While digging the field , a Digger found a solid object , about 6 <unk> feet under the ground . 
 He stopped digging immediately and lifted this object out of the ground . 
 The Developer , on seeing that this solid object was the Statue of some Deity , halted further digging and got the Statue cleaned . 
 He then called a Hindu Priest to identify the Deity , as he himself was not sure about it . 
 The Statue roughly 2 feet tall , happened to be of Shirdi Sai Baba in a sitting posture . 
 Soon , water started coming out from the place where the digger had found Baba 's Statue and slowly it turned into a small pond . 
 Hence , Baba 's Statue was put on a small wooden pallet and now rests floating in the pond , at the same place . 
 Also , apparently the Developer has decided to leave this particular spot untouched and re @-@ develop another area . 
 = = In various religions = = 
 = = = Hinduism = = = 
 During Sai Baba 's life , the Hindu saint <unk> of <unk> declared Sai Baba to be a " spiritual diamond . " Another saint , <unk> , also called him a " jewel . " Sri <unk> Maharaj greatly revered Sai Baba , and in 1873 , when he met him he bestowed the title Jagad guru upon him . Sai Baba was also greatly respected by <unk> Saraswati ( known as <unk> Swami ) . He was also revered by a group of <unk> yogis , to which he belonged , known as the Nath @-@ Panchayat . 
 According to B.V. <unk> , a posthumous follower who was widely praised as Sai Baba 's apostle , many Hindus regarded Sai Baba as a Muslim . This attitude was prevalent up to 1954 even among some of his devotees in Shirdi . 
 = = = Zoroastrianism = = = 
 Sai Baba was revered by prominent Zoroastrians such as Nanabhoy <unk> and Homi Bhabha , and has been cited as the Zoroastrians ' most popular non @-@ Zoroastrian religious figure . 
 Meher Baba , who was born into a Zoroastrian family , met Sai Baba once , during World War I , in December 1915 . Meher Baba was a youngster named Merwan Sheriar Irani , when he met Sai Baba for a few minutes during one of Sai Baba 's processions in Shirdi . This event is considered as the most significant in Meher Baba 's life . Shri Sai Satcharita ( Sai Baba 's life story ) , makes no mention of Meher Baba . But in Lord Meher , the life story of Meher Baba , there are numerous references to Sai Baba . 
 Meher Baba credited his Avataric advent to Upasni , Sai Baba , and three other Perfect Masters : Hazrat Babajan , Hazrat Tajuddin Baba , and Narayan Maharaj . He declared Sai Baba to be a Qutub @-@ e @-@ Irshad ( the highest of the five <unk> , a " Master of the Universe " in the spiritual hierarchy ) . 
 = = In culture = = 
 = = = Sacred art and architecture = = = 
 There are many Sai Baba temples in India . There are also temples located in countries outside India , including in the United States , Netherlands , Kenya , Benin , Cuba , Canada , Pakistan , Australia , United Kingdom , Germany , Japan . In the mosque in Shirdi , in which Sai Baba lived , there is a life @-@ size portrait of him by Shama Rao Jaykar , an artist from Mumbai . Numerous monuments and statues depicting Sai Baba , which serve a religious function , have been made . One of them , made of marble by a sculptor named Balaji Vasant Talim , is in the Samadhi Mandir in Shirdi where Sai Baba was buried . 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 Sai Baba has been the subject of several feature films in many languages produced by India 's film industry . 
 = Microsoft vs. <unk> = 
 Microsoft vs. <unk> was a legal dispute between Microsoft and a Canadian Belmont High School student named Mike Rowe over the domain name " <unk> " . The case received international press attention following Microsoft 's perceived heavy @-@ handed approach to a 12th grade student 's part @-@ time web design business and the subsequent support that Rowe received from the online community . A settlement was eventually reached , with Rowe granting ownership of the domain to Microsoft in exchange for an Xbox and additional compensation . 
 = = Background = = 
 The domain name <unk> was initially registered by Canadian student Mike Rowe in August 2003 . Rowe set up the site as a part @-@ time web design business , choosing the domain because of the phonetic pun by adding the word " soft " to the end of his name . Microsoft saw the name as trademark infringement because of its phonetic resemblance to their trademarked corporate name and demanded that he give up the domain . After receiving a letter on January 14 , 2004 from Microsoft 's Canadian legal representatives Smart & Biggar , Rowe replied asking to be compensated for giving up the domain . 
 Microsoft offered to pay Rowe 's out @-@ of @-@ pocket expenses of $ 10 , the original cost of registering the domain name . Rowe countered asking instead for $ 10 @,@ 000 , later claiming that he did this because he was " mad at " Microsoft for their initial $ 10 offer . Microsoft declined the offer and sent a cease and desist order spanning 25 pages . Microsoft accused Rowe of setting up the site in order to try to force them into a large financial settlement , a practice known as cybersquatting . 
 = = Press coverage and settlement = = 
 Rowe went to the press , creating publicity for the case and garnering support for his cause , including donations of over $ 6 @,@ 000 and an offer of free advice from a lawyer . At one point Rowe was forced to take down his site after it was overwhelmed by around 250 @,@ 000 page views over a period of twelve hours , only managing to get the site back up after changing to a service provider with a higher capacity . The case , portrayed as a David versus Goliath struggle by the media , characterized Microsoft in a negative light . The resulting bad publicity was later described as a " public relations mess . " The public showing of support that Rowe received was credited with " softening Microsoft 's stance , " leading to an eventual settlement . 
 In late January 2004 , it was revealed that the two parties had come to an out of court settlement , with Microsoft taking control of the domain . In return Microsoft agreed to pay all of the expenses that Rowe had incurred including setting up a new site at and redirecting traffic to <unk> Additionally , Microsoft provided Rowe with a subscription to the Microsoft Developer Network , an all expenses paid trip for him and his family to the Microsoft Research Tech Fest at their headquarters in Redmond , Washington , training for Microsoft certification and an Xbox with a selection of games . Following an online poll , Rowe donated most of his legal defense fund to a children 's hospital and used the remaining money for his future university education . 
 = = Further developments = = 
 After settling the dispute with Microsoft , Rowe attempted to auction off the documentation he had received on the on @-@ line auction site eBay , describing it as " a piece of Internet history . " The materials included one copy of the original 25 page cease and desist letter as well as an inch @-@ thick WIPO book containing copies of trademarks , web pages and e @-@ mails between him and Microsoft . The auction received more than half a million page views and bidding rose to more than $ 200 @,@ 000 . The high bids turned out to be fraudulent and the auction was restricted to pre @-@ approved bidders . After restarting from the reserve price of $ 500 , the documents eventually sold for $ 1 @,@ 037 . 
 Microsoft later admitted that they may have been too aggressive in their defense of the " Microsoft " trademark . Following the case it was suggested by Struan Robertson – editor of Out @-@ <unk> – that Microsoft had little choice but to pursue the issue once it had come to light or they would have risked weakening their trademark . This view was also espoused by ZDNet , who noted that had Microsoft knowingly ignored Rowe 's site , the company would have risked losing the right to fight future trademark infringements . Robertson opined that — had legal proceedings ensued — Rowe would have made a strong argument for keeping his domain , as he was using his real name and was not claiming to be affiliated with Microsoft . 
 = Abby Martin = 
 Abigail Suzanne " Abby " Martin ( born September 6 , 1984 ) is an American journalist and presenter of The Empire Files , a weekly investigative news program on <unk> English . She was formerly the host of Breaking the Set on RT America network , working from the Washington , D.C. bureau . Before hosting her own show , she had worked for two years as a correspondent for RT America . 
 Martin is also an artist and activist , and helped found the citizen journalism website , Media Roots . She serves on the board of directors for the Media Freedom Foundation which manages Project Censored . Martin appeared in the documentary film Project Censored The Movie : Ending the Reign of Junk Food News ( 2013 ) , and co @-@ directed 99 % : The Occupy Wall Street Collaborative Film ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Martin grew up in Pleasanton , California , where she attended Amador Valley High School , graduating in 2002 . She became interested in journalism when her old high school boyfriend enlisted in the military after the September 11 attacks in 2001 . " I didn 't want him going to war , let alone fighting in one , " she recalls . " I began to critically ask ' What is really going on ? ' " By the time she was a sophomore at San Diego State University , she began questioning what she called the " selling " of the Iraq War by the media . She received an undergraduate degree in political science and minored in Spanish . 
 In 2004 , she campaigned for John Kerry 's presidential campaign , but became disillusioned with the left @-@ right paradigm , a concept proposing that societies have a tendency to divide themselves into ideological opposites . Martin worked for a time as an investigative journalist for a San Diego @-@ based online news site until moving back to Northern California . In 2008 , Martin posted a video showing her support for the 9 / 11 Truth movement . She has labelled the US government 's version of September 11 , 2001 as " propaganda " . During the administration of President George W. Bush she said of the attacks : " I 've researched it for three years and every single thing that I uncover solidifies my belief that it was an inside job and that our government was complicit in what happened . " The New York Times described her as a 9 / 11 conspiracy theorist , but Martin told the Associated Press in March 2014 that she " no longer subscribes " to the theory that 9 / 11 was an inside job as she did earlier . 
 = = Graphic arts = = 
 After high school , Martin began painting . Themes in her paintings include politics , nature , and psychedelia . She also takes photographs and makes collages . Her works have been exhibited several times around California . She views art as " an amazing outlet " and a " way to interpret the ugly truths in the world and reflect a better future . " 
 = = Media Roots = = 
 In 2009 , Martin founded the organization Media Roots , a citizen journalism platform for reporting news . As an independent journalist with Media Roots , Martin covered the Occupy Oakland ( California ) actions during the Occupy Wall Street movement in 2011 . Her documentary video footage of Occupy Oakland protests was used by the family of 24 @-@ year @-@ old Scott Olsen , who was injured during the protests , in a lawsuit against the Oakland Police Department . Martin 's footage was used to argue that the protests were non @-@ violent at the time Olsen was allegedly hit in the head with a police projectile . RT took notice of Martin 's work and began using her as a correspondent . In the fall of 2010 , she moved to Washington , D.C. 
 = = Breaking the Set = = 
 Martin began hosting her own show , Breaking the Set , on RT America in September 2012 from Washington , D.C. The show mixes media criticism with investigative journalism . It describes itself as " a show that cuts through the pre @-@ written narrative that tries to tell you what to think , and what to care about " , and as a show that " cuts through the false Left / Right paradigm set by the establishment & reports the hard facts " . The original opening credits depict Martin applying a sledgehammer to a television tuned to CNN . A later version of the opening credits depicted Martin traveling in a helicopter over Manhattan 's Central Park . According to Rolling Stone magazine , past shows investigated " Monsanto , Nestle , the U.S. federal electoral system , the drone program , the NSA , Israel , Obama , and water fluoridation " . 
 Martin drew widespread media attention when she closed her show on March 3 , 2014 , with a minute @-@ long statement condemning the Russian military intervention in Ukraine . She appeared to be reading from a teleprompter , leading observers to conclude that her remarks were made with the consent of the show 's producers . Glenn Greenwald wrote a piece that compared Martin 's statement favorably to the behavior of the United States media during the 2003 invasion of Iraq . RT also issued a statement saying : " Contrary to the popular opinion , RT doesn 't beat its journalists into submission , and they are free to express their own opinions , not just in private but on the air . " RT added : " [ W ] e 'll be sending her to Crimea to give her an opportunity to make up her own mind from the epicentre of the story . " Martin declined the offer , saying " I am not going to Crimea despite the statement RT has made . " 
 The Breaking the Set program came to an end in February 2015 , with Martin leaving RT and stating she had " decided to focus on investigative field reporting " . Speaking for RT , Anna <unk> told BuzzFeed , “ Abby decided that this is the time for her to try something new . We are proud of the great work she has done as the host of Breaking the Set . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Journalist Nik <unk> of Der Tagesspiegel said Martin " looks like a model and acts like a punk . " Writer Jeremy Koss described her as " vibrant , artistic and outspoken " . Millennial Magazine portrayed Martin as an " unfiltered " media representative for the Millennial generation who reports " stories that deserve public recognition " . 
 = = Selected work = = 
 Television 
 The Empire Files ( 2015 – , host ) 
 Breaking the Set ( 2012 – 15 ) , host 
 RT America ( 2010 – 12 ) , correspondent 
 Film 
 99 % : The Occupy Wall Street Collaborative Film ( 2013 ) , co @-@ director 
 Project Censored the Movie ( 2013 ) , as herself 
 Books 
 Martin , Abby . ( 2011 ) . Framing the Messengers : Junk Food News and News Abuse for Dummies . In Mickey Huff ( Ed . ) Censored 2012 : The Top 25 Censored Stories of 2010 – 11 . Seven Stories Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Martin , Abby . ( 2011 ) . Media Democracy in Action . In Mickey Huff ( Ed . ) Censored 2012 : The Top 25 Censored Stories of 2010 – 11 . Seven Stories Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Radio 
 Media Roots Radio ( 2010 – 15 ) 
 Project Censored , <unk> ( 94 @.@ 1 FM ) , co @-@ host 
 Video 
 Media Roots TV ( 2009 – present ) 
 Artwork 
 The Crisis of Civilization ( 2011 ) , film poster 
 = Lotus Intro = 
 " Lotus Intro " is a song recorded by American singer Christina Aguilera for her seventh studio album , Lotus ( 2012 ) . Written by Aguilera , Dwayne Abernathy , Candice Pillay and Alex da Kid , the song is about her rebirth as an artist , and is a representation of the symbolic nature of the Lotus Flower . " Lotus Intro " was created from Aguilera 's passion for " chill @-@ out " electronica music , and incorporates electronic and electronica styles . A sample of M83 's " Midnight City " was originally included in the demo , but was ultimately not cleared . 
 Upon its release , " Lotus Intro " garnered mixed reviews from music critics ; some complimented its hypnotizing melody , while others stated the song 's name is misleading , as the track is a full @-@ length song , and not a short introduction . Aguilera first performed " Lotus Intro " at the 40th American Music Awards on November 18 , 2012 , as part of a medley with Lotus tracks " Army of Me " and " Let There Be Love " . Upon the release of the album , the song debuted at number 165 on the South Korean international singles chart , selling 1 @,@ 898 copies . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 After the release of Aguilera 's sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) , which failed to generate sales , she divorced from her husband Jordan Bratman , made her acting debut in a film called Burlesque and recorded its accompanying soundtrack . The singer then became a coach on NBC 's singing contest show The Voice and appeared as a guest vocalist on Maroon 5 's single " Moves Like Jagger " ( 2011 ) , which spent four weeks atop the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . Following these events , Aguilera announced that she wanted to record her seventh album , stating that she wanted high quality and " personal " songs to record . She revealed that the album would be a " culmination of everything I 've experienced up until this point ... I 've been through a lot since the release of my last album , being on ( The Voice ) , having had a divorce ... This is all sort of a free rebirth for me . " She continued to say that " I 'm embracing many different things , but it 's all feel @-@ good , super @-@ expressive [ and ] super @-@ vulnerable . " She further expressed that the album would be about " self @-@ expression and freedom " because of the personal struggles she had overcome during the last couple of years . 
 Speaking about her new material on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 2012 , Aguilera revealed that the album was taking a while to record because " I don 't like to just get songs from producers . I like them to come from a personal place ... I 'm very excited . It 's fun , exciting , introspective , it 's going to be great " . " Lotus Intro " was inspired by Aguilera 's passion for " chill @-@ out " electronica . Recorded at Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California by Josh Mosser , " Lotus Intro " was written by Christina Aguilera , Dwayne Abernathy , Candice Pillay , Alexander Grant , and it was produced by Alex da Kid and Dem Jointz . Aguilera 's vocals were recorded by Oscar Ramirez at The Red Lips Room in Beverly Hills , California , while Aguilera and Pillay conducted the vocal production . Mike Delo Rio contributed additional vocals on the track , and J Browz added additional strings . The original demo of the track included a sample of M83 's " Midnight City " , but it was not approved and therefore not included on the final version . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 " Lotus Intro " is an electronic music song which lasts for a duration of 3 : 17 ; it was inspired by Aguilera 's passion for electronica . It has a " hypnotic " yet " dark , serious " tone which develops and matures as it progresses , depicting Aguilera 's rebirth , similar to the life cycle of a Lotus Flower . The track opens with tribal chant by Aguilera , who sings the line " Rise up lotus , rise / This is the beginning " over a " heavy " hip hop beat . Aguilera sings the lyrics " I look at my reflection and embrace the woman I 've become / The unbreakable lotus in me , I now set free " over electronic " bleeps and beeps " . Some of the opening lyrics , including " Rise up / This is the beginning " and " Leave the past behind " , serve as a mission statement for the rest of the album . Despite claiming to " submerge from hurt , pain , broken pieces " and " leave the past behind / say goodbye to the scared child inside , " Andrew Hampp for Billboard felt that the singer " still has a few scores to settle . " According to Robert Copsey for Digital Spy , the singer explains how the a Lotus Flower is " the unbreakable flower " in the lyrics " To the sky I rise / Spread my wings and fly " . He further wrote that the listener could be fooled by the title " Lotus Intro " , as it is a full length song and not a short introduction . Sarah Godfrey for The Washington Post was critical of Aguilera 's vocal performance , writing that although the singer 's strength is her voice , she sounds " modulated beyond recognition " . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Aguilera performed " Lotus Intro " for the first time at the 40th American Music Awards on November 18 , 2012 , held at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles , California . As one of the first singers to be announced as a performer at the award ceremony , Aguilera sang " Lotus Intro " as part of a medley with two other tracks from Lotus : " Let There Be Love " and " Army of Me " . During an interview with MTV News , Aguilera revealed what the performance would be like and the creative direction behind it : 
 It 's very exciting . It 's definitely going to be a reflection of what Lotus means to me . If you take that album cover and give it a little performance twist , I 'll bring that album cover to life , so it 's going to be really fun . I can 't give too much away about the songs , but it 's definitely going to represent the album because the album is very multilayered . It doesn 't represent ' Your Body ' as a single tone . It has its ballads ; and everything comes from a very sincere , deep – rooted place whether it 's having fun or being vulnerable . 
 Wearing a " fuller @-@ figure " " cinched in corset " designed by The Blonds , who also design outfits for Lady Gaga . Leah Simpson for the Daily Mail wrote that Aguilera put a " sexy twist on patriotism with a star – spangled bodysuit and managed to get a few pulses racing in the over @-@ the @-@ top ensemble . " The performance featured dance routines and dancers wearing torture bags over their heads with the words ' Freak ' and ' Queen ' printed on them . Bruna Nessif for E ! Online described the performance as " interesting , " and noted that the theme " to celebrate everyone for who they are " was similar to the moral content presented on Gaga 's album Born This Way ( 2011 ) . As Aguilera finished her set , the singer was joined on stage by Pitbull to perform his song " Feel This Moment " , on which she is a featured artist . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Westlake Studios , Los Angeles , CA . 
 Vocals recorded at The Red Lips Room , Beverly Hills , CA . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Christina Aguilera , Dwayne Abernathy , Candice Pillay , Alexander Grant 
 Production – Alex da Kid , Dem Jointz 
 Recording – Josh Mosser 
 Vocal recording – Oscar Ramirez 
 Vocal production – Christina Aguilera , Candice Pillay 
 Additional vocals – Mike Del Rio 
 Additional strings – J Browz 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Lotus , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Lotus , " Lotus Intro " debuted on the South Korean international singles chart at number 165 during the week of November 11 to 17 , 2012 , due to digital download sales of 1 @,@ 898 . 
 = 2012 New Mexico Bowl = 
 The 2012 <unk> New Mexico Bowl was a post @-@ season American college football bowl game that was held on December 15 , 2012 , at University Stadium on the campus of the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque , New Mexico in the United States . The seventh edition of the New Mexico Bowl began at 11 : 00 a.m. MST and aired on ESPN . It featured the Nevada Wolf Pack , who represented the Mountain West Conference in their first year as a member , against the Arizona Wildcats , who represented the Pac @-@ 12 Conference . The Wolf Pack accepted their invitation with a 7 – 4 record in their first eleven games of the season , while the Wildcats accepted their invitation after finishing the regular season at 7 – 5 . The bowl was the first of 35 played in the 2012 – 13 bowl game season . 
 Coming into the game , both teams had sound offenses and were led by their respective running backs , sophomore Ka 'Deem Carey for Arizona and senior Stefphon Jefferson for Nevada , who ranked number one and number two respectively in total rushing yards during the regular season . Arizona and Nevada ranked third and fourth respectively in total offense . Both teams ' defenses were ranked towards the bottom of college football . Consequently , the game was widely expected to be high @-@ scoring . 
 Arizona won the game 49 – 48 after scoring two touchdowns in the final two minutes to come back for the victory . As expected , the game was dominated by offense ; Arizona and Nevada combined for 1234 total yards and 70 first downs . Despite losing the game , Nevada possessed the ball nearly twice as long and gained twice as many rushing yards as Arizona . Arizona quarterback Matt Scott was named the game 's offensive most valuable player ( MVP ) , and teammate Marquis Flowers , a linebacker , was named the game 's defensive MVP . 
 = = Teams = = 
 The New Mexico Bowl is played annually at the campus stadium of the University of New Mexico , a founding member of the Mountain West Conference which has had a tie @-@ in since the game 's establishment in 2006 . 2012 was the first year of the Pac @-@ 12 's tie in . The game featured the nation 's top rushers , Arizona 's All @-@ American Ka 'Deem Carey ( 146 @.@ 4 ypg ) and Nevada 's Stefphon Jefferson ( 141 @.@ 9 ypg ) . It also featured Arizona quarterback Matt Scott ( 3 @,@ 723 total offense yards ) and Nevada quarterback Cody Fajardo ( 3 @,@ 511 total offense yards ) . 
 This was the fourth meeting between these two teams . Arizona leads the all @-@ time record 2 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 . The last time they played was in 1941 . 
 = = = Arizona = = = 
 Arizona came off of a 7 @-@ 5 ( 4 @-@ 5 in conference ) season in coach Rich Rodriguez 's debut with the team . Arizona started their season by beating Toledo , Oklahoma State , and South Carolina State prior to getting blown out 49 @-@ 0 by Oregon . Later in the season , Arizona beat USC who was ranked # 9 . Star running back Ka 'Deem Carey had his best game of the year against Colorado totaling 366 yards to give the Wildcats their sixth win of the season . Their regular season concluded with a loss to rival Arizona State 41 @-@ 34 . 
 The 2012 edition was the first appearance in the bowl for both Arizona and for the Pac @-@ 12 . Arizona , seventh best in the nation in total offense ( 521 @.@ 83 ypg ) , was led by quarterback Matt Scott ( 338 @.@ 45 ypg , 3 @,@ 238 yards passing ) , All @-@ American running back Ka 'Deem Carey who led the nation in rushing ( 146 @.@ 42 ypg ) and set a school record with his 1 @,@ 757 rushing yards , good for 21 touchdowns , and wide receiver Austin Hill who totaled 1 @,@ 189 yards . 2012 was the first season in Arizona 's history during which they had a 3000 @-@ yard passer , a 1000 @-@ yard rusher , and a 1000 @-@ yard receiver . Senior place kicker John Bonano was named the 2012 Pac @-@ 12 Football Scholar @-@ Athlete of the Year ( Physiology major with a 3 @.@ 927 GPA ) . 
 = = = Nevada = = = 
 The Wolf Pack came off their inaugural season as a member of the Mountain West , during which they compiled a conference record of 4 @-@ 3 , good for fifth place in the conference . They began their season by defeating rival California 31 @-@ 24 . After losing to South Florida by a single point , Nevada won five consecutive games to achieve bowl eligibility . The Wolf Pack then dropped three of their final four to bring their record to 7 @-@ 5 . After defeating the New Mexico Lobos to improve their record to 7 @-@ 4 , the Wolf Pack accepted an invitation to the New Mexico Bowl . 
 Nevada coach Chris Ault was one of three members of the College Football Hall of Fame to lead a team into a bowl game , along with Barry Alvarez ( Wisconsin interim coach ) and Steve Spurrier ( South Carolina ) . Nevada 's senior receiver Brandon Wimberly had caught a pass in all 39 games of his college career . This was the Wolf Pack 's second New Mexico Bowl ; they had previously played in the 2007 edition ( then as a member of the Western Athletic Conference ) , losing to the hometown New Mexico Lobos by a score of 23 @-@ 0 . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 This was the first bowl of the 2012 @-@ 13 College Football Bowl season . Prior to 2012 , the teams had not met since 1941 despite their close proximity . In 1941 , Arizona beat Nevada 26 – 7 . Overall , the series record prior to the game was 1 – 1 – 1 . Arizona , who had appeared in a bowl game in four of the previous five seasons , made the Pac @-@ 12 's first appearance in the New Mexico Bowl . Nevada made its eighth consecutive bowl appearance and second all @-@ time in the New Mexico Bowl . 
 = = = Offense = = = 
 Coming into the game , Arizona and Nevada were two of the top offenses in the country , ranking 7th and 10th in yards per game respectively . There was also significant hype surrounding the game because it featured two of the best running backs in the country , Ka 'Deem Carey for Arizona , and Stefphon Jefferson for Nevada . Carey was ranked number one in the country in total rushing yards , while Jefferson was ranked number two . The duo were also prolific scorers ; Jefferson was second in the country in rushing touchdowns with 25 and Carey was third with 24 . The game was widely expected to be a shoot @-@ out , as both teams were in the top @-@ 20 scoring offenses in the regular season . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 There were very low expectations for the defenses ; the over / under was set at 75 @.@ 5 total points . During the regular season , both defenses were ranked in the bottom 30 ( out of 120 ) in points allowed . Despite having three players on the All @-@ Mountain West team , Nevada allowed opponents to convert third downs 47 @.@ 2 % of the time ( 107th in the country ) . Arizona was led defensively during the regular season by Jake Fischer , who accumulated 119 total tackles , while Nevada was led by Albert Rosette who totaled 135 regular season tackles . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Nevada methodically moved down the field on their first drive and scored first on a 16 @-@ yard run by Stefphon Jefferson to cap off an 8 @-@ play , 75 @-@ yard drive . Later in the quarter , the Wolf Pack took a 14 @-@ 0 lead following a 17 @-@ yard touchdown pass from quarterback Cody Fajardo to Zach Sudfeld . Arizona fumbled on the ensuing kickoff . On the first play of their drive , Nevada took a 21 @-@ 0 lead on a 28 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Sudfeld . All @-@ American running back Ka 'Deem Carey finally got Arizona on the board with a 21 @-@ yard touchdown run late in the first quarter . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 In the second quarter , Arizona outscored Nevada 21 @-@ 10 . Taking advantage of two Nevada turnovers , an interception thrown by Cody Fajardo and a fumble by Stefphon Jefferson , Arizona was able to tie the game at 21 with one @-@ yard touchdown runs by Matt Scott and Carey , respectively . Nevada regained the lead on a 14 @-@ yard rushing touchdown by Jefferson , but Arizona tied the game once again on a 9 @-@ yard Carey touchdown run , his third of the game . Nevada enjoyed a three @-@ point lead at the half after a 27 field goal by Allen Hardison capped off a 16 @-@ play , 65 @-@ yard drive and made the score 31 @-@ 28 . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 After kicking off to start the game , Arizona got the ball first in the second half . Their first drive went three @-@ and @-@ out . After a 51 @-@ yard punt , Nevada took over at their own 11 @-@ yard line . They put together an 11 @-@ play , 89 @-@ yard drive that culminated with a 33 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Cody Fajardo to <unk> Turner . During the course of throwing the touchdown pass , Fajardo hurt his hand and was seen shaking it on his way to the end zone to celebrate the score . He returned for Nevada 's next offensive drive . Arizona 's next drive got them into Nevada territory , but an interception thrown by Matt Scott ended any hopes of scoring . Nevada took the field and drove 84 yards down the field on 15 plays . Near the end of the drive once Nevada was inside the 10 @-@ yard line , Fajardo ran the ball for a gain of three yards . During the course of the play , he took a hit to the head from an Arizona defender . He exited the game for one play , but subsequently returned on that drive and scored a one @-@ yard rushing touchdown . Arizona was held scoreless in the quarter , and heading into the final quarter of regulation , Nevada possessed a 45 @-@ 28 lead . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 Arizona came in to the fourth quarter trailing Nevada by 17 points . Arizona was able to cut the lead to 45 @-@ 35 on a 63 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Scott to Austin Hill soon after the 4th quarter began . Nevada then took a 48 @-@ 35 lead on a 25 @-@ yard field goal from Hardison , for a 13 @-@ point lead with only 1 : 44 left in regulation time . Arizona , with no timeouts and needing two scores to win the game , was able to cut the lead down to 48 @-@ 42 with only 42 seconds left in regulation on a short touchdown pass from Scott to Hill . After Marquis Flowers successfully recovered the onside kick , Arizona quickly scored with another short Scott touchdown pass , this time to Tyler Slavin , to take tie the game at 48 with only 19 seconds left in regulation . Prior to the extra point attempt , Nevada coach Chris Ault called his final timeout to try to ice kicker John Bonano . The tactic was unsuccessful , as Bonano made the extra point to give Arizona a one @-@ point lead . The final 19 seconds of the game were the only time that Arizona led . Arizona held on to the lead after Arizona 's Flowers intercepted a Fajardo pass with a few seconds remaining in the game . 
 = = Scoring summary = = 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Individual statistics = = = 
 Passing 
 Rushing 
 Receiving 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On December 28 , 2012 , nearly two weeks after the bowl game , Nevada head coach Chris Ault announced that he would retire from his position as head football coach at Nevada . Son of former National Football League executive Bill Polian Brian Polian was subsequently signed a five @-@ year contract to be the new head coach of the Wolf Pack on January 7 , 2013 . 
 = Ramón Ramírez ( Venezuelan pitcher ) = 
 Ramón A. Ramírez ( born September 16 , 1982 in <unk> , Venezuela ) is a Venezuelan pitcher . He stands 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall and weighs 190 pounds ( 86 kg ) . Previously , he has pitched for the Cincinnati Reds . He bats and throws right @-@ handed . He throws three pitches : a fastball , a slider , and a changeup . 
 Ramírez was signed by the San Diego Padres in 2000 as an outfielder , but he was released in 2001 . The Reds signed him in 2003 as a pitcher , and he reached the major leagues in 2008 , when he made four starts for the Reds . The next year , he appeared in 11 games in relief for the Reds . After the season , the Tampa Bay Rays claimed him off waivers , but they released him . The Boston Red Sox claimed him off waivers , and he spent 2010 in the minor leagues for them . He signed with the Doosan Bears of the Korea Baseball Organization in 2011 , but he was released before appearing in a game with them . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = San Diego Padres = = = 
 On March 27 , 2000 , Ramírez was signed by the San Diego Padres as an outfielder . He was released by the Padres on June 12 , 2001 . 
 = = = Cincinnati Reds = = = 
 = = = = 2004 – 2007 = = = = 
