 = = = Modern usage = = = 
 The great white pelican is the national bird of Romania . The brown pelican is the national bird of three Caribbean countries — Saint Kitts and Nevis , Barbados and Sint Maarten — and features on their coats of arms . It is also the state bird of the US state of Louisiana , which is known colloquially as the Pelican State ; the bird appears on the state flag and state seal . It adorns the seals of Louisiana State University and Tulane University , and is the mascot of the New Orleans Pelicans NBA team , Tulane University , and the University of the West Indies . A white pelican logo is used by the Portuguese bank <unk> Geral , and a pelican is depicted on the reverse of the Albanian 1 lek coin , issued in 1996 . The name and image were used for Pelican Books , an imprint of non @-@ fiction books published by Penguin Books . The seal of the Packer Collegiate Institute , a pelican feeding her young , has been in use since 1885 . 
 The pelican is the subject of a popular limerick originally composed by Dixon Lanier Merritt in 1910 with several variations by other authors . The original version ran : 
 = Freedom ( Nicki Minaj song ) = 
 " Freedom " is a song by Trinidadian recording artist Nicki Minaj , for the reissue of her second studio album Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded , subtitled The Re @-@ Up ( 2012 ) . It was written by Minaj , Matthew Burnett , and Matthew Samuels . Production was helmed by Samuels under his stage name Boi @-@ 1da . The song was released for digital download by Cash Money Records in the US and Canada on November 2 , 2012 and in other countries on November 6 , 2012 . It was serviced to US urban radio on November 27 and to mainstream radio in the United Kingdom the following day . " Freedom " is a downtempo hip hop and R & B song that features a " sonically breezy " soundscape , complied with ambient riffs , pop @-@ inspired synths , and soft pop choruses . 
 To promote the song , an accompanying music video for the song was released on November 15 , 2012 . It was shot mainly in black and white , and features Minaj in a variety of scenes such as a deserted area with a boat , dressed as a Queen on a throne , and is interspersed with scenes of nature . The song peaked at number 17 on the UK R & B Chart , number 23 on the US Rap Songs , and number 31 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . " Freedom " was promoted with several live performances , most notably the American Music Awards of 2012 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In September 2012 , Minaj announced the reissue of Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded , subtitled The Re @-@ Up , containing an additional disc with eight newly @-@ recording songs and an exclusive behind @-@ the @-@ scenes DVD to supplement the standard edition of the original album . Minaj commented at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards , " I 'm putting lots of new songs on there and I 'm actually going to drop my new single like next week . <unk> , you are gonna spaz . You are gonna love it . You are gonna go crazy ! " Production of the project was a main focus on Minaj 's three @-@ part E ! special , Nicki Minaj : My Truth , which aired in November 2012 . On On Air with Ryan Seacrest , Minaj stated that " I feel like the music is such a better representation of me where I am now as an artist in my career . As long as people can hear the music , I 'm good . " 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 Musically , " Freedom " is a hip hop and R & B song that follows a similar style to other Minaj songs heard on her debut album , Pink Friday . The song features street @-@ slang bravado and " venomous " rapping in the verses with thin , fragile vocals over <unk> soft pop choruses . The instrumentation in " Freedom " mixes together smooth ambient riffs , pop @-@ inspired crystal @-@ clear synthesizers , and a smooth R & B beat , creating a sonically breezy soundscape . Lyrically , Minaj is still confrontational yet reflective , talking about her life in the spotlight and rise to fame . In the lyrics , Minaj states how other rappers " in the competition " will never thank her for opening the doors for them , and how they don 't even thank their creator Jesus Christ for helping them get far , saying : " They 'll never thank me for opening doors / But they ain 't even thank Jesus when he died on the cross / ' Cause your spirit is ungrateful , bitches is so hateful , I remain a staple . " 
 Charley Rogulewski of Vibe said " The old Nicki Minaj is back on her latest track " Freedom . " " , while going onto note the songs " dreamy " production and compared it to " Right Thru Me , " " Your Love " and " Save Me " off her debut album . Entertainment Weekly reviewer Kyle Anderson called the song " middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road R & B " and criticized Minaj for choosing to make music that appeals to pop radio , instead of being unique . Josiah Hughes of Exclaim ! was critical of the song , saying it was : " by @-@ the @-@ books Nicki , as she delivers venomous raps on the verses before giving saccharine @-@ sweet melody a whirl on the choruses . Surprise , surprise — the whole thing is delivered atop poppy , crystal clear synths . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The video was shot in black @-@ and @-@ white at Dungeness , Kent , United Kingdom . It begins with a stairway set in a foggy setting leading up to the sky . Then angles of different scenery are shown such as a deserted area with a boat next to railroad resembling Noah 's Ark , railroad <unk> , and a True Cross with a key hung over it . Minaj is shown fading into clouds , before she raps her first verse wearing a black flowing dress and a crown of thorns . Minaj has various wardrobe changes in the video . Minaj is then seen dressed as a queen , over a balcony with a spiral chandelier behind her . Various clips of nature are shown such as waves , birds , and grass . Minaj is then seen singing the chorus in a blonde wig , in a vast space , with a lot of fog . Minaj raps her second verse sitting on a throne donning a black wig similar to the on she wore in her previous music video for " I Am Your Leader " . After scenes of nature and of Minaj , the video transforms into color . The video concludes as Minaj is seen with a stray @-@ like face , walking in the wilderness , while clips of Minaj singing continue throughout the video . It closes with the stairway , seen in the beginning of the video . Tom Eames of Digital Spy complimented the video for its " glamorous " shots of Minaj , a sentiment echoed by Liza Darwin of MTV News , who said : " We already know Nicki 's got her beauty and fashion game on lock these days , but for her new vid the singer ditches the bustiers , tutus , and Zenon @-@ inspired ensembles for a toned @-@ down ( for her , at least ) wardrobe of glittery gowns , decadent furs , and more than one crown . After all , if there 's <unk> fit to be queen bee , it 's this lady . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Minaj performed the song live for the first time on the American Music Awards of 2012 on November 18 , 2012 . For the performance , Minaj wore a white fur cape and boots , and was later joined on @-@ stage by a choir . " Freedom " was also performed on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on January 15 , 2013 , where she sang in a slim red dress , surrounded by fog and <unk> chandeliers . On January 25 , 2013 , Minaj performed the song along with " Va Va Voom " and on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on January 25 , 2013 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Rodrigues solitaire = 
 The Rodrigues solitaire ( Pezophaps solitaria ) is an extinct , flightless bird that was endemic to the island of Rodrigues , east of Madagascar in the Indian Ocean . Genetically within the family of pigeons and doves , it was most closely related to the also extinct dodo of Mauritius , the two forming the subfamily Raphinae . The Nicobar pigeon is their closest living genetic relative . 
 Rodrigues solitaires grew to the size of swans , and demonstrated pronounced sexual dimorphism . Males were much larger than females and measured up to 90 centimetres ( 35 inches ) in length and 28 kilograms ( 62 pounds ) in weight , contrasting with 70 centimetres ( 28 in ) and 17 kilograms ( 37 lb ) for females . Its plumage was grey and brown ; the female was paler than the male . It had a black band at the base of its slightly hooked beak , and its neck and legs were long . Both sexes were highly territorial , with large bony knobs on their wings that were used in combat . The Rodrigues solitaire laid a single egg , that was incubated in turn by both sexes . Gizzard stones helped digest its food , which included fruit and seeds . 
 First mentioned during the 17th century , the Rodrigues solitaire was described in detail by François Leguat , the leader of a group of French Huguenot refugees who were marooned on Rodrigues in 1691 – 1693 instead of being taken to their intended destination , Réunion . It was hunted by humans and introduced animals , and was extinct by the late 18th century . Apart from Leguat 's account and drawing , and a few other contemporary descriptions , nothing was known about the bird until a few subfossil bones were found in a cave in 1789 . Thousands of bones have subsequently been excavated . It is the only extinct bird with a former star constellation named after it , Turdus <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The French explorer François Leguat was the first to refer to the bird as the " solitaire " ( referring to its solitary habits ) , but it has been suggested that he borrowed the name from a 1689 tract by Marquis Henri Duquesne , his sponsor , mentioning the Réunion solitaire . The bird was first scientifically named in 1789 as a species of dodo ( Didus solitarius , based on Leguat 's description ) by Johann Friedrich Gmelin in the thirteenth edition of Systema Naturae . Hugh Edwin Strickland and Alexander Gordon Melville suggested the common descent of the Rodrigues solitaire and the dodo in 1848 . They dissected the only known dodo specimen with soft tissue , comparing it with the few Rodrigues solitaire remains then available . 
 Strickland stated that , although not identical , these birds shared many distinguishing features in the leg bones otherwise only known in pigeons . The fact that the Rodrigues solitaire laid only one egg , fed on fruits , was monogamous and cared for its nestlings also supported this relationship . Strickland recognised its generic distinction and named the new genus Pezophaps , from ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> ‘ pedestrian ’ ) and <unk> ( <unk> ‘ pigeon ’ ) . The differences between the sexes of the bird were so large that Strickland thought they belonged to two species , naming the smaller female bird Pezophaps minor . Later study of skeletal features by Alfred and Edward Newton indicated that the solitaire was morphologically intermediate between the dodo and ordinary pigeons , but differed from them in its unique carpal knob . 
 The term " solitaire " has also been used for other species with solitary habits , such as the Réunion ibis . Some scientists believed that Réunion was home not only to a white dodo , but also to a white bird similar to the Rodrigues solitaire , both of which are now believed to be misinterpretations of old reports of the ibis . An atypical 17th @-@ century description of a dodo and bones found on Rodrigues , now known to have belonged to the Rodrigues solitaire , led Abraham Dee Bartlett to name a new species , Didus nazarenus ; it is now a junior synonym of this species . 
 For many years the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire were placed in a family of their own , the Raphidae ( formerly Dididae ) , because their exact relationships with other pigeons were unresolved . Each was also placed in a monotypic family ( Raphidae and Pezophapidae , respectively ) , as it was thought that they had evolved their similarities independently . Osteological and DNA analysis has since led to the dissolution of the family Raphidae , and the dodo and solitaire are now placed in their own subfamily , Raphinae , within the family Columbidae . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 In 2002 , American geneticist Beth Shapiro and colleagues analysed the DNA of the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire for the first time . Comparison of mitochondrial cytochrome b and 12S rRNA sequences isolated from the femur of a Rodrigues solitaire and the tarsal of a dodo confirmed their close relationship and their placement within the Columbidae . The genetic evidence was interpreted as showing the Southeast Asian Nicobar pigeon ( Caloenas nicobarica ) to be their closest living relative , followed by the crowned pigeons ( Goura ) of New Guinea , and the superficially dodo @-@ like tooth @-@ billed pigeon ( Didunculus <unk> ) from Samoa . This clade consists of generally ground @-@ dwelling island endemic pigeons . The following cladogram shows the closest relationships of the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire within Columbidae , based on Shapiro et. al , 2002 : 
 A similar cladogram was published in 2007 , inverting the placement of Goura and <unk> and including the pheasant pigeon ( <unk> nobilis ) and the thick @-@ billed ground pigeon ( Trugon terrestris ) at the base of the clade . Based on behavioural and morphological evidence , Jolyon C. Parish proposed that the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire should be placed in the Gourinae subfamily along with the Groura pigeons and others , in agreement with the genetic evidence . In 2014 , DNA of the only known specimen of the recently extinct spotted green pigeon ( Caloenas maculata ) was analysed , and it was found to be a close relative of the Nicobar pigeon , and thus also the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire . 
 The 2002 study indicated that the ancestors of the Rodrigues solitaire and the dodo diverged around the Paleogene @-@ Neogene boundary . The Mascarene Islands ( Mauritius , Réunion , and Rodrigues ) , are of volcanic origin and are less than 10 million years old . Therefore , the ancestors of both birds probably remained capable of flight for a considerable time after the separation of their lineage . The Nicobar and spotted green pigeon were placed at the base of a lineage leading to the Raphinae , which indicates the flightless raphines had ancestors that were able to fly , were semi @-@ terrestrial , and inhabited islands . This in turn supports the hypothesis that the ancestors of those birds reached the Mascarene islands by island hopping from South Asia . The lack of mammalian herbivores competing for resources on these islands allowed the solitaire and the dodo to attain very large sizes . The dodo lost the ability to fly owing to the lack of mammalian predators on Mauritius . Another large , flightless pigeon , the Viti Levu giant pigeon ( Natunaornis gigoura ) , was described in 2001 from subfossil material from Fiji . It was only slightly smaller than the Rodrigues solitaire and the dodo , and it too is thought to have been related to the crowned pigeons . 
 = = Description = = 
 The beak of the Rodrigues solitaire was slightly hooked , and its neck and legs were long . One observer described it as the size of a swan . The skull was 170 mm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) long , flattened at the top with the fore and hind parts elevated into two bony ridges structured with cancellous bone . A black band ( a contemporary description described it as a " frontlet " ) appeared on its head just behind the base of the beak . The plumage of the Rodrigues solitaire was described as grey and brown . Females were paler than males and had light @-@ coloured elevations on the lower neck . 
 Sexual size dimorphism in this species is perhaps the greatest in any neognath bird . Males were considerably larger than females , measuring 90 cm ( 35 in ) in length and weighing up to 28 kg ( 62 lb ) , whereas females were 70 cm ( 28 in ) and weighed 17 kg ( 37 lb ) . This is only 60 % of the weight of a mature male . Their weight may have varied substantially due to fat cycles , meaning that individuals were fat during cool seasons , but slim during hot seasons , and may have been as low as 21 kg in males and 13 kg in females . Though male pigeons are usually larger than females , there is no direct evidence for the largest specimens actually being the males of the species , and this has only been assumed based on early works . Though the male was probably largest , this can only be confirmed by molecular sexing techniques , and not skeletal morphology alone . 
 The Rodrigues solitaire shared traits with the dodo , its closest relative , such as size and features in the skull , pelvis and sternum . It differed in other aspects ; it was taller and more slender than the dodo and had a smaller skull and beak , a flatter skull roof and larger orbits . Its neck and legs were proportionally longer , and the dodo did not possess an equivalent to the carpal knob of the Rodrigues solitaire . Many skeletal features of the Rodrigues solitaire and dodo that are unique among pigeons have evolved to adapt to flightlessness . Their pelvic elements were thicker than those of flighted birds ( to support their greater weight ) , and their pectoral region and wings were paedomorphic ( underdeveloped , retaining juvenile features ) . However , the skull , trunk and pelvic limbs were peramorphic , which means they changed considerably with maturity . 
 Members of both sexes possessed a large tuberous knob of bone exostosis situated at the base of the carpometacarpus of each wrist . Other wing bones also sometimes show similar structures . The knob was cauliflower @-@ like in appearance , and consisted of up to two or three lobes . The knobs were about half the length of the metacarpus , were larger in males than females , and described as the size of a musket ball . One study measured the largest knob to be 32 @.@ 9 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 30 in ) in diameter . The knobs vary in size across individuals , and were entirely absent from 58 % of specimens examined for the study . These are thought to be immature birds , or birds without territory . The <unk> of males without the knobs were smaller on average than those with it , but there was little difference between the females . In life , the knobs would have been covered by tough cartilaginous or keratinous integument , which would have made them appear even larger . Carpal spurs and knobs are also known from other extant as well as extinct birds . Within Columbidae , the crowned pigeons and the Viti Levu giant pigeon have outgrowths on the carpometacarpus which are similar to those of the female Rodrigues solitaire . Other well known examples are the steamer ducks , the torrent duck , <unk> , screamers , the spur @-@ winged goose , and the extinct <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Contemporary descriptions = = = 
 Apart from François Leguat 's rather simple depiction , the life appearance of the Rodrigues solitaire is only known from a handful of descriptions ; no soft @-@ tissue remains survive . Leguat devoted three pages of his memoirs to the Rodrigues solitaire , and was clearly impressed by the bird . He described its appearance as follows : 
 Of all the Birds in the Island the most remarkable is that which goes by the name of the solitary , because it is very seldom seen in company , tho ' there are abundance of them . The Feathers of the Males are of a brown grey Colour : the Feet and Beak are like a Turkey 's , but a little more crooked . They have scarce any Tail , but their Hind @-@ part covered with Feathers is roundish , like the <unk> [ rump ] of a horse ; they are taller than Turkeys . Their Neck is straight , and a little longer in proportion than a Turkey 's when it lifts up his Head . Its Eye is Black and lively , and its Head without Comb or Cop . They never fly , their Wings are too little to support the Weight of their Bodies ; they serve only to beat themselves , and flutter when they call one another . They will whirl about for twenty or thirty times together on the same side , during the space of four or five minutes . The motion of their Wings makes then a noise very like that of a Rattle ; and one may hear it two hundred <unk> off . The Bone of their Wing grows greater towards the <unk> , and forms a little round Mass under the Feathers , as big as a Musket Ball . That and its Beak are the chief Defence of this Bird . ' Tis very hard to catch it in the Woods , but easie in open Places , because we run faster than they , and sometimes we approach them without much Trouble . From March to September they are extremely fat , and taste admirably well , especially while they are young , some of the Males weigh forty @-@ five Pounds . 
 Several of Leguat 's observations were later confirmed through study of subfossil Rodrigues solitaire remains . The curved contour lines of the pelvis also support the roundness of its hind parts , which he compared to that of a horse . Also , a ridged surface appears at the base of the beak , indicating the position of the <unk> ridge , which Leguat described as a " widow 's peak " . Before fossils of the carpal knob were found , Strickland noted that the keel of the sternum of the Rodrigues solitaire was so well @-@ developed as to almost indicate it had possessed the power of flight ; however , since the humerus was very short he inferred that this was instead related to Leguat 's claim that they used their wings for defence . 
 Leguat continued with an elaborate description of the female Rodrigues solitaire , which also appears to be the sex depicted in his illustration of the bird : 
 The Females are wonderfully beautiful , some fair , some brown ; I call them fair , because they are the colour of fair Hair . They have a sort of Peak , like a Widow 's upon their Breasts [ beaks ] , which is of a dun colour . No one Feather is straggling from the other all over their Bodies , they being very careful to adjust themselves , and make them all even with their <unk> . The Feathers on their Thighs are round like Shells at the end , and being there very thick , have an agreeable effect . They have two Risings on their <unk> [ crop ] and the Feathers are whiter than the rest , which <unk> represents the fine neck of a Beautiful Woman . They walk with so much <unk> and good Grace , that one cannot help admiring them and loving them ; by which means their fine Mein often saves their Lives . 
 It has been proposed that Leguat 's comparison between the crop of the female Rodrigues solitaire and the " beautiful bosom of a woman " ( changed to " fine neck " in some editions of his memoirs ) was out of longing for female companionship . 
 Leguat 's statements were confirmed by another description by Julien Tafforet , who wrote in 1726 : 
 The solitaire is a large bird , which weighs about forty or fifty pounds . They have a very big head , with a sort of frontlet , as if of black velvet . Their feathers are neither feathers nor fur ; they are of light grey colour , with a little black on their backs . <unk> proudly about , either alone or in pairs , they preen their plumage or fur with their beak , and keep themselves very clean . They have their toes furnished with hard scales , and run with quickness , mostly among the rocks , where a man , however agile , can hardly catch them . They have a very short beak , of about an inch in length , which is sharp . They , nevertheless , do not attempt to hurt anyone , except when they find someone before them , and , when hardly pressed , try to bite him . They have a small stump of a wing , which has a sort of bullet at its extremity , and serves as a defence . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Observations of the Rodrigues solitaire in life indicate that they were highly territorial . They presumably settled disputes by striking each other with their wings ; to aid this purpose , they used the knobs on their wrists . Fractures in their wing bones also indicate that they were used in combat . It has also been suggested that these fractures may have been the result of a hereditary bone disease rather than battle @-@ injuries . But in all extant birds where carpal spurs and knobs are present , these are used as weapons without exceptions . Though some dodo bones have been found with healed fractures , it had weak pectoral muscles and more reduced wings in comparison with the Rodrigues solitaire . Since Rodrigues receives less rainfall and has more seasonal variation than Mauritius , which would have affected the availability of resources on the island , the Rodrigues solitaire would have more reason to evolve aggressive territorial behaviour . Several accounts state that they also defended themselves with a powerful bite . 
 In addition to their use as weapons , both sexes of the Rodrigues solitaire also used their wings for communication . The wings could create low @-@ frequency sounds for communicating with mates , or to warn rivals , but it is unknown exactly how this sound was created . The sound could be heard 200 yards ( 182 m ) away , and this may therefore be the size of the territory of an individual . Other species of birds are also known to use their wings to create sounds that attract mates or mark their territory . 
 In 1869 , the Newton brothers suggested that the carpal knobs may have been formed through continuous injuries , as they resemble diseased bone . It has also been claimed that the carpal knobs were instead formed due to a hereditary disease caused by inbreeding . This was dismissed in a 2013 study , since such lesions would likely not occur only in a specific part of the skeleton , but would appear in any growing bone tissue . If such a disease was due to inbreeding , it would also be present in other isolated island bird populations , but it is not . The authors instead suggested that the wing bones contained metaplastic tissue able to form the knob . This development was either in response to continuous impacts during combat , or to hormones released when individuals paired up and acquired territories . It appears a male which had long held a territory would possess especially large carpal knobs , and that their mates would have such developments as well , only smaller . 
 Some evidence , including their large size and the fact that tropical and frugivorous birds have slower growth rates , indicates that the Rodrigues solitaire may have had a protracted development period . Based on mass estimates , it has been suggested the male could reach the age of 28 , and the female 17 . Pierre @-@ André d <unk> , writing about his time on the island around 1735 , stated that a captive Rodrigues solitaire ( which he described as having a melancholic appearance ) would always walk in the same line until running out of space , and then return . The species may have lived primarily in the island 's woodlands , rather than on the shores . 
 Many other of the endemic species of Rodrigues became extinct after the arrival of man , so the ecosystem of the island is heavily damaged . Before humans arrived , forests covered the island entirely , but very little remains today due to deforestation . The Rodrigues solitaire lived alongside other recently extinct birds such as the Rodrigues rail , the Rodrigues parrot , Newton 's parakeet , the Rodrigues starling , the Rodrigues owl , the Rodrigues night heron , and the Rodrigues pigeon . Extinct reptiles include the domed Rodrigues giant tortoise , the saddle @-@ backed Rodrigues giant tortoise , and the Rodrigues day gecko . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Leguat stated that the Rodrigues solitaire fed on dates , whereas Tafforet mentioned seeds and leaves . No other accounts mention diet . It has been suggested it ate <unk> palm fruits , for which it competed with the now extinct Cylindraspis tortoises . It is not known how the young were fed , but related pigeons provide crop milk . The risings on the crop of the female may have covered glands that produced the crop milk . If the theory is correct , the birds may have practiced a division of labour , where the female stayed and fed the young crop milk , while the male collected food in the crop and delivered it to the female . It has been suggested that the maximum size attained by the solitaire and the dodo was limited by the amount of crop milk they were able to produce for their young during early growth . 
 Several contemporary accounts state that the Rodrigues solitaire used gizzard stones . Dodos also did this , which may imply a similar diet . Leguat described the stones in the following passage , mentioning that Rodrigues solitaires refused to feed in captivity : 
 Tho ' these Birds will sometimes very familiarly come up near enough to one , when we do not run after them , yet they will never grow Tame . As soon as they are caught they shed Tears without Crying , and refuse all sustenance till they die . 
 We find in the <unk> of both Male and Female , a brown Stone , of the bigness of a Hen 's Egg , ' tis somewhat rough , flat on one side and round on the other , heavy and hard . We believe this Stone was there when they were hatched , for let them be never so young , you meet with it always . They never have but one of ' em , and besides , the Passage from the Craw to the <unk> is so narrow , that a like Mass of half <unk> <unk> 'd not pass . It serv 'd to whet our Knives better than any other Stone Whatsoever . 
 In 1877 three stones were found in a cavern on Rodrigues , each near a Rodrigues solitaire skeleton , and were inferred to be the gizzard stones mentioned by Leguat . One of the stones was examined and found to be dolerite : somewhat rough , hard and heavy , c . 50 g ( 1 3 ⁄ 4 oz ) , but hardly flat on one side as described by Leguat . This could be due to its association with a young individual . Although Leguat asserted that the bird hatched with the gizzard stone already inside , in reality adults most likely fed the stones to their hatchlings . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The most detailed account of the reproductive habits of the Rodrigues solitaire is Leguat 's . He described mating and nesting as follows : 
 When these Birds build their Nests , they choose a clean Place , gather together some Palm @-@ Leaves for that purpose , and heap them up a foot and a half high from the Ground , on which they sit . They never lay but one Egg , which is much bigger than that of a Goose . The Male and Female both cover it in their turns , and the young is not hatch 'd till at seven Weeks ' end : All the while they are sitting upon it , or are bringing up their young one , which is not able to provide itself in several Months , they will not suffer any other Bird of their Species to come within two hundred Yards round of the Place ; But what is very singular , is , the Males will never drive away the Females , only when he perceives one he makes a noise with his Wings to call to the Female , and she drives the unwelcome Stranger away , not leaving it till ' tis without her Bounds . The Female do 's the same as to the Males , whom she leaves to the Male , and he drives them away . We have observ 'd this several Times , and I affirm it to be true . 
 The <unk> between them on this occasion last sometimes pretty long , because the Stranger only turns about , and do 's not fly directly from the Nest . However , the others do not forsake it till they have quite driven it out of their Limits . After these Birds have rais 'd their young One , and left it to itself , they are always together , which the other Birds are not , and tho ' they happen to mingle with other Birds of the same Species , these two Companions never <unk> . We have often remark 'd , that some Days after the young leaves the Nest , a Company of thirty or forty brings another young one to it , and the now <unk> 'd Bird , with its Father and Mother <unk> with the Band , march to some bye Place . We frequently follow 'd them , and found that afterwards the old ones went each their way alone , or in Couples , and left the two young ones together , which we call 'd a Marriage . 
 The clutch was described as consisting of a single egg ; given the bird 's large size , this led to proposals that the solitaire was K @-@ selected , which means it produced a low number of altricial offspring , which required extensive parental care until maturity . The gathering of unrelated juveniles suggests that they formed crèches , that may have followed foraging adults as part of the learning process . A study of subfossil remains found that the carpal knob only developed after the bird reached skeletal maturity . 
 Tafforet 's account confirms Leguat 's description of reproductive behaviour , adding that Rodrigues solitaires would even attack humans approaching their chicks : 
 They do not fly at all , having no feathers to their wings , but they flap them , and make a great noise with their wings when angry , and the noise is something like thunder in the distance . They only ly , as I am led to suppose , but once in the year , and only one egg . Not that I have seen their eggs , for I have not been able to discover where they lay . But I have never seen but one little one alone with them , and , if any one tried to approach it , they would bite him very severely . These birds live on seeds and leaves of trees , which they pick up on the ground . They have a gizzard larger than the fist , and what is surprising is that there is found in it a stone of the size of a <unk> 's egg , of oval shape , a little flattened , although this animal cannot swallow anything larger than a small cherry @-@ stone . I have eaten them : they are tolerably well tasted . 
 The size difference between sexes has led to the suggestion that the Rodrigues solitaire was not monogamous as stated by Leguat , and that this deeply religious man attributed the trait to the bird for moral reasons . It has been proposed that it was instead polygynous , and the wing @-@ rattling behaviour described for males suggests lek @-@ mating , where males gather for competitive mating display . However , size dimorphism does occur in some monogamous birds ; most other pigeons are monogamous as well . A 2015 article proposed that males invited females into their territories as secondary mates , which would result in the resident female acting aggressively towards the newcomer . Similar behaviour is seen in species that practice resource @-@ defence polygyny . The territories probably provided all the food the birds needed in <unk> to acting as breeding @-@ areas , and there was probably intense competition for favourable territories . The fact that Rodrigues island shrank by 90 % at the end of the Pleistocene may also have contributed to such competition over territories , and thereby furthered sexual dimorphism . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Hans <unk> <unk> was the first to list " dodos " , most likely referring to the Rodrigues solitaire , as part of the fauna of Rodrigues in 1601 . Sir Thomas Herbert mentioned " dodos " on Rodrigues again in 1634 , and they were also mentioned in 1700 . The next account , which was the first referring to the bird as the " solitaire " , was published in François Leguat 's 1708 memoir , A New Voyage to the East Indies . Leguat was the leader of a group of nine French Huguenot refugees , who were the first to colonise the island from 1691 to 1693 , after they were marooned there by their captain . His description of the Rodrigues solitaire and its behaviour is the most detailed account of the bird in life , and he also described other species that are now extinct . Leguat 's observations are considered some of the first cohesive accounts of animal behaviour in the wild . He later left for Mauritius , but was too late to observe dodos there . The Huguenots praised the Rodrigues solitaires for their flavour , especially that of the young , and used their gizzard stones as knife <unk> . D <unk> later claimed these were also useful in medicine , and referred to them as <unk> . The second most detailed description of the bird was found in an anonymous document rediscovered in 1874 called Relation de l 'Ile Rodrigue , which has been attributed to Julien Tafforet , a mariner marooned on Rodrigues in 1726 . His observations are considered credible , though it is known he had a copy of Leguat 's memoirs with him during his stay . 
 Many old accounts mention that Rodrigues solitaires were hunted by man . Writing in 1735 , Gennes de la <unk> described the capture and consumption of two specimens as follows : 
 Our men told of having seen goats and a large quantity of birds of different kinds : they brought , amongst others , two of which were bigger by a third than the largest turkey ; they appeared , nevertheless to be still quite young , still having down on the neck and head ; their wingtips were but sparsely feathered , without any proper tail . Three sailors told me of having seen two others , of the same species , as big as the biggest ostrich . The young ones that were brought had the head made more or less like the latter animal , but their feet were similar to those of turkeys , instead of that of the ostrich which is forked and cloven in the shape of a hind 's foot . These two birds , when skinned , had an inch of fat on the body . One was made into a pie , which turned out to be so tough that it was <unk> . 
 <unk> Steenstrup noted that some Rodrigues solitaire remains bore traces of having been broken by man or perhaps another large predator , to extract bone marrow . 
 Unlike the dodo , no Rodrigues solitaires are known to have been sent to Europe alive . However , it has been claimed that Bertrand @-@ François Mahé de La Bourdonnais sent a " solitaire " to France from the nearby island of Réunion around 1740 . Since the Réunion solitaire is believed to have become extinct by this date , the bird may actually have been a Rodrigues solitaire . 
 = = = Extinction = = = 
 The Rodrigues solitaire probably became extinct sometime between the 1730s and 1760s ; the exact date is unknown . Its disappearance coincided with the tortoise trade between 1730 and 1750 ; traders burnt off vegetation , hunted solitaires and imported cats and pigs that preyed on eggs and chicks . In 1755 , Joseph @-@ François Charpentier de Cossigny attempted to obtain a live specimen , as he had been assured the Rodrigues solitaire still survived in remote areas of the island . Though trying for 18 months , and offering large rewards , none could be found . He noted that cats were blamed for decimating the species , but suspected that it was due to hunting by humans instead . Alexandre Guy Pingré did not encounter any solitaires when he visited Rodrigues to observe the 1761 transit of Venus , although he had been assured they survived . His friend Pierre Charles Le Monnier named the constellation Turdus <unk> after the bird to commemorate the journey . Although the Rodrigues solitaire is the only extinct bird to have a former constellation named for it , celestial mapmakers did not know what it looked like and star maps depict other birds . 
 In 1786 , subfossil Rodrigues solitaire bones encrusted in stalagmite were discovered in a cave and sent to Georges Cuvier about 1830 . For unknown reasons , he stated they had recently been found on Mauritius , which caused confusion , until they were compared with other bones from Rodrigues that were found to belong to the same species . These finds confirmed Leguat 's descriptions , but at this time no living residents of Rodrigues remembered having seen live specimens . In 1831 , a man who had lived on Rodrigues for 40 years said that he had never seen birds large enough to be Rodrigues solitaires . Rodrigues covers only 104 square kilometres ( 40 sq mi ) , making it implausible that the bird would have survived undetected . 
 Subfossils were also recovered during the 1860s , but more complete remains were found during the 1874 transit of Venus , since an observation station was located on the island . Many of these excavations were requested by brothers Alfred and Edward Newton , who used them to describe the osteology of the bird in detail . Thousands of bones were excavated , and mounted skeletons were composed from the remains of several specimens . It has been suggested that the skeleton of this species is the best described after that of humans . In spite of this , some later scholars doubted Leguat 's story , and the existence of the Rodrigues solitaire . In 1955 , George Evelyn Hutchinson doubted aspects of the bird 's biology mentioned by Leguat , and in 1921 , G. Atkinson claimed the memoir was merely a novel , and that the man had never even existed . Today , it is widely accepted that Leguat 's memoirs are credible observations of the bird in life . 
 = 2011 Leopard Trek season = 
 The 2011 season for Leopard Trek / <unk> <unk> / , its first , began in January at the Tour Down Under and ended in October at the Giro di Lombardia . As a UCI ProTeam , they were automatically invited and obligated to send a squad to every race in the UCI World Tour . The team formed for 2011 as a Luxembourgian national project and boasts that nation 's two premier riders , Andy and Fränk Schleck . Several riders from the Schleck brothers ' former Team Saxo Bank joined the new team . 
 The team was built for strong showings in the classic cycle races , and includes the best classics rider from the 2010 season , world time trial champion Fabian Cancellara . Though Cancellara did not win any race that awarded points to the UCI World Tour , he consistently placed highly enough that he was briefly the world number one rider in the midst of the classics season . Thanks to Cancellara 's performances and the Schleck brothers both finishing on the podium at Liège – Bastogne – Liège , the team was also in the top spot for a time . 
 Team member Wouter Weylandt died after crashing during stage 3 of the Giro d 'Italia , leading to the team 's mass withdrawal the next day . Though he won a stage with a long solo breakaway in the mountains , and wore the race leader 's yellow jersey for a day , Andy Schleck was runner @-@ up at the Tour de France for the third consecutive year . Brother Fränk joined him on the podium in third place . 
 The team won its final race under the Leopard name , with Oliver Zaugg finishing first at the Giro di Lombardia . For 2012 , the team was set to merge with the American Team RadioShack , under the new name RadioShack – Nissan . Though most of that team 's management and sponsors were to come on board , the resultant squad continued to be based in Luxembourg under the same license , meaning it is a continuation of this franchise and not the American one . 
 = = 2011 roster = = 
 Ages as of January 1 , 2011 . 
 = = = Riders ' 2010 teams = = = 
 = = Genesis of the new team = = 
 It was first reported shortly after the conclusion of the 2010 Tour de France that Andy and Fränk Schleck would leave Team Saxo Bank , the team for which they had each ridden for the entirety of their respective careers , at the conclusion of that season . It was soon revealed that they would spearhead a new team , one based in their native Luxembourg , led by former Team Saxo Bank staff Kim Andersen and Brian Nygaard . Luxembourg real estate tycoon Flavio Becca was eventually revealed as the team 's owner . Andersen and Nygaard sought him out in May 2010 for advice . Becca , a sports fan , had plans to form a new cycling team himself , and he offered Nygaard the position of general manager for his team , essentially combining their ambitions . Becca also brought Andersen on , giving the Dane a position as a sporting director . Fränk Schleck later revealed that he and his brother had had little to do with the formation of the team , being approached with the prospect of joining at the 2010 Tour of Luxembourg in June . Despite a good relationship with Team Saxo Bank manager Bjarne Riis , the brothers felt the opportunity to ride for a " home @-@ based team " was too good to pass up . Andersen made similar comments , saying that the team would have gone forward even if the Schleck brothers rode elsewhere in 2011 . 
 A solid portion of the team 's ridership came from Team Saxo Bank just as the Schlecks had , as eight of the eleven riders to depart Team Saxo Bank in the 2010 offseason did so for this team . The most prominent of these was four @-@ time world time trial champion Fabian Cancellara , who was under contract to Team Saxo Bank for 2011 and had to buy his way out of it . After doing so , the Swiss rider signed with the team for three years . The team had hired a roster of 25 riders at the time of their presentation , with Thomas Rohregger joining in late February . 
 No title sponsor was announced for the team in 2010 , as it went about signing riders for its inaugural season . It was known simply as the " Luxembourg Pro Cycling Project " for the first several months of its existence . Even as the end of 2010 neared , Nygaard steadfastly refused to reveal the team 's official name , opting to hold off on doing so until the team 's official presentation on January 6 , 2011 . Team member Jakob Fuglsang perhaps inadvertently revealed part of the name in an interview about three weeks before the team 's presentation , saying the team would be called " Team Leopard " and that Leopard would be the name in the center of the jersey . Trek , which signed as on as bike supplier in September , was revealed as a title sponsor at the team 's presentation , officially making the team 's name Leopard Trek . The Leopard name has no particular meaning ; it reflects Becca 's holding company and is simply an animal he likes . The team presentation itself was something of a spectacle , featuring gymnasts , race videos , and presentations for each rider in front of an audience of 4 @,@ 000 people , culminating in Nygaard and all riders appearing on stage wearing suit jackets and black scarves as they posed for photos . Shortly after the team 's presentation , Trek sent out a primer to cycling media detailing their preferences that the team not be referred to with the prefix " Team " as some other teams are and that there be no hyphen between the sponsors ' names . They also specified a preferred verbal pronunciation and that when referred to in print , the team 's name should appear in all capital letters . This last request was not widely adhered to . 
 When the UCI released its list of teams graded according to their hierarchy that decided who would receive a World Tour license , this team 's signees put them at the top , making them world number one before they even existed . This did not guarantee the team a top @-@ level license , it simply qualified them for it , but they were later announced as having received a four @-@ year World Tour license . Whether intentionally or incidentally , this corresponded to the initial financial guarantee Becca put up for the team . Nygaard hailed the license acquisition as the fruition of many months of hard work . This afforded the team automatic invitations to all World Tour events , including the season 's three Grand Tours . 
 = = One @-@ day races = = 
 = = = Spring classics = = = 
 Klemme got the team 's first @-@ ever win early in the spring season , at Le Samyn . After a solo escapee was caught by an elite 12 @-@ rider group that came clear of the peloton , Klemme timed his attack on the day 's final climb with precision and stayed out front for victory by eight seconds over <unk> Ista . The team came to the first monument race of the season , Milan – San Remo , with high ambitions . Cancellara aimed for a second triumph in the race , having previously won the 2008 edition , but he recognized that slipping away unmarked in the race 's final kilometers as he did three years prior would be difficult to do again . He considered Philippe Gilbert to be his principal rival for the race . Cancellara and O 'Grady made the day 's major selection on the Le Manie climb , after a crash 90 km ( 56 mi ) from the finish . O 'Grady hit out on the attack a few times shortly before the end of the race , but it was Cancellara who was present in an eight @-@ rider group that formed on the Poggio which decided the race . These eight riders represented eight different teams , so no one was able to get a proper leadout . After Gilbert , Vincenzo Nibali , and Yoann <unk> opened up the sprint , Cancellara tried to come around them for the win , but was beaten at the line by HTC – Highroad 's Matthew Goss . Cancellara was deeply disappointed to finish second , feeling that even though he had done one of the best sprints of his life , he had not done adequately to pay off his team 's efforts on the day . 
 Cancellara was noticeably still recovering from his Milan – San Remo effort at Dwars door Vlaanderen , where he tried to attack for victory in the finale , but faded quickly and finished only 36th . The squad 's best @-@ placed rider was Posthuma in 31st . Cancellara 's recovery was perhaps complete at the E3 Prijs Vlaanderen – Harelbeke . After a series of mechanical incidents , resulting in several wheel changes and then a whole bike change , Cancellara sped past the trailing peloton on the Oude Kwaremont climb and effortlessly bridged to the front of the race . Once there , he left even the front group on the road well behind him , winning the race by a full minute over second placed Vladimir Gusev . Cancellara said he was more impressed with this victory than when he won the same race in 2010 , and analysis of his win suggested he stood as the odds @-@ on favorite for the Tour of Flanders . Jonathan Vaughters , whose Garmin – Cervélo team had effectively controlled the front of the race but were powerless to stop Cancellara , stated that should an on @-@ form Cancellara ever get even five seconds ' advantage at the front of a race near the end , he would likely not be seen again . Vaughters joked that rival teams would need a sniper to stop the Swiss classics specialist . 
 Cancellara 's pedigree , 2011 successes , and status as defending champion made him a major favorite for the second monument race , the Tour of Flanders . Cancellara put in a seemingly decisive move from the head of the main field on the Leberg , the fourteenth cobbled climb on the day 's parcours . He quickly opened up a time gap of over a minute , and the race seemed to be decided . He cracked on the Muur van Geraardsbergen , however , and was swept up by an elite leading group of favorites and contenders . He put in a second acceleration on the last climb , the <unk> , and was followed by Sylvain Chavanel and Nick Nuyens . Having perhaps spent himself too early in the race by attacking solo and not working with other riders to gain a large time gap , Cancellara could only manage third of the three . After the race , Cancellara blasted Nuyens and the other riders in the race , saying they only rode to keep him from winning . He referred to himself as a " gladiator " and said that the manner in which Nuyens won , staying in Cancellara 's slipstream and then outsprinting him with the line in view , had no value in his eyes . 
 Cancellara was again thought to be the odds @-@ on favorite at the next monument classic , Paris – Roubaix . After an aggressive first two hours of racing kept any breakaway groups from going clear , a leading group of 21 slowly formed between the start of the cobbles and the Arenberg sector . They took a maximum advantage of two and a half minutes . The second group on the road gradually whittled down to a select group of top favorites . Cancellara tried several times to accelerate out of this group to bridge to the front of the race . Thor Hushovd , Alessandro Ballan , and Juan Antonio Flecha marked his moves , but did not contribute any work , instead simply holding Cancellara 's wheel . Eventually , Cancellara decided against towing the superior sprinter Hushovd to the front of the race with him , and for a while forewent further attacks . During this time , the leaders ' time gap held steady at about 90 seconds for many kilometers . Right about the time that Johan Vansummeren attacked from the leading group and got free to occupy first position on the road , with 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) left to race , Cancellara did likewise out of the group of favorites , putting in easily his most intensive pull . Only Hushovd and Ballan could follow , and they stormed past the remnants of the earlier breakaway , with the exception of Vansummeren who remained out front for victory . Cancellara bested Maarten Tjallingii and Grégory Rast in a sprint for second place 19 seconds back of the Belgian . Cancellara again rued after the race that everyone had marked him and only him . He claimed that the non @-@ cooperation of riders like Hushovd and Ballan had meant victory for him was not possible , and so second place for him was like a victory that day . Vaughters commented that Cancellara was indeed the strongest single rider in the race , but his squad had been the strongest team , which was why they won . Cancellara was also badly isolated from his teammates as a result of his rivals ' tactics and his teammates ' lesser form . The only other Leopard Trek rider after to finish the race was Mortensen in 94th , almost 14 minutes down . Cancellara 's ride was not entirely without reward , as it was after Paris – Roubaix that he attained the UCI world number one ranking , thanks mostly to his three podium finishes at the monuments . 
 Cancellara was not considered to be a favorite for the Amstel Gold Race , though he was part of the strong squad that the Leopard Trek team brought to the race . Sporting director Kim Andersen stated the race was more of a goal for one of the Schleck brothers . Cancellara commented that he felt " free as a bird " in the Amstel , riding it for the first time since 2004 , and that he was not under pressure to get a result . He identified Philippe Gilbert as the main favorite for the race , and promised not to ride against him as he felt his rivals had done to him in the cobbled classics . The race took place two days after Fränk Schleck 's 30th birthday , further intensifying it as a goal for him . Cancellara and both Schleck brothers effectively stayed at the front of the race most of the day , but Cancellara and Fränk Schleck lost contact after crashing on the <unk> 28 km ( 17 mi ) from the finish . This left Andy Schleck alone to fend for victory , and his tactic was a solo attack launched from 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) out , on the <unk> . The tactic was nearly successful , as the younger Schleck brother occupied first position on the road with only 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) left to race , but a chase pack led by Gilbert overhauled him at that point . Visibly spent from his solo effort , Schleck had nothing left for the finale and finished 11th , 28 seconds down on race winner Gilbert . He stated after the race that he was satisfied with his effort , feeling that going for the win from so far out was his only play for victory without any teammates in the front group . He may have finished a few positions higher if he had stayed with the Gilbert group , but he almost certainly would have had no chance for victory against the fast finisher Gilbert ; thus , the solo attack was the correct move in his eyes , since his only ambition was victory . 
 The Schleck brothers were again the squad leaders for the remaining Ardennes classics , La Flèche Wallonne and Liège – Bastogne – Liège . Pre @-@ race analyses mentioned them as contenders for both races . At La Flèche Wallonne , Andy Schleck worked for brother Fränk , taking pulls at the front of the main field to help chase down the morning breakaway . He did not feel physically up to riding for the win . Fränk was able to ride at the front of the race all day , and made the selections up to the race @-@ concluding Mur de Huy . Philippe Gilbert made an early attack on the Mur and held on to win – Fränk was seventh , six seconds back . Both brothers rode well at Liège – Bastogne – Liège . On the Côte de Roche aux Faucons , 20 km ( 12 mi ) from the end of the race , they both surged clear of the group of race favorites . Gilbert marked them , and stayed in their <unk> as the trio surged to the front of the race . Later , the Belgian also took pulls , and even tried to solo for victory , but could not shake the Schlecks . The three survived to the finish , 24 seconds clear of a chase pack that formed on the Côte de Saint @-@ Nicolas . Neither brother attacked in the finale , which came on a slight downhill , leaving the superior sprinter Gilbert to take a rather easy win , his fourth in 11 days . 
 Despite the spring classics season ending without any victories , Nygaard stated he felt satisfied with the many high placings the team had achieved , particularly in the face of Gilbert 's clear strength . Additionally , Leopard Trek became the number one team in the UCI 's rankings after Liège – Bastogne – Liège , a position they had occupied , to no small amount of criticism , before the season and before they officially existed . Nizzolo closed out the team 's early @-@ season account by with a podium finish at the inaugural <unk> Berlin , taking second in the mass sprint behind Skil – Shimano 's Marcel Kittel . 
 The team also sent squads to Omloop Het Nieuwsblad , the Clásica de Almería , Kuurne – Brussels – Kuurne , the Scheldeprijs and the Eschborn @-@ Frankfurt City Loop , but placed no higher than 11th in any of these races . 
 = = = Fall races = = = 
 The team had an excellent later half of the season in single @-@ day races , attaining top @-@ ten placings in all but one such race that they entered . This successful run started at the Clásica de San Sebastián . Both Schleck brothers were mentioned as possible pre @-@ race contenders , and Fränk Schleck rode to sixth place on the day by finishing with the first chase pack back of solo winner Philippe Gilbert and second @-@ placed Carlos Barredo . In August , Nizzolo continued his strong neo @-@ pro season with a fifth place ride at the GP Ouest @-@ France , finishing second @-@ best from the peloton behind three attacking riders who took each podium place just ahead of them . 
 The team next took high placings at the two UCI World Tour races in Canada , the GP de Québec and the GP de Montréal . Though Andy Schleck intended to start the GP de Québec , he was forced to pull out due to dental issue . Wegmann was mentioned among the pre @-@ race contenders , and it was indeed the veteran German who turned in the team 's top performance . He followed eventual race winner Gilbert when the Belgian made his winning move on the course 's penultimate climb , eventually coming in fourth at the finish , 14 seconds down . Denifl was the team 's top rider two days later in Montréal . Part of a late breakaway , he occupied third position on the road until the final moments , when Gilbert and his Omega Pharma – Lotto teammate Jurgen Roelandts surpassed him , leaving him fifth on the day . Back in Europe later in September , the team achieved podium finishes at the Grand Prix de la Somme and the Grand Prix d 'Isbergues . Wegmann finished third at the Grand Prix de la Somme , completing the podium behind Anthony Roux and Lloyd <unk> at the front of a 13 @-@ rider sprint finish . O 'Grady then narrowly missed out on taking a first solo win in three years in <unk> , losing a two @-@ up sprint to Saxo Bank – SunGard 's Jonas <unk> Jørgensen and settling for second place overall . Wagner led the peloton over the line 8 seconds later to give Leopard Trek two of the three podium spots . 
 In October , Wegmann rode to sixth place in his native Germany in the mass finish to the Sparkassen Giro . The next day , trainee rider Rüdiger Selig won a selective sprint finish at Binche – Tournai – Binche , beating out former Tour de France green jersey winner Baden Cooke and a field including seven first @-@ division teams . Viganò nearly joined him on the podium , taking fourth place . Zaugg then showed signs of his coming late @-@ season form at the Giro dell 'Emilia , finishing in ninth place 33 seconds back of the solo winner . The team took two top @-@ ten places at the next day , at concurrent races , the GP Bruno Beghelli and Paris – Tours . At the Italian race , Monfort found his way into a winning breakaway that formed as the morning 's initial breakaway was caught , eventually finishing the day in 7th place , 21 seconds behind the winner Filippo Pozzato . At the same time in France , O 'Grady rode to an 8th place finish behind BMC Racing Team 's Greg Van Avermaet . 
 With the team 's merger with Team RadioShack already announced , the traditional season @-@ closing weekend in Italy at the Giro del Piemonte and the Giro di Lombardia effectively figured to comprise the team 's final races under this guise . At the Giro del Piemonte , Bennati made each of the day 's selections , first a 31 @-@ rider group that formed at the 85 km ( 53 mi ) to go mark and then a 14 @-@ rider break in the race 's final kilometer . He could manage only seventh in the uphill final sprint , however . 
 The team did not have any rider highlighted as a favorite entering the Giro di Lombardia ; pre @-@ race analyses held Gilbert as the man to beat . Zaugg rode at the front of the race the entire day , riding off the front to occupy first position as the solo leader on the Villa <unk> climb . He then maintained his advantage on the alternating flat sections and remaining climbs ( the Muro dell <unk> and the finishing climb in Lecco ) , holding on for victory ahead of Garmin – Cervélo 's Dan Martin and Team Katusha 's Joaquim Rodríguez by 8 seconds . The victory was not only Zaugg 's first monument classic win , or even his first single @-@ day win , it was his first professional victory of any kind , coming at age 30 . Post @-@ race analysis compared Zaugg 's triumph to some of the more notable upsets to which the race has played host in its history . 
 The team 's lone miss to this level of success was at Vattenfall Cyclassics , where Wegmann finished as the team 's best rider , in 15th place . 
 = = Stage races = = 
 After the team had been shut out in early season stage races , Cancellara was victorious in the short individual time trial that closed out Tirreno – Adriatico . Taking the course some two hours before the race 's top riders , the four @-@ time world champion covered the 9 @.@ 3 km ( 5 @.@ 8 mi ) distance in 10 ' 33 " , and only one rider came within ten seconds of his time . At Critérium International in March , five @-@ time champion Voigt was hopeful of breaking the record he shares with Emile <unk> and Raymond Poulidor to stand alone as a six @-@ time champion , but admitted that the course and the weather did not suit him , and so his chances would be slim . During the decisive stage 1 , Voigt bridged up to a morning breakaway some 90 km ( 56 mi ) from the finish on the Col de l <unk> . He said afterward that he might slip away unmarked and stay away for victory , but if he were chased it would make the race hard , and a hard race would suit the Schleck brothers . The latter scenario is exactly what occurred . Voigt was caught well before the summit of the <unk> and finished the day in 75th place , over 20 minutes down , but the Schlecks both stayed with the front group on the road throughout the stage . Fränk Schleck put in his own attack for victory 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from the summit and stayed away for victory . Andy Schleck was tenth , a minute down on his brother . The elder Schleck brother held his advantage through the flat stage and individual time trial on day two of the three @-@ stage race , emerging as overall victor . 
 Bennati found great success at the Circuit de la Sarthe , taking his first wins in over a year at that race . The Italian sprinter first won stage 1 in a full field sprint before Garmin – Cervélo 's Michel Kreder defeated him in the sprint finish the next day . Later the same day as stage 2 , Bennati won the 6 @.@ 8 km ( 4 @.@ 2 mi ) time trial to extend his overall lead . It was the first time trial Bennati had ever won as a professional . He finished six minutes down in the hilly fourth stage , losing any chance at winning the race overall , but he rebounded to claim a third win in the event in a reduced sprint in stage 5 . Three wins and a second place meant he handily won the event 's points classification as well . 
 The team rode with heavy hearts at the Tour of California in May . It was their first event back in competition after their mass withdrawal from the Giro d 'Italia the day after the death of team member Wouter Weylandt . The race paid tribute to Weylandt by holding a moment of silence before its first stage and allowing the Leopard Trek team to lead the peloton into the neutralized zone , as well as all organization , staff , and riders wearing black armbands . The team did not attain any victories in the race , with Gerdemann in 11th place their best finisher . Neo @-@ pro Nizzolo took the team 's lone win in the month of May , triumphing in the field sprint finish to Bayern @-@ Rundfahrt 's final stage . 
 The team proved to be a prolific winner in stage race events over the summer . The first was the Tour de Luxembourg , a race with special meaning for the team as it is in Luxembourg where they are headquartered and derive much of their identity . Several riders all but certain to participate in the forthcoming Tour de France rode the Tour de Luxembourg . Cancellara dominantly won the 2 @.@ 6 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) prologue individual time trial , finishing five seconds the better of Team Europcar 's Damien Gaudin . No other time gap from one rider to the next exceeded three seconds , and most were only fractions of a second . Two days later , Gerdemann seized control of the race by winning stage 2 after dropping two breakaway companions . He rode solo to the win 9 seconds ahead of the peloton , which gave him the race lead . He retained through the conclusion of the race two days later , thus taking the overall crown . Later in the month of June came the Tour de Suisse . Cancellara again proved the best in the prologue time trial , this one 7 @.@ 1 km ( 4 @.@ 4 mi ) long , besting HTC – Highroad 's Tejay van Garderen by 9 seconds . He then won the longer time trial stage that concluded the event eight days later , a 32 @.@ 1 km ( 19 @.@ 9 mi ) race against the clock . This performance was not as dominant , as his winning margin was again 9 seconds , this time over Team RadioShack 's Andreas Klöden . The team missed out on the event 's final podium but nonetheless showed strongly overall , with Fuglsang , Fränk Schleck , and Monfort all finishing in the top ten . Andy Schleck also took what is for his career a relative rarity gaining a noteworthy result outside the Tour de France . He won the climber 's jersey , having first taken it after stage 7 . Later in the summer , the team won stages at three further events , with Bennati winning sprints at the Tour of Austria and the Tour de Wallonie , and Fuglsang a solo win at the end of a finishing circuit in stage 3 at the Tour of Denmark . 
 The team also sent squads to the Tour Down Under , the Tour of Qatar , the Volta ao Algarve , Vuelta an Andalucía , <unk> van West @-@ Vlaanderen , Paris – Nice , Volta a Catalunya , the Tour of the Basque Country , the Tour de Romandie , the Four Days of Dunkirk , the Tour of California , the Critérium du Dauphiné , Delta Tour Zeeland , the Ster ZLM Toer , the Tour de Pologne , the Eneco Tour , the USA Pro Cycling Challenge , the Tour du Poitou Charentes , the Tour of Britain , the Tour de Wallonie @-@ <unk> and the Tour of Beijing , but did not achieve a stage win , classification win , or podium finish in any of them . 
 = = Grand Tours = = 
 = = = Giro d 'Italia = = = 
 Leopard Trek entered the Giro with limited aspirations . Squad leader Wegmann was a former Giro mountains classification winner , but he said he would not target that award in the 2011 Giro and instead hoped for a stage win . He said the squad would aim to finish eighth or better in the opening team time trial and that Zaugg was the squad 's general classification rider , though it would be unlikely for him to finish higher than 15th . The squad came in 14th in the team time trial , finishing with eight riders together at a deficit of 42 seconds to the winners HTC – Highroad . Weylandt was ninth in the field sprint to finish stage 2 the next day . 
 = = = = Death of Wouter Weylandt = = = = 
 During the descent of the third @-@ category Passo del Bocco in stage 3 , Weylandt crashed and suffered catastrophic injury . Race doctor Giovanni Tredici and the doctor for the Garmin – Cervélo team were in cars very near Weylandt 's group on the road , and administered cardiopulmonary resuscitation for approximately 40 minutes . Doctors also gave Weylandt adrenaline and atropine to try to restart his heart , though Tredici stated after the fact that resuscitation efforts were rather clearly in vain , and that Weylandt was already dead by the time they got to him . They were never able to revive the Belgian , and he was declared dead on the spot . A short time later , Weylandt 's body was airlifted off the descent and taken to a nearby hospital , where the pathologist conducting the autopsy concluded that the Belgian had sustained a basilar skull fracture , and had died immediately upon crashing . Weylandt 's death was the first at the Giro in 25 years , and the first at one of cycling 's Grand Tours since Fabio <unk> died during the 1995 Tour de France . 
 Manuel Antonio Cardoso of Team RadioShack had been nearest to Weylandt when he crashed , and stated that Weylandt had touched a small retaining wall on the left side of the road with either his pedal or his handlebars , and was then catapulted across the road to the other side , where he again collided with something . He had looked behind him to ascertain his exact position in the race when he clipped the wall . Teammate Stamsnijder also witnessed the accident , saying " it was a very hard fall . " Italian police , conducting an inquest into Weylandt 's death , also took an official statement from the Portuguese rider at Team RadioShack 's hotel . A memorial was placed at the crash site , where Weylandt 's widow and mother , along with cyclists , passersby and residents of nearby villages , placed flowers . The Leopard Trek team remained in the race for another day at the encouragement of Weylandt 's family . Race leader David Millar spent the evening discussing with members of Leopard Trek , his teammate ( and Weylandt 's training partner and best friend ) Tyler Farrar , and Weylandt 's family how best to pay tribute to the fallen rider . Weylandt wore bib number 108 in the race , and Giro officials have said they will not assign the number in future editions of the race . 
 The next day 's stage was preceded by a minute 's silence , and ridden as a procession in Weylandt 's memory . In keeping with convention , there was no competitive racing . Each of the 23 teams took to the front of the peloton for about 15 minutes , and the remaining Leopard Trek squad , along with Farrar , were allowed to finish first with their arms around each other . Millar led the rest of the field across the line a few seconds later . No results for the stage were recorded , and it did not count towards the general classification or any of the points competitions . After the stage , instead of any podium presentations , the four jersey classification leaders ( Millar , Alessandro Petacchi , Gianluca Brambilla , and Jan Bakelants ) appeared on stage with the Leopard Trek team to lead another moment of silence . Subsequently , Farrar and the remaining Leopard Trek squad all decided to leave the race . Feillu did not want to leave the Giro , feeling that continuing to race would have been the best way to honor Weylandt , but he did not mind acquiescing to his teammates ' will . For most of them , the decision was based on a desire to attend Weylandt 's funeral , which took place nine days after his death . Members of the Giro squad served as pallbearers . Other teammates , as well as Farrar , members of Weylandt 's former team Quick @-@ Step , and Giro director Angelo Zomegnan were all in attendance , along with hundreds of cycling fans assembled outside the chapel . 
 = = = Tour de France = = = 
 Leopard Trek came to the Tour de France with , per season @-@ long expectations , a squad centered around overall victory . The leader was probably Andy Schleck , entering as runner @-@ up in the past two Tours de France and three @-@ times running winner of the young rider classification , an award for which he was no longer eligible . Brother Fränk said his goal was to have Andy win the Tour , with Fränk himself also there on the podium with him . The remaining squad members were Cancellara , Gerdemann , Monfort , Fuglsang , Voigt , O 'Grady , and Posthuma . Every rider on the squad had ridden the Tour de France before , and all but Monfort , Fuglsang , and Posthuma had previously worn the yellow jersey . Pre @-@ race analysis speculated Cancellara could aim for a few days in the race lead before the course shifted to the high mountains . 
 Cancellara showed himself in the finale of the Tour 's first stage , which featured a mostly flat course culminating in a short uphill finish . He attacked for victory inside the final kilometer , but Omega Pharma – Lotto 's Philippe Gilbert quickly closed the gap , effectively neutralizing the move . Cancellara then sat up ( abandoned any further attempts to win ) , and finished 18th . Both Schleck brothers managed to stay at the front of the race ahead of two major crashes toward the end , which led to riders such as Samuel Sánchez and Alberto Contador losing a minute and 20 seconds . The next day 's team time trial presented an opportunity for the squad . With four @-@ time and reigning world time trial champion Cancellara leading them , they rode to fourth place on the day , within fractions of a second of BMC Racing Team and Team Sky and four seconds the lesser of the day 's winners Garmin – Cervélo . While the team missed out on taking the yellow jersey , the ride did install Gerdemann , Fränk Schleck , and Cancellara into fifth through seventh place overall , with Andy Schleck in tenth and Fuglsang in 11th tied on the same time , giving the team several options going forward . Two days later , Fränk Schleck was the team 's best man on the Mûr @-@ de @-@ Bretagne , finishing in the leading group with stage winner Cadel Evans . Brother Andy , along with Fuglsang , was in the chase group eight seconds back . Cancellara finished with the second @-@ to @-@ last group a little over four minutes down on the winner , ruling him out of any possibility of wearing the yellow jersey in this Tour . 
 The next several stages favored sprinters and a solo breakaway winner . The overall standings did not change until stage 9 , when a breakaway group involving Thomas Voeckler gained sufficient time that the veteran Frenchman became the new race leader . The Schleck brothers were two and a half minutes down in the classification at this point , but within a few seconds of the nearest true overall favorite Evans . Fuglsang as well remained in the top ten , 30 seconds the lesser of Andy Schleck and just over three minutes off the race lead . Fränk Schleck took time out of the bulk of the field in stage 12 . With 2 @.@ 5 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) remaining in the stage @-@ concluding climb to Luz <unk> , the elder Schleck brother broke free of the group of the race 's top riders in pursuit of two down the road . He did not quite reach them , finishing ten seconds back on the day , but the ride moved him up to second place overall , 28 seconds ahead of his brother and 17 the better of Evans . The brothers both missed an important move in stage 16 , ending on the descent from the second @-@ category Col de Manse . Contador , Sánchez , and Evans rode the most aggressive descent , a tactic which gained them a solid measure of time . Evans took 21 seconds out of Fränk Schleck to re @-@ assume second place overall ; the younger Schleck brother lost a full minute and six seconds to the veteran Australian . 
 The team set about taking time back in the high mountain stage 18 , ending with an hors catégorie arrival at the Col du Galibier . Monfort and Posthuma both made the morning breakaway , providing support for Andy Schleck after he attacked out of the group of overall favorites on the ascent of the Col d 'Izoard . Schleck bridged first to Posthuma and then to Monfort , the latter guiding him down the 17 km ( 11 mi ) long descent of the <unk> , as Schleck is a superlative climber but a poor descender . After catching and surpassing all other remaining members from the morning breakaway , Monfort then rode an extremely lengthy and strenuous pull ahead of Schleck until 17 km ( 11 mi ) remained in the stage , when he finally <unk> and dropped back . This left Andy free to climb the Galibier solo , taking the stage win alone two minutes ahead of the next rider , which happened to be brother Fränk . He rode clear of the group of the race 's top riders in the final kilometer , gaining eight seconds against Evans . While the team 's tactics on the day appeared to cinch the yellow jersey for Andy , prior race leader Voeckler retained the yellow jersey by a margin of 15 seconds . The status quo among the Schlecks and Evans held on stage 19 , though with Voeckler finally falling from the top of the overall classification that gave Andy Schleck the yellow jersey ahead of the stage 20 individual time trial . Stage 19 , ending at Alpe d 'Huez , had favored Schleck ahead of Evans , and he was characterized as missing an important opportunity to pad his lead ahead of the time trial , where Evans ' skills are superior . 
 Though Evans was the stronger of the two against the clock , Schleck had surpassed expectations in the long time trial at the 2010 Tour de France , leading to speculation as to whether his 57 @-@ second cushion over the Australian could be sufficient for him to win the Tour . Evans rode one of the best time trials of his career , finishing in second place seven seconds off the pace of Tony Martin , the rider who was crowned world time trial champion later that year . Andy said of his and his brother 's rides that they were probably the best time trials likewise of their respective careers , but they were no match for Evans ' performance . The Australian was two and a half minutes better than both of them , taking the overall lead by a minute and a half with Andy slipping to second and Fränk to third . Since the Tour 's final stage is traditionally mostly ceremonial save for a final sprint finish , the time trial effectively cemented the final overall standings . Andy took the positive from the result , saying he and his brother were both proud of each other for their efforts and were excited to stand on the podium together in Paris , even if neither of them was on the top step . 
 = = = Vuelta a España = = = 
 Leopard Trek 's squad for the Vuelta a España consisted of Bennati , Cancellara , Fuglsang , Monfort , O 'Grady , Viganò , Wagner , Zaugg , and Rohregger . Bennati was speculated to be a contender for the Vuelta 's sprint stages , while for Cancellara the race represented an opportunity to hone his form ahead of the world championships . No rider on the squad was highlighted as an overall contender . 
 The squad was one of the first to start the stage 1 team time trial . Viganò crashed at one point and finished almost three minutes behind his teammates , but the squad still managed to put up the day 's winning time , finishing with the necessary five riders together four seconds the better of defending Vuelta champion Vincenzo Nibali 's Liquigas – Cannondale squad . Fuglsang was the rider who crossed the line first , making him the first wearer of the race leader 's red jersey . He said after the stage that the team had not pre @-@ determined who would cross the line first , as is customarily the case in advance of a team time trial . It had simply been Fuglsang 's turn to ride on the front when the finish line came . He said would try to ride for the overall classification , with Bennati and Cancellara to hunt for stage wins in the sprints and individual time trial , respectively . Bennati contested the sprint finish the next day , taking sixth behind Christopher Sutton . Since Fuglsang also finished at the front of the race , combined stage finishes meant that Bennati would take the red jersey for stage 3 . Solo stage winner Pablo <unk> claimed the jersey the next day , but Fuglsang and Monfort continued to be well @-@ placed in the overall standings . 
 Neither dropped below 11th place overall heading into the stage 10 individual time trial , where the squad had three riders finish in the top ten . Cancellara 's fourth @-@ place ride was perhaps a disappointment , in that he finished a minute and 27 seconds slower than the stage winner Tony Martin , the rider seen as his chief rival for the world championships time trial . Fuglsang took sixth on the day and Monfort tenth , putting Fuglsang 12 seconds off the race lead in second place overall and Monfort sixth 59 seconds back . Both of them lost time in stage 11 , finishing in a group 27 seconds back of the group containing most of the race 's top riders , but both remained in the top ten overall . Both again fell down the standings in stage 14 on La Farrapona , a day when out of the first 50 riders no more than four finished together . Their overall positions reversed the next day on the storied Alto del Angliru . Monfort finished with a group that lost time to only six riders , while Fuglsang was a further minute and eight seconds down the road from his teammate . This left Monfort fifth overall and Fuglsang seventh , after Fuglsang had been the higher @-@ placed of the two for the entire race to that point . The next major mountain was Peña <unk> in stage 17 . Both riders were well off the pace , with Monfort finishing 19th and Fuglsang 31st . Monfort still held sixth overall with the result , but Fuglsang fell out of the top ten , down to 12th place . Fuglsang improved a place to 11th after stage 19 , when Wouter Poels , who had been ahead of him , finished six minutes behind the main field . Those were their final overall positions , with both Monfort 's sixth place and Fuglsang 's 11th representing the best such finishes for either of them in a Grand Tour . The day before the race ended , Bennati gave the team a second stage win , coming home first in a large sprint finish in stage 20 at Vitoria . 
 = = Away from competition = = 
 = = = Merger with Team RadioShack = = = 
 During the Vuelta a España , reports surfaced that the Leopard Trek team was in talks to bring in sponsorship and management from the American @-@ based Team RadioShack . Reports suggested that team owner Flavio Becca was dissatisfied with the team 's management and aimed to bring aboard Johan Bruyneel and others from Team RadioShack . While team officials for Leopard Trek initially denied the rumor , and Bruyneel refused to address them altogether , the merger was confirmed by both sides on September 6 , with five days remaining in the Vuelta . Becca had sought out Bruyneel because of his history of successes in the Tour de France , guiding Lance Armstrong to seven championships there and Alberto Contador to two . Bruyneel later commented that he looked forward to trying to add Andy Schleck 's name to his list of Tour success stories . Bruyneel 's arrival effectively ousted Brian Nygaard , who immediately left his position as the team 's general manager ; it is unclear who , if anyone , succeeded him for the remainder of 2011 . Becca offered him a lesser position within the team , but Nygaard refused it , saying it was as good as being fired . Upon announcing Nygaard 's departure , Becca also revealed that his company would hold the fused team 's license and that it would continue to be based out of Luxembourg , essentially confirming the 2012 entity as an extension of this franchise while Team RadioShack would be considered defunct . 
 What followed was a period of uncertainty regarding exactly who would and would not be a part of the merged team . Leopard Trek had 27 riders under contract for 2012 and Team RadioShack had 13 – UCI rules impose a hard limit of 30 riders on top @-@ level teams , meaning at least ten riders with valid contracts would be released from them . Leopard Trek riders were not told about the merger ahead of time and were unsure of their status at a time when riders everywhere looked to conclusively determine their places of employment for the upcoming season . The situation was further complicated by two rider transfers made in August , when Ben Hermans and Grégory Rast signed with Leopard Trek away from Team RadioShack , meaning they had effectively re @-@ joined the team they had only just left . The new team also signed four riders who had not been a member of either side in 2011 . This resulted in 12 riders departing for other teams , with 13 incoming from Team RadioShack 's 2011 formation ( that number including Hermans and Rast ) and 12 riders being retained from Leopard Trek 's 2011 formation . The fused team announced its new name as RadioShack @-@ Nissan @-@ Trek , though UCI rules limit registry to two title sponsors , meaning their name in the official UCI record is RadioShack @-@ Nissan . 
 Reactions to the merger were widespread . Amid descriptions of the team as a " super @-@ team " from at least one analyst were Team Saxo Bank manager Bjarne Riis ' claims that he simply looked forward to defeating them . Cervélo co @-@ founder and former Cervélo TestTeam manager Gerard <unk> saw the merger on a strictly business level , with neither side having sufficient resources to field a team at the level they would like , while cooperatively they would . Trek had been bike supplier for both teams in 2011 , and funneling money they would normally spend on two teams into one , coupled with an expected reduction in support from the electronics company RadioShack , would make it all the simpler for them to back a top @-@ level team . The merger also drew criticism , as the two sides ' initial press releases describing it did not make it seem that they were in agreement over their perception of the merger and the newly combined entity . The fact that neither ridership nor lower @-@ level management nor ousted sponsors seemed to know about the move at all ahead of time also drew criticism . 
 = = = Rider breakdown = = = 
 With 58 riders – excluding Wouter Weylandt , after his death at the Giro d 'Italia – competing for Leopard Trek and Team RadioShack during the 2011 season , a battle for places on the squad ensued . As UCI regulations stipulated that a squad could not have more than 30 riders for the season , many riders were left without a guaranteed place in the merged RadioShack – Nissan team for the 2012 season . Thirteen riders remained within the Leopard SA @-@ licensed setup for 2012 ; the two @-@ year contracts of Daniele Bennati and Jakob Fuglsang , as well as the three @-@ year contracts of Fabian Cancellara and Maxime Monfort , and the four @-@ year contracts for Andy Schleck and Fränk Schleck , were all honoured . Joost Posthuma , Jens Voigt , and Oliver Zaugg , who had all joined the team on one @-@ year contracts in 2011 , extended their deals to remain with the team into 2012 . Linus Gerdemann also remained with the team , despite having been linked with Team Katusha , while Thomas Rohregger signed a new two @-@ year deal with the team . Also remaining with the team were Giacomo Nizzolo and Robert Wagner . 
 = = = = Riders in = = = = 
 A total of seventeen riders joined the Leopard SA setup for 2012 , of which thirteen riders had been part of Team RadioShack in 2011 . These riders included American national champion Matthew Busche , Tour of California winner Chris Horner , Vuelta an Andalucía victor Markel Irizar , and Andreas Klöden , who won the Tour of the Basque Country in 2011 . Also joining from Team RadioShack were stagiaire George Bennett – signing his first professional contract – as well as Ben Hermans , Ben King , and Portuguese duo Tiago Machado , and Nelson Oliveira . Yaroslav Popovych and Grégory Rast both signed with the team to bolster their efforts in the Classic races , while Jesse Sergent and Haimar Zubeldia followed the lead of some of their team @-@ mates to join the newly formed team . 
 The four remaining places on the roster were taken by riders who had not been involved with the merging of the two teams , and joined RadioShack @-@ Nissan @-@ Trek from rival squads ; Jan Bakelants joined from the Omega Pharma – Lotto team , Laurent Didier from Saxo Bank – SunGard , Tony Gallopin left Cofidis to join the team , while Hayden <unk> joined from HTC – Highroad , which also ceased to exist at the end of the season . 
 = = = = Riders out = = = = 
 Aside from Weylandt , thirteen members of Leopard Trek in 2011 did not continue with the merged team in 2012 . Will Clarke joined Champion System as the squad made their début as a UCI Professional Continental Team in 2012 . Stefan Denifl and Martin Mortensen both joined Vacansoleil – DCM , while Anders Lund and Bruno Pires joined Team Saxo Bank . Other riders to join UCI ProTeams were Stuart O 'Grady , who joined the new @-@ for @-@ 2012 GreenEDGE team , Davide Viganò left for the Lampre – ISD team , Fabian Wegmann joined Garmin – Barracuda , and late @-@ season stagiaire Rüdiger Selig joined Team Katusha for the 2012 season . Elsewhere , Dominic Klemme and Tom Stamsnijder joined Project 1t4i , later Argos – Shimano ; Brice Feillu found a place on the roster of the Saur – Sojasun team , while Martin Pedersen signed with domestic Continental team Christina Watches – <unk> . 
 = = Season victories = = 
 = Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace = 
 Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace is the sixth studio album by rock band Foo Fighters , released on September 25 , 2007 by RCA Records . The album is noted for a blend of regular rock and acoustic rock tracks with shifting dynamics , which emerged from the variety of styles employed on the demos the band produced . It also marks the second time the band worked with producer Gil Norton , whom frontman Dave Grohl brought to fully explore the potential of his compositions and have a record that sounded different from their previous work . Grohl tried to focus on songs with messages that resonated on the audience , writing reflective lyrics which drew inspiration from the birth of his daughter . 
 Critical reception to Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace was mostly positive , with praise to the sonic variety and songwriting , though some reviewers found the record inconsistent and uninspired . The album topped the charts in the United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand and Austria , and had three successful singles , " The Pretender " , " Long Road to Ruin " and " Let It Die " . Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace was nominated for five Grammy Awards , winning Best Rock Album , and was also awarded the Brit Award of Best International Album . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 The tour for the Foo Fighters ' fifth album , In Your Honor , had both acoustic and electric shows to fit the song variety in that record . Frontman Dave Grohl discussed this with RCA Music Group president Clive Davis , on how " it 'd be so cool " if the Foo Fighters were the band that did those different shows that appealed to specific audiences " and they wouldn 't necessarily have to go to both " , to which Davis replied that " you can do both together " . Grohl took this advice when composing his following album . Grohl added that " we didn 't plan the new album to be half rock and half acoustic " , picking the songs the band considered the best , with " demos which ranged from psycho fucking <unk> to sloppy , Tom Petty country to fucking piano @-@ driven songs " . 
 Since Grohl felt the songs were different from the band 's previous input and " had the potential to be something great " , he considered that instead of doing something like the last three albums , the band had to go out of " our own comfort zone " and " needed someone to push us out of there " . So Grohl decided to work again with Gil Norton , who produced the band 's second album The Colour and the Shape , citing how Norton taught the band of the importance of pre @-@ production and refining the composition , and claiming Norton 's " unconventional " approach " seems to capture the best of this band " , considering that with him " we 're not going to do a straightforward AC / DC record , he 's gonna make it different " . 
 Preparation was extensive : first Grohl had his usual start @-@ off by developing demos with drummer Taylor Hawkins , but for the first time Grohl tried to input vocals and lyrics in this early composition stage . After rounding up composition with guitarist Chris Shiflett and bassist Nate Mendel , Grohl spent two weeks with Norton discussing " arrangements , harmony and melody " and reducing the song ideas , and then the band spent four weeks rehearsing , playing " a song a day , from noon to midnight " . Hawkins stated that " we basically played each of these songs 100 different times , trying every little thing every different way " and that it was the first time since The Colour and the Shape " that Dave had to deal with someone in the room questioning all his ideas " , given how condescending previous producer Nick Raskulinecz was . Grohl claimed the choices were for the " most powerful , dramatic songs " , and that there was an effort to " make everything sound as natural as possible - just like on the albums we grew up listening to " , citing 1970s artists such as Neil Young and Wings as a major influence . Shiflett added that for the first time he played lead guitar in some tracks while Grohl " usually works out all the bits " of composition . 
 Recording began on March 2007 at Studio 606 in Dave Grohl 's Virginia home 's basement ( the studio has since been moved to Northridge , California ) . As the band took a ten @-@ day break in April , Grohl thought that the record needed another uptempo song , so he spent his time developing an unfinished song that became " The Pretender " . The sessions wrapped in mid @-@ June , and for the first time the band did not feel the need to rerecord any song . Grohl stated that while In Your Honor was a double album because he felt " schizophrenic " to alternate between loud and acoustic songs , Norton helped on sequencing the tracks into " an album that makes sense " . 
 The album features the Foo Fighters ' first instrumental , " Ballad of the Beaconsfield Miners " . It was written by Grohl after meeting with one of the miners involved in the Beaconsfield mine collapse who requested an iPod with In Your Honor in it during the incident . As Grohl was moved by this action , he decided to " write something just to dedicate to him that night because he definitely seemed like a hero " , and later promised to include the instrumental on the album . The album version features Kaki King , whom Grohl invited to record the song as she was visiting Studio 606 . Grohl later said that " I showed it to her once , and she shredded 10 times better than I ever played it " . Another guest was guitarist Pat Smear , who had been a bandmember from 1995 to 1998 , and a guest musician on the tour for In Your Honor . Smear , who has since been reinstated as a full @-@ on member , described his participation as " the oddest recording experience I had with Foo Fighters " given he had no input in composition and was " going in and playing on a song that was already written " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace offers a mix of both electric and acoustic songs , which Grohl likened to the band growing older and " comfortable with all kinds of music " instead of just focusing on straight rock songs , saying that listening to the album he felt like " we 've gotten over our insecurities , because it presents us in a way that we probably hid in the past . " Grohl also stated that " the idea now is to step up and make [ The Zombies ' ] <unk> and Oracle " - the album he claimed to have listened the most during production - and that " it has always been my dream to mix Steely Dan with <unk> . " Amidst the amount of heavier tracks and themes Grohl decided to include the song " Cheer Up , Boys ( Your Make Up Is Running ) " , described as " the most light @-@ hearted , melodic song of all " which " seemed like a little ray of hope in the middle of all this despair . " Grohl added that there was a bigger focus on melodies even in heavier tracks such as " The Pretender " , " Let It Die " and " Erase / Replace " , and that album closer " Home " , a ballad featuring Grohl on the piano , was " the best song I 've ever written " . 
 The songs of the album are noted for their changing dynamics - with " middle sections [ that ] turn into this mass orchestrated swarm and ridiculous time signatures " which include musical references to 1970s soft rock bands such as Wings , Eagles and Bread - summed by Hawkins by saying the band " wanted to make sure that everything ' built ' on this record , that each instrument started somewhere and went somewhere else in the course of a song " . The drummer attributed this to the acoustic tour leading the band to " shed some of the fear of incorporating mellower stuff with the heavy stuff " , and Grohl added that " we wanted the stops to be pin @-@ drop silent before exploding . If we had a beautiful melody , we 'd throw a fucking string quartet in there . So we did everything we could to really magnify all those elements and that was fun . Usually you have a few parameters you 're afraid to pass but , this time , there was no fear of going too far . " Mix engineer Rich Costey added that his work of " preserve what [ the band ] had done to a fairly large degree " with " balancing and rides to get the dynamics to happen " was difficult given the sonic variety of Echoes , which went from " [ the Foo Fighters ' ] endless walls of guitar overdubs , almost like a swarm of bees " to string quartets : " The challenge of this type of mix is to retain the power of the track , yet define a space for everything . " 
 As the acoustic tour made Grohl realize " we were making music worth listening to , rather than music made for pummelling the person next to you " he decided to give more importance to the lyrics and " have a connection with the crowd in front of us " , considering that among the many compositions the band made on pre @-@ production " the ones that stand out are the ones that say something " . So for the first time the lyrics started being written before recording begun , with Grohl stating that he " sat in the back of the studio and just wrote every day for about 14 hours a day . " Most of the lyrics of the album deal with themes of birth , death and life , which Grohl attributed to the birth of his daughter Violet , considering that having a child " changes your entire outlook on the world " , and that he was suddenly more emotional - " So when you 're writing music with that in mind or that in your heart , everything just blooms into this fucking incredibly colourful , colourful feeling . " Helped by the extensive lyrical preparation , the lyrics also tried to show more of Grohl 's feelings , " those things that you 've always wanted to do or always wanted to say " , with Hawkins adding that he could not listen to " Stranger Things Have Happened " as " I 'm one of his best friends , and the last thing I want to do is read a love letter to his wife or whoever it is . " 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The cover art was made by Invisible Creature , and features a combination between a torpedo and a guitar amplifier tube to juxtapose the weapon " with another object that traditionally wasn ’ t associated with war or violence " . The remainder of the album sleeve has similar juxtapositions of objects " that reflected the album 's tone of life and mortality " . 
 The album 's title comes from a lyric on the album 's final song , " Home " . Grohl stated that as he struggled to think of a title given the musical variety of the album , even considering the title " The One With That Song On It " , he looked at the song lyrics and after reading the ones from " Home " Grohl " thought it was nice because it 's open to interpretation and it 's a beautiful title and I think the album is beautiful in its diversity and its melody and its musicality – it goes from delicate acoustic moments to the heaviest shit we ’ ve ever done . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The album 's first single , " The Pretender " , had a forty @-@ second preview released on a cross @-@ promotional campaign with rock radio stations in July 2007 , and eventually saw its debut on August 3 , 2007 at ESPN 's broadcast of the X Games XIII . It was released for music download and for radio play in August 2007 , with a CD single coming out on September 17 , 2007 . " Long Road to Ruin " was released as the second single in December 2007 . In 2008 , " Cheer Up , Boys ( Your Make Up Is Running ) " was issued as a download single in the UK , with " Let It Die " being picked instead for the United States . All three North American singles topped Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks charts , making it only the ninth album in history to spawn three number one hits on this chart , and " The Pretender " set a record by spending eighteen weeks at the summit . 
 Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace was released on September 24 , 2007 . Pre @-@ orders through iTunes were awarded with a free download of " The Pretender " , advance tickets through Ticketmaster , and the bonus tracks " Seda " and " Once and For All " . The album was also issued as a double vinyl record . 
 The promotional tour begun in September 2007 , after some concerts in the United Kingdom during the summer , and lasted until Fall 2008 . While the back @-@ up band compiled for the In Your Honor tour - guitarist Pat Smear , keyboardist Rami Jaffe , violinist Jessy Greene , and percussionist Drew Hester - remained to perform complex songs such as " Come Alive " , a few tracks had more stripped @-@ down arrangements . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 In the United States , Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace entered the Billboard 200 album chart at number three , selling 168 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , and has since been certified Gold by the RIAA . As of April 14 , 2011 , it has sold 897 @,@ 000 copies in US . The album debuted at the top of the UK album chart , selling 135 @,@ 685 albums in its first week ; Australia and New Zealand , being certified platinum in its first week in both countries ; and Canada , where the album went Platinum . 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Initial critical response to Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace was positive . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album has received an average score of 71 , based on 30 reviews . 
 Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Tom Sinclair considered that while the record was not ground @-@ breaking , " the Foos have found a way to create their own archetype , with an instinctive feel for what constitutes a killer song " , and praised " how damn near flawless the tone of the whole set feels " . Rolling Stone 's David Fricke praised the sonic variety , described by him as " an anthology of strong new songs by a great bunch of bands , all calling themselves Foo Fighters " . Jessica Letkemann of Billboard was <unk> of the " delicious sundown grooves " of the quieter piece and " the Foos ' usual soft @-@ louder @-@ loudest ' radio friendly unit shifters ' " - referencing a track of Nirvana 's In Utero - while considering " Home " the only disappointing track . Robert Christgau rated the album a B , describing it as a " candid attempt to recapitulate Nirvana Mark II 's 10 @-@ year @-@ old triumph , The Colour and the Shape " . Henrik Holmgren of Melodic praised the production of the album and felt that Grohl singing " gets better and better with every record . " Dave Simpson of The Guardian called Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace the band 's " most accomplished album " , praising the composition and saying that " Gil Norton 's stunning production can 't disguise the raw humanity beneath the sheen " . 
 A few critics considered the album not as inspired as the band 's previous work . Kyle Anderson of Spin wrote that " two @-@ thirds of these tracks sound a lot like songs Grohl has done before " , considering that album 's strengths came from " the handful of songs that deviate from the wallop <unk> template " . Allmusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine also felt the rock songs were not as remarkable " compared to the almost effortlessly engaging melodies of the softer songs " , ultimately describing Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace as " just another Foo Fighters album instead of the consolidation of strengths that it was intended to be " . Pitchfork Media 's Adam Moerder considered that the album " feels like a retread " and that the band was " sounding less and less relatable " , with <unk> acoustic tracks and rock songs that " sound cold and detached compared to heart @-@ wrenching Foo pop gems like ' Big Me ' or ' <unk> ' " . While Sputnikmusic reviewer John Hanson was <unk> of the rock songs , where he felt " the boys are most comfortable " , he considered that the songwriting " has just become stale " and ultimately described Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace as " extremely boring and uninspired " . PopMatters ' Josh Timmermann was very critical of the overtly serious tone of the record compared to the lighthearted work the band had done before , joking that the title of " Cheer Up , Boys " " sounds like the suggestion of a concerned fan for a band he or she used to actually care about . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 50th Grammy Awards , Echoes , Silence , Patience & Grace won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album , and " The Pretender " was chosen for Best Hard Rock Performance . The album was also nominated for Album of the Year , while " The Pretender " was also nominated for Record of the Year and Best Rock Song . The album also won Best International Album at the 2008 Brit Awards . Q ranked it the 12th best album of 2007 , while Rolling Stone put the album at the 45th spot in a similar list . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Grohl , Taylor Hawkins , Nate Mendel and Chris Shiflett except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Dave Grohl – lead vocals , rhythm guitar , piano on " Summer 's End " , " Statues " and " Home " 
 Nate Mendel – bass 
 Taylor Hawkins – drums , backing vocals on " Erase / Replace " , " Cheer Up , Boys ( Your Make Up Is Running ) " , " The Pretender " and " But , Honestly " , piano on " Summer 's End " 
 Chris Shiflett – lead guitar , backing vocals on " Cheer Up , Boys ( Your Make Up Is Running ) " 
 = = = Additional musicians = = = 
 Drew Hester – percussion on " Come Alive " , " Let It Die " , " Cheer Up , Boys ( Your Make Up Is Running ) " , " Long Road to Ruin " and " Summer 's End " 
 Rami Jaffee – keyboards on " Let It Die " , " Erase / Replace " , " Long Road to Ruin " , " Come Alive " and " But , Honestly " , accordion on " Statues " 
 Brantley Kearns Jr . – fiddle on " Statues " 
 Kaki King – rhythm guitar on " Ballad of the Beaconsfield Miners " 
 Pat Smear – rhythm guitar on " Let It Die " 
 Strings on " The Pretender " , " Statues " , " Home " and " Come Alive " by The Section Quartet ( arranged and conducted by Audrey Riley ) 
 Oliver Allgood - Lute on " Long Road To Ruin " 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Gil Norton – producer 
 Adrian Bushby – engineer 
 Jake Davies - protools engineer 
 John <unk> – assistant engineer 
 Rich Costey – mixer 
 Claudius <unk> – assistant mixer 
 Brian Gardner – mastering 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 | } 
 = = = Singles charts = = = 
 I ^ " Let It Die " was released as a downloadable single only . 
 II ^ " Cheer Up , Boys ( Your Make Up Is Running ) " was released as a downloadable single in the UK only . 
 A ^ " Long Road to Ruin " Charted only on the Belgian combined sales and airplay chart ( Ultratip ) . 
 B ^ " Let It Die " did not enter the Billboard Hot 100 but peaked on the Billboard Hot 100 Singles Sales chart at number 3 , and on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 6 . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 434 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 434 ( designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as SR <unk> ) is a 12 @.@ 47 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 20 @.@ 07 km ) state highway located in northeast Pennsylvania . The western terminus of the route is at Pennsylvania Route 739 in the Blooming Grove Township community of Lords Valley . The eastern terminus of the route is at the New York @-@ Pennsylvania border in Shohola Township , where PA 434 crosses the Delaware River and enters New York , becoming New York State Route 55 at an intersection with New York State Route 97 in the town of Highland . State Route 434 used to be part of Pennsylvania Route 37 and Pennsylvania Route 137 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 434 begins at an intersection with Route 739 and Pike County Quadrant Route 4004 in Lords Valley , a community in Blooming Grove Township . Route 434 heads to the northeast , passing businesses and homes before leaving the community . The highway then gets into a more scenic rural region , with trees surrounding the highway . Route 434 , which makes several curves for the next few miles , passes to the south of a lake . The highway continues on for several miles in this way . A short time later , the highway passes a couple homes and crosses Shohola Creek . Just north of the creek , the area becomes somewhat urbanized with homes beginning to surround the road again . However , this does not last long , with forests returning once more . Just north of the community , Route 434 intersects U.S. Route 6 . 
 After the intersection with U.S. Route 6 , the surroundings around the highway become a mix of homes and forests . This lasts for much of the distance on Route 434 until Greeley , where it becomes urbanized again . In downtown Greeley , Route 434 splits at an intersection where Pennsylvania Route 590 begins . The highway makes a curve , turning to the southeast for a distance north of Greeley . Soon afterwards , Route 434 parallels Shohola Creek , heading northeastward . Route 434 begins to become urbanized for a third time , passing some large buildings along with homes and forests . The creek continues to parallel , with the highway turning in several different directions . The forests begin to recede as Route 434 enters Shohola Township . Twin Lakes Road , a quadrant route , terminates at Route 434 before crossing the Delaware River and becoming New York State Route 55 and Sullivan County Route 11 at the border . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1928 , what is now Pennsylvania Route 590 between Lackawaxen and present @-@ day PA 434 in Greeley was designated Pennsylvania Route 37 . From Greeley , PA 37 continued south along the PA 434 alignment to its southern terminus at U.S. Route 6 . In 1946 , PA 37 was removed from the PA 590 alignment . 
 While PA 37 occupied the 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) segment of modern PA 434 from US 6 to Greeley , a spur of PA 37 , Pennsylvania Route 137 , occupied the remainder of PA 434 from Greeley to the state line from 1928 to 1946 . In 1946 , however , PA 37 was realigned to follow the entire alignment of PA 434 from US 6 to New York , decommissioning PA 137 in the process . PA 37 remained in existence until 1967 when PA 37 was replaced by PA 434 . In 2004 , State Route 434 was extended from its southern terminus down to an intersection with State Route 739 in Lords Valley . 
 PA 434 shared a brief 0 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 16 km ) concurrency US 6 after its extension to PA 739 was created . A new unsignalized intersection was built between 2005 and 2008 eliminating this concurrency . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Donna Freedman = 
 Donna Freedman is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours , played by Margot Robbie . Believing she had performed badly in the audition , Robbie went on holiday to Canada . She then learned she had won the part and had to return to Australia to begin filming . She made her first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 2 June 2008 . Donna was initially introduced as a guest character , but Robbie was promoted to the regular cast shortly after she made her debut . In April 2010 , it was revealed that Robbie had told producers she would like to leave when her contract expired at the end of the year . Five months later , it was announced that Robbie had quit Neighbours and she departed on 26 January 2011 . 
 Donna was originally portrayed as an obsessive fan of musician Ty Harper ( Dean Geyer ) and someone who had a desire for friends and acceptance . After befriending the teens of Ramsay Street , Donna changes her ways and matures into a warm , loveable girl . She has been described as being fiery , beautiful , kooky and confident . The character 's storylines have seen her develop a relationship with Ringo Brown ( Sam Clark ) , kissing Sunny Lee ( Hany Lee ) , deal with the arrival of her family , searching for her biological father and having an affair with Andrew Robinson ( Jordan Smith ) . The character became popular with viewers and Robbie earned various award nominations for her portrayal of Donna , including two Logie Award nominations . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Margot Robbie auditioned for the role of Donna in 2008 . The actress believed that she had performed badly in the audition and decided to leave for a five @-@ week snowboarding holiday in Canada . Robbie had been in Canada for two days when she received a phone call telling her that she had been successful and that she had to return to Australia . Robbie began appearing on @-@ screen in June of that year . Donna was originally supposed to have a guest character role , but Robbie was promoted to regular cast member shortly after her debut . 
 In April 2010 , it was revealed that producers were " battling " to keep Robbie with the show after she told them that she would like to leave when her contract expired at the end of the year . Producers began negotiating with Robbie to renew her contract and a spokesperson said " Margot isn 't going anywhere for a long while yet . Producers love the character of Donna Freedman and there 's plenty in store for her in the coming months , particularly in terms of her on @-@ off romance with Ringo . " 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Donna 's personality has evolved and developed throughout her time on the show . Donna arrives as an obsessed groupie of Ty Harper ( Dean Geyer ) , who manages to force her way into the Ramsay Street teen group . Donna had no one to turn to and buried her love in the music scene and Ty , who became her focus for love and acceptance . Donna is driven by a fierce need for approval and acceptance , which makes her try too hard . Robbie revealed that she shares some of Donna 's characteristics . She said " [ Donna ] ' s fiery and outgoing and I 'm a bit like that . Sometimes I can be too loud and say things when I shouldn 't . But I don 't stalk people . Other than that , we 're kind of similar . " 
 TV Week described Donna as " beautiful and a free spirit who is also a little loud and obnoxious " , while the Metro called her " kooky . " The teens of Ramsay Street warm to her eventually and with their help , Donna changes her ways and becomes accepted . The official Neighbours website states that Donna has become a warm , loveable , charming and playful girl . Her integration into the street and the lives of the other residents has matured Donna and she leads the normal life she always wanted . In May 2009 , Robbie said that Donna is a " really likeable character " and that she gets to play out funny and crazy storylines while playing her . In November of that year , it was revealed that Robbie had begged the scriptwriters to let Donna go off the rails or go to rehab . Robbie said that she would like a dramatic storyline , but the show 's G rating makes it difficult . Robbie also said that she enjoys playing Donna , as she is " great " and a " bit crazy " . She added " I 'm really glad I get to play her and not an average , boring teenage girl . You can be an average , boring teenage girl every other day of the week . It 's fun to be able to say and do these things you normally wouldn 't " . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Donna initially lives with and is cared for by her father , Matt Freedman ( Benjamin Mitchell ) , but after he tries to cover up a hit @-@ and @-@ run accident that Donna committed , he tells her that he must leave or face jail . Donna is hurt and humiliated when he leaves her alone . Donna eventually confesses to Elle Robinson ( Pippa Black ) that Matt has left and Donna moves in with Elle , who later becomes her guardian . At the end of 2008 , Donna 's younger brother and sister , Simon ( Mauricio Merino , Jr . ) and Tegan ( Chelsea Jones ) were introduced to the show . Merino and Jones won three @-@ month contracts with the show through a competition with Dolly magazine . It was announced that the siblings would be " Donna 's worst nightmare " and they were described as being " cheeky " and " pesky " . Robbie said she was looking forward to the arrival of Donna 's siblings and developing her character further with their introductions . She added " The more storylines I do , the more real my character becomes . Now , I can do things and relate to her and understand where she 's coming from " . 
 Following the introduction of her siblings , Donna 's mother was also introduced in February 2009 . Australian actress and singer , Tottie Goldsmith was given the role of Cassandra Freedman . Goldsmith described her character as being " manipulative " and " insanely selfish " . Donna and her mother were seen clashing on many occasions as Cassandra had hurt her daughter a lot in the past . Cassandra was a young girl when she had Donna and she did not have the maturity to deal with a baby . Goldsmith said that Cassandra " resented Donna and saw her as a threat . Over the years , Cass has hurt Donna so much that her daughter 's almost become immune to the way her mother behaves " . Goldsmith added that Cassandra is not a " maternal person " and she has not been able to connect with her children . Cassandra moves into the street in a bid to win over wealthy resident , Paul Robinson ( Stefan Dennis ) . She is later driven out of town after she makes her relationship with Donna worse . 
 Just before Cassandra leaves town , she tells Donna that Matt , the man who raised her , is not her biological father . Cassandra tells Donna that her real father is a man named Nick . In 2009 , it was announced that Donna 's father had been cast and would be introduced the following year . Brian <unk> was given the role of Nick Nixon . Of the introduction of Brian and Nick , executive producer , Susan Bower said " The Freedman family have provided fantastic drama for us so far and we have lots in store for Brian , it 's great to have him with us . This is just one of many , many great storylines we have coming up in 2010 " . Donna discovers that there are two men that could be her father and she contacts them both . Nick Nixon replies first and Donna begins to believe that he is her father . However , Professor Nicholas McKay ( Chris <unk> ) later turns up and Donna becomes confused over the situation . Nicholas has just been released from jail and he is keen to do something right . However , he hurts Donna when he tells her that she is just like her mother and that she will run away . Robbie said " He takes a horrible approach " . Nicholas ' arrival makes Donna more afraid to find out the results of the DNA test she asked Nick to take . On the situation , Robbie said " She 's a hopeless romantic and wants the happily ever after – not only with Ringo , but with her family . " The DNA test eventually proves that Nick is her real father . 
 = = = Bisexuality = = = 
 When Robbie first began filming , she was told that Donna was bisexual . Of this Robbie said , " In one of the blocks she is talking to Bridget about their ' first time ' and Donna asks Bridget if it was with a guy or girl ? I liked the way the writers conveyed that , it was just really subtle and they didn 't make a big coming out scene of it . I think it 's a good message to send out because it 's not such a big deal to lots of people . Not all of them have such drama surrounding it " . Donna 's first storyline that included this aspect of her character was a kiss between herself and fellow female character , Sunny Lee ( Hany Lee ) . The kiss occurs after Donna discovers that Sunny has been writing the romantic love letters given to her by her boyfriend . Sunny is shocked when Donna leans over and kisses her on the lips , as it is her first kiss . The show 's producers called the kiss between Sunny and Donna as " impulsive " and Robbie agreed saying " It 's really not a big deal at all . It 's not an actual gay storyline , it 's just kind of an impulsive peck " . The storyline came weeks after rival soap Home and Away endured a backlash to its own same @-@ sex romance . 
 The storyline received attention from the Australian Family Association , with spokesman John Morrissey saying that he was concerned about TV " normalising " same @-@ sex relationships . Psychologist Dr Janet Hall praised the storyline , saying it allows families to discuss the topic . Bower defended the kiss , which was shot before the Home and Away controversy , saying " Ours is a lovely tale about friendship . It 's very innocent . " She added " If we were going to do a lesbian story – and Neighbours is not against lesbian stories – we would do it properly . This is a teenage romance story . There 's nothing sexual " . In June 2009 , Bower was asked if there were any plans to explore Donna 's bisexuality , to which she replied that there was not . She said " We 're getting an enormous amount of leverage with Donna being the person she is and there 's just so much storyline with her and romance with Ringo that I 'm not saying it 's out of the question , but it 's not in any planning stages now " . 
 = = = Relationship with Ringo Brown = = = 
 Shortly after her character 's arrival on @-@ screen , Robbie said " There is some love coming up for Donna . She gets in to a long term relationship and really falls for someone . " Donna first kisses Ringo Brown ( Sam Clark ) at a kissing booth to get in with the established teen group . Donna and Ringo later begin a relationship , but when Donna wants to take things further , Ringo tells her that he wants to slow things down . Donna believes that she is being rejected and when she hears about Ringo 's relationship with Carmella Cammeniti ( Natalie Blair ) and then sees them together , she confronts Ringo . Ringo then tries to convince Donna that his heart belongs to her . The couple 's relationship goes through various problems . During a moment of time together at home , Donna leaves Ringo to retrieve the cat and the house is set alight . Donna is forced to rescue Ringo and drag him outside . After Zeke Kinski ( Matthew Werkmeister ) returns to Ramsay Street , Ringo believes that Donna had cheated on him with his friend and breaks up with her . Donna then goes to Zeke to seek solace and it leads to a love triangle between the three of them . 
 Towards the end of 2009 , Donna and Ringo 's relationship goes through a rocky patch and during <unk> week , Donna sleeps with Andrew Robinson ( Jordan Smith ) . Andrew later turns up in Erinsborough much to Donna 's shock . Robbie said that Donna begins to " freak out " because she did not expect to see Andrew again and now he could tell everyone what happened between them . Robbie added " Ringo and Donna were definitely going through a rocky patch for a while , but things were starting to look up . If she comes clean , they might find a way to work through it . But it doesn 't look good . " Sam Clark said that Ringo and Donna 's love for each other is very strong , but he was not sure if it was strong enough to survive a betrayal . Robbie and Clark also said that the couple were heading in different directions career @-@ wise and it would be challenging for them . Donna later begins an affair with Andrew after he helps her out and then puts pressure on her to give in to their attraction . Robbie said that Donna is " flattered " by Andrew 's interest in her and when Ringo puts his career before her , Andrew tells Donna what she wants to hear . On Andrew and Donna 's compatibility , Robbie said " Andrew 's more into the fashion scene than Ringo . He 's suave and well @-@ dressed , and he 's an <unk> businessman . He 's perfect for the world Donna is trying to get into . " However , Robbie admitted that Ringo is the perfect guy for Donna as they balance each other out well . Ringo leaves for Sydney after finding out Donna cheated on him and when he returns his relationship with Donna is " frosty " . Robbie commented on the ex @-@ couple 's future and said " I think at the moment it 's quite in the balance . It 's right up to the network at the moment as to whether they 'll get back together or not . " 
 Ringo and Donna later get back together and to prove that he loves her , Ringo proposes . In June 2010 , it was revealed that the 6000th episode celebrations would see the wedding of Donna and Ringo . News.com reported that producers hoped that the wedding would " recreate the magic " of Scott Robinson ( Jason Donovan ) and Charlene Mitchell 's ( Kylie Minogue ) 1987 wedding . Robbie said she had " big shoes to fill " , but she was honoured to be working on her biggest storyline since she arrived . Clark said that Donna and Ringo had made the decision that they are going to be with each other for life and that they are " going to be solid from now on " . On the wedding day , Donna 's car breaks down and she is forced to ride in the back of Lucas Fitzgerald 's ( Scott Major ) truck . Donna walks down the aisle to Ringo 's version of " Suddenly " , the original song played at Scott and Charlene 's wedding . Clark added " It 's a perfect day , but I can 't promise they 'll live happily ever after . " Donna and Ringo became the 36th couple to get married on the show . A month later , Ringo is knocked down by Stephanie Scully 's ( Carla Bonner ) motorcycle and he dies . Donna is devastated and she stays in her room . Steph comes to visit her and as she is apologising , Donna gets up and hugs her . Of Donna 's reaction , Robbie said " Donna is almost in a state of confusion and insists that the whole thing was an accident . Donna is just numb and she doesn 't know what to feel . " 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 In September 2010 , Robbie confirmed rumours that she was to leave Neighbours after almost three years . Of her reason to leave Robbie said " I want to go to America ; it 's always been my goal to work in Hollywood . It 's the one stage in my life where I have absolutely nothing holding me down " . Robbie filmed her final scenes in October and her character left on @-@ screen in early 2011 . Robbie later revealed her character 's exit is positive and that Donna departs Ramsay Street for a fashion design school in New York . Robbie said " It is very daunting for Donna at first . Ringo was the one who applied for Donna to do this course – it 's like he 's doing this one last thing for her . " She said that Donna becomes determined to be a success and that it is her last chance to live up to Ringo 's expectations of her . Robbie added that she wanted Donna to go to rehab or have a dramatic death , but she got a " boring old happy ending " instead . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Donna comes to Charlie 's to see musician Ty Harper , who is her main focus in life . Ty introduces Donna to Rachel Kinski ( Caitlin Stasey ) and they try to get her to leave . Ringo Brown decides to help Donna make friends . Donna helps to clear an area of the bush and when a fire breaks out , she is suspected of starting it because of her strange behaviour . Daniel Fitzgerald ( Brett Tucker ) , a school counsellor , talks with Donna , who then decides to transfer to Erinsborough High . There she eventually becomes friends with Rachel and Bridget Parker ( Eloise Mignon ) , and starts dating Ringo . Donna 's father , Matt , bans her from seeing Ringo and she steals his car . Donna accidentally hits Nicola West ( Imogen Bailey ) and her dog , Bronte . However , Donna is initially unaware that she hit Nicola and she and Ringo ask Lucas Fitzgerald to fix the car . When she realises that she also hit Nicola , Donna tells Matt what happened . He tries to frame Lucas to save her , but he is caught and then goes on the run . Elle Robinson takes Donna in and becomes her legal guardian . 
 After she stops taking her birth @-@ control pills , Donna believes she may be pregnant . Donna convinces Rachel and Bridget to take pregnancy tests with her . Donna 's is negative , but Bridget discovers that she is pregnant . Donna 's younger siblings , Simon and Tegan , arrive in Ramsay Street and their mother , Cassandra , follows not long after . Ringo and Donna break up and she becomes closer to Rachel 's brother , Zeke . They share a kiss and Donna decides to leave Erinsborough to sort her head out . On her return , she gets back together with Ringo and clashes with her mother . Before Cassandra leaves town , she tells Donna that Matt is not her biological father . Donna creates an online vlog in a bid to find her father and James Linden ( Tim Ross ) turns up claiming to be Donna 's half brother . They take a DNA test and James tells Donna that it confirms they are related . James later transfers Elle 's money out of her online bank account and leaves , devastating Donna . Donna meets fashion designer Saffron <unk> ( <unk> Asmar ) and she is offered an internship with her company . Donna skips school and neglects her friends and chores . She decides to quit and Saffron slaps her . Donna presses charges and Saffron apologises . Donna befriends Kate Ramsay ( Ashleigh Brewer ) following Rachel 's departure and Bridget 's death . 
 During <unk> week Donna meets Andrew Robinson and has sex with him . Andrew turns up in Erinsborough and he and Donna eventually continue their affair . One of their trysts is accidentally recorded and Scott Griffin ( Eamonn George ) finds it and shows at Charlie 's . Ringo is devastated and leaves for Sydney . Donna begins university and during her second lecture , Saffron turns up as a guest speaker . Saffron turns Donna 's classmates against her , but Donna stands up to her . While going through her mother 's diary , Donna discovers that there are two men , Nick Nixon and Nicholas McKay , who could be her biological father . She contacts them both and she gets a job in Nick Nixon 's restaurant to see what he is like and she eventually tells him that she might be his daughter . They take a DNA test , which confirms that they are related . Donna tries to be nice to Ringo 's new girlfriend , Naomi ( Kate Bell ) , but she struggles . Ringo breaks up with Naomi and Donna discovers that Naomi has been following her . Naomi 's trashes Donna 's university project and steals her own medical file from the hospital . Donna is arrested , but Declan Napier ( Erin Mullally ) and Ringo find the file at Naomi 's house and Donna is released . 
 Donna is crushed by some scaffolding after she goes to a building site to pick up Ringo . Earlier in the day , Paul had tampered with the scaffolding platform due to a feud with the site 's owner . Ringo helps Donna to breathe and she is rushed to hospital , where she undergoes surgery to repair a ruptured spleen . Donna and Ringo then reunite and Ringo proposes to her . However , Donna turns him down , before proposing to him herself . Ringo wins a green card to the United States and they decide to bring the wedding forward . Donna meets Ringo 's mother , Prue ( Penny Cook ) and she later discovers Prue and Nick together . The wedding venue has to be changed and Donna 's car breaks down , so Lucas has to drive Donna and Nick to the new venue . They are stopped by the police , but Donna eventually makes it to the ceremony and she and Ringo marry . Following the honeymoon , Donna moves in with the Kennedy family . On their one month anniversary , Ringo is knocked down by Stephanie Scully 's ( Carla Bonner ) motorbike and dies . Donna is devastated and she struggles to accept that he has gone . Donna initially blames Kate for Ringo 's death because he pushed her out of the way . Donna is upset when she misses Ringo 's funeral . Donna is angry when Paul tries to use her to upset Steph at her trial . She later tells the court that Steph should not go to jail as it will not bring Ringo back . Donna receives a letter from a New York design school and Zeke tells her that Ringo applied for a place on her behalf . After initially deciding to stay in Ramsay Street , Donna 's friends manage to convince her to leave by staging a fashion show showcasing her designs . Donna says her goodbyes in the street and she leaves for New York with Nick . 
 = = In other media = = 
 In 2009 , Neighbours became the first Australian series to establish Twitter accounts for its characters . Donna was one of four characters to have an account set up , with the others being Declan , Ringo and Zeke . They began sending daily updates to their fans , giving advice and talking to each other . The updates are " complementary to the show 's on @-@ air storylines " . FremantleMedia Enterprises vice @-@ president of licensing Ben Liebmann said , " We thought it was a really great way to continue or allow the audience to engage with the Neighbours world off @-@ screen " . The messages are overseen by the Fremantle digital team , which is integrated with the story department of the Neighbours production team . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Robbie earned several award nominations for her portrayal of Donna . She was nominated for Most Popular New Female Talent at the 2009 Logie Awards . She was nominated for Best Newcomer and Funniest Performance at the Inside Soap Awards and Fave Aussie Hottie at the Nickelodeon Australian Kids ' Choice Awards . In 2011 , Robbie received a nomination for the Most Popular Actress Logie Award . 
 The character has been well received . The South Wales Evening Post called Donna " one of the programme 's most popular faces " and the Bristol Evening Post said she was " one of the most refreshing Neighbours characters to come along for many a moon " . Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy said the character had become a favourite with fans . Ruth Deller , of television website Lowculture , called Donna " fierce and fabulous " . Robbie 's co @-@ star , Scott Major ( Lucas Fitzgerald ) praised her performance as Donna saying , " Donna could 've been played in so many ways , but I think Margot nailed it , she 's always fun to work with , she 's a barrel of laughs and always works hard at her stuff . She 's really created Donna on her own and made Donna her own character " . 
 Website AfterEllen commented on Donna 's bisexuality saying that her introduction to Neighbours was " progress " . They were also happy to see that Donna had been added to the credits , meaning that she would be around for a while . Holy Soap named Donna 's most memorable moments as " Stepping out with Zeke after Ringo had dumped her " and " Locking lips with Korean exchange student Sunny " . In August 2010 , TV Week included Donna in their " Top 25 Neighbours characters " . They said " <unk> , but kind @-@ hearted Donna always lands herself in trouble " . 
 = No Depression ( album ) = 
 No Depression is the first studio album by alternative country band Uncle Tupelo , released in June 1990 . After its formation in the late 1980s , Uncle Tupelo recorded the Not Forever , Just for Now demo tape , which received a positive review by the College Media Journal in 1989 . The review led to the band 's signing with what would become Rockville Records later that year . The album was recorded with producers Sean Slade and Paul Q. Kolderie at Fort Apache Studios , on a budget of US $ 3 @,@ 500 . 
 No Depression was critically acclaimed and sold well for an independent release . Selling over 15 @,@ 000 copies within a year of its release , the album 's success inspired the roots music magazine No Depression . The record is considered one of the most important alternative country albums , and its title is often used as a synonym for the alternative country genre after being popularized by No Depression magazine . After regaining the rights to the album through a lawsuit , Uncle Tupelo released a remastered version in 2003 through Legacy Records , expanded to include six bonus tracks . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jay Farrar , Jeff Tweedy and Mike Heidorn began their musical careers in the 1980s playing in a garage band , The Plebes . After a few gigs , creative differences between the members led to the development of a punk rock sound for the band . As punk rock was unpopular in the St. Louis region , the band changed their style to blues @-@ rock and renamed themselves Uncle Tupelo . At this point , they stopped performing covers and began to write their own songs . 
 The band discovered a musical niche around Washington University in St. Louis , where bands such as Brian Henneman 's Chicken Truck performed in a similar style . The trio recorded its first professional tracks in Champaign , Illinois with future Chicago punk producer Matt Allison . The demo tape , Not Forever , Just for Now , contained early versions of several songs that would later appear on their debut album , including " Train " , " Whiskey Bottle " , " Flatness " , " Screen Door " , and " Before I Break " . 
 That demo , as well as the band 's rigorous touring schedule , attracted the attention of several music scouts . Record labels initially were wary of signing the band whom they perceived as straddling " the divide between the countrified punk of early 1980s such as Green on Red , Jason & the Scorchers , and X — none of whom had bum @-@ rushed the charts — and the Pacific Northwest grunge of Mudhoney and Nirvana , which was still years from breaking out commercially " . However , the influential CMJ New Music Report gave the demo tape a favorable review in 1989 , praising its " mature , developed , seriously thought @-@ out songwriting " . This review prompted New York City @-@ based distributor Dutch East India Trading to provide funding for the band to record an album on their Giant Records label , shortly before the label was renamed to Rockville Records . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Six months before signing a full contract with Giant / Rockville , Uncle Tupelo recorded the tracks for No Depression over ten days in January 1990 at Fort Apache South , a musician @-@ run studio in the Roxbury neighborhood of Boston , Massachusetts . As the trio could not afford the cost of recording at a twenty @-@ four track studio in nearby Cambridge , they settled on the cheaper Fort Apache studio . The album cost US $ 3 @,@ 500 to produce , $ 1 @,@ 000 of which went to in @-@ house producers Sean Slade and Paul Q. Kolderie . The band was interested in working with Slade and Kolderie after hearing their production of Dinosaur Jr . ' s album Bug . The producers allowed Farrar to use the same 1961 Gibson Les Paul guitar that J. Mascis used on Bug , which gave the power chords on No Depression a richer tone . 
 Slade and Kolderie suggested that the band deemphasize the roots rock influences heard on Not Forever , Just for Now and convinced them to replace the harmonica parts with pedal steel guitar . For this , Slade and Kolderie recruited guitarist Rich Gilbert of Human Sexual Response for the recording . The tracks were recorded using little overdubbing ; only a few banjo and acoustic guitar parts were later added to the songs . At the suggestion of Slade and Kolderie , No Depression was recorded on eight @-@ track , so " the music would compress and " jump " off the tape during playback " . The recording sessions occurred before Uncle Tupelo officially became affiliated with Giant Records , so there was little input from the label . 
 Lyrically the songs reflected the band members ' experiences growing up in Belleville . Farrar and Tweedy romanticized tales about unemployment , alcoholism , and the feeling of living in a small town in an effort to emulate the profundity of songwriters such as Woody Guthrie . Musically , No Depression was influenced by the start @-@ stop musical pattern of the Minutemen . The cover of the album features a blurry photo of the band , taken by J. Hamilton , reminiscent of the albums released on Folkways Records . 
 = = Promotion and reception = = 
 No Depression was released by Rockville Records on June 21 , 1990 . The promotional tour for the album began at Cicero 's Basement , a St. Louis bar associated with Washington University . The tour took Uncle Tupelo to both the East Coast and the Southwestern United States . Missouri radio stations <unk> and KCOU frequently played tracks off the album . By March 1991 , No Depression had sold over 15 @,@ 000 units , a hit by independent record standards . The proceeds from the album recuperated the $ 3 @,@ 500 cost of the album , but Rockville refused to pay the band any royalties . Farrar and Tweedy later successfully sued Rockville CEO Barry Tenenbaum to attain the royalties . The surprise success of the album prompted Columbia Records to pay the band to record additional tracks with Slade and Kolderie at Fort Apache Studio in the summer of 1990 , but the results were not released . Rolling Stone did not publish a review of the album upon its initial release , although the magazine later featured Uncle Tupelo in an article about rising stars alongside the Black Crowes . Rolling Stone later called the album " one of the loudest , loneliest wails in recent memory to arise from the Midwest 's recession @-@ plagued plains " . Robert Christgau dismissed the album as a " dud " . 
 After the lawsuit with Tenenbaum , Farrar and Tweedy received the rights to their first three albums ( including No Depression ) , which were previously held by Rockville . In 2003 , Uncle Tupelo remastered and re @-@ released No Depression with six bonus tracks through Legacy Records , a Sony Music label . Among the bonus tracks were cover versions of the Flying Burrito Brothers ' " Sin City " , the Carter Family 's " Blues Die Hard " , and The <unk> ' " Left in the Dark " . The liner notes for the re @-@ release featured an article written by Mike Heidorn about Uncle Tupelo 's early days and the creation of No Depression . Upon re @-@ release , Allmusic referred to the album as " Uncle Tupelo 's landmark opening salvo " , praising its " undeniable electricity " and remarking that it brought " new life " to the fusion of country and punk rock . Rolling Stone critic Tom Moon lauded " the band 's impressive songwriting range " , but noted that the bonus material was " pleasant but <unk> " . Pitchfork Media gave the re @-@ issue an 8 @.@ 4 rating out of 10 , proclaiming " No Depression is a significant record " . 
 No Depression is cited by RealNetworks as one of the most important albums in the alternative country genre . This was partly due to the success of the alternative country periodical No Depression , which took its name partly from the album . Due the impact of the album on alternative country , " No Depression " is sometimes used as a synonym for the genre . Allmusic critic Jason Ankeny noted that the album helped the band " kick @-@ start a revolution which reverberated throughout the American underground " . In 1999 , Spin listed the album as one of the " Top 90 Albums of the 90s " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Jay Farrar , Jeff Tweedy , and Mike Heidorn except as indicated . 
 " Graveyard Shift " – 4 : 43 
 " That Year " ( Farrar , Tweedy ) – 2 : 59 
 " Before I Break " – 2 : 48 
 " No Depression " ( A.P. Carter ) – 2 : 20 
 " Factory Belt " – 3 : 13 
 " Whiskey Bottle " – 4 : 46 
 " Outdone " ( Farrar , Tweedy ) – 2 : 48 
 " Train " ( Tweedy ) – 3 : 19 
 " Life Worth Livin ' " – 3 : 32 
 " Flatness " ( Tweedy ) – 2 : 58 
 " So Called Friend " ( Farrar ) – 3 : 12 
 " Screen Door " – 2 : 42 
 " John Hardy " ( traditional , arr . Lead Belly ) – 2 : 21 
 Track 13 is a CD only bonus track . 
 2003 CD reissue bonus track 
 " Left in the Dark " ( <unk> ) – 3 : 09 
 " Won 't Forget " – 2 : 51 
 " Sin City " ( Parsons , Hillman ) – 3 : 53 
 " Whiskey Bottle " ( Live Acoustic ) – 4 : 40 
 " No Depression " ( 1988 Demo ) – 2 : 19 
 " Blues Die Hard " ( 1987 Demo ) ( A. P. Carter ) – 4 : 08 
 Tracks 17 – 19 previously unreleased . 
 2014 Legacy Edition Track Listing 
 Disc 1 
 Original Album + 2003 Bonus Tracks 
 " Graveyard Shift " – 4 : 43 
 " That Year " – 2 : 59 
 " Before I Break " – 2 : 48 
 " No Depression " ( A.P. Carter ) – 2 : 20 
 " Factory Belt " – 3 : 13 
 " Whiskey Bottle " – 4 : 46 
 " Outdone " – 2 : 48 
 " Train " – 3 : 19 
 " Life Worth Livin ' " – 3 : 32 
 " Flatness " – 2 : 58 
 " So Called Friend " – 3 : 12 
 " Screen Door " – 2 : 42 
 " John Hardy " ( traditional , arr . Lead Belly ) – 2 : 21 
 Disc 1 bonus tracks 
 " Left in the Dark " ( Ken <unk> ) – 3 : 09 
 " Won 't Forget " – 2 : 51 
 " I Got Drunk ( A @-@ Side ) " – 2 : 26 
 " Sin City ( B @-@ Side ) " ( Parsons , Hillman ) – 3 : 53 
 " Whiskey Bottle " ( Live Acoustic ) – 4 : 40 
 Disc 2 - Demos 
 " Outdone " – 2 : 57 
 " That Year " – 3 : 14 
 " Whiskey Bottle " – 4 : 55 
 " Flatness " – 3 : 24 
 " I Got Drunk " – 3 : 07 
 " Before I Break " – 2 : 44 
 " Life Worth Living " – 3 : 25 
 " Train " – 3 : 31 
 " Graveyard Shift " – 4 : 58 
 " Screen Door " – 2 : 46 
 " No Depression " – 2 : 18 
 " Blues Die Hard " – 4 : 08 
 " Before I Break " – 3 : 11 
 " I Got Drunk " – 2 : 55 
 " Screen Door " – 2 : 23 
 " Blues Die Hard " – 4 : 00 
 " Pickle River " – 2 : 18 
 Tracks 1 @-@ 10 from 1989 demo tape " Not Forever , Just for Now " , tracks 11 @-@ 12 from 1988 demo tape " Live & Otherwise " , and tracks 13 @-@ 17 from 1987 demo tape " Colorblind and <unk> " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Uncle Tupelo 
 Jay Farrar – vocals , guitar , banjo , mandolin , fiddle , harmonica 
 Mike Heidorn – drums , cymbals 
 Jeff Tweedy – vocals , acoustic guitar , bass guitar 
 Additional personnel 
 Rich Gilbert – pedal steel guitar 
 J. Hamilton – photography 
 Paul Q. Kolderie – production , audio engineering , sound effects 
 Sean Slade – production , piano , engineering , background vocals 
 = Ontario Highway 140 = 
 King 's Highway 140 , commonly referred to as Highway 140 , is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . The highway connects Port Colborne near Lake Erie with Highway 406 in Welland , via the Main Street Tunnel . It was constructed in the early 1970s as part of the Welland Bypass project of the Welland Canal , which resulted in the severance of several highways and rail lines . Opened to traffic in late 1972 , several months following the tunnel , Highway 140 has remained unchanged since , despite growing calls to resign it as an extension of Highway 406 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 140 begins at an intersection with Highway 3 on the eastern edge of Port Colborne . From there , Highway 3 continues east to Fort Erie ; to the west it becomes Niagara Regional Road 3 . The roadway carrying Highway 140 continues south of Highway 3 as a local road named Elizabeth Street , whereas Highway 140 travels north , to the west of forestland and a quarry . The highway parallels the Welland Canal throughout its length , always within 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of the waterway . Wooden high @-@ tension powerlines parallel the highway until it diverges , curving towards the northeast immediately north of Chippawa Road . It travels diagonally for several kilometres before ascending on an overpass and crossing the former Canadian National Humberstone Subdivision tracks . 
 The highway gradually straightens to a north – south alignment as it crosses Highway 58A and a set of railway tracks , both of which travel beneath the nearby Welland Canal to the west . Continuing north , Highway 140 passes over Lyons Creek , which meanders northeast to converge with the Welland River west of the Niagara River . The highway ends approximately 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) north of this point at an intersection with Main Street ( Niagara Regional Road 27 ) . Main Street travels beneath the Welland Canal immediately west of Highway 140 , providing a connection to Highway 406 on the opposite side . Because of its importance as both a through route past the canal and in linking Highway 140 with Highway 406 , East Main Street between Highways 140 and 406 is maintained the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) as Highway <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of Highway 140 begins in May 1966 , when the St. Lawrence Seaway Authority received Federal approval for the Welland Bypass , a 13 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometre ( 8 @.@ 3 mi ) channel that would serve to bypass the canal through downtown Welland , where several crossings proved to be a hazard for shipping traffic and the shipping traffic an impediment to pedestrian and vehicular traffic . The new channel would be dug out and flooded , providing the opportunity for the construction of cheap cut and cover tunnels beneath the channel . By 1968 , construction was underway on tunnels at East Main Street and at the Port Colborne – Welland <unk> . 
 Due to the numerous road disconnections that would take place as a result of the Welland Bypass , a new highway was proposed to link Welland with Port Colborne . One of the severed highways was Highway 58 , which then followed Canal Bank Street south from Welland . In late 1970 , the Department of Highways tendered contracts for the construction of the new highway on the east side of the bypass . Construction began from the north , reaching as far south as Ramey Road . 
 The section north of Townline Road was completed within a year . Around the same time , the third and final contract was tendered for the section north of Highway 3 . On May 20 , 1972 , the Main Street Tunnel was opened to traffic at a morning ceremony featuring local officials and the Welland Police Association Pipe Band . Highway 140 was opened several months later , without ceremony , on October 5 . It has remained unchanged since then , and was not affected by the provincial highway transfers in 1997 and 1998 . 
 The various municipalities serviced by Highway 140 , as well as Niagara Region , have called for four @-@ laning the route and redesignating it as Highway 406 . However , the MTO is committed to extending Highway 406 to Highway 58 southwest of Welland . On April 4 , 2006 , the MPP for Erie — Lincoln , Tim Hudak , introduced a Private Member 's Bill . The Highway 406 to Port Colborne Act passed first reading , but was not brought up for a second reading . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 140 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . The entire route is located in the Regional Municipality of Niagara . 
 = K @-@ 26 ( Kansas highway ) = 
 K @-@ 26 is a 3 @.@ 601 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 5 @.@ 795 km ) state highway located entirely within Cherokee County , Kansas . It runs from an intersection with U.S. Route 166 ( US @-@ 166 ) and US @-@ 400 northwest of the Missouri / Kansas / Oklahoma tripoint north to K @-@ 66 in Galena . The highway is maintained by the Kansas Department of Transportation ( KDOT ) . 
 The route was designated in 1937 on a roadway that ran from Crestline to the Missouri state line , but was moved to its current location via a series of route re @-@ designations that took place over the following decades , assuming its current route in the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 K @-@ 26 begins at an intersection with US @-@ 166 and US @-@ 40 east of Baxter Springs . The roadway heads north through a wooded area , passing several farms . The route then crosses Shoal Creek and enters the city of Galena as Main Street . In Galena , K @-@ 26 reaches its northern terminus at K @-@ 66 , which is also known as 7th Street . Main Street continues north of the intersection toward a BNSF Railway line . 
 The route is maintained by KDOT , which is responsible for constructing and maintaining highways in the state . As part of this role , KDOT regularly surveys traffic on their highways . These surveys are most often presented in the form of annual average daily traffic , which is a measurement of the number of vehicles that use a highway during an average day of the year . In 2010 , KDOT calculated that a total of <unk> vehicles used the road daily , including 225 trucks . No part of the highway has been listed as part of the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the nation 's defense , mobility , and economy . 
 = = History = = 
 K @-@ 26 was first designated in 1937 over the former eastern segment of K @-@ 34 , a gravel road that ran from K @-@ 96 and US @-@ 69 in Crestline east to the Missouri state line . In 1941 , K @-@ 26 and the easternmost portion of K @-@ 96 switch designations . After this , K @-@ 26 ran from US @-@ 66 west of Galena north to K @-@ 96 and US @-@ 69 . This roadway was paved when K @-@ 26 was designated along it . Between 1948 and 1953 , the highway was extended east along US @-@ 66 to Galena and south from there to its current southern terminus at US @-@ 166 . In the mid @-@ 1980s when US @-@ 66 was decommissioned , the portion of K @-@ 26 along it was re @-@ signed as K @-@ 66 and the portion of the highway from US @-@ 66 to Crestline was designated as part of U.S. Route 69 Alternate ( US @-@ 69 Alt ) . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Cherokee County . 
 = Three Gorges Dam = 
 The Three Gorges Dam is a hydroelectric dam that spans the Yangtze River by the town of <unk> , located in Yiling District , Yichang , Hubei province , China . The Three Gorges Dam is the world 's largest power station in terms of installed capacity ( 22 @,@ 500 MW ) . In 2014 the dam generated 98 @.@ 8 TWh of electricity , setting a new world record by 0 @.@ 17 TWh previously held by the <unk> Dam on the Brazil / Paraguay border in 2013 of 98 @.@ 63 . But in 2015 , the Itaipu power plant resumed the lead in annual worldwide production , producing 89 @.@ 5 TWh , while production of Three Gorges was 87 TWh . 
 Except for a ship lift , the dam project was completed and fully functional as of July 4 , 2012 , when the last of the main water turbines in the underground plant began production . The ship lift was complete in December 2015 . Each main water turbine has a capacity of 700 MW . The dam body was completed in 2006 . Coupling the dam 's 32 main turbines with two smaller generators ( 50 MW each ) to power the plant itself , the total electric generating capacity of the dam is 22 @,@ 500 MW . 
 As well as producing electricity , the dam is intended to increase the Yangtze River 's shipping capacity and reduce the potential for floods downstream by providing flood storage space . The Chinese government regards the project as a historic engineering , social and economic success , with the design of state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art large turbines , and a move toward limiting greenhouse gas emissions . However , the dam flooded archaeological and cultural sites and displaced some 1 @.@ 3 million people , and is causing significant ecological changes , including an increased risk of landslides . The dam has been a controversial topic both domestically and abroad . 
 = = History = = 
 A large dam across the Yangtze River was originally envisioned by Sun Yat @-@ sen in The International Development of China , in 1919 . He stated that a dam capable of generating 30 million horsepower ( 22 GW ) was possible downstream of the Three Gorges . In 1932 , the Nationalist government , led by Chiang Kai @-@ shek , began preliminary work on plans in the Three Gorges . In 1939 , Japanese military forces occupied Yichang and surveyed the area . A design , the Otani plan , was completed for the dam in anticipation of a Japanese victory over China . 
 In 1944 , the United States Bureau of Reclamation chief design engineer , John L. Savage , surveyed the area and drew up a dam proposal for the ' Yangtze River Project ' . Some 54 Chinese engineers went to the U.S. for training . The original plans called for the dam to employ a unique method for moving ships ; the ships would move into locks located at the lower and upper ends of the dam and then cranes with cables would move the ships from one lock to the next . In the case of smaller water craft , groups of craft would be lifted together for efficiency . It is not known whether this solution was considered for its water @-@ saving performance or because the engineers thought the difference in height between the river above and below the dam too great for alternative methods . Some exploration , survey , economic study , and design work was done , but the government , in the midst of the Chinese Civil War , halted work in 1947 . 
 After the 1949 Communist takeover , Mao Zedong supported the project , but began the Gezhouba Dam project nearby first , and economic problems including the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution slowed progress . After the 1954 Yangtze River Floods , in 1956 , Mao Zedong authored " Swimming " , a poem about his fascination with a dam on the Yangtze River . In 1958 , after the Hundred Flowers Campaign , some engineers who spoke out against the project were imprisoned . 
 During the 1980s , the idea of a dam reemerged . The National People 's Congress approved the dam in 1992 : out of 2 @,@ 633 delegates , 1 @,@ 767 voted in favour , 177 voted against , 664 abstained , and 25 members did not vote . Construction started on December 14 , 1994 . The dam was expected to be fully operational in 2009 , but additional projects , such as the underground power plant with six additional generators , delayed full operation until May 2012 . The ship lift was completed in 2015 . The dam had raised the water level in the reservoir to 172 @.@ 5 m ( 566 ft ) above sea level by the end of 2008 and the designed maximum level of 175 m ( 574 ft ) by October 2010 . 
 = = Composition and dimensions = = 
 Made of concrete and steel , the dam is 2 @,@ 335 m ( 7 @,@ 661 ft ) long and the top of the dam is 185 metres ( 607 ft ) above sea level . The project used 27 @.@ 2 million cubic metres ( 35 @.@ 6 × 10 ^ 6 cu yd ) of concrete ( mainly for the dam wall ) , 463 @,@ 000 tonnes of steel ( enough to build 63 Eiffel Towers ) and moved about 102 @.@ 6 million cubic metres ( 134 @.@ 2 × 10 ^ 6 cu yd ) of earth . The concrete dam wall is 181 metres ( 594 ft ) high above the rock basis . 
 When the water level is at its maximum of 175 metres ( 574 ft ) above sea level , which is 110 metres ( 361 ft ) higher than the river level downstream , the dam reservoir is on average about 660 kilometres ( 410 mi ) in length and 1 @.@ 12 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 700 ft ) in width . It contains 39 @.@ 3 km3 ( 31 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 acre · ft ) of water and has a total surface area of 1 @,@ 045 square kilometres ( 403 sq mi ) . On completion , the reservoir flooded a total area of 632 square kilometres ( 244 sq mi ) of land , compared to the 1 @,@ 350 square kilometres ( 520 sq mi ) of reservoir created by the Itaipu Dam . 
 = = Economics = = 
 The government estimated that the Three Gorges Dam project would cost 180 billion yuan ( US $ 22 @.@ 5 billion ) . By the end of 2008 , spending had reached 148 @.@ 365 billion yuan , among which 64 @.@ 613 billion yuan was spent on construction , 68 @.@ 557 billion yuan on relocating affected residents , and 15 @.@ 195 billion yuan on financing . It is estimated that the construction cost will be recovered when the dam has generated 1 @,@ 000 terawatt @-@ hours ( 3 @,@ 600 PJ ) of electricity , yielding 250 billion yuan . Full cost recovery is expected to occur ten years after the dam starts full operation . 
 As of December 20 , 2013 , the full cost of the Three Gorges Dam project has been recovered . 
 Funding sources include the Three Gorges Dam Construction Fund , profits from the Gezhouba Dam , loans from the China Development Bank , loans from domestic and foreign commercial banks , corporate bonds , and revenue before and after the dam is fully operational . Additional charges were assessed as follows : Every province receiving power from the Three Gorges Dam has to pay ¥ 7 @.@ 00 per MWh extra . Other provinces had to pay an additional charge of ¥ 4 @.@ 00 per MWh . The Tibet Autonomous Region pays no surcharge . 
 = = Power generation and distribution = = 
 = = = Generating capacity = = = 
 Power generation is managed by China Yangtze Power , a listed subsidiary of China Three Gorges Corporation ( <unk> ) — a Central Enterprise SOE administered by <unk> . The Three Gorges Dam is the world 's largest capacity hydroelectric power station with 34 generators : 32 main generators , each with a capacity of 700 MW , and two plant power generators , each with capacity of 50 MW , making a total capacity of 22 @,@ 500 MW . Among those 32 main generators , 14 are installed in the north side of the dam , 12 in the south side , and the remaining six in the underground power plant in the mountain south of the dam . The expected annual electricity generation will be over 100 TWh . 
 = = = Generators = = = 
 The main generators weigh about 6 @,@ 000 tonnes each and are designed to produce more than 700 MW of power . The designed head of the generator is 80 @.@ 6 meters ( 264 ft ) . The flow rate varies between 600 – 950 cubic metres per second ( 21 @,@ 000 – 34 @,@ 000 cu ft / s ) depending on the head available . The greater the head , the less water needed to reach full power . Three Gorges uses Francis turbines . Turbine diameter is 9 @.@ 7 / 10 @.@ 4 m ( <unk> design / Alstom 's design ) and rotation speed is 75 revolutions per minute . Rated power is 778 MVA , with a maximum of 840 MVA and a power factor of 0 @.@ 9 . The generator produces electrical power at 20 kV . The outer diameter of the generator stator is 21 @.@ 4 / 20 @.@ 9 m . The inner diameter is 18 @.@ 5 / 18 @.@ 8 m . The stator , the biggest of its kind , is 3 @.@ 1 / 3 m in height . Bearing load is <unk> / 5500 tonnes . Average efficiency is over 94 % , and reaches 96 @.@ 5 % . 
 The generators are manufactured by two joint ventures . One of them includes Alstom , ABB Group , <unk> , and the Chinese company <unk> Motor . The other includes Voith , General Electric , Siemens ( abbreviated as <unk> ) , and the Chinese company Oriental Motor . The technology transfer agreement was signed together with the contract . Most of the generators are water @-@ cooled . Some newer ones are air @-@ cooled , which are simpler in design and manufacture and are easier to maintain . 
 = = = Generator installation progress = = = 
 The 14 north side main generators are in operation . The first ( No. 2 ) started on July 10 , 2003 . The north side became completely operational September 7 , 2005 with the implementation of generator No. 9 . Full power ( 9 @,@ 800 MW ) was only reached on October 18 , 2006 after the water level reached 156 m . 
 The 12 south side main generators are also in operation . No. 22 began operation on June 11 , 2007 and No. 15 started up on October 30 , 2008 . The sixth ( No. 17 ) began operation on December 18 , 2007 , raising capacity to 14 @.@ 1 GW , finally surpassing Itaipu ( 14 @.@ 0 GW ) , to become the world 's largest hydro power plant by capacity . 
 The 6 underground main generators are also in operation as of May 23 , 2012 , when the last main generator , No. 27 , finished its final test raising capacity to 22 @.@ 5 GW . After 9 years of construction , installation and testing , the power plant is now fully operational . 
 = = = Output milestones = = = 
 By August 16 , 2011 , the plant had generated 500 TWh of electricity . In July 2008 it generated 10 @.@ 3 TWh of electricity , its first month over 10 TWh . On June 30 , 2009 , after the river flow rate increased to over 24 @,@ 000 m3 , all 28 generators were switched on , producing only 16 @,@ 100 MW because the head available during flood season is insufficient . During an August 2009 flood , the plant first reached its maximum output for a short period . 
 During the November to May dry season , power output is limited by the river 's flow rate , as seen in the diagrams on the right . When there is enough flow , power output is limited by plant generating capacity . The maximum power @-@ output curves were calculated based on the average flow rate at the dam site , assuming the water level is 175 m and the plant gross efficiency is 90 @.@ 15 % . The actual power output in 2008 was obtained based on the monthly electricity sent to the grid . 
 The Three Gorges Dam reached its design @-@ maximum reservoir water level of 175 m ( 574 ft ) for the first time on October 26 , 2010 , in which the intended annual power @-@ generation capacity of 84 @.@ 7 TWh was realized . In 2012 , the dam 's 32 generating units generated a record 98 @.@ 1 TWh of electricity , which accounts for 14 % of China 's total hydro generation . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 The State Grid Corporation and China Southern Power Grid paid a flat rate of ¥ 250 per MWh ( US $ 35 @.@ 7 ) until July 2 , 2008 . Since then , the price has varied by province , from ¥ 228 @.@ 7 – 401 @.@ 8 per MWh . Higher @-@ paying customers receive priority , such as Shanghai . Nine provinces and two cities consume power from the dam . 
 Power distribution and transmission infrastructure cost about 34 @.@ 387 billion Yuan . Construction was completed in December 2007 , one year ahead of schedule . 
 Power is distributed over multiple 500 kilovolt ( kV ) transmission lines . Three Direct current ( DC ) lines to the East China Grid carry 7 @,@ 200 MW : Three Gorges – Shanghai ( 3 @,@ 000 MW ) , HVDC Three Gorges – Changzhou ( 3 @,@ 000 MW ) , and HVDC Gezhouba – Shanghai ( 1 @,@ 200 MW ) . The alternating current ( AC ) lines to the Central China Grid have a total capacity of 12 @,@ 000 MW . The DC transmission line HVDC Three Gorges – Guangdong to the South China Grid has a capacity of 3 @,@ 000 MW . 
 The dam was expected to provide 10 % of China 's power . However , electricity demand has increased more quickly than previously projected . Even fully operational , on average , it supports only about 1 @.@ 7 % of electricity demand in China in the year of 2011 , when the Chinese electricity demand reached <unk> @.@ 8 TWh . 
 = = Environmental impact = = 
 = = = Emissions = = = 
 According to the National Development and Reform Commission of China , 366 grams of coal would produce 1 kWh of electricity during 2006 . At full power , Three Gorges reduces coal consumption by 31 million tonnes per year , avoiding 100 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions , millions of tonnes of dust , one million tonnes of sulfur dioxide , 370 @,@ 000 tonnes of nitric oxide , 10 @,@ 000 tonnes of carbon monoxide , and a significant amount of mercury . Hydropower saves the energy needed to mine , wash , and transport the coal from northern China . 
 From 2003 to 2007 , power production equaled that of 84 million tonnes of standard coal , reducing carbon dioxide by 190 million tonnes , sulfur dioxide by 2 @.@ 29 million tonnes , and nitrogen oxides by 980 @,@ 000 tonnes . 
 The dam increased the Yangtze 's barge capacity sixfold , reducing carbon dioxide emission by 630 @,@ 000 tonnes . From 2004 to 2007 a total of 198 million tonnes of goods passed through the ship locks . Compared to using trucking , barges reduced carbon dioxide emission by ten million tonnes and lowered costs by 25 % . 
 = = = Erosion and sedimentation = = = 
 Two hazards are uniquely identified with the dam . One is that sedimentation projections are not agreed upon , and the other is that the dam sits on a seismic fault . At current levels , 80 % of the land in the area is experiencing erosion , depositing about 40 million tons of sediment into the Yangtze annually . Because the flow is slower above the dam , much of this sediment will now settle there instead of flowing downstream , and there will be less sediment downstream . 
 The absence of silt downstream has three effects : 
 Some hydrologists expect downstream riverbanks to become more vulnerable to flooding . 
 Shanghai , more than 1 @,@ 600 km ( 990 mi ) away , rests on a massive sedimentary plain . The " arriving silt — so long as it does arrive — strengthens the bed on which Shanghai is built ... the less the tonnage of arriving sediment the more vulnerable is this biggest of Chinese cities to inundation ... " 
 Benthic sediment buildup causes biological damage and reduces aquatic biodiversity . 
 = = = Earthquakes and landslides = = = 
 Erosion in the reservoir , induced by rising water , causes frequent major landslides that have led to noticeable disturbance in the reservoir surface , including two incidents in May 2009 when somewhere between 20 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 26 @,@ 000 and 65 @,@ 000 cu yd ) of material plunged into the flooded <unk> Gorge of the Wu River . Also , in the first four months of 2010 , there were 97 significant landslides . 
 = = = Waste management = = = 
 The dam catalyzed improved upstream wastewater treatment around Chongqing and its suburban areas . According to the Ministry of Environmental Protection , as of April 2007 more than 50 new plants could treat 1 @.@ 84 million tonnes per day , 65 % of the total need . About 32 landfills were added , which could handle 7 @,@ 664 @.@ 5 tonnes of solid waste every day . Over one billion tons of wastewater are released annually into the river , which was more likely to be swept away before the reservoir was created . This has left the water looking stagnant , polluted and murky . 
 = = = Forest cover = = = 
 In 1997 the Three Gorges area had 10 % forestation , down from 20 % in the 1950s . 
 Research by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization research suggested that the Asia @-@ Pacific region would , overall , gain about 6 @,@ 000 km2 ( 2 @,@ 300 sq mi ) of forest by 2008 . That is quite a turnaround from the 13 @,@ 000 km2 ( 5 @,@ 000 sq mi ) net loss of forest each year in the 1990s . The main reason is China 's huge reforestation effort . This accelerated after the 1998 Yangtze River floods convinced the government that it must restore tree cover , especially in the Yangtze 's basin upstream of the Three Gorges Dam . 
 = = = Wildlife = = = 
 Concerns about the potential wildlife impact of the Dam predate the National People 's Congress 's approval in 1992 . This region has long been known for its rich biodiversity . It is home to 6 @,@ 388 species of plants , which belong to 238 families and 1508 genera . Of these plant species , 57 percent are endangered . These rare species are also used as ingredients in traditional Chinese medicines . Already , the percentage of forested area in the region surrounding the Three Gorges Dam has dropped from twenty percent in 1950 to less than ten percent as of 2002 , negatively affecting all plant species in this locality . The region also provides habitats to hundreds of freshwater and terrestrial animal species . Freshwater fish are especially affected by dams due to changes in the water temperature and flow regime . Many other fish are hurt in the turbine blades of the hydroelectric plants as well . This is particularly detrimental to the ecosystem of the region because the Yangtze River basin is home to 361 different fish species and accounts for twenty @-@ seven percent of all endangered freshwater fish species in China . Other aquatic species have been endangered by the dam , particularly the baiji , or Chinese river dolphin , now extinct . In fact , Government Chinese scholars even claim that the Three Gorges Dam directly caused the extinction of the baiji . 
 Of the 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 remaining critically endangered Siberian crane , a large number currently spend the winter in wetlands that will be destroyed by the Three Gorges Dam . The dam contributed to the functional extinction of the baiji Yangtze river dolphin . Though it was close to this level even at the start of construction , the dam further decreased its habitat and increased ship travel , which are among the factors causing what will be its ultimate demise . In addition , populations of the Yangtze sturgeon are guaranteed to be " negatively affected " by the dam . 
 = = Floods , agriculture , industry = = 
 An important function of the dam is to control flooding , which is a major problem for the seasonal river of the Yangtze . Millions of people live downstream of the dam , with many large , important cities like Wuhan , Nanjing , and Shanghai situated adjacent to the river . Plenty of farm land and China 's most important industrial area are built beside the river . 
 The reservoir 's flood storage capacity is 22 cubic kilometres ( 18 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acre · ft ) . This capacity will reduce the frequency of major downstream flooding from once every ten years to once every 100 years . The dam is expected to minimize the effect of even a " super " flood . In 1954 the river flooded 193 @,@ 000 km2 ( 74 @,@ 518 sq mi ) , killing 33 @,@ 169 people and forcing 18 @,@ 884 @,@ 000 people to move . The flood covered Wuhan , a city of eight million people , for over three months , and the <unk> Railway was out of service for more than 100 days . The 1954 flood carried 50 cubic kilometres ( 12 cu mi ) of water . The dam could only divert the water above <unk> , leaving 30 to 40 km3 ( 7 @.@ 2 to 9 @.@ 6 cu mi ) to be diverted . Also the dam cannot protect against some of the large tributaries downstream , including the Xiang , <unk> , <unk> , Lishui , <unk> , and the Gan . 
 In 1998 a flood in the same area caused billions of dollars in damage ; 2 @,@ 039 km2 ( 787 sq mi ) of farm land were flooded . The flood affected more than 2 @.@ 3 million people , killing 1 @,@ 526 . In early August 2009 , the largest flood in five years passed through the dam site . The dam limited the water flow to less than 40 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 52 @,@ 000 cu yd ) per second , raising the upstream water level from 145 @.@ 13 metres on August 1 , 2009 , to 152 @.@ 88 on August 8 , 2009 . 4 @.@ 27 cubic kilometres of flood water were captured and the river flow was cut by as much as 15 @,@ 000 cubic metres per second . 
 The dam discharges its reservoir during the dry season between December and March every year . This increases the flow rate of the river downstream , and provides fresh water for agricultural and industrial usage . It also improves shipping conditions . The water level upstream drops from 175 m to 145 m , preparing for the rainy season . The water also powers the Gezhouba Dam downstream . 
 Since the filling of the reservoir in 2003 , the Three Gorges Dam has supplied an extra 11 cubic kilometres of fresh water to downstream cities and farms during the dry season . 
 During the 2010 South China floods , in July , inflows at the Three Gorges Dam reached a peak of 70 @,@ 000 m3 / s ( 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 cu ft / s ) , exceeding the peak during the 1998 Yangtze River Floods . The dam 's reservoir rose nearly 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) in 24 hours and reduced the outflow to 40 @,@ 000 m3 / s ( 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 cu ft / s ) in discharges downstream , effectively alleviating serious impacts on the middle and lower river . 
 = = Navigating the dam = = 
 = = = Locks = = = 
 The installation of ship locks is intended to increase river shipping from ten million to 100 million tonnes annually , as a result transportation costs will be cut between 30 and 37 % . Shipping will become safer , since the gorges are notoriously dangerous to navigate . Ships with much deeper draft will be able to navigate 2 @,@ 400 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 500 mi ) upstream from Shanghai all the way to Chongqing . It is expected that shipping to Chongqing will increase fivefold . 
 There are two series of ship locks installed near the dam ( 30 ° 50 ′ 12 ″ N 111 ° 1 ′ 10 ″ E ) . Each of them is made up of five stages , with transit time at around four hours . Maximum vessel size is 10 @,@ 000 tons . The locks are 280 m long , 35 m wide , and 5 m deep ( 918 × 114 × 16 @.@ 4 ft ) . That is 30 m longer than those on the St Lawrence Seaway , but half as deep . Before the dam was constructed , the maximum freight capacity at the Three Gorges site was 18 @.@ 0 million tonnes per year . From 2004 to 2007 , a total of 198 million tonnes of freight passed through the locks . The freight capacity of the river increased six times and the cost of shipping was reduced by 25 % . The total capacity of the ship locks is expected to reach 100 million tonnes per year . 
 These locks are staircase locks , whereby inner lock gate pairs serve as both the upper gate and lower gate . The gates are the vulnerable hinged type , which , if damaged , could temporarily render the entire flight unusable . As there are separate sets of locks for upstream and downstream traffic , this system is more water efficient than bi @-@ directional staircase locks . 
 = = = Ship lift = = = 
 In addition to the canal locks , there is a ship lift , a kind of elevator for vessels . The ship lift can lift ships of up to 3 @,@ 000 tons . The vertical distance traveled is 113 metres , and the size of the ship lift 's basin is 120 × 18 × 3 @.@ 5 metres . The ship lift takes 30 to 40 minutes to transit , as opposed to the three to four hours for stepping through the locks . One complicating factor is that the water level can vary dramatically . The ship lift must work even if water levels vary by 12 meters ( 39 ft ) on the lower side , and 30 metres on the upper side . 
 The ship lift 's design uses a helical gear system , to climb or descend a toothed rack . 
 The ship lift was not yet complete when the rest of the project was officially opened on May 20 , 2006 . In November 2007 it was reported in the local media that construction of the ship lift started in October 2007 . 
 In February 2012 Xinhua reported that the four towers that are to support the ship lift had almost been completed . 
 The report said the towers had reached 189 metres of the anticipated 195 metres , the towers would be completed by June 2012 and the entire <unk> in 2015 . 
 As of May 2014 , the ship lift was expected to be completed by July 2015 . It was tested in December 2015 and announced complete in January 2016 . Lahmeyer , the German firm that designed the ship lift , said it will take a vessel less than an hour to transit the lift . An article in Steel Construction says the actual time of the lift will be 21 minutes . It says that the expected dimensions of the 3 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 kg ) passenger vessels the ship lift 's basin was designed to carry will be 84 @.@ 5 metres ( 277 ft ) X 17 @.@ 2 metres ( 56 ft ) X 2 @.@ 65 metres ( 8 @.@ 7 ft ) . 
 = = = Portage railways = = = 
 Plans also exist for the construction of short portage railways bypassing the dam area altogether . Two short rail lines , one on each side of the river , are to be constructed . The 88 kilometer long northern portage railway ( <unk> ) will run from the <unk> port facility ( <unk> ) on the northern side of the Yangtze , just upstream from the dam , via Yichang East Railway Station to the <unk> <unk> port facility in <unk> Town ( <unk> ) , below Yichang . The 95 kilometer long southern portage railway ( <unk> ) will run from <unk> ( upstream of the dam ) via Yichang South Railway Station to <unk> ( on the <unk> – Liuzhou Railway ) . 
 In late 2012 , preliminary work started along both future railway routes . 
 = = Relocation of residents = = 
 As of June 2008 , China relocated 1 @.@ 24 million residents ( ending with <unk> in Hubei Province ) as 13 cities , 140 towns and 1350 villages either flooded or were partially flooded by the reservoir [ A _ 2 @-@ M : <unk> @-@ <unk> : S @-@ 15 ] , about 1 @.@ 5 % of the province 's 60 @.@ 3 million and Chongqing Municipality 's 31 @.@ 44 million population . About 140 @,@ 000 residents were relocated to other provinces . 
 Relocation was completed on July 22 , 2008 . Some 2007 reports claimed that Chongqing Municipality will encourage an additional four million people to move away from the dam to the main urban area of Chongqing by 2020 . However , the municipal government explained that the relocation is due to urbanization , rather than the dam , and people involved included other areas of the municipality . 
 Allegedly , funds for relocating 13 @,@ 000 farmers around <unk> disappeared after being sent to the local government , leaving residents without compensation . 
 = = Other effects = = 
 = = = Culture and aesthetics = = = 
 The 600 km ( 370 mi ) long reservoir flooded some 1 @,@ 300 archaeological sites and altered the appearance of the Three Gorges as the water level rose over 300 ft ( 91 m ) . Cultural and historical relics are being moved to higher ground as they are discovered , but the flooding inevitably covered undiscovered relics . Some sites could not be moved because of their location , size , or design . For example , the hanging coffins site high in the Shen Nong Gorge is part of the cliffs . 
 = = = National security = = = 
 The United States Department of Defense reported that in Taiwan , " proponents of strikes against the mainland apparently hope that merely presenting credible threats to China 's urban population or high @-@ value targets , such as the Three Gorges Dam , will deter Chinese military coercion . " 
 The notion that the military in Taiwan would seek to destroy the dam provoked an angry response from the mainland Chinese media . People 's Liberation Army General Liu Yuan was quoted in the China Youth Daily saying that the People 's Republic of China would be " seriously on guard against threats from Taiwan independence terrorists . " 
 The three gorge dam is a steel @-@ concrete gravity dam . The water is held back by the innate mass of the individual dam sections . As a result , damage to an individual section should not affect other parts of the dam . Due to the sheer size of the dam , it is expected to withstand tactical nuclear strikes . 
 = = = Structural integrity = = = 
 Days after the first filling of the reservoir , around 80 hairline cracks were observed in the dam 's structure . The submerged spillway gates of the dam might pose a risk of cavitation , similar to that which severely damaged the poorly designed and <unk> spillways of the Glen Canyon Dam in the US state of Arizona , which was unable to properly withstand the Colorado river floods of 1983 . However 163 @,@ 000 concrete units of the Three Gorges dam all passed quality testing and the deformation was within design limits . An experts group gave the project overall a good quality rating . 
 = = Upstream dams = = 
 In order to maximize the utility of the Three Gorges Dam and cut down on sedimentation from the Jinsha River , the upper course of the Yangtze River , authorities plan to build a series of dams on the Jinsha , including <unk> Dam , <unk> Dam , along with the now completed <unk> and <unk> dams . The total capacity of those four dams is 38 @,@ 500 MW , almost double the capacity of the Three Gorges . <unk> is preparing for construction and <unk> is seeking government approval . Another eight dams are in the midstream of the Jinsha and eight more upstream of it . 
 = 2007 – 08 Bradford City A.F.C. season = 
 The 2007 – 08 season was the 105th season in Bradford City A.F.C. ' s history , their 93rd in The Football League and 95th in the league system of English football . After finishing 22nd in League One during the 2006 – 07 season , Bradford City were relegated to League Two meaning the season would be their first in the bottom tier of The Football League since 1981 – 82 . It was also Stuart McCall 's first season as manager , after he was appointed the full @-@ time successor to Colin Todd in May 2007 . It covers a period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 . 
 McCall brought in seven new signings in pre @-@ season , as well as a number of loan players , but from September to November , the club failed to win in eight games , leaving them in 21st place in League Two . The club improved during the latter part of the season , finishing in 10th place , three places and 16 points outside the play @-@ offs . Bradford also suffered first round exits in two of the cup competitions they entered , and lost in the second round of the FA Cup . Peter Thorne was the club 's top goalscorer , recording 15 goals , 14 in the league and one in the FA Cup . The season also marked centre back David Wetherall 's retirement after 304 league games with the club . Joe Colbeck was named player of the season , despite spending part of the season on loan at Darlington . The club 's average attendance of 13 @,@ 756 was the highest in the division . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the 2006 – 07 season , manager Colin Todd had been sacked because of a poor run of results . Club captain David Wetherall was originally appointed Todd 's successor on a caretaker basis , before being handed the role until the end of the season , during the following month . Wetherall could not stop City 's run of poor form , and the club were relegated to League Two on 28 April 2007 after a 3 – 0 defeat at Chesterfield . It was the club 's third relegation in seven seasons , and meant the 2007 – 08 season would be their first season in the fourth division of English football in 25 years . On 22 May 2007 , former City player Stuart McCall , who had played more than 400 games for the club during two previous spells , was announced as the club 's new manager to take over on 1 June 2007 . Although the club had just 13 players with first @-@ team experience , the bookmakers made City second favourites to win the League Two title . 
 Despite the club 's relegation , off the field , chairman Julian Rhodes had announced a deal to slash the price of watching professional football to just £ 138 , the equivalent of £ 6 per match , and the cheapest season tickets in England . In June 2007 , Rhodes was also joined by Mark Lawn as new joint chairman of the club . Lawn signed a deal to wipe out the club 's debts . 
 = = Review = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ season = = = 
 With just 13 players on the books , McCall 's first job was to sign a number of new players to build a first @-@ team squad . McCall 's first signings were strikers Barry Conlon , from Mansfield Town , and Peter Thorne , from Norwich City , both on free transfers , on 2 July 2007 . No more players were signed by the time City played their first pre @-@ season friendly away at Harrogate Town on 16 July 2007 . However , there were eight trialists in the team which won 1 – 0 . The only goal of the game was a header from David Wetherall . Two days later , City were defeated 2 – 1 by Conference side Farsley Celtic , before a 2 – 0 victory against North Ferriby United . Scott Phelan , who had played all three of the pre @-@ season games during a trial , became McCall 's third signing on 24 July from Everton . The same day , City drew 1 – 1 with Burnley in their only home pre @-@ season friendly open to fans , with a goal from Paul Evans . McCall signed full back Darren Williams , from Hartlepool United , Kyle Nix on a monthly contract , and Nathan <unk> on loan from Barnsley but released three other trialists . <unk> had been the third loan signing from Barnsley , following Paul <unk> , who had played for Bradford in the 2003 – 04 season , and Thomas <unk> . The following two friendlies both ended in defeat ; first 1 – 0 to York City , then 2 – 1 to Blackpool in a private practice match , with another goal from Evans . Evans completed his transfer the following day , to be followed by Alex Rhodes , who had been on trial from Brentford , and Guylain Ndumbu @-@ Nsungu on loan from Gillingham , the following week . 
 A new home and away strip for the season was announced , with the home shirts worn for the first time in the friendly against Burnley . The club also sold more than 12 @,@ 000 season tickets , with 12 @,@ 019 fans buying one before the end of the deadline for the cheap offer on 31 July . 
 = = = August = = = 
 Bradford started their league season on 11 August 2007 with a 1 – 1 draw with Macclesfield Town , when a crowd of 14 @,@ 345 was inside Valley Parade , 1 @,@ 000 more than was originally announced . The attendance was more than 6 @,@ 000 higher than any other game in the division . Macclesfield had taken the lead , with City equalising shortly before half @-@ time when Guylain Ndumbu @-@ Nsungu scored with a rebound after Barry Conlon 's penalty was saved . Four days later City were at Championship side Wolverhampton Wanderers , for the first round of the League Cup . Wolves scored twice in the first five minutes of the second half , and despite Kyle Nix pulling one back for Bradford , City went out 2 – 1 . City 's second league game of the season was the first league game to be played at Shrewsbury Town 's new £ 15m ground the New Meadow , when an early penalty from former City player Dave Hibbert gave the home side a 1 – 0 win . McCall 's first win as manager came in the third game when a debut goal from Luke Medley secured a 2 – 1 victory over Wrexham . 
 = = = September = = = 
 Bradford started September with consecutive defeats ; first 2 – 1 in the league against Barnet , before a 5 – 1 loss to Doncaster Rovers in the Johnstone 's Paint Trophy . For the latter game , McCall had named a weakened team , which included debutants Ben <unk> and Sean Taylforth , and City faced a £ 5 @,@ 000 fine from The Football League , but were eventually only fined £ 3 @,@ 000 . Two victories in the league followed against Lincoln City — the first time the two teams had met in a league game since the fire disaster in 1985 — and Peterborough United . But the month ended as it had started with back @-@ to @-@ back defeats against Hereford United and Wycombe Wanderers . 
 = = = October = = = 
 The run of consecutive defeats extended to five during the first two weeks of October . After a 3 – 0 defeat to Accrington Stanley , McCall added two more loan signings to the squad , Nicky Law , son of former City manager Nicky Law , and goalkeeper Rhys Evans . Both played as City lost 2 – 1 to both Milton Keynes Dons , when Barry Conlon scored his first goal for the club , then Morecambe . The run of defeats came to an end when City drew 0 – 0 with Darlington , but the month ended without a single victory after another draw , this time 1 – 1 with Grimsby Town , when Rhys Evans was substituted after 24 minutes for City , and Ndumbu @-@ Nsungu scored a late equaliser following Grimsby 's own goalkeeper Phil Barnes ' red card . Evans ' loan deal was cut short following the injury and he returned to Blackpool after just four games . Young midfielder Joe Colbeck , who had been one of several players McCall wanted to send out on loan to gain first team experience , was loaned out to Darlington for a month . 
 = = = November = = = 
 Bradford 's run without a league victory extended to eight games after a 2 – 1 defeat to Brentford . The run , which stretched back to 15 September came to an end with a 2 – 1 win over Chester City on 6 November 2007 when Alex Rhodes scored his first goal for the club . City again defeated Chester City four days later , this time in the FA Cup , when Peter Thorne 's first goal for the club secured a 1 – 0 win . City won their third game in a row with a 4 – 1 victory over Dagenham & Redbridge — their highest victory of the season , before the month ended with a 1 – 1 draw against Stockport County . 
 = = = December = = = 
 Bradford were eliminated from the FA Cup with a 3 – 0 defeat to League One side Tranmere Rovers . They returned to league action with two more draws , away to Mansfield Town and Chesterfield , the latter game of which featured Joe Colbeck , who had returned from Darlington early despite his one @-@ month loan spell being originally extended . The following week City signed Willy Topp for £ 35 @,@ 000 — the first time they had paid a transfer fee for a player since Andy Tod in November 2001 — nearly three months after he first came on trial . City were given two weeks off before their next game , when their home game against Rotherham United on 15 December was postponed because of a frozen pitch . But they could not take advantage of the extra rest and despite taking the lead against Peterborough United , two second half goals gave Peterborough a 2 – 1 win and helped them to second in the league . The highest attendance of the season for a League Two game attended City 's next game on Boxing Day against Lincoln City . It was the first time the two teams had met in the league at Valley Parade since the fire of 1985 and the crowd of 15 @,@ 510 observed a minute silence and wreath @-@ laying ceremony before the game . Peter Thorne gave City the lead , and despite an <unk> from Lincoln , Barry Conlon secured a 2 – 1 win for Bradford in the last minute . The 2007 calendar year finished with another home game , but this time City lost 3 – 1 to Hereford United . 
 = = = January = = = 
 The New Year started with a number of changes off the field . Loan signing Ndumbu @-@ Nsungu returned to Gillingham but <unk> 's deal was extended to allow him to play against Accrington Stanley on New Year 's Day , before a permanent deal was finalised the following week . Midfielder Lee Bullock was also signed on a loan transfer from Hartlepool United . City beat Accrington 2 – 0 with Matthew Clarke scoring his first for the club and Joe Colbeck adding his first since he returned from his loan spell at Darlington . It was followed up with another win , when Thorne scored City 's first hat @-@ trick for two years , to defeat Notts County 3 – 0 . Two away draws followed at Bury and Wrexham , but City returned to winning ways with a 4 – 2 victory over Shrewsbury Town to finish the month unbeaten . 
 McCall had also been busy in the transfer market during January , with the trio of Ben Starosta , Scott Loach and TJ Moncur all arriving on loan . Bullock made his loan permanent and signed an 18 @-@ month contract , and David Brown signed after impressing on a trial . Five players also left Valley Parade on loan deals during January , with Craig Bentham joining Farsley Celtic , Luke Medley joining Cambridge City , Sean Taylforth and Luke Morgan both going to Droylsden , and Simon Ainge joining Halifax Town . Goalkeeper Donovan Ricketts was also expected to leave but his transfer to Queens Park Rangers collapsed after the Home Office rejected his application for a work permit . 
 = = = February = = = 
 City 's unbeaten run was extended to six games when David Brown scored on his debut to beat Macclesfield Town 1 – 0 . The run came to an end with consecutive 2 – 1 defeats to Bury and Rochdale . On 20 February 2008 , David Wetherall , who had played nearly 300 league games for City since he joined in 1999 , announced he would retire at the end of the season . City won their first win in three games when they beat Notts County for the second time in as many months , with a 3 – 1 win . Three days later City added a second consecutive win by defeating Rotherham United 3 – 2 in the game which had been postponed in December , with Lee Bullock scoring his first goal for the club . The same day , club chairman Julian Rhodes announced a new season ticket offer in a bid to fill more of the 25 @,@ 000 @-@ seater stadium for the following season by offering free tickets if more than 9 @,@ 000 adult tickets were bought . 
 = = = March = = = 
 March started with two more consecutive defeats . Dagenham & Redbridge defeated City 2 – 0 in their first game at Valley Parade , when Barry Conlon missed a penalty and then an open goal both when the score was 1 – 0 . In the following game , Peter Thorne scored a penalty to give City the lead against Stockport County , but County scored twice to win 2 – 1 . Four days later , Bradford recorded their third victory of the season against Chester City , when Conlon scored the only goal of the game in a 1 – 0 victory . Conlon scored another in the following game but City again were beaten , 2 – 1 by Mansfield Town . Following Wetherall 's announcement that he would retire , City 's supporters staged a special day to celebrate his career and contribution to the club , during the away fixture on 22 March 2008 at Rotherham United , where the team had lost 4 – 1 the previous season during Wetherall 's spell as player @-@ manager . The result of the game finished 1 – 1 , during which Omar Daley was sent off . City played a second game two days later , because of the Easter fixture list , when Peter Thorne scored the 150th league goal of his career to help City beat Chesterfield 1 – 0 . The month finished with a 3 – 1 victory over Darlington , when Tom Penford scored his first goal for the club , and both Barry Conlon and Joe Colbeck scored against their former club . The victory put City into the top half of the table for the first time since September . During March , City also won a Football League award for their season ticket deal at the start of the season . 
 = = = April = = = 
 On 1 April 2008 , first City 's keeper Donovan Ricketts was blocked from coming back into the country following a Jamaica call @-@ up , before City lost 2 – 1 at Rochdale , following a late winning goal from Rochdale 's Adam Le <unk> . City returned to winnings ways four days later , when Eddie Johnson scored the only goal of a 1 – 0 victory over Morecambe . Johnson scored for a second successive game , three days later to secure a 1 – 1 draw with Barnet in a rearranged game at Valley Parade . A second successive draw on 12 April , this time 2 – 2 against Brentford , meant that City could no longer reach the play @-@ offs , ensuring that they would again be playing in League Two during 2008 – 09 . A late goal from Joe Colbeck on 19 April prevented a third successive draw and gave City a 2 – 1 victory over Grimsby Town . Colbeck was named the club 's player of the season at the annual award ceremony on 23 April , but was sent off in the club 's final home of the season against Milton Keynes Dons . Bradford were already 2 – 0 behind when Colbeck was dismissed , and despite a goal from Omar Daley , they lost 2 – 1 , which crowned Milton Keynes as the league champions . 
 On 29 April 2008 , McCall announced the list of players he would be keeping and releasing at the end of the season . As well as Ricketts , who was unlikely to be given a new work permit , the first team players to be released were Darren Williams , Paul Evans , Tom Penford and Alex Rhodes . Craig Bentham , who had spent three months on loan at Farsley Celtic , and Scott Phelan , who had not featured since December , were also deemed surplus to requirements . Back @-@ up goalkeepers Ben <unk> and Jamie Waite , neither of whom had played a first team league game , and youngsters David Brown , Luke Morgan and Damian Hopkins completed the list of 13 players to leave the club . Barry Conlon and Kyle Nix were the only first team regulars to be offered new contracts , along with juniors Luke Medley , Luke O 'Brien and Sean Taylforth . 
 = = = May and June = = = 
 City finished the season with a 2 – 1 defeat at Wycombe Wanderers , when Luke Medley scored a penalty on his first start for the club . McCall had made a number of changes to the side , after his decision to release 13 players , giving a debut to Sean Taylforth and also giving places to three of the released players . It was also David Wetherall 's final game for the club . 
 In the week after the season had finished , Barry Conlon was the first to sign a new deal keeping him at the club until January 2008 , before Kyle Nix and Luke O 'Brien signed their season @-@ long contracts . By the end of the week , McCall made his first transfer of the summer when he signed goalkeeper Jonathan McLaughlin from non @-@ league Harrogate Town . It was not until the end of the month that he added his second signing , when midfielder Chris Brandon , a former club trainee , joined from Huddersfield Town on a free transfer . Defender Paul Arnison , who had been released by Carlisle United in May , became the club 's third summer transfer , when he signed a two @-@ year contract on 18 June 2008 . On 30 June 2008 , the final day before City would return to pre @-@ season training , City signed a second defender , when Graeme Lee joined on a free transfer from Doncaster Rovers . He also signed a two @-@ year contract . 
 = = Match results = = 
 = = = Legend = = = 
 = = = Football League Two = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 = = = League Cup = = = 
 = = = Football League Trophy = = = 
 = = League table = = 
 Source : The Football League 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals scored * Rotherham United deducted 10 points for entering administration ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = Player details = = 
 Source : <unk> 
 = = Transfers = = 
 = = = In = = = 
 = = = Out = = = 
 = = = Loans in = = = 
 = = = Loans out = = = 
 = Bowling Green State University = 
 Bowling Green State University ( BGSU ) is a public research university located in Bowling Green , Ohio , United States . The 1 @,@ 338 @-@ acre ( 541 @.@ 5 ha ) main academic and residential campus is located 15 miles ( 24 km ) south of Toledo , Ohio . The institution was granted a charter in 1910 as a normal school , specializing in teacher training and education , as part of the Lowry Normal School Bill that authorized two new normal schools in the state of Ohio . Over the university 's history , it developed from a small rural normal school into a comprehensive public university . 
 As of 2012 Bowling Green offered over 200 undergraduate programs , as well as master 's and doctoral degrees through eight academic colleges . Its academic programs have been nationally ranked by Forbes magazine , U.S. News & World Report , and Washington Monthly . The 2011 Carnegie Foundation classified BGSU as having " high research activity " . Research projects in the areas of psychology , sociology , education and human development , energy and sustainability are among the most prominent . BGSU had an on @-@ campus residential student population of 6 @,@ 500 students and a total student population of over 17 @,@ 000 students as of 2011 . The university also maintains a satellite campus , known as BGSU Firelands , in Huron , Ohio , 60 miles ( 97 km ) east of the main campus . Although the majority of students attend classes on BGSU 's main campus , about 2 @,@ 500 students attend classes at Firelands and about 1 @,@ 000 additional students at extension locations or online . About 85 % of Bowling Green 's students are from Ohio . 
 The university hosts an extensive student life program , with over 300 student organizations . Fielding athletic teams known as Bowling Green Falcons , the university competes at the NCAA Division I level ( NCAA Division I FBS for football ) as a member of the Mid @-@ American Conference in all sports except ice hockey , in which the university is a member of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association . The campus is home to annual events including the Dance Marathon a student @-@ organized philanthropy event , Winterfest , and Buckeye Boys State . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The movement for a public high learning institution in northwestern Ohio began in the late 1800s as part of the growth in public institutions during the Progressive Era to meet demands for training and professional development of teachers . During the period , people of northwestern Ohio campaigned for a school in their region to produce better quality education and educators . The movement argued that the existing universities , The Ohio State University in Columbus , Miami University in Oxford and Ohio University in Athens , were distant and the region lacked a state @-@ supported school of its own . 
 In 1910 , the Ohio General Assembly passed the Lowry Normal School Bill that authorized Governor Judson Harmon to appoint the Commission on Normal School Sites to survey forty communities for two sites for normal schools , one in northeastern Ohio and one in northwestern Ohio . The commission examined population within a 25 @-@ mile ( 40 @.@ 2 km ) radius of each community , along with railroad and transportation infrastructure , the moral atmosphere , health and sanitary conditions and site suitability . Bowling Green offered four possible sites and became one of four finalists including Fremont , Napoleon , and Van Wert . Despite the town being the home of John Lowry , Napoleon was ruled out because the commission found it had numerous saloons . Fremont was eliminated mainly due to the specific stipulations imposed by the President Rutherford B. Hayes Memorial Commission . Bowling Green was chosen on November 10 , 1910 over Van Wert in a 3 – 2 vote by the commission . The site located on 82 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 334 km2 ) of primarily rural land and a small town park , nearby railroad and transportation infrastructure , its central location in the region , and Bowling Green 's dry status were major factors that the town was chosen by the commission . At the same time , the commission chose Kent for a school in Northeastern Ohio . Over the years 1911 and 1912 , the Board of Trustees was appointed by the Governor and elected a school president on February 16 , 1912 . A campus plan was created and $ 150 @,@ 000 was appropriated to develop the campus and construct the first buildings . 
 The school opened on September 15 , 1914 as Bowling Green State Normal School in two temporary locations at the Bowling Green Armory and at a branch school in Toledo for the 1914 – 1915 academic year . It initially enrolled 304 students from Ohio , Michigan , and New York who were taught by 21 faculty members . The school graduated its first class in 1915 , consisting of 35 certified teachers . University Hall and Williams Hall opened that year , the school 's first two permanent buildings . Two years later the first baccalaureate degrees for teacher education were awarded . On March 28 , 1920 a tornado , part of the 1920 Palm Sunday tornado outbreak , damaged three of the school 's buildings . The tornado touched down near Bowling Green and strengthened as it moved into Ottawa County where it killed two people in Genoa . 
 = = = Early growth and development = = = 
 Over the next decade the school expanded academic facilities , athletics and student life , as enrollment grew to over 900 students . On October 28 , 1927 , Ivan " Doc " Lake , a BGSU graduate and sports editor of the Daily Sentinel @-@ Tribune , established the nickname “ Falcons " . Lake thought the falcon was a fitting nickname because the falcon is a small but powerful bird of prey , and like the athletes , goes through extensive preparations and training . He also thought the nickname fit with the school 's colors . Prior to Lake 's creation of the nickname , sports writers used various others , including : “ B.G. <unk> , ” “ Teachers , ” and the “ B.G. <unk> " . The school achieved the status of college in 1929 when the Emmons @-@ Hanna Bill changed renamed it to Bowling Green State College ( <unk> ) . At the same time , the college expanded its curriculum through the addition of the College of Liberal Arts , now known as the College of Arts and Sciences . 
 Enrollment levels held steady into the Great Depression ; but in 1933 , the Ohio State Senate Welfare Commission proposed a plan to convert the school into a mental health institution . Students , faculty and administrators organized with the Bowling Green community to counter the proposal . The Student Protest Committee coordinated with the faculty and administration to organize a campus rally and march through the downtown Bowling Green . Members of the Protest Committee then launched a letter @-@ writing campaign to community leaders throughout northwest Ohio , which helped convince the state legislature that closing the school would be counterproductive . The measure was defeated by a 14 – 5 vote . A few years later , in May 1935 , the college was granted university status and changed its name to Bowling Green State University . The university added the College of Business Administration to the existing College of Education and College of Liberal Arts . Within a year BGSU added master 's degree programs in Education , English , History , Social Science and Mathematics . In 1939 , the university established The Committee for Gifts , Endowments , and Memorials , its first private endowment fund . 
 = = = World War II , Post @-@ war era expansion = = = 
 The 1940s , including World War II and its aftermath , brought big changes to BGSU . The war caused a drastic decrease in male enrollment and by 1943 , the university canceled dances and <unk> , citing the lack of male students . The university continued expanding facilities including its first student union , The Falcon ’ s Nest , and new cottage @-@ style dorms for social groups and learning @-@ living communities , and dedication of the Wood County airport . Bowling Green was one of 240 colleges and universities to take part in the V @-@ 5 and V @-@ 12 Navy College Training Programs to supplement the lower enrollment during the war . The programs offered students a path to a Navy commission , enrolling cadets in regular college courses as well as naval training . Faculty were added to accommodate the military training programs . Student life adapted to the wartime era with efforts such as the War Relief Committee , blood drives and War Bonds initiatives . 
 In the post @-@ war era , BGSU constructed temporary structures to keep up with the increased housing demands for veterans and their families . BGSU added 40 trailers to house male and married students in 1945 , known as " Falcon Heights " . In 1946 , the university added 15 steel buildings to house male students in an area near the football stadium that became known as " Tin Pan Alley " . By the late 1940s , the student house shortage became so severe that the nearby National Guard Armory and ODOT garage were converted to house male students . The Federal Housing Authority provided two wooden barracks , ten trailers , and more steel buildings . The BGSU Army ROTC was established on campus in 1948 as enrollment increased dramatically in the post war era . The university continued to add academic programs as the enrollment increased during the mid to late 1940s , including the Graduate School in 1948 after Dr. Emerson <unk> led the effort to create school . By 1950 , enrollment grew to new record highs , with over 5 @,@ 000 students . 
 = = = McDonald era = = = 
 1951 saw major changes when Ralph W. McDonald was appointed the fourth president in school history , following the retirement of Frank Prout . McDonald was the first university president from outside Ohio and came to BGSU with a focus on improving teacher education and certification standards . Prior to becoming president , he served as the Executive Secretary of the Department of Higher Education of the National Education Association for seven years . Under McDonald , BGSU reorganized its three colleges to group common departments together within each college . Reflecting the Cold War era , BGSU added an Air Force ROTC program and a Department of Air Science and Tactics . BGSU continued to add programs and in the early 1950s added a Master of Education ( <unk> ) and a Master of Science ( M.S. ) in Education . The university constructed new residence halls during the decade , Prout Hall in 1955 and Founders Quadrangle in 1957 . The new student center opened in 1958 , after four years of construction at a cost of $ 2 @.@ 75 million . In the years 2012 @-@ 2014 , the residence hall was renovated and remodeled . This renovation updated the rooms , bathrooms , lobbies and outside sidewalks and walkways . 
 = = = 1960 – 1990 : Diverse Growth = = = 
 The College of Education experienced rapid growth and expansion during the 1960s when the university added various specialized education programs , including majors in special education , school psychology , guidance and counseling and vocational rehabilitation counseling . It expanded arts and music programs when the music department became the College of Education 's first " school " , renamed the School of Music in 1961 . Specializations in guidance and counseling were added to the Master of Arts and Master of Education degrees in 1964 ; as well as a new department for teaching college administration . By 1965 , BGSU 's College of Education enrolled 5 @,@ 470 students and was ranked the 16th largest producer of teachers in the United States . The university added new academic , administrative , and athletic facilities during the 1960s . Memorial Hall , later known as Anderson Arena , opened in 1960 . The new Administration Building opened in 1964 and the William T. Jerome Library opened in 1967 . 
 Student activism became common in the 1960s , reflecting the various social and political events of the time period . Vietnam War protests were common in downtown Bowling Green and on campus . In 1969 , a Black Student Union formed to encourage unity , scholarship , leadership , culture and political awareness of African Americans students . The majority of student activism at BGSU was peaceful and Bowling Green was the only public college or university in Ohio to remain open in the spring of 1970 , following the Kent State shootings during anti @-@ war protests . 
 Bowling Green added two colleges in the early 1970s when the College of Health and Human Services opened in 1973 and the School of Music was elevated to the College of Musical Arts in 1975 . In addition to the new colleges , the BGSU Popular Culture Center opened in 1970 as one of the first pop culture centers in the United States . In 1978 , the university established the University Honors Program . 
 Throughout the 1970s construction continued , starting with the Mathematical Sciences Building , followed by the Offenhauer Towers in 1971 and Industrial Education & Technology Building in 1972 . The Business Building and the Industrial Arts Building opened in 1973 and University Hall received renovations in 1974 that included new seating , an improved sound system , and air conditioning in the auditorium . In 1979 , the Student Recreation Center and the Moore Musical Arts Center opened . In 1970 , the Board of Trustees ended an alcoholic beverage ban on campus . The Cardinal Room , an on @-@ campus eatery , began serving beer . A growing trend in the late 1960s and early 1970s was the development of large apartment complexes adjacent to campus . By the 1970s approximately 4 @,@ 000 students lived in private , off @-@ campus housing . On campus , Darrow Hall became the first co @-@ ed dorm in 1972 with men and women inhabiting alternating floors . 
 The School of Technology was given college status in 1985 and renamed the College of Technology . The university expanded many of the technology and science facilities during the 1980s , including constructing the Planetarium and Physical Sciences Building . In 1985 Ronald Reagan became the seventh president or president to @-@ be to visit the university after Warren G. Harding , Theodore Roosevelt , William Howard Taft , John F. Kennedy , Richard Nixon , and Gerald Ford . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 During the 1990s the university renovated and constructed many buildings . The BGSU Fine Arts Center received a $ 9 @.@ 8 million addition in the early 1990s . Founders Hall was reopened in 1994 after extensive renovations at a cost of $ 15 million . That same year BGSU opened <unk> Hall . East Hall opened in 1998 . All residence halls received wiring for Ethernet connections . 
 In 2008 , the university began the first phase of a $ 200 million renovation project . BGSU first announced plans for the Stroh Center , a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ seat arena to replace the aging Anderson Arena . The $ 36 million arena opened in September 2011 , hosting basketball and volleyball ; in addition to graduation ceremonies , concerts and other events . The arena was named for Kermit Stroh and Mary Lu Stroh , who donated $ 7 @.@ 7 million for the project , the largest single private gift in BGSU 's history . In 2009 the university began construction on the Wolfe Center for the Arts . The 93 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 8 @,@ 600 m2 ) facility opened in 2011 with performance space , as well as work and classroom areas for art studies of the School of Art , the Department of Theatre and Film , and the School of Musical Arts . The facility was designed by Norwegian architectural firm Snøhetta , the firm 's first American project . That same year , BGSU built a $ 40 million residence hall project that included two new residence halls , one a traditional @-@ style dorm and a second suite @-@ style for upperclassmen . The residence hall project added more than 800 beds . In the fall of 2011 , BGSU opened The Oaks dining hall . The Oaks was constructed with sustainable designs that included a hybrid solar and wind power system to fulfill Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ( LEED ) , an electric @-@ powered truck to distribute food on campus , and a rooftop garden . The building used sustainable and recycled construction materials . 
 = = Campuses = = 
 = = = Main = = = 
 The main academic and residential campus is located on the northeast side of Bowling Green . The campus is arranged in a rectangle roughly one and a half miles long and one mile wide . It includes over 116 buildings on 1 @,@ 338 acres ( 5 @.@ 41 km2 ) . The campus is bordered by Wooster Street to the south , Thurstin Avenue to the west , Poe Road to the north , and I @-@ 75 to the east . The university also owns buildings and parking lots throughout Bowling Green and the Bowling Green Research Enterprise Park just east of I @-@ 75 . Ridge Street and East Merry Street run east @-@ west through campus and Mercer Street bisects campus on a north @-@ south axis . 
 The oldest portion of the BGSU campus is located in the southwest corner . It contains the oldest buildings on campus and was the original location . This area offers green space with large trees and historic buildings built in the early 1900s . Administrative services and classrooms occupy these buildings . Although not part of the historic section , Founders Hall , a large dorm , is located on the Southwest corner . Hanna Hall houses The Dorothy and Lillian Gish Film Theater and Gallery . Dedicated to BGSU in 1976 , it features early film memorabilia and highlights the careers of both Lillian Gish and Dorothy Gish . The theater was renovated and rededicated in 1990 . It seats 168 and is home to Tuesdays at the Gish , an International Film Series , and a Sunday Matinee Series , which are all free and open to the community . 
 The Science Research Complex is located on the northwest side of campus . The buildings of the science research complex were built in the mid @-@ 60s . They include Mathematical Science , Life Science , Psychology , Physical Science , and Technology ( engineering ) . The Geology , Chemistry and Earth Science departments are located in Overman Hall there . 
 Three large residence halls occupy the western edge of campus . Offenhauer Towers consist of a ten @-@ story and an eleven @-@ story tower , connected by a first @-@ floor lobby . Offenhauer shelters a small grocery store called Outtakes Quick Cuisine . McDonald Hall houses over 1 @,@ 200 students and an eco @-@ friendly dining facility known as The Oaks . Falcon Heights , a new residence hall , was added in 2011 across the street . 
 The Bowen @-@ Thompson Student Union opened in 2002 in the west @-@ central part of campus . It houses eateries including The Falcon 's Nest food court , Starbucks and The Black Swamp Pub . Other facilities include the Campus Bookstore , The Peregrine Shop ( a convenience store ) , an on @-@ campus post office , computer labs , meeting rooms , a 250 @-@ seat movie theater , ballrooms , and various student lounges . 
 Central Campus features large lecture halls and classroom buildings . One of the most prominent is the 95 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 9 @,@ 000 m2 ) <unk> Hall , which contains 28 classrooms and lecture halls capable of seating a total of 2 @,@ 000 students . Others include Business Administration , Education , Math / Science and the Eppler Complex , home to the Sport Management department . Anderson Arena is a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ seat arena , home for BGSU men 's and women 's basketball and women 's gymnastics and volleyball . Memorial Hall is connected to Anderson and houses the college 's ROTC programs . Jerome Library is the main library on campus and the second tallest building at nine stories . Conklin North is another residence hall in the central portion of campus . Oak Grove Cemetery is located in the north @-@ central portion of campus . Student Health Services was once located next to the cemetery but now is located off campus near the Education building . 
 The BGSU campus police station as well as counseling services are located in the College Park Office Building on the southern edge . Kohl Hall is a dormitory exclusive to members of the Chapman Learning Community , Partners in Context and Community for Urban Educators . A new , predominantly freshman dormitory known as Centennial Hall was established in 2011 and is equipped with its own dining hall , known as Carillon Place Dining . The southern edge hosts on @-@ campus fraternity and sorority houses , although the majority of sororities are near the Student Union on the western edge . 
 Arts programs are located to the east of Anderson Arena and Jerome Library in the east @-@ central area . The Fine Arts Center is home to the School of Art and houses classrooms , a studio , workshop spaces , art galleries a glassblowing studio and faculty offices . BGSU is one of only a few schools that offer degrees in glassblowing . The Moore Musical Arts Center is located along Ridge St and is the home to the College of Musical Arts . Moore includes classrooms , recording studios , rehearsal halls , and <unk> Hall , a large theater where many performances on campus are held . Moore also includes MidAmerican Center for Contemporary Music , a national center with a focus on the study , performance , creative work and promotion of contemporary music . The Wolfe Center for the Arts opened in December 2011 . It is the new centerpiece for the Arts , located between Fine Arts and Moore . The 93 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 9 @,@ 000 m2 ) building houses the School of Art , the Department of Theatre and Film , and the School of Musical Arts . It includes classrooms , rehearsal space , performance / theater space , as well as design and office space , the 400 @-@ seat Thomas and Kathleen Donnell Theatre , and a black @-@ box stage , editing and digital laboratories , classrooms , studios , faculty space , and choral rehearsal rooms . 
 Nearby are two identical residence halls known as the Harshman Quadrangle and the Kreischer Quadrangle , separated by a large field . Each quadrangle contains four connected halls that operate as separate units . In the Harshman Quadrangle , these units are identified as Anderson , Bromfield , Chapman , and Dunbar . In Kreischer , the halls are known as Ashley , Batchelder , Compton , and Darrow . Kreischer features a popular dining hall called The Sundial as well as an Outtakes store in Kreischer @-@ Ashley . Kreischer @-@ Compton is home to the Arts Village Learning Community , for students with interests in dance , art , creative writing , theater , or music . This community offers members @-@ only classes . Bowling Green State University opened the Falcon health center in 2013 , after demolishing the Popular Culture building in 2012 . 
 = = = = Athletic and recreation facilities = = = = 
 Most athletic and recreation facilities are located on the eastern half of campus . The Student Recreation Center is a 185 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 17 @,@ 000 m2 ) facility that includes two swimming pools , four weight rooms , a cardio room , an elevated running track , an Activity Center for aerobics and a large sports center which accommodates basketball , tennis , volleyball , and badminton and other sports . North of the center lies Perry Field House , a 127 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 12 @,@ 000 m2 ) athletic facility with a 100 x 60 indoor synthetic turf , four batting cages , and a 200 @-@ meter track encircling four courts for basketball , volleyball , or tennis . The BGSU Ice Arena is a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ seat ice hockey arena that is used by various teams and clubs as well as public use . The rink is also home to the Black Swamp Ice Frogs , a special needs hockey team . The arena also includes a smaller ice sheet for curling , figure skating , youth ice hockey , and public skating . The Eppler complex is the oldest building on campus for athletics and is the main practice area for cheerleading , gymnastics , dancing and fencing . At one time it housed the original natatorium . Doyt Perry Stadium is a 28 @,@ 600 seat football stadium located on the eastern edge . The Stroh Center is a new on @-@ campus venue for athletics , concerts , commencement , lectures , and numerous campus and community events . The facility serves as the home for the Falcons men ’ s and women ’ s basketball and volleyball programs . Notably , the new structure is one of the most environmentally friendly buildings on campus , designed to achieve challenging Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ( LEED ) certification . There is also the Poe Ditch Rugby field on the north side of campus on Poe Road . BGSU is also home to Forrest <unk> Golf Course located on the Northeast portion of campus . It is located to the North of Doyt Perry Stadium . The course is run by Kurt Thomas . The course is open to the public and offers great venues of campus and the surrounding area of Bowling Green . 
 = = = = Transportation and safety = = = = 
 The campus fare @-@ free bus transit system began in 1990 and runs throughout the campus and surrounding neighborhoods . In 2005 the university started testing Hybrid buses on the service 's main route . The first hybrid bus on the system used a proprietary diesel @-@ electric propulsion system , known as a Hybrid Booster Drive ( <unk> ) , and was developed by the Electric Vehicle Institute ( <unk> ) within the BGSU College of Technology . The system is made up of four routes . It includes major stops at various residence halls , academic buildings and athletic buildings . The campus has a phone application that allows the students to track the location of the different buses around campus . This application also gives an estimated time on the buses arrival to the bus stops . 
 The Orange Bike program began in 2008 as part of an increase in campus sustainability . The program operates a community <unk> system to reduce the carbon footprint of students ' commutes across campus . Riders register once and have the option to ride an Orange Bike anywhere on @-@ campus , lock it up at any university bike rack for other riders . 
 The University Police Department provides 24 @-@ hour law enforcement and security , campus escort service , motorist assistance , educational programs , and crime prevention information for the BGSU campus and surrounding areas . The department is staffed by 24 full @-@ time , state @-@ certified police officers granted full police authority by the Ohio Revised Code . In addition to the officers , the department includes a student safety services staff that provides services for the university community , such as crowd control and the campus escort service . The department deploys uniformed officers to patrol the campus in marked police cars , bicycles , and on foot and has a mutual aid agreement with the Bowling Green City Police and with all other state university police departments in Ohio . 
 = = = BGSU Firelands = = = 
 The college is located in Huron , Ohio , about 60 miles ( 97 km ) east of Bowling Green . BGSU Firelands is a non @-@ residential , commuter school and accommodates approximately 2 @,@ 500 undergraduate and graduate students served by 51 full @-@ time faculty members , as well as part @-@ time faculty . BGSU Firelands has a 20 : 1 student @-@ faculty ratio . Approximately 32 % of <unk> 's student population is " nontraditional " ( over age 25 ) . The college offers fifteen associate degrees in 22 areas of study and prepares students for transfer to bachelor ’ s programs or for entry into the job market in technical or <unk> areas . The college also offers nine on @-@ site bachelor 's degree programs in Early Childhood Education , Criminal Justice , Business Administration , Liberal Studies , Visual Communication Technology , Applied Health Science , Nursing , and Advanced Tech Ed . Students can take general education classes towards BGSU majors at the main campus classes or transferring to another four @-@ year institution . 
 First offered in 1946 in the Sandusky area and later expanded to serve Erie , Huron , Lorain , and Ottawa counties , extension programs established a foundation for BGSU Firelands , the university 's regional campus . The college was established at a site located near Lake Erie in Huron , Ohio when the first building ( now Foundation Hall ) was opened . In 2003 , Cedar Point Center opened its doors on the Firelands campus . The facility houses a 450 @-@ seat divisible public meeting area , smaller conference rooms , a cyber cafe , multimedia classrooms , and two distance learning classrooms . In March 2011 , BGSU Firelands unveiled a new master plan calling for the construction of three buildings to handle more students , more college / community partnerships ; and expand the James H. McBride Arboretum to the entire campus . 
 = = Academics and organization = = 
 Bowling Green State University offers more than 200 undergraduate majors and confers degrees . BGSU has full accreditation from the Higher Learning Commission ( HLC ) of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools . Bowling Green has been fully accredited by the North Central Association of the Higher Learning Commission since 1916 and received its ten @-@ year renewal in 2002 – 2003 . In addition , BGSU has accreditation from the HLC to offer full degree programs online . The university offers bachelor 's degrees , master 's degrees , and doctoral degrees through its eight colleges : 
 BGSU was ranked 97th on the Top Public Schools ranking by U.S. News & World Report . The university remains a leader in teacher preparation and was ranked 127th among America 's Best Education Schools by U.S. News & World Report . Students enrolled in the College of Education and Human Development may choose majors from among several teacher licensure areas , including early childhood ( grades Pre @-@ K to 3 ) , Middle Childhood ( grades 4 – 9 ) , Adolescent @-@ Young Adult ( grades 7 – 12 ) , Special Education ( grades K – 12 ) , and foreign language ( grades K – 12 ) . In addition , BGSU continues to have one of the top four programs in the United States for Industrial & Organizational Psychology per U.S. News & World Report . 
 BGSU offered the nation 's first PhD program in photochemical science and the first Ph.D. program in applied philosophy . The college of Business recently opened a facility at Levis Commons in Perrysburg , Ohio for its Professional MBA program . BGSU opened a satellite campus offering MBA classes at Owens State Community College in Findlay , Ohio in January 2013 . 
 = = = Tuition and graduation rates = = = 
 Fall 2012 undergraduate tuition for the main campus costs are $ 371 @.@ 40 dollars per credit hour for in @-@ state tuition while out @-@ of @-@ state tuition is $ 676 @.@ 40 per credit hour . The prices for undergraduate main campus tuition and fees are a 3 @.@ 5 % increase from the 2011 – 12 academic year . The increase in tuition was in response to a $ 2 @.@ 8 million cut from the state funding . Fall 2012 graduate tuition costs are $ 485 @.@ 00 per credit hour for in @-@ state tuition , and out @-@ of @-@ state tuition is $ 790 @.@ 00 per credit hour . 
 The six @-@ year graduation rate for the university 's main campus was 61 percent . Bowling Green State University 's six @-@ year graduation rate exceeded its predicted rate of 47 percent . The university 's was named in the top five positive differences between actual and expected graduation rates of similar public universities by U.S. News & World Report . Graduation rates for by race among this group are 60 percent unknown race , 60 percent white , 55 percent Asian @-@ American , 50 percent African @-@ American , 50 percent international students , 48 percent Hispanic @-@ American , and 43 percent Native American students . 
 = = = Faculty and research = = = 
 BGSU has a student @-@ faculty ratio of 20 : 1 . The university currently has 1 @,@ 982 academic staff , including 797 full @-@ time faculty , 312 adjunct faculty , and 873 graduate assistant and research staff . Since November 2010 , BGSU full @-@ time faculty have been represented in collective bargaining by the BGSU Faculty Association , a chapter of the American Association of University Professors . 
 In 1979 , American author James Baldwin taught at BGSU for one quarter as a Distinguished Visiting Professor in the Ethnic Studies Department , after a month @-@ long stint as writer in residence in 1978 . 
 The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education classified Bowling Green State University as a Doctorate @-@ granting Research University with high research activity . In the first quarter of fiscal year 2012 , BGSU received about $ 8 @.@ 1 million in research funds from federal , university , private and others sources with over 52 % from the National Science Foundation , National Institutes of Health , the United States Department of Energy , the United States Department of Health and Human Services , and the United States Department of Education . Research projects in the areas of Psychology , Sociology , Education and Human Development , Energy and Sustainability , are among the University 's most prominent . 
 The BGSU Center for Sustainability and the Environment was named as one of Ohio ’ s Centers of Excellence in advanced energy by the Ohio Board of Regents in October 2009 . The center conducts research on renewable energy such as solar energy and wind generation on Lake Erie , energy conversion , and using algae to generate biofuel . Research in conjunction with the University of Toledo created new ways to effectively determine appropriate Ohio windmill sites . 
 In 2010 , BGSU 's Health and Wellness Across the Lifespan Center was named as a Center for Excellence by the Ohio Board of Regents . The Center of Excellence for Health and Wellness Across the Lifespan primarily focuses on research pertaining to areas such as physical health , substance use and abuse , mental health , voice and speech science , family and marriage research , and health communication . It houses the first National Center for Family & Marriage Research , established by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services along with the Center for Family and Demographic Research , which received long @-@ term funding by the National Institutes of Health for voice and speech science research . 
 = = = Presidents = = = 
 BGSU has had many Presidents , some of them are distinguished : 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Bowling Green 's athletic teams are known as the Falcons . The university participates in NCAA Division I ( Division I @-@ A for football ) as a member of the Mid @-@ American Conference and the Western Collegiate Hockey Association for ice hockey . BGSU is one of only 13 universities in the country offering NCAA division I @-@ A football , division I men 's and women 's basketball , and Division I ice hockey . The Falcons ' main rivals are the Rockets of the University of Toledo . Separated by just 20 miles ( 32 km ) on Interstate 75 , the two schools celebrate a heated rivalry in several sports . The most well @-@ known of these games is the Battle of I @-@ 75 , a football game held each year in which the winner takes home the Peace Pipe , a Native American peace pipe placed upon a wood tablet . The university sponsors 18 athletic teams : baseball , men 's and women 's basketball , men 's and women 's cross county , football , men 's and women 's golf , women 's gymnastics , men 's ice hockey , men 's and women 's soccer , softball , women 's swimming , women 's tennis , women 's track and field , and women 's volleyball . 
 The Falcons women 's basketball teams had recent postseason success . The team won conference championships in women 's basketball in 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 . At the NCAA Women 's Division I Basketball Championship , the Falcons lost in the first round in 2005 and 2006 , but then reached the " Sweet Sixteen " in 2007 . The 1984 Falcons hockey team defeated the University of Minnesota Duluth in the longest college hockey championship game in history , to win the NCAA National Championship . Former BGSU head football coach Doyt Perry led the Falcons to the NCAA " Small College " Football National Title and undefeated season in 1959 . Several BGSU coaches went on to prominent careers . Football coach Urban Meyer went on to great success at the University of Florida , earning two BCS National Championship Game appearances in a three @-@ year span , winning in 2007 and 2009 . He also won the first FBS Playoff championship while coaching at The Ohio State University in 2015 . Hockey coach Jerry York became the winningest active coach in NCAA hockey , winning four NCAA National Championships at Boston College in 2001 , 2008 , 2010 and 2012 after his Bowling Green championship in 1984 . 
 = = = Club sports and events = = = 
 BGSU offers a variety of sports at the club level . Men 's sports include cross country / track and field , rugby , lacrosse , baseball , basketball , soccer and ice hockey . Women 's club sports include rugby , cross country / track and field , Lacrosse , soccer , softball , equestrian , figure skating , and gymnastics . In recent years , the club rugby team has been very successful . Also , in April 2011 , BGSU hosted the National Club Track and Field Championships at Whittaker Track on the east end of campus . 
 = = Student life = = 
 Ohio residents account for 85 % of the undergraduate student population while out @-@ of @-@ state students come from all 50 US states and 70 foreign countries . The student body consists of 54 % women and 46 % men , of which , 22 % are either of international origin or members of ethnic minority groups . Bowling Green had an on @-@ campus residential student population of 6 @,@ 500 students as of 2011 . Approximately 85 % are in @-@ state students . The majority of students attend classes on BGSU 's main campus . In addition to the main campus enrollment , 2 @,@ 500 students enrolled in classes at BGSU Firelands as of 2011 . 300 students attend classes at BGSU extension locations , and over 600 students attend classes via distance learning . 
 The university has an extensive student life program , with over 300 student organizations ; club and recreational sports programs ; nationally ranked living @-@ learning communities and freshmen experience programs ; student media organizations and publications ; and Greek organizations . Bowling Green State University was recognized for excellence in first @-@ year experience programs and residential living / learning communities by U.S. News & World Report from 2002 – 2003 through 2010 – 2011 . In BGSU 's residential learning communities , students with similar interests , majors , cultural connections , and goals live and study together . In the academically @-@ based communities students work closely with faculty members who teach classes and have offices in the residence hall . BGSU offers eight residential learning communities : Arts Village , Global Village , Honors Learning Community , La Comunidad , La Maison Française , Natural and Health Sciences Residential Community , Partners in Context and Community , Chapman Community at Kohl ; eight residential theme communities : Army ROTC , Aviation , Batchelder Music Community , Construction Management , Fraternity and Sorority Life , Wellness , and <unk> ; and one non @-@ residential learning community known as Honors Scholars . BGSU was included U.S. News & World Report 's rankings for First @-@ Year Experience Programs for the 2006 – 07 through 2011 – 2012 reports . The university was again ranked in the top ten in the 2011 – 12 edition . 
 In 2012 Bowling Green redesigned its undergraduate curriculum , creating an interdisciplinary program known as the <unk> ( BGeX ) , that places a focus on personal growth and development , social connections , critical thinking , problem solving and diversity . First @-@ year students begin the BGeX program during the BGeX Introduction Weekend prior to the start of the semester and continued taking courses designed to meet BGeX criteria throughout the four years of the undergraduate programs . 
 GeoJourney is a special academic program conducted by the School of Earth , Environment , and Society that features a nine @-@ week field trip / camping trip / road trip across the United States to national parks and monuments granting 24 students a semester of college credit . The GeoJourney field program includes Geology , Environmental Studies and Native American studies . Credits apply to the BG Perspective general education requirements . Students on the journey conduct interdisciplinary field investigations and gain first @-@ hand experiences in a wide range of environments . In 2004 the first GeoJourney trip went to 24 states , 30 national parks and covered over 14 @,@ 500 miles across the United States . 
 As part of the Department of Recreational Sports , the BGSU Outdoor Program offers outdoor trips , an indoor climbing wall , team @-@ building , and an outdoor equipment rental center to BGSU students , faculty , staff and surrounding community members . In August 2008 the program introduced the Freshman Wilderness Experience , which couples a week @-@ long backpacking trip on the Appalachian Trail with a monthly class to assist students in transitioning from high school to college life . In 2009 The Outdoor Program won the David J Web Award by the Association of Outdoor Recreation and Education ( <unk> ) as an outstanding non @-@ profit outdoor program . 
 = = = Greek life = = = 
 Bowling Green is home to many fraternities and sororities . The university began Greek community initiatives during the 1940s and it has slowly flourished into a strong community . Each fraternity and sorority at BGSU promotes community service efforts , academic excellence , philanthropic events , and university involvement each through their own nationally recognized organization . As of 2013 , 8 % of undergraduate men and 12 % of undergraduate women were members of Greek organizations . BGSU is demolishing its current Greek Town Homes located on old Fraternity Row , old Sorority Row , and the North and South Greek Conklin buildings while they plan and construct a new Greek Village which will consolidate all of the organizations together on the West side of campus against Wooster Street . The plan consists of 10 buildings divided into 33 sections consisting of 4 @-@ Bedroom , 12 @-@ Bedroom , and 18 @-@ Bedroom style homes . The site lies on top of old Fraternity Row and the North and South Conklin building locations . The demolition is scheduled for the fall of 2014 and the new Greek Village is scheduled to be finished in the fall of 2016 . 
 = = = Media and publications = = = 
 Campus newspapers include the independent student newspaper , The BG News , published since 1920 . It was known as the Bee Gee News before assuming its current name on September 21 , 1951 . The paper is available for free at 135 newsstands . In 2009 the paper became available on a web portal known as BG Views . The paper prints 7 @,@ 000 copies of the paper Monday through Friday during the fall and spring semesters , and on Wednesday during the summer . The university 's independent , student operated yearbook was first published in 1918 but stopped after one edition for six years . In 1924 it resumed production and was published every year as a record of students , activities , and events for a given year . In 2008 , the yearbook was replaced with a magazine format , The Key Magazine , and is published semi @-@ annually , in fall and spring semesters . 
 Electronic media include two radio stations and one public television station , as well as student @-@ produced television . BGSU 's Public Broadcasting Service affiliate , WBGU @-@ TV , broadcasts to nineteen counties in northwestern and west central Ohio and hosts PBS programming , local programming and <unk> News , a student @-@ run television newscast airing live at 5 : 30pm twice a week ( Tuesday and Thursday ) . The campus is home to two student @-@ operated radio stations as part of the Department of Telecommunications . WBGU 88 @.@ 1 FM and WFAL Falcon Radio . WBGU @-@ FM serves as an independent radio , non @-@ commercial educational ( NCE ) , FCC @-@ licensed station that focuses mostly on independent music programming and broadcasts women 's basketball and hockey ; while WFAL Falcon Radio , formerly WFAL 1610 AM , is a student @-@ run commercial radio station that broadcasts music including Modern rock , Top 40 , Hip hop and talk shows . Both radio stations host news and sports talk shows and BGSU athletic events through partnerships with other student @-@ media organizations . The Bowling Green Radio News Organization ( <unk> ) provides radio news coverage Monday @-@ Friday through student @-@ produced shows ; while the Bowling Green Radio Sports Organization ( <unk> ) broadcasts BGSU athletic events on WBGU @-@ FM and WFAL as well as local high school sports on WFAL . 
 The Mid @-@ American Review is an international literary journal published through the BGSU Department of English . The Mid @-@ American Review showcases contemporary fiction , poetry , nonfiction , and translations . It was created in 1980 when the format changed from a student @-@ published literary magazine , known as the Itinerary , to an international publication . Prairie Margins is a national undergraduate literary journal published by students in the Creative Writing Program . The annual journal features literary work by both BGSU students and undergraduate creative writers from other institutions . The Projector is a peer @-@ reviewed electronic journal on film , media and culture published twice a year by the Department of Theatre & Film . 
 = = = Traditions and events = = = 
 SICSIC is an official spirit organization at BGSU that began in 1946 by President Frank J. Prout . SICSIC routinely attends major BGSU sporting events and other campus activities promoting school spirit . The organization is secret and contains six members , two each for sophomore , junior and senior classes . Two new members are chosen at the end of their class 's freshman year to replace that year 's two graduating seniors . The group is characterized by their use of gray jumpsuits and masks of famous pop culture and political figures to hide their identities , which are not revealed until the last home basketball game of their senior year . 
 BGSU 's official mascots are Freddie and Frieda Falcon . Freddie Falcon began appearing at athletic events in 1950 , while Frieda first appeared on February 25 , 1966 as Mrs. Freddie Falcon . Frieda returned in the 1980 – 81 academic year as Freddie ’ s little sister . 1980 marked the first official female Frieda after the 1966 version was played by a male cheerleader . Freddie and Frieda routinely make appearances at BGSU athletic events and other major events around campus and the community . In a similar tradition to SICSIC , the identities of the students who play Freddie and Frieda are not revealed until the end of the basketball and hockey seasons . 
 BGSU currently is the home of Ohio 's largest student @-@ run philanthropy , Dance Marathon . BGSU 's chapter is one of the largest and most active Dance Marathon organizations in the nation . BGSU Dance Marathon operates similar to other dance marathon events held nationwide at other college . The event is run entirely by college students and the proceeds go to local children 's hospitals . Funds raised through BGSU 's Dance Marathon benefit children at the Mercy Children 's Hospital in Toledo via the Children 's Miracle Network . 2011 marked the 16th year the BG has conducted the Dance Marathon . Since the event began , it has raised over $ 2 @.@ 2 million for the Children 's Hospital . 
 Bowling Green hosts an annual event for three days in February similar to other winter cities to celebrate winter , snow , and cold weather activities . Winterfest was first held in 2009 and centers around the town 's rich ice skating and ice hockey traditions . Winterfest events are held all over Bowling Green . Many of the on campus events are held at the BGSU Ice Arena , including curling , skating , BGSU ice hockey and figure skating exhibitions . 
 Bowling Green has hosted the American Legion event known as Buckeye Boys State since 1978 . The program gathers high school juniors from all over Ohio for a nine @-@ day program in June . At Buckeye Boys State , the students operate a full government modeled after the Government of Ohio . 
 = = = Marching band = = = 
 The Falcon Marching Band is the largest student organization at BGSU , with over 260 members . The band performs at home football games and other university functions including select road football games and various bowl games including the Raisin Bowl in Fresno , California , Silver Bowl in Las Vegas , Nevada , the Motor City Bowl in Detroit , Michigan , the GMAC Bowl in Mobile , Alabama , the Humanitarian Bowl in Boise , Idaho , the Military Bowl in Washington , D.C. , and the Little Caesars Pizza Bowl in Detroit , Michigan . In 2007 , the band was invited to the Bands of America Regional in Indianapolis , Indiana . The Athletic Band is auditioned group that at most basketball and hockey games , as well as other university events . 
 The first band to represent what would become Bowling Green State University was formed during the 1923 @-@ 1924 academic year . Making its first appearance early during the football season , the band 's premier performance that year as at the dedication of the new athletic field at Homecoming . The Falcon Marching Band , features a symphonic sound and chair step marching that rivals bands of larger conferences . Under the direction of Dr. Michael King , the 250 member marching band is the largest student organization on campus . The band performs at all home football games , which are hosted in Doyt Perry Stadium as well as other various university functions . The Falcon Marching Band only exists during the football season . 
 The <unk> serves as a showcase of the finest in musical and visual performance , as well as a centerpiece for athletic spirit at BGSU , and is composed of students from all colleges of the University . Membership is open by audition to students of all class levels and all majors . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Alumni of Bowling Green State University have become notable in a variety of different fields including politics and government , business , science , literature , arts and entertainment , and athletics . A number of Bowling Green Falcons have excelled at the collegiate , Olympic , and professional levels sports , including : Kevin Bieksa , Rob Blake , Dan Bylsma , Scott Hamilton , Orel Hershiser , Mike McCullough , George McPhee . Ken Morrow , Don Nehlen , Jordan <unk> , Nate Thurmond , and Dave <unk> . Alumni involved in government and politics include : former Israeli ambassador Daniel Ayalon , Ohio state senator Kevin Coughlin . , Ohio state senator Randy Gardner , and current Ohio congressman Tim Ryan . Other notable alumni include : explorer Conrad Allen , author <unk> Marie Boles , TCU Chancellor Victor J. <unk> actor Tim Conway , ESPN sportscaster Jay Crawford NYU economic professor William Easterly , CBS News Correspondent Steve Hartman , ESPN sportscaster Jason Jackson , Adobe Systems President and CEO Shantanu <unk> , actress Eva Marie Saint , and author James Carlos Blake , winner of the Los Angeles Times Book Prize . 
 = Dubai = 
 Dubai ( / <unk> / doo @-@ BY ; Arabic : <unk> <unk> , Gulf pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is the most populous city in the United Arab Emirates ( UAE ) . It is located on the southeast coast of the Persian Gulf and is the capital of the Emirate of Dubai , one of the seven emirates that make up the country . Abu Dhabi and Dubai are the only two emirates to have veto power over critical matters of national importance in the country 's legislature . The city of Dubai is located on the emirate 's northern coastline and heads up the Dubai @-@ Sharjah @-@ Ajman metropolitan area . Dubai is to host World Expo 2020 . 
 Dubai has emerged as a global city and business hub of the Middle East . It is also a major transport hub for passengers and cargo . By the 1960s , Dubai 's economy was based on revenues from trade and , to a smaller extent , oil exploration concessions , but oil was not discovered until 1966 . Oil revenue first started to flow in 1969 . Dubai 's oil revenue helped accelerate the early development of the city , but its reserves are limited and production levels are low : today , less than 5 % of the emirate 's revenue comes from oil . The emirate 's Western @-@ style model of business drives its economy with the main revenues now coming from tourism , aviation , real estate , and financial services . Dubai has recently attracted world attention through many innovative large construction projects and sports events . The city has become iconic for its skyscrapers and high @-@ rise buildings , in particular the world 's tallest building , the Burj Khalifa . Dubai has been criticised for human rights violations concerning the city 's largely South Asian workforce . Dubai 's property market experienced a major deterioration in 2008 – 09 following the financial crisis of 2007 – 08 , but the emirate 's economy has made a return to growth , with a projected 2015 budget surplus . 
 As of 2012 , Dubai is the 22nd most expensive city in the world and the most expensive city in the Middle East . In 2014 , Dubai 's hotel rooms were rated as the second most expensive in the world , after Geneva . Dubai was rated as one of the best places to live in the Middle East by U.S. global consulting firm Mercer . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Many theories have been proposed as to the origin of the word " Dubai " . One theory suggests the word was used to describe the souq , which was similar to the souq in Ba . Another theory states that the name came from a word meaning " money " , as people from Dubai were commonly believed to be rich due to the thriving trading center of the location . An Arabic proverb says " Daba Dubai " ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) , meaning " They came with a lot of money . " According to <unk> <unk> , a scholar on the UAE 's history and culture , the word Dubai may have come from the word <unk> ( Arabic : <unk> ) ( a past tense derivative of <unk> ( Arabic : <unk> ) , which means " to creep " ) , referring to the slow flow of Dubai Creek inland . The poet and scholar Ahmad Mohammad <unk> traces it to the same word , but to its alternative meaning of " baby locust " ( Arabic : <unk> ) due to the abundant nature of locusts in the area before settlement . 
 = = History = = 
 Although stone tools have been found at many archaeological sites , little is known about the UAE 's early inhabitants as only a few settlements have been found . Many ancient towns in the area were trading centers between the Eastern and Western worlds . The remnants of an ancient mangrove swamp , dated at 7000 BC , were discovered during the construction of sewer lines near Dubai Internet City . The area was covered with sand about 5 @,@ 000 years ago as the coast retreated inland , becoming part of the city 's present coastline . Pre @-@ Islamic ceramics have been found from the 3rd and 4th centuries . Prior to the introduction of Islam to the area , the people in this region worshiped <unk> ( or Bajar ) . After the spread of Islam in the region , the Umayyad Caliph of the eastern Islamic world invaded south @-@ east Arabia and drove out the Sassanians . Excavations by the Dubai Museum in the region of Al @-@ <unk> ( Jumeirah ) found several artifacts from the Umayyad period . 
 The earliest recorded mention of Dubai is in 1095 in the Book of Geography by the Andalusian @-@ Arab geographer Abu Abdullah al @-@ Bakri . The Venetian pearl merchant <unk> Balbi visited the area in 1580 and mentioned Dubai ( <unk> ) for its pearling industry . 
 Dubai is thought to have been established as a fishing village in the early 18th century and was , by 1822 , a town of some 7 – 800 members of the Baniyas tribe and subject to the rule of Sheikh Tahnoon of Abu Dhabi . 
 In 1833 , following tribal feuding , members of the Al Bu <unk> tribe seceded from Abu Dhabi and established themselves in Dubai . The exodus from Abu Dhabi was led by Ubaid bin Saeed and <unk> bin <unk> who became joint leaders of Dubai until Ubaid died in 1836 , leaving <unk> to establish the Maktoum dynasty . 
 Dubai signed the treaty of ' Perpetual Maritime Truce ' of 1853 along with other <unk> States and also – like its neighbours on the <unk> Coast – entered into an exclusivity agreement in which the United Kingdom took responsibility for the emirate 's security in 1892 . 
 Two catastrophes struck the town during the 1800s . First , in 1841 , a smallpox epidemic broke out in the Bur Dubai locality , forcing residents to relocate east to Deira . Then , in 1894 , fire swept through Deira , burning down most homes . However , the town 's geographical location continued to attract traders and merchants from around the region . The emir of Dubai was keen to attract foreign traders and lowered trade tax brackets , which lured traders away from Sharjah and Bandar <unk> , the region 's main trade hubs at the time . Persian merchants naturally looked across to the Arab shore of the Persian Gulf finally making their homes in Dubai . They continued to trade with <unk> , however , as do many of the dhows in Dubai Creek today , and they named their district <unk> , after the <unk> region in southern Persia . 
 = = = Pre @-@ oil Dubai = = = 
 Dubai 's geographical proximity to Iran made it an important trade location . The town of Dubai was an important port of call for foreign tradesmen , chiefly those from Iran , many of whom eventually settled in the town . By the beginning of the 20th century , it was an important port . 
 Dubai was known for its pearl exports until the 1930s ; the pearl trade was damaged irreparably by the Great Depression in the 1930s and the innovation of cultured pearls . With the collapse of the pearling industry , Dubai fell into a deep depression and many residents starved or migrated to other parts of the Persian Gulf . 
 In the early days since its inception , Dubai was constantly at odds with Abu Dhabi . In 1947 , a border dispute between Dubai and Abu Dhabi on the northern sector of their mutual border escalated into war . Arbitration by the British and the creation of a buffer frontier running south eastwards from the coast at Ras <unk> resulted in a temporary cessation of hostilities . 
 Despite a lack of oil , Dubai 's ruler from 1948 , Sheikh Rashid bin Saeed Al Maktoum , used revenue from trading activities to build infrastructure . Electricity , telephone services , and an airport were established in Dubai in the 1950s and , in 1959 , the emirate 's first hotel , the Airlines Hotel , was constructed . This was followed by the Ambassador and Carlton Hotel in 1968 . 
 On 7 April 1961 , the Dubai @-@ based MV Dara , a five thousand ton British flagged vessel that plied the route between Basra ( Iraq ) , Kuwait and Bombay ( India ) , was caught in unusually high winds off Dubai . Early the next morning in heavy seas off Umm Al Qawain , an explosion tore out the second class cabins and started fires . The captain gave the order to abandon ship but two lifeboats capsized and a second explosion occurred . A flotilla of small boats from Dubai , Sharjah , Ajman and Umm Al Qawain picked up survivors but in all 238 lives were lost in the disaster . 
 In 1962 the British Political Agent noted that " Many new houses and blocks of offices and flats are being built ... the Ruler is determined , against advice [ from the British ] to press on with the construction of a jet airport ... More and more European and Arab firms are opening up and the future looks bright . " 
 The asphalt runway was constructed in 1965 , opening Dubai to both regional and long haul traffic . In 1970 a new terminal building was constructed which included Dubai 's first duty @-@ free shops . 
 = = = Oil era = = = 
 After years of exploration following large finds in neighboring Abu Dhabi , oil was eventually discovered in territorial waters off Dubai in 1966 , albeit in far smaller quantities . The first field was named ' Fateh ' or ' good fortune ' . This led the emirate to grant concessions to international oil companies , thus leading to a massive influx of foreign workers , mainly Asians and Middle easterners . Between 1968 and 1975 the city 's population grew by over 300 % . 
 As part of the infrastructure for pumping and transporting oil from the Fateh field , located offshore of the Jebel Ali area of Dubai , a number of 50 @,@ 000 gallon storage tanks were built , known locally as ' <unk> ' , by welding them together on the beach and then digging them out and floating them to drop onto the seabed at the Fateh field . These were constructed by the Chicago Bridge and Iron Company , which gave the beach its local name ( Chicago Beach ) until the Chicago Beach Hotel was demolished and replaced by the Jumeirah Beach Hotel in the late nineties . 
 Dubai had already embarked on a period of infrastructural development and expansion . Oil revenue , flowing from 1969 onwards supported a period of growth with Sheikh Rashid embarking on a policy of building infrastructure and a diversified trading economy before the emirate 's limited reserves were depleted . Oil accounted for 24 % of GDP in 1990 , but had reduced to 7 % of GDP by 2004 . 
 Critically , one of the first major projects Sheikh Rashid embarked upon when oil revenue started to flow was the construction of Port Rashid , a deep water free port constructed by British company Halcrow . Originally intended to be a four @-@ berth port , it was extended to sixteen berths as construction was ongoing . The project was an outstanding success , with shipping queuing to access the new facilities . The port was inaugurated on 5 October 1972 , although its berths were each pressed into use as soon as they had been built . Port Rashid was to be further expanded in 1975 to add a further 35 berths before the larger port of Jebel Ali was constructed . 
 Port Rashid was the first of a swathe of projects designed to create a modern trading infrastructure , including roads , bridges , schools and hospitals . 
 = = = Reaching the UAE 's Act of Union = = = 
 Dubai and the other ' <unk> states ' had long been a British protectorate where the British took care of foreign policy and defence , as well as arbitrating between the rulers of the Eastern Gulf . This was to change with PM Harold Wilson 's announcement , on 16 January 1968 , that all British troops were to be withdrawn from ' East of Aden ' . The decision was to pitch the coastal emirates , together with Qatar and Bahrain , into fevered negotiations to fill the political vacuum that the British withdrawal would leave behind . 
 The principle of union was first agreed between the ruler of Abu Dhabi , Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan , and Sheikh Rashid of Dubai on 18 February 1968 meeting in an encampment at <unk> Al <unk> , near Al <unk> , a desert stop between the two emirates . The two agreed to work towards bringing the other emirates , including Qatar and Bahrain , into the union . Over the next two years , negotiations and meetings of the rulers followed <unk> <unk> as a form of union was thrashed out . The nine @-@ state union was never to recover from the October 1969 meeting where heavy @-@ handed British intervention resulted in a walk @-@ out by Qatar and Ras Al Khaimah . Bahrain and Qatar were to drop out of talks , leaving only six emirates to agree on union on 18 July 1971 . 
 On 2 December 1971 , Dubai , together with Abu Dhabi , Sharjah , Ajman , Umm Al Qawain and Fujairah joined in the Act of Union to form the United Arab Emirates . The seventh emirate , Ras Al Khaimah , joined the UAE on 10 February 1972 , following giant non @-@ Arab neighbour Iran 's annexation of the RAK @-@ owned <unk> islands . 
 In 1973 , Dubai joined the other emirates to adopt a uniform currency : the UAE dirham . In that same year , the prior monetary union with Qatar was dissolved and the UAE <unk> was introduced throughout the Emirates . 
 = = = Modern Dubai = = = 
 During the 1970s , Dubai continued to grow from revenues generated from oil and trade , even as the city saw an influx of immigrants fleeing the Lebanese civil war . Border disputes between the emirates continued even after the formation of the UAE ; it was only in 1979 that a formal compromise was reached that ended disagreements . The Jebel Ali port was established in 1979 . <unk> ( Jebel Ali Free Zone ) was built around the port in 1985 to provide foreign companies unrestricted import of labor and export capital . Dubai airport and the aviation industry also continued to grow . 
 The Gulf War of 1990 had a negative financial effect on the city , as depositors withdrew their money and traders withdrew their trade , but subsequently , the city recovered in a changing political climate and thrived . Later in the 1990s , many foreign trading communities — first from Kuwait , during the Gulf War , and later from Bahrain , during the Shia unrest — moved their businesses to Dubai . Dubai provided refueling bases to allied forces at the Jebel Ali Free Zone during the Gulf War , and again during the 2003 Invasion of Iraq . Large increases in oil prices after the Gulf War encouraged Dubai to continue to focus on free trade and tourism . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Dubai is situated on the Persian Gulf coast of the United Arab Emirates and is roughly at sea level ( 16 m or 52 ft above ) . The emirate of Dubai shares borders with Abu Dhabi in the south , Sharjah in the northeast , and the Sultanate of Oman in the southeast . Hatta , a minor exclave of the emirate , is surrounded on three sides by Oman and by the emirates of Ajman ( in the west ) and Ras Al Khaimah ( in the north ) . The Persian Gulf borders the western coast of the emirate . Dubai is positioned at 25 @.@ <unk> ° N 55 @.@ 3095 ° E ﻿ / 25 @.@ <unk> ; 55 @.@ 3095 and covers an area of 1 @,@ 588 sq mi ( 4 @,@ 110 km2 ) , which represents a significant expansion beyond its initial 1 @,@ 500 sq mi ( 3 @,@ 900 km2 ) designation due to land reclamation from the sea . 
 Dubai lies directly within the Arabian Desert . However , the topography of Dubai is significantly different from that of the southern portion of the UAE in that much of Dubai 's landscape is highlighted by sandy desert patterns , while gravel deserts dominate much of the southern region of the country . The sand consists mostly of crushed shell and coral and is fine , clean and white . East of the city , the salt @-@ crusted coastal plains , known as sabkha , give way to a north @-@ south running line of dunes . Farther east , the dunes grow larger and are tinged red with iron oxide . 
 The flat sandy desert gives way to the Western Hajar Mountains , which run alongside Dubai 's border with Oman at Hatta . The Western Hajar chain has an arid , jagged and shattered landscape , whose mountains rise to about 1 @,@ 300 metres ( 4 @,@ 265 feet ) in some places . Dubai has no natural river bodies or oases ; however , Dubai does have a natural inlet , Dubai Creek , which has been dredged to make it deep enough for large vessels to pass through . Dubai also has multiple gorges and waterholes , which dot the base of the Western Al Hajar mountains . A vast sea of sand dunes covers much of southern Dubai and eventually leads into the desert known as The Empty Quarter . <unk> , Dubai is in a very stable zone — the nearest seismic fault line , the Zagros Fault , is 200 kilometres ( 124 miles ) from the UAE and is unlikely to have any seismic impact on Dubai . Experts also predict that the possibility of a tsunami in the region is minimal because the Persian Gulf waters are not deep enough to trigger a tsunami . 
 The sandy desert surrounding the city supports wild grasses and occasional date palms . Desert hyacinths grow in the sabkha plains east of the city , while acacia and <unk> trees grow in the flat plains within the proximity of the Western Al Hajar mountains . Several indigenous trees such as the date palm and neem as well as imported trees such as the eucalypts grow in Dubai 's natural parks . The <unk> bustard , striped hyena , caracal , desert fox , falcon and Arabian oryx are common in Dubai 's desert . Dubai is on the migration path between Europe , Asia and Africa , and more than 320 migratory bird species pass through the emirate in spring and autumn . The waters of Dubai are home to more than 300 species of fish , including the <unk> . The typical marine life off the Dubai coast includes tropical fish , jellyfish , coral , dugong , dolphins , whales and sharks . Various types of turtles can also be found in the area including the hawksbill turtle and green turtle , which are listed as endangered species . 
 Dubai Creek runs northeast @-@ southwest through the city . The eastern section of the city forms the locality of Deira and is flanked by the emirate of Sharjah in the east and the town of Al <unk> in the south . The Dubai International Airport is located south of Deira , while the Palm Deira is located north of Deira in the Persian Gulf . Much of Dubai 's real @-@ estate boom is concentrated to the west of Dubai Creek , on the Jumeirah coastal belt . Port Rashid , Jebel Ali , Burj Al Arab , the Palm Jumeirah and theme @-@ based free @-@ zone clusters such as Business Bay are all located in this section . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Dubai has a hot desert climate . Summers in Dubai are extremely hot , windy , and humid , with an average high around 41 ° C ( 106 ° F ) and overnight lows around 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) in the hottest month , August . Most days are sunny throughout the year . Winters are warm with an average high of 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) and overnight lows of 14 ° C ( 57 ° F ) in January , the coldest month . Precipitation , however , has been increasing in the last few decades , with accumulated rain reaching 94 @.@ 3 mm ( 3 @.@ 71 in ) per year . Dubai summers are also known for the moderate to high humidity level , which can make it uncomfortable for many . The highest recorded temperature in Dubai is 52 @.@ 1 ° C ( 126 ° F ) , reached in July 2002 . 
 = = Governance and politics = = 
 Dubai has been ruled by the Al Maktoum family since 1833 ; the emirate is an absolute monarchy with no elections ( other than the few thousand Dubai citizens participating in the electoral college for the Federal National Council of the UAE ) . The ruler , Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum , is also the Vice President and Prime Minister of the United Arab Emirates and member of the Supreme Council of the Union ( SCU ) . Dubai appoints 8 members in two @-@ term periods to the Federal National Council ( <unk> ) of the UAE , the supreme federal legislative body . 
