 The decision in Yates undermined the 1951 Dennis decision by holding that contemplation of abstract , future violence may not be prohibited by law , but that urging others to act in violent ways may be outlawed . Writing for the majority , Justice John Marshall Harlan introduced the notion of balancing society 's right of self @-@ preservation against the right to free speech . He wrote : 
 We are thus faced with the question whether the Smith Act prohibits advocacy and teaching of forcible overthrow as an abstract principle , divorced from any effort to instigate action to that end , so long as such advocacy or teaching is engaged in with evil intent . We hold that it does not .... In failing to distinguish between advocacy of forcible overthrow as an abstract doctrine and advocacy of action to that end , the District Court appears to have been led astray by the holding in Dennis that advocacy of violent action to be taken at some future time was enough . 
 Yates did not rule the Smith Act unconstitutional or even overrule the Dennis decision , but Yates limited the application of the Act to such a degree that it became nearly unenforceable . The Yates decision outraged some conservative members of Congress , who introduced legislation to limit judicial review of certain sentences related to sedition and treason , which did not pass . 
 = = = Membership clause = = = 
 Four years after the Yates decision , the Supreme Court reversed the conviction of another second @-@ tier CPUSA leader , John Francis Noto of New York , in the 1961 Noto v. United States case . Noto was convicted under the membership clause of the Smith Act , and he challenged the constitutionality of that clause on appeal . The membership clause was in the portion of the Smith Act that made it a crime " to organize or help to organize any society , group , or assembly of persons who teach , advocate , or encourage the overthrow or destruction of any government in the United States by force or violence ; or to be or become a member of , or affiliate with , any such society , group , or assembly of persons , knowing the purposes thereof ... " . In a unanimous decision , the court reversed the conviction because the evidence presented at trial was not sufficient to demonstrate that the Party was advocating action ( as opposed to mere doctrine ) of forcible overthrow of the government . On behalf of the majority , Justice Harlan wrote : 
 The evidence was insufficient to prove that the Communist Party presently advocated forcible overthrow of the Government not as an abstract doctrine , but by the use of language reasonably and ordinarily calculated to incite persons to action , immediately or in the future .... In order to support a conviction under the membership clause of the Smith Act , there must be some substantial direct or circumstantial evidence of a call to violence now or in the future which is both sufficiently strong and sufficiently pervasive to lend color to the otherwise ambiguous theoretical material regarding Communist Party teaching and to justify the inference that such a call to violence may fairly be imputed to the Party as a whole , and not merely to some narrow segment of it . 
 The decision did not rule the membership clause unconstitutional . In their concurring opinions , Justices Black and Douglas argued that the membership clause of the Smith Act was unconstitutional on its face as a violation of the First Amendment , with Douglas writing that " the utterances , attitudes , and associations in this case ... are , in my view , wholly protected by the First Amendment , and not subject to inquiry , examination , or prosecution by the Federal Government . " 
 = = = Final conviction = = = 
 In 1958 , the leader of the North Carolina branch of the CPUSA , Junius Scales , became the final CPUSA member convicted under the Smith Act , and the only one convicted after the Yates decision . Prosecutors pursued Scales ' case because he specifically advocated violent political action and gave demonstrations of martial arts skills . Scales was accused of violating the membership clause of the Smith Act , not the clause prohibiting advocacy of violence against the government . In his appeal to the Supreme Court , Scales contended that the 1950 McCarran Internal Security Act rendered the Smith Act 's membership clause ineffective , because the McCarran Act explicitly stated that membership in a communist party does not constitute a per se violation of any criminal statute . In 1961 , the Supreme Court , in a 5 – 4 decision , upheld Scales ' conviction , finding that the Smith Act membership clause was not obviated by the McCarran Act , because the Smith Act required prosecutors to prove first , that there was direct advocacy of violence ; and second , that the defendant 's membership was substantial and active , not merely passive or technical . Two Justices of the Supreme Court who had supported the Yates decision in 1957 , Harlan and Frankfurter , voted to uphold Scales ' conviction . 
 Scales was the only defendant convicted under the membership clause . All others were convicted of conspiring to overthrow the government . President Kennedy commuted his sentence on Christmas Eve , 1962 , making Scales the final Smith Act defendant released from prison . Scales is the only Supreme Court decision to uphold a conviction based solely upon membership in a political party . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Yates and Noto decisions undermined the Smith Act and marked the beginning of the end of CPUSA membership inquiries . When the trials came to an end in 1958 , 144 people had been indicted , resulting in 105 convictions , with cumulative sentences totaling 418 years and $ 435 @,@ 500 ( $ 3 @,@ 880 @,@ 753 in 2016 dollars ) in fines . Fewer than half the convicted communists served jail time . The Smith Act , 18 U.S.C. § <unk> , though amended several times , has not been repealed . 
 For two decades after the Dennis decision , free speech issues related to advocacy of violence were decided using balancing tests such as the one initially articulated in Dennis . In 1969 , the court established stronger protections for speech in the landmark case Brandenburg v. Ohio which held that " the constitutional guarantees of free speech and free press do not permit a State to forbid or proscribe advocacy of the use of force or of law violation except where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action " . Brandenburg is now the standard applied by the Court to free speech issues related to advocacy of violence . 
 The Smith Act trials decimated the leadership ranks of the CPUSA . Immediately after the 1949 trial , the CPUSA – alarmed at the undercover informants that had testified for the prosecution – initiated efforts to identify and exclude informers from its membership . The FBI encouraged these suspicions by planting fabricated evidence which suggested that many innocent Party members were FBI informants . Dennis attempted to provide leadership from inside the Atlanta penitentiary , but prison officials censored his mail and successfully isolated him from the outside world . Prison officials from the Lewisburg prison prevented Williamson from writing to anyone other than immediate family members . Lacking leadership , the CPUSA suffered from internal dissension and disorder , and by 1953 the CPUSA 's leadership structure was inoperative . In 1956 , Nikita Khrushchev revealed the reality of Stalin 's purges , causing many remaining CPUSA members to quit in disillusionment . By the late 1950s , the CPUSA 's membership had dwindled to 5 @,@ 000 , of whom over 1 @,@ 000 may have been FBI informants . 
 The defendants at the 1949 trial were released from prison in the mid @-@ 1950s . Gus Hall served as a Party leader for another 40 years ; he supported the policies of the Soviet Union , and ran for president four times from 1972 to 1984 . Eugene Dennis continued to be involved in the CPUSA and died in 1961 . Benjamin J. Davis died in 1964 . Jack <unk> , who continued working on the Daily Worker , died in 1966 . John Gates became disillusioned with the CPUSA after the revelation of Stalin 's Great Purge ; he quit the Party in 1958 and later gave a television interview to Mike Wallace in which he blamed the CPUSA 's " unshaken faith " in the Soviet Union for the organization 's downfall . 
 Henry Winston became co @-@ chair of the CPUSA ( with Hall ) in 1966 and was awarded the Order of the October Revolution by the Soviet Union in 1976 . After leaving prison , Carl Winter resumed Party activities , became editor of the Daily Worker in 1966 , and died in 1991 . Gil Green was released from Leavenworth prison in 1961 and continued working with the CPUSA to oppose the Vietnam War . Party leader William Z. Foster , 69 years old at the time of the 1949 trial , was never tried due to ill health ; he retired from the Party in 1957 and died in Moscow in 1961 . 
 John Williamson was released early , in 1955 , and deported to England , although he had lived in the United States since the age of ten . Irving Potash moved to Poland after his release from prison , then re @-@ entered the United States illegally in 1957 , and was arrested and sentenced to two years for violating immigration laws . Robert G. Thompson skipped bail , was captured in 1953 , and sentenced to an additional four years . He died in 1965 and U.S. Army officials refused him burial in Arlington National Cemetery . His wife challenged that decision , first losing in U.S. District Court and then winning in the Court of Appeals . Defense attorney George W. Crockett Jr. later became a Democratic congressman from Michigan . 
 = The Girl Who Waited = 
 " The Girl Who Waited " is the tenth episode of the sixth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , and was first broadcast on BBC One and BBC America on 10 September 2011 . It was written by Tom MacRae and was directed by Nick Hurran . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) takes his companions Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and her husband Rory ( Arthur Darvill ) to the planet <unk> for a holiday , but they find that the planet is on quarantine as the two @-@ hearted natives are susceptible to a deadly plague . Amy accidentally gets separated from the Doctor and Rory but when they try to rescue her they arrive 36 years later in her timeline . The older Amy does not trust the Doctor , who is forced to remain on the TARDIS as he also has two hearts , and will not allow the Doctor and Rory to leave and rescue her at the correct point in her timeline . 
 " The Girl Who Waited " featured little of the Doctor , due to multiple episodes being filmed at the same time . Gillan played the older version of herself and prosthetics were applied to make her appear older . The episode was filmed on a lower budget , and MacRae decided to make the main sets all white in colour . " The Girl Who Waited " was seen by 7 @.@ 6 million viewers in the UK and received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Doctor takes Rory and Amy to the planet <unk> , claiming it is a top holiday destination , but is unaware that the planet is suffering from a fatal plague , <unk> , that affects beings with two hearts and can kill them within a day . The native population has created " kindness centres " , where those infected by the plague are placed in one of several thousand accelerated time streams , allowing them to live out their lives whilst in communication with their loved ones through a large glass lens in the waiting room . On their arrival , Amy is separated from the Doctor and Rory , and becomes stuck in an accelerated time stream . As the Doctor and Rory discover Amy 's location , they are approached by one of the facility 's Handbots , a faceless white robot with human @-@ like hands . The Handbot explains the plague , and failing to recognise the Doctor or Rory as alien , attempts to administer a dose of medicine that would be fatal . The Doctor uses the glass lens to warn Amy of this , and tells her to wait for him in the kindness centre , promising to rescue her . The Doctor and Rory return to the TARDIS with the glass lens , which the Doctor uses to lock the time machine onto Amy 's timestream . Meanwhile , Amy discovers Interface , providing vocal control over the complex 's computer systems , and learns she can mask her presence from the Handbots using the emissions from the time engines driving the accelerated time streams . 
 The Doctor , unable to leave the TARDIS due to the plague , gives Rory the lens , his sonic screwdriver , and a pair of glasses through which the Doctor can see and communicate with Rory . Rory explores the complex , and runs into a group of Handbots . The robots are quickly defeated by an older and bitter Amy , who is now a vigilante with the aid of Interface , but has otherwise been unable to escape . She is angry with the Doctor , telling him she has been waiting 36 years for rescue . She has been alone except for a reprogrammed Handbot called " Rory " . The Doctor realises they have mistakenly latched onto the wrong time stream , and urges the older Amy to help find her younger self . She refuses , knowing that if the younger Amy is rescued , she will cease to exist . Though Rory considers saving the older Amy , the Doctor warns him that by taking her aboard the TARDIS , they will forgo any chance of rescuing the younger Amy . The Doctor discovers evidence of younger Amy nearby , and instructs Rory to use the lens to communicate with her , hoping that seeing the younger , crying Amy will convince the older one to help with the rescue . The older Amy remembers this discussion from when she was younger Amy and had failed to convince the older Amy to help . However , this time the younger Amy convinces the older Amy to change her mind by asking her to consider Rory . The older Amy agrees to help if the Doctor would take her too ; the Doctor promises to do so despite the difficulty in completing the action since the TARDIS will be unable to handle the paradox of having two Amys from different <unk> aboard together . 
 The Doctor temporarily brings the two Amys into the same time stream by having them synchronise their thoughts whilst having Rory manipulate the time engines . Rory 's glasses begin to malfunction due to feedback from the paradox , forcing the three of them to race through the complex amongst several Handbots to reach the TARDIS without the Doctor 's assistance . As they near its location , the older Amy falls back to protect the other two , but the younger Amy runs into a Handbot and is sedated . As the older Amy covers his back , Rory takes the younger Amy into the TARDIS . Once they are inside the Doctor slams the door behind them and admits to Rory that it is impossible for both Amys to exist in the same timestream . Rory must now choose which Amy he wants . Rory and the older Amy have a tearful farewell at the TARDIS door before the older Amy tells him to move on without her . The older Amy then allows herself to be taken by the Handbots . Amy wakes up and asks " Where is she ? " , and the Doctor leaves Rory to explain to her . 
 = = Production = = 
 Tom MacRae , the writer of the episode , had previously written the two @-@ parter " Rise of the Cybermen " / " The Age of Steel " for the second series , which featured the return of the Cybermen . As bringing back the Cybermen had limited plot opportunities and put MacRae in the " second seat " as a writer , he was pleased that he had the opportunity to do whatever he wanted . MacRae was proud of the finished script , calling it his " most accomplished piece of plotting ever " . The original title of the episode was " The Visitors ' Room " . This was changed to " Visiting Hour " and then " Kindness " . The episode , contrary to some reports , was never at any point titled " The Green Anchor " . " The Girl Who Waited " is a title that has been used to refer to Amy after she waited 12 years for the Doctor to return in " The Eleventh Hour " . Executive producer Beth Willis insisted that Amy 's speech about how Rory was the most beautiful man she had ever met make it into the final version . 
 " The Girl Who Waited " is designed as an episode in which the actor playing the Doctor is not required for much of the shooting — these have become known as " Doctor Lite " episodes . Established with the second series episode " Love & Monsters " because of the production schedule , it has become a tradition that continued with episodes such as " Blink " . MacRae enjoyed exploring Amy and Rory 's characters and their past , as the Doctor was " always to a certain extent mythic " which limited what could be explored with his character . In one draft of the script , the scene near the end in which Rory and the two Amys race to the TARDIS did not include Rory in person ; he was watching the scene from the lens . It also included a sequence that featured a Handbot 's hand being cut and continuing to walk by itself . With " The Girl Who Waited " being a lower @-@ budget episode , MacRae wrote for the <unk> Centre to be entirely white , and described the sets as " big white boxes " . He was pleased with the way it turned out , feeling that the all @-@ white added a " really interesting visual sense to it " . 
 The original idea was to have an older actress play the older Amy , but Karen Gillan volunteered to play the older version of her character with the aid of prosthetics . It was also decided that having Gillan play both characters would be more believable . Gillan developed different body @-@ language , vocal range and attitude for the new individual , whose character has changed after being left behind and in danger . To achieve this , Gillan studied with a voice coach and movement coach . Gillan also wore padding which affected her movement , and stated she spent " hours in make @-@ up " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Girl Who Waited " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 10 September 2011 and on the same date in the United States on BBC America . Overnight viewing figures showed that it was watched by six million viewers on BBC One , which was an improvement of 0 @.@ 5 million from the previous episode . The episode was also at the number one spot on BBC 's iPlayer , as reported the day after it aired . The episode later topped the iPlayer chart for September . Final consolidated ratings showed a time @-@ shift increase of 1 @.@ 6 million , bringing the total up to 7 @.@ 6 million viewers , up 530 @,@ 000 viewers on the previous episode , " Night Terrors " . The episode received an Appreciation Index of 85 , placing it in the " excellent " category . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode has received critical acclaim from critics . Dan Martin of The Guardian said that it contained " the series ' most tearjerking <unk> so far " and the " psychedelic premise [ gave ] the characters the chance to shine " . He praised Karen Gillan 's difference in performance as the old Amy and her improvement in performance since the previous series . Martin later called it a " damn near perfect episode " , rating it the best episode of the series , though the finale was not included in the list . Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph gave the episode four out of five stars , praising MacRae 's ability to overcome budget issues and deliver " quite a powerful and moving drama , with an ending that although inevitable still delivered a well of sadness " . He thought the older Amy 's " technical wizardry seemed a tad unlikely " ( she manages to scrounge up a sonic screwdriver while waiting for the Doctor ) but " the power of Gillan 's performance skated over any minor quibbles " . 
 In a review for The Independent , Neela Debnath said that " critics of the constant tampering with time will not like this episode " but " it is a cracker in terms of time paradoxes and the hypothetical moral dilemmas caused by said paradoxes " . She praised the character development of Rory and the dynamic between the trio that had not been seen with previous characters in the show , as well as " some great moments of comedy " . She also called it a " sumptuous visual delight " in the sets of the garden and the centre . IGN 's Matt Risley rated the episode 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , praising MacRae for straying away from a complicated time travel narrative and instead give " a simple yet refreshingly new examination of Amy Pond " . He also praised Karen Gillan 's climactic performance and director Nick Hurran . However , he criticised the " iffy time travel rules " and " <unk> " that ensured a slower pace . SFX magazine reviewer Nick Setchfield awarded " The Girl Who Waited " five out of five stars , praising Hurran as well as the performance of the three leads . Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times praised MacRae 's dialogue because " it works so beautifully and is delivered to perfection by Karen Gillan and Arthur Darvill " . He also commented on Gillan 's make @-@ up job for the older Amy , which " is brilliant in its subtlety " but wished her hair could have been " chopped or grey " . 
 Christopher Bahn of the A.V. Club was less positive about the episode , grading it as a B- . He praised the early scene where Amy was abandoned for the " zingy dialogue " but found himself " enjoying the cleverness of the explanation without really buying into it " . He expressed confusion at how the time @-@ shift worked and thought the problem was too thin to carry out the whole episode , and that Amy 's abandonment and love for Rory which was left " [ didn 't ] pull it off " . He thought that the two Amys seen in the mini episodes " Space " and " Time " were more fun to watch and the episode did not reveal anything new about Amy and Rory . However , he praised how the decision the Doctor had to make was portrayed . 
 The episode was nominated for the 2012 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( Short Form ) , though it lost to Neil Gaiman 's episode " The Doctor 's Wife " . 
 = French battleship Charles Martel = 
 The Charles Martel was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the French Navy built in the 1890s . She was laid down in April 1891 , launched in August 1893 , and completed in June 1897 . She was a member of a group of five broadly similar battleships , along with Carnot , Jauréguiberry , Bouvet , and Masséna , which were ordered in response to the British Royal Sovereign class . Like her half @-@ sisters , she was armed with a main battery of two 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns and two 274 mm ( 10 @.@ 8 in ) guns in individual turrets . She had a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Charles Martel spent her active career in the Mediterranean Squadron of the French fleet , first in the active squadron , and later in the Reserve Squadron . She regularly participated in fleet maneuvers , and in the 1901 exercises , the submarine Gustave <unk> hit her with a dummy torpedo , which was widely hailed in the press . Charles Martel was out of service by the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , and so she saw no action during the conflict . She was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1922 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Charles Martel was the first member of a group of five battleships built to a broadly similar design , but different enough to be considered unique vessels . Design specifications were identical for each of the ships , but different engineers designed each vessel . The ships were based on the previous battleship Brennus , but instead of mounting the main battery all on the centerline , the ships used the lozenge arrangement of the earlier vessel Magenta , which moved two of the main battery guns to single turrets on the wings . The five ships were built in response to the British Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships . 
 An earlier vessel , also named Charles Martel , was laid down in 1884 and cancelled under the tenure of Admiral Théophile Aube . The vessel , along with a sister ship named Brennus , was a modified version of the Marceau @-@ class ironclad battleships . After Aube 's retirement , the plans for the ships were entirely redesigned , though the later pair of ships are sometimes conflated with the earlier , cancelled designs . This may be due to the fact that both of the ships named Brennus were built in the same shipyard , and material assembled for the first vessel was used in the construction of the second . The two pairs of ships were , nevertheless , distinct vessels . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Charles Martel was 115 @.@ 49 meters ( 378 ft 11 in ) long between perpendiculars , and had a beam of 21 @.@ 64 m ( 71 ft 0 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 38 m ( 27 ft 6 in ) . She had a displacement of 11 @,@ 639 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 455 long tons ) . Her forecastle gave her a high freeboard forward , but her deck was cut down to the main deck level aft . She was equipped with two heavy military masts . She had a crew of 644 officers and enlisted men . 
 Charles Martel had two vertical triple expansion engines each driving a single screw , with steam supplied by twenty @-@ four Lagrafel d 'Allest water @-@ tube boilers . Her propulsion system was rated at 14 @,@ 900 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 100 kW ) , which allowed the ship to steam at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . As built , she could carry 650 t ( 640 long tons ; 720 short tons ) of coal , though additional space allowed for up to 980 t ( 960 long tons ; 1 @,@ 080 short tons ) in total . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Charles Martel 's main armament consisted of two Canon de 305 mm Modèle 1887 guns in two single @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft . She also mounted two Canon de 274 mm Modèle 1887 guns in two single @-@ gun turrets , one amidships on each side , sponsoned out over the tumblehome of the ship 's sides . Her secondary armament consisted of eight Canon de 138 @.@ 6 mm Modèle 1888 guns , which were mounted in single turrets at the corners of the superstructure . She also carried four 9 @-@ pounder quick @-@ firing guns , twelve 3 @-@ pounders , and eight 1 @-@ pounder revolving cannons . Her armament suite was rounded out by two 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , which were submerged in the ship 's hull . 
 The ship 's armor was constructed with nickel steel . The main belt was 460 mm ( 18 in ) thick amidships , and tapered down to 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) at the lower edge . On either end of the central citadel , the belt was reduced to 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) at the waterline and 250 mm on the lower edge ; the belt extended for the entire length of the hull . Above the belt was 101 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 in ) thick side armor . The main battery guns were protected with 380 mm ( 15 in ) of armor , and the secondary turrets had 101 mm thick sides . The main armored deck was 69 mm ( 2 @.@ 7 in ) thick . The conning tower had 230 mm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Career = = 
 Charles Martel was laid down in January April 1891 and launched in August 1893 . After completing fitting @-@ out work , she was commissioned into the French Navy in June 1897 . She was delayed in completing her sea trials , as her boiler tubes had to be replaced with a safer , weld @-@ less design , following an accident aboard Jauréguiberry with her welded tubes . Following her commissioning for service , she was assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron . In 1900 , she became the flagship of Rear Admiral <unk> , the commander of the Second Division of the Mediterranean Squadron . The Mediterranean Squadron , including Charles Martel , conducted an extensive cruise with the Northern Squadron in June – July 1900 , which culminated in a Grand Review of the fleet in Cherbourg at the end of July . During the 1901 maneuvers , Charles Martel was hit by a training torpedo fired by the submarine Gustave <unk> , which created an uproar in the press . 
 During early Summer 1902 , Charles Martel was transferred to the Reserve Squadron , along with three other battleships and three armored cruisers . The ship did not participate in the annual fleet maneuvers in July – August of the following year . She remained in the Reserve Squadron , which was renamed the Second Squadron in 1906 ; by that time , she was in the Second Division of the Squadron , under the command of Rear Admiral <unk> . The ship was maintained in a state of en <unk> <unk> , a state of reduced readiness with a minimal crew . Charles Martel was in full commission for three months of the year , and in reserve with a reduced crew for the remainder . She remained in this status for the duration of 1907 . 
 By the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Charles Martel had been laid up in the port of Brest , along with Carnot . Both ships were retained on the effective list , however , pending the completion of the new Normandie @-@ class battleships . Charles Martel was ultimately stricken from the naval register in 1922 and sold for scrapping that year . 
 = Economy of Scotland in the Middle Ages = 
 The economy of Scotland in the Middle Ages covers all forms of economic activity in the modern boundaries of Scotland , between the departure of the Romans from Northern Britain in the fifth century , until the advent of the Renaissance in the early sixteenth century , including agriculture , crafts and trade . Having between a fifth or sixth of the arable or good pastoral land and roughly the same amount of coastline as England and Wales , marginal pastoral agriculture and fishing were two of the most important aspects of the Medieval Scottish economy . With poor communications , in the early Middle Ages most settlements needed to achieve a degree of self @-@ sufficiency in agriculture . Most farms were operated by a family unit and used an infield and outfield system . 
 Arable farming grew in the High Middle Ages and agriculture entered a period of relative boom between the thirteenth century and late fifteenth century . Unlike England , Scotland had no towns dating from Roman occupation . From the twelfth century there are records of burghs , chartered towns , which became major centre of crafts and trade . There are also Scottish coins , although English coinage probably remained more significant in trade , and until the end of the period barter was probably the most common form of exchange . Craft and industry remained relatively undeveloped before the end of the Middle Ages and , although there were extensive trading networks based in Scotland , while the Scots exported largely raw materials , they imported increasing quantities of luxury goods , resulting in a bullion shortage and perhaps helping to create a financial crisis in the fifteenth century . 
 = = Background = = 
 Scotland is roughly half the size of England and Wales and has approximately the same amount of coastline , but only between a fifth and a sixth of the amount of the arable or good pastoral land , under 60 metres above sea level , and most of this is located in the south and east . This made marginal pastoral farming and fishing the key factors in the pre @-@ modern economy . Its north Atlantic position means that it has very heavy rainfall , which encouraged the spread of blanket peat bog , the acidity of which , combined with high level of wind and salt spray , made most of the western islands treeless . The existence of hills , mountains , quicksands and marshes made internal communication and conquest extremely difficult . 
 After the departure of the Romans from Northern Britain , in the fifth century four major circles of influence had emerged in what is now Scotland . In the east were the Picts , whose kingdoms eventually stretched from the river Forth to Shetland ; in the west the Gaelic ( Goidelic ) -speaking people of Dál Riata with their royal fortress at Dunadd in Argyll , with close links with the island of Ireland , from which they brought with them the name Scots ; in the south was the British ( Brythonic ) Kingdom of Alt Clut , descendants of the peoples of the Roman @-@ influenced kingdoms of " The Old North " ; finally , there were the Angles who had overrun much of southern Britain and held the Kingdom of Bernicia ( later the northern part of Northumbria ) , in the south @-@ east . This situation was transformed from the eighth century when ferocious Viking raids began . Orkney , Shetland and the Western Isles eventually fell to the Norsemen . These threats may have speeded a long term process of gaelicisation of the Pictish kingdoms , which adopted Gaelic language and customs and which probably facilitated a merger of the Gaelic and Pictish crowns . This culminated in the rise of Cínaed mac Ailpín ( Kenneth MacAlpin ) in the 840s , which brought to power the House of Alpin , who became the leaders of a combined Gaelic @-@ Pictish kingdom , known as the Kingdom of Alba and later as Scotland . 
 From the sixth century , Scotland experienced a process of Christianisation , traditionally seen as carried out by Irish @-@ Scots missionaries , including St Ninian , St Kentigern and St Columba and to a lesser extent those from Rome and England . However , Gilbert Markus highlights the fact that most of these figures were not church @-@ founders , but were usually were active in areas where Christianity had already become established , probably through gradual diffusion that is almost invisible in the historical record . This would have included trade , conquest and intermarriage . 
 There are almost no written sources from which to re @-@ construct the demography of Medieval Scotland . Estimates have been for the early period made of a population of 10 @,@ 000 inhabitants in Dál Riata and 80 – 100 @,@ 000 for Pictland , which was probably the largest region . From the formation of the Kingdom of Alba in the tenth century , to before the Black Death reached the country in 1349 , estimates based on the amount of farmable land , suggest that population may have grown from half a million to a million . Although there is no reliable documentation on the impact of the plague , if the pattern followed that in England , then the population may have fallen to as low as half a million by the end of the fifteenth century . 
 = = Agriculture = = 
 In the early Middle Ages , poor transport forced self @-@ sufficiency on small settlements . Lacking the urban centres created under the Romans in the rest of Britain , the economy of Scotland in the early Middle Ages was overwhelmingly agricultural . With a lack of significant transport links and wider markets , most farms had to produce a self @-@ sufficient diet of meat , dairy products and cereals , supplemented by hunter @-@ gathering . Limited archaeological evidence indicates that throughout Northern Britain , farming was done on single homesteads or amongst a small cluster of three or four homes . Each of these probably contained a nuclear family , with kinship relationships likely to be common among neighbouring houses and settlements , reflecting the partition of land through inheritance . A system was adopted that distinguished between the infield , around the settlement , where crops were grown every year , and the outfield , further away , where crops were grown and then left fallow in different years . This would be the predominant system until the eighteenth century . 
 The nature of agricultural production was determined by the land and climate . The cold and wet climate meant that more oats and barley were grown than corn . The evidence of bones indicates that cattle were by far the most important domesticated animal , followed by pigs , sheep and goats , while domesticated fowl were very rare . Bone evidence indicates that there was a significant growth in the fish trade around 1000 . This increased marine exploitation of the Highlands and Islands may have been as a result of the arrival of Scandinavian settlers in this period . 
 The early Middle Ages were a period of climatic deterioration , with a drop in temperature and an increase in rainfall , resulting in more land becoming unproductive . Climate change had a major impact on agriculture in this period and terms emerged to describe different quantities of land . In the period c . 1150 to 1300 , warm dry summers and less severe winters allowed cultivation at much greater heights above sea level and made land more productive . Arable farming grew significantly , but was still more common in low @-@ lying areas than in high @-@ lying areas such as the Highlands , Galloway and the Southern Uplands . The main unit of land measurement in Scotland was the ploughgate , also known as the davoch and in Lennox as the arachor . It may have measured about 104 acres ( 0 @.@ 42 km2 ) , divided into 4 raths . The average amount of land used by a husbandman in Scotland might have been around 26 acres . 
 Most farming was based on the lowland fermtoun or Highland baile , settlements of a handful of families that jointly farmed an area notionally suitable for two or three plough teams , allocated in run rigs to tenant farmers . They usually ran downhill so that they included both wet and dry land , helping to offset some of the problems of extreme weather conditions . Most ploughing was done with a heavy wooden plough with an iron coulter , pulled by oxen , which were more effective in heavy soils and cheaper to feed than horses . Obligations to the local lord usually included supplying oxen for ploughing the lord 's land on an annual basis and the much resented obligation to grind corn at the lord 's mill . 
 In the late Middle Ages , average temperatures began to reduce again , with cooler and wetter conditions limiting the extent of arable agriculture , particularly in the Highlands . The introduction of new monastic orders such as the Cistercians in this period also brought innovations in agriculture . Their monasteries became major landholders , particularly in the Borders . They were sheep farmers and producers of wool for the markets in Flanders . By the late Middle Ages , Melrose Abbey and the Earl of Douglas had about 15 @,@ 000 sheep apiece , making them among the largest sheep farmers in Europe . 
 New farming methods began to transform agriculture in some parts of the country . Monastic agriculture was organised in granges , farms run by lay brothers of the order . Granges were theoretically within 30 miles of the mother monastery , so that those working there could return for services on Sundays and feast days . They were used for variety of purposes , including pastoral , arable and industrial production . However , to manage more distant assets in Ayrshire , Melrose Abbey used Mauchline as a " super grange " , to oversee lesser granges . The rural economy appears to have boomed in the thirteenth century and was still buoyant in the immediate aftermath of the Black Death , which reached Scotland in 1349 , and may have carried off a third of the population . However , by the 1360s there was a severe falling off in incomes that can be seen in clerical benefices , of between a third and half compared with the beginning of the era , to be followed by a slow recovery in the fifteenth century . 
 = = Burghs = = 
 Records of burghs , small towns granted legal privileges from the crown , can be found from the eleventh century . Burghs ( a term derived from the Germanic word for fortress ) , developed rapidly during the reign of David I ( 1124 – 53 ) . Up until this point there were no identifiable towns in Scotland . Most of the burghs that were granted charters in his reign probably already existed as settlements . Charters were copied almost verbatim from those used in England , and early citizens , called burgesses , that were usually English or Flemish . They were able to impose tolls and fines on traders within a region outside their settlements . Most of the early burghs were on the east coast , and among them were the largest and wealthiest , including Aberdeen , Berwick , Perth and Edinburgh , whose growth was facilitated by trade with the European continent . In the south @-@ west , Glasgow , Ayr and Kirkcudbright were aided by the less @-@ profitable sea trade with Ireland , and to a lesser extent France and Spain . 
 Burghs had unique layouts and economic functions . They were typically were surrounded by a palisade or possessed a castle , and usually had a marketplace , with a widened high street or junction , often marked by a mercat cross ( market cross ) , beside houses for the burgesses and other inhabitants . The foundations of around 15 burghs can be traced to the reign of David I and there is evidence of 55 burghs by 1296 . In addition to the major royal burghs , the late Middle Ages saw the proliferation of baronial and ecclesiastical burghs , with 51 being created between 1450 and 1516 . Most of these were much smaller than their royal counterparts . Excluded from international trade they mainly acted as local markets and centres of craftsmanship . In general , burghs probably carried out far more local trading with their hinterlands than nationally or internationally , relying on them for food and raw materials . 
 = = Manufacture and trade = = 
 While burghs acted as centres of basic crafts . These included the manufacture of shoes , clothes , dishes , pots , joinery , bread and ale , which would normally be sold to inhabitants and visitors on market days . However , there were relatively few developed manufacturing industries in Scotland for most of this period . By the late fifteenth century , there were the beginnings of a native iron @-@ casting industry , which led to the production of cannon and of the silver and goldsmithing for which the country would later be known . As a result , the most important exports were unprocessed raw materials , including wool , hides , salt , fish , animals and coal , while Scotland remained frequently short of wood , iron and , in years of bad harvests , grain , which was imported in large quantities , particularly from the Baltic ports , through Berwick and Ayr . 
 Limited sources indicate for the early Middle Ages indicate that there was some trade of luxury goods with continental Europe . For most of the period there are not the detailed custom accounts that exist for England , that can provide an understanding of foreign trade , with the first records for Scotland dating to the 1320s . In the early Middle Ages , the rise of Christianity meant that wine and precious metals were imported for use in religious rites , and there are occasional references of trips to and from foreign countries , such as the incident recorded by Adomnán in which St Columba went to a port to await ships bearing news , and presumably other items , from Italy . Imported goods found in archaeological sites of the period include ceramics and glass , while many sites indicate iron and precious metal working . 
 In the High Middle Ages , although the Scottish economy was still dominated by agriculture and by short @-@ distance , local trade , there was an increasing amount of foreign trade . Coins were replacing barter goods , with Scottish coins being struck from the reign of David I. Mints were established at Berwick , Roxburgh , Edinburgh and Perth , but until the end of the period most exchange was done without the use of metal currency , and English coins probably outnumbered Scottish ones . Until the disruption caused by the outbreak of the Wars of Independence in the early fourteenth century , most naval trade was probably coastal and most foreign trade was with England . The wars closed English markets and raised the levels of piracy and disruption to naval trade on both sides . They may have led to an increase in continental trade , and isolated references indicate that Scottish ships were active in Norway and Danzig , and the earliest records from the 1330s indicate that five @-@ sixths of this trade was in the hands of Scottish merchants . 
 Wool and hides were the major exports in the late Middle Ages . From 1327 to 1332 , the earliest period for which figures survive , the annual average was 5 @,@ 700 sacks of wool and 36 @,@ 100 leather hides . The disruption of the Wars of Independence , which not only limited trade but damaged much of the valuable agricultural land of the Borders and Lowlands , meant that this fell in the period 1341 – 42 to 1342 – 43 to 2 @,@ 450 sacks of wool and 17 @,@ 900 hides . The trade recovered to reach a peak in the 1370s , with an annual average of 7 @,@ 360 sacks , but the international recession from the 1380s saw a reduction to an annual average of 3 @,@ 100 sacks . The introduction of sheep @-@ scab was a serious blow to the wool trade from the early fifteenth century . Despite a levelling @-@ off , in the Low Countries there was another drop in exports as the markets collapsed in the early @-@ sixteenth century . Unlike in England , this did not prompt the Scots to turn to large @-@ scale cloth production and only poor @-@ quality rough cloths seem to have been significant . 
 Exports of hides and particularly salmon , where the Scots held a decisive advantage in quality over their rivals , appear to have held up much better than wool , despite the general economic downturn in Europe in the aftermath of the Black Death . Exports of hides averaged 56 @,@ 400 a year from 1380 to 1384 , but fell to an average of 48 @,@ 000 over the next five years and to 34 @,@ 200 by the end of the century . In the late Middle Ages , the growing desire among the court , lords , upper clergy and wealthier merchants for luxury goods , that largely had to be imported ( including fine cloth from Flanders and Italy ) , led to a chronic shortage of bullion . This , and perennial problems in royal finance , led to several debasements of the coinage , with the amount of silver in a penny being cut to almost a fifth between the late fourteenth century and the late fifteenth century . The heavily debased " black money " , introduced in 1480 , had to be withdrawn two years later and may have helped fuel a financial and political crisis . 
 = Roads to Vegas = 
 " Roads to Vegas " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the eleventh season and the 209th overall episode of Family Guy . It follows Brian and Stewie as they head off to Vegas using a teleporting machine , which malfunctions and creates clones of themselves . The episode , which is the seventh in the series of Road to ... episodes , originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 19 , 2013 , airing before the episode " No Country Club for Old Men " . Together , the two episodes were promoted as being the season finale . 
 First announced at the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , the episode was written by Steve Callaghan and directed by Greg Colton . The episode received generally positive reviews from critics upon release . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 5 @.@ 28 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances from Alexandra Breckenridge , Ralph Garman , Gary Janetti , Joe Lomonaco , Patrick Meighan , Emily Osment , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin , and John Viener . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the Quahog Gay Pride Day festivities , in a raffle sponsored by Weenie and the Butt , Brian wins tickets to see Celine Dion in Las Vegas . As they prepare to travel , Stewie convinces Brian to use the new teleportation device he has been working on instead . Stewie 's device appears to have malfunctioned , and he believes it failed to work , when it instead created a duplicate set of Brian and Stewie which was teleported to Vegas . The real Brian and Stewie then travel by plane to Vegas . As the duplicated pair check into the Bellagio hotel , their luck makes itself present immediately with the duplicated Brian winning a large jackpot at the slot machines near the entrance . The real Brian and Stewie arrive to find their room has been already taken . As the duplicated pair have the time of their lives , the real pair find themselves in a third @-@ rate hotel . Trying their luck , they quickly lose all of the money they brought . 
 The real Brian is ready to go home but Stewie admits that he already gambled away their return tickets . Brian admits that he cannot call for help after taking money from Lois . Using money they got from a loan shark , they bet on a basketball game and lose yet again . Preparing to leave , the duplicated pair sitting nearby accidentally take the empty backpack from the unlucky pair , while the real Stewie takes the duplicated pair 's backpack , which is full of money . 
 As the pairs go their separate ways , an enforcer for the loan shark catches up with the duplicated pair to get the money back and they discover they have no cash . The enforcer orders Brian to decide whether he kills him or Stewie . Brian initially refuses to choose but when he panics , he tells the enforcer to shoot Stewie in the head , killing him . Meanwhile , the real pair worry about getting caught or endangering the family . Stewie suggests that perhaps they should kill themselves and Brian reluctantly agrees . They prepare to throw themselves off the top balcony of the hotel but Stewie chickens out at the last second , leaving Brian to fall to his death . A panic @-@ stricken Stewie trips over his backpack and finds the money the other pair had won . 
 Returning home the next day , the duplicated Brian and real Stewie bump into each other at the bus terminal . Stewie realizes that the device had made clones of themselves . After deceiving each other about how their respective friend 's deaths transpired , the lucky Brian and unlucky Stewie return home , while the dead Stewie and Brian greet each other coldly at the pearly gates of Heaven . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 " Roads to Vegas " is the seventh episode of the series ' Road to .. hallmark which air through various seasons of the show . The episode was directed by Greg Colton , who previously directed the Road to ... episodes " Road to Germany " , " Road to the Multiverse " , and " Road to the North Pole " . It was written by Family Guy veteran Steve Callaghan . " Roads to Vegas " is Callaghan 's first writing credit for a Road to ... episode . 
 In July 2012 , the Family Guy panel first announced the episode at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International by giving a brief plot outline . The episode was revealed as the penultimate episode of the series ' eleventh season , airing before the premiere of " No Country Club for Old Men " . Together , the two episodes were promoted as the season finale . On a press release , the Fox Network then officially announced the episode and described it as : 
 Stewie and Brian use Stewie 's time machine to go to Las Vegas for a Bette Midler concert , but chaos ensues when the machine malfunctions and creates alt @-@ versions of the pair : a " lucky " version and an " unlucky " one . 
 Production of the episode began months in advance according to the episode 's writer Steve Callaghan . " We 're actually working over a year ahead of time , " Callaghan says in an interview with Hollywood.com. He added " We work so far ahead I can even tell you the finale [ ... ] the finale is a really cool episode called ' Roads to Vegas . ' It 's like a road show and Stewie and Brian teleport themselves to Las Vegas , but in the process [ they ] unknowingly create a duplicate of one another . " In an interview with The Hollywood Reporter , Callaghan recalled the scene in the episode where Brian and Stewie consider joint suicide the most difficult scene for him to write in 2012 . 
 In addition to the regular cast , " Roads to Vegas " featured guest performances from actress Alexandra Breckenridge , actor Ralph Garman , voice actor Joe Lomonaco , and actress and singer Emily Osment . Recurring voice actors and series writers Gary Janetti , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin , and John Viener also made minor appearances throughout " Roads to Vegas " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During its original airing , the episode was viewed by a total of 5 @.@ 28 million viewers according to Nielsen ratings . This made it the most viewed episode to premiere that night on Fox 's Animation Domination , edging out two episodes of The Cleveland Show and two episodes of The Simpsons . The episode received a 2 @.@ 6 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews . Kevin McFarland of The A.V. Club gave the episode a B + and said that it " isn 't typically as heavy on the usual stock jokes that weigh the show down , and the adventures of Brian and Stewie drive more interest than most other characters . " Carter Dotson of TV Fanatic gave the episode a 4 @.@ 4 rating and called the episode and its sister episode , " No Country Club for Old Men " , " a perfect representation of the wild extremes of this season . " He added " it wasn 't the funniest episode , but the way the parallel stories worked and intertwined was at least extremely interesting , lacking much of the lazy humor that at times plagued this season . Mark Trammell of TV Equals said " All in all , an okay episode that benefited from the combination approach , but MacFarlane might want to retire both the time travel stuff and the " road picture " <unk> after this one , as the well is clearly running dry [ ... ] To tell the truth , I didn 't laugh as much as I wanted to " . 
 = Insanity in English law = 
 Insanity in English law is a defence to criminal charges based on the idea that the defendant was unable to understand what he was doing , or , that he was unable to understand that what he was doing was wrong . 
 The defence comes in two forms ; where the defendant claims he was insane at the time of the crime , and where the defendant asserts he is insane at the time of trial . In the first situation , the defendant must show that he was either suffering from a disease which damaged the functioning of the mind and led to a defect of reason that prevented him from understanding what he was doing , or that he could not tell that what he was doing was wrong . In the second situation , the test is whether or not the defendant can differentiate between " guilty " and " not guilty " verdicts , instruct counsel and recognise the charges he is facing . If successful , he is likely to be detained under the Criminal Procedure ( Insanity ) Act 1964 , although judges have a wide discretion as to what to do . 
 Use of insanity as a concept dates from 1324 , and its criminal application was used until the late 16th century in an almost identical way . The defence , if successful , either allowed the defendant to return home or led to him being incarcerated until he was granted a royal pardon ; after 1542 , a defendant who became insane prior to the trial could not be tried for any crime , up to and including high treason . During the 18th century the test to determine insanity became extremely narrow , with defendants required to prove that they could not distinguish between good and evil and that they suffered from a mental disease which made them incapable of understanding the consequences of their actions . The current wording comes from the M 'Naghten Rules , based on the trial of Daniel M 'Naghten in 1843 . 
 The defence of insanity has been subject to intense criticism , particularly from the Butler Committee , which noted that the rules were " based on too limited a concept of the nature of mental disorder " , highlighting " the outmoded language of the M 'Naghten Rules which gives rise to problems of interpretation " and that the rules were " based on the now obsolete belief in the pre @-@ eminent role of reason in controlling social behaviour ... [ the rules ] are not therefore a satisfactory test of criminal responsibility " . The Committee proposed reform of the law in 1975 , followed by a draft bill from the Law Commission in 1989 ; so far , these have both been ignored by successive governments . 
 = = History = = 
 The idea of insanity in English law dates from 1324 , when the Statute de <unk> Regis allowed the King to take the lands of idiots and lunatics . The early law used various words , including " idiot " , " fool " and " <unk> " to refer to those who had been insane since birth , and " lunatic " for those who had later become insane , or were insane with some lucid intervals . In the criminal law , insanity was used as a defence in a roughly identical way from this point until the late 16th century ; if an insane person commits a crime , he was not punished in the same way that a sane felon who committed the same crime would be . This was for several reasons ; firstly , the cruel punishment usually meted out to felons to set an example would not have the same effect on the insane . Secondly , as felonies required a mens rea , an insane person could not be guilty because they did not have the capacity to hold a mens rea . Thirdly , the phrase <unk> solo <unk> <unk> was used ; " a lunatic was punished by his madness alone " . 
 In many cases , the insane defendant was released and allowed to go home ; in some , he was held in prison until the King decided to grant him a pardon . A lunatic who became insane prior to the trial could not be executed , nor , after 1542 , trialled for felonies up to and including high treason . It was then established that somebody found not guilty due to insanity should be immediately released ; up until the beginning of the 19th century , this was almost all that could be done , although the Vagrancy Act 1714 allowed two Justices of the Peace to confine a dangerous lunatic . The test of insanity was extremely narrow ; defendants had to prove that they were incapable of distinguishing between good and evil , and , following the trial of John Firth in 1790 , that they suffered from a mental disease which made them incapable of " forming a judgment upon the consequences of [ their ] actions " . 
 = = = Trial of James Hadfield = = = 
 On 15 May 1800 , James Hadfield attempted to assassinate George III ; he had come to believe that the second coming of Christ would be brought about by his own death , and therefore attempted to be judicially executed . Hadfield approached the King in the royal box at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , firing a pistol at him ; however , the King was bowing to the audience at the time , and the shot passed over his head . He was tried on 26 June 1800 at the Court of King 's Bench , and his counsel , Thomas Erskine , argued that although Hadfield 's planning of the attack meant that the normal defence of insanity would not have been sufficient , the true test of insanity is delusions and " frenzy or raving madness " , which Hadfield suffered from . Several medical experts testified that Hadfield 's injuries at the Battle of Tourcoing , where he was repeatedly struck in the head by a sabre , had caused insanity , and Lord Kenyon immediately sent the jury away to reach a decision . Their verdict was " not guilty ; he being under the influence of insanity at the time the act was committed " , the first time a jury had been asked to give a reason for their decision and the origins of the phrase " not guilty by reason of insanity " . 
 The result of the case was the Criminal Lunatics Act 1800 ; Parliament , concerned that similar criminals could be allowed to go free , provided that somebody found " not guilty by reason of insanity " should be remanded in custody until granted a royal pardon . The 1800 Act also put limits on what crimes a defence of insanity could be used for . Prior to the Act , it could be used in any case , but the new legislation limited the defence to indictable offences . 
 = = = The M 'Naghten Case = = = 
 On 20 January 1843 , Daniel M 'Naghten attempted to assassinate Robert Peel , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom . Approaching a man he believed to be Peel , M 'Naghten fired into his back , in fact killing Edward Drummond , Peel 's secretary . Immediately arrested , he was charged with murder and tried on 3 March 1843 at the Old Bailey . He was assisted in his defence by two solicitors , four barristers including Alexander Cockburn and nine medical experts , along with eight lay witnesses . Both sides agreed that M 'Naghten was insane ; the question was what constituted a valid legal defence of insanity . The judges decided that " every man is presumed to be sane , and to possess a sufficient degree of reason to be responsible for his crimes , until the contrary be proved to their satisfaction ; and that to establish a defence on the ground of insanity , it must be clearly proved that , at the time of the committing of the act , the party accused was labouring under such a defect of reason , from disease of the mind , as not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing ; or , if he did know it , that he did not know what he was doing was wrong " , which was boiled down to " did the defendant know what he was doing , and if so , that what he was doing was wrong ? " . This established the M 'Naghten Rules , which remain the principal method of deciding insanity in English law . 
 = = = Trial of Lunatics Act 1883 = = = 
 The Trial of Lunatics Act 1883 was the next development in the law , allowing the jury to return a verdict that the defendant was guilty , but insane at the time , and should be kept in custody as a " criminal lunatic " . This Act was passed at the request of Queen Victoria , who , the target of frequent attacks by mentally ill individuals , demanded that the verdict be changed from " not guilty " so as to act as a deterrent to other lunatics ; the phrasing of " guilty of the act or omission charged , but insane so as not to be responsible , according to law , for his actions . " remained in use until the Criminal Procedure ( Insanity ) Act 1964 . 
 = = Current law = = 
 Under the current law there are two applications of the insanity defence ; where it is claimed that the defendant was insane at the time that he committed the crime , and where it is claimed that he was insane at the time of the trial and thus unable to effectively defend himself . The defence is most commonly used in the Crown Court , since it was previously believed that it required a jury ; in DPP v Harper [ 1997 ] , it was decided that the defence could also be applied in the Magistrates ' Court . 
 = = = Insanity at the time of the crime = = = 
 Where the defendant is alleged to have been insane at the time of committing the offence , this issue can be raised in one of three ways ; the defendant can claim he was insane , the defendant can raise a defence of <unk> where the judge decides it was instead insanity , or the defendant can raise a plea of diminished responsibility , where the judge or prosecution again show that insanity is more appropriate . Whatever the way in which a plea of insanity is reached , the same test is used each time , as laid out in the M 'Naghten Rules ; " to establish a defence on the ground of insanity , it must be clearly proved that , at the time of the committing of the act , the party accused was labouring under such a defect of reason , from disease of the mind , as not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing ; or , if he did know it , that he did not know what he was doing was wrong " . 
 " Disease of the mind " is not a medical term ; it instead means that the defendant must show he was suffering from a disease which affected the functioning of the mind , which does not necessarily have to be a disease of the brain . This was confirmed in the case of R v Kemp [ 1957 ] 1 QB 399 , where the defendant 's arteriosclerosis led to him assaulting his wife while unconscious . It must then be shown that this disease of the mind led to a " defect of reason " ; that the defendant 's ability to reason was impaired by the disease . Alternately , the defendant can try to show that he did not know " the nature or quality of his act or that it was wrong " . The first requires proof that the defendant did not know what he was doing ; that he had no awareness of what he was happening , that he was unaware of the consequences of his act or that he knew what he was doing , but was deluded as to the circumstances ; for the latter , Jonathan Herring gives the example of a man who " thought he was killing a monstrous person when he was in fact killing a person " . When arguing that the defendant was " not knowing the act was wrong " , " wrong " is taken to mean " illegal " , as set out in R v Windle [ 1952 ] 2 QB 826 . 
 = = = Insanity at the time of the trial = = = 
 If a defendant at the time of trial claims he is insane , this hinges on whether or not he is able to understand the charge , the difference between " guilty " and " not guilty " and is able to instruct his lawyers . If he is unable to do these things , he can be found " unfit to plead " under Section 4 of the Criminal Procedure ( Insanity ) Act 1964 . In that situation , the judge has wide discretion as to what to do with the defendant , except in cases of murder , where he must be detained in hospital . 
 = = Criticism and attempted reform = = 
 The law in this area is often criticised because it sets a legal standard for insanity , not a medical one . In R v Quick and <unk> [ 1973 ] QB 910 , for example , the courts decided that an assault committed when the defendant was suffering from hypoglycemia due to the taking of insulin was not insane in nature , while in R v <unk> [ 1989 ] 1 WLR 287 it was held that a crime committed while the defendant was suffering from hyperglycemia did constitute insanity . As a result , the existing law allows some diabetics to be acquitted while others are declared insane , something one academic describes as " absurd " . In R v Sullivan , a man was charged with grievous bodily harm under the Offences against the Person Act 1861 after assaulting his friend during an epileptic seizure . The House of Lords ruled that Sullivan was indeed insane , and that " it does not lie within the power of the courts to alter [ the insanity test ] " . Some critics have professed " unease " at the powers of the courts to confine people found not guilty by reason of insanity in mental hospitals , arguing that discussion of mental health should be limited to the mens rea of the crime ; if the mental condition of the defendant voided the offence 's mens rea , he should be acquitted . 
 The Butler Committee 's report in 1975 submitted the law of insanity to intense criticism , saying that it is " based on too limited a concept of the nature of mental disorder " , noting " the outmoded language of the M 'Naghten Rules which gives rise to problems of interpretation " and that the rules were " based on the now obsolete belief in the pre @-@ eminent role of reason in controlling social behaviour ... [ the rules ] are not therefore a satisfactory test of criminal responsibility " . An additional criticism given is that the defence puts the burden of proof onto the defendant , while in all other cases the burden is on the prosecution . The Butler Committee proposed reform , which was repeatedly ignored by successive governments ; the Law Commission drafted a Criminal Code Bill in 1989 which altered the rules on insanity , but this was again ignored . 
 = Odense = 
 Odense ( Danish pronunciation : [ <unk> ̩ <unk> ] ) is the third @-@ largest city in Denmark . It has a population of 175 @,@ 245 as of January 2016 , and is the main city of the island of Funen . By road , Odense is located 45 kilometres ( 28 mi ) north of Svendborg , 144 kilometres ( 89 mi ) to the south of Aarhus and 167 kilometres ( 104 mi ) to the southwest of Copenhagen . The city is the seat of Odense Municipality and was the seat of Odense County until 1970 , and Funen County from 1970 until 1 January 2007 , when Funen County became part of the Region of Southern Denmark . Odense has close associations with Hans Christian Andersen who is remembered above all for his fairy tales . He was born in the city in 1805 and spent his childhood years there . 
 There has been human settlement in the Odense area for over 4 @,@ 000 years , although the name was not mentioned in writing until 988 , and by 1070 , it had already grown into a thriving city . Canute IV of Denmark , generally considered to be the last Viking king , was murdered by unruly peasants in Odense 's St Alban 's Priory on 10 July 1086 . Although the city was burned in 1249 following a royal rivalry , it quickly recovered and flourished as a centre of commerce in the Middle Ages . After a period of decline , large @-@ scale plans for development were made during the 18th century , which led to the rebuilding of Odense Palace and the building of a canal to the Port of Odense , facilitating trade . In 1865 , one of the largest railway terminals in Denmark was built , further increasing the population and commerce , and by 1900 , Odense had reached a population of 35 @,@ 000 . Odense 's Odinstårnet was one of the tallest towers in Europe when built in 1935 but was destroyed by the Nazis during World War II . The University of Southern Denmark was established in 1966 . 
 In the present day , Odense remains the commercial hub of Funen , and has a notable shopping district with a diversity of stores . Several major industries are located in the city including the Albani Brewery and <unk> , Denmark 's major dealer in vegetables , fruits and flowers . The city is home to Odense Palace , erected by King Frederik IV who died there in 1730 , the Odense Theatre , the Odense Symphony Orchestra , and the Hans Christian Andersen Museum , situated in the house that was the birthplace of Hans Christian Andersen . In sports , Odense has a number of football clubs including OB , BM , <unk> , and B1913 , the Odense Bulldogs professional ice hockey team , and the city also hosts the H.C. Andersen Marathon . Odense is served by Hans Christian Andersen Airport and Odense station , which lies on the line between Copenhagen and the Jutland peninsula . 
 = = History = = 
 For the Catholic ecclesiastical history , see Roman Catholic bishopric of Odense 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The name Odense is derived from <unk> Vé , meaning " Odin 's sanctuary " as the area was known as a sanctuary for worshippers of the Nordic god , Odin . 
 Odense is one of Denmark 's oldest cities . Archaeological excavations in the vicinity show proof of settlement for over 4 @,@ 000 years since at least the Stone Age . The earliest community was centred on the higher ground between the Odense River to the south and <unk> Lake ( now dry ) to the north . <unk> , one of Denmark 's former Viking ring fortresses , lay to the south of the river . Today , Odense 's <unk> Museum has many artefacts related to the early Viking history in the Odense area . The Vikings built numerous fortifications along the river banks to defend it against invaders coming in from the coast . 
 The city celebrated its thousandth anniversary in 1988 , commemorating the first mention of the town 's name in a letter dated 18 March 988 from the German Emperor Otto III which granted rights to Odense and neighbouring settlements . The first church in Odense appears to have been St Mary 's , probably built in the late 12th century . The territory , previously part of the vast Archbishopric of Hamburg , was created a Catholic diocese in 988 . The first recorded bishops of Odense were <unk> Hvide and <unk> , who was consecrated by Archbishop Æthelnoth of Canterbury , in 1022 . 
 Recent excavations have shown that from the early 11th century , the town developed in the area around Albani Torv , <unk> , <unk> and Vestergade . By 1070 , Odense had already grown into a city of stature in Denmark . Canute IV of Denmark , generally considered to be the last Viking king , was murdered by unruly peasants , discontent with the high taxes he imposed on the town , in Odense 's St Alban 's Priory on 10 July 1086 . He was canonized in 1100 . The priory no longer exists , although a church has been situated on the site since about 900 . At the beginning of the 12th century , Benedictine monks from England founded St Canute 's Abbey . It was here the English monk <unk> wrote Denmark 's first literary work , Vita et Passio S. <unk> ( The Life and Passion of St Canute ) . Canute 's shrine in Odense Cathedral ( which was attached to the priory ) attracted pilgrims throughout the Middle Ages . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 In the Middle Ages , a number of churches and monasteries were built in the town . St Canute 's Church ( <unk> . <unk> Kirke ) , now the cathedral , dates from the end of the 13th century and was closely connected to the Benedictine Order . The town 's other old churches are St Mary 's ( Vor Frue Kirke ) and St John 's ( <unk> . Hans Kirke ) with its adjacent monastery . Greyfriars Monastery ( <unk> <unk> ) was founded by the Franciscans in 1279 . 
 In 1247 Odense was burned by Abel of Denmark during conflicts with his brother King Erik IV . The cathedral had to be completely rebuilt . Nevertheless , the town continued to flourish as a commercial centre , and was charted in 1335 . The city thrived economically during the Middle Ages , attracting many merchants and craftsman who traded their goods . 
 In 1482 Bishop Karl <unk> brought the German printer Johann Snell to Odense to print a short prayer book , Breviarium <unk> , considered to be the first work to be printed in Scandinavia . In parallel Snell printed De <unk> et bello <unk> , an account of the Turkish siege of the island of Rhodes . 
 After the Danish Reformation , involving the suppression of the Catholic bishopric in 1536 , the city enjoyed a sustained period of prosperity from the 1530s to the mid @-@ 17th century , becoming northern Funen 's commercial centre . One of the main sources of income was the sale of cattle , providing substantial funds for the construction of fine half @-@ timbered houses for the local merchants . The local nobility also participated in the city 's development by building residences where they spent the winter months . But the city 's prosperity came to an abrupt end in the late 1650s heavy taxes were imposed after the end of the Swedish Wars . A period of stagnation ensued until the end of the 18th century . 
 From the 16th century the town was the meeting @-@ place of several parliaments , and until 1805 Odense was the seat of the provincial assembly of Funen . By 1700 Odense 's population was about 4 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Dramatic changes began in Odense in the 18th century to modernise the city and a great plan was drawn up for development . In 1720 , Frederick IV ordered the rebuilding of Odense Palace , partly on the foundations of the 13th century St. Hans ’ s Monastery , and the construction of St Hans ’ s Church by the Knights Hospitallers . An 8 kilometre ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) long , 7 @.@ 5 metre ( 25 ft ) deep canal from Odense Harbour to Odense Fjord was built between 1796 and 1806 to facilitate the growth of Odense as a port city , radically increasing its level of trade and population . Founded in 1796 , Odense Teater is the first provincial theatre in Denmark and the country 's second oldest . Odense Central Library was established in 1924 and removed to Odense station in 1995 . The Odense Music Library contains Denmark 's largest collection of phonograms . 
 From the 1840s , the city enjoyed a period of rapid expansion beyond its traditional boundaries , becoming Denmark 's second largest city . The city gates were demolished in 1851 and soon afterwards development extended to the area south of the river . Glove production , which had begun in the 18th century , developed into one of the most important industries while the harbour facilities were further expanded . In 1853 Denmark 's first modern water and gas works were opened in Odense . Commerce was further boosted by the building of a railway across Funen in 1865 , and Odense became one of Denmark 's largest rail junctions . All this provided an ideal basis for industrialisation , attracting a wide range of industries including iron and metals , textiles , and food and beverages . Separate areas of the city were devoted to increased industrial and residential expansion , and the population of the city began to grow markedly ; by 1900 it had 35 @,@ 000 inhabitants . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 Odense 's most famous landmark was Odinstårnet ( The Odin Tower ) constructed in 1935 , as the second @-@ tallest tower in Europe , only surpassed by the Eiffel Tower with its 177 meters . Odinstårnet was blown up by a Danish Nazi group in 1944 and has never been rebuilt . However , a miniature model now stands in <unk> in the area where the original was located . During the German occupation in the Second World War , Odense 's general strike in August 1943 contributed to terminating collaboration with the Germans . 
 Until the beginning of the Danish industrial revolution , Odense was also the second @-@ largest city in modern Denmark , but has in recent times been overtaken by Aarhus . From the 1960s Odense increasingly became a cultural hub , with the establishment of a university in 1966 and the launching of trade shows , including the large Odense Congress Centre . In 1988 a major national television network , TV2 , was established in Odense . 
 In celebration of the thousandth anniversary in 1988 , a forest , <unk> ( meaning " The Thousand Year Forest " ) was planted . In 2005 the city celebrated the 200th anniversary of the birth of Hans Christian Andersen . 
 The Odense Steel Shipyard ( <unk> ) , which since 1996 had been Denmark 's largest shipbuilding facility , closed in 2012 as a result of international competition . Opened in 1919 by A.P. Møller , it latterly produced container ships for <unk> , the parent company . The Lindø site was sold to the Port of Odense ( Odense Havn ) who are developing the Lindø Industrial Park . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Odense is situated in the northeastern centre of the island of Funen . By road , Odense is located 45 kilometres ( 28 mi ) north of Svendborg , 144 kilometres ( 89 mi ) to the south of Aarhus , 167 kilometres ( 104 mi ) to the southwest of Copenhagen , 136 kilometres ( 85 mi ) east of Esbjerg and 69 kilometres ( 43 mi ) southeast of Kolding . Suburbs of Odense include <unk> to the north , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> to the northeast , <unk> to the west , <unk> to the southwest , and <unk> <unk> and <unk> to the south . 
 The Odense River flows through Odense , to the south of the main shopping quarter . To the northeast of the city is the Odense Fjord , and to the northeast , along the 165 road to Kerteminde is Kerteminde Fjord . The fjord is accessed through the narrow passage of <unk> , between Hals and Skoven , and is connected by canal to the Port of Odense . The small fishing village of <unk> lies 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) to the southeast of the passage . A controlling depth of 11 metres ( 36 ft ) is reported in the northern part of channel between the entrance to the fjord and Lindo Terminal Quay . The bight of Fyns Hoved to the northeast of the harbour curves south to form the approach to Odense Fjord . The eastern side of the bight between Fyns Hoved and Skoven , 5 @.@ 5 metres ( 18 ft ) to the south , is irregular , with a beach and hills behind it , and to the south of the bight is the small , shallow <unk> Bay , with the <unk> Light in the vicinity . Skoven is a bare , rugged peninsula , with Dalby Bay ( Dalby Bugt ) to the east . 
 In the southwestern part of the Odense Fjord are the islands of <unk> and the 21 hectare <unk> , although the latter is connected to the mainland by a 300 metre ( 980 ft ) -long causeway . <unk> is the largest island in the fjord at 132 hectares and is an important breeding ground for migratory birds . It is part of the Special Area of Conservation No . SPC 94 , Odense Fjord under the EU Habitat and Birds Directives and has been subject to close monitoring , with the target to reach at least " good " ecological status by 2015 . The island is low @-@ lying , the highest point of <unk> only reaching six metres above the sea . There is a 25 hectare forest on the northern part of the island while the southern part consists of coastal meadows . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Odense has a temperate oceanic climate , classified as Köppen zone Cfb . Mild summers feature average maximum temperatures exceeding 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) , while winters are characterised by minimum temperatures dropping just below freezing . The hottest months on average are July and August with highs of 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) and daily mean temperatures of 17 ° C ( 63 ° F ) and 16 ° C ( 61 ° F ) respectively . These are also the wettest months , with August receiving 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) and July 64 mm ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) of rain on average . Extratropical cyclones frequently affect the region , contributing to abundant precipitation . The coldest months are January and February , with a daily mean temperature of 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) , and lows of − 2 ° C ( 28 ° F ) and − 3 ° C ( 26 ° F ) respectively . It is common for Odense Fjord to contain ice between January and March , and the entrance is kept clear by icebreakers . The tidal range in the fjord varies up to 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 ft 0 in ) , and winds from the west and northeast may raise the water level by up to 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 ft 11 in ) and winds from the east and southwest may lower it by up to 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 ft 11 in ) . Climate data for the city are recorded at Hans Christian Andersen Airport ( ICAO : <unk> ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Odense has long been a populated town , and in 1670 it had a population of 3 @,@ 808 people . By 1787 the population had grown to 5 @,@ 363 to and 5 @,@ 782 in 1801 . The population grew markedly during the 19th century , reaching 8 @,@ 709 inhabitants in 1834 , 10 @,@ 238 in 1845 , 12 @,@ 932 in 1855 , 16 @,@ 970 in 1870 , 20 @,@ 804 in 1880 and 20 @,@ 268 in 1890 . 
 With improvements in communications by rail and via the port , the population of Odense grew dramatically in the early 20th century . The 1901 census recorded 40 @,@ 138 people , growing to 47 @,@ 224 in 1911 , 61 @,@ 969 in 1921 and 87 @,@ 090 in 1935 . During the Second World War , the population passed the 100 @,@ 000 mark , reaching 103 @,@ 107 in 1945 . It continued to grow in the post war years , with 120 @,@ 570 recorded in 1955 and 133 @,@ 384 in 1965 ; the city reached a population of 139 @,@ 490 people in 1970 , a time when it was developing as a university city after Odense University was established in 1966 . 
 Residents began to move out of the centre into the suburban areas which were included in Odense Municipality after boundaries were redefined in 1970 . As a result , the population declined slightly in the 1970s and 1980s , falling to 136 @,@ 646 in 1981 . It began climbing again in the late 1980s , and steadily grew to 144 @,@ 518 in 1996 and 145 @,@ 554 in 2004 . In 2010 Odense had a population of 166 @,@ 305 people . As of 2015 it had a population of 173 @,@ 814 . 
 = = Municipal administration = = 
 Odense Municipality is the administrative unit which covers not only the city of Odense but surrounding suburbs and villages . Odense City Council consists of 29 members , including a mayor . The mayor of Odense , Anker Boye , is a member of the Social Democratic Party . His first term was from 1993 to 2005 when he was defeated by Jan Boye , a Conservative . He was re @-@ elected in the 2009 election , forming a coalition with the Red – Green Alliance , the Socialist People 's Party and the Social Democrats . The city council 's motto is At lege er at <unk> ( Playing is living ) summarising a new approach addressing learning , innovation , development and growth with targets for 2017 . Boye and his administration have been criticised for mismanaging the celebrations for the 200th anniversary of Hans Christian Andersen in 2005 , above all for allegedly signing a contract with Tina Turner for a show which resulted in a deficit of 13 million kroner . 
 In the 2013 municipal elections , Boye was successful in obtaining sufficient support from the Liberals and the left to ensure his continuation as mayor from the beginning of 2014 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Odense is Funen 's most important industrial and commercial centre , and the city 's central location in Denmark makes it one of the national convention and congress centres . Enterprises include the Albani Brewery , ABB ( Asea Brown Boveri ) , Kansas <unk> ( clothing ) , Plus Pack ( canning and containers ) as well as manufacturers in the electrical sector . In recent years there has been a general trend from manufacturing into the service sector . By 2002 , 51 % of the workforce was employed by the service sector while only 13 % were working in industry . Lindø Wharf , once Denmark 's largest shipbuilding facility , has now been converted into Lindø Industrial Park specialising in the production and storage of components for the offshore industries , creating a variety of new tenants . <unk> , a large horticultural centre , supplies fruit , vegetables , flowers and plants to most of the country as well as for export . Established in 1988 , Denmark 's major commercial television channel TV 2 is based in Odense . 
 The <unk> shopping centre is located in the south @-@ eastern part of Odense . The centre dates from 1971 and is the second largest in Denmark with 100 @,@ 000 m2 ( 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 sq ft ) floor space and more than 150 shops as well as restaurants , a cinema and a fitness centre . A wide variety of shops can be found in the city centre , especially on <unk> and Vestergade and adjacent pedestrian streets . 
 Tourism is an important source of income for the city . In 2008 Odense Municipality was listed seventh in Denmark for turnover on tourism , reaching 1 @.@ 6 million Danish kroner for the year . In 2011 , Odense Zoo was Funen 's most popular tourist attraction and the eleventh most popular in Denmark with 405 @,@ 913 visitors . The zoo was founded in 1930 and covers an area of 3 @.@ 6 hectares ( 8 @.@ 9 acres ) and has roughly 2 @,@ 000 animals , covering 147 species . In 2001 , Odense Zoo inaugurated a DKK 60 million " <unk> " featuring South American animal life . 
 Nightlife in the city culminates in Brandts Passage , which contains numerous restaurants , bars and cafes , such as the Envy @-@ Lounge , Australian Bar , Brandts <unk> and Cafe <unk> . The jazz club , <unk> Dexter , is situated on the <unk> . Other notable <unk> venues include Franck A , <unk> and Club Retro . Restaurants include the Cuckoos Nest bar and restaurant , the Brasserie <unk> , the Den Gamle <unk> , set in a 17th @-@ century half @-@ timbered house , <unk> , run by leading chef <unk> <unk> who serves fresh fish and meat dishes , which is now closed , and the Under <unk> in an 18th @-@ century cottage opposite the Hans Christian Andersen house which serves Franco @-@ Danish cuisine . Hotels of note include the Radisson SAS HC Andersen Hotel , the First Hotel Grand with its brasserie bar , the 68 @-@ room Old English @-@ style Clarion Collection Hotel Plaza , City Hotel , which is in close proximity to the Hans Christian Andersen museum , and the 140 @-@ room <unk> Odense City . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 <unk> , a hill in the Odense area , is the site of one of Denmark 's six former Viking ring castles , built during the reign of Sweyn Forkbeard , who had forced his father Harold Bluetooth to leave the country and seek refuge by the Jomsvikings in <unk> ( modern Poland ) in around 975 . The fort provided its occupier the command of the Odense River passing next to the hill . The archaeological remains of the fort were heavily damaged when a building for the Odd Fellow lodge was constructed on the site during the late nineteenth century . 
 = = = Churches = = = 
 Odense is the see of the bishop of Funen . Saint Canute 's Cathedral ( Danish : Sankt <unk> Kirke ) was formerly connected with the great Benedictine monastery of the same name , and is one of the largest and finest buildings of its kind in Denmark . Originally dating from 1081 – 1093 , the church was rebuilt in the 13th century in brick in a pure Gothic style . Under the altar lies Canute ( Danish : Knud ) , the patron saint of Denmark and his brother on public display . A large fragment of Byzantine cloth is displayed next to the two skeletons . The cathedral also boasts one of Denmark 's most remarkable altarpieces , a magnificent triptych by Claus Berg . Kings Jens and Christian II are buried in the city . 
 St Alban 's Church , built in the <unk> style and consecrated in 1908 , is the Roman Catholic church of Odense . Its steeple is 54 m ( 177 ft ) high . St Mary 's Church ( Vor Frue Kirke or Our Lady 's Church ) , built in the 13th century and restored in 1851 – 1852 and again in 1864 , contains a carved 16th @-@ century altarpiece by Claus Berg of Lübeck . St John 's Church ( Sankt Hans Kirke ) , first mentioned in 1295 , was built by the Knights Hospitaller , also known as the Order of Saint John . Not much of the original building remains as it was rebuilt in 1636 and subsequently restored . Built of red brick with horizontal decorations on the chancel wall , it has large Gothic windows . The date of 1496 on one of the bells in the step @-@ ribbed tower may well be the year the church was completed . The tower is adjacent to Odense Palace which was originally built as a monastery . 
 <unk> Church was the first church to be built in Odense since the Middle Ages . Completed in 1902 , it was designed by Niels Jacobsen in the late Romanesque style in red brick on granite foundations . The cross @-@ shaped interior is complemented by a spired bell @-@ tower , 45 m ( 148 ft ) high . The Peace Church ( <unk> ) consecrated in 1920 was so named in gratitude for the end of the First World War . The church was the work of Peder Vilhelm Jensen @-@ Klint who went on to design Copenhagen 's Grundtvig 's Church . 
 = = = City Hall = = = 
 Odense 's City Hall ( Odense <unk> ) , with its medieval Italian look , was designed by Johan Daniel <unk> and Carl <unk> in the Historicist style . Completed in 1883 , it combines red masonry with sandstone decorations , stepped gables and a saw @-@ tooth course . It stands on the site of a smaller building from 1480 . In 1937 Bent <unk> @-@ Møller won the competition for the building 's enlargement . The tower over the main entrance was torn down in 1942 but was not rebuilt . As work was delayed during the war , the extension was not completed until 1955 . In conjunction with Hans Christian Andersen 's 200th anniversary in 2005 , comprehensive renovation work was completed on the building 's interiors , including the entrance halls , meeting rooms , banqueting hall and council chamber . 
 = = = Palaces and theatres = = = 
 Odense Palace was erected by Frederick IV , who died there in 1730 . Now an administrative building , it stands on the site of Sankt Hans <unk> , a 15th @-@ century monastery which was transferred to the Crown in 1536 . The main white Baroque wing with 13 bays was designed by J.C. Krieger for Frederick IV and completed in 1723 . Set in a park , the King 's Garden was constructed to a French design by Johan Cornelius Krieger . 
 Odense Teater , first established in 1796 , is Denmark 's second oldest theatrical enterprise and one of the country 's three main theatres . The original building was on <unk> Torv was used until 1914 when a new building designed by Jacobsen was opened on <unk> . It has three stages : Store Scene , <unk> , and <unk> . The theatre also has stages in the former sugar factory <unk> , where it runs the first drama school outside Copenhagen established in 1941 . It is notable in theatrical history for staging the première of Henrik Ibsen 's first contemporary realist drama The Pillars of Society on 14 November 1877 . Teater Momentum or Teater <unk> <unk> , publicly funded by the municipal government and the Ministry of Cultural Affairs , is also of note . Established in 2005 , it signs on a new director each year who is charged with creating the " volume " of the year with a set of plays and performers . It also puts on other cultural entertainment including concerts , debates , lectures and poetry . 
 Odense Symphony Orchestra ( Odense Symfoniorkester ) , one of Denmark 's five regional orchestras , was formally established in 1946 . The orchestra is based in Odense Concert Hall , which was inaugurated in 1982 . Most of the orchestra ’ s concerts are given in the Carl Nielsen Hall , a seating capacity of 1 @,@ 212 and a large 46 @-@ stops organ built by Marcussen & Son . First established in 1948 , Funen Opera ( Den Fynske Opera ) was reopened in 1996 after a period of closure . It specializes in presenting contemporary operas in Danish . 
 = = = Hans Christian Andersen connections = = = 
 Remembered above all for his fairy tales , Hans Christian Andersen was born in Odense in 1805 . It is thought his birthplace is the small yellow house on the corner of Hans <unk> Stræde and Bangs <unk> in the old town . In 1908 the house was opened as the Hans Christian Andersen Museum . It documents his life from his childhood years as the son of a struggling shoemaker , to his schooling , career as an author , and later life , with artefacts providing an insight into his acquaintances and adventures . Andersen 's childhood home is on <unk> not far from the cathedral . He lived in the little half @-@ timbered house from the age of two until he was 14 . Opened as a museum in 1930 , the house contains an exhibition of the cobbling tools used by his father and other items based on Andersen 's own descriptions . 
 Throughout the city there are numerous statues and sculptures representing characters from the stories of Hans Christian Andersen . They include the Steadfast Tin Soldier , the Mermaid , the Shepherdess and the Chimney Sweep , the Toad , the <unk> Needle , the Emperor 's New Clothes , the Sea Horse , the Paper Boat , the Flying Trunk and the Wild Swans . There is also a distinctive statue of Andersen in <unk> ( The Fairy Tale Park ) beside the cathedral . Sculpted by Louis <unk> in 1888 , it shows the storyteller with a book in his hand , ready to entertain onlookers with his fairy tales . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 The museums in Odense are mainly governed by the Odense City Museums , a department of the municipal government . Funen 's Art Museum ( Fyns Kunstmuseum ) , formerly The Museum of Funen 's Abbey , is one of Denmark 's oldest art museums , dating to 1885 . It contains the principal works by Jens Juel , <unk> Dreyer , P.S. Krøyer and H. A. <unk> . The open @-@ air The Funen Village museum ( Den Fynske <unk> ) tries to emulate what country life was like in Denmark at the time of Andersen 's life and contains houses of historical Odense . 
 The Carl Nielsen Museum is dedicated to the life of Carl Nielsen and his wife , the sculptor Anne Marie Carl @-@ Nielsen . It documents his life from his childhood in the town of Nr. <unk> , to his career and success on the European music scene , with his violins , his bugle and his grand piano on display , as well as a number of his musical scores , including six symphonies , three concertos , two operas , and chamber music and numerous songs . 
 The <unk> cultural history museum of Odense is one of the most notable remaining Renaissance buildings of the city , built in 1646 by the nobleman Falk <unk> . It has many artefacts related to the early Viking history in Odense , and is named after the narrow street <unk> adjacent to the building , where a coin workshop once operated in around 1420 . Located in a courtyard of half @-@ timbered houses , the museum also has exhibits on Funen 's ancient history , as well as Odense in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance . 
 The Danish Railway Museum is the national railway museum of Denmark , the largest such museum in Scandinavia . It was established in 1975 in a former engine shed adjacent to the city 's main railway station and has an area of over 10 @,@ 000 metres ( 33 @,@ 000 ft ) , with some 50 locomotives and railway carriages on 20 rail tracks from all periods of Danish rail history . The oldest steam engine dates back to 1869 . 
 The Brandts Museum of Photographic Art ( <unk> for <unk> ) in Odense is the only national Danish art museum dedicated specifically to photographic art . It was founded on 13 September 1985 as part of the Brandts International Centre for Art and Culture and opened its own exhibition space in 1987 . The Media Museum of Odense documents the history of the freedom of speech in Denmark since 1849 , and the development of the printing press and the history of Danish broadsheet Berlingske . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Odense University = = = 
 Odense University , established by law in 1964 , was the first of three new provincial universities created to relieve pressure on the universities of Copenhagen and Aarhus . Teaching began in 1966 . By the end of the 20th century , there were 11 @,@ 000 students and some 5 @,@ 000 employees . Before it became part of the University of Southern Denmark in 1998 , it had four faculties covering arts , medicine , and natural and social sciences . The university building which opened in 1971 was designed by <unk> Arkitekter . 
 = = = University of Southern Denmark = = = 
 The University of Southern Denmark ( <unk> <unk> ) was established in 1998 as a merger of Odense University , the Southern Denmark Business School ( <unk> Syd ) , the Southern Engineering School ( <unk> Syd ) and the South Jutland University Centre ( <unk> <unk> ) . The main campus is in Odense but there are also departments in Copenhagen , Esbjerg , Kolding , Slagelse and <unk> . With some 26 @,@ 000 students ( 2012 ) , the establishment is Denmark 's third largest university . The Faculty of Engineering ( Det Tekniske <unk> ) combines several institutions : Odense <unk> ( a mechanical engineering college which was established in 1905 and in 1962 became the Southern Engineering School ) , the Mads Clausen Institute and the <unk> Mc @-@ Kinney Møller Institute . 
 = = = Other educational institutions = = = 
 Odense also includes departments of the University College <unk> headquartered in Vejle . The university is the result of a merger between several further education institutions on Funen and in Jelling , Vejle and Svendborg . UCL is currently undertaking comprehensive renovation of the buildings on Niels <unk> <unk> from the 1960s where it will concentrate its Odense interests . It intends to open University College <unk> Campus Odense in August 2014 . 
 Aimed at improving employment opportunities in business , the <unk> Academy of Professional Higher Education ( <unk> <unk> ) was established in 2009 as a result of a merger between <unk> Business College , <unk> college , Kold College and Vejle Business College . In 2014 , it had 3 @,@ 200 students and a staff of 300 . Its programmes are offered at various locations in Odense and Vejle . Under the auspices of the municipality , the Odense School of Music ( Odense <unk> ) offers educational courses with an emphasis on music to children and young people up to the age of 25 . 
 Kold College is a privately run institution offering vocational courses in food , agriculture and gardening . Founded in 2004 , after a merger between Datum Tekniske Skole and <unk> <unk> , it changed its name to Kold College in 2008 . It also offers secondary education courses in the natural sciences . The college is named after Christen Kold who founded vocational schools on Funen in the mid @-@ 19th century . 
 Funen Art Academy is an independent , nationally recognized educational institution located in the Brandts complex in central Odense which offers 5 @-@ year course in the visual arts . 
 Odense is home to eight gymnasiums ( Grammar schools ) , 21 state grade schools as well as a number of private schools . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Odense 's most important football clubs are Odense Boldklub ( OB ) , BK Marienlyst ( BM ) , <unk> , and B1913 . OB has a history going back to 1887 when it was founded as Odense <unk> ( Odense Cricket Club ) . It changed its name to Odense Boldklub in 1893 after football was included in its activities . The club has won three national championships , and five cup titles . The club play their home matches at TRE @-@ FOR Park , also known as Odense Stadion . BK Marienlyst , founded in 1922 , are in the Danish 2nd Division West , and play their home matches at <unk> , which has a capacity of 1 @,@ 200 . The club also has a notable volleyball team . RC Odense represents the city at rugby in combination with Lindø RSC . 
 The Odense Bulldogs are a professional ice hockey team based in Odense . They play in the top Danish League AL @-@ Bank <unk> , as the only team from Funen . In tennis , Tennis Club Odense is located near the Odense River . The country 's largest tennis centre is due to open in Marienlyst in 2014 . 
 The H.C. Andersen Marathon is held annually in Odense . On Ascension Sunday , children can participate in <unk> ( the Fairy Tale Run ) with circuits from 2 @.@ 5 to 10 km . There are many smaller sports clubs in Odense covering athletics , badminton , basketball , boxing , climbing , cycling , fencing , football , golf , gymnastics , handball , jujitsu , karate , riding , roller @-@ skating , shooting , swimming , table tennis , tennis , volleyball , yoga and wrestling as well as several specialising in facilities for people with disabilities . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The Port of Odense consists of three main basins and a number of facilities along the canal , with quays measuring roughly 4 @,@ 200 metres ( 13 @,@ 800 ft ) in length in total . Vessels up to a length of 160 metres ( 520 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 8 metres ( 22 ft ) are facilitated in the port . The wharf for tankers is situated outside the harbour on the southern side of the canal , with facilities for tankers , general cargo ships , bulk , and LPG ships , and has a depth of 7 @.@ 5 metres ( 25 ft ) . Accessibility to Odense was greatly increased when the ferry service between the two main Danish islands , Zealand and Funen , was replaced by the Great Belt Bridge – opened in 1997 for rail traffic , 1998 for road traffic . When the bridge opened , it was the second longest suspension bridge in the world . Aarhus can be reached by train in 1 hour and 33 minutes while , thanks to the Great Belt Bridge , trains to Copenhagen can take as little as an hour and a quarter . 
 Odense 's main railway station Odense Station lies on the line between Copenhagen and Jutland , the peninsular mainland . International trains connect the town with Sweden and mainland Europe , for example , Stockholm . SJ has a direct <unk> train to Stockholm daily , taking 7 hours to the capital city . Local and regional trains link Odense to the rest of Denmark . A separate passenger railway , <unk> , operates between Odense and Svendborg . Formerly , railways connected Odense to most of Funen 's coastal cities , but these links were closed down in the 1950s and 1960s . Today , these regional routes are served by buses operated by the public company <unk> , which also operates the town 's municipal bus service , connecting the town 's suburbs to the city centre . 
 By road , Odense connects to Zealand and Jutland with the <unk> Motorway ( Fynske <unk> ) , a section of the E20 , and to Svendborg on the southern part of Funen by way of the Svendborg Motorway ( <unk> ) , which comprises the Danish Route 9 . Other , smaller routes connect Odense to the rest of Funen , with direct links to all coastal towns . 
 Odense is served by Odense Airport , which operates flights to tourist resorts , mainly in the summer months . 
 = = Healthcare = = 
 The Odense University Hospital ( OUH ) , established in 1912 , is of major regional importance , not only for healthcare , but for conducting research in collaboration with the Institute of Clinical Research of the University of Southern Denmark . OUH is the largest hospital unit in Denmark and the largest employer in Odense , and as of 2006 it had 1200 beds and a staff of 7700 people , of which 1300 people were doctors . Today there are about 10 @,@ 000 employees covering all fields of medicine . The hospital tower block is 57 metres ( 187 ft ) high , has 15 floors and is Odense 's tallest building . It is the principal hospital for the northern part of Funen but also takes patients from all over Denmark , as it has highly specialized units within hand <unk> surgery and special neuro @-@ radiological intervention . 
 The Hans Christian Andersen Children ’ s Hospital , part of the OUH , is the only paediatric department on the island of Funen , and also conducts research into nutrition and gastrointestinal diseases , asthma and allergies , hormonal diseases and others . As of 2013 , the children 's hospital had consisted of seven wards and had 377 employees , with about 10 @,@ 000 admissions and 25 @,@ 000 annual outpatient visits annually . A new DKK 6 @.@ 3 billion hospital is under construction in closer proximity to the University of Southern Denmark , scheduled to be completed in 2018 . The hospital will have a floor area of 212 @,@ 000 square metres ( 2 @,@ 280 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . 
 Odense is home to several other private hospitals , including Privathospitalet H. C. Andersen <unk> , Privathospitalet <unk> , and Privathospitalet <unk> . Odense C is also the location of the renowned dental clinic , <unk> Karen Juel Nissen 
 = = Media = = 
 Odense is the centre for media activity on Funen , and the hub of the regional network . Its principal newspaper is <unk> Stiftstidende , a daily broadsheet owned by Den Fynske <unk> and published by <unk> Stiftstidende A / S , which was established on 3 January 1772 . Until 1841 the newspaper was known as <unk> <unk> Odense Adresse @-@ <unk> <unk> , and on 13 April 1993 the newspaper changed its 221 @-@ year @-@ old tradition as a midday newspaper , to a morning paper . In 2013 , it had an average circulation of 47 @,@ 738 , down from some 60 @,@ 500 in 2005 . The editor in chief , Per <unk> , chairs the board of the Centre for Journalism at the University of Southern Denmark , one of the two university journalism departments in Denmark . Denmark 's largest university press , the University Press of Southern Denmark , is also based in Odense . It was founded in 1966 as Odense University Press ( Odense <unk> ) , and its authors are mainly academics from the University of Southern Denmark . 
 The television station TV 2 , fully owned by the state since 2003 , is based in Odense . The station began broadcasting on 1 October 1988 as a privately owned company , thereby ending the television monopoly previously exercised by the Danmarks Radio ( DR ) . Since 2007 , TV 2 has had about 1 @,@ 000 employees . Now operating six channels , TV 2 now broadcasts over 40 @,@ 000 hours of television programmes per year . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Hans Christian Andersen ( 1805 – 1875 ) , novelist , poet , fairy tale and short story writer 
 Carl Nielsen ( 1865 – 1931 ) , classical composer , born near Odense , celebrating the 150th anniversary of his birth in 2015 
 King Knud IV ( c . 1043 – 1086 ) , also known as Canute the Saint and Canute the Holy 
 Carl Frederik <unk> ( 1829 – 1901 ) , industrialist , banker , and philanthropist 
 Thomas B. <unk> ( 1866 – 1938 ) , inventor and industrialist 
 Anja Andersen ( born 1969 ) , handball player 
 Her Royal Highness the Duchess of Gloucester ( born Birgitte Eva Henriksen ; 1946 ) , born and raised in Odense 
 Caroline Wozniacki ( born 1990 ) , tennis player 
 Peter Eastgate ( born 1985 ) , winner of the Main Event at the 2008 World Series of Poker 
 Abraham Kurland ( 1912 – 1999 ) , Olympic wrestling medallist 
 Kim Larsen ( born 1945 ) , rock star 
 Jens <unk> ( born 1954 ) , sculptor 
 Frederik <unk> ( born 1983 ) , cricketer 
 <unk> ( born 1988 ) , pop star , songwriter 
 Ove <unk> ( 1919 – 2004 ) , actor , film star 
 Allan Simonsen ( 1978 – 2013 ) , racing driver 
 = = Twin cities = = 
 Odense has over 20 twin cities . For a full list of twin cities , see Odense Municipality . Several are them are stated below : 
 Kaunas , Lithuania 
 Klaksvík , Faroe Islands 
 Tampere , Finland 
 Kiev , Ukraine 
 Upernavik , Greenland 
 Petah Tikva , Israel 
 Funabashi , Japan 
 Groningen , Netherlands 
 = Meryl Streep = 
 Mary Louise " Meryl " Streep ( born June 22 , 1949 ) is an American actress . Cited in the media as the " best actress of her generation " , Streep is particularly known for her versatility in her roles , transformation into the characters she plays , and her accent adaptation . She made her professional stage debut in The Playboy of Seville in 1971 , and went on to receive a 1976 Tony Award nomination for Best Featured Actress in a Play for A Memory of Two Mondays / 27 Wagons Full of Cotton . She made her screen debut in the 1977 television film The Deadliest Season , and made her film debut later that same year in Julia . In 1978 , she won an Emmy Award for her role in the miniseries Holocaust , and received her first Academy Award nomination for The Deer Hunter . Nominated for 19 Academy Awards in total , Streep has more nominations than any other actor or actress in history ; she won Best Supporting Actress for Kramer vs. Kramer ( 1979 ) , and Best Actress for Sophie 's Choice ( 1982 ) and for The Iron Lady ( 2011 ) . 
 Streep is one of only six actors to have won three or more competitive Academy Awards for acting . Her other nominated roles are The French Lieutenant 's Woman ( 1981 ) , Silkwood ( 1983 ) , Out of Africa ( 1985 ) , Ironweed ( 1987 ) , Evil Angels ( 1988 ) , Postcards from the Edge ( 1990 ) , The Bridges of Madison County ( 1995 ) , One True Thing ( 1998 ) , Music of the Heart ( 1999 ) , Adaptation ( 2002 ) , The Devil Wears Prada ( 2006 ) , Doubt ( 2008 ) , Julie & Julia ( 2009 ) , August : Osage County ( 2013 ) , and Into the Woods ( 2014 ) . She returned to the stage for the first time in over 20 years in The Public Theater 's 2001 revival of The Seagull , won a second Emmy Award in 2004 for the HBO miniseries Angels in America ( 2003 ) , and starred in the Public Theater 's 2006 production of Mother Courage and Her Children . 
 Streep has also received 29 Golden Globe nominations , winning eight — more nominations , and more competitive ( non @-@ honorary ) wins than any other actor ( male or female ) in the history of the award . Her work has also earned her two Screen Actors Guild Awards , a Cannes Film Festival award , five New York Film Critics Circle Awards , two BAFTA awards , two Australian Film Institute awards , five Grammy Award nominations , and five Drama Desk Award nominations , among several others . She was awarded the AFI Life Achievement Award in 2004 and the Kennedy Center Honor in 2011 for her contribution to American culture through performing arts . President Barack Obama awarded her the 2010 National Medal of Arts and in 2014 the Presidential Medal of Freedom . In 2003 , the government of France made her a Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mary Louise Streep was born on June 22 , 1949 in Summit , New Jersey , to Mary Wolf Wilkinson ( 1915 – 2001 ) , a commercial artist and art editor ; and Harry William Streep Jr . ( 1910 – 2003 ) , a pharmaceutical executive . The eldest child , she has two younger brothers , Dana David and Harry William III . 
 Streep 's father was of German and Swiss ancestry . Her father 's lineage traces back to Loffenau , Germany , from where her second great @-@ grandfather , Gottfried <unk> , emigrated to the United States , and where one of her ancestors served as mayor ( the surname was later changed to " Streep " ) . Another line of her father 's family was from <unk> , Switzerland . Her mother had English , German , and Irish ancestry . Some of Streep 's maternal ancestors lived in Pennsylvania and Rhode Island and were descended from 17th @-@ century immigrants from England . Her eighth great @-@ grandfather , Lawrence Wilkinson , was one of the first Europeans to settle in Rhode Island . Streep is also a distant relative of William Penn , the founder of Pennsylvania ; records show that her family is among the first purchasers of land in the state . Streep 's maternal great @-@ great @-@ grandparents , Manus McFadden and Grace Strain , the namesake of Streep 's second daughter , were natives of the Horn Head district of <unk> , Ireland . 
 Streep 's mother , whom she has compared in both appearance and manner to Dame Judi Dench , strongly encouraged her daughter and instilled confidence in her from a very young age . Streep has said : " She was a mentor because she said to me , ' Meryl , you 're capable . You 're so great . ' She was saying , ' You can do whatever you put your mind to . If you 're lazy , you 're not going to get it done . But if you put your mind to it , you can do anything . ' And I believed her . " Although Streep was naturally more introverted than her mother , at times when she later needed an injection of confidence in adulthood she would consult her mother , asking her for advice . Streep was raised as a Presbyterian in Bernardsville , New Jersey , where she attended Bernards High School . Author Karina Longworth described her as a " gawky kid with glasses and frizzy hair " , yet noted that she liked to show off in front of the camera in family home videos from a young age . At the age of 12 , Streep was selected to sing at a school recital , which led to her having opera lessons from Estelle Liebling . However , despite her talent , she remarked that " I was singing something I didn 't feel and understand . That was an important lesson — not to do that . To find the thing that I could feel through " . She quit after four years . Streep had many Catholic school friends , and regularly attended mass . 
 Although in high school Streep appeared in numerous school plays , she was uninterested in serious theatre until acting in the play Miss Julie at Vassar College in 1969 , in which she gained attention across the campus . Vassar drama professor Clinton J Atkinson noted , " I don 't think anyone ever taught Meryl acting . She really taught herself " . Streep demonstrated an early ability to mimic accents and to quickly memorize her lines . She received her BA cum laude from the college in 1971 , before applying for an MFA from the Yale School of Drama . At Yale she supplemented her course fees by waitressing and typing , and appeared in over a dozen stage productions a year , to the point that she became overworked , developing ulcers . She contemplated quitting acting and switching to study law . Streep played a variety of roles onstage , from Helena in A Midsummer Night 's Dream to an 80 @-@ year @-@ old woman in a wheelchair in a comedy written by then @-@ unknown playwrights Christopher Durang and Albert <unk> . One of her teachers was Robert Lewis , one of the co @-@ founders of the Actors Studio . Streep disapproved of some of the acting exercises she was asked to do , remarking that the professors " delved into personal lives in a way I find obnoxious " . She received her MFA from Yale in 1975 . Streep also enrolled as a visiting student at Dartmouth College in the fall of 1970 , and received an Honorary Doctor of Arts degree from the college in 1981 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 = = = = Theater and film debut = = = = 
 Streep moved to New York City in 1975 , and was cast by Joseph Papp in a production of Trelawny of the Wells at the Public Theater , opposite Mandy Patinkin and John Lithgow . She went on to appear in five more roles in her first year in New York , including in Papp 's New York Shakespeare Festival productions of Henry V , The Taming of the Shrew with Raúl Juliá , and Measure for Measure opposite Sam Waterston and John Cazale . She entered into a relationship with Cazale at this time , and resided with him until his death three years later . She starred in the musical Happy End on Broadway , and won an Obie for her performance in the off @-@ Broadway play Alice at the Palace . 
 Although she had not set out for a film career , Robert De Niro 's performance in Taxi Driver ( 1976 ) had a profound impact on young Streep , who said to herself , " that 's the kind of actor I want to be when I grow up " . Streep began auditioning for film roles , and underwent an unsuccessful audition for the lead role in Dino De Laurentiis 's King Kong . Laurentiis stated in Italian to his son : " This is so ugly . Why did you bring me this " . Unknown to Laurentiis , Streep understood Italian and she remarked , " I 'm very sorry that I 'm not as beautiful as I should be but , you know — this is it . This is what you get " . She continued to work on Broadway , appearing in the 1976 double bill of Tennessee Williams ' 27 Wagons Full of Cotton and Arthur Miller 's A Memory of Two Mondays . For the former , she received a Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play nomination . Streep 's other Broadway credits include Anton Chekhov 's The Cherry Orchard and the Bertolt Brecht @-@ Kurt Weill musical Happy End , in which she had originally appeared off @-@ Broadway at the Chelsea Theater Center . She received Drama Desk Award nominations for both productions . 
 Streep 's first feature film role came opposite Jane Fonda in the 1977 film Julia , in which she had a small role during a flashback sequence . Most of her scenes were edited out , but the brief time on screen horrified the actress : " I had a bad wig and they took the words from the scene I shot with Jane and put them in my mouth in a different scene . I thought , I 've made a terrible mistake , no more movies . I hate this business " . However , Streep cites Fonda as having a lasting influence on her as an actress , and has credited her as " open [ ing ] probably more doors than I probably even know about " . 
 = = = = Breakthrough = = = = 
 Robert De Niro , who had spotted Streep in her stage production of The Cherry Orchard , suggested that she play the role of his girlfriend in the war film The Deer Hunter ( 1978 ) . Cazale , who had been diagnosed with lung cancer , was also cast in the film , and Streep took on the role of a " vague , stock girlfriend " to remain with Cazale for the duration of filming . Longworth notes that Streep " made a case for female empowerment by playing a woman to whom empowerment was a foreign concept — a normal lady from an average American small town , for whom subservience was the only thing she knew " . Pauline Kael , who would later become a strong critic of Streep 's , remarked that Streep was a " real beauty " who brought much freshness to the film with her performance . The film 's success exposed Streep to a wider audience and earned her a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress . 
 In the 1978 miniseries Holocaust , Streep played the leading role of a German woman married to a Jewish artist in Nazi era Germany . She found the material to be " unrelentingly noble " and professed to have taken on the role for financial gain . Streep travelled to Germany and Austria for filming while Cazale remained in New York . Upon her return , Streep found that Cazale 's illness had progressed , and she nursed him until his death on March 12 , 1978 . With an estimated audience of 109 million , Holocaust brought a wider degree of public recognition to Streep , who found herself " on the verge of national visibility " . She won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie for her performance . Despite the awards success , Streep was still not enthusiastic towards her film career and preferred acting on stage . 
 Hoping to divert herself from the grief of Cazale 's death , Streep accepted a role in The Seduction of Joe Tynan ( 1979 ) as the chirpy love interest of Alan Alda , later commenting that she played it on " automatic pilot " . She performed the role of Katherine in The Taming of the Shrew for Shakespeare in the Park , and also played a supporting role in Manhattan ( 1979 ) for Woody Allen . Streep later said that Allen did not provide her with a complete script , giving her only the six pages of her own scenes , and did not permit her to improvise a word of her dialogue . In the drama Kramer vs. Kramer , Streep was cast opposite Dustin Hoffman as an unhappily married woman who abandons her husband and child . Streep thought that the script portrayed the female character as " too evil " and insisted that it was not representative of real women who faced marriage breakdown and child custody battles . The makers agreed with her , and the script was revised . In preparing for the part , Streep spoke to her own mother about her life as a wife with a career , and frequented the Upper East Side neighborhood in which the film was set , watching the interactions between parents and children . The director Robert Benton allowed Streep to write her own dialogue in two key scenes , despite some objection from Hoffman , who " hated her guts " . Jaffee and Hoffman later spoke of Streep 's tirelessness , with Hoffman commenting , " She 's extraordinarily hardworking , to the extent that she 's obsessive . I think that she thinks about nothing else but what she 's doing . " The film was controversial among feminists , but it was a role which film critic Stephen Farber believed displayed Streep 's " own emotional intensity " , writing that she was one of the " rare performers who can imbue the most routine moments with a hint of mystery " . 
 For Kramer vs. Kramer , Streep won both the Academy Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress . She was also awarded the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actress , National Board of Review Award for Best Supporting Actress and National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actress for her collective work in her three film releases of 1979 . Both The Deer Hunter and Kramer vs. Kramer were major commercial successes and were the consecutive winners of the Academy Award for Best Picture . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 = = = = Rise to stardom = = = = 
 In 1979 , Streep began <unk> Alice in Concert , a musical version of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , with writer and composer Elizabeth <unk> and director Joseph Papp ; the show was put on at New York 's Public Theater from December 1980 . Frank Rich of The New York Times referred to Streep as the " one wonder " of the production , but questioned why she had devoted so much energy to it . By 1980 , Streep had progressed to leading roles in films . She was featured on the cover of Newsweek magazine with the headline " A Star for the 80s " , with Jack Kroll commenting , " There 's a sense of mystery in her acting ; she doesn 't simply imitate ( although she 's a great mimic in private ) . She transmits a sense of danger , a primal unease lying just below the surface of normal behavior " . Streep denounced the fervent media coverage of her at this time as " excessive hype " . 
 The story within a story drama The French Lieutenant 's Woman ( 1981 ) was Streep 's first leading role . The film paired Streep with Jeremy Irons as contemporary actors , telling their modern story , as well as the Victorian era drama they were performing . Streep perfected an English accent for the part , but considered herself a misfit for the role : " I couldn 't help wishing that I was more beautiful " . A New York Magazine article commented that , while many female stars of the past had cultivated a singular identity in their films , Streep was a " chameleon " , willing to play any type of role . Streep was awarded a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role for her work . The following year , she reunited with Robert Benton for the psychological thriller , Still of the Night ( 1982 ) , co @-@ starring Roy Scheider and Jessica Tandy . Vincent Canby , writing for The New York Times , noted that the film was an homage to the works of Alfred Hitchcock , but that one of its main weaknesses was a lack of chemistry between Streep and Scheider , concluding that Streep " is stunning , but she 's not on screen anywhere near long enough " . 
 Greater success came later in 1982 , when Streep starred in the drama Sophie 's Choice ( 1982 ) , portraying a Polish holocaust survivor caught in a love triangle between a young naive writer ( Peter MacNicol ) and a Jewish intellectual ( Kevin Kline ) . Streep 's emotional dramatic performance and her apparent mastery of a Polish accent drew praise . William Styron wrote the novel with Ursula Andress in mind for the role of Sophie , but Streep was determined to get the role . She obtained a bootlegged copy of the script , and threw herself on the ground begging the director Alan J. Pakula to give her the role . Streep filmed the " choice " scene in one take and refused to do it again , finding it extremely painful and emotionally exhausting . Emma Brockes of The Guardian believes the scene in which Streep is ordered by an SS guard at Auschwitz to choose which one of her two children would be gassed and which would proceed to the labor camp , is her most famous scene , remarking : " It 's classic Streep , the kind of scene that makes your scalp tighten , but <unk> in a way is her handling of smaller , harder @-@ to @-@ grasp emotions " . Among several notable acting awards , Streep won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance , and her characterization was voted the third greatest movie performance of all time by Premiere magazine . Roger Ebert said of her delivery , " Streep plays the Brooklyn scenes with an enchanting Polish @-@ American accent ( she has the first accent I 've ever wanted to hug ) , and she plays the flashbacks in subtitled German and Polish . There is hardly an emotion that Streep doesn 't touch in this movie , and yet we 're never aware of her straining . This is one of the most astonishing and yet one of the most unaffected and natural performances I can imagine . " Pauline Kael on the contrary called the film an " infuriatingly bad movie " and thought that Streep " <unk> " herself , which she believed explained why her movie heroines " don 't seem to be full characters , and why there are no incidental joys to be had from watching her " . 
 The year 1983 saw Streep play her first non @-@ fictional character , the nuclear whistleblower and labor union activist Karen Silkwood who died in a suspicious car accident while investigating alleged wrongdoing at the Kerr @-@ McGee plutonium plant , in Mike Nichols 's biographical film Silkwood . Streep felt a personal connection to Silkwood , and in preparation she met with people close to the woman , and in doing so realized that each person saw a different aspect of her personality . She said , " I didn 't try to turn myself into Karen . I just tried to look at what she did . I put together every piece of information I could find about her ... What I finally did was look at the events in her life , and try to understand her from the inside . " Jack Kroll of Newsweek considered Streep 's characterization to have been " brilliant " , while Silkwood 's boyfriend Drew Stephens expressed approval in that Streep had played Karen as a human being rather than a myth , despite Karen 's father Bill thinking that Streep and the film had dumbed his daughter down . Pauline Kael believed that Streep had been miscast . Streep next played opposite Robert De Niro in the romance Falling in Love ( 1984 ) , which was poorly @-@ received , and portrayed a fighter for the French Resistance during World War II in the British drama Plenty ( 1985 ) . For the latter , Roger Ebert wrote that she conveyed " great subtlety ; it is hard to play an unbalanced , neurotic , self @-@ destructive woman , and do it with such gentleness and charm ... Streep creates a whole character around a woman who could have simply been a catalogue of symptoms . " In 2008 , Molly Haskell praised Streep 's performance in Plenty , believing it to be " one of Streep 's most difficult and ambiguous " films and " most feminist " role . 
 = = = = Out of Africa and backlash = = = = 
 Longworth considers Streep 's next release , Out of Africa ( 1985 ) , to have established her as a Hollywood superstar . In the film , Streep starred as the Danish writer Karen Blixen opposite Robert Redford 's Denys Finch Hatton . Director Sydney Pollack was initially dubious about Streep in the role as he did not think she was sexy enough , and had considered Jane Seymour for the part . Pollack recalls that Streep impressed him in a different way : " She was so direct , so honest , so without bullshit . There was no shielding between her and me . " Streep and Pollack often clashed during the 101 @-@ day shoot in Kenya , particularly over Blixen 's voice . Streep had spent much time listening to tapes of Blixen and began speaking in an old @-@ fashioned and aristocratic fashion , which Pollack thought excessive . A significant commercial and critical success , the film earned Streep another Academy Award nomination for Best Actress , also winning Best Picture . Critic Stanley Kaufmann wrote , " Meryl Streep is back in top form . This means her performance in Out of Africa is at the highest level of acting in film today " . 
 Longworth notes that the dramatic success of Out of Africa led to a backlash of critical opinion against Streep in the years that followed , especially as she was now demanding $ 4 million a picture . Unlike other stars at the time such as Sylvester Stallone and Tom Cruise , Streep " never seemed to play herself " , and certain critics felt her technical finesse led people to literally see her acting . Her next films did not appeal to a wide audience ; she co @-@ starred with Jack Nicholson in the dramas Heartburn ( 1986 ) and Ironweed ( 1987 ) , in which she sang onscreen for the first time since the television movie , Secret Service ( 1977 ) . In Evil Angels ( 1988 ) , she played Lindy Chamberlain , an Australian woman who had been convicted of the murder of her infant daughter despite claiming that the baby had been taken by a dingo . Filmed in Australia , Streep won the Australian Film Institute Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role , a Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival , and the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress . Streep has said of perfecting the Australian accent in the film : " I had to study a little bit for Australian because it 's not dissimilar [ to American ] , so it 's like coming from Italian to Spanish . You get a little mixed up " . Vincent Canby of The New York Times referred it to her performance as " another stunning performance " , played with " the kind of virtuosity that seems to redefine the possibilities of screen acting " . 
 In 1989 , Streep lobbied to play the lead role in Oliver Stone 's adaption of the play Evita , but two months before filming was due to commence she dropped out , citing " exhaustion " initially , although it was later revealed that there was a dispute over her salary . By the end of the decade , Streep actively looked to star in a comedy . She found the role in She @-@ Devil ( 1989 ) , a satire that parodied Hollywood 's obsession with beauty and cosmetic surgery , in which she played a glamorous writer . Though not a success , Richard Corliss of Time wrote that Streep was the " one reason " to see the film and observed that it marked a departure from the dramatic roles she was known to play . Reacting to her string of poorly received films , Streep said : " Audiences are shrinking ; as the marketing strategy defines more and more narrowly who they want to reach — males from 16 to 25 — it 's become a chicken @-@ and @-@ egg syndrome . Which came first ? First they release all these summer movies , then do a demographic survey of who 's going to see them " . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 = = = = Unsuccessful comedies and The Bridges of Madison County = = = = 
 Biographer Karen Hollinger described the early 1990s as a downturn in the popularity of Streep 's films , attributing this partly to a critical perception that her comedies had been an attempt to convey a lighter image following several serious but commercially unsuccessful dramas , and more significantly to the lack of options available to an actress in her forties . Streep commented that she had limited her options by her preference to work in Los Angeles , close to her family , a situation that she had anticipated in a 1981 interview when she commented , " By the time an actress hits her mid @-@ forties , no one 's interested in her anymore . And if you want to fit a couple of babies into that schedule as well , you 've got to pick your parts with great care . " At the Screen Actor 's Guild National Women 's Conference in 1990 , Streep <unk> the first national event , emphasizing the decline in women 's work opportunities , pay parity , and role models within the film industry . She criticized the film industry for downplaying the importance of women both on screen and off . 
 After roles in the comedy @-@ drama Postcards from the Edge ( 1990 ) and the comedy @-@ fantasy Defending Your Life ( 1991 ) , Streep starred with Goldie Hawn in farcical black comedy , Death Becomes Her ( 1992 ) , with Bruce Willis as their co @-@ star . Streep persuaded writer David Koepp to rewrite several of the scenes , particularly the one in which her character has an affair with a younger man , which she believed was " unrealistically male " in its conception . The seven @-@ month shoot was the longest of Streep 's career , during which she got into character by " thinking about being slightly pissed off all of the time " . Due to Streep 's allergies to numerous cosmetics , special prosthetics had to be designed to age her by ten years to look 54 , although Streep believed that they made her look nearer 70 . Longworth considers Death Becomes Her to have been " the most physical performance Streep had yet committed to screen , all broad weeping , smirking , and eye @-@ rolling " . Although it was a commercial success , earning $ 15 @.@ 1 million in just five days , Streep 's contribution to comedy was generally not taken well by critics . Time 's Richard Corliss wrote approvingly of Streep 's " wicked @-@ witch routine " but dismissed the film as " She @-@ Devil with a make @-@ over " and one which " hates women " . 
 In 1993 , Streep appeared with Jeremy Irons , Glenn Close and Winona Ryder in The House of the Spirits , set during the military dictatorship of Chile . The film was not well received by critics . Anthony Lane of The New Yorker wrote : " This is really quite an achievement . It brings together Jeremy Irons , Meryl Streep , Winona Ryder , Antonio Banderas , and Vanessa Redgrave and insures that , without exception , they all give their worst performances ever " . The following year , Streep featured in The River Wild , as the mother of children on a whitewater rafting trip who encounter two violent criminals ( Kevin Bacon and John C. Reilly ) in the wilderness . Though critical reaction was generally mixed , Peter Travers of Rolling Stone found her to be " strong , sassy and looser than she has ever been onscreen " . 
 Streep 's most successful film of the decade came in the 1995 romance The Bridges of Madison County from director Clint Eastwood , who adapted the film from Robert James Waller 's novel of the same name . It relates the story of Robert Kincaid ( Eastwood ) , a photographer working for National Geographic , who has a love affair with a middle @-@ aged Italian farm wife in Iowa named Francesca ( Streep ) . Though Streep disliked the novel it was based on , she found the script to be a special opportunity for an actress her age . She gained weight for the part , and dressed differently from the character in the book to emulate voluptuous Italian film stars such as Sophia Loren . Both Loren and Anna Magnani were an influence in her portrayal , and Streep viewed Pier Paolo <unk> 's Mamma Roma ( 1962 ) prior to filming . The film was a box office hit and grossed over $ 70 million in the United States . The film , unlike the novel , was warmly received by critics . Janet Maslin of The New York Times wrote that Eastwood had managed to create " a moving , elegiac love story at the heart of Mr. Waller 's self @-@ congratulatory overkill " , while Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal described it as " one of the most pleasurable films in recent memory " . Longworth believes that Streep 's performance was " crucial to transforming what could have been a weak soap opera into a vibrant work of historical fiction implicitly critiquing postwar America 's stifling culture of domesticity " . She considers it to have been the role in which Streep became " arguably the first middle @-@ aged actress to be taken seriously by Hollywood as a romantic heroine " . 
 = = = = Late 1990s = = = = 
 In 1996 , Streep played the estranged sister of Bessie ( Diane Keaton ) , a woman battling leukemia , in Marvin 's Room , an adaptation of the play by Scott McPherson . Streep recommended Keaton for the role . The film also starred a young Leonardo DiCaprio as Streep 's character 's rebellious son . Roger Ebert stated that " Streep and Keaton , in their different styles , find ways to make Lee and Bessie into much more than the expression of their problems . " The film was critically acclaimed , and Streep earned another Golden Globe nomination for her performance . 
 In 1998 , Streep played an Irishwoman opposite Michael Gambon and Catherine McCormack in Pat O 'Connor 's Dancing at Lughnasa , which was entered into the Venice Film Festival of 1998 . Janet Maslin of The New York Times remarked that " Meryl Streep has made many a grand acting gesture in her career , but the way she simply peers out a window in Dancing at Lughnasa ranks with the best . Everything the viewer need know about Kate Mundy , the woman she plays here , is written on that prim , lonely face and its flabbergasted gaze " . Later that year , Streep played a cancer sufferer caught in a difficult family situation , playing the mother of Renée Zellweger and wife of William Hurt in One True Thing . The film was well received by critics . Mick LaSalle in the San Francisco Chronicle declared , " After ' One True Thing ' , critics who persist in the fiction that Streep is a cold and technical actress will need to get their heads examined . She is so instinctive and natural – so thoroughly in the moment and operating on flights of inspiration – that she 's able to give us a woman who 's at once wildly idiosyncratic and utterly believable . " Los Angeles Times film critic Kenneth Turan noted that Streep 's role " is one of the least self @-@ consciously dramatic and surface showy of her career , but that she " adds a level of honesty and reality that makes [ her performance ] one of her most moving . " 
 In 1999 , Streep portrayed Roberta <unk> , a real @-@ life New Yorker who found passion and enlightenment teaching violin to the inner @-@ city kids of East Harlem , in the music drama Music of the Heart . A departure from director Wes Craven 's previous work on films like A Nightmare on Elm Street and the Scream series , Streep replaced singer Madonna who left the project before filming began due to creative differences with Craven . Required to perform on the violin , Streep went through two months of intense training , five to six hours a day . Streep received nominations for an Academy Award , a Golden Globe and a Screen Actors Guild Award for her performance . Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four and wrote that " Meryl Streep is known for her mastery of accents ; she may be the most versatile speaker in the movies . Here you might think she has no accent , unless you 've heard her real speaking voice ; then you realize that <unk> 's speaking style is no less a particular achievement than Streep 's other accents . This is not Streep 's voice , but someone else 's – with a certain flat quality , as if later education and refinement came after a somewhat unsophisticated childhood . " 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 = = = = 2000 – 05 = = = = 
 Streep entered the 2000s with an uncredited voice cameo in Steven Spielberg 's A.I. Artificial Intelligence , a science fiction film about a childlike android , played by Haley Joel Osment . The same year , Streep co @-@ hosted the annual Nobel Peace Prize Concert concert with Liam Neeson which was held in Oslo , Norway , on December 11 , 2001 , in honour of the Nobel Peace Prize laureate , the United Nations and Kofi Annan . 
 In 2001 , Streep returned to the stage for the first time in more than twenty years , playing Arkadina in The Public Theater 's revival of Anton Chekhov 's The Seagull , directed by Mike Nichols and co @-@ starring Kevin Kline , Natalie Portman , and Philip Seymour Hoffman . The same year , she began work on Spike Jonze 's comedy @-@ drama Adaptation ( 2002 ) , in which she portrayed real @-@ life journalist Susan Orlean . Lauded by critics and viewers alike , the film won Streep her fourth Golden Globe in the Best Supporting Actress category . A. O. Scott considered Streep 's portrayal of Orlean to have been " played with impish composure " , noting the contrast in her " wittily realized " character with love interest Chris Cooper 's " lank @-@ haired , toothless charisma " as the autodidact arrested for poaching rare orchids . In 2002 Streep appeared alongside Nicole Kidman and Julianne Moore in Stephen Daldry 's The Hours , based on the 1999 novel by Michael Cunningham . Focusing on three women of different generations whose lives are interconnected by the novel Mrs. Dalloway by Virginia Woolf , the film was generally well received and won all three leading actresses a Silver Bear for Best Actress . 
 In 2003 , Streep had a cameo as herself in the Farrelly brothers comedy Stuck on You ( 2003 ) and reunited with Mike Nichols to star with Al Pacino and Emma Thompson in the HBO adaptation of Tony Kushner 's six @-@ hour play Angels in America , the story of two couples whose relationships dissolve amidst the backdrop of Reagan Era politics . Streep , who was cast in four roles in the mini @-@ series , received her second Emmy Award and fifth Golden Globe for her performance . In 2004 , Streep was awarded the AFI Life Achievement Award by the board of directors of the American Film Institute . She appeared in Jonathan Demme 's moderately successful remake of The Manchurian Candidate , co @-@ starring Denzel Washington , playing the role of a woman who is both a U.S. senator and the manipulative , ruthless mother of a vice @-@ presidential candidate . The same year , she played the supporting role of Aunt Josephine in Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events alongside Jim Carrey , based on the first three novels in Snicket 's book series . The black comedy received generally favorable reviews from critics , and won the Academy Award for Best Makeup . Inspired by her love of <unk> in France and Claude Monet , Streep did the narration for the film Monet 's <unk> , with Alice Waters , Steve Wynn , Daniel Boulud and Helen <unk> Bordman . 
 Streep was next cast in the 2005 comedy film Prime , directed by Ben Younger . In the film , she played Lisa Metzger , the Jewish psychoanalyst of a divorced and lonesome business @-@ woman , played by Uma Thurman , who enters a relationship with Metzger 's 23 @-@ year @-@ old son ( Bryan Greenberg ) . A modest mainstream success , it eventually grossed US $ 67 @.@ 9 million internationally . Roger Ebert noted how Streep had " that ability to cut through the solemnity of a scene with a zinger that reveals how all human effort is " . 
 = = = = 2006 – 09 = = = = 
 In August and September 2006 , Streep starred onstage at The Public Theater 's production of Mother Courage and Her Children at the Delacorte Theatre in Central Park . The Public Theater production was a new translation by playwright Tony Kushner ( Angels in America ) , with songs in the Weill / Brecht style written by composer Jeanine Tesori ( Caroline , or Change ) ; veteran director George C. Wolfe was at the helm . Streep starred alongside Kevin Kline and Austin Pendleton in this three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour play . Also in 2006 , Streep , along with Lily Tomlin , portrayed the last two members of what was once a popular family country music act in Robert Altman 's final film A Prairie Home Companion . A comedic ensemble piece featuring Lindsay Lohan , Tommy Lee Jones , Kevin Kline and Woody Harrelson , the film revolves around the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes activities at the long @-@ running public radio show of the same name . The film grossed more than US $ 26 million , the majority of which came from domestic markets . 
 Commercially , Streep fared better with a role in The Devil Wears Prada ( 2006 ) , a loose screen adaptation of Lauren Weisberger 's 2003 novel of the same name . Streep portrayed the powerful and demanding Miranda Priestly , fashion magazine editor ( and boss of a recent college graduate played by Anne Hathaway ) . Though the overall film received mixed reviews , her portrayal , of what Ebert calls the " poised and imperious Miranda " , drew rave reviews from critics and earned her many award nominations , including her record @-@ setting 14th Oscar bid , as well as another Golden Globe . Upon its commercial release , the film became Streep 's biggest commercial success yet , grossing more than US $ 326 @.@ 5 million worldwide . 
 In 2007 , Streep was cast in four films . She portrayed a wealthy university patron in Chen Shi @-@ zheng 's much @-@ delayed feature drama Dark Matter , a film about a Chinese science graduate student who becomes violent after dealing with academic politics at a U.S. university . Inspired by the events of the 1991 University of Iowa shooting , and initially scheduled for a 2007 release , producers and investors decided to shelve Dark Matter out of respect for the Virginia Tech massacre in April 2007 . The drama received negative to mixed reviews upon its limited 2008 release . Streep played a U.S. government official who investigates an Egyptian foreign national suspected of terrorism in the political thriller Rendition ( 2007 ) , directed by Gavin Hood . Keen to get involved in a thriller film , Streep welcomed the opportunity to star in a film genre for which she was not usually offered scripts and immediately signed on to the project . Upon its release , Rendition was less commercially successful , and received mixed reviews . 
 Also in 2007 , Streep had a short role alongside Vanessa Redgrave , Glenn Close and her eldest daughter Mamie Gummer in Lajos Koltai 's drama film Evening , based on the 1998 novel of the same name by Susan Minot . Switching between the present and the past , it tells the story of a bedridden woman , who remembers her tumultuous life in the mid @-@ 1950s . The film was released to a lukewarm reaction from critics , who called it " beautifully filmed , but decidedly dull [ and ] a colossal waste of a talented cast . " Streep 's last film of 2007 was Robert Redford 's Lions for Lambs , a film about the connection between a platoon of United States soldiers in Afghanistan , a U.S. senator , a reporter , and a California college professor . Like Evening , critics felt that the talent of the cast was wasted and that it suffered from slow pacing , although one critic announced that Streep positively stood out , being " natural , unforced , quietly powerful " , in comparison to Redford 's forced performance . 
 In 2008 , Streep found major commercial success when she starred in Phyllida Lloyd 's Mamma Mia ! , a film adaptation of the musical of the same name , based on the songs of Swedish pop group ABBA . Co @-@ starring Amanda Seyfried , Pierce Brosnan , Stellan Skarsgård and Colin Firth , Streep played a single mother and a former girl @-@ group singer , whose daughter ( Seyfried ) , a bride @-@ to @-@ be who never met her father , invites three likely paternal candidates to her wedding on an idyllic Greek island . An instant box office success , Mamma Mia ! became Streep 's highest @-@ grossing film to date , with box office receipts of US $ 602 @.@ 6 million , also ranking it first among the highest @-@ grossing musical films for now . Nominated for another Golden Globe , Streep 's performance was generally well received by critics , with Wesley Morris of the Boston Globe commenting " the greatest actor in American movies has finally become a movie star . " 
 Streep 's other film of 2008 was Doubt featuring Philip Seymour Hoffman , Amy Adams , and Viola Davis . A drama revolving around the stern principal nun ( Streep ) of a Bronx Catholic school in 1964 who brings charges of pedophilia against a popular priest ( Hoffman ) , the film became a moderate box office success , but was hailed by many critics as one of the best of 2008 . The film received five Academy Awards nominations , for its four lead actors and for Shanley 's script . Ebert , who awarded the film the full four stars , highlighted Streep 's caricature of a nun , who " hates all inroads of the modern world " , while Kelly Vance of The East Bay Express remarked : " It 's thrilling to see a pro like Streep step into an already wildly exaggerated role and then ramp it up a few notches just for the sheer hell of it . Grim , red @-@ eyed , deathly pale Sister Aloysius may be the scariest nun of all time . " 
 In 2009 , Streep played chef Julia Child in Nora Ephron 's Julie & Julia , co @-@ starring Amy Adams and Stanley Tucci . ( Tucci and Streep had worked together earlier in Devil Wears Prada . ) The first major motion picture based on a blog , Julie and Julia contrasts the life of Child in the early years of her culinary career with the life of young New Yorker Julie Powell ( Adams ) , who aspires to cook all 524 recipes in Child 's cookbook Mastering the Art of French Cooking . Longworth believes her caricature of Julia Child was " quite possibly the biggest performance of her career while also drawing on her own experience to bring lived @-@ in truth the story of a late bloomer " . The same year , Streep starred in Nancy Meyers ' romantic comedy It 's Complicated , with Alec Baldwin and Steve Martin . She received nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for both Julie & Julia and It 's Complicated ; she won the award for Julie & Julia and later received her 16th Oscar nomination for it . She also lent her voice to Mrs. Felicity Fox in the stop @-@ motion film Fantastic Mr. Fox . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 Streep 's first film of the 2010s was Phyllida Lloyd 's The Iron Lady ( 2011 ) , a British biographical film about Margaret Thatcher , which takes a look at the Prime Minister during the Falklands War and her years in retirement . Streep , who sat through a session at the House of Commons to observe British MPs in action in preparation for her role , called her casting " a daunting and exciting challenge . " While the film had a mixed reception , Streep 's performance got rave reviews , earning her Best Actress awards at the Golden Globes and the BAFTAs as well as her third win at the 84th Academy Awards . Former advisers , friends and family of Thatcher criticized Streep 's portrayal of her as inaccurate and biased . The following year , after Thatcher 's death , Streep issued a formal statement describing Thatcher 's " hard @-@ nosed fiscal measures " and " hands @-@ off approach to financial regulation , " while praising her " personal strength and grit . " 
 In 2012 , Streep reunited with Prada director David Frankel on the set of the comedy @-@ drama film Hope Springs , co @-@ starring Tommy Lee Jones and Steve Carell . Streep and Jones play a middle @-@ aged couple , who attend a week of intensive marriage counseling to try to bring back the intimacy missing in their relationship . Reviews for the film were mostly positive , with critics praising the " mesmerizing performances [ ... ] which offer filmgoers some grown @-@ up laughs – and a thoughtful look at mature relationships " . 
 In 2013 , Streep starred alongside Julia Roberts , Ewan McGregor , Chris Cooper , and others in the black comedy drama August : Osage County about a dysfunctional family that reunites into the familial house when their patriarch suddenly disappears . Based on Tracy Letts 's Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning play of the same name , Streep received positive reviews for her portrayal of the family 's strong @-@ willed and contentious matriarch , who is suffering from oral cancer and an addiction to narcotics , and was subsequently nominated for another Golden Globe , SAG , and Academy Award . At the National Board of Review Awards in 2013 , Streep labeled Walt Disney as " anti @-@ semitic " and a " gender bigot . " Former actors , employees and animators who knew Disney during his lifetime rebuffed the comments as misinformed and selective . The Walt Disney Family Museum issued a statement rebuking Streep 's allegations indirectly , citing , among others , Disney 's contributions to Jewish charities and his published letters stating that women " have the right to expect the same chances for advancement as men . " However , Disney 's grandniece , Abigail Disney , wholeheartedly agreed with Streep 's statements , stating that he was an " anti @-@ Semite , " and " racist " who was also an exemplary filmmaker whose work " made billions of people happy . " 
 Streep 's first film of 2014 was the motion picture adaptation of the young adult novel The Giver . Set in 2048 , the social science fiction film tells the story of a post @-@ apocalyptic community without war , pain , suffering , differences or choice , where a young boy is chosen to learn the real world . Streep , who plays the community 's leader , was aware of the book before being offered the role by co @-@ star and producer Jeff Bridges . Upon its release , The Giver was met with generally mixed to negative reviews from critics . The same year , she also had a small role in the period drama film The <unk> , Set in the 1850s midwest , the film stars Hilary Swank and Jones as an unusual pair , who helps three women driven to madness by the frontier to get back East . Streep appears not until the end of the film , playing a preacher 's wife , who takes the women into care . The <unk> premiered at the 2014 Cannes Film Festival where it garnered largely positive reviews from critics . 
 Her final film of 2014 was the Disney film adaptation of the Broadway musical Into the Woods , directed by Rob Marshall . A fantasy genre crossover inspired by the Grimm Brothers ' fairy tales , it centers on a childless couple , who sets out to end a curse placed on them by a vengeful witch , played by Streep . Though the film was dismissed by some critics such as Mark Kermode as " irritating <unk> " , Streep 's performance earned her Academy Award , Golden Globe , SAG , and Critic 's Choice Award nominations for Best Supporting Actress . In July 2014 , it was announced that Streep would portray Maria Callas in Master Class , but the project was pulled after director Mike Nichols 's death in November of the same year . 
 In 2015 , Streep starred in Jonathan Demme 's Ricki and the Flash , playing a grocery store checkout worker by day who is a rock musician at night , and who has one last chance to reconnect with her estranged family . Streep learned to play the guitar for the semi @-@ autobiographical dramedy film , which reunited her with her eldest daughter Mamie Gummer . Reviews of the film were generally mixed . Streep 's other film of the year was director Sarah Gavron 's period drama Suffragette , co @-@ starring Carey Mulligan and Helena Bonham Carter . In the film , she played the small but pivotal role of Emmeline Pankhurst , a British political activist and leader of the British suffragette movement who helped women win the right to vote . The film received mostly positive reviews , particularly for the performances of the cast , though its distributor earned criticism that Streep 's prominent position within the marketing was misleading . 
 In February 2016 , Streep served in her first appearance as president of the main competition jury at the 66th Berlin International Film Festival . Streep will next be seen in the Stephen Frears @-@ directed comedy Florence Foster Jenkins , a biopic about the eponymous opera singer . Other cast members include Hugh Grant , and Simon Helberg . 
 = = Acting style and legacy = = 
 Such is Streep 's contemporary position in world cinema that Vanity Fair has commented that " it 's hard to imagine that there was a time before Meryl Streep was the greatest @-@ living actress " . Emma Brockes of The Guardian notes that despite Streep 's being " one of the most famous actresses in the world " , it is " strangely hard to pin an image on Streep " , in a career where she has " laboured to establish herself as an actor whose roots lie in ordinary life " . Despite her success , Streep has always been modest about her own acting and achievements in cinema . She has stated that she has no particular method when it comes to acting , learning from the days of her early studies that she can 't be articulate . She said in 1987 , " I have a smattering of things I 've learned from different teachers , but nothing I can put into a valise and open it up and say ' Now which one would you like ' ? Nothing I can count on and that makes it more dangerous . But then the danger makes it more exciting . " She has stated that her ideal director is one who gives her complete artistic control , and allowing a degree of improvization and her to learn from her own mistakes . 
 Karina Longworth notes how " external " Streep 's performances are , " chameleonic " in her impersonation of characters , " subsuming herself into them , rather than personifying them " . In her early roles such as Manhattan and Kramer vs. Kramer , she was compared to both Diane Keaton and Jill Clayburgh , in that her characters were unsympathetic , which Streep has attributed to the tendency to be drawn to playing women who are difficult to like and are devoid of a mutual emotional understanding with others . Streep has stated that many consider her to be a technical actor , but she professed that it comes down to her love of reading the initial script , adding , " I come ready and I don 't want to screw around and waste the first 10 takes on adjusting lighting and everybody else getting comfortable " . 
 Mike Nichols , who directed Streep in Silkwood , Heartburn and Postcards from the Edge , praised Streep 's ability to transform herself into her characters , remarking that " in every role she becomes a totally new human being . As she becomes the person she is portraying , the other performers begin to react to her as if she were that person " . He said that directing her is " so much like falling in love that it has the characteristics of a time which you remember as magical but which is shrouded in mystery " . He also noted that Streep 's acting ability had a profound impact on her co @-@ stars and that " one could improve by 1000 % purely by watching her . " Longworth believes that in nearly every film , Streep has " sly infused " a feminist point of view in her portrayals . However , film critic Molly Haskell has stated , " None of her heroines are feminist , strictly speaking . Yet they uncannily embody various <unk> of experience in the last twenty years , as women have redefined themselves against the background of the women 's movement " . 
 Streep is well known for her ability to imitate a wide range of accents , from Danish in Out of Africa ( 1985 ) to English received pronunciation in Plenty ( 1985 ) , The French Lieutenant 's Woman ( 1981 ) , and The Iron Lady ( 2011 ) ; Italian in The Bridges of Madison County ( 1995 ) ; a Minnesota accent in A Prairie Home Companion ( 2006 ) ; Irish @-@ American in Ironweed ; and a heavy Bronx accent in Doubt . Streep has stated that she grew up listening to artists such as Barbra Streisand , The Beatles and Bob Dylan , and she learned a lot about how to use her voice , her " instrument , " by listening to Barbra Streisand 's albums . In the 1988 film Evil Angels , in which she portrays a New Zealand transplant to Australia , Streep perfected a hybrid of Australian & New Zealand English . Her performance received the Australian Film Institute Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role , as well as Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival , and the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress . 
 For her role in the film Sophie 's Choice ( 1982 ) , Streep spoke both English and German with a Polish accent , as well as Polish itself . In The Iron Lady , she reproduced the vocal style of Margaret Thatcher from the time before Thatcher became Britain 's Prime Minister , and after she had taken elocution lessons to change her pitch , pronunciation , and delivery . Streep has commented that using accents as part of her acting is a technique she views as an obvious requirement in her portrayal of a character . When questioned in Belfast as to how she reproduces different accents , Streep replied in a perfect Belfast accent : " I listen . " 
 = = Other work = = 
 After Streep appeared in Mamma Mia ! , her rendition of the song " Mamma Mia " rose to popularity in the Portuguese music charts , where it peaked at No. 8 in October 2008 . At the 35th People 's Choice Awards , her version of " Mamma Mia " won an award for " Favorite Song From A Soundtrack " . In 2008 , Streep was nominated for a Grammy Award ( her fifth nomination ) for her work on the Mamma Mia ! soundtrack . Throughout her career , Streep has narrated numerous audio books , including three by children 's book author William Steig : Brae Irene , <unk> <unk> , and The One and Only Shrek ! . 
 Streep is the spokesperson for the National Women 's History Museum , to which she has donated a significant amount of money ( including her fee for The Iron Lady , which was $ 1 million ) and hosted numerous events . On October 4 , 2012 , Streep donated $ 1 million to The Public Theater in honor of both its late founder , Joseph Papp , and her friend , the author Nora Ephron . She also supports Gucci 's " Chime For Change " campaign that aims to spread female empowerment . Streep , when asked in a 2015 interview by Time Out magazine if she was a feminist , answered , " I am a humanist , I am for nice easy balance . " 
 In 2014 , Streep established two scholarships for students at the University of Massachusetts Lowell – the Meryl Streep Endowed Scholarship for English majors , and the Joan Hertzberg Endowed Scholarship ( named for Streep 's former classmate at Vassar College ) for math majors . In April 2015 , it was announced that Streep had funded a screenwriters lab for female screenwriters over forty years old , called the Writers Lab , to be run by New York Women in Film & Television and the collective IRIS . As of the announcement , the Writers Lab is the only initiative in the world for female screenwriters over forty years old . 
 In 2015 , Streep signed an open letter for which the ONE Campaign had been collecting signatures ; the letter was addressed to Angela Merkel and Nkosazana Dlamini @-@ Zuma , urging them to focus on women as they served as the head of the G7 in Germany and the AU in South Africa respectively , which was set to set the priorities in development funding before a main UN summit in September 2015 to establish new development goals for the generation . Also in 2015 , Streep sent each member of the U.S. Congress a letter supporting the Equal Rights Amendment . Each of her letters was sent with a copy of the book Equal Means Equal : Why the Time for the ERA is Now by Jessica Neuwirth , president of the ERA Coalition . In March 2016 Streep , among others , signed a letter asking for gender equality throughout the world , in observance of International Women 's Day ; this was also organized by the ONE Campaign . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Author Karina Longworth notes that despite her " high level of stardom " for decades , Streep has managed to maintain a relatively normal personal life . Streep lived with actor John Cazale for three years until his death from lung cancer in March 1978 . Al Pacino remarked that " I 've hardly ever seen a person so devoted to someone who is falling away like John was . To see her in that act of love for this man was overwhelming . " Streep said of his death , " I didn 't get over it . I don 't want to get over it . No matter what you do , the pain is always there in some recess of your mind , and it affects everything that happens afterwards . I think you can assimilate the pain and go on without making an obsession of it " . 
 Streep married sculptor Don Gummer six months after Cazale 's death . They have four children : musician Henry ( born 1979 ) , actresses Mamie ( born 1983 ) and Grace ( born 1986 ) , and model Louisa ( born 1991 ) . In August 1985 , the family moved into a $ 1 @.@ 8 @-@ million private estate in Connecticut , with an extensive art studio to facilitate Streep 's husband 's work , and lived there until they bought a $ 3 @-@ million mansion in Brentwood , Los Angeles , in 1990 . They eventually moved back to Connecticut . 
 When asked if religion plays a part in her life in 2009 , Streep replied : " I follow no doctrine . I don 't belong to a church or a temple or a synagogue or an ashram . " In an interview in December 2008 , she also alluded to her lack of religious belief when she said : " So I 've always been really , deeply interested , because I think I can understand the solace that 's available in the whole construct of religion . But I really don 't believe in the power of prayer , or things would have been avoided that have happened , that are awful . So it 's a horrible position as an intelligent , emotional , yearning human being to sit outside of the available comfort there . But I just can 't go there . " 
 When asked from where she draws consolation in the face of aging and death , Streep responded : " Consolation ? I 'm not sure I have it . I have a belief , I guess , in the power of the aggregate human attempt – the best of ourselves . In love and hope and optimism – you know , the magic things that seem inexplicable . Why we are the way we are . I do have a sense of trying to make things better . Where does that come from ? " 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Louse = 
 Louse ( plural : lice ) is the common name for members of the order Phthiraptera , which contains nearly 5 @,@ 000 species of wingless insect . Lice are obligate parasites , living externally on warm @-@ blooded hosts which include every species of bird and mammal , except for monotremes , pangolins , bats and cetaceans . Lice are vectors of diseases such as typhus . 
 Chewing lice live among the hairs or feathers of their host and feed on skin and debris , while sucking lice pierce the host 's skin and feed on blood and other secretions . They usually spend their whole life on a single host , cementing their eggs , which are known as <unk> , to hairs or feathers . The eggs hatch into nymphs , which moult three times before becoming fully grown , a process that takes about four weeks . 
 Humans host three species of louse , the head louse , the body louse and the pubic louse . The body louse has the smallest genome of any known insect ; it has been used as a model organism and has been the subject of much research . 
 Lice were ubiquitous in human society until at least the Middle Ages . They appear in folktales , songs such as The Kilkenny Louse House , and novels such as James Joyce 's Finnegans Wake . They commonly feature in the psychiatric disorder delusional parasitosis . A louse was one of the early subjects of microscopy , appearing in Robert Hooke 's 1667 book , Micrographia . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The order Phthiraptera is clearly a monophyletic grouping , united as the members are by a number of derived features including their parasitism on warm @-@ blooded vertebrates and the combination of their metathoracic ganglia with their abdominal ganglia to form a single ventral nerve junction . The order has traditionally been divided into two suborders , the sucking lice ( Anoplura ) and the chewing ( Mallophaga ) ; however , recent classifications suggest that the Mallophaga are paraphyletic and four suborders are now recognized : 
 Anoplura : sucking lice , occurring on mammals exclusively 
 <unk> : parasites of elephants and warthogs 
 <unk> : mostly avian chewing lice , however , one family parasitizes mammals 
 <unk> : a primitive suborder of chewing lice , widespread on birds , however , also live on South @-@ American and Australian mammals 
 Nearly 5 @,@ 000 species of louse have been identified , about 4 @,@ 000 being parasitic on birds and 800 on mammals . Lice are present on every continent in all the habitats that their host animals and birds occupy . They are found even in the Antarctic , where penguins carry 15 species of lice ( in the genera <unk> and <unk> ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 <unk> lice are small wingless insects ranging from 0 @.@ 5 to 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 02 to 0 @.@ 20 in ) in length . They have narrow heads and oval , flattened bodies . They have no ocelli , and their compound eyes are reduced in size or absent . Their antennae are short with three to five segments , and their mouth parts , which are retractable into their head , are adapted for piercing and sucking . There is a cibarial pump at the start of the gut ; it is powered by muscles attached to the inside of the cuticle of the head . The mouthparts consist of a proboscis which is toothed , and a set of stylets arranged in a cylinder inside the proboscis , <unk> a salivary canal ( ventrally ) and a food canal ( dorsally ) . The thoracic segments are fused , the abdominal segments are separate , and there is a single large claw at the tip of each of the six legs . 
 Chewing lice are also flattened and can be slightly larger than sucking lice , ranging in length from 0 @.@ 5 to 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 02 to 0 @.@ 24 in ) . They are similar to sucking lice in form but the head is wider than the thorax and all species have compound eyes . There are no ocelli and the mouthparts are adapted for chewing . The antennae have three to five segments and are slender in the suborder <unk> , but club @-@ shaped in the suborder <unk> . The legs are short and robust , and terminated by one or two claws . Many lice are specific to a single species of host and have co @-@ evolved with it . They are usually cryptically coloured to match the fur or feathers of the host . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Lice are divided into two groups : sucking lice , which obtain their nourishment from feeding on the sebaceous secretions and body fluids of their host ; and chewing lice , which are scavengers , feeding on skin , fragments of feathers or hair , and debris found on the host 's body . Most are found on only specific types of animals , and , in some cases , on only a particular part of the body ; some animals are known to host up to fifteen different species , although one to three is typical for mammals , and two to six for birds . For example , in humans , different species of louse inhabit the scalp and pubic hair . Lice generally cannot survive for long if removed from their host . Some species of chewing lice house symbiotic bacteria in <unk> in their bodies . These may assist in digestion because if the insect is deprived of them , it will die . If their host dies , lice can opportunistically use <unk> to hitch a ride on a fly and attempt to find a new host . 
 A louse 's color varies from pale beige to dark gray ; however , if feeding on blood , it may become considerably darker . Female lice are usually more common than males , and some species are parthenogenetic , with young developing from unfertilized eggs . A louse 's egg is commonly called a nit . Many lice attach their eggs to their hosts ' hair with specialized saliva ; the saliva / hair bond is very difficult to sever without specialized products . Lice inhabiting birds , however , may simply leave their eggs in parts of the body inaccessible to preening , such as the interior of feather shafts . Living louse eggs tend to be pale whitish , whereas dead louse eggs are yellower . 
 Lice are <unk> , being born as miniature versions of the adult , known as nymphs . The young moult three times before reaching the final adult form , usually within a month after hatching . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The average number of lice per host tends to be higher in large @-@ bodied bird species than in small ones . Lice have an aggregated distribution across bird individuals , i.e. most lice live on a few birds , while most birds are relatively free of lice . This pattern is more pronounced in territorial than in colonial — more social — bird species . Host organisms that dive under water to feed on aquatic prey harbor fewer taxa of lice . Bird taxa that are capable of exerting stronger antiparasitic defense — such as stronger T cell immune response or larger uropygial glands — harbor more taxa of <unk> lice than others . Reductions in the size of host populations may cause a long @-@ lasting reduction of louse taxonomic richness , for example , birds introduced into New Zealand host fewer species of lice there than in Europe . Louse sex ratios are more balanced in more social hosts and more female @-@ biased in less social hosts , presumably due to the stronger isolation among louse subpopulations ( living on separate birds ) in the latter case . The extinction of a species results in the extinction of its host @-@ specific lice . Host @-@ switching is a random event that would seem very rarely likely to be successful , but speciation has occurred over evolutionary time @-@ scales so it must be successfully accomplished sometimes . 
 Lice may reduce host life expectancy if the infestation is heavy , but most seem to have little effect on their host . The habit of dust bathing in domestic hens is probably an attempt by the birds to rid themselves of lice . Lice may transmit microbial diseases and helminth parasites , but most individuals spend their whole life cycle on a single host and are only able to transfer to a new host opportunistically . <unk> lice may reduce the thermoregulation effect of the plumage ; thus heavily infested birds lose more heat than others . Lice infestation is a disadvantage in the context of sexual rivalry . 
 The human body louse Pediculus humanus humanus had its genome sequenced in 2010 , and at that time it had the smallest insect genome known . This louse can transmit certain diseases while the human head louse ( P. h. capitis ) , to which it is closely related , cannot . With their simple life history and small genomes , the pair make ideal model organisms to study the molecular mechanisms behind the transmission of pathogens and vector competence . In 2015 there were 5 cases of louse @-@ borne relapsing fever being transmitted to locals reported in Italy . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 Humans host three different kinds of lice : head lice , body lice , and pubic lice . Lice infestations can be controlled with lice combs , and medicated shampoos or washes . 
 Lice have been the subject of significant DNA research in the 2000s that led to discoveries on human evolution . The three species of sucking lice that parasitize human being belong to two genera : Pediculus and <unk> head lice ( Pediculus humanus capitis ) , body lice ( Pediculus humanus corporis ) , and pubic lice ( Phthirus pubis ) . Human head and body lice ( genus Pediculus ) share a common ancestor with chimpanzee lice , while pubic lice ( genus Phthirus ) share a common ancestor with gorilla lice . Using phylogenetic and <unk> analysis , Reed et al. hypothesized that Pediculus and Phthirus are sister taxa and monophyletic . In other words , the two genera descended from the same common ancestor . The age of divergence between Pediculus and its common ancestor is estimated to be 6 @-@ 7 million years ago , which matches the age predicted by chimpanzee @-@ hominid divergence . Because parasites rely on their hosts , host @-@ parasite <unk> events are likely . 
 For example , genetic evidence suggests that our human ancestors acquired pubic lice from gorillas approximately 3 @-@ 4 million years ago . Unlike the genus Pediculus , the divergence in Phthirus does not match the age of host divergence that likely occurred 7 million years ago . Reed et al. propose a Phthirus species host @-@ switch around 3 @-@ 4 million years ago . While it is difficult to determine if a parasite @-@ host switch occurred in evolutionary history , this explanation is the most parsimonious ( containing the fewest evolutionary changes ) . 
 Additionally , the DNA differences between head lice and body lice provide corroborating evidence that humans used clothing between 80 @,@ 000 and 170 @,@ 000 years ago , before leaving Africa . Human head and body lice occupy distinct ecological zones : head lice live and feed on the scalp , while body lice live on clothing and feed on the body . Because body lice require clothing to survive , the divergence of head and body lice from their common ancestor provides an estimate of the date of introduction of clothing in human evolutionary history . 
 The mitochondrial genome of the human species of body lice ( Pediculus humanus humanus ) , the head louse ( Pediculus humanus capitis ) and the pubic louse ( Phthirus pubis ) fragmented into a number of <unk> , at least seven million years ago . Analysis of mitochondrial DNA in human body and hair lice reveals that greater genetic diversity existed in African than in non @-@ African lice . Human lice can also shed light on human migratory patterns in pre @-@ history . The dominating theory of anthropologists regarding human migration is the Out of Africa Hypothesis . Genetic diversity accumulates over time , and mutations occur at a relatively constant rate . Because there is more genetic diversity in African lice , the lice and their human hosts must have existed in Africa before anywhere else . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 Lice have been intimately associated with human society throughout history . In the Middle Ages , they were essentially ubiquitous . At the death of Thomas Becket , Archbishop of Canterbury in 1270 , it was recorded that " The vermin boiled over like water in a simmering cauldron , and the onlookers burst into alternate weeping and laughing " . A mediaeval treatment for lice was an ointment made from pork grease , incense , lead , and aloe . 
 Robert Hooke 's 1667 book , Micrographia : or some physiological descriptions of minute bodies made by magnifying glasses with observations and Inquiries thereupon , illustrated a human louse , drawn as seen down an early microscope . 
 Margaret Cavendish 's satirical The Description of a New World , Called The Blazing @-@ World ( 1668 ) has " Lice @-@ men " as " mathematicians " , investigating nature by trying to weigh the air like the real scientist Robert Boyle . 
 In 1935 the Harvard medical researcher Hans Zinsser wrote the book Rats , Lice and History , showing that both body and head lice transmit typhus between humans . Despite this , the modern view is that only the body louse can transmit the disease . 
 Soldiers in the trenches of the First World War suffered severely from lice , and the typhus they carried . The Germans boasted that they had lice under effective control , but themselves suffered badly from lice in the Second World War on the Eastern Front , especially in the Battle of Stalingrad . " <unk> " became a grim euphemism for the extermination of Jews in concentration camps such as Auschwitz under the Nazi regime . 
 In the psychiatric disorder delusional parasitosis , patients express a persistent irrational fear of animals such as lice and mites , imagining that they are continually infested and complaining of itching , with " an unshakable false belief that live organisms are present in the skin " . 
 = = = In literature and folklore = = = 
 James Joyce 's 1939 book Finnegans Wake has the character Shem the Penman infested with " <unk> fleas , the <unk> lice , ... bats in his belfry " . 
 Clifford E. <unk> 's A Chemehuevi Song : The Resilience of a Southern Paiute Tribe retells the story of <unk> ( Coyote ) ' s love for <unk> ( Louse ) . Her eggs are sealed in a basket woven by her mother , who gives it to Coyote , instructing him not to open it before he reaches home . Hearing voices coming from it , however , Coyote opens the basket and the people , the world 's first human beings , pour out of it in all directions . 
 The Irish songwriter John Lyons ( b . 1934 ) wrote the popular song The Kilkenny Louse House . The song contains the lines " Well we went up the stairs and we put out the light , Sure in less than five minutes , I had to show fight . For the fleas and the bugs they collected to march , And over me stomach they formed a great arch " . It has been recorded by Christie Purcell ( 1952 ) , Mary Delaney on From Puck to Appleby ( 2003 ) , and the Dubliners on Double Dubliners ( 1972 ) among others . 
 Robert Burns dedicated a poem to the Louse , inspired by witnessing one on a lady 's bonnet in church : " Ye ugly , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> 'd , by saint and sinner , How dare ye set your fit upon her , sae fine lady ! Gae somewhere else , and seek your dinner on some poor body . " John Milton in Paradise Lost mentioned the biblical plague of lice visited upon pharaoh : " Frogs , lice , and flies must all his palace fill with loathed intrusion , and filled all the land . " John Ray recorded a Scottish proverb , " Gie a beggar a bed and he 'll repay you with a Louse . " In Shakespeare 's Troilus and Cressida , Thersites compares Menelaus , brother of Agamemnon , to a louse : " Ask me not what I would be , if I were not Thersites ; for I care not to be the louse of a <unk> , so I were not Menelaus . " 
 = Genevieve Lhermitte = 
 Genevieve Lhermitte is a Belgian woman who killed her five children on February 28 , 2007 . She killed each of her children by slitting their throats with a kitchen knife stolen from a local grocery store while her husband was visiting family in Morocco . After Lhermitte killed her children , she then tried to kill herself . The suicide attempt failed , and Lhermitte was taken into custody and charged with first @-@ degree murder . She was subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment . 
 Lhermitte had regularly seen a psychiatrist and was reported to demonstrate serious mental issues . She claimed that she was driven to kill her children due to troubles at home ( namely , living with an outsider who financially supported the family ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Genevieve Lhermitte was born on November 16 , 1966 in Brussels to Michel Lhermitte , a businessman and student , and Marina <unk> , a nurse . Lhermitte had two younger sisters : Catherine in 1969 , and Mireille in 1972 . Though she struggled with her coursework and self @-@ confidence during her secondary studies , Lhermitte graduated in 1991 with a diploma in French and History from the Educational Institute of Social Promotion of the French Community ( <unk> ) in Uccle . It was during the 1988 @-@ 1989 year at <unk> that Lhermitte met her future husband , <unk> Moqadem , who was studying mathematics and physics but did not complete his studies . 
 Lhermitte and Moqadem married on September 22 , 1990 , and moved into the apartment of Dr. Michel Schaar , a physician , with whom Moqadem was residing . Schaar had befriended Moqadem 's family in Morocco in the 1980s and served as the young man 's host in Belgium , and Moqadem considered Schaar as an adoptive father . While Moqadem worked at a convenience store , it was Schaar that was the primary financial provider . Lhermitte did not object to living with Schaar in his apartment as she thought it would be on a temporary basis . 
 In 1991 , Lhermitte was hired as a teacher . Shortly after beginning her new career , Lhermitte gave birth to her first child , Yasmine ( b . August 13 , 1992 ) . Three years later , she delivered her second child , Nora ( b . February 13 , 1995 ) . From June 1 , 1995 to August 31 , 1996 , Lhermitte was granted leave from her teaching position due to postpartum depression . After the birth of Lhermitte 's first child Yasmin , Schaar purchased a house for himself and the couple to live in , and he dedicated his apartment to his practice . In 1996 , Schaar hired Moqadem to serve as his filing assistant part @-@ time , then full @-@ time in 1998 . During this period , Schaar still covered most expenses , including vacations , house repairs , monthly allowances , and life insurance for each family member . Lhermitte gave birth to two more daughters , Miriam ( b . April 20 , 1997 ) and Mina ( May 20 , 1999 ) , before the family 's move from Brussels to the provincial town of Nivelles . Schaar paid the mortgage and lived on the second floor . 
 Tensions began rising between Lhermitte and her husband . Moqadem would spend long hours away from home , becoming a regular at a bar and a spa . In addition , he would take several trips each year to visit his family in Marrakesh , with the length of each trip ranging from a week to a month . Lhermitte 's first son and fifth child , Mehdi , was born on August 9 , 2003 . The following year , Schaar recommended that Lhermitte should see a psychiatrist and she began consulting the psychiatrist Dr. <unk> Veldekens in 2005 . 
 = = Crime = = 
 On February 28 , 2007 , Moqadem was expected to return from a trip to Morocco to visit his family . Lhermitte took her eldest daughter Yasmin to a dermatology appointment . After picking up the rest of her children from school and preparing lunch for them , Lhermitte heard a voice tell her , " the machine is running . " Lhermitte mailed two letters : a letter with jewelry for her sisters , and the other letter to her friend Valerie . In the letter to Valerie , she called Dr. Michel Scharr " a rotten bastard " who " stole " the intimacy between herself , her husband , and her children . She also accused her husband of being " deaf " and " blind " to her concerns regarding Dr. Scharr . After mailing the letters , she went to a grocery store and slipped two knives into her shopping bag . 
 Lhermitte told investigators that , when she returned , she hid the knives in a drawer and called over her youngest daughter Mina while the other children were watching Spy Kids 3 . Lhermitte tried to strangle Mina , but when the child struggled Lhermitte resorted to slashing her throat with one of the stolen knives , all while speaking comforting words and apologizing to the child . <unk> was the next to be killed , the youngest and the only son . When her attempts to strangle her child again failed , Lhermitte cut <unk> 's throat and washed the knife afterward in the bathroom sink . 
 According to her account , Lhermitte then told daughter Myriam that she had a surprise for her in the office . When Myriam entered the office , Lhermitte told her to sit on a chair and wear a blue handkerchief over her eyes . Once Myriam was seated , Lhermitte took a marble plaque she found nearby and smashed it over Myriam 's head , and then cut her throat . Nora , who was allegedly Dr. Schaar 's favorite goddaughter , was asked to sit in a chair while Lhermitte slit her throat from behind . After Nora had been killed , Lhermitte wrote the letters " <unk> " on the bathroom mirror in Nora 's blood , and later stated that she had intended to spell the name " Judas . " 
 Lhermitte 's last victim was her eldest daughter , Yasmin . The mother called over Yasmin and told her she had a surprise for her , just like she had done with Myriam . Lhermitte attacked Yasmin from behind as she entered the office , but Yasmin was able to dodge the knife by diving to the ground . After a struggle in which Yasmin suffered multiple stab wounds , Lhermitte stabbed her in the back and slashed her throat . With her children dead , Lhermitte then attempted to kill herself by falling on her knife . When she realized that the wound would not be fatal , she wrote " call the police " in red marker on her door and called emergency services to the house . Investigators found the four children tucked in their beds , some with stuffed toys in their arms . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The trial began on December 8 , 2008 and lasted about two weeks , ending December 19 , 2008 in the Assize Court of Brabant @-@ Wallon in Nivelles . Genevieve Lhermitte 's lawyers were Daniel <unk> and Xavier <unk> . The jury consisted of eight women and four men . Genevieve Lhermitte confessed to the murder of her children , so the trial focused on what drove Lhermitte commit the crime . Xavier <unk> told the jury , " Your task is to discover why a woman who had hitherto been a perfect mother suddenly exploded . " This statement was made early on in the trial and started the thought process of what made Lhermitte so unstable that she would kill her own children . Prosecutor Pierre Rans began opening statements with a description of the scene that met emergency services on February 28 , 2007 at the former teacher 's home in Nivelles . The prosecutor asked for 30 years in prison . 
 During the trial , Lhermitte testified that her role as wife and mother was disrupted by having the middle @-@ aged Belgian doctor , Michel Schaar , living in the same house as part of the family . According to Lhermitte , Scharr accompanied her and Moqadem on their honeymoon and stayed in their room . Lhermitte stated , " We [ Lhermitte and Moqadem ] had to wait until he fell asleep before we could make love . I found that weird but <unk> said he regarded him as his stepfather . I think the doctor loved my husband in a platonic way . " Apart from explaining Scharr 's intrusion on her relationship with her husband , Lhermitte also mentioned their family 's reliance on Dr. Schaar : " He watched TV with us in the evenings and went on holiday with us in the summer . We depended on him financially . " In court , Lhermitte was asked why she laid the dead body of her 13 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Nora in the bathroom used by Dr Schaar . She replied : " I wanted to hurt him . Nora was his favorite . " 
 The trial ended with Lhermitte receiving the maximum sentence for the murder of her five children . The court and the jury did not take any extenuating circumstances into account . In her closing argument , Lhermitte said she would accept any punishment the court gave her and showed remorse for her actions . Earlier in the trial , psychiatrists had found that Lhermitte was not of sound mind when she committed the acts and should not be held accountable for her actions . They felt that she should be admitted into a psychiatric institution rather than going to prison , but the jury did not follow their opinions . Lhermitte had been battling with depression for many years . She concluded that she saw the murder of her children and committing suicide as her only way out . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Trial billing = = = 
 Lhermitte filed for and received a judgment of divorce before her trial ; Moqadem at first appealed the decision but later withdrew his objection . Following the trial , Lhermitte was not able to pay for the trial costs , so under Belgian law it fell to her now ex @-@ husband to pick up the bill . This conformed to the Law of Belgium , with the state seeking funds due to have been shared from the sale of their house under their divorce agreement . The overall court expenses and fines were 72 @,@ 743 euros ( about $ 93 @,@ 000 ) . Moqadem said he was “ disgusted and revolted ” by the injustice of this billing system . Moqadem ’ s attorney attempted to have the bill written off , calling for “ administrative requirements to be balanced by decency ” given the nature of the tragedy . 
 In February 2010 , Moqadem remarried <unk> <unk> , a professor of Islamic law at the Faculty of Islamic Sciences in Brussels . A daughter was born to the couple about a year later . In June 2013 , it was reported that Moqadem had lost 30 @,@ 000 euros in an investment scam and that he was being harassed by Lhermitte 's former attorney for further fees . 
 = = = Post @-@ trial lawsuit = = = 
 After being sentenced to life imprisonment , Lhermitte filed a lawsuit seeking € 3m in damages against her psychiatrist , <unk> Veldekens . She said that had her psychiatrist rushed to see her while she was in her disturbed state , the crime would not have been committed . Lhermitte wanted to “ secure recognition of the prejudice genuinely suffered ” due to the psychiatrist ’ s alleged inaction . During the trial , Veldekens reported meeting with Lhermitte after a first alarming letter , but couldn 't meet with her on February 13 , 2007 due to his full schedule . In December 2011 , the case was dismissed against Veldekens . The court ruled that the criminal charges against the psychiatrist were " irrelevant . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Belgian director and screenwriter Joachim Lafosse released Our Children , a film based on the story , to positive reviews in 2012 . One reviewer called the film a " gloomy and penetrating psychological drama " that portrays the claustrophobia of a protagonist who lives in an environment in which " the walls are constantly closing in around her . " Our Children also attained an 93 % rating on the aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes . Émilie <unk> , a French @-@ speaking Belgian actress , played the character based on Genevieve Lhermitte . <unk> won the Un Certain Regard Award at the Cannes Film Festival and " Best Actress " at the Saint Petersburg International Film Festival for her role . 
 In December 2010 , Moqadem and Schaar filed a lawsuit against Lafosse demanding that they be able to review the film 's screenplay . The 4th Civil Chamber of the Court of Brussels ruled that the lawsuit was " admissible but unfounded . " However , production had already begun — cast negotiations were finished , and the team had already approached the French government about receiving subsidies — and Lafosse demonstrated no intent to hand over his work . The pair 's lawyer subsequently released an official statement : " Moqadem and Schaar feel that this is a violation of their privacy and do not understand why the filmmakers have so little respect for them . " 
 = Breakaway ( Kelly Clarkson song ) = 
 " Breakaway " is a song recorded by American pop @-@ rock singer Kelly Clarkson . The song , written by Matthew Gerrard , Bridget Benenate and Avril Lavigne , was originally intended for Lavigne 's debut studio album , Let Go ( 2002 ) . After being deemed unsuitable for the album , it was passed to Clarkson to be recorded as a soundtrack for the film The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement . Clarkson , who was finishing her second studio album at that time , recorded " Breakaway " to tide her fans over until the first single from her new album was released . However , the song 's success prompted its inclusion on Clarkson 's second album where she decided to name the album after the song . " Breakaway " was first released by Walt Disney Records as the first single from The Princess Diaries 2 soundtrack on July 19 , 2004 . In May 2006 , Breakaway was reissued as the fifth and final single from the album of the same name . 
 " Breakaway " received positive reviews from music critics , who complimented the song 's message and simple lyrics they could relate to . It incorporates acoustic guitars and airy drums which are interspersed with Clarkson 's controlled voice . The lyrics narrate Clarkson 's journey as a girl growing up in a small town who follows her dream for self @-@ improvement . " Breakaway " was a commercial success outside of the United States , where it peaked within the top 20 of multiple European countries , and in the top 10 in Australia , Belgium , Hungary and the Netherlands . In the US , the song peaked at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and became her third top ten song in the chart . It also topped the US Adult Contemporary for twenty @-@ one non @-@ consecutive weeks , a record that is now shared between herself and Celine Dion 's " A New Day Has Come " . 
 Directed by Dave Meyers , the accompanying music video for " Breakaway " portrays Clarkson as a young girl from a small town who follows her dream and becomes an international star . It also contained scenes interspersed from The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement . Clarkson acted out most of the lyrics in the music video because she felt that the song was autobiographical . Critics responded positively to the music video for being faithful to the central theme shared by the song , the film , and Clarkson 's personal biography . Clarkson performed the song in a series of live appearances such as television shows Saturday Night Live , The Oprah Winfrey Show and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . She has performed the song in her concert tours , including the Stronger Tour . " Breakaway " has also been covered by many contestants from reality television singing competitions , notably Katie Stevens , a contestant in the ninth season of American Idol , as well as an English pop duo , Belle Amie who finished eleventh in the seventh season of The X Factor . It was also used in Brazilian soap opera Malhação . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Breakaway " was originally written by Avril Lavigne , Bridget Benenate and Matthew Gerrard . According to Benenate , the song was written in 2001 when she was working with Gerrard for Lavigne 's first album , Let Go . Benenate explained that Lavigne came to her to write the song , saying 
 Avril talked about her life and what things were important to her – she was the inspiration for the song : - ) : - ) . Matthew began creating the melody and track , and I started working on the lyrics . I remember staying in bed for three days , writing 25 versions of the lyric . I love being in bed and writing lyrics , and having my dog Jet and my kitty Dash on the bed . Anyway , we finally finished the lyric , then we completed the demo . 
 After the production of the song was deemed unsuitable for Lavigne 's album , the song was passed to several artists including Samantha Moore before finally being recorded by Kelly Clarkson . Benenate also added that it was Mitchell Leib , the President of Music and Soundtracks for Walt Disney Pictures and Television / Buena Vista Music Group , who secured " Breakaway " as one of the soundtracks of The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement . In an interview with MTV , Clarkson said that she recorded " Breakaway " to tide fans over until September that year before she released the first single from her second album . Nevertheless , the song 's huge success prompted its inclusion on the album where Clarkson decided to name the album as Breakaway . Clarkson expressed that " Breakaway " was different from everything she has done , saying that it " is a simple song , and I think that its simplicity is what 's beautiful about it . Whenever writers or producers come to work with me , they take advantage of the fact that I can really belt it out . What 's cool about ' Breakaway ' is that it doesn 't take advantage of that . The song just uses the simplicity of my voice . " The song was officially released to radio stations on July 20 , 2004 as the first single of the The Princess Diaries soundtrack . Lavigne 's original demo of the song leaked onto the internet nearly a decade later in April 2014 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Breakaway " is a folk pop song with a length of three minutes and fifty @-@ seven seconds . It is composed in the key of C major , with a tempo of 160 beats per minute . <unk> Dawood of Dawn lauded the song for being the best track on the album , writing " " Breakaway " is an enchanting single that will have you humming along to its infectious , gentle chorus and the inspiring lyrics . " It has a chord progression of Am7 – GB – C @-@ F ( 9 ) and Clarkson 's vocal range in the song spans two octaves from the low note of G3 to the note of D5 . Sam Lansky of <unk> thought that Clarkson 's vocal floated over strummed guitars and airy drums , a combination which elevated the inspirational message of the song . Dave Donelly of Sputnikmusic noted that " Breakaway " successfully contrasted typical acoustic verse with a soaring pop chorus which was interspersed by Clarkson ’ s controlled but powerful voice . 
 Lyrically , the song is about growing up and moving on in life . Natalie Nichols of The Baltimore Sun considered " Breakaway " as Clarkson 's anthem which is about a small @-@ town girl going for her dreams . Clarkson admitted that she could relate to the song , saying : 
 It describes how I got into the business , verbatim . I did grow up in a small town , I wanted to get out , I felt like there was something ... not better for me , but something different for me . I didn 't feel like I fit in at school . Whether you are a DJ , or if you work with computers , or if you 're a teacher , everyone has that point where they feel , ' I 'm bored and this isn 't what I wanted to do with my <unk> 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 While reviewing the album , Shirley <unk> of Rolling Stone opined that " Breakaway " was the highlight of the album where Clarkson sounded " more Avril than Ashlee " . Rhonda Lynn of Florida Entertainment Scene praised the acoustic guitar in the song which is instrumental in holding the whole structure together . Tammy La Gorce of Amazon.com thought that the song would not wear out due to its " rock @-@ friendly thumps , dips , and rolls . " In a different perspective , Joan Anderman of Boston.com remarked that " Breakaway " is not new or exciting @-@ sounding but he admitted that the " hit single accomplishes the rare feat of being thoroughly middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road without sacrificing grace or intelligence " . Chuck Taylor of Billboard felt that the song was a weak choice as a single compared to Clarkson 's previous hits , writing " ' Breakaway ' sounds more like an Irish folk song propped up with pop production than the anthemic material with which Clarkson has won over legions of fans . " Kathi Kamen Goldmark of Disney <unk> felt that the song was tedious , simultaneously dull and so emotionally overwrought that it almost sounds like a parody of itself . Michael Wood of The Village Voice described the song as " a swoony acoustic folk @-@ pop that Goo Goo Doll Johnny Rzeznik would trade his hair gel for " . Jill Salama of Oprah.com listed " Breakaway " as one of her nine favourite Idol singles of all time , writing " There is nothing that gets us more than a song about a girl going out on her own . Making a wish , making a change and , of course , breaking away . But seriously , this song is more than just a high school graduation anthem . " 
 Bill Lamb of About.com ranked " Breakaway " at number four in his list of Top 10 Kelly Clarkson songs . The song received a nomination in the category of Song of the Year : Adult Hit Radio at the 2005 Radio Music Awards but lost to Green Day 's " Boulevard of Broken Dreams " . It was one of the recipients of <unk> Spin Awards in November 2004 with 100 @,@ 000 spins accumulated throughout the year . On March 5 , 2013 , Billboard ranked the song # 5 in its list of Top 100 American Idol Hits of All Time . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week ending August 28 , 2004 , " Breakaway " debuted at number sixty on the Billboard Hot 100 . On its tenth week , the song jumped from number twelve to number ten to become Clarkson 's third Top 10 song in the chart , following " A Moment Like This " and " Miss Independent " . It peaked at number six on the week ending November 20 , 2004 . The song spent forty @-@ six weeks in Billboard Hot 100 , a feat that was later achieved by its immediate successor , " Since U Been Gone " . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on February 5 , 2005 . " Breakaway " also debuted at number thirty @-@ seven on the US Pop Songs on the week dated August 21 , 2004 . Three months later , it peaked at number two on the week ending November 13 , 2004 and was held off the top spot by Nelly featuring Tim McGraw 's " Over and Over " . The song entered Billboard Adult Pop Songs at number thirty @-@ six on the week dated August 21 , 2004 before peaking at number two on the week ending February 12 , 2005 . 
 " Breakaway " also made an appearance on the US Adult Contemporary at number thirty on the week ending September 18 , 2004 . The song fell out of the chart after its debut , before re @-@ entering the chart at the same position of number thirty in its second week . Six months later , " Breakaway " topped Billboard Adult Contemporary , dethroning Los Lonely Boys ' " Heaven " on the week ending March 12 , 2005 . The song spent twenty consecutive weeks at number one on the chart before being dethroned by Michael Bublé 's " Home " . However , the song returned to top the Billboard Adult Contemporary for the twenty @-@ first week on the week ending August 6 , 2005 . With this achievement , " Breakaway " tied the record with Celine Dion 's " A New Day Has Come " as the longest @-@ running Adult Contemporary chart @-@ topper by a female artist . " Breakaway " is also the longest @-@ running chart @-@ topper to come from a film in Billboard Adult Contemporary history , surpassing the nineteen @-@ week record held jointly by Phil Collins 's " You 'll Be in My Heart " from Tarzan and Celine Dion 's " Because You Loved Me " from Up Close & Personal . It remains as Clarkson 's longest @-@ running number one in her career . As of October 2012 , " Breakaway " has sold 1 @,@ 850 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads . Internationally , " Breakaway " was a commercial success . In Australia , " Breakaway " debuted at number fourteen on the week ending September 26 , 2004 before peaking at number ten , three weeks later . It was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of over 35 @,@ 000 units . In New Zealand , " Breakaway " entered the New Zealand Singles Chart at number nineteen on the week ending October 18 , 2004 . Six weeks later , the song ascended to a new peak of number twelve . On July 8 , 2006 , the song debuted and peaked at number twenty @-@ two in the United Kingdom . In Ireland , it debuted and peaked at number twelve on the week ending June 29 , 2006 . Elsewhere in Europe , " Breakaway " peaked at number six in Belgium , number eight in Austria , as well as number nine in the Netherlands . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Breakaway " was directed by Dave Meyers , which was shot in two days from July 10 to July 11 , 2004 . In the video , the younger version of Clarkson was played by Lindsey Krueger . According to Meyers , working with Clarkson was a pleasant experience because he felt she was good and honest , although he had initial doubts in the beginning . He explained , " I was a little worried , her coming off ' American Idol , ' it inherently feels manufactured and I didn 't know how much of it was true artistry . But when I met her , she really does have a good , solid vibe . It was an honor to bring some of that out of her . " Since the song is autobiographical , Clarkson decided to act out most of the lyrics in the video . Meyers also realized that the song was featured in The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement and he struggled to find a way to address the film @-@ footage in the music video , saying " Since it 's a movie tie @-@ in , the idea stems from trying to figure out a new way of addressing the film @-@ footage requirement they put on you , so we came up with the idea of her attending the premiere , which is very much something she will do in real life . " 
 The video begins with the younger version of Clarkson sitting at the back seat of a station wagon . Singing the first verse , she witnesses a depressing scene of her brother quarreling with her sister who are scolded by their mother . She slowly clasps both her hands before the video shifts to the present day where Clarkson is seen arriving on the red carpet with her publicist for the world premiere of The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement . After posing for the photographers , she enters the cinema and watches the film . The next scene switches back to the younger Clarkson who is sitting and looking around her neighborhood at her house 's rooftop as a plane is seen flying across the sky . The video switches back to the older Clarkson who is now watching the aforementioned film in her laptop inside the plane as it goes through a mild turbulence . Clarkson is also seen reminiscing about her past job as a worker in a movie theater , singing with her co @-@ workers . The next scene shows Clarkson singing with her band in a backyard party which is shown alternately with scenes from the film , as well as a montage of her family and co @-@ workers waving away from her . In the final scene , the younger Clarkson is shown praying by her bedside . 
 The video was uploaded to MTV 's website on August 9 , 2004 . The video reached number five on the AOL Music Top Video chart in September 2004 , with 740 @,@ 176 million streams . Kate Aurthur of The New York Times praised the music video for successfully illustrating the message of a girl following her own dream , which is a central theme shared by the song , the movie and Clarkson 's biography . She also lauded the director of the video , Dave Meyers , for his ability to use Clarkson 's evolution as an element to overshadow the distracting clips from The Princess Diaries : Royal Engagement despite noticing that the use of visual metaphors in the music video was overwrought . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Clarkson first performed " Breakaway " on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on August 2004 . In February 2005 , she performed " Breakaway " as well as " Since U Been Gone " on Saturday Night Live . On September 23 , 2005 , she appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show and performed " Breakaway " as well as " Because of You " . While touring at the Palace Theatre in Cleveland , Ohio during her Breakaway World Tour , Clarkson performed " Breakaway " while signing several autographs for her fans near the stage to purposely let the crowd belt out the chorus . " Breakaway " was also included in the setlist of Clarkson 's 2009 All I Ever Wanted Tour where she performed the song in Hammerstein Ballroom without any dancers , acrobatics , moving set pieces and no special effects . Caryn Ganz noted that Clarkson belted the ballad song effortlessly by walking back and forth across the stage with her right hand on the mic and her left resting on her chest . Jim Cantiello of MTV opined that Clarkson 's " low chest @-@ voice cooed the verses of ' Breakaway ' " and complimented the singer 's vocal prowess throughout the concert . On April 3 , 2012 , Clarkson performed " Breakaway " as an encore to her Stronger Tour at Nokia Theatre L.A. Live , Los Angeles , where she told the audience that people started supporting her because of the song . 
 = = Cover versions and use in media = = 
 " Breakaway " has also been covered by contestants from reality television singing competitions . Katie Stevens covered the song on the ninth season of American Idol . Despite listening to the judges ' comments to sing a contemporary song , her rendition was criticized from the judges ; Randy Jackson thought the note was too big for Stevens while Ellen DeGeneres felt Stevens did not sell the lyrics . Kara DioGuardi said , " I don 't think you know who you are yet as an artist " , an opinion agreed by Simon Cowell . Jim Cantiello of MTV noted that Stevens ' performance of the song was her weakest performance in the show , stating " Unfortunately , her uneven vocals on ' Breakaway ' exposed her youthful inexperience . " The same opinion was echoed by Eric Ditzian of MTV who opined that Stevens failed to resonate her youthful energy favouring the song choice . " Breakaway " was performed by Julie Zorrilla in the semi @-@ finals of American Idol season 10 . Samantha Stephens of The Republican felt Zorrilla 's performance was mediocre , expressing that it wasn 't painful to watch and wasn 't anything special either . Gil Kaufman of MTV remarked that Zorrilla 's voice was shaky and it lacked personality . After landing in the bottom two , Belle Amie , an English pop duo contestant on the seventh season of The X Factor , decided to perform " Breakaway " as their survival song . Nevertheless , they were eliminated in the episode . Swedish Idol contestant , Alice <unk> covered the song which appeared in Det <unk> från Idol , an album released from the musical competition . The song was also performed by Megan Hilty on the episode titled " Understudy " of the American television series Smash , which aired on April 7 , 2012 . Matt Tucker of <unk> thought the performance was " lovely " , describing it as one of the things that stood out in the episode . The song was covered by Jenna Ushkowitz , Kevin McHale and Darren Criss , on the 97th episode , " Frenemies " , of the musical series Glee , which aired on February 25 , 2014 . For the thirteenth season of American Idol , the song is used as the send off song when a contestant is voted off . The contestant who is voted off , their cover of the song is played during the goodbye montage video package . It was also used in thirtieth season of Brazilian soap opera Malhação . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = Puella Magi Madoka Magica = 
 Puella Magi Madoka Magica ( 魔法少女まどか ☆ マギカ , Mahō Shōjo Madoka Magika , " Magical Girl Madoka Magica " ) is a Japanese anime television series produced by Shaft and Aniplex . It was directed by <unk> Shinbo and written by Gen Urobuchi , with original character designs by Ume Aoki , character design adaptation by Takahiro Kishida , and music by Yuki Kajiura . The story follows a group of female middle school students who choose to become magical girls and must battle surreal enemies called witches . However , they consequently learn of the anguish and perils associated with their newfound roles . 
 The first ten episodes of the series aired in Japan on TBS and MBS between January and March 2011 , while the final two episodes were delayed until April 2011 due to the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami . A manga adaptation of the series and various spin @-@ off manga series have been published by Houbunsha and licensed in North America by Yen Press . A novelisation by Nitroplus was released in August 2011 , and a dedicated magazine , Manga Time Kirara Magica , was launched by Houbunsha in June 2012 . A video game for the PlayStation Portable was released in March 2012 , with another for PlayStation Vita released in December 2013 . A film series has also been produced , consisting of two films recapping the anime series , released in October 2012 , and a third film featuring an original story which was released on October 26 , 2013 . A concept film acting as a trailer for a new project was screened in December 2015 . 
 Puella Magi Madoka Magica has received widespread critical acclaim , with critics praising the writing , visuals and soundtrack of the series , as well as its unorthodox approach to the magical girl subgenre . It has also been a commercial success , with each BD volume selling more than 50 @,@ 000 copies . The series won several awards in Japan , such as the Television Award at the 16th Animation Kobe Awards , as well as 12 Newtype Anime Awards and the Grand Prize for animation in the 2011 Japan Media Arts awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the fictional city of <unk> , Japan , a middle school student named Madoka Kaname and her friend Sayaka Miki encounter a small , cat @-@ like creature named Kyubey . It offers a contract in which a girl may have any wish granted in exchange for obtaining magical powers and being tasked with fighting against witches . Meanwhile , a transfer student and magical girl named Homura Akemi tries to stop Madoka from making the contract with Kyubey at all costs . Madoka and Sayaka then meet Mami Tomoe , an upperclassman at the same school who is also a magical girl and offers to bring them along on her witch hunts so that they may learn of the responsibilities that come with being a magical girl . 
 As Madoka contemplates accepting the contract with Kyubey , she witnesses the death of Mami at the hands of a witch and realizes that a magical girl 's life is filled with danger , anguish , and suffering . This is further enforced by the appearance of Kyoko Sakura , a veteran magical girl whose wish indirectly caused the death of her family . Madoka also discovers that not only do magical girls give up their souls to form their Soul Gems , the source of their magic , but when those Soul Gems become too tainted with despair , they transform into the very witches they fight against . This is exemplified when Sayaka , heavily disillusioned with the current state of the world , falls into an irrecoverable despair that turns her into a witch . It is then revealed that Kyubey 's alien race is harvesting the emotions from magical girls to use as energy to counteract the spread of entropy . Madoka also learns that Homura is a magical girl from a different timeline who has repeated the same month countless times in order to try to save her from a grisly fate . After these revelations , Madoka decides to become a magical girl with the wish to stop witches before they are created . This rewrites the laws of the universe , resulting in Madoka becoming nothing more than a concept and Homura being the only one who remembers her in the new world that is formed . 
 = = Production = = 
 While collaborating on Hidamari Sketch and Bakemonogatari , <unk> Shinbo expressed to Aniplex producer <unk> Iwakami his desire to create a new magical girl series , thus spawning the development of Puella Magi Madoka Magica . During the early planning stage , Iwakami decided not to adapt an existing work in order to give Shinbo more freedom in his direction style . Another goal of the project was to develop an anime that could appeal to a wider audience than the usual demographic for media within the magical girl genre . Iwakami and Shinbo intended for their series to be accessible to " the general anime fan . " Shinbo then contacted Gen Urobuchi to work on the project as a scriptwriter and Ume Aoki as a character designer . Takahiro Kishida was also enlisted to adapt Aoki 's character designs for production of the television series . 
 In his role as producer , Iwakami took a mostly hands @-@ off approach . Due to Puella Magi Madoka Magica being an original series rather than an adaptation based off an already existing work , he described the main goal solely as " coming up with a high @-@ quality piece of entertainment " . After helping to recruit the staff , he allowed them mostly free rein in developing the actual content of the story , providing minimal guidance from himself . After viewing the character designs that Aoki created , he became fully assured that he could trust the creative talent of the team . In an interview with Anime News Network after the series finished airing in Japan , Iwakami summed up his philosophy as " I don 't matter much ; it 's up to those talents to do their work . If something comes to a stand @-@ still I might intervene , but they did an excellent job and I was very happy seeing the results in episode one . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 During the pre @-@ writing planning phase , Iwakami simply requested that Urobuchi make the storyline " heavy " . Furthermore , Shinbo specified that it should contain copious amounts of blood and violence , elements that were unusual to the magical girl genre . The director also specifically sought for many of the magical girl characters to be killed throughout the series . Urobuchi admitted he had no trouble with these requirements , referencing his past reputation as a writer of very dark and somber stories , the extent of which Shinbo had not fully known . One objective was for the script to starkly contrast with the way the anime was to be marketed . Shinbo planned for the series to be advertised in an innocent and pure manner that would deliberately conceal its dark undertones . For example , the title logo for the anime was rendered using rounded fonts that would appear more harmless to audiences . Urobuchi further misled fans following the development of the anime by using his Twitter account to try to convince them that the plot of the series was very innocuous . The true nature of the series was disguised because Shinbo strongly desired for its dark themes to come as a complete surprise to the viewer . Iwakami later defended the mature themes in the Puella Magi Madoka Magica , stating " the story of Madoka is serious but it 's not entirely inappropriate for children . For example , there 's nothing sexually explicit in it . There 's some death , but it 's not gratuitous ; it can be explained within the context of the story . " 
 Otherwise , Shinbo granted Urobuchi a large amount of autonomy in writing the series and determining the path of the story . In describing his interactions with Iwakami and Shinbo while collaborating on the series , Urobuchi commented that " neither one is the type to show their hand , they would always wait for me to make the next move . " In his effort to create a successful deconstruction of the magical girl genre , Urobuchi studied aspects of traditional magical girl media that were " troubling or overlooked " . He also stated that the development of the plot was heavily influenced by the character drawings he saw Aoki design . Other inspirations he credited for contributing to the series included horror fiction author Stephen King as well as previous projects that Shinbo directed such as Hidamari Sketch and Magical Girl Lyrical <unk> . 
 Urobuchi attributed his past experience working on projects with screenwriters Ichiro Itano and Yōsuke Kuroda as a major influence in his writing for Puella Magi Madoka Magica , and has referred to both of them as his mentors . To set the initial pacing of the series , Urobuchi used a technique he credited as originally from Kuroda . The first episode would throw the viewer into a specific part of the story with unknown context , the second episode would then define the particular rules governing the story 's setting , and the third episode would be responsible for divulging the revelation in the plot so as to hook the viewer . The twist in the third episode was determined during the project proposal stage and involved the death of Mami , a main character figure . This decision was controversial , and Urobuchi recalled production staff members continually approaching him and asking him to reconsider due to their own fondness for the character . However , he refused and the plot remained unchanged during production . Nevertheless , Urobuchi realized that this progression could be very hard for viewers to accept and might hurt the overall series ' success with some audiences , commenting : " I always thought this is an age where entertainment basically is about soothing and healing , like adopting a style where unchanging day @-@ to @-@ day life is to continue forever . " 
 In an interview with Ultra Jump Egg , Urobuchi gave insight into his writing philosophy , stating that he believed the overarching plot of a story was more important than the characters within it . He indicated that he would first determine the actions and the ultimate fate of a character before even assigning it a name , and contrasted this with other writing methods which first focused on developing the characters and then creating a storyline for them to follow . He again defended his decision to have Mami die , claiming that this could actually have the converse effect of making her character even more memorable , saying , " I think there are quite many characters who became immortal exactly because they died , like Caesar <unk> in JoJo 's Bizarre Adventure or <unk> in Fist of the North Star . Precisely because of the way they died , they were able to live forever . " 
 = = = Character design = = = 
 Urobuchi stated that Sayaka was his favorite character overall , and remarked that her plotline was the most enjoyable to write . Due to her grim fate by the end of the series , a destiny that Shinbo believed was slightly unfair , he asked Urobuchi if it was possible to change the plot so that Sayaka could be spared . Urobuchi declined , asserting that her death was too integral to the overarching story . Shinbo then inquired if there were any way that she could be brought back to life , admitting he had become very attached to the character . However , Urobuchi again refused , explaining that this would be impossible with regard to the already @-@ established rules governing the story . Shinbo finally acquiesced to this , but remarked that he believed there may have been too large of a burden placed on the characters who were in essence young middle school girls . 
 The alien character Kyubey was also envisioned and designed by Urobuchi . As one of the primary antagonists in the series , Iwakami stated that " the mash @-@ up of cuteness and darkness is the central theme to Madoka , and Kyubey is an epitome of that theme . " A central goal in Urobuchi 's writing was to highlight the moral and ethical dissonance between Kyubey and the young middle school girls , which was done through actions in the series such as Kyubey eating its own corpse in order to recycle energy . He compared the character to monsters occurring in the works of horror fiction author H. P. Lovecraft , commenting of Kyubey : " he isn 't evil , it is his lack of feelings that make him scary . " Urobuchi further remarked upon the moral ambiguity that the series displays in an interview with Asahi Shimbun , stating " Al @-@ Qaeda brought down the Twin Towers due to their self @-@ righteousness . Justice for some people is an evil for others . Good intentions , kindness , and hope will not necessarily make people happy . " 
 Due to unforeseen scheduling problems with Shaft , production for the series was postponed for three years following the completion of its writing . However , once the issues were resolved , production began without any further complications . The animation studio spearheaded the conception and design of the witches in the series , as well as creating each one 's individual backstory . Urobuchi had originally envisioned the witches to be similar to conventional monsters such as Godzilla , but upon seeing the surreal concept art for one of the main witches , Walpurgis Night , he remarked : " How can Homura possibly fight against something like this ? " Designers from Shaft also added quotes from the German folklore legend Faust to the series . Throughout production , the animation production team <unk> Inu Curry had freedom to insert new details or modify existing ones from the original script . An example is during a scene in the final episode where the team added black wings to Homura , something which was not included in Urobuchi 's writing . Urobuchi praised this aspect of the production , commenting that " additions by the animation production team added more mystery and depth to [ the ] characters , and without them , it would have been very difficult to write any further stories in the world of the series " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Iwakami and Shinbo recruited Yuki Kajiura to compose the soundtrack for the series after Urobuchi recommended her . Shinbo had previously worked with Kajiura on Le Portrait de Petit <unk> , and Urobuchi told of the inspiration the music from that series had on him while writing parts of the script . Stating that he had long been a fan of her anime soundtracks , Urobuchi also praised Kajiura 's work ethic , remarking that she would always fully familiarize herself with the plotline of the story while composing for it . Japanese pop music duo <unk> was also commissioned to perform " Connect " ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the opening theme of the series . Iwakami involved himself directly in the song 's development to ensure that it would fit with the series , marking one of the only times that he explicitly intervened in an aspect of the production . Both " Connect " and the ending theme , " Magia " by <unk> , were revealed in a television commercial several weeks before the series ' premiere in Japan . 
 = = Broadcast and distribution = = 
 On January 7 , 2011 , Puella Magi Madoka Magica debuted on Mainichi Broadcasting System ( MBS ) , Tokyo Broadcasting System ( TBS ) , and Chubu @-@ Nippon Broadcasting ( CBC ) in Japan . The first ten episodes aired weekly without interruption , and were also available for streaming on Nico Nico Douga and <unk> 's Anime One service . However , due to the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami in March , the planned broadcasts for the last two episodes were halted . Additionally , TBS elected to cancel its scheduled airing of the 10th episode in order to provide more news coverage of the natural disaster . 
 Due to these delays , Urobuchi issued an apology to viewers . However , he also indicated that the postponements could be viewed in a positive light because they alleviated some production pressures placed on animation studio Shaft due to the tight broadcast schedule . Citing particularly challenging drawings for episodes 11 and 12 , Urobuchi and Iwakami planned to have Shaft continue to improve the episodes immediately up until their new air time . Furthermore , Urobuchi remarked that if episode 11 in its current state had been aired as scheduled , the result most likely would have been disappointing . On March 23 , 2011 , the broadcast for the rest of the series was delayed indefinitely . However , the production team reported that they were continuing to work on the episodes and announced their intention to finish airing the series by April . Finally , on April 10 , 2011 , the official website for Puella Magi Madoka Magica announced that broadcasts would resume on April 21 . Episodes 11 and 12 aired back @-@ to @-@ back on MBS to conclude the series , while TBS and CBC ran episode 10 in addition to 11 and 12 . 
 Iwakami later commented on this unique production experience in an interview with Anime News Network . He mentioned that Shaft was always pressed for time during the production process and only just managed to complete each episode right before its air time . After the earthquake and tsunami occurred , he stated that much of the staff was rattled by the incident and because of this they were not able to work effectively on episodes 11 and 12 . However , in overcoming this situation , he remarked " a week went by , and two weeks went by , and the staff started saying that they couldn 't stay in shock forever , that they had to keep on going , and then production continued . " 
 The series was released on six Blu @-@ ray Disc ( BD ) and DVD volumes between April 27 and September 21 , 2011 , having been delayed from the original release date of March 30 , 2011 due to the earthquake . Drama CDs were included with the first , third and fifth BD / DVD volumes . The sixth and final volume released on September 21 , 2011 contains a director 's edit of episode 12 . The series began streaming on Crunchyroll on February 15 , 2012 , as well as on Hulu and Crackle . 
 Aniplex of America released the series in North America , including an English dub , in three BD and DVD volumes released between February 14 and June 12 , 2012 , along with limited editions containing the original soundtrack CDs and special items . Manga Entertainment licensed the series in the United Kingdom and released it on BD / DVD in a complete collection on October 29 , 2012 . Madman Entertainment licensed the series in Australia , where it began to air on the kids channel ABC3 on June 29 , 2013 , following an early preview on January 6 . The dubbed series began streaming on Viz Media 's streaming service , Neon Alley in late 2013 . 
 = = Related media = = 
 = = = Print media = = = 
 Houbunsha has published several manga series based on the franchise . A direct adaptation of the anime series , illustrated by Hanokage , was published in three tankōbon volumes , each containing four chapters , released between February 12 and May 30 , 2011 . The manga has been licensed in North America by Yen Press . A side story manga , Puella Magi Kazumi Magica : The Innocent Malice ( <unk> ☆ マギカ 〜 The innocent malice 〜 , Mahō Shōjo Kazumi Magika : The Innocent Malice ) , written by Masaki Hiramatsu and illustrated by Takashi <unk> , was serialized between the March 2011 and January 2013 issues of Manga Time Kirara Forward . A third manga , Puella Magi Oriko Magica ( <unk> ☆ マギカ , Mahō Shōjo Oriko Magika ) , written by <unk> Mura , was released in two tankōbon volumes released on May 12 , 2011 , and June 12 , 2011 , respectively . Both Kazumi Magica and Oriko Magica have been licensed by Yen Press in North America . The first volume of Kazumi Magica was released in May 2013 . Puella Magi Madoka Magica : Wraith Arc ( 魔法少女まどか ☆ マギカ <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , written and illustrated by Hanokage , began serialization in the 20th issue of Manga Time Kirara Magica released on June 10 , 2015 . The plot depicts the events that happened between Puella Magi Madoka Magica the Movie : Eternal and Puella Magi Madoka Magica the Movie : Rebellion . 
 The first volume of an official anthology comic featuring guest artists was released on September 12 , 2011 . A dedicated monthly magazine by Houbunsha , Manga Time Kirara Magica ( <unk> ☆ マギカ , Manga <unk> Kirara Magika ) , launched on June 8 , 2012 , and features various manga stories , including spin @-@ off stories of Oriko Magica . A film comic adaptation of the series titled Puella Magi Madoka Magica : Film Memories went on sale on May 26 , 2012 . Another manga by Hanokage , Puella Magi Madoka Magica : The Different Story , was published in three tankōbon volumes between October 12 and November 12 , 2012 , and licensed by Yen Press in 2014 . Puella Magi <unk> Magica ( <unk> ☆ マギカ ) , written and illustrated by Gan , released its first volume on November 12 , 2013 , before starting serialization in Manga Time Kirara Magica on November 22 , 2013 . Puella Magi Homura Tamura ( <unk> ☆ <unk> ) , written and illustrated by Afro , is serialized in Manga Time Kirara Magica , and released its first volume in October 2013 ; Yen Press licensed the manga . Puella Magi Homura 's Revenge ! ( 魔法少女まどか ☆ マギカ <unk> ! ) , written by <unk> and illustrated by <unk> , was serialized in Manga Time Kirara Magica , and released two volumes in December 2013 ; Yen Press licensed the manga . 
 A novel adaptation of the series written by Hajime <unk> and illustrated by <unk> was published by Nitroplus on August 14 , 2011 . A pre @-@ release was available at Comiket 80 on August 12 , 2011 . A book based on Gen Urobuchi 's original draft treatment for the anime , titled Puella Magi Madoka Magica : The Beginning Story , was released in November 2011 . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 A video game based on the series titled Puella Magi Madoka Magica Portable ( 魔法少女まどか ☆ マギカ <unk> , Mahō Shōjo Madoka Magika <unk> ) for the PlayStation Portable was released by Namco Bandai Games on March 15 , 2012 . The game allows players to take many routes , changing the fate of the original storyline . Urobuchi returned as the writer with Shaft doing the animation production on the title , while Yusuke <unk> and <unk> Doi acted as producers . The game was released in two editions , a standard box including a bonus DVD , and a limited edition box containing a Madoka <unk> , a bonus Blu @-@ ray Disc , a Kyubey pouch , a ' <unk> ' handkerchief and a special clear card . 
 An action game for the PlayStation Vita titled Puella Magi Madoka Magica : The Battle Pentagram ( <unk> Battle Pentagram ) developed by <unk> and published by Namco Bandai Games was later released in Japan on December 19 , 2013 . The game featured an original story created with guidance from <unk> in which all five magical girls team up to defeat the powerful witch , Walpurgis Night . Upon release , a limited edition version was also available that included codes for additional in @-@ game costumes as well as merchandise such as a CD copy of the original sound track and an art book . 
 A free smartphone application , Mami 's Heart Pounding Tiro Finale ( <unk> , Mami no Doki Doki Tiro <unk> ) was released on October 14 , 2011 . A third @-@ person shooter titled Puella Magi Madoka Magica TPS featuring Homura Akemi was released for Android devices in December 2011 . A second TPS title featuring Mami was released on August 2012 and a third featuring Sayaka and Kyoko was released on October 16 , 2012 . A puzzle game for the iPhone titled Puella Magi Madoka Magica Puzzle of Memories was released on March 29 , 2013 . 
 Costumes from Puella Magi Madoka Magica , alongside content based on other anime and games , are available as downloadable content ( DLC ) for the PSP game Gods Eater Burst in Japan . Costumes and accessories are also available as DLC for Tales of Xillia 2 . Costumes and accessories were made available as DLC for Phantasy Star Online 2 in October 2013 . Another collaboration with the mobile game Phantom of the Kill took place for an event that ran from August 8 , 2015 to September 21 , 2015 . During that campaign , players had a chance of obtaining various playable Madoka characters through the <unk> . There were also Puella Magi Madoka Magica themed missions , weapons , and items during that time . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 In November 2011 , it was announced in the December issue of Kadokawa Shoten 's Newtype magazine that a three @-@ part theatrical film project was in development by Shaft . The first two films , titled Beginnings ( <unk> , Hajimari no Monogatari ) and Eternal ( <unk> , Eien no Monogatari ) , are compilations of the anime TV series featuring redone voices and some scenes with new animation . The first film , which covers the first eight episodes of the TV series , was released in theatres on October 6 , 2012 , while the second film , which covers the last four episodes , was released on October 13 , 2012 . The first two films were screened in selected locations in the United States and seven other countries between October 2012 and February 2013 , as well as screened at Anime Festival Asia between November 10 – 11 , 2012 , in Singapore . The two films were released on Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD on July 30 , 2013 , in standard and collector 's edition sets and is being made available for import by Aniplex of America . The third film , titled Rebellion ( <unk> , <unk> no Monogatari ) , features an all @-@ new story written by Urobuchi and acts as a sequel to the TV series . It was released to Japanese theatres on October 26 , 2013 . The film received a North American imported release on December 3 , 2013 . The first and second films were re @-@ released with an English dub on July 15 , 2014 . 
 A short concept film for a new story , described as a " movie @-@ based image board " , was debuted at Shaft anniversary exhibition <unk> on November 27 , 2015 . Shaft representative director and president Mitsutoshi Kubota later confirmed in an interview in Newtype that the concept film will launch a new Puella Magi Madoka Magica project . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Puella Magi Madoka Magica has received widespread critical acclaim . In his 10 out of 10 review , UK Anime Network 's Andy Hanley lauded the series for its deeply emotional content and described it as immersive and filled with grandiose visuals along with an evocative soundtrack . Additionally , he recommended that viewers watch it several times in order to fully comprehend the complex and multilayered plotline . He went on to claim that it was the greatest TV anime series of the 21st century thus far . Scott Green of Ain 't It Cool News commented that the series was " hugely admirable " and he would give it the highest possible recommendation to anyone even slightly interested in anime . He also praised the animation team 's attention to detail , stating that the series " would not work nearly as well if the characters in general and as magical girls specifically weren 't presently so spectacularly winningly by the production . " T.H.E.M. Anime reviewer Tim Jones criticized what he regarded as weak character development but nevertheless remarked that the series was " beautiful , well @-@ written , and surprisingly dark " and gave it four out of five stars . In the review , Jones also commended the unique animation and design of the backdrops shown during witch fights , which he described as surreal and " trippy " , but beautiful . In his review of the three BD volumes of the anime series , Zac Bertschy of Anime News Network characterized the story as very emotionally dark and " one of the most ambitious and beautiful anime series in recent memory . " He went on to award each of the volumes A or A + overall ratings . 
 The darker approach to the popular magical girl subgenre in Japanese anime and manga was also a point of high praise by reviewers . In its take on the series , the staff at Japanator remarked that this trope " added a level of depth and complexity to the genre that we haven ’ t ever seen , and I don ’ t think we will see again . [ ... ] Adding on that dressing gave the show a more perverse and cruel feeling to it , making it all the more compelling to watch . " Liz Ohanesian of LA Weekly attributed the genre deconstruction of Puella Magi Madoka Magica to the series ' popularity with older , male audiences , an otherwise unusual demographic to the genre . Furthermore , she commented on cultural impact that the series produced , observing that in both Japan and the US there has been incredible fan captivation surrounding the series . She credited the all @-@ star crew including writer Urobuchi , director Shinbo , and the Shaft animation studio as " hitmakers " and described the anime as " a series designed for acclaim . " TechnologyTell 's Jenni Lada warned that the show 's external appearance belied its true " darker and more twisted " essence . She recommended viewers watch at least three episodes in order to discover the series ' true nature . Production I.G 's Katsuyuki Motohiro watched Puella Magi Madoka Magica after hearing opinions that it exceeded Neon Genesis Evangelion . Upon viewing the series , he was so amazed that he began analyzing Urobuchi 's other works and was then motivated to request Urobuchi to write the crime thriller Psycho @-@ Pass . 
 = = = Sales and accolades = = = 
 The first BD volume sold 53 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , 22 @,@ 000 of which were sold on its first day , breaking the record previously held by the sixth BD volume of Bakemonogatari . The second volume sold 54 @,@ 000 copies , breaking its own record . Each subsequent volume has managed to sell over 50 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . This was despite controversy over the pricing of the volumes which some considered to be unfairly high . The staff at Japanator stated they could not recommend that their readers buy the volumes due to the prohibitive cost . Bertschy concurred , writing that the " limited episode count and high price of entry make the show inaccessible to an audience unwilling to shell out . " 
 The Nihon <unk> Shimbun newspaper reported that before the release of the third movie , the anime had grossed a total of 40 billion yen in the sales of related goods . A live broadcast of the entire series streamed on Nico Nico Douga on June 18 , 2011 garnered around 1 million viewers , surpassing the previous record of 570 @,@ 000 held by Lucky Star . 
 The show won the Television Award at the 16th Animation Kobe Awards , as well as 12 Newtype Anime Awards and the Grand Prize for animation in the 2011 Japan Media Arts awards . It also won three Tokyo Anime Awards in the Television Category , Best Director and Best Screenplay , and the Selection Committee Special Prize award at the 2012 Licensing of the Year awards . Madoka Magica was awarded a Seiun Award for " Best Media " at the 2012 Japan Science Fiction Convention . In 2015 , the show was also awarded the inaugural Sugoi Japan Grand Prix , Japan 's nationwide vote for manga , anime , and novels considered as cultural assets that have the potential to be beloved all over the world , among all the works published since 2005 . 
 = The Rocketeer ( film ) = 
 The Rocketeer is a 1991 American period superhero film from Walt Disney Pictures , produced by Charles Gordon , Lawrence Gordon , and Lloyd Levin , directed by Joe Johnston , and starring Billy Campbell , Jennifer Connelly , Alan Arkin , Timothy Dalton , Paul Sorvino and Tiny Ron Taylor . The film is based upon the character of the same name created by comic book artist and writer Dave Stevens . 
 Set in 1938 Los Angeles , California , The Rocketeer tells the story of stunt pilot Cliff Secord who discovers a rocket powered jet pack that enables him to fly without an aircraft . His heroic deeds soon attract the attention of Howard Hughes and the FBI , who are hunting for the missing jet pack , as well as sadistic Nazi operatives . 
 Development for The Rocketeer started as far back as 1983 , when Stevens sold the film rights . Steve Miner and William Dear considered directing The Rocketeer before Johnston signed on . Screenwriters Danny Bilson and Paul De Meo had creative differences with Disney , which caused the film to languish in development hell . The studio also intended to change the trademark helmet design ; Disney CEO Michael Eisner wanted a straight NASA @-@ type helmet , but Johnston convinced the studio otherwise . Johnston also had to convince Disney to let him cast unknown actor Billy Campbell in the lead role . Filming for The Rocketeer lasted from September 19 , 1990 to January 22 , 1991 . The visual effects sequences were created and designed by Industrial Light & Magic , and were supervised by animation director Wes Takahashi . 
 The film was released on June 21 , 1991 and received generally favorable reviews from critics , although plans for Rocketeer sequels were abandoned after the film failed to perform at the box office . As of 2012 , new efforts were being made for a remake , but there has not been any new announcements since . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1938 Los Angeles , two gangsters in Eddie Valentine 's ( Paul Sorvino ) gang steal a rocket pack from Howard Hughes ( Terry O 'Quinn ) . During their escape , they find themselves on an airfield , where they hide the rocket pack , ending in an auto @-@ airplane accident while escaping , with the police in hot pursuit . Stunt pilot Cliff Secord ( Billy Campbell ) , whose Gee Bee racer was totaled during the accident , and airplane mechanic Peevy ( Alan Arkin ) later find the rocket pack hidden in a bi @-@ plane cockpit . Meanwhile , well @-@ known actor Neville Sinclair ( Timothy Dalton ) , who hired Valentine 's gang to steal the rocket pack , sends his monstrous henchman Lothar ( Tiny Ron ) to question the injured getaway driver , who tells him that the rocket pack is at the airfield . 
 Cliff 's aspiring actress girlfriend , Jenny Blake ( Jennifer Connelly ) , has a bit part in the latest Neville Sinclair film . On the set , Sinclair overhears Cliff attempting to tell Jenny about the rocket pack , so he invites her to dinner . Afterward , at a local air show , Cliff uses the rocket pack ( and Peevy 's newly designed face @-@ hiding finned helmet ) to rescue his friend Malcolm ( Eddie Jones ) , who is drunkenly piloting a bi @-@ plane . Having been seen by the newsreel press in the airshow audience ( and Valentine 's gangsters ) , " The Rocketeer " becomes a media sensation . 
 Sinclair sends Lothar to Cliff and Peevy 's home to find the rocket pack . The FBI arrives , but Cliff and Peevy escape , while Lothar steals its detailed schematics drawn up by Peevy . Later , at the airfield diner , Cliff and Peevy , trapped by several Valentine mobsters , learn that Jenny had a date with Sinclair , and of the actor 's involvement in the hunt for the rocket pack . The diner patrons overpower the gangsters , while a bullet ricochet punctures the rocket 's fuel tank , which Peevy temporarily patches with Cliff 's chewing gum . 
 At Sinclair 's home , Jenny discovers that he is a Nazi secret agent , and Jenny knocks him out . She is later detained and forced to leave a message for Cliff to bring the rocket pack to the Griffith Observatory in exchange for her life . Just before he is arrested by the FBI and taken to Howard Hughes , Cliff hides the rocket pack . Hughes reveals his rocket pack is a prototype , similar to one that Nazi scientists have , up to now , been unsuccessful in developing . When Secord asks why there is so much interest in the rocket pack , Hughes shows a horrifying propaganda film depicting flying soldiers invading the United States and hoisting a Nazi flag over the White House . When Hughes demands the return of the rocket pack , Cliff explains that he needs it to rescue Jenny ; he escapes , inadvertently leaving behind a clue to where he is headed . 
 Cliff flies to the rendezvous , where Sinclair demands that Cliff give him the rocket pack . Cliff divulges to the mobsters that the actor is a Nazi spy ; Valentine turns his weapon on Sinclair and Lothar . Sinclair summons 60 heavily armed Nazi S.A. commandos hidden at the observatory . The Nazi rigid airship Luxembourg appears overhead to evacuate Sinclair . FBI agents suddenly announce their presence , having secretly surrounded the area ; they and the mobsters join forces to battle the Nazis . Sinclair and Lothar escape , dragging Jenny with them aboard the airship . 
 Cliff flies to and boards the airship , but during the ensuing showdown , Jenny accidentally sets the bridge on fire using a flare gun . Sinclair takes the rocket pack to save himself , saying " I 'll miss Hollywood " . This proves to be an ironic statement , as Cliff has removed the makeshift chewing gum patch from the tank , which is now leaking . The fuel catches fire , and the fire follows the vapor trail to the rocket pack 's fuel tank , which also catches fire , causing Sinclair to plummet to his death near the " <unk> " sign ; the resulting explosion destroys the LAND part of the sign . Lothar is engulfed in flames as the airship explodes , but Cliff and Jenny are rescued at the last moment by Hughes and Peevy flying an autogyro . 
 Hughes later presents Cliff with a brand @-@ new Gee Bee air racer and a fresh pack of chewing gum . As Hughes leaves , Jenny returns Peevy 's rocket pack blueprints , which she found in Sinclair 's home ; Peevy decides that , with some modifications , he can build an even better one . 
 = = Cast = = 
 As appearing in The Rocketeer , ( main roles and screen credits identified ) : 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Comic book writer / artist Dave Stevens created the Rocketeer in 1982 and immediately viewed the character as an ideal protagonist for a film adaptation . Steve Miner purchased the film rights from Stevens in 1983 , but he strayed too far from the original concept and the rights reverted to Stevens . In 1985 Stevens gave writers Danny Bilson and Paul De Meo a free option on The Rocketeer rights . Stevens liked that " their ideas for The Rocketeer were heartfelt and affectionate tributes to the 1930s serials with all the right dialogue and atmosphere . Most people would approach my characters contemporarily , but Danny and Paul saw them as pre @-@ war mugs . " 
 Stevens , Bilson and De Meo began to consider making The Rocketeer as a low @-@ budget film , shot in black @-@ and @-@ white and funded by independent investors . Their plan was to make the film a complete homage to the Commando Cody serial films , and use a cast largely associated with character actors . However , that same year , the trio approached William Dear to direct / co @-@ write The Rocketeer , and they eventually dropped the low @-@ budget idea . Bilson , De Meo , and Dear kept the comic book 's basic plot intact , but fleshed it out to include a Hollywood setting and a climactic battle against a Nazi Zeppelin . They also tweaked Cliff 's girlfriend to avoid comparisons to Bettie Page ( Stevens ' original inspiration ) , changing her name from Betty to Jenny and her profession from nude model to Hollywood extra ( a change also made to make the film more family friendly ) . Dear proceeded to transform the climax from a submarine into a Zeppelin setpiece . 
 Stevens , Bilson , De Meo , and Dear began to pitch The Rocketeer in 1986 to the major film studios but were turned down . " This was 1986 , long before Batman or Dick Tracy or anything similar " , Stevens explained . " In those days , no studio was interested at all in an expensive comic book movie . We got there about three years too early for our own good ! " Walt Disney Studios eventually accepted The Rocketeer because they believed the film had toyetic potential and appeal for merchandising . The Rocketeer was set to be released through the studio 's Touchstone Pictures label ; Stevens , Bilson , De Meo , and Dear all signed a contract which would permit them to make a trilogy of Rocketeer films . However , Disney studio chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg switched the film to a Walt Disney Pictures release . According to Stevens , " immediately , Betty and anything else ' adult ' went right out with the bathwater . They really tried to shoehorn it into a kiddie property so they could sell toys . All they really wanted at the end of the day , was the name " . 
 Initially , Disney executives wanted to set the film in contemporary times , out of concern that a period piece might not appeal to a large audience . However , Bilson and DeMeo argued that the success of the Indiana Jones trilogy proved that <unk> would enjoy an adventure film set in the 1930s , and the studio finally agreed . 
 Bilson and DeMeo then submitted their seven @-@ page film treatment to Disney , but the studio put their script through an endless series of revisions . Over five years , Disney fired and rehired Bilson and DeMeo three times . DeMeo explained that " Disney felt that they needed a different approach to the script , which meant bringing in someone else . But those scripts were thrown out and we were always brought back on " . They found the studio 's constant tinkering with the screenplay to be a frustrating process as " executives would like previously excised dialogue three months later . Scenes that had been thrown out two years ago were put back in . What was the point " ? DeMeo said . One of Bilson and De Meo 's significant revisions to the script over the years was to make Cliff and Jenny 's romance more believable and avoid cliché aspects that would stereotype Jenny as a damsel in distress . The numerous project delays forced Dear to drop out as director . Joe Johnston , a fan of the comic book , immediately offered his services as director when he found out Disney owned the film rights . Johnston was quickly hired and pre @-@ production started in early @-@ 1990 . After Bilson and De Meo 's third major rewrite , Disney finally greenlighted The Rocketeer . 
 The characterization of Neville Sinclair was inspired by movie star Errol Flynn , or rather by the image of Flynn that had been popularized by Charles Higham 's unauthorized and fabricated biography of the actor , in which he asserted that Flynn was , among other things , a Nazi spy . The film 's Neville Sinclair is , like Higham 's Flynn , a movie star known for his work in swashbuckler roles , and who is secretly a Nazi spy . Because Higham 's biography of Flynn was not refuted until the late 1980s , the image of Flynn as a closet Nazi remained current all through the arduous process of writing and re @-@ writing the script . The other real @-@ life characterization was of Howard Hughes . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting the lead role of Cliff Secord was a struggle for the filmmakers . Disney executive Jeffrey Katzenberg even had one of the studio 's then @-@ staff writers , Karey Kirkpatrick , audition for the part . Kevin Costner and Matthew Modine were the first actors considered for the role . When they both proved to be unavailable , Dennis Quaid , Kurt Russell , Bill Paxton and Emilio Estevez auditioned for the part . Johnny Depp was Disney 's favorite choice , while Paxton commented he came " really close " to getting the lead . Vincent D 'Onofrio turned down the role and the filmmakers were forced to continue their search . 
 The decision to cast Billy Campbell as Cliff Secord caused mixed emotions amongst Disney executives . Director Joe Johnston and creator Dave Stevens believed Campbell was perfect for the role , but Disney wanted an A @-@ list actor . Johnston eventually convinced Disney otherwise . Campbell was not familiar with the comic book when he got the part but quickly read it , in addition to books on aviation . He also prepared by listening to 1940s period music . The actor had a fear of flying but overcame it with the help of the film 's aerial coordinator , Craig Hosking . To ensure his safety , Campbell was doubled for almost all of the flying sequences in conventional aircraft . Ultimately , a scale model devised by ILM puppeteer Tom St. Amand was used for all the rocket pack scenes . 
 For the female lead of Cliff 's girlfriend Jenny , Sherilyn Fenn , Kelly Preston , Diane Lane and Elizabeth McGovern were considered before Jennifer Connelly was eventually cast . Campbell and Connelly 's working relationship eventually led to a romantic coupling , which Johnston found to be a technique for method acting that helped with their on @-@ screen chemistry . For Secord 's sidekick , Peevy , Dave Stevens hoped that Lloyd Bridges would play the part , but Bridges turned it down and Alan Arkin was cast . The part of Neville Sinclair was offered to Jeremy Irons and Charles Dance before Timothy Dalton accepted the role . Lastly , the part of Eddie Valentine was written with Joe Pesci in mind , but he turned down the part , which went to Paul Sorvino . 
 Remaining cast members included Tiny Ron Taylor as Lothar , Terry O 'Quinn as Howard Hughes , Jon Polito as Otis Bigelow , Ed Lauter as Agent Fitch , Eddie Jones as Malcolm the Mechanic and Robert Miranda as Spanish Johnny . Rocketeer creator Dave Stevens has a cameo as the German test pilot who is killed when the Nazis ' version of a rocket backpack explodes during the takeoff sequence . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for The Rocketeer lasted from September 19 , 1990 to January 22 , 1991 . Filming at the Griffith Observatory took place in November 1990 . The film ended up going 50 days over schedule due to weather and mechanical problems . Rocketeer creator Dave Stevens allied himself with director Joe Johnston and production manager Ian Bryce in an effort to be as heavily involved in the production process as possible and to try and secure as much artistic control as he could from Disney . Disney , in particular , was not enthusiastic with Stevens ' involvement . " I was on the set day and night " , Stevens reflected , " from pre @-@ production till post @-@ production ! And initially , I had to fight to prove that I was there for the benefit of the film , and not for my own ego . " 
 The original production budget was set at $ 25 million , but rose to $ 40 million . This happened after Disney became impressed with the dailies ; " they realized this was a bigger movie than they were anticipating " , Johnston explained , " and they approved <unk> . It never got completely out of control . " An abandoned World War II runway at the Santa Maria , California airport set the scene for the fictional Chaplin Air Field . Additional scenes were shot at Bakersfield . For the air circus scene , 700 Santa Maria extras and 25 vintage aircraft were employed . Aerial coordinator Craig Hosking remarked in an interview , " What makes The Rocketeer so unique was having several one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind planes that hadn 't flown in years , " including a 1916 Standard biplane and a Gee Bee Model Z racer . The sequence where Cliff rescues Malcolm was adapted shot @-@ for @-@ shot from Stevens ' comic book . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Stevens gave the film 's production designer Jim Bissell and his two art directors his entire reference library pertaining to the Rocketeer at that time period , including blueprints for hangars and bleachers , schematics for building the autogyro , photos and drawings of the Bulldog Cafe , the uniforms for the air circus staff , and contacts for locating the vintage aircraft that were to be used . Stevens remembers that they " literally just took the reference and built the sets " . Disney originally intended to change the Rocketeer 's trademark helmet design completely . President Michael Eisner wanted a straight NASA @-@ type helmet but director Johnston threatened to quit production on The Rocketeer . Disney relented , but only after creating a number of prototype designs that were ultimately rejected by the filmmakers . Stevens asked Johnston for one week to produce a good helmet design . He proceeded to work with a sculptor he knew , made a cast of the film 's main stunt man 's head and brainstormed ideas with the help of his sketches . They produced a helmet that the filmmakers agreed looked appropriate from all angles ; in most respects it was identical to the helmet design Stevens had used for his comics series . 
 Rick Baker designed the Rondo Hatton @-@ inspired prosthetic makeup designs for the Lothar character , portrayed by Tiny Ron Taylor . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 The visual effects were designed and created by George Lucas ' Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) with Ken Ralston ( Who Framed Roger Rabbit , Sony Pictures Imageworks founder ) serving as the VFX supervisor . Rocketeer director Joe Johnston previously worked as an art director / model maker at ILM before his film directing career took off . Johnston 's insistence on a realistic flying <unk> led ILM to devise a lifelike Cliff Secord model that was filmed in " stop @-@ motion @-@ animation " coupled with an 18 " figurine that was manipulated by hand and in " go @-@ motion " to create " motion @-@ blur . " <unk> @-@ up Moviola effects were also used to advantage in the air circus sequence where a combination of live action and stop @-@ motion animation was also employed . 
 The Rocketeer 's attack on the Nazi Zeppelin was filmed near Six Flags Magic Mountain amusement park in Valencia , California over four months through pick @-@ ups . Remaining visual effects footage took place at ILM 's headquarters in San Rafael and Hamilton Air Force Base . There , they constructed a 12 ft scale model of the Zeppelin , which was photographed against matte paintings that resembled 1938 Los Angeles for intercutting purposes . The Zeppelin explosion special effect alone cost $ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The music for The Rocketeer was composed and conducted by James Horner . The soundtrack received positive reviews and is often mentioned as being one of the film 's stronger elements . The soundtrack was released by Hollywood Records and features nearly an hour of music with eight tracks of score and two vocal tracks performed by actress / singer Melora Hardin . The two songs were arranged by Billy May , who had collaborated with Horner several times in the past . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 To promote The Rocketeer , Disney made tie @-@ in endorsements with Pizza Hut and M & M 's / Mars candies . An extensive product line followed of computer games , toys , posters , trading cards , pins , patches , buttons , T @-@ shirts , and children 's clothing , licensed to coincide with the film 's opening . The studio also spent a further $ 19 million on TV advertising alone . A television special documentary , titled The Rocketeer : Excitement in the Air , was broadcast on the Disney Channel in June 1991 . That same month , a young adult novelization written by Peter David was published by Bantam Books , while a similar novelization by Ron Fontes , for younger readers was published by Scholastic Books for Disney Press . 
 The Rocketeer had its premiere at the 1 @,@ 100 seat El Capitan Theatre on June 19 , 1991 . This was the first premiere to take place at the El Capitan in more than two years , due to an Art Deco @-@ like restoration project Disney had been working on . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 When released on the home video market in 1991 – 1992 in both LaserDisc and VHS / Beta videotape formats , The Rocketeer earned an additional $ 23 @.@ 18 million in rentals . A movie soundtrack , compiled and produced by James Horner , was released in both audio cassette and CD variants . The Rocketeer was released on Region 1 DVD by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment in August 1999 . No special features were included on the later DVD release although the 1991 LaserDisc ( # 1239 as ) had included the original theatrical trailer . A Blu @-@ ray Disc was released on December 13 , 2011 for its 20th Anniversary Edition . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Rocketeer was released in the United States on June 21 , 1991 , earning $ 9 @.@ 6 million in its opening weekend in 1 @,@ 616 theaters . The film opened # 4 behind Robin Hood : Prince of Thieves , City Slickers and Dying Young . Rocketeer eventually grossed only $ 46 @.@ 6 million in US box office making it a disappointment . Outside the US and Canada , the film was released through Touchstone Pictures rather than Walt Disney Pictures , in an attempt to attract the teenage audience it did not reach in North America . 
 The Disney tag also was seen to have turned off people who assumed that the film was for children . In addition , Rocketeer 's original Art Deco poster was changed because it failed to draw attention to the cast , including then @-@ current James Bond , Timothy Dalton . A new poster was designed to feature Dalton , Billy Campbell and Jennifer Connelly prominently . However , the film also failed in Britain , grossing just over £ 1 million in its first two weeks at just under 250 screens . The new ad campaign was being designed while the British promotional campaign for the film was already under way and some theaters still had the stylized U.S. movie poster . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received mixed or average reviews from critics . Based on 57 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 61 % of the critics enjoyed The Rocketeer with an average score of 5 @.@ 9 / 10 . Roger Ebert enjoyed the film , noting its homages to the film serials of the 1930s – 1950s . Although Ebert cited the visual effects as being state of the art , he described them " as charmingly direct as those rockets in the Flash Gordon serials — the ones with sparklers hidden inside of them , which were pulled on wires in front of papier @-@ mâché mountains . " Leonard Maltin wrote that the " film captures the look of the ' 30s , as well as the gee @-@ whiz innocence of Saturday matinée serials , but it 's talky and takes too much time to get where it 's going . Dalton has fun as a villain patterned after Errol Flynn . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone magazine also gave a positive review . " The Rocketeer is more than one of the best films of the summer ; it 's the kind of movie magic that we don 't see much anymore " , he continued , " the kind that charms us , rather than bullying us , into suspending disbelief . " 
 Internet reviewer James Berardinelli commented that " The Rocketeer may not be perfect , but it 's an excellent example of how to adapt a comic book to the screen . " However , Janet Maslin from The New York Times gave a mixed review . She called The Rocketeer " a benign adventure saga that has attractive stars , elaborate gimmicks and nice production values — everything it needs except a personality of its own . " Maslin believed that by setting the story in 1938 , the filmmakers were more interested in the Art Deco production design and visual effects instead of imbuing the storyline with " inspiration , which may be why it finally feels flat . " Hal Hinson , writing in The Washington Post , felt the film was too concerned with family @-@ friendliness . Jonathan Rosenbaum of Chicago Reader believed both the editing and the storyline were not well balanced and felt The Rocketeer ripped @-@ off elements of Indiana Jones and Back to the Future . Rosenbaum also cited the casting decision of character actors as being too practical . " The whole thing is good @-@ natured enough " , he explained , " but increasingly mechanical . " 
 Rocketeer creator Dave Stevens acknowledged he was " satisfied with 70 % of the film " and highly praised Joe Johnston 's direction . " The overall spirit and sweetness of the series is still there , intact " , Stevens remembers . " We lost some good character stuff in editing for time , but the tone of it is still what I was trying to project in the comic pages . I also thought Joe 's casting choices were excellent . To his credit , Joe did not fill out the cast with a bunch of Beverly Hills , 90210 Barbie and Ken @-@ type kids . " Stevens found Billy Campbell to be " a good @-@ looking guy but he also happens to be Cliff ! I would never have cast him based on good looks alone , but he came into the audition and just nailed it shut . He was made for it . The part was his . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The Rocketeer was nominated for both the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film , but lost both categories to Terminator 2 : Judgment Day . Costume designer Marilyn Vance won the Saturn Award for Best Costumes , while Jennifer Connelly ( Best Supporting Actress ) and VFX supervisor Ken Ralston ( Best Special Effects ) also received nominations . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 From the beginning of the process of making The Rocketeer , creator Dave Stevens and screenwriters Danny Bilson and Paul De Meo envisioned it as the first entry of a trilogy . Disney , in particular , hoped the film would carry a vein similar to the Indiana Jones franchise . Both Campbell and Connelly were contracted for sequels ; Campbell for two more and Connelly for only one . However , with the film 's disappointing box office performance , plans for a sequel were halted in July 1991 . " [ Unfortunately ] the movie didn 't make as much money as Disney had hoped " , Campbell reflected in a January 2008 interview with MTV News . " And that coupled with the acrimonious relationship that the director [ Joe Johnston ] and the studio had , contributed to them not even considering it . " 
 Although the calls for a sequel remain unrequited , as with many films of this genre , the movie has built up a cult following in both the United States and Japan , where until 2008 , <unk> , a major toy manufacturer , issued two versions of 12 " <unk> action figures and replica helmets based on the film . The original Dave Stevens comics are still in demand and movie memorabilia continues to have a ready audience . In addition , Johnston 's work on this film led to him being hired 20 years later to direct another period superhero film , Captain America : The First Avenger in 2011 . 
 As of 2012 , Disney was reported to be developing a remake of The Rocketeer . Saw series creator James Wan has talked about directing the film . Further announcements since then have yet to be made . 
 = TNA Unbreakable = 
 Unbreakable was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion that took place on September 11 , 2005 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the first and only show under the Unbreakable name and ninth event in the 2005 TNA PPV schedule . Nine professional wrestling matches and two pre @-@ show matches were featured on the card , three of which were for championships . 
 The main event at Unbreakable was a Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship , in which then @-@ champion Christopher Daniels defended the title against the challengers A.J. Styles and Samoa Joe . Styles ended up gaining the pinfall in the bout , thus winning the title . The NWA World Heavyweight Championship was defended in a Raven 's Rules match between then @-@ champion Raven and the challenger Rhino . Raven pinned Rhino in the encounter to retain the championship . A Four Way Elimination Tag Team match for the NWA World Tag Team Championship was held at Unbreakable , in which then @-@ champions The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) defeated the teams of Alex Shelley and Johnny Candido , America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) , and Team Canada ( A @-@ 1 and Eric Young ) to remain champions . On the undercard , Abyss defeated Sabu in a No Disqualification match during the show . 
 Unbreakable is remembered for the Three Way TNA X Division Championship match , which received a rare 5 Star match rating from wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer , the first and currently the only one the company had received . The main event was ranked by TNA as the fourth greatest moment in the company 's history . Corey David Lacroix of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated the show an 8 out of 10 , stating " TNA 's Unbreakable PPV was an astounding buffet of action , catering to the variety of tastes among professional wrestling fans . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Unbreakable was announced in June 2005 to take place on September 11 , 2005 . TNA scheduled Unbreakable to be held at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . TNA released a poster to promote the event featuring Raven and Rhino . A thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show was slatted to take place prior to the telecast . Unbreakable was dedicated to the " unbreakable spirit of the American people . " 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Unbreakable featured nine professional wrestling matches and two pre @-@ show matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event was a Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship , in which then @-@ champion Christopher Daniels defended the title against the challengers A.J. Styles and Samoa Joe . Prior to Unbreakable , TNA held the 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament to determine the number @-@ one contender to the TNA X Division Championship . The tournament involved eight men , with Joe and Styles making it to the final round at TNA 's previous PPV event Sacrifice on August 14 . There , Joe defeated Styles after interference from Daniels to earn a shot at the title . On the August 19 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! , TNA commentator Mike Tenay announced that Daniels would defend the title against Joe at the event . Later during the same episode , Daniels assaulted Joe until Styles came out to attack Daniels over his interference in the bout at Sacrifice . Due to Styles ' actions , Daniels demanded that NWA Championship Committee member Larry Zbyszko suspend Styles . Instead , Zbyszko added Styles to the encounter on the August 26 episode of Impact ! , making it a Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship at the event . This match was also promoted as the X Division " Dream Bout " , as the top competitors in the division were being pitted against each other for the championship . 
 The predominant bout on the card was for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship between then @-@ champion Raven and the challenger Rhino . At Sacrifice , Raven teamed with Sabu to face the team of Jeff Jarrett and Rhino . On the pre @-@ show of the gathering , Zbyszko announced if Jarrett pinned Raven during the contest then he would earn a future NWA World Heavyweight Championship match . However , he added that if Raven pinned Jarrett during the contest then Jarrett would not have another title match for an entire year . Rhino ended up pinning Raven at the event , with TNA declaring him number @-@ one contender on their website after the show . Tenay promoted Raven versus Rhino for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at Unbreakable on the August 19 episode of Impact ! . 
 The NWA World Tag Team Championship was defended at Unbreakable in a Four Way Elimination Tag Team match by then @-@ champions The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) , who were pitted against the teams of Alex Shelley and Sean Waltman , America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ; AMW ) , and A @-@ 1 and Eric Young of Team Canada . This match was the combination of several storylines . The Naturals were involved in an on @-@ screen rivalry heading into Unbreakable with A @-@ 1 , Bobby Roode , Petey Williams , and Young — collectively known as Team Canada . At TNA 's Slammiversary PPV event on June 19 , The Naturals defeated Williams and Young to retain the World Tag Team Championship . The Naturals then teamed with Lance Hoyt in a Six Man Tag Team match to face A @-@ 1 , Roode , and Young in a losing effort at TNA 's No Surrender PPV event on July 17 . Afterwards , The Naturals began an alliance with AMW leading to an Eight Man Tag Team match against A @-@ 1 , Roode , Williams , and Young at Sacrifice . Team Canada were the victors at the show . On the August 19 episode of Impact ! , The Naturals defeated A @-@ 1 and Young by disqualification to retain the World Tag Team Championship . Following the bout , Team Canada assaulted The Naturals until AMW came to their aid , which resulted in a brawl between the two teams with The Naturals feeling they did not need AMW 's help . Concurrently at this time TNA held the Chris Candido Memorial Tag Team Tournament , which involved eight randomly assigned teams . Zbyszko announced on the August 26 episode of Impact ! that a Four Way Elimination Tag Team match for the NWA World Tag Team Championship was planned for Unbreakable , in which The Naturals would defend against AMW , Team Canada , and the winners of the tournament . The final round of the Tournament was held on the September 9 episode of Impact ! , where the team of Shelley and Waltman defeated the team of Chris Sabin and Shocker to join the match . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Show = = = 
 Prior to Unbreakable , TNA held a thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show . During the broadcast , TNA interviewer Shane Douglas announced the NWA World Heavyweight Championship match between Raven and Rhino was changed to a Raven 's Rules match . Two bouts were held during the telecast , the first pitted Cassidy Riley against Jerrelle Clark . The encounter went to a no contest at 1 minute and 56 seconds when Monty Brown interfered in the bout attacking both wrestlers and proceeding to challenge the winner of Raven versus Rhino for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship to a title defense at TNA 's next PPV event Bound for Glory on October 23 . Shark Boy fought Mikey Batts in the second , winning the contest at 3 minutes and 20 seconds by pinfall after forcing Batts chin into his shoulder with his signature Dead Sea Drop . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 Unbreakable featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast . Jeremy Borash ( for the main event only ) and David Penzer were ring announcers for the event . Andrew Thomas , Rudy Charles , and Mark " Slick " Johnson participated as referees for the encounters . Shane Douglas handled the interview duties during the show . Besides employees who appeared in a wrestling role , Traci Brooks , Sonny Siaki , Matt Bentley , Jeff Jarrett , James Mitchell , and Jimmy Hart all appeared on camera , either in backstage or in ringside segments . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The gathering began with a Six Man Tag Team match between the 3Live Kru ( B.G. James , Konnan , and Ron Killings ) and The Diamonds in the Rough ( David Young , Elix Skipper , and Simon Diamond ) . The duration of the bout was 4 minutes and 20 seconds . Konnan used his shoe as a weapon during the encounter . 3Live Kru won the match by pinfall after Konnan slammed Young face @-@ first into the mat with his signature <unk> maneuver . 
 The second bout of the show was between two non @-@ contracted wrestlers , Austin Aries and Roderick Strong . It lasted 8 minutes even . Aries gained the pinfall after slamming Strong head @-@ first into the mat with a brainbuster , followed by a 450 ° aerial splash onto a prone Strong . 
 Sonny Siaki accompanied the team of Apolo and Lance Hoyt for their match with Kip James and Monty Brown next . Kip attempted to kick Apolo with a charging big boot , but accidentally hit Brown . This allowed Apolo to kick Kip in the face and cover for a near @-@ fall . Brown then gained the win for his team after crashing into Apolo with his signature Pounce maneuver at 9 minutes and 58 seconds . 
 The following contest pitted Chris Sabin against Petey Williams , lasting 12 minutes and 34 seconds . The bout was originally scheduled as Sabin facing his tag team partner in the Chris Candido Memorial Tag Team Tournament , Shocker . However , Shocker was unable to attend the show and was replaced by Williams . Williams held Sabin by Sabin 's legs in a Sharpshooter submission hold twice during the match , with Sabin forcing Williams to release the hold both times . Near the end , Williams went to perform his signature Canadian Destroyer maneuver on Sabin , before Sabin countered the move into his signature Cradle Shock maneuver . After lifting up and slamming Williams back and neck @-@ first into the mat , Sabin followed with the pinfall to win the encounter . Matt Bentley — formally known as Michael Shane — returned to TNA by attacking Sabin and Williams after the bout . Bentley then announced an Ultimate X open challenge to take place at Bound for Glory . 
 TNA held a No Disqualification match between Abyss , who was accompanied by James Mitchell , and Sabu next . Its duration was 11 minutes and 30 seconds . This was originally promoted as Abyss versus Sabu , however , a No Disqualification stipulation was added during the event . In a No Disqualification match , weapons are legal , as well as outside interference , with a victor determined only by pinfall or submission . In the final minutes , Abyss retrieved a bag of thumbtacks which were hidden under the ring . He then poured the contents onto the ring mat before slamming Sabu back @-@ first into the tacks with his signature Black Hole Slam maneuver . 
 Bobby Roode faced Jeff Hardy in the sixth encounter . Roode 's fellow Team Canada member Petey Williams interfered in the contest distracting the referee , allowing Roode to attempt to hit Hardy with the a hockey stick . Hardy dodged the swing and countered with his signature Twist of Fate maneuver , forcing Roode 's chin into his shoulder . Afterwards , Hardy jumped off the top of a padded turnbuckle onto both Williams and Roode at ringside . Later , Roode re @-@ entered the ring with Hardy remaining at ringside , allowing Jeff Jarrett to attack Hardy from behind with a hockey stick . Jarrett then pushed Hardy into the ring with Roode covering for the pinfall victory at 9 minutes and 7 seconds . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The Four @-@ Way Elimination Tag Team match for the NWA World Tag Team Championship was next , in which The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) , who were accompanied by Jimmy Hart , defended against the teams of Alex Shelley and Sean Waltman , America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) , and Team Canada ( A @-@ 1 and Eric Young ) . The bout duration was 18 minutes and 1 second . Waltman was advertised to team with Shelley for the encounter , but missed the show due to undisclosed reasons . In this bout , if a member of a team is pinned or made to submit , then him and his partner is eliminated from the contest ; the objective is to be the last team standing . Shelley began the bout alone , until Chris Candido 's legitimate brother Johnny Candido , who was in attendance along with several of Candido 's family members , jumped the railing to join Shelley as his tag team partner . A bit later , Douglas kicked Candido in the crotch and pinned him with a roll @-@ up pin , thus eliminating Shelley and Candido from the contest . AMW were the next eliminated ; Young pinned Harris with a roll @-@ up after A @-@ 1 hit Harris across the back with a hockey stick . The Naturals pinned A @-@ 1 after slamming him into the mat face @-@ first with their signature tag team Natural Disaster maneuver . Due to the pin , Team Canada were eliminated from the contest , thus giving the victory to The Naturals who retained the NWA World Tag Team Championship . 
 The NWA World Heavyweight Championship was defended in a Raven 's Rules match by Raven against Rhino in the eighth encounter on the card . A contest conducted under Raven 's Rules means there are no count @-@ outs or no disqualifications , and weapons are provided for the environment ; the only way to win is by pinfall or submission . Raven used a pizza cutter early on in the bout to cut open Rhino 's forehead , causing him to bleed heavily . Later , Raven 's forehead was also cut open due to being hit by a trashcan . Rhino used a staple gun during the contest ; Rhino placed several staples in Raven 's forehead . Cassidy Riley , Jeff Hardy , and Jeff Jarrett interfered in the bout . Riley interfered by accidentally distracting the referee during a pin attempt by Raven , whom Riley was attempting to aid . Jarrett came down to the ring near the end trying to bash Raven in the face with the NWA World Heavyweight Championship belt , but was stopped by Hardy . Raven then performed his signature Raven Effect DDT maneuver on Jarrett , forcing his head into the ring mat . Afterwards , Raven performed the Raven Effect DDT on Rhino and covered for the pinfall victory to retain the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at 14 minutes and 28 seconds . 
 The main event was a Three Way match for what ring announcer Jeremy Borash described as the " TNA X Division Championship of the World " , in which then @-@ champion Christopher Daniels defended against the challengers A.J. Styles and Samoa Joe . Its duration was 22 minutes and 50 seconds . The match began with Joe and Styles double teaming Daniels , with the two engaging in a kicking competition against Daniels ' back to see who could kick the hardest . While Daniels and Joe stood at ringside , Styles used the ropes to slingshot himself up into the air where he performed a backflip onto both competitors in what Styles ' named the Shooting Styles Press . Later back in the ring , Daniels grabbed Styles and fell backwards in the process causing Styles to flip overhead towards Joe . Styles landed on Joe 's shoulders and quickly fell backwards , flipping Joe forward . A few minutes later , Joe held Daniels in his signature Coquina Clutch submission hold , which was broken when Styles ascended a padded turnbuckle and jumped off to perform his signature Spiral Tap aerial technique , landing onto Daniels and Joe . Afterwards , Styles and Daniels fought on the top of a turnbuckle , with Joe ascending as well in order to lift up both and throw them off in a suplex . Joe followed by performing his signature Muscle Buster maneuver on Styles , forcing him back and neck @-@ first into the mat . Daniels then attempted to hit Joe with the TNA X Division Title belt , which Joe countered into a powerslam . Daniels then followed by kicking the belt into the side of Joe 's head . Styles eventually gained the pinfall on Daniels after countering Daniels ' signature Angel 's Wings maneuver into a bridging pin to win the TNA X Division Championship . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A total of 775 people attended Unbreakable . Canadian Online Explorer writer Corey David Lacroix rated the entire event an 8 out of 10 . TNA 's previous event Sacrifice did not receive a rating , however , No Surrender , which took place prior to Sacrifice , was given an 8 out of 10 by Jason Clevett . Unbreakable was ranked lower than TNA 's next event , Bound for Glory , which received a 9 out of 10 from Bob Kapur . Compared to rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's Unforgiven PPV event held on September 18 , Unbreakable was rated higher , as Chris Sokol gave Unforgiven a 6 out of 10 . 
 Lacroix felt that with Unbreakable TNA " truly cemented the formula needed for delivering great pay per views . " He concluded with " TNA 's Unbreakable PPV was an astounding buffet of action , catering to the variety of tastes among professional wrestling fans . " Lacroix also commented " If you missed it , get the replay . Don 't think , just do it – – the main event is well worth the price . " The main event was given Lacroix 's highest match rating of 10 out of 10 in his review . He gave his lowest rating of 4 out of 10 to the opening Six Man Tag Team match . The NWA World Heavyweight Championship bout was ranked with a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , while a 7 out of 10 was given to the NWA World Tag Team Championship contest . Commenting on the main event , Lacroix spoke of it as a " certified match of the year candidate . " Going onto describe in detail : " Unbreakable came to a close with mind @-@ boggling main event , featuring a three @-@ way dance between Samoa Joe against AJ Styles against X Division champion Christopher Daniels for the championship title . Now , this is the part where I go into a detail review of the match , but I 'm not going to that . Fact is there is no review that could do justice in describing just how stellar this bout was . " Regarding the Four Way Elimination match , Lacroix believed Johnny Candido 's participation was " a nice gesture " , but wonder " if they could have come up with something else , preferably outside of the match . " 
 James Caldwell of the Pro Wrestling Torch published a review of the show . In his review he stated that the main event was an " amazing , special match " , which he felt was " pro wrestling at its finest in 2005 . " As for the Raven 's Rules match , Caldwell thought it was a " brutal hardcore match " , which was a " good adrenaline rush but nothing separated the match from previous TNA hardcore matches . " Regarding the NWA World Tag Team Championship bout , Caldwell say it was a " decent tag match that could have been much better if Waltman and Shelley were around at the end where the formula could have been changed up . " 
 Wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer bestowed a rare 5 Star match rating to the Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship main event between A.J. Styles , Christopher Daniels , and Samoa Joe . TNA released a DVD counting down the top 50 moments in their history in 2007 , with the Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship ranked at number 4 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Three Way main event began an extended storyline revolving around the participants . At Bound for Glory , A.J. Styles defeated Christopher Daniels in a Thirty @-@ Minute Iron Man match to retain the TNA X Division Championship . TNA then held a Four @-@ on @-@ Four Tag Team Elimination X match at TNA 's Genesis PPV event on November 13 . In that match , Team Ministry ( Alex Shelley , Daniels , Samoa Joe , and Roderick Strong ) defeated the team of Austin Aries , Chris Sabin , Matt Bentley , and Sonjay Dutt . After the contest , Joe assaulted Daniels , performing his signature Muscle Buster maneuver on him twice , the second time on a steel chair . Daniels suffered an injury in the storyline due to the attack , sidelining him until December 11 at TNA 's Turning Point PPV event . At that event , Daniels saved Styles from an assault by Joe following Joe 's victory over Styles to win the TNA X Division Championship . Daniels then challenged Joe for the championship at TNA 's Final Resolution PPV event on January 15 , 2006 , but Joe retained the title . At TNA 's Against All Odds PPV event on February 12 , 2006 , Daniels , Joe , and Styles competed in another Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship ; Joe gained the pinfall to retain the title . The three competed again , but this time in a Three Way Ultimate X match for the championship at TNA 's Destination X PPV event on March 12 , 2006 . Daniels won , becoming the new TNA X Division Champion . The rivalry ended on the April 13 , 2006 episode of Impact ! when Joe defeated Daniels to win back the championship . TNA promoted an Unbreakable rematch at their 2009 Turning Point PPV event on November 15 . This time it was a Three Way match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship between Styles , Daniels , and Joe . Styles won the match to retain the championship . This encounter reignited the feud between Styles and Daniels , leading to a bout for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship at TNA 's Final Resolution PPV event on December 20 , 2009 , which Styles also won . 
 Following Unbreakable , Raven lost the NWA World Heavyweight Championship to Jeff Jarrett at a Border City Wrestling event on September 15 after interference by America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ; AMW ) and Scott D 'Amore to win the championship . Raven did not receive a rematch for the title . Instead , Jarrett was scheduled to defend the championship against a returning Kevin Nash at Bound for Glory . Nash could not attend the event due to a legitimate medical emergency , with TNA holding a Ten @-@ Man Gauntlet match to find his replacement at the show . Rhino won the match and took Nash 's place in the main event . There , Rhino defeated Jarrett to win the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . Rhino also competed in a Four Way Monster 's Ball match at Bound for Glory against Abyss , Jeff Hardy , and Sabu . Rhino was the victor in this encounter as well . 
 The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) defended the NWA World Tag Team Championship against AMW on the October 22 episode of Impact ! . They were unsuccessful in their defense , as AMW won the match by pinfall . AMW and The Naturals fought again at Bound for Glory , where AMW retained the championship . 
 A Three Way Ultimate X match was held at Bound for Glory , with the winner becoming number @-@ one contender to the TNA X Division Championship . Petey Williams defeated Chris Sabin and Matt Bentley in the match . A rematch was held on the November 3 episode of Impact ! , which Williams also won . 
 TNA management were very upset with Sean Waltman after he failed to appear to participate in the Four Way Elimination Tag Team match . This anger was due to Waltman being one @-@ half of the winners of the Chris Candido Memorial Tag Team Tournament . Despite not appearing on the show , Waltman was in Orlando and dressed to compete , but did not arrive at the arena in time . Waltman was not used by TNA until January 15 , 2006 when he appeared at their Final Resolution PPV event . 
 = = Results = = 
 Four Way Elimination Tag Team match 
 1 . ^ 
 = Digital radio in the United Kingdom = 
 In the United Kingdom , the roll @-@ out of digital radio is proceeding since engineering test transmissions were started by the BBC in 1990 followed by a public launch in September 1995 . The UK currently has the world 's biggest digital radio network , with 103 transmitters , two national DAB ensembles and 48 local and regional DAB ensembles broadcasting over 250 commercial and 34 BBC radio stations across the UK . In the capital , London there are already more than 64 different digital stations available . In addition to DAB , radio stations are also broadcast on digital television platform as well as internet radio in the UK . Between April 2007 and April 2008 the BBC trialled Digital Radio Mondiale on mediumwave and shortwave frequencies . Digital radio ensemble operators and stations need a broadcasting licence from the UK 's media regulator Ofcom to broadcast . 
 Digital radio in the United Kingdom is being promoted by radio stations and the broadcasting industry on the premise that it provides superior quality sound and a wider choice of radio stations , is easier to use , and is resistant to the interference which other broadcast media are susceptible to . Notwithstanding one basic flaw which is not mentioned ; the fact that many sets are inferior mono ones , there is the fact that the price paid for the extra number of stations is that the audio quality on DAB is lower than on FM . Also some areas of the country are not presently covered by DAB ; the BBC says that it may not provide coverage to the final 10 % of the population , and may use Digital Radio Mondiale instead . In 2011 , Ofcom published a consultation with the intent to push DAB coverage across the United Kingdom up to the same level as enjoyed by FM broadcasting in the United Kingdom . The United Kingdom Government intends to migrate the vast majority of AM and FM analogue services to digital between 2015 and 2019 , subject to targets being met for coverage , listening figures for digital radio and agreements in relation to funding and other decisions related to switchover being made under a Memorandum of Understanding between the Department for Culture , Media and Sport , broadcasters and ensemble operators . 
 In the UK , 39 @.@ 9 % of all radio listening hours by the second quarter of 2015 were through digital platforms , with DAB making up for the majority of digital radio listening ( 67 % ) , and twenty six million households claim to have access to a DAB radio set . 
 = = Digital Audio Broadcasting = = 
 Experimental transmissions of the DAB Eureka 147 standard from the Crystal Palace transmitting station by the BBC started in 1990 with permanent transmissions covering London in September 1995 . With the expansion of its single @-@ frequency network in the spring of 1998 , the BBC national ensemble was available to 65 % of the UK population by 2001 and to 85 % by 2004 . 
 The Broadcasting Act of 1996 allowed the introduction of national , regional and local commercial ensembles in the United Kingdom . 
 The first national ensemble licence for DAB from the Radio Authority was advertised in 1998 and one applicant applied for the licence . The licence was awarded to the GWR Group and NTL Broadcast , who since the launch were renamed Arqiva . The two companies formed the Digital One ensemble , which began broadcasting on 15 November 1999 . The Digital One ensemble has grown and is currently available to over 90 % of the UK population although an Ofcom report into Digital Radio in 2013 puts robust household coverage at 89 @.@ 5 % of the UK . 
 = = = Growth and benefits of DAB in the UK = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , the uptake of DAB has increased since the launch of the BBC national DAB ensemble in 1995 . Lower prices , new radio stations and marketing have increased the uptake of DAB radio in the UK . Digital radios were first sold as car radios in 1997 , priced around £ 800 , with hi @-@ fi tuners costing up to £ 2 @,@ 000 being released two years later . In 2001 , Digital One invested in Frontier Silicon to produce a new processing chip which would allow cheaper portable radios to be produced . Roberts Radio , Goodmans and in 2002 , Pure Digital 's award winning Evoke series of radios broke the £ 100 price barrier , and DAB take up has increased since . As the result of the increase of uptake of DAB , electrical retailer Dixons announced in 2006 that it would discontinue selling analogue radios , though Dixons still continues to stock and sell analogue radios , and has given no indication of a timetable , as of August 2011 . 
 The BBC and other DAB broadcasters have been encouraging DAB take up by promoting a number of features which are either new or improve upon former technology in their sales literature . The benefit of DAB is that due to the use of multiplexing technology and encoding technology , broadcasters including the BBC and EMAP have been able to launch exclusive digital radio stations alongside their existing analogue radio stations . Broadcasters also state that DAB offers better reception , without the problems of interference that are more noticeable through analogue radio . DAB radios also come with features such as station lists , so listeners do not need to retune their receivers , as well as scrolling text , providing information such as breaking news , travel information or the latest track information . 
 DAB has also been marketed as having two major advantages over analogue radio broadcasting in that using MPEG @-@ 1 Audio Layer II lossy audio compression technology , parts of the audio spectrum that cannot be heard by humans are discarded , meaning less data needs to be sent over the air . This , as well as multiplexing technology , allows a number of channels to be broadcast together on one frequency as opposed to one channel for analogue radio broadcasts . 
 National , local and regional DAB ensembles use the same frequency for the area they cover . Using a single @-@ frequency network , an ensemble broadcasting a number of stations can cover the same area as a number of FM frequencies which would be required to cover the same area for one station . The BBC carried out successful tests of a single @-@ frequency network in London before launching its national DAB ensemble . 
 = = = Criticisms of DAB in the UK = = = 
 DAB technically provides low audio quality in the UK due to 98 % of stereo stations using a bit rate level of 128 kbit / s. with the <unk> audio codec , which provides poorer sound quality than FM @-@ quality ( assuming good reception on both DAB and FM ) . A bit rate of 256 kbit / s has been judged to provide a high quality stereo broadcast signal . Also , a large and growing number of music stations are only transmitting in mono . Indeed , the bit rates used by the radio stations on other digital platforms , such as cable , terrestrial and satellite are usually higher than on DAB , so the audio quality is also higher . For example , all of the BBC stations use higher bit rates on the digital TV platforms than on DAB apart from the BBC World Service on Freeview . On the other hand , an Ofcom survey , which was undertaken due to many consultation responses citing poor DAB quality , found that 94 % of DAB listeners thought DAB was at least as good as FM . 
 Ofcom estimates that even after extra spectrum has been allocated to DAB , around 90 local radio stations will be unable to transmit on DAB , either because there is no space for them on a local DAB multiplex , or because they cannot afford the high transmission costs of DAB that the multiplex operators are charging . Ofcom announced in 2005 that it regarded Digital Radio Mondiale ( DRM ) as an option for local stations unable to secure carriage or unable to pay the high transmission costs of DAB . One of the drawbacks of DAB has not been addressed . In simple terms the frequency of a broadcast is the carrier frequency ( i.e. a sine wave ) In order to carry any information the carrier frequency must be modulated . The signal at the receiver ( radio ) is then <unk> and the information is retrieved . The demodulators for FM signals are almost instantaneous so that one can have radios in different areas and move between those areas to hear the broadcast continuously . In contrast the demodulators for digital signals take a finite time and each digital radio takes a different time to <unk> the broadcast signal , so that if you move between different radios that are spatially apart you are likely to hear the same part of the broadcast twice or miss parts of it depending on the time to <unk> the signal of the individual radios . The other drawback with DAB is that it is all or nothing . If there is any interference or loss due to moving out of the footprint of the broadcast signal you will receive no signal , whereas in the case of FM you can hear something even if it is crackly . 
 On 30 January 2008 , a report in the Daily Mail claimed that there were not enough DAB radios being sold to support the service for the future and that people were favouring their traditional analogue radios over DAB . It also reported that unless sales started to rise , DAB in the UK could follow the same fate as Betamax Video Cassettes did in the 1980s . In January 2009 , the Digital Radio Development Bureau announced that fewer DAB radio sets were sold in Christmas 2008 than in the previous year , although the group states that customer confidence in DAB remains high . 
 On 24 January 2009 , Ofcom allowed electrical retailers to be granted a licence to rebroadcast DAB signals within their stores to demonstrate DAB radio sets within their stores . The United Kingdom consumer charity , Which ? warned that consumers who could not get an adequate DAB signal could be misled by the in @-@ store sets . The Digital Radio Development Bureau replied to the Which ? report stating that stores contain a steel structure which produce a <unk> cage effect where DAB signals are blocked out . The DRDB recommended that consumers should check DAB coverage online with their postcode before purchasing a DAB radio to avoid disappointment . 
 On 24 November 2010 , a number of commercial radio operators refused to run an advertisement promoting DAB , one operator stating that it would be " fundamentally immoral and dishonest " until DAB coverage matches that of FM . Commercial radio executives have argued that the BBC should pick up the majority of the cost of expanding the DAB network across the United Kingdom . 
 = = = = Company <unk> of DAB = = = = 
 = = = = = GCap = = = = = 
 On 11 February 2008 GCap Media chief executive Fru Hazlitt presented a new strategy for GCap to fend off a takeover bid from Global Radio . The strategy for DAB included the closure of national DAB stations Planet Rock and <unk> on 31 March 2008 as well as the disposal of Digital One to Arqiva for £ 1 . Hazlitt also said that the DAB platform in the UK was not economically viable and that growth in digital radio would come from FM and Internet Radio , announcing a deal with Apple to stream GCap stations on the iPod touch and iPhone on the same day . 
 The takeover of GCap by Global Radio has led to them keeping Digital One and looking to take a stake in Channel 4 's second national commercial multiplex . 
 The Digital Radio Development Bureau and the 4 Digital Group defended DAB by stating that DAB was showing signs of growth and would become more attractive to consumers and broadcasters . The BBC and 4 Digital Group issued a joint statement on 12 February 2008 stating their commitment to DAB . 
 = = = = = 4 Digital Group = = = = = 
 On 10 October 2008 , Channel 4 announced that it would pull out of the 4 Digital Group consortium , that it would not launch services on the second national multiplex , and that it would axe its three digital radio services , E4 Radio , Channel 4 Radio and Pure 4 . Channel 4 chief executive Andy Duncan admitted that ending Channel 4 's foray into digital radio could cost the corporation £ 9 million . 
 = = = DAB frequency plan = = = 
 DAB radio stations in the United Kingdom are broadcast on a number of frequency blocks on VHF Band III . The original plan devised in Wiesbaden for the framework of DAB in Europe was to allocate frequency blocks 11B to 12D for UK DAB broadcasting . However , as part of its Review of Radio , Ofcom has expanded the frequency allocations for DAB and has advertised local and a national ensemble licence on blocks outside the original Wiesbaden plan on 10B to <unk> and 11A . Block 5A has also been reserved for the launch of local ensembles . In 2015 , additional blocks were opened up for small scale DAB trials for nine months . 
 Under a Maastricht plan in 2002 , the UK also has L band allocations for local terrestrial DAB , though there are no plans to broadcast any digital radio stations on L band . Ofcom auctioned spectrum in L band in 2008 for a number of uses , including terrestrial digital radio . On 16 May 2008 , Ofcom declared that Qualcomm UK Spectrum Ltd had won the auction of L band frequencies in the UK . 
 = = = = BBC National DAB = = = = 
 The BBC 's national DAB ensemble broadcasts on frequency block 12B ( 225 @.@ 648 MHz ) across the United Kingdom , with coverage currently at 94 @.@ 4 % . The multiplex is owned and operated by the BBC and is transmitted from a number of transmitter sites across the country . The BBC 's national multiplex carries only BBC national radio stations . Local BBC radio stations are carried on the relevant local DAB ensemble where commercial DAB licences are operating . 
 = = = = Commercial DAB multiplexes = = = = 
 There are a number of commercial DAB multiplexes operators in the UK who run 48 local and regional DAB multiplexes across the United <unk> operators include the two national operators , Digital One and Sound Digital as well as local multiplex operators including NOW Digital , Bauer Media Group , UTV , Switch Digital and <unk> . Local and regional ensembles cover 71 @.@ 7 % of the UK . 
 = = DAB + = = 
 The United Kingdom Government has ruled out any transition from DAB to DAB + for the foreseeable future , a decision backed by the radio industry and the Department for Culture , Media and Sport . The chief executive of the DRDB , Tony <unk> , mirrored the calls by the radio industry and experts to not adopt DAB + in the UK . In an interview with the TechRadar website in 2009 , he stated that DAB + was a " red herring " and may not be introduced in the UK for the foreseeable future due to the growing number of digital radio sets currently being sold and used in the future which cannot decode HE @-@ AAC and therefore access DAB + stations . <unk> also cited greater expense for broadcasters and overall satisfaction with the current audio quality of DAB stations of which a move to DAB + would only benefit a small number of audiophiles as other reasons . Independent radio analyst Grant Goddard also stated that there was an economic decision not to adopt DAB + for both the industry and consumers . 
 The <unk> Group , led by Channel 4 , who were originally awarded the licence to operate the new national DAB multiplex , had planned to launch a podcast service using the DAB + format . 
 Despite opposition aired to the Government regarding the introduction of DAB + in the United Kingdom by the industry and experts , Ofcom began testing DAB + on the Brighton Experimental ensemble in January 2013 for a period of one month . The Department of Culture , Media and Sport published minimum specifications for digital radio receivers in the UK in February 2013 which states that a receiver sold in the UK must be capable of decoding a DAB + stream of up to 144 capacity units . 
 In March 2014 , the BBC announced that it would undertake a trial of DAB + in the UK later in the year . 
 On September 1 , 2014 , Folder Media began a four @-@ month trial of DAB + on the North East Wales and West Cheshire ensemble . 
 In early 2016 , two new stations launched DAB + services on the Portsmouth trial multiplex . The operators of the second national multiplex , Sound Digital launched three full @-@ time broadcasting DAB + services on 29 February 2016 . As of May 2016 , there are now eight DAB + stations in Portsmouth ( on the trial multiplex ) ; three in Manchester ( on the trial multiplex ) ; and Chris Country on the North Wales , Cheshire and Liverpool local multiplex , plus the three the on the sound digital network . 
 = = Digital terrestrial television = = 
 Digital radio on the digital terrestrial platform started on 30 October 2002 with the launch of the BBC 's digital only radio services , BBC 1Xtra , BBC Five Live Sports Extra , BBC 6 Music , BBC 7 and the BBC Asian Network as well as existing stations BBC Radio Five Live and the BBC World Service . All the stations broadcast on the BBC 's multiplex B. 
 On the same day EMAP Radio ( now owned by Bauer Radio ) launched three radio stations , Smash Hits , Kerrang ! and Kiss . Two other commercial radio stations also launched , <unk> and 102 @.@ 2 Jazz FM . 
 The BBC later launched BBC Radio 1 , Radio 2 , Radio 3 and Radio 4 FM on multiplex A on 14 February 2003 . These channels later moved to Multiplex 1 on 3 October 2007 . 
 Currently , the digital terrestrial platform has twenty seven radio stations broadcasting from broadcasters including the BBC , Bauer Radio , GMG Radio and Absolute Radio . 
 = = Digital satellite radio = = 
 Unlike North America , the UK does not have a commercial satellite radio service . The North American service is provided by a company called SiriusXM . 
 There are radio stations broadcasting via Satellite to the United Kingdom , however these are aimed at home users for playback through their televisions since these same satellites are also used for television broadcast and usually use SES ' Astra series of satellites at 28 @.@ 2 ° east or the Eutelsat 28A satellite at 28 @.@ 5 ° east . Radio stations broadcast free @-@ to @-@ air via the Sky Digital , Freesat from Sky platforms and any DVB @-@ S compliant set @-@ top box . The Freesat platform has all the BBC 's national and regional digital radio stations as well as BBC London 94 @.@ 9 from the launch on 6 May 2008 on the EPG . 
 WorldSpace was planning a subscription based digital radio satellite service on the upper frequencies of the L band , however , Qualcomm beat WorldSpace in 2008 , securing the L band frequencies in the Ofcom auction process . 
 = = Digital cable television = = 
 A number of digital radio stations also broadcast through digital cable platforms , including Virgin Media and <unk> . 
 = = Internet radio = = 
 In the United Kingdom , over 350 of the UK 's radio stations also stream their stations online , not including Restricted Service <unk> radio stations , Hospital radio stations and stations who solely broadcast online . <unk> figures taken between April and May in 2008 showed that 14 @.@ 5 million people have listened to radio online with 9 @.@ 4 million people listening every week . As well as listening through a media player on a computer , a number of British firms , including BT Group , <unk> , Pure Digital , Roberts Radio , Dixons and Acoustic Energy have brought out Internet radio devices which use the Wi @-@ Fi signal from a router to stream Internet radio stations within range of a Wi @-@ Fi router . Apple and GCap Media made a deal in February 2008 for GCap stations to be broadcast through iPhone and iPod touch devices . Recently , dedicated smartphone and tablet computer applications published by radio stations and third party companies as well as smart TV applications also allow UK radio stations to be listened to . 
 In 2006 , the Phonographic Performance Limited ( PPL ) announced that it would charge additional royalty fees on UK Internet radio stations if they broadcast outside the UK . Radio stations which stream online including GCap Media and GMG Radio , have implemented IP blocking to prevent listeners outside the UK from listening to their radio stations and therefore avoided the increased fees . 
 In March 2007 , a BBC News article reported that the PPL were re @-@ negotiating royalty fees paid by UK Internet radio stations , and the result of the negotiations would be that fees would increase . 
 In 2011 , the BBC and commercial radio operators through the industry body , <unk> , launched a unified front end player for UK radio station Internet streams on personal computers and laptops named <unk> . The player replaced the various listen now windows on radio station websites and also added listen again capabilities for individual shows if the station supported it . 
 = = Digital Radio Mondiale = = 
 Digital Radio Mondiale ( DRM - not to be confused with Digital Rights Management ) is being considered by Ofcom for introduction in Britain in 2012 , on the present AM medium wave band . 
 In 2005 , tests of DRM on shortwave radio from European transmitters broadcasting into the United Kingdom were performed by Virgin Radio , Classic Gold , Premier Christian Radio , Virgin Radio Classic Rock , Asian Sound and CVC . 
 The British Broadcasting Corporation started broadcasting the BBC World Service on shortwave and mediumwave radio for a few hours a day across Europe from Orford Ness in Suffolk and <unk> in Norway , the latter being receivable across England , Wales and Southern Scotland . 
 The BBC undertook a trial of the digital radio <unk> ( DRM ) technology , which allowed them to explore digital radio using medium @-@ wave frequencies . The trial broadcast BBC Radio Devon using the new technology in the Plymouth area from April 2007 and closed down on 31 October 2008 . In May 2009 , the BBC released a report on the trial in Devon . The report gave a number of conclusions about DRM from the trial : 
 The sound quality from the trial was better than AM quality , but not as good as average DAB quality ; 
 The daytime coverage of the DRM trial extended further than the discontinued AM service . However , the night @-@ time service , as expected to be smaller than daytime coverage due to the characteristics of medium wave broadcasting , did cause problems with interference to the DRM trial . The BBC stated this interference can be avoided , but only with a redesign of the transmission network ; 
 A single frequency network is possible and would be significantly robust . 
 = = Digital Multimedia Broadcasting = = 
 In 2006 , National Grid Wireless carried out a technical trial of T @-@ DMB and DAB @-@ IP on the Stoke & Stafford ( formerly UTV @-@ EMAP / Bauer Stoke ) ensemble . The trial assessed the reception qualities of both technologies in urban and rural areas as well as the mobile television and radio services which could be delivered . 
 There is currently an ongoing experimental DMB multiplex broadcast in London on L @-@ Band and Cambridge on VHF Band III , used for video , audio and data applications . 
 = = Analogue switch @-@ over = = 
 On 29 January 2009 the UK Government 's interim report into digital communication for the future by Lord Carter , Digital Britain , made the suggestion that DAB would be the future direction of digital radio in the United Kingdom . The report stated that only when the following conditions are met , a migration from FM to DAB would begin : 
 Digital radio listening figures hit at least 50 % ; 
 Coverage of DAB matches that of FM , of 90 % which the report stated would not be achieved until 2015 . The report mentioned that the Government would work with the BBC to meet the coverage target . 
 The original Interim Report of the Digital Radio Working Group published in 2008 specified that the 50 % threshold for listening figures should be based on those for DAB . This was subsequently watered down to incorporate listening via any digital platform so as to make it easier to meet the criteria . The main driver behind the proposed move to switch off the FM transmission system is still down to the intense lobbying of the commercial radio sector so that they can save costs . 
 Carter also suggested in his report that manufacturers of devices which can pick up radio signals ensure it is DAB ready for the forthcoming migration . The report also indicates plans to create a Digital Radio Delivery Group ( <unk> ) , made up of the major investors of DAB , whose plan it will be to ensure a smooth transition from AM and FM to DAB for consumers . They will also advise on digital radio migration . On 22 September 2009 the <unk> and Digital Radio Development Bureau were integrated into one organisation for this purpose - Digital Radio UK . 
 On 16 June 2009 the final Digital Britain report concluded that a switchover of all national and local FM services which currently broadcast on DAB multiplexes would take place in 2015 and that DAB would be chosen to take the UK to and beyond switchover . The Digital Economy Act 2010 has a requirement stating that the United Kingdom must prepare for digital switchover . To aid the transition to digital radio , Digital Radio UK started a Radio Amnesty during May and June 2010 where people could trade in an old AM / FM analogue radio for a 10 @-@ 20 % discount on a new DAB digital radio from participating retailers . Analogue sets which can be reconditioned will be sent to southern Africa . 
 On 30 November 2010 it was reported that ministers were considering delaying the switchover to DAB until 2017 at the earliest . , however Ofcom did publish official plans for increasing DAB reception in various places around the same date . 
 On 2 July 2012 , the Department for Culture , Media and Sport created a Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU ) with the BBC and commercial radio broadcasters and ensemble operators as to where the future direction of digital radio should go with a three phase plan toward FM switchoff . A decision on the switchover will be made by the Government in 2013 . The MoU creates three phases toward switchover : 
 Three scenarios drawn up by the DCMS suggest switchover could begin between 2015 and 2019 either in one step or staged across the regions of the United Kingdom . 
 = = Application and licensing = = 
 The United Kingdom media and communications regulator Ofcom ( and before the formation of Ofcom , the Radio Authority ) advertises and provides the licenses for digital radio services in the United Kingdom , under the Broadcasting Acts of 1990 and 1996 . 
 = = = Application and licensing procedures = = = 
 Ofcom awards licenses for digital radio services differently depending on the type of service and the platform . Ofcom advertises the licences of new digital radio ensembles and are subject to an open competition to the highest bidder . Ensemble licence awards are awarded for twelve years . On digital television services , individual stations can apply for either a digital cable and satellite licence to broadcast on the aforementioned platforms , or apply for a digital terrestrial licence to broadcast on digital terrestrial television . 
 On Digital Terrestrial Television and DAB , broadcasters also need to contact the ensemble or multiplex operator of a local or national DAB ensemble or digital terrestrial multiplex to broadcast within a region , subject to a fee payable to the ensemble operator . On Digital Satellite , radio stations need to secure capacity with a transponder operator and an uplink to a satellite . To broadcast on the Sky Digital platform , a broadcaster must also secure an EPG slot allowing viewers to navigate to their channel using the set @-@ top @-@ boxes provided by British Sky Broadcasting . A request for an EPG slot must be done up to nine months in advance . The same procedure applies to secure a slot on the Freesat platform , although stations need to contact Freesat UK Ltd instead of BSkyB . On Digital Cable , broadcasters need to contact a cable supplier for carriage . 
 All stations broadcast in the UK must legally hold a music copyright licence from the Phonographic Performance Limited , PRS for Music and Mechanical @-@ Copyright Protection Society in order for royalties to be paid to the musicians the main bodies represent . 
 = = = First national ensemble = = = 
