 Paulos Faraj Rahho was born to an Assyrian Catholic family in 1942 . He spent nearly all his life in Mosul , a city with one of the largest and oldest Christian populations in Iraq . In 1954 , he entered the St. Peter 's junior and major seminary in Baghdad in order to become a priest . After his ordination on June 10 , 1965 he briefly worked in Baghdad before being appointed to St. Isiah 's Church in Mosul . Between 1974 and 1976 , Rahho completed his religious studies with a Licentiate in Theology from the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas , Angelicum in Rome . 
 Rahho later founded the church of the Sacred Heart in Tel <unk> , a town some 12 miles ( 20 km ) north of Mosul . He also opened an orphanage for handicapped children . 
 = = = Archbishop of Mosul = = = 
 On January 12 , 2001 , the Synod of Bishops of the Chaldean Catholic Church elected him archbishop of the <unk> of Mosul . On February 16 , 2001 , he was ordained Chaldean Archbishop of Mosul , giving him responsibility for around 20 @,@ 000 Catholics in ten parishes . He was ordained by Mar Raphael I <unk> , the Patriarch of Babylon . His church is known in Mosul as Safina ( The Ship ) , but parishioners called it the Holy Spirit Church . 
 = = = Unease with Sharia = = = 
 Rahho expressed disquiet at the moves to incorporate Sharia law more fundamentally into the Iraqi constitution , and continued throughout his life to lead worship in difficult situations . During his 2007 trip to Rome , with the patriarch of Babylon Emmanuel III Delly who was then appointed cardinal , Rahho confided that he had been threatened by gunmen in his native town . Following the start of the Iraq war , persecution of Christians in Iraq increased dramatically . Rahho commented on the precarious situation of Chaldean Christians in an interview with Asia News shortly before his kidnapping . 
 = = Kidnapping and death = = 
 Late on February 29 , 2008 , according to a report given by the Catholic News Service , Archbishop Rahho was kidnapped from his car in the Al @-@ Nur district of the city ; his bodyguards and driver were killed . According to church officials , " gunmen sprayed the Archbishop 's car with bullets , killed two bodyguards and shoved the bishop into the trunk of a car . In the darkness , he managed to pull out his cellphone and call the church , telling officials not to pay a ransom for his release " they said . " He believed that this money would not be paid for good works and would be used for killing and more evil actions , " the officials said . Other reports stated that also investigators believed the archbishop may have been shot at the time of the kidnapping . 
 The kidnappers demanded Christians contribute to the jihad , through jizya . The captors also demanded the release of Arab ( non @-@ Iraqi ) detainees and that they be paid $ 3 million for Rahho 's release . The kidnappers also demanded that Iraqi Christians form a militia to fight the US forces . 
 On March 13 , 2008 , it was reported that the Archbishop 's body had been found buried in a shallow grave near Mosul . Officials of the Chaldean Church in Iraq said they had received a call telling them where the body was buried . Reports over the cause of death were contradictory . An official of the morgue in Mosul said the archbishop , who had health problems , including high blood pressure and diabetes , might have died of natural causes . Police at the Mosul morgue said the Archbishop " appeared to have been dead a week and his body bore no bullet wounds " . Nineveh Deputy Governor <unk> Goran stated that when relatives and authorities went to the location specified by the kidnappers and found the body , it had " gunshot wounds " . The identity of those behind his murder is disputed . Some Assyrians within the community believe Al @-@ Qaida and other Sunni Arab factions were behind the murder . Other Christians in Mosul , including the archbishop ’ s family , believe that it was the Kurds who ordered his assassination . Kurdish authorities ordered an investigation and subsequently made several arrests , though their reports have failed to convince the family . 
 Archbishop Paulos Faraj Rahho is believed to be the highest @-@ ranking Chaldean Catholic clergyman to have been killed in the Iraq war . The funeral services were held in the town of <unk> , with Chaldean Catholic Cardinal Emmanuel Delly in presence . 
 = = = International reactions = = = 
 Vatican City : Pope Benedict XVI stated the murder was " an act of inhuman violence that offends the dignity of the human being . " " The pope also denounced the 5 @-@ year @-@ long Iraq war , saying it had provoked the complete breakup of Iraqi civilian life . ' Enough with the slaughters . Enough with the violence . Enough with the hatred in Iraq ! ' Benedict said to applause at the end of his Palm Sunday Mass in St. Peter 's Square . " 
 Iraq : Prime Minister Nouri al @-@ Maliki said " the attack was the work of a criminal gang intent on provoking religious strife . " 
 United Kingdom : British Foreign Secretary David Miliband said " His [ Archbishop Rahho 's ] kidnapping was a cowardly act perpetrated by individuals who have rejected dialogue and peaceful politics . His killing represents an appalling act of premeditated violence . My thoughts are with the Archbishop 's family . " 
 United States : President Bush was quoted as saying " I send my condolences to the Chaldean community and the people of Iraq . The terrorists will continue to lose in Iraq because they are savage and cruel . " The Arab American Institute said " This despicable act against a peaceful leader of a vulnerable ( Chaldean ) minority community violates every moral code . " 
 Chaldean Catholic Church : Patriarch Emmanuel III Delly , who broke down and wept during funeral services in <unk> , urged Christians on Friday not to seek revenge for the death of the archbishop . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 One of the killers , named Ahmed Ali Ahmed , was found and arrested . Ahmed was an Al @-@ Qaida in Iraq cell leader in Mosul . On 19 May 2008 , the Iraqi Central Criminal Court sentenced Ahmed to death . However , high representatives of the Chaldean Catholic Church opposed the death sentence . In his will , Rahho called upon the Iraqi Assyrian Christian community to work with Muslim and Yazidi Iraqis to develop ties across religious divisions within Iraq . 
 = The Sinking of the Lusitania = 
 The Sinking of the Lusitania ( 1918 ) is a silent animated short film by American cartoonist Winsor McCay . It is a work of propaganda re @-@ creating the never @-@ photographed 1915 sinking of the British liner RMS Lusitania . At twelve minutes it has been called the longest work of animation at the time of its release . The film is the earliest surviving animated documentary and serious , dramatic work of animation . 
 In 1915 a German submarine torpedoed and sank the RMS Lusitania ; 128 Americans were among the 1 @,@ 198 dead . The event outraged McCay , but the newspapers of his employer William Randolph Hearst downplayed the event , as Hearst was opposed to the US joining World War I. McCay was required to illustrate anti @-@ war and anti @-@ British editorial cartoons for Hearst 's papers . In 1916 , McCay rebelled against his employer 's stance and began work on the patriotic Sinking of the Lusitania on his own time with his own money . 
 The film followed McCay 's earlier successes in animation : Little Nemo ( 1911 ) , How a Mosquito Operates ( 1912 ) , and Gertie the Dinosaur ( 1914 ) . McCay drew these earlier films on rice paper , onto which backgrounds had to be laboriously traced ; The Sinking of the Lusitania was the first film McCay made using the new , more efficient cel technology . McCay and his assistants spent twenty @-@ two months making the film . His subsequent animation output suffered setbacks , as the film was not as commercially successful as his earlier efforts , and Hearst put increased pressure on McCay to devote his time to editorial drawings . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The film opens with a live @-@ action prologue in which McCay busies himself studying a picture of the Lusitania as a model for his film @-@ in @-@ progress . <unk> boast of McCay as " the originator and inventor of Animated Cartoons " , and of the 25 @,@ 000 drawings needed to complete the film . McCay is shown working with a group of anonymous assistants on " the first record of the sinking of the Lusitania " . 
 The liner passes the Statue of Liberty and leaves New York Harbor . After some time , a German submarine cuts through the waters and fires a torpedo at the Lusitania , which billows smoke that builds until it envelops the screen . Passengers scramble to lower lifeboats , some of which capsize in the confusion . The liner tilts from one side to the other and passengers are tossed into the ocean . 
 A second blast rocks the Lusitania , which sinks slowly into the deep as more passengers fall off its edges , and the ship submerges amid scenes of drowning bodies . The liner vanishes from sight , and the film closes with a mother struggling to keep her baby above the waves . An intertitle declares : " The man who fired the shot was decorated for it by the Kaiser ! And yet they tell us not to hate the Hun . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Winsor McCay ( c . 1869 – 1934 ) produced prodigiously detailed and accurate drawings since early in life . He earned a living as a young man drawing portraits and posters in dime museums , and attracted large crowds with his ability to draw quickly in public . He began working as a newspaper illustrator full @-@ time in 1898 , and in 1903 began drawing comic strips . His greatest comic strip success was the children 's fantasy comic strip Little Nemo in Slumberland , which he began in 1905 . In 1906 , McCay began performing on the vaudeville circuit , doing chalk talks — performances during which he drew in front of a live audience . 
 Inspired by the flip books his son brought home , McCay said he " came to see the possibility of making moving pictures " of his cartoons . His first animated film , Little Nemo ( 1911 ) , was composed of four thousand drawings on rice paper . His next film , How a Mosquito Operates ( 1912 ) , naturalistically shows a giant mosquito draw blood from a sleeping man until it burst . McCay followed this with a film that became an interactive part of his vaudeville shows : in Gertie the Dinosaur ( 1914 ) , McCay commanded his animated dinosaur with a whip on stage . 
 The British liner RMS Lusitania briefly held the record for largest passenger ship upon its completion in 1906 . McCay displayed a fondness for it , and featured it in the episode for September 28 , 1907 , of his comic strip Dream of the Rarebit Fiend , and again in the episode for November 10 , 1908 , of A Pilgrim 's Progress by Mister Bunion , where Bunion declares it " the monster boat that has smashed the record " . 
 The Germans employed submarines in the North Atlantic during World War I , and in April 1915 the German government issued a warning that it would target British civilian ships . The Lusitania was torpedoed on May 7 , 1915 , during a voyage from New York ; 128 Americans were among the 1 @,@ 198 who lost their lives . Newspapers owned by McCay 's employer William Randolph Hearst downplayed the tragedy , as Hearst was opposed to the US entering the war . His own papers ' readers were increasingly pro @-@ war in the aftermath of the Lusitania . McCay was as well , but was required to illustrate anti @-@ war and anti @-@ British editorials by editor Arthur Brisbane . In 1916 , McCay rebelled against his employer 's stance and began to make the patriotic Sinking of the Lusitania in his own time . 
 The sinking itself was never photographed . McCay said that he gathered background details on the Lusitania from Hearst 's Berlin correspondent August F. Beach , who was in London at the time of the disaster and was the first reporter at the scene . The film was the first attempt at a serious , dramatic work of animation . 
 = = Production history = = 
 The Sinking of the Lusitania took twenty @-@ two months to complete . McCay had assistance from his neighbor , artist John Fitzsimmons , and from Cincinnati cartoonist William Apthorp " Ap " Adams , who took care of layering the cels in proper sequence for shooting . Fitzsimmons was responsible for a sequence of waves , sixteen frames to be cycled over McCay 's drawings . McCay provided illustrations during the day for the newspapers of William Randolph Hearst , and spent his off hours at home drawing the cels for the film , which he took to Vitagraph Studios to be photographed . 
 McCay 's working methods were laborious . On Gertie the Dinosaur an assistant painstakingly traced and retraced the backgrounds thousands of times . Rival animators developed a number of methods to reduce the workload and speed production to meet the increasing demand for animated films . Within a few years of Nemo 's release , it became near @-@ universal practice in animation studios to use American Earl Hurd 's cel technology , combined with Canadian Raoul Barré 's registration pegs , used to keep cels aligned when photographed . Hurd had patented the cel method in 1914 ; it saved work by allowing dynamic drawings to be drawn on one or more layers , which could be laid over a static background layer , relieving animators of the tedium of retracing static images onto drawing after drawing . McCay adopted the cel method beginning with The Sinking of the Lusitania . 
 As with all his films , McCay financed Lusitania himself . The cels were an added expense , but greatly reduced the amount of drawing necessary in contrast to McCay 's earlier methods . The cels used were thicker than those that later became industry standard , and had a " tooth " , or rough surface , that could hold pencil , wash , and crayon , as well as ink lines . The amount of rendering caused the cels to buckle , which made it difficult to keep them aligned for photographing ; Fitzsimmons addressed this problem using a modified loose @-@ leaf binder . 
 McCay said it took him about eight weeks to produce eight seconds worth of film . The claimed 25 @,@ 000 drawings filled 900 feet of film . Lusitania was registered for copyright on July 19 , 1918 , and was released by Jewel Productions who were reported to have acquired it for the highest price paid for a one @-@ reel film up to that time . It was included as part of a Universal Studios Weekly newsreel and featured on the cover of an issue of Universal 's in @-@ house publication The Moving Picture Weekly . Its première in England followed in May 1919 . Advertisements called it " [ t ] he world 's only record of the crime that shocked humanity " . 
 = = Style = = 
 The animation combines editorial cartooning techniques with live @-@ action @-@ like sequences , and is considered McCay 's most realistic effort ; the intertitles emphasized that the film was a " historical record " of the event . McCay animated the action in what animation historian Donald Crafton describes as a " realistic graphic style " . The film has a dark mood and strong propagandist feel . It depicts the terrifying fates of the passengers , such as the drowning of children and human chains of passengers jumping to their deaths . The artwork is highly detailed , the animation fluid and naturalistic . McCay used alternating shots to simulate the feel of a newsreel , which reinforced the film 's realistic feel . 
 McCay made stylistic choices to add emotion to the " historical record " , as in the anxiety @-@ inducing shots of the submarines lurking beneath the surface , and abstract styling of the white sheets of sky and sea , vast voids which engorge themselves on the drowning bodies . Animation historian Paul Wells suggested the negative space in the frames filled viewers with anxiety through psychological projection or introjection , Freudian ideas that had begun circulating in the years before the film 's release . Scholar Ulrich Merkl suggests that as a newspaperman , McCay was likely aware of Freud 's widely reported work , though McCay never publicly acknowledged such an influence . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Sinking of the Lusitania was noted as a work of war propaganda , and is often called the longest work of animation of its time . The film is likely the earliest animated documentary . McCay 's biographer , animator John Canemaker , called The Sinking of the Lusitania " a monumental work in the history of the animated film " . Admired by his animation contemporaries , Canemaker wrote that it " did not revolutionize the film cartoons of its time " as McCay 's skills were beyond what his contemporaries were able to follow . In the era that followed , animation studios made occasional non @-@ fiction films , but most were comedic shorts lasting no more than seven minutes . Animation continued in its role of supporting feature films rather than as the main attraction , and rarely received reviews . Lusitania was not a commercial success ; after a few years in theaters , Lusitania brought McCay about $ 80 @,@ 000 . McCay made at least seven further films , only three of which are known to have seen commercial release . 
 After 1921 , when Hearst learned McCay devoted more of his time to animation than to his newspaper illustrations , Hearst required McCay to give up animation . He had plans for several animation projects that never came to fruition , including a collaboration with Jungle Imps author George Randolph Chester , a musical film called The Barnyard Band , and a film about the Americans ' role in World War I. Later in life , McCay at times publicly expressed his dissatisfaction with the animation industry as it had become — he had envisioned animation as an art , and lamented how it had become a trade . According to Canemaker , it was not until Disney 's feature films in the 1930s that the animation industry caught up with McCay 's level of technique . 
 Animation historian Paul Wells described Lusitania as " a seminal moment in the development of the animated film " for its combination of documentary style with propagandist elements , and considered it an example of animation as a form of Modernism . Steve <unk> called the film " [ t ] he most significant cinematic version of the [ Lusitania ] disaster " . A review in The Cinema praised the film , especially the scene in which the first torpedo explodes , which it called " more than reality " . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Journals = = = = 
 = = = = Other sources = = = = 
 = Split Loyalties = 
 " Split Loyalties " is the second episode of series seven of the British espionage television series Spooks , and the 58th episode overall . It was originally broadcast on BBC Three on 27 October 2008 , and repeated on frontline channel BBC One the following day . The episode was written by head writer Neil Cross ; with additional writing by Ben Richards ; and directed by Colm McCarthy . The episode is considered the second of a two @-@ part story , following preceding episode " New Allegiances " . 
 In the episode , Sir Harry Pearce ( Peter Firth ) is determined to carry out his revenge on London 's FSB head of operations Arkady Kachimov ( Stuart Wilson ) , who in the previous episode purposely withheld intelligence that caused the death of Adam Carter . However , the MI5 team discover he is overseeing a cyber attack in progress , and returned officer Lucas North ( Richard Armitage ) may be involved . In the end , MI5 stop the attack , and Harry kills Kachimov . 
 " Split Loyalties " include four deleted scenes , which were not included in the final episode , but placed in the series ' official website . The episode attracted over five million viewers after its broadcast , as well as receiving generally positive reviews from television critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Eight hours following the death of Adam Carter , Ros Myers ( Hermione Norris ) and Sir Harry Pearce ( Peter Firth ) discuss how they are to get back at FSB head of operations in London Arkady Kachimov ( Stuart Wilson ) . Afterwards , Ros returns to her hotel room , and destroys it in a fit of rage . The next morning , Harry asks Richard Dolby ( Robert East ) to go after Kachimov , but is refused . However , Harry decides to disobey and go after Kachimov anyway , and promotes Ros to chief of Section D , a position previously held by Adam . Harry calls Lucas North ( Richard Armitage ) to meet with him for information on Kachimov . Before Lucas arrives , he calls Kachimov to warn him Harry is coming after him . Later , Lucas is appointed a handler from the FSB , and is shocked to find it is his ex @-@ wife , Elizabeta Starkova ( Paloma Baeza ) . 
 Meanwhile , Malcolm Wynn @-@ Jones ( Hugh Simon ) discovers a communication burst coming from the North Sea , believing a Russian submarine is entering British waters unannounced to carry out a mission . After learning that Alexander <unk> ( Georg <unk> ) , a man with connections to Kachimov , is going to shut down his company 's servers , Malcolm confirms his suspicions ; the Russians are planning a cyber attack against Britain by breaking into a submarine communications cable and shutting down every computer system in the country . Harry urges Dolby to temporarily shut down the Internet , but is once again denied . Later , Ros breaks into Lucas ' flat while he is away , and discovers Lucas is a double agent , feeding the Russians news that MI5 know about their planned attack . Ros tasers Lucas and brings him back to Thames House . Lucas admits he is spying for the Russians because Kachimov promised he would be released from prison sooner if he would , but also reveals he intends to bring Kachimov down by making him trust Lucas . 
 Although sceptical , Harry sends Lucas to Kachimov to learn which cable the submarine will attack so Malcolm can launch a counterattack . Lucas is able to turn Kachimov by forging evidence that he is an MI5 mole . They both go to the Russian embassy and find the submarine 's location , after which Malcolm launches the counterattack with seconds to spare . Kachimov is later arrested . Lucas visits Elizabeta at her home , which was also their married home and he asks her to become an asset to MI5 to save her from arrest because of her association with Kachimov . In the end , Kachimov is with Harry and Ros in a field . Kachimov states his admiration for Adam 's sacrifice , but then callously says he was a replaceable resource . In the final moments , Ros hands Harry a gun and Harry kills Kachimov with a shot to the chest . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by head writer Neil Cross . It was also additionally written by Ben Richards . The plot of the episode was influenced by the resurgence of power in Russia following the end of the Cold War , which the producers felt in subtle ways is threatening the security of the West . The producers also included scenes that would show Lucas adjusting to the outside world following eight years of imprisonment , to show how emotionally damaged the character is , and make the audience realise he is struggling . One of the scenes include Lucas struggling to sleep on a bed , and soon resorts to lying on the floor instead . 
 The episode includes four deleted scenes , which feature more on Adam 's past . In the scenes Harry tells Ros that he was looking for Adam 's mother , but could not find her because before his death , Adam altered her records on where she lived . Harry visits a wealthy estate where she worked and is told she is currently in Blackpool . In the last scene , Harry and Ros toast to Adam . Those scenes have been included on BBC iPlayer on the Spooks website . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The episode was originally broadcast on digital channel BBC Three from 10 : 30 pm on Monday , 27 October 2008 , the same day as the BBC One viewing of the first episode . The episode would be repeated on the frontline BBC One a day later , during the 9 pm to 10 pm time slot . The BBC Three broadcast was viewed by 827 @,@ 000 and a 7 @.@ 3 % audience share . It was the second most seen multichannel of the night , beaten by the first episode of Dead Set from E4 . The BBC One repeat was seen by 5 @.@ 06 million viewers with a 22 @.@ 2 per cent ; though it was down by 450 @,@ 000 from the previous episode , it still won its time slot ; and both broadcasts achieved a total reach of 5 @.@ 89 million . According to the Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board , the episode received final viewing figures of 0 @.@ 93 million on BBC Three , and 5 @.@ 63 million on BBC One ; together they add up to 6 @.@ 56 million . 
 The Daily Telegraph stated " after yesterday 's shock demise of series pin @-@ up Rupert Penry @-@ Jones as Adam , fans of the spy drama may be forgiven for approaching the second episode of the new series with trepidation . Fear not , though , there are no star deaths [ ... ] only one rather welcome one [ Lucas ] . " John Beresford of TV Scoop praised the entire episode , stating " the pace didn 't let up from start to finish , the whole thing looked awesome , the acting was pitch perfect , " and the dialogue " never drops into the realms of trite , or hyperbole , or parody . Each phrase is like a diamond . Tight , bright and sparkling . And able to cut deep , " adding " this series is already shaping up to be a classic . " Beresford also noted Armitage 's performance , although this was only his second appearance , " Armitage looks and sounds like he 's been here all along . " Greg O 'Keefe of the Liverpool Echo , who also reviewed the first episode , as both episodes are considered a two @-@ part story , stated it was " packed with great action sequences , razor @-@ sharp writing and the usual quota of twists and turns . We were also treated to some excellent scenes , shot in Moscow , as the pesky Russians were established as the villains of the series . " 
 = You May Now Kiss the ... Uh ... Guy Who Receives = 
 " You May Now Kiss the ... Uh ... Guy Who Receives " is the 25th episode of the fourth season of Family Guy . The episode originally aired on April 30 , 2006 on Fox . In the episode , Brian 's gay cousin Jasper comes to Quahog with his boyfriend Ricardo to get married . Mayor West tries to ban same @-@ sex marriage to divert attention from a bad investment he made with the taxpayers ' money . Brian fights for gay marriage and ends up taking Mayor West hostage to get his view across . 
 The episode was written by David A. Goodman and directed by Dominic Polcino . The episode received polarized reviews from critics . The week it aired , the episode had an estimated 7 @.@ 8 million viewers . The episode features guest performances from Michael Clarke Duncan , Ralph Garman , Rachael MacFarlane , Chad Morgan , Charles Reid , Craig Reid , Kevin Michael Richardson , and Stark Sands , as well as several recurring voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Brian ’ s gay cousin Jasper comes to Quahog with his Filipino boyfriend Ricardo , and announces that they are going to get married . Everyone is delighted — except for Lois , who is against same @-@ sex marriage . Later , Mayor Adam West reveals in the city center a solid gold statue of the Honey Smacks mascot Dig ’ Em , and dedicates the statue to the servicemen who died in what he refers to as the " recent Gulf conflict " . The cost of the statue puts the city in debt . In order to distract the townspeople , he proposes a bill outlawing same sex marriage . Meanwhile , Chris falls for Alyssa , a beautiful girl who belongs to the Young Republicans , and joins the group to impress her . 
 Brian vows to make West change his mind , getting 10 @,@ 000 people to sign a petition to oppose the bill . Lois refuses to sign and takes Stewie to visit her parents . Before Brian can present the petition to the mayor , Chris burns it because Alyssa has agreed he may touch her breasts if he destroys the document , much to Brian 's anger . Brian manages to get 10 @,@ 000 more signatures on a new petition to show it to Mayor West , but West still won 't change his mind . Out of desperation , Brian takes a security guard ’ s gun , and holds the mayor hostage . 
 Lois hears about Brian on TV , and then discovers that her parents do not love each other , and even raised her to believe that a heterosexual couple who hate each other have more of a right to marry than a homosexual couple who love each other . Horrified , Lois changes her mind on same @-@ sex marriage , deciding that gay couples who love each other have the right to be together . She returns to Quahog to convince Brian to free the mayor , saying that if he pursues this any further , he will be hurting his own cause . Brian agrees , and ends the hostage situation . Since it has distracted the town from the Dig ' Em scandal , Mayor West agrees to drop the ban on gay marriage . Brian gives him a key for a Volkswagen Scirocco , and West drops the hostage charges . Jasper and Ricardo get married in the backyard of the Griffin house . 
 = = Production = = 
 Written by David A. Goodman , and directed by Dominic Polcino , series creator Seth MacFarlane came up with the idea for the episode while writing a pilot episode featuring two gay men . MacFarlane describes himself as " incredibly passionate about [ his ] support for the gay community " , and finds it to be " infuriating and idiotic " that two gay partners " have to go through this fucking dog and pony act when they stop at a hotel and the guy behind the counter says , ' You want one room or two ? ' " . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actor Michael Clarke Duncan , voice actor Ralph Garman , actress Rachael MacFarlane , actress Chad Morgan , actor Charles Reid , actor Craig Reid , voice actor Kevin Michael Richardson , and voice actor Stark Sands guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voices include Lori Alan , Alex Breckenridge , Johnny Brennan , writer Mike Henry , writer Chris Sheridan , writer Danny Smith , writer John Viener , and actor Adam West , who portrays an exaggerated version of himself . Actor Patrick Warburton has a guest appearance as well . 
 Censor issues required multiple changes to the episode . The line when Peter says , " It 's not like we 're going to have a gay sex orgy in the living room , " was originally , " Come on Lois , we 're not going to drill glory holes in the living room . " The show received a broadcast standards request that the anti @-@ gay video the priest shows Lois say " Pat Robertson Industries , " so as not to make it look like FOX had an opinion about homosexuals . The writers had a problem with Lois being against gay marriage , as they felt they were not portraying her in a way that is consistent with other episodes as she expressed a more liberal viewpoint on many past issues on the show and even expressed a generally more accepting view of gays in the episode Brian Sings and Swings . The DVD version has a deleted scene during the backyard wedding ending where Ricardo ( who doesn 't speak English ) asks Stewie what 's going on and Stewie ( who speaks Tagalog ) tells Ricardo that he 'll find out on his wedding night . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Mayor West builds a statue of Dig ' Em , the Sugar Smacks mascot , which causes controversy and causes West to ban gay marriage . Stewie takes over air traffic control , and causes Matthew McConaughey 's private plane to crash into the ocean . The film , The Sound of Music , is also referenced in the episode . West also swallowed a <unk> board game and an older issue of People magazine which features the actor Paul Hogan . A cutaway gag involves Peter in the band The Proclaimers , in a recording for the song I 'm Gonna Be ( 500 Miles ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " You May Now Kiss the ... Uh ... Guy Who Receives " had an average of 7 @.@ 8 million viewers and was the eighty @-@ first most watched show of the week . Bob Sassone from TV Squad wrote that he could not stop laughing throughout the episode , feeling that there is " just something really funny about gay dogs getting married and a giant gold statue of Dig ' Em , the Sugar Smacks mascot " . While reviewing the Family Guy Volume 4 DVD , Nancy Basile of About.com called the episode " sharp " . 
 = Send It On ( Disney 's Friends for Change song ) = 
 " Send It On " is a song performed by American recording artists Demi Lovato , the Jonas Brothers , Miley Cyrus and Selena Gomez . The group , billed as Disney 's Friends for Change , stems from Disney 's environmental initiative of the same name . " Send It On " was written by Adam Anders , Nikki Hassman , and Peer Åström and produced by Anders and Åström . The song was released on August 11 , 2009 by Walt Disney and Hollywood Records as a promotional charity single in order to benefit international environmental associations . In regard to the song and the campaign , the six singers noted that it is a good cause and that it is one dear to them . The ballad is lyrically about passing on an environmentalist message . 
 The song garnered mixed to average reviews from critics , who noted that the lyrics make no mention of the environment . The song received airplay only on Radio Disney and peaked at number twenty on the Billboard Hot 100 . The corresponding music video has all four acts singing into microphones on top of a brightly lit stage and running across a park setting where many children are following them . Demi Lovato , The Jonas Brothers , Miley Cyrus and Selena Gomez all showed great vocal performance for the song . 
 = = Background = = 
 Initially known as " Pass It On " , the song was written by Adam Anders and Nikki Hassman in collaboration with Peer Åström . The four artists went through several recording sessions in early April 2009 . Each person shared their opinion in regards to the song and Disney 's Friends for Change in an interview with Access Hollywood . Joe Jonas said that the song is one with a " great message . " He added that the song is about helping the Earth in whichever way possible and that it is mainly about letting " everyone know . " Joe Jonas said the song even reminds oneself to be more eco @-@ friendly . Gomez stated , 
 " If I could describe the feeling of performing ' Send It On , ' it would have to be very empowering . It 's more of a power you can 't control . It 's very sweet and it 's got a message behind it . And I think that 's what makes it really beautiful , because it 's not just about us wearing cute clothes and performing on the stage , it 's about us giving this message . " 
 Cyrus mentioned that her favorite part to record was the line " One spark starts a fire . " Cyrus said she " loved " the line because it was true for her and that if children send on the message , everyone will know . She also believed that they were " encouraging kids to do it " , which she found inspirational . Lovato stated : " It 's very important to us to be good to the environment " and that the song is a part of a " big movement " that they are attempting to achieve . Kevin Jonas said it was a " big honor " and that " the vibe [ ... ] is great " because they have " all known each other for years now . " Nick Jonas said that the song is just about " taking those tiny steps " that could make the Earth better . 
 = = Music , vocal arrangements and lyrics = = 
 The song is set in common time with a ballad tempo of 90 beats per minute . It is written in a key of A major . The group 's vocals span three octaves , from F # 3 to E5 . The song has the following chord progression , A – F # m – C # m – E5 . 
 The song is sung from a first person viewpoint , allowing an audience to " internalize " the message — which involves everybody — by singing the word " we " together . " Send It On " commences with acoustic guitars and then transitioning to violins . Miley Cyrus and Nick Jonas together sing the first verse , " A word ’ s just a word till you mean what you say . " Then the two sing the first chorus together . Demi Lovato and Joe Jonas then sing main lines of the second verse with the other group ( Miley Cyrus and Nick Jonas ) singing , " If we take the chances to change circumstances . " Then , Selena Gomez and Kevin Jonas also join in the second chorus and sing the third verse . For the rest of the song the six of them sing . The overall theme and message of the song is to encourage to pass on the environmental pledge ; this can be heavily interpreted from the lines : " Just one spark starts a fire . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Snippets of the song was first heard as the opening theme for commercials that aired on Disney Channel in regards to Disney 's Friends for Change . " Send It On " later debuted on Radio Disney on August 7 , 2009 . Later on August 11 , the song was released digitally , via iTunes Store . Disney will direct 100 % of the proceeds from " Send it On " to environmental charities through the Disney Worldwide Conservation Fund ( <unk> ) . The music video premiered on Disney Channel on August 14 and the day later to Disney.com and ABC . On August 15 , a digital extended play was released to the iTunes Store , featuring the song , its music video , two commercials in regards to the project that aired on Disney Channel and a digital booklet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Send It On " received average critical reviews . Bill Lamb of About.com stated : " The song may sound a bit tedious . It 's not likely to be much more enduring than the typical American Idol winner 's finale song . However , the purchase of this song is for a very good cause . " Gina Sepre and Whitney English of E ! said that the song was Disney 's take on " We are the World " by a super @-@ group billed as USA for Africa , a group which included successful acts such as Michael Jackson and Diana Ross . Leo Hickman of The Guardian criticized the artists as hypocritical and the song 's lyrics as ineffective , noting that " there are no references at all to the environment to be found within the song , " as opposed to Cyrus 's song " Wake Up America " from her second album which he mentioned was more influential . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 The song received mediocre airplay due to it not being released for mainstream radio and only Radio Disney . However , the song debuted at number nine on Hot Digital Songs which led to it making into the Billboard Hot 100 , issue dated August 29 , 2009 . " Send It On " debuted and peaked at number twenty in the Hot 100 . It then fell to number twenty @-@ one , and stayed on for three more weeks before falling off . 
 = = Music video = = 
 On June 6 , 2009 , Lovato confirmed to be on set of the corresponding music video to the song , via her official Twitter account . The music video to " Send It On " was first seen on Disney Channel on August 14 , 2009 , and on ABC Family on April 22 , 2010 . 
 The music video begins with Miley Cyrus and Nick Jonas sitting on the edge of a dark stage where Nick , also playing the acoustic guitar , and Miley singing the first verse . The video then changes to the two walking onto the brightly lighted stage , singing the chorus , and then being joined by Demi Lovato and Joe Jonas who sing the second verse . The entire group is then shown on the stage as they sing the chorus . Kevin and Joe Jonas then remove a curtain covering the background of stage to reveal a sky @-@ painted backdrop in which Selena Gomez and Kevin Jonas proceed to sing the third verse . The ending of the video follows the entire group running out of a large stage door and through a " park @-@ like " setting while finishing the song . A crowd of minors also begin running behind the group . The video ends with the group jumping onto and sitting on a couch in the middle of the park with the crowd stopping in the background . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 U.S. Digital Download 
 " Send It On " - 3 : 26 
 U.S. Digital EP 
 " Send It On " - 3 : 26 
 " Send It On " ( Music Video ) - 3 : 25 
 " Join Disney 's Friends for Change " ( Video ) - 0 : 45 
 " Register and Pledge " ( Video ) - 1 : 31 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Come Back to Me ( Vanessa Hudgens song ) = 
 " Come Back to Me " is the debut single by American actress and singer Vanessa Hudgens . The song was written and produced by Antonina Armato and Tim James . It was released on September 12 , 2006 , through Hollywood Records as the lead single from Hudgens ' debut studio album , V ( 2006 ) . The song is built around a sample of " Baby Come Back " ( 1977 ) by American band Player . Due to the inclusion of the sample , the original song 's writers , Peter Beckett and J.C. Crowley , obtained writing credits . Musically , " Come Back to Me " is a pop and R & B song with an urban beat , string instruments and hand claps . 
 Critical reception of " Come Back to Me " was generally positive ; some critics praised the inclusion of the Player sample and named the song one of the album 's best tracks . However , it was criticized for holding a manufactured and overproduced sound . It performed moderately in the United States , where it peaked at number 55 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 18 on the Pop Songs chart . It fared better internationally as it peaked in the top 20 in several countries , including France , Italy , New Zealand and Spain . The accompanying music video was directed by Chris Applebaum and features Hudgens dancing in front of colorful backdrops and hanging out with her friends . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Come Back to Me " was written and produced by Antonina Armato and Tim James , who are known for numerous Disney music projects . The strings were arranged by Nicky Scappa and Read , and played by the latter . Hudgens performs backing vocals alongside singer @-@ songwriter Char Licera . The song was mixed by Serban Ghenea at Mixstar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia and mastered by Steven Marcussen at Marcussen Mastering in Los Angeles , California . " Come Back to Me " was released as Hudgens ' debut single on September 12 , 2006 , through digital distribution . On October 10 , 2006 , it was serviced for contemporary hit radio airplay in the United States . It was first released physically on December 15 , 2006 , in Germany , alongside the b @-@ side track " Don 't Talk " . The single was later released via digital download in European countries on December 18 , 2006 . A CD single was released in Germany on February 2 , 2007 , featuring the song 's music video , the album track " Too Emotional " and a photo gallery . 
 Musically , " Come Back to Me " is an R & B and pop song with an instrumentation consisting of urban beats , strings and hand claps . In an interview with Madison Chapman from Time for Kids , Hudgens acknowledged the variety of musical styles present on her debut album , calling it a " fun mixture of everything " . She used " Come Back to Me " as an example of the multiple genres on the album and described it as " pop and R & B " . The song opens with a string @-@ laden intro . Bill Lamb of About.com noted Hudgens ' vocals as " loose " and " friendly " on the track . The song samples American rock band Player 's single " Baby Come Back " ( 1977 ) , written by Peter Beckett and J.C. Crowley , who both received writing credits on the song . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics . About.com writer Bill Lamb rated " Come Back to Me " three and a half stars out of five ; he praised its pop sound and Hudgens ' " engaging personality " , but criticized it for having a manufactured sound from the " Disney pop factory " . Moreover , Lamb wrote : " ' Come Back to Me ' is unlikely to linger too long in your memory , but it also fails to generate any annoying after taste . Program it into your listening when you need a contemporary , breezy , light pop confection ... Sure , you are being manipulated by the corporate music establishment , but the song is fun . " He also noted that the " Baby Come Back " sample was possibly added to " trigger pleasant deja vu in parents listening along with their kids " . In an editorial review for Rhapsody , Nick Cavalieri named the song one of the best tracks on V. 
 Kyle Anderson of MTV Newsroom deemed " Come Back to Me " a song with " a clever sample and a particularly infectious hook " . Entertainment Weekly writer Leah Greenblatt considered the song the album 's standout and said that it " excellently jacks a sample from soft @-@ rock smash ' Baby Come Back ' . " In a more mixed review , Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music rated " Come Back to Me " three stars out of five and commented that the song sounded unoriginal and said that several other songs appeared to have been " mashed together " to create it . Furthermore , McAlpine said : " Vanessa acquits herself well on the vocals ... but it 's a bit overproduced and slightly soulless in that kind of relentlessly @-@ perky way that graduates of the school of Disney stardom sometimes have . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Come Back to Me " made its debut at number 79 on the Billboard Hot 100 in the issue dated September 30 , 2006 . The song ascended and descended on the chart for several weeks before reaching its peak position of number 55 , in the issue dated December 9 , 2006 . It also peaked at number 18 on the Pop Songs chart , number 22 on Pop 100 Airplay , number 57 on the Pop 100 and number 63 on Radio Songs . Across Europe , " Come Back to Me " fared better on the charts and peaked at number 43 on European Hot 100 Singles . In France , it peaked at number 12 and remained on the chart for a total of 25 weeks before falling off . In Italy , it debuted at number eight , which became its peak position , and stayed on the chart for two weeks . The song achieved its highest peak position in New Zealand , where it reached number six and spent five weeks in the top ten . In total , it appeared on the chart for 17 weeks . The song also peaked at number 36 in Australia , number 58 in Germany and number 100 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video and live performances = = 
 The music video for " Come Back to Me " was directed by Chris Applebaum . The video was first shown on Disney Channel on August 25 , 2006 , following the premiere of The Cheetah Girls 2 . Hudgens walks onto the set of a music video , applies her makeup and changes her shoes . She then performs while dancing against a brightly lit backdrop . Next , she is shown performing and dancing in a black room with numerous chandeliers flickering on and off . She later appears on a red stage with circles flickering in various colors . Afterwards , more shots of the black room is shown , including one in which she is swinging on a chandelier . In the last scene , she sings and dances in front of a colorful background . Black @-@ and @-@ white shots of her and her friends are interspersed throughout the video , and Hudgens ' friend , actress Alexa Nikolas , makes an appearance . The Arizona Republic writer Bill Goodykoontz wrote that Hudgens shows a somewhat mature side in the video : " [ W ] hen your only context for ever having seen Hudgens is starring as Gabriella , the sweet little brainiac in High School Musical , it 's certainly different to see her flouncing around in spaghetti @-@ strap tops , rolling her shoulders and whatnot . " A director 's cut version of the video appears on the physical release of the single . 
 As part of promotion , Hudgens performed " Come Back to Me " on several occasions . She first performed it while serving as the opening act for The Cheetah Girls during the The Party 's Just Begun Tour in the fall of 2006 . On September 28 , 2006 , she performed it on an episode of Good Morning America , and on Live with Regis & Kelly later the same day . She also performed the song at the nationwide tour High School Musical : The Concert , which she toured alongside her High School Musical cast mates . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Antonia Armato , Tim James , Peter Beckett , J.C. Crowley 
 Production – Antonia Armato , Tim James 
 Engineering – Nigel Lundemo , Read 
 Programming – Nicky Scappa , Nigel Lundemo 
 Associate production – The Honor Role 
 String arrangement – Nicky Scappa , Read 
 Strings – Read 
 Lead vocals - Vanessa Hudgens 
 Background vocals – Char Licera , Vanessa Hudgens 
 Credits are adapted from the V album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Radio dates and release history = = 
 = Battle of Midway = 
 The Battle of Midway was a decisive naval battle in the Pacific Theater of World War II . Between 4 and 7 June 1942 , only six months after Japan 's attack on Pearl Harbor and one month after the Battle of the Coral Sea , the United States Navy under Admirals Chester Nimitz , Frank Jack Fletcher , and Raymond A. Spruance decisively defeated an attacking fleet of the Imperial Japanese Navy under Admirals Isoroku Yamamoto , Chuichi Nagumo , and Nobutake Kondo near Midway Atoll , inflicting devastating damage on the Japanese fleet that proved irreparable . Military historian John Keegan called it " the most stunning and decisive blow in the history of naval warfare . " 
 The operation , like the earlier attack on Pearl Harbor , sought to eliminate the United States as a strategic power in the Pacific , thereby giving Japan a free hand in establishing its Greater East Asia Co @-@ Prosperity Sphere . The Japanese hoped another demoralizing defeat would force the U.S. to capitulate in the Pacific War and thus ensure Japanese dominance in the Pacific . Luring the American aircraft carriers into a trap and occupying Midway was part of an overall " barrier " strategy to extend Japan 's defensive perimeter , in response to the Doolittle air raid on Tokyo . This operation was also considered preparatory for further attacks against Fiji , Samoa , and Hawaii itself . 
 The plan was handicapped by faulty Japanese assumptions of the American reaction and poor initial dispositions . Most significantly , American codebreakers were able to determine the date and location of the planned attack , enabling the forewarned U.S. Navy to prepare its own ambush . All four of Japan 's large aircraft carriers — Akagi , Kaga , Soryu and Hiryu , part of the six @-@ carrier force that had attacked Pearl Harbor six months earlier — and a heavy cruiser were sunk , while the U.S. lost only the carrier Yorktown and a destroyer . After Midway and the exhausting attrition of the Solomon Islands campaign , Japan 's capacity to replace its losses in materiel ( particularly aircraft carriers ) and men ( especially well @-@ trained pilots and maintenance crewmen ) rapidly became insufficient to cope with mounting casualties , while the United States ' massive industrial and training capabilities made losses far easier to replace . The Battle of Midway is considered a turning point in the Pacific War . 
 = = Background = = 
 After expanding the war in the Pacific to include Western outposts , the Japanese Empire had attained its initial strategic goals quickly , taking the Philippines , Malaya , Singapore , and the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) ; the latter , with its vital oil resources , was particularly important to Japan . Because of this , preliminary planning for a second phase of operations commenced as early as January 1942 . There were strategic disagreements between the Imperial Army ( IJA ) and Imperial Navy ( IJN ) , and infighting between the Navy 's GHQ and Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto 's Combined Fleet , and a follow @-@ up strategy was not formed until April 1942 . Admiral Yamamoto finally succeeded in winning the bureaucratic struggle with a thinly veiled threat to resign , after which his plan for the Central Pacific was adopted . 
 Yamamoto 's primary strategic goal was the elimination of America 's carrier forces , which he regarded as the principal threat to the overall Pacific campaign . This concern was acutely heightened by the Doolittle Raid on 18 April 1942 , in which 16 U.S. Army Air Forces B @-@ 25 Mitchell bombers launched from USS Hornet bombed targets in Tokyo and several other Japanese cities . The raid , while militarily insignificant , was a shock to the Japanese and showed the existence of a gap in the defenses around the Japanese home islands as well as the accessibility of Japanese territory to American bombers . 
 This , and other successful hit @-@ and @-@ run raids by American carriers in the South Pacific , showed that they were still a threat , although seemingly reluctant to be drawn into an all @-@ out battle . Yamamoto reasoned that another air attack on the main U.S. Naval base at Pearl Harbor would induce all of the American fleet to sail out to fight , including the carriers . However , due to the increased strength of American land @-@ based air power on the Hawaiian Islands since the December 7 attack the previous year , he judged that it was now too risky to attack Pearl Harbor directly . 
 Instead , Yamamoto selected Midway , a tiny atoll at the extreme northwest end of the Hawaiian Island chain , approximately 1 @,@ 300 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 nautical miles ; 2 @,@ 100 kilometres ) from Oahu . This meant that Midway was outside the effective range of almost all of the American aircraft stationed on the main Hawaiian islands . Midway was not especially important in the larger scheme of Japan 's intentions , but the Japanese felt the Americans would consider Midway a vital outpost of Pearl Harbor and would therefore be compelled to defend it vigorously . The U.S. did consider Midway vital ; after the battle , establishment of a U.S. submarine base on Midway allowed submarines operating from Pearl Harbor to refuel and re @-@ provision , extending their radius of operations by 1 @,@ 200 miles ( 1 @,@ 900 km ) . In addition to serving as a seaplane base , Midway 's airstrips also served as a forward staging point for bomber attacks on Wake Island . 
 = = = Yamamoto 's plan : Operation MI = = = 
 Typical of Japanese naval planning during World War II , Yamamoto 's battle plan was exceedingly complex , requiring the careful and timely coordination of multiple battle groups over hundreds of miles of open sea . His design was predicated on optimistic intelligence suggesting that USS Enterprise and USS Hornet , forming Task Force 16 , were the only carriers available to the U.S. Pacific Fleet . During the Battle of the Coral Sea one month earlier , USS Lexington had been sunk and USS Yorktown damaged so severely that the Japanese believed she too had been lost . Yorktown deployed , after being hastily repaired at Pearl Harbor , and played a critical role in the discovery and eventual destruction of the Japanese fleet carriers at Midway . Much of Yamamoto 's planning , coinciding with the general feeling among the Japanese leadership at the time , was based on a gross misjudgement of American morale , which was believed to be debilitated from the string of Japanese victories in the preceding months . 
 Yamamoto felt deception would be required to lure the U.S. fleet into a fatally compromised situation . To this end , he dispersed his forces so that their full extent ( particularly his battleships ) would be unlikely to be discovered by the Americans prior to battle . Critically , Yamamoto 's supporting battleships and cruisers trailed Vice Admiral Chūichi Nagumo 's carrier force by several hundred miles . Japan 's heavy surface forces were intended to destroy whatever elements of the U.S. fleet might come to Midway 's defense once Nagumo 's carriers had weakened them sufficiently for a daylight gun duel ; this was typical of the battle doctrine of most major navies at the time . 
 What Yamamoto did not know was that the U.S. had broken the main Japanese naval code ( dubbed JN @-@ 25 by the Americans ) . His emphasis on dispersal also meant none of his formations were in a position to support each other . For instance , despite the fact Nagumo 's carriers were expected to carry out strikes against Midway and bear the brunt of American counterattacks , the only warships in his fleet larger than the screening force of twelve destroyers were two battleships , two heavy cruisers , and one light cruiser . By contrast , Yamamoto and Kondo had between them two light carriers , five battleships , four heavy cruisers , and two light cruisers , none of which saw action at Midway . The battleships and the small carriers of the trailing force were unable to keep pace with the carriers of the Kido Butai and so could not have sailed in company with them , while the distance between Yamamoto and Kondo 's forces and Nagumo 's carriers had grave implications during the battle : the invaluable reconnaissance capability of the scout planes carried by the cruisers and carriers , as well as the additional antiaircraft capability of the cruisers in the trailing force , was denied to Nagumo . 
 = = = Aleutian invasion = = = 
 In order to obtain support from the Imperial Japanese Army for the Midway operation , the Imperial Japanese Navy agreed to support their invasion of the Aleutian Islands . The IJA wished to occupy the western Aleutians to place the Japanese home islands out of range of U.S. land @-@ based bombers based in Alaska . The Japanese operations in the Aleutian Islands ( Operation AL ) removed yet more ships that could otherwise have augmented the force striking Midway . Whereas many earlier historical accounts considered the Aleutians operation as a feint to draw American forces away , early twenty @-@ first century research has suggested that AL was intended to be launched simultaneously with the attack on Midway . A one @-@ day delay in the sailing of Nagumo 's task force resulted in Operation AL beginning a day before the Midway attack . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = American reinforcements = = = 
 To do battle with an enemy expected to muster four or five carriers , Admiral Chester W. Nimitz , Commander in Chief , Pacific Ocean Areas , needed every available U.S. flight deck . He already had Vice Admiral William Halsey 's two @-@ carrier ( Enterprise and Hornet ) task force at hand , though Halsey was stricken with severe dermatitis and had to be replaced by Rear Admiral Raymond A. Spruance , Halsey 's escort commander . Nimitz also hurriedly recalled Rear Admiral Frank Jack Fletcher 's task force , including the carrier Yorktown , from the South West Pacific Area . 
 Despite estimates that Yorktown , damaged in the Battle of the Coral Sea , would require several months of repairs at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard , her elevators were intact and her flight deck largely so . The Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard worked around the clock , and in 72 hours she was restored to a battle @-@ ready state , judged good enough for two or three weeks of operations , as Nimitz required . Her flight deck was patched , whole sections of internal frames were cut out and replaced . Repairs continued even as she sortied , with work crews from the repair ship USS Vestal , herself damaged in the attack on Pearl Harbor six months earlier , still aboard . 
 Yorktown 's partially depleted air group was rebuilt using whatever planes and pilots could be found . The dive and torpedo squadrons were replaced with those from USS Saratoga , with Yorktown 's own dive bomber squadron remaining in the scout bomber role . The fighter squadron was reformed with replacement F4F @-@ 4 Wildcat aircraft and aircrew drawn from Saratoga . In addition , surviving pilots from USS Lexington , under the command of Lexington 's Lieutenant Commander John S. " Jimmy " Thach , were also assigned to Yorktown . Some of the aircrew were inexperienced , which may have contributed to an accident in which Thach 's executive officer was killed . Despite efforts to get Saratoga ( which had been undergoing repairs on the American West Coast ) ready for the coming engagement , the need to resupply and assemble sufficient escorts meant that she was not able to reach Midway until after the battle . 
 On Midway , by 4 June the USN had stationed four squadrons of PBYs — 31 aircraft in total — for long @-@ range reconnaissance duties , and 6 brand @-@ new TBF @-@ 1 Avengers , the latter a detachment from Hornet 's VT @-@ 8 . The Marine Corps stationed 19 SBD Dauntlesses , 7 F4F @-@ 3 Wildcats , 17 SB2U @-@ 3 Vindicators , and 21 F2A @-@ 3s . The USAAF contributed a squadron of 17 B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses and 8 B @-@ 26 Marauders equipped with torpedoes : in total 126 aircraft . Although the F2As and <unk> were already obsolete , they were the only aircraft available to the Marine Corps at the time . 
 = = = Japanese shortcomings = = = 
 During the Battle of the Coral Sea one month earlier , the Japanese light carrier Shōhō had been sunk and the fleet carrier Shōkaku had sustained three bomb hits , and was in drydock undergoing repairs . Although the carrier Zuikaku escaped the battle undamaged , she had lost almost half her air group , and was in port in Kure awaiting replacement planes and pilots . That there were none immediately available is attributable to the failure of the IJN crew training program , which already showed signs of being unable to replace losses . Instructors from the Yokosuka Air Corps were employed in an effort to make up the shortfall . 
 Historians Parshall and Tully believe that by combining the surviving aircraft and pilots from Shōkaku and Zuikaku , it is likely that Zuikaku could have been equipped with almost a full composite air group . They also note that doing so would have violated Japanese carrier doctrine , which stressed that carriers and their pilots must train as a single unit ( in contrast , American training was only conducted at the squadron level ) . In any case , the Japanese apparently made no serious attempt to get Zuikaku ready for the forthcoming battle . 
 Thus , Carrier Division 5 , consisting of the two most advanced aircraft carriers of the Kido Butai would not be available , which meant that Admiral Nagumo had to rely on four fleet carriers : Kaga and Akagi forming Carrier Division 1 and Hiryū and Sōryū as Carrier Division 2 . At least part of this was due to fatigue ; Japanese carriers had been constantly on operations since 7 December 1941 , including raids on Darwin and Colombo . 
 The main Japanese carrier @-@ borne strike aircraft were the <unk> " Val " dive bomber and the B5N2 " Kate " , which was used either as a torpedo bomber or as a level bomber . The main carrier fighter was the fast and highly maneuverable A6M " Zero " . For a variety of reasons , production of the " Val " had been drastically reduced , while that of the " Kate " had been stopped completely and , as a consequence , there were none available to replace losses . In addition , many of the aircraft being used during the June 1942 operations had been operational since late November 1941 and , although they were well @-@ maintained , many were almost worn out and had become increasingly unreliable . These factors meant all carriers of the Kido Butai had fewer aircraft than their normal complement , with few spare aircraft or parts stored in the carriers ' hangars . 
 Japanese strategic scouting arrangements prior to the battle were also in disarray . A picket line of Japanese submarines was late getting into position ( partly because of Yamamoto 's haste ) , which let the American carriers reach their assembly point northeast of Midway ( known as " Point Luck " ) without being detected . A second attempt at reconnaissance , using four @-@ engine <unk> " Emily " flying boats to scout Pearl Harbor prior to the battle and detect whether the American carriers were present , part of Operation K , was thwarted when Japanese submarines assigned to refuel the search aircraft discovered that the intended refueling point — a hitherto deserted bay off French Frigate Shoals — was now occupied by American warships , because the Japanese had carried out an identical mission in March . Thus , Japan was deprived of any knowledge concerning the movements of the American carriers immediately before the battle . 
 Japanese radio intercepts did notice an increase in both American submarine activity and message traffic . This information was in Yamamoto 's hands prior to the battle . Japanese plans were not changed ; Yamamoto , at sea in Yamato , assumed Nagumo had received the same signal from Tokyo , and did not communicate with him by radio , so as not to reveal his position . These messages were , contrary to earlier historical accounts , also received by Nagumo before the battle began . For reasons which remain unclear , Nagumo did not alter his plans or take additional precautions . 
 = = = Allied code @-@ breaking = = = 
 Admiral Nimitz had one priceless advantage : US cryptanalysts had partially broken the Japanese Navy 's JN @-@ <unk> code . Since early 1942 , the US had been decoding messages stating that there would soon be an operation at objective " AF " . It was not known where " AF " was , but Commander Joseph Rochefort and his team at Station HYPO were able to confirm that it was Midway ; Captain Wilfred Holmes devised a ruse of telling the base at Midway ( by secure undersea cable ) to broadcast an uncoded radio message stating that Midway 's water purification system had broken down . Within 24 hours , the code breakers picked up a Japanese message that " AF was short on water . " No Japanese radio operators who intercepted the message seemed concerned that the Americans were broadcasting uncoded that a major naval installation close to the Japanese threat ring was having a water shortage , which could have tipped off Japanese intelligence officers that it was a deliberate attempt at deception . HYPO was also able to determine the date of the attack as either 4 or 5 June , and to provide Nimitz with a complete IJN order of battle . Japan had a new codebook , but its introduction had been delayed , enabling HYPO to read messages for several crucial days ; the new code , which had not yet been cracked , came into use on 24 May , but the important breaks had already been made . 
 As a result , the Americans entered the battle with a very good picture of where , when , and in what strength the Japanese would appear . Nimitz knew that the Japanese had negated their numerical advantage by dividing their ships into four separate task groups , all too widely separated to be able to support each other . This dispersal resulted in few fast ships being available to escort the Carrier Striking Force , reducing the number of anti @-@ aircraft guns protecting the carriers . Nimitz calculated that the aircraft on his three carriers , plus those on Midway Island , gave the U.S. rough parity with Yamamoto 's four carriers , mainly because American carrier air groups were larger than Japanese ones . The Japanese , by contrast , remained almost totally unaware of their opponent 's true strength and dispositions even after the battle began . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Order of battle = = = 
 = = = Initial air attacks = = = 
 At about 09 : 00 on 3 June , Ensign Jack Reid , piloting a PBY from U.S. Navy patrol squadron VP @-@ 44 , spotted the Japanese Occupation Force 500 nautical miles ( 580 miles ; 930 kilometres ) to the west @-@ southwest of Midway . He mistakenly reported this group as the Main Force . Nine B @-@ 17s took off from Midway at 12 : 30 for the first air attack . Three hours later , they found Tanaka 's transport group 570 nautical miles ( 660 miles ; 1 @,@ 060 kilometres ) to the west . 
 Under heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire , they dropped their bombs . Although their crews reported hitting 4 ships , none of the bombs actually hit and no significant damage was inflicted . Early the following morning Japanese oil tanker Akebono Maru sustained the first hit when a torpedo from an attacking PBY struck her around 01 : 00 . This was the only successful air @-@ launched torpedo attack by the U.S. during the entire battle . 
 At 04 : 30 on 4 June , Nagumo launched his initial attack on Midway itself , consisting of 36 Aichi D3A dive bombers and 36 Nakajima B5N torpedo bombers , escorted by 36 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters . At the same time he launched his 8 search aircraft ( one from the heavy cruiser Tone launched 30 minutes late ) . Japanese reconnaissance arrangements were flimsy , with too few aircraft to adequately cover the assigned search areas , laboring under poor weather conditions to the northeast and east of the task force . As Nagumo 's bombers and fighters were taking off , 11 PBYs were leaving Midway to run their search patterns . At 05 : 34 , a PBY reported sighting 2 Japanese carriers and another spotted the inbound airstrike 10 minutes later . 
 American radar picked up the enemy at a distance of several miles , and interceptors were scrambled . <unk> bombers headed off to attack the Japanese carriers , their fighter escorts remaining behind to defend Midway . At 06 : 20 , Japanese carrier aircraft bombed and heavily damaged the U.S. base . Midway @-@ based Marine fighters , which included 7 F4Fs and 21 F2As , intercepted the Japanese and suffered heavy losses , though they managed to destroy 4 B5Ns and at least 3 A6Ms . Within the first few minutes , 3 F4Fs and 13 F2As were destroyed , while most of the surviving U.S. planes were damaged , with only 2 remaining airworthy . American anti @-@ aircraft fire was intense and accurate , destroying 4 additional Japanese aircraft and damaging many more . 
 Of the 108 Japanese aircraft involved in this attack , 11 were destroyed , 14 were heavily damaged , and 29 were damaged to some degree . The initial Japanese attack did not succeed in neutralizing Midway : American bombers could still use the airbase to refuel and attack the Japanese invasion force , and most of Midway 's land @-@ based defenses were intact . Japanese pilots reported to Nagumo that a second aerial attack on Midway 's defenses would be necessary if troops were to go ashore by 7 June . 
 Having taken off prior to the Japanese attack , American bombers based on Midway made several attacks on the Japanese carrier force . These included 6 Grumman Avengers , detached to Midway from the USS Hornet 's VT @-@ 8 ( Midway was the first combat mission for the VT @-@ 8 airmen , and the combat debut of the TBF ) , Marine Scout @-@ Bombing Squadron 241 ( VMSB @-@ 241 ) , consisting of 11 SB2U @-@ 3s and 16 SBDs , plus 4 USAAF B @-@ 26s , armed with torpedoes , and 15 B @-@ 17s . The Japanese repelled these attacks , losing 2 fighters while destroying 5 TBFs , 2 <unk> , 8 SBDs , and 2 B @-@ 26s . The first Marine aviator to perish in the battle , Major Lofton R. Henderson of VMSB @-@ 241 , was killed while leading his inexperienced Dauntless squadron into action . The main airfield at Guadalcanal was named after him in August 1942 . 
 One B @-@ 26 , after being seriously damaged by anti @-@ aircraft fire , veered into a steep dive straight toward Akagi . Making no attempt to pull out of its run , the aircraft narrowly missed crashing directly into the carrier 's bridge , which could have killed Nagumo and his command staff . This experience may well have contributed to Nagumo 's determination to launch another attack on Midway , in direct violation of Yamamoto 's order to keep the reserve strike force armed for anti @-@ ship operations . 
 = = = Nagumo 's dilemma = = = 
 In accordance with Japanese carrier doctrine at the time , Admiral Nagumo had kept half of his aircraft in reserve . These comprised two squadrons each of dive bombers and torpedo bombers . The dive bombers were as yet unarmed . The torpedo bombers were armed with torpedoes should any American warships be located . 
 At 07 : 15 , Nagumo ordered his reserve planes to be re @-@ armed with contact @-@ fused general purpose bombs for use against land targets . This was a result of the attacks from Midway , as well as of the morning flight leader 's recommendation of a second strike . This had been under way for about 30 minutes when , at 07 : 40 , the delayed scout plane from Tone signaled that it had sighted a sizable American naval force to the east , but neglected to describe its composition . Later evidence suggests Nagumo did not receive the sighting report until 08 : 00 . 
 Nagumo quickly reversed his order to re @-@ arm the bombers with general purpose bombs and demanded that the scout plane ascertain the composition of the American force . Another 20 – 40 minutes elapsed before Tone 's scout finally radioed the presence of a single carrier in the American force . This was one of the carriers from Task Force 16 . The other carrier was not sighted . 
 Nagumo was now in a quandary . Rear Admiral Tamon Yamaguchi , leading Carrier Division 2 ( Hiryū and Sōryū ) , recommended that Nagumo strike immediately with the forces at hand : 18 Aichi <unk> dive bombers each on Sōryū and Hiryū , and half the ready cover patrol aircraft . Nagumo 's opportunity to hit the American ships was now limited by the imminent return of his Midway strike force . The returning strike force needed to land promptly or it would have to ditch into the sea . Because of the constant flight deck activity associated with combat air patrol operations during the preceding hour , the Japanese never had an opportunity to position ( " spot " ) their reserve planes on the flight deck for launch . 
 The few aircraft on the Japanese flight decks at the time of the attack were either defensive fighters or , in the case of Sōryū , fighters being spotted to augment the Combat Air Patrol . Spotting his flight decks and launching aircraft would have required at least 30 to 45 minutes . Furthermore , by spotting and launching immediately , Nagumo would be committing some of his reserve to battle without proper anti @-@ ship armament ; he had just witnessed how easily unescorted American bombers had been shot down . Poor discipline caused many of the Japanese bombers to ditch their bombs and attempt to dogfight intercepting F4Fs . 
 Japanese carrier doctrine preferred the launching of fully constituted strikes rather than piecemeal attacks . Without confirmation of whether the American force included carriers ( not received until 08 : 20 ) , Nagumo 's reaction was doctrinaire . In addition , the arrival of another land based American air strike at 07 : 53 gave weight to the need to attack the island again . In the end , Nagumo decided to wait for his first strike force to land , then launch the reserve , which would by then be properly armed with torpedoes . 
 In the final analysis , it made no difference ; Fletcher 's carriers had launched their planes beginning at 07 : 00 , so the aircraft that would deliver the crushing blow were already on their way . Even if Nagumo had not strictly followed carrier doctrine , he could not have prevented the launch of the American attack . 
 = = = Attacks on the Japanese fleet = = = 
 The Americans had already launched their carrier aircraft against the Japanese . Fletcher , in overall command aboard Yorktown , and benefiting from PBY sighting reports from the early morning , ordered Spruance to launch against the Japanese as soon as was practical , while initially holding Yorktown in reserve in case any other Japanese carriers were found . 
 Spruance judged that , though the range was extreme , a strike could succeed and gave the order to launch the attack . He then left Halsey 's Chief of Staff , Captain Miles Browning , to work out the details and oversee the launch . The carriers had to launch into the wind , so the light southeasterly breeze would require them to steam away from the Japanese at high speed . Browning therefore suggested a launch time of 07 : 00 , giving the carriers an hour to close on the Japanese at 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . This would place them at about 155 nautical miles ( 287 km ; 178 mi ) from the Japanese fleet , assuming it did not change course . The first plane took off from Spruance 's carriers Enterprise and Hornet a few minutes after 07 : 00 . Fletcher , upon completing his own scouting flights , followed suit at 08 : 00 from Yorktown . 
 Fletcher , along with Yorktown 's commanding officer , Captain Elliott Buckmaster , and their staffs , had acquired first @-@ hand experience in organizing and launching a full strike against an enemy force in the Coral Sea , but there was no time to pass these lessons on to Enterprise and Hornet which were tasked with launching the first strike . Spruance ordered the striking aircraft to proceed to target immediately , rather than waste time waiting for the strike force to assemble , since neutralizing enemy carriers was the key to the survival of his own task force . 
 While the Japanese were able to launch 108 aircraft in just seven minutes , it took Enterprise and Hornet over an hour to launch 117 . Spruance judged that the need to throw something at the enemy as soon as possible was greater than the need to coordinate the attack by aircraft of different types and speeds ( fighters , bombers , and torpedo bombers ) . Accordingly , American squadrons were launched piecemeal and proceeded to the target in several different groups . It was accepted that the lack of coordination would diminish the impact of the American attacks and increase their casualties , but Spruance calculated that this was worthwhile , since keeping the Japanese under aerial attack impaired their ability to launch a counterstrike ( Japanese tactics preferred fully constituted attacks ) , and he gambled that he would find Nagumo with his flight decks at their most vulnerable . 
 American carrier aircraft had difficulty locating the target , despite the positions they had been given . The strike from Hornet , led by Commander Stanhope C. Ring , followed an incorrect heading of 265 degrees rather than the 240 degrees indicated by the contact report . As a result , Air Group Eight 's dive bombers missed the Japanese carriers . Torpedo Squadron 8 ( VT @-@ 8 , from Hornet ) , led by Lieutenant Commander John C. Waldron , broke formation from Ring and followed the correct heading . The 10 F4Fs from Hornet had run out of fuel and had to ditch . 
 Waldron 's squadron sighted the enemy carriers and began attacking at 09 : 20 , followed by Torpedo Squadron 6 ( VT @-@ 6 , from Enterprise ) whose Wildcat fighter escorts also ran low on fuel and had to turn back at 09 : 40 . Without fighter escort , all 15 TBD Devastators of VT @-@ 8 were shot down without being able to inflict any damage , with Ensign George H. Gay , Jr . , the only survivor . VT @-@ 6 lost 10 of their 14 Devastators , and 10 of Yorktown 's VT @-@ 3 's 12 Devastators were shot down with no hits to show for their effort , thanks in part to the abysmal performance of their Mark 13 torpedoes . Midway was the last time the TBD Devastator was used in combat . 
 Senior Navy and Bureau of Ordnance officers never questioned why half a dozen torpedoes , released so close to the Japanese carriers , produced no results . The Japanese combat air patrol , flying Mitsubishi A6M2 Zeros made short work of the unescorted , slow , under @-@ armed TBDs . A few TBDs managed to get within a few ship @-@ lengths range of their targets before dropping their torpedoes — close enough to be able to strafe the enemy ships and force the Japanese carriers to make sharp evasive maneuvers — but all of their torpedoes either missed or failed to explode . The abysmal performance of American torpedoes in the early months of the war became a scandal . Torpedo after torpedo either missed by running directly under the target , prematurely exploded , or struck targets with textbook right angle hits ( sometimes with an audible clang ) and failed to explode . 
 Despite their failure to score any hits , the American torpedo attacks indirectly achieved three important results . First , they kept the Japanese carriers off balance and unable to prepare and launch their own counterstrike . Second , they pulled the Japanese combat air patrol ( CAP ) out of position . Third , many of the Zeros ran low on ammunition and fuel . The appearance of a third torpedo plane attack from the southeast by Torpedo Squadron 3 ( VT @-@ 3 from Yorktown ) at 10 : 00 very quickly drew the majority of the Japanese CAP to the southeast quadrant of the fleet . Better discipline , and the employment of a greater number of Zeroes for the CAP might have enabled Nagumo to prevent ( or at least mitigate the damage caused by ) the coming American attacks . 
 By chance , at the same time VT @-@ 3 was sighted by the Japanese , three squadrons of SBDs from Enterprise and Yorktown ( VB @-@ 6 , VS @-@ 6 and VB @-@ 3 , respectively ) were approaching from the southwest and northeast . The Yorktown squadron ( VB @-@ 3 ) had flown just behind VT @-@ 3 but elected to attack from a different course . The two squadrons from Enterprise were running low on fuel because of the time spent looking for the enemy . Squadron commander C. Wade McClusky , Jr. decided to continue the search , and by good fortune spotted the wake of the Japanese destroyer Arashi , steaming at full speed to rejoin Nagumo 's carriers after having unsuccessfully depth @-@ charged U.S. submarine Nautilus , which had unsuccessfully attacked the battleship Kirishima . Some bombers were lost from fuel exhaustion before the attack commenced . 
 McClusky 's decision to continue the search and his judgment , in the opinion of Admiral Chester Nimitz , " decided the fate of our carrier task force and our forces at Midway ... " All three American dive @-@ bomber squadrons ( VB @-@ 6 , VS @-@ 6 and VB @-@ 3 ) arrived almost simultaneously at the perfect time , locations and altitudes to attack . Most of the Japanese CAP was focusing on the torpedo planes of VT @-@ 3 and were out of position , armed Japanese strike aircraft filled the hangar decks , fuel hoses snaked across the decks as refueling operations were hastily being completed , and the repeated change of ordnance meant that bombs and torpedoes were stacked around the hangars , rather than stowed safely in the magazines , making the Japanese carriers extraordinarily vulnerable . 
 Beginning at 10 : 22 , the two squadrons of Enterprise 's air group split up with the intention of sending one squadron each to attack Kaga and Akagi . A miscommunication caused both of the squadrons to dive at the Kaga . Recognizing the error , Lieutenant Commander Richard Halsey Best and his two wingmen were able to pull out of their dive and , after judging that Kaga was doomed , headed north to attack Akagi . Coming under an onslaught of bombs from almost two full squadrons , Kaga sustained four or five direct hits , which caused heavy damage and started multiple fires . One of the bombs landed near the bridge , killing Captain <unk> Okada and most of the ship 's senior officers . Lieutenant Clarence E. Dickinson , part of McClusky 's group , dove on the Kaga : 
 We were coming down in all directions on the port side of the carrier ... I recognized her as the Kaga ; and she was enormous ... The target was utterly satisfying ... I saw a bomb hit just behind where I was aiming ... I saw the deck rippling and curling back in all directions exposing a great section of the hangar below ... I saw [ my ] 500 @-@ pound bomb hit right abreast of the [ carrier 's ] island . The two 100 @-@ pound bombs struck in the forward area of the parked planes ... 
 Several minutes later , Best and his two wingmen dived on the Akagi . Mitsuo <unk> , the Japanese aviator who led the attack on Pearl Harbor , was on the Akagi when it was hit , and described the attack : 
 A look @-@ out screamed : " Hell @-@ Divers ! " I looked up to see three black enemy planes plummeting towards our ship . Some of our machineguns managed to fire a few frantic bursts at them , but it was too late . The plump silhouettes of the American Dauntless dive @-@ bombers quickly grew larger , and then a number of black objects suddenly floated eerily from their wings . 
 Although Akagi sustained only one direct hit ( almost certainly dropped by Lieutenant Commander Best ) , it proved to be a fatal blow ; the bomb struck the edge of the mid @-@ ship deck elevator and penetrated to the upper hangar deck , where it exploded among the armed and fueled aircraft in the vicinity . Nagumo 's chief of staff , Ryūnosuke Kusaka , recorded " a terrific fire ... bodies all over the place ... Planes stood tail up , belching livid flames and jet @-@ black smoke , making it impossible to bring the fires under control . " Another bomb exploded under water very close astern ; the resulting geyser bent the flight deck upward " in grotesque configurations " and caused crucial rudder damage . 
 Simultaneously , Yorktown 's VB @-@ 3 , commanded by Max Leslie , went for Sōryū , scoring at least three hits and causing extensive damage . Some of Leslie 's bombers did not have bombs as they were accidentally released when the pilots attempted to use electrical arming switches . Nevertheless , Leslie and others still dive @-@ bombed , strafing carrier decks and providing covers for those with bombs . Gasoline ignited , creating an " inferno , " while stacked bombs and ammunition detonated . VT @-@ 3 targeted Hiryū , which was hemmed in by Sōryū , Kaga , and Akagi , but achieved no hits . 
 Within six minutes , Sōryū and Kaga were ablaze from stem to stern , as fires continued to spread through the ships . Akagi , having been struck by only one bomb , took longer to burn , but the resulting fires quickly expanded and soon proved impossible to extinguish ; she too was eventually consumed by the flames and had to be abandoned . All remained temporarily afloat , as none had suffered damage below the waterline , other than the rudder damage to Akagi caused by the near miss close astern . Despite initial hopes that Akagi could be saved or at least towed back to Japan , all three carriers were eventually abandoned and scuttled . 
 = = = Japanese counterattacks = = = 
 Hiryū , the sole surviving Japanese aircraft carrier , wasted little time in counterattacking . Hiryū 's first attack wave , consisting of 18 D3As and 6 fighter escorts , followed the retreating American aircraft and attacked the first carrier they encountered , Yorktown , hitting her with three bombs , which blew a hole in the deck , snuffed out her boilers , and destroyed one anti @-@ aircraft mount . The damage also forced Admiral Fletcher to move his command staff to the heavy cruiser Astoria . Repair teams were able to temporarily patch the flight deck and restore power to several boilers within an hour , giving her a speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) and enabling her to resume air operations . Thirteen dive bombers and three escorting fighters were lost in this attack ( two escorting fighters turned back early after they were damaged attacking some of Enterprise 's SBDs returning from their attack on the Japanese carriers ) . 
 Approximately one hour later , Hiryū 's second attack wave , consisting of ten B5Ns and six escorting A6Ms , arrived over the Yorktown ; the repair efforts had been so effective that the Japanese pilots assumed that Yorktown must be a different , undamaged carrier . They attacked , crippling Yorktown with two torpedoes ; she lost all power and developed a 23 @-@ degree list to port . Five torpedo bombers and two fighters were shot down in this attack . 
 News of the two strikes , with the reports each had sunk an American carrier ( actually both strikes had damaged , but not sunk , Yorktown ) , greatly improved morale in the Japanese carrier task force . Its few surviving aircraft were all recovered aboard Hiryū . Despite the heavy losses , the Japanese believed that they could scrape together enough aircraft for one more strike against what was believed to be the only remaining American carrier . 
 = = = American counterattack = = = 
 Late in the afternoon , a Yorktown scout aircraft located Hiryū , prompting Enterprise to launch a final strike of 24 dive bombers ( including 6 SBDs from VS @-@ 6 , 4 SBDs from VB @-@ 6 , and 14 SBDs from Yorktown 's VB @-@ 3 ) . Despite Hiryū being defended by a strong cover of more than a dozen Zero fighters , the attack by Enterprise and orphaned Yorktown aircraft launched from Enterprise was successful : four , possibly five bombs hit Hiryū , leaving her ablaze and unable to operate aircraft . Hornet 's strike , launched late because of a communications error , concentrated on the remaining escort ships but failed to score any hits . 
 After futile attempts at controlling the blaze , most of the crew remaining on Hiryū were evacuated and the remainder of the fleet continued sailing northeast in an attempt to intercept the American carriers . Despite a scuttling attempt by a Japanese destroyer that hit her with a torpedo and then departed quickly , Hiryū stayed afloat for several more hours , being discovered early the next morning by an aircraft from the escort carrier Hōshō and prompting hopes she could be saved , or at least towed back to Japan . Soon after being spotted , Hiryū sank . Rear @-@ Admiral Tamon Yamaguchi , together with the ship 's captain <unk> Kaku , chose to go down with the ship , costing Japan perhaps her best carrier officer . 
 As darkness fell , both sides took stock and made tentative plans for continuing the action . Admiral Fletcher , obliged to abandon the derelict Yorktown and feeling he could not adequately command from a cruiser , ceded operational command to Spruance . Spruance knew the United States had won a great victory , but he was still unsure of what Japanese forces remained and was determined to safeguard both Midway and his carriers . To aid his aviators , who had launched at extreme range , he had continued to close with Nagumo during the day and persisted as night fell . 
 Finally , fearing a possible night encounter with Japanese surface forces , and believing Yamamoto still intended to invade , based in part on a misleading contact report from Tambor , Spruance changed course and withdrew to the east , turning back west towards the enemy at midnight . For his part , Yamamoto initially decided to continue the engagement and sent his remaining surface forces searching eastward for the American carriers . Simultaneously , he detached a cruiser raiding force to bombard the island . The Japanese surface forces failed to make contact with the Americans due to Spruance 's decision to briefly withdraw eastward , and Yamamoto ordered a general withdrawal to the west . It was fortunate Spruance did not pursue , for had he come in contact with Yamamoto 's heavy ships , including Yamato , in the dark and considering the Japanese Navy 's superiority in night @-@ attack tactics at the time , his cruisers would have been overwhelmed and his carriers sunk . 
 Spruance failed to regain contact with Yamamoto 's forces on 5 June despite extensive searches . Towards the end of the day he launched a search @-@ and @-@ destroy mission to seek out any remnants of Nagumo 's carrier force . This late afternoon strike narrowly missed detecting Yamamoto 's main body and failed to score hits on a straggling Japanese destroyer . The strike planes returned to the carriers after nightfall , prompting Spruance to order Enterprise and Hornet to turn on their lights to aid the landings . 
 At 02 : 15 on the night of 5 / 6 June , Commander John Murphy 's Tambor , lying 90 nautical miles ( 170 km ; 100 mi ) west of Midway , made the second of the submarine force 's two major contributions to the battle 's outcome , although its impact was heavily blunted by Murphy himself . Sighting several ships , neither Murphy nor his executive officer , Ray Spruance , Jr . , could identify them . Uncertain of whether they were friendly or not and unwilling to approach any closer to verify their heading or type , Murphy decided to send a vague report of " four large ships " to Admiral Robert English , Commander , Submarine Force , Pacific Fleet ( COMSUBPAC ) . This report was passed on by English to Nimitz , who then sent it to Spruance . Spruance , a former submarine commander , was " understandably furious " at the vagueness of Murphy 's report , as it provided him with little more than suspicion and no concrete information on which to make his preparations . Unaware of the exact location of Yamamoto 's " Main Body " ( a persistent problem since the time PBYs had first sighted the Japanese ) , Spruance was forced to assume the " four large ships " reported by Tambor represented the main invasion force and so he moved to block it , while staying 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ; 120 mi ) northeast of Midway . 
 In reality , the ships sighted by Tambor were the detachment of four cruisers and two destroyers Yamamoto had sent to bombard Midway . At 02 : 55 these ships received Yamamoto 's order to retire and changed course to comply . At about the same time as this change of course , Tambor was sighted and during maneuvers designed to avoid a submarine attack , Mogami and Mikuma collided , inflicting serious damage on Mogami 's bow . The less severely damaged Mikuma slowed to 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) to keep pace . Only at 04 : 12 did the sky brighten enough for Murphy to be certain the ships were Japanese , by which time staying surfaced was hazardous and he dived to approach for an attack . The attack was unsuccessful and at around 06 : 00 he finally reported two westbound Mogami @-@ class cruisers , before diving again and playing no further role in the battle . <unk> along on a straight course at 12 knots — roughly one @-@ third their top speed and only 1 knot faster than Tambor while submerged — Mogami and Mikuma had been almost perfect targets for a submarine attack . As soon as Tambor returned to port , Spruance had Murphy relieved of duty and reassigned to a shore station , citing his confusing contact report , poor torpedo shooting during his attack run and general lack of aggression , especially as compared to Nautilus , the oldest of the 12 boats at Midway and the only one which had successfully placed a torpedo on target ( albeit a dud ) . This was in the context as referenced above , of mistaken criticism of submariner performance for severe ineffectiveness of navy torpedoes , already reported as technical by submariners , but unaddressed until 1943 . 
 Over the following two days , first Midway and then Spruance 's carriers launched several strikes against the stragglers . Mikuma was eventually sunk by Dauntlesses , while Mogami survived further severe damage to return home for repairs . The destroyers Arashio and Asashio were also bombed and strafed during the last of these attacks . Captain Richard E. Fleming , a U.S. Marine Corps aviator , was killed while executing a glide bomb run on Mikuma and was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor . 
 Meanwhile , salvage efforts on Yorktown were encouraging , and she was taken in tow by USS <unk> . In the late afternoon of 6 June , the Japanese submarine I @-@ 168 , which had managed to slip through the cordon of destroyers ( possibly due to the large amount of debris in the water ) , fired a salvo of torpedoes , two of which struck Yorktown . There were few casualties aboard , since most of the crew had already been evacuated , but a third torpedo from this salvo struck the destroyer USS Hammann , which had been providing auxiliary power to Yorktown . Hammann broke in two and sank with the loss of 80 lives , mostly due to her own depth charges exploding . With further salvage efforts deemed hopeless , the remaining repair crews were evacuated from Yorktown , which sank just after 05 : 00 on 7 June . 
 = = Japanese casualties = = 
 By the time the battle ended , 3 @,@ 057 Japanese had died . Casualties aboard the four carriers were : Akagi : 267 ; Kaga : 811 ; Hiryu : 392 ; Soryu : 711 ; a total of 2 @,@ 181 . The heavy cruisers Mikuma ( sunk ; 700 casualties ) and Mogami ( badly damaged ; 92 ) accounted for another 792 deaths . 
 In addition , the destroyers Arashio ( bombed ; 35 ) and Asashio ( strafed by aircraft ; 21 ) were both damaged during the air attacks which sank Mikuma and caused further damage to Mogami . Floatplanes were lost from the cruisers Chikuma ( 3 ) and Tone ( 2 ) . Dead aboard the destroyers Tanikaze ( 11 ) , Arashi ( 1 ) , <unk> ( 1 ) and the fleet oiler Akebono Maru ( 10 ) made up the remaining 23 casualties . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After winning a clear victory , and as pursuit became too hazardous near Wake , American forces retired . Spruance once again withdrew to the east to refuel his destroyers and rendezvous with the carrier Saratoga , which was ferrying much @-@ needed replacement aircraft . Fletcher transferred his flag to Saratoga on the afternoon of 8 June and resumed command of the carrier force . For the remainder of that day and then 9 June , Fletcher continued to launch search missions from the three carriers to ensure the Japanese was no longer advancing on Midway . Late on 10 June a decision was made to leave the area and the American carriers eventually returned to Pearl Harbor . 
 Historian Samuel E. Morison noted in 1949 that Spruance was subjected to much criticism for not pursuing the retreating Japanese , thus allowing their surface fleet to escape . Clay Blair argued in 1975 that had Spruance pressed on , he would have been unable to launch his aircraft after nightfall , and his cruisers would have been overwhelmed by Yamamoto 's powerful surface units , including Yamato . Furthermore , the American air groups had suffered considerable losses , including most of their torpedo bombers . This made it unlikely that they would be effective in an airstrike against the Japanese battleships , even if they had managed to catch them during daytime . Also , by this time Spruance 's destroyers were critically low on fuel . 
 On 10 June , the Imperial Japanese Navy conveyed to the military liaison conference an incomplete picture of the results of the battle . Chūichi Nagumo 's detailed battle report was submitted to the high command on 15 June . It was intended only for the highest echelons in the Japanese Navy and government , and was guarded closely throughout the war . In it , one of the more striking revelations is the comment on the Mobile Force Commander 's ( Nagumo 's ) estimates : " The enemy is not aware of our plans ( we were not discovered until early in the morning of the 5th at the earliest ) . " In reality , the whole operation had been compromised from the beginning due to Allied code @-@ breaking efforts . 
 The Japanese public and much of the military command structure were kept in the dark about the extent of the defeat : Japanese news announced a great victory . Only Emperor Hirohito and the highest Navy command personnel were accurately informed of the carrier and pilot losses . Consequently , even the Imperial Japanese Army ( IJA ) continued to believe , for at least a short time , that the fleet was in good condition . 
 On the return of the Japanese fleet to Hashirajima on 14 June the wounded were immediately transferred to naval hospitals ; most were classified as " secret patients " , placed in isolation wards and quarantined from other patients and their own families to keep this major defeat secret . The remaining officers and men were quickly dispersed to other units of the fleet and , without being allowed to see family or friends , were shipped to units in the South Pacific , where the majority died in battle . None of the flag officers or staff of the Combined Fleet was penalized , with Nagumo later being placed in command of the rebuilt carrier force . 
 As a result of the defeat , new procedures were adopted whereby more Japanese aircraft were refueled and re @-@ armed on the flight deck , rather than in the hangars , and the practice of draining all unused fuel lines was adopted . The new carriers being built were redesigned to incorporate only two flight deck elevators and new firefighting equipment . More carrier crew members were trained in damage @-@ control and firefighting techniques , although the losses later in the war of Shōkaku , Hiyō , and especially Taihō suggest that there were still problems in this area . 
 Replacement pilots were pushed through an abbreviated training regimen in order to meet the short @-@ term needs of the fleet . This led to a sharp decline in the quality of the aviators produced . These inexperienced pilots were fed into front @-@ line units , while the veterans who remained after Midway and the Solomons campaign were forced to share an increased workload as conditions grew more desperate , with few being given a chance to rest in rear areas or in the home islands . As a result , Japanese naval air groups as a whole progressively deteriorated during the war while their American adversaries continued to improve . 
 = = = American prisoners = = = 
 Three U.S. airmen , Ensign Wesley Osmus , a pilot from Yorktown , Ensign Frank O 'Flaherty , a pilot from Enterprise and Aviation Machinist 's Mate B. F. ( or B. P. ) Bruno Gaido , the radioman @-@ gunner of O 'Flaherty 's SBD , were captured by the Japanese during the battle . Osmus was held on Arashi ; O 'Flaherty and Gaido on the cruiser Nagara ( or destroyer Makigumo , sources vary ) ; all three were interrogated , and then killed by being tied to water @-@ filled kerosene cans and thrown overboard to drown . The report filed by Nagumo tersely states of Ensign Osmus , " He died on 6 June and was buried at sea " ; O 'Flaherty and Gaido 's fates were not mentioned in Nagumo 's report . The execution of Ensign Wesley Osmus in this manner was apparently ordered by Arashi 's captain , Watanabe Yasumasa . Had Watanabe survived the war ( he died in December 1943 ) , he would have likely been tried as a war criminal . 
 = = = Japanese prisoners = = = 
 Two enlisted men from Mikuma were rescued from a life raft on 9 June by USS Trout and brought to Pearl Harbor . After receiving medical care , at least one of these sailors cooperated during interrogation and provided intelligence . Another 35 crewmen from Hiryu were taken from a lifeboat by USS Ballard on 19 June after being spotted by an American search plane . They were brought to Midway and then transferred to Pearl Harbor on USS Sirius . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The Battle of Midway has often been called " the turning point of the Pacific " . It was the Allies ' first major naval victory against the Japanese . Although the Japanese continued to try to secure more territory , and the U.S. did not move from a state of naval parity to one of supremacy until after several more months of hard combat , Midway allowed the Allies to switch to the strategic initiative , paving the way for the landings on Guadalcanal and the prolonged attrition of the Solomon Islands campaign . Midway allowed this to occur before the first of the new Essex @-@ class fleet carriers became available at the end of 1942 . 
 Some authors have stated heavy losses in carriers and veteran aircrews at Midway permanently weakened the Imperial Japanese Navy . Parshall and Tully have stated that the heavy losses in veteran aircrew ( 110 , just under 25 % of the aircrew embarked on the four carriers ) , were not crippling to the Japanese naval air corps as a whole ; the Japanese navy had 2 @,@ 000 carrier @-@ qualified aircrew at the start of the Pacific war . The loss of four large fleet carriers and over 40 % of the carriers ' highly trained aircraft mechanics and technicians , plus the essential flight @-@ deck crews and armorers , and the loss of organizational knowledge embodied in such highly trained crew , were still heavy blows to the Japanese carrier fleet . A few months after Midway , the <unk> sustained similar casualty rates in the Battle of the Eastern Solomons and Battle of Santa Cruz , and it was these battles , combined with the constant attrition of veterans during the Solomons campaign , which were the catalyst for the sharp downward spiral in operational capability . 
 After the battle Shōkaku and Zuikaku were the only large carriers of the original Pearl Harbor strike force left for offensive actions . Of Japan 's other carriers , Taihō , which was not commissioned until early 1944 , would be the only fleet carrier worth teaming with Shōkaku and Zuikaku ; Ryūjō and Zuihō were light carriers , while Jun 'yō and Hiyō , although technically classified as fleet carriers , were second @-@ rate ships of comparatively limited effectiveness . In the time it took Japan to build three carriers , the U.S. Navy commissioned more than two dozen fleet and light fleet carriers , and numerous escort carriers . By 1942 the United States was already three years into a shipbuilding program mandated by the Second Vinson Act , intended to make the navy larger than all the Axis navies combined , plus the British and French navies , which it was feared might fall into Axis hands . 
 Both the United States and Japan stepped up the training of aircrew , but the United States had a more effective pilot rotation system , which meant that more veterans survived and went on to training or command billets , where they were able to pass on lessons they had learned in training rather than in combat , where errors were more likely to be fatal . By the time of the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944 , the Japanese had nearly rebuilt their carrier forces in terms of numbers , but their planes , many of which were obsolescent , were largely flown by inexperienced and poorly trained pilots . 
 Midway showed the worth of pre @-@ war naval cryptanalysis and intelligence @-@ gathering . These efforts continued and were expanded throughout the war in both the Pacific and Atlantic theaters . Successes were numerous and significant . For instance , cryptanalysis made possible the shooting down of Admiral Yamamoto 's airplane in 1943 . 
 = = Discovery of sunken vessels = = 
 Because of the extreme depth of the ocean in the area of the battle ( more than 17 @,@ 000 ft or 5 @,@ 200 m ) , researching the battlefield has presented extraordinary difficulties . On 19 May 1998 , Robert Ballard and a team of scientists and Midway veterans from both sides located and photographed Yorktown . The ship was remarkably intact for a vessel that had sunk in 1942 ; much of the original equipment and even the original paint scheme were still visible . 
 Ballard 's subsequent search for the Japanese carriers was unsuccessful . In September 1999 , a joint expedition between <unk> Corp. and the U.S. Naval Oceanographic Office searched for the Japanese aircraft carriers . Using advanced <unk> techniques in conjunction with the ship 's log of the submarine USS Nautilus , the expedition located a large piece of wreckage , subsequently identified as having come from the upper hangar deck of Kaga . The main wreck of Kaga has yet to be located . 
 = = Remembrances = = 
 Chicago Municipal Airport , important to the war effort in World War II , was renamed Chicago Midway International Airport ( or simply Midway Airport ) in 1949 in honor of the battle . 
 Waldron Field , an outlying training landing strip , at Corpus Christi NAS as well Waldron Road leading to the strip , was named in honor of the commander of USS Hornet 's Torpedo Squadron 8 . Yorktown Boulevard leading away from the strip was named for the U.S. carrier sunk in the battle . 
 Henderson Field ( Guadalcanal ) was named in honor of United States Marine Corps Major Lofton Henderson , who was the first Marine aviator to perish during the battle . 
 An escort carrier , USS Midway ( CVE @-@ 63 ) was commissioned on 17 August 1943 . She was renamed St. Lo on 10 October 1944 to clear the name Midway for a large fleet aircraft carrier , USS Midway ( CV @-@ 41 ) , which was commissioned on 10 September 1945 , eight days after the Japanese surrender , and is now docked in San Diego , California , as the USS Midway Museum . 
 On 13 September 2000 , Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt designated the lands and waters of Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge as the Battle of Midway National Memorial . 
 = Birthday ( Katy Perry song ) = 
 " Birthday " is a disco song recorded by American singer Katy Perry for her fourth studio album , Prism ( 2013 ) . It was written by Perry , Bonnie McKee and producers Dr. Luke , Max Martin , and Cirkut . Critics , as well as Perry herself , have compared the track to works by Prince and Mariah Carey . Through double entendres in the lyrics of " Birthday " , Perry makes sexual references while celebrating a partner 's birthday . The song was sent by Capitol to mainstream and rhythmic radio on April 21 , 2014 as the fourth single from Prism . 
 Following the release of Prism , " Birthday " entered the single charts of South Korea and France . After being released as an official single , it reached the top 30 in Australia , UK , and Netherlands , number 17 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 7 on the Canadian Hot 100 . A music video for the track was released on April 24 , 2014 . Primarily recorded with hidden cameras , it features Perry disguised as five different characters in birthday parties and other celebrations . The makeup effects disguises for Perry were designed and created by Tony Gardner . 
 Jess Glynne covered the song on BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 " Birthday " was written by Perry , Bonnie McKee , Cirkut , Dr. Luke , and Max Martin . The latter three produced the song and contributed to the instrumentation and programmed their respective instruments . The drums were played by Steven Wolf , while the horns were played by the Saturday Night Live Band , arranged by Lenny Pickett and engineered by Dave O 'Donnell . Its audio engineering was done by Peter Carlsson , Clint Gibbs , Sam Holland , and Michael Illbert . The track was finally mixed by Serban Ghenea at the MixStar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia , accompanied by the mixing engineer , John Hanes . The song itself was recorded at various studios , including Luke 's in the Boo in Malibu , California , Conway Recording Studios in Hollywood , California , Playback Recording Studio in Santa Barbara , California , MXM Studios in Stockholm , Sweden and Secret Garden Studios in Montecito , California . 
 The song surfaced online on October 16 , 2013 — two days prior to the official release of Prism . On April 3 , 2014 , the singer announced on her Twitter account that " Birthday " would be released as the album 's fourth single , posting its cover art as well . The art is based on a photograph , taken during a birthday party circa 1990 , in which a blonde Perry and her sister Angela Hudson smile toward the camera ; " puffy " letter balloons were " photoshopped " onto the cover to spell out Perry 's name . The song title appears in candles over a floral cake . To promote the single , a lyric video for " Birthday " was uploaded onto Perry 's Vevo account on April 10 , 2014 . It depicts a variety of cakes and sweets — among other confections — decorated with the song 's lyrics and concludes with Perry lighting the last candle of a cake . 
 = = Composition = = 
 At the length of three minutes and thirty @-@ five seconds ( 3 : 35 ) , " Birthday " is primarily styled in the genre of disco . " Birthday " is composed in the key of B major and follows a progression of <unk> – C ♯ m7 – <unk> – C ♯ m7 – B with a tempo of 126 beats per minute . Perry 's vocals range from B3 to F ♯ 5 . During a preview event for Prism , held in New York City , Perry described " Birthday " as her " attempt at writing " a song that American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey would have included in her eponymous debut album . Since its release , its musical composition has been strongly compared to that of other works of Prince and duo Wendy and Lisa . 
 " Birthday " contains elements of funk @-@ pop , synthpop , and disco house . The song is backed by a " busy but buoyant " instrumentation featuring a " deeply rhythmic impulse " . Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times felt " Birthday " was a musically updated version of disco , achieved by replacing " cheesy strings " with " jerky breaks and synth washes " . Its " joyful " lyrics present the commemoration of her partner 's birthday as a metaphor for sexual intercourse . The bridge section of " Birthday " , which sees Perry singing " Let me get you in your birthday suit / It 's time to bring out the big balloons " , was found by Ben <unk> to resemble French duo Daft Punk 's works . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine and Kitty Empire from The Guardian called " Birthday " one of the best tracks from Prism : Erlewine described it as a " glorious retro @-@ disco explosion " and Empire found a " girly simpatico " in the song that sustains it . Marah Eakin from The A.V. Club felt the track was " pure fun " . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard called it a " stone @-@ cold stunner " , going on to say the song " serves as pop music 's ( superior ) answer to Swizz Beatz 's " Everyday Birthday " . He also felt it was the song with the " most smash potential " included in Prism . Chris Bosman of Consequence of Sound wrote that the song was a " irrepressible disco jam " and found it superior to Carly Rae Jepsen 's album Kiss ( 2012 ) . 
 Jon Dolan from Rolling Stone noted that the " sunny effervescence " from Teenage Dream was present on the song . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine said that the " sexy and playful " song was " offset by brackish fare " . Alexis Petridis from The Guardian considered that the song resembled a four to the floor remix of a Mariah Carey song , but complimented its melodies for being " significantly stronger " than those of Jessie J 's album , Alive ( 2013 ) . Rob Harvilla from Spin criticized the song 's " sensuality " , which he described as being of " an off @-@ kilter , grade @-@ school goofy , beanie @-@ propeller sort of sensuality " . Evan Sawdey of PopMatters deemed " Birthday " the " catchiest thing " on Prism , but he also thought it was a " rewrite " of Jessie J 's hit " Domino " and Perry 's former song " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " . Lewis Corner from Digital Spy classified it as a " flirty pop @-@ gem " , while HitFix 's Melinda Newman awarded it a B + grade , calling it a " delectable pop confection " . James Reed from The Boston Globe called the song 's double entendre lyrics " hilarious " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Upon the release of Prism , due to strong digital download sales , " Birthday " charted on the singles charts in France and South Korea . It debuted on the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique singles chart at number 160 where it stayed for one week . In South Korea , it peaked at number 51 on the Gaon International Chart with digital downloads of 3 @,@ 089 copies . Before being released as a single , the song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 chart of April 16 , 2014 , at number 91 . One week later , the song jumped to number 83 . The following week , it went from 83 to 37 . It peaked at 17 on the Hot 100 , becoming Perry 's third single to miss the top ten after " Thinking of You " and " Unconditionally " . The song has peaked at the top of Hot Dance Club Songs chart extending her record for most consecutive dance club no.1 songs to 14 . In Germany , " Birthday " became the lowest charting single , peaking at number 69 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and filming = = = 
 The official music video for " Birthday " was directed by Marc Klasfeld and Danny Lockwood ; Dawn Rose served as a producer , while Nicole <unk> served as executive producer , Richard <unk> <unk> as the editor , Tony Gardner as the make @-@ up artist , and Joseph Robbins was the director of photography . For the video , which was filmed in April 2014 , Perry played the characters of five party entertainers , appearing in five parties . They consisted of a burlesque @-@ like elderly woman named Goldie , a Jewish master of ceremonies named Yosef <unk> , a clown named Kriss , an animal trainer named Ace , and a face @-@ painter named Princess Mandee . In order to transform Perry physically to each character , she spent up to seven hours getting prosthetic makeup applied by Tony Gardner . 
 The parties that Perry attended were real , and its participants were unaware of Perry 's presence ; the organizers believed they had signed up to star in a reality show called " Birthday <unk> " . Similarly , the majority of events that took place during the visual were staged without the knowledge of the celebrations ' organizers and guests . For example , the car crash that occurs in the video left several children who observed it frightened and crying . Perry deemed the video " very intricate to make and shoot " and her " most insane " to date . A teaser for the video which introduced the characters was released on April 22 , 2014 whereas the complete video was revealed two days later . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video begins with short introductions to the characters Goldie , Yosef , Kriss , Ace , and Mandee . Perry is then shown entering all of the parties as " five of the world ’ s worst birthday entertainers " in disguise . At a man 's 90th birthday , Goldie emerges from a large birthday cake and begins to give the man a lap dance . At a child 's birthday party , Kriss the Clown attempts to create balloon animals , while Ace the Animal Trainer introduces a group of children to a box of mice before appearing to eat one , which makes a child cry . At another child 's party , Princess Mandee paints a girl 's face incompetently ; Goldie begins to suffer from respiratory problems , and Yosef does the worm at a boy 's Bar Mitzvah . Goldie pulls a man 's prosthetic leg off and proceeds to play air guitar with it , and Kriss crashes into a table before drinking alcohol behind a tree . 
 At the elderly man 's party , Goldie collapses and a woman tries to use a defibrillator on her . While attempting to hit a piñata , Kriss walks onto the road to cause a car crash which shocks the party attendees . At the petting cage , Ace lets a goat run wild which defecates and urinates on the ground ; meanwhile Goldie drops a birthday cake on the 90 @-@ year @-@ old man , Yosef is then shown beatboxing at the Bar Mitzvah to the disapproval of the guests . Princess Mandee takes off her hat , wig and mask and reveals herself to be Perry , to which the children scream in pleasure . Goldie eats cake with the elderly man , before straddling him on his wheelchair . At the end of the song , Princess Mandee and the children say " happy birthday " to the camera . During the credits , the characters dance and lip sync to a remixed version of the song . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Christina Garibaldi of MTV News wrote that Perry " continues to top herself " with the video and billed the video 's " approach " as " creative , fun and pretty hysterical " . Salon 's Daniel D 'Addario was critical of character Yosef <unk> , denouncing it as a " Jewish stereotype " . He noted that Perry had already been the center of controversy due to being dressed as a geisha for a 2013 performance of " Unconditionally " , and questioned her decision to portray Yosef . Writing for Time , Nolan <unk> quipped , " Jewish people aren 't costumes " and found the video distracting from the song . Ariana <unk> from Entertainment Weekly dubbed the character " anti @-@ Semitic " and suggested that Perry should stop impersonating members of other cultures . For Consequence of Sound , Chris Coplan called the visual " incredible " and described it as a " less grating and tiresome " version of The Master of Disguise . Complex writer Zach Frydenlund positively remarked that the video " deliver [ ed ] " and regarded the Goldie character look as " quite nice " . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 At the 2014 Billboard Music Awards via a pre @-@ recorded performance , the single was promoted for the first time . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Digital download ( remix ) 
 " Birthday " ( Cash Cash Remix ) – 4 : 25 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = = Song = = = 
 Song credits adapted from the liner notes of Prism , Capitol Records . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 Credits of the video production adapted from the visual . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Tucker @-@ class destroyer = 
 The Tucker class of destroyers was a ship class of six ships designed by and built for the United States Navy shortly before the United States entered World War I. The Tucker class was the fourth of five classes of destroyers that were known as the " thousand tonners " , because they were the first U.S. destroyers over 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 016 t ) displacement . 
 The design of what became the Tucker class was the result of compromises between the General Board of the United States Navy and the U.S. Navy 's Bureau of Construction and Repair . The General Board , tasked with creating an integrated battle fleet , wanted a larger ship that could serve in a scouting role and proposed a ship larger than the unique British destroyer HMS Swift of 1907 , and more than twice the displacement of any previous U.S. destroyer . Input from Construction and Repair resulted in a design that was an incremental development of the O 'Brien class , which itself was similar to the first of the thousand tonners , the Cassin class ( which displaced about a third more than the preceding Paulding class ) . 
 The ships were built by four private American shipyards — Bath Iron Works , Fore River Shipbuilding Company , New York Shipbuilding Corporation , and William Cramp and Sons — and were laid down between February and November 1914 ; launched between April and July 1915 ; and commissioned into the U.S. Navy between July 1915 and May 1916 . The ships had a median displacement of 1 @,@ 060 long tons ( 1 @,@ 080 t ) , were just over 315 feet ( 96 m ) in length , and had a beam of about 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) . Most of the ships had two direct @-@ drive steam turbines and a single geared cruising turbine ; Wadsworth was equipped with two geared steam turbines only and , as the first U.S. destroyer so equipped , greatly influenced later U.S. Navy destroyer designs . All of the ships were designed for a maximum speed of 29 @.@ 5 knots ( 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) and a range of 2 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 600 km ) at more economical speeds . As built , they were armed with four 4 @-@ inch ( 10 cm ) guns and had four twin 21 @-@ inch ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes with a load of eight torpedoes , but all were later equipped with depth charges . 
 All six ships operated in the Atlantic or Caribbean until the U.S. entrance into World War I in April 1917 , when all six were sent overseas to Queenstown , Ireland , for convoy escort duties . Several of the ships rescued passengers and crew from ships sunk by U @-@ boats , and several had encounters with U @-@ boats themselves ; Jacob Jones was torpedoed and sunk by U @-@ 58 in December 1917 . All five surviving members of the class had returned to the United States by early 1919 and been decommissioned by June 1922 . Between 1924 and 1926 , four of the five ( all but Wadsworth ) were commissioned into the United States Coast Guard to help enforce Prohibition as a part of the " Rum Patrol " . They were returned to U.S. Navy custody between 1934 and 1936 , and had all been sold for scrapping by 1936 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In September 1912 , the General Board of the United States Navy asked the Navy 's Bureau of Construction and Repair ( C & R ) to develop plans for the next class of destroyers . The General Board asked for a design with four 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) guns , six twin 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes , and twenty floating mines , that could travel at up to 35 knots ( 65 km / h ) with steaming radius of 2 @,@ 500 nautical miles at 20 knots ( 4 @,@ 600 km at 37 km / h ) . C & R came back with a design for a 385 @-@ foot ( 117 m ) long , 2 @,@ 160 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 2 @,@ 190 t ) displacement , triple @-@ screw " super @-@ destroyer " requiring 40 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 30 @,@ 000 kW ) to make the design speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ) . The C & R design was similar to , but larger than the unique British destroyer HMS Swift of 1907 , and more than twice the displacement of the largest U.S. destroyers . 
 The General Board , whose main concern was the integrated operation of the United States battle fleet , pushed for the design to provide more scouting capabilities for fleet operations . But the high cost of the design — $ 1 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 for hull and machinery vs. $ 790 @,@ 000 for the O 'Brien @-@ class ships — and the lack of operating experience with the Cassin class — the first of the " thousand tonners " ( destroyers exceeding 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 020 t ) displacement ) which were just beginning to be launched — caused C & R to resist the much larger design . The Chief Constructor of the Navy , the head of C & R , pointed out that the British had not repeated the Swift design in the five years since her introduction , and noted that " a destroyer that gets too large loses many of the desirable features of the type " . 
 In November 1912 , the General Board offered several alternatives to reduce the size of the destroyer , and was convinced by C & R that the most practical solution was a design that shared much with the O 'Brien class : matching that class ' main battery and torpedo load but with a design speed of 29 @.@ 5 knots ( 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) and the desired 2 @,@ 500 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 4 @,@ 600 km ) steaming radius . The General Board also specified that the ships be equipped with " two aeroplane guns , if they can be developed and installed " , have provisions for laying thirty @-@ six mines , and a strengthened bow for ramming . The C & R design for the Tucker class , DD @-@ 57 through DD @-@ 62 , was approved by the Secretary of the Navy in December 1912 , and authorized by Congress in 1913 . 
 = = Design = = 
 As built , the Tucker @-@ class ships were 315 feet 3 inches ( 96 @.@ 09 m ) in length ( overall ) , were between 29 feet 9 inches ( 9 @.@ 07 m ) and 30 feet 6 inches ( 9 @.@ 30 m ) abeam , and had a median draft of 9 feet 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 84 m ) . The hull shape featured the distinctive high forecastle typical of U.S. destroyer classes since the 1908 – 09 Smith class , the first destroyers designed to be truly ocean @-@ going vessels . The ships displaced between 1 @,@ 060 and 1 @,@ 150 long tons ( 1 @,@ 080 and 1 @,@ 170 t ) with a median of 1 @,@ 060 long tons ( 1 @,@ 080 t ) . 
 The ships were equipped with two propeller shafts and two Curtis steam turbines fed by four Yarrow boilers , providing a minimum of 17 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) to achieve the design speed of 29 @.@ 5 knots ( 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) . For all of the ships except Wadsworth , the pair of main turbines was supplemented with a cruising turbine geared to one of the shafts . Wadsworth had no cruising turbines , but instead had her twin turbines geared directly to the propeller shafts — the first American destroyer so outfitted . She served as a testbed , and had a considerable effect on U.S. destroyer design after her trials in July 1915 . 
 The main battery of the Tucker class consisted of four 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) / 50 Mark 9 guns , with each gun weighing in excess of 6 @,@ 100 pounds ( 2 @,@ 800 kg ) . The guns fired 33 @-@ pound ( 15 kg ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at 2 @,@ 900 feet per second ( 880 m / s ) . At an elevation of 20 ° , the guns had a range of 15 @,@ 920 yards ( 14 @,@ 560 m ) . 
 The Tucker class was also equipped with four twin 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes , for a total load of eight Mark 8 torpedoes . Although the General Board had called for two anti @-@ aircraft guns for the Tucker class , they were not originally outfitted with the weapons ; the Sampson class was the first American destroyer class so armed . Likewise , there is no record of any of the Tucker ships being outfitted with mine @-@ laying apparatus . During World War I , most American destroyers were used in anti @-@ submarine warfare roles , and were equipped with depth charges and delivery systems , such as Y @-@ guns and depth charge racks . Tucker @-@ class ships were equipped with depth charges during the war , but no specific mentions of the types of depth charges used or delivery system are recorded in available sources . 
 = = = Comparisons with other " thousand tonners " = = = 
 The " thousand tonners " were the 26 United States Navy destroyers of five classes — Cassin , Aylwin , O 'Brien , Tucker , and Sampson — so named because they were the first U.S. Navy destroyers to have displacements greater than 1 @,@ 000 long tons . The Cassin class , the first of the thousand tonners , displaced about a third more than the preceding Paulding class . The introduction of the thousand tonners led to the <unk> and other older , smaller displacement destroyers of previous classes to be dismissively called " <unk> " , a nickname also commonly applied to the Ford Model T. 
 The Tucker class was the fourth of the five classes of " thousand tonners " . The earlier <unk> ( DD @-@ 43 to DD @-@ 46 ) , <unk> ( DD @-@ 47 to DD @-@ 50 ) and O 'Brien @-@ class ( DD @-@ 51 to DD @-@ 56 ) ships were about 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) shorter than the Tucker ships and had a lower displacement , between 40 and 80 long tons ( 41 and 81 t ) less than the median displacement of the Tuckers ; the later Sampson @-@ class ( DD @-@ 63 to DD @-@ 68 ) ships were the same length and displaced 10 long tons ( 10 t ) more . All five classes were armed with four 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) guns , but the torpedo size and complement varied . All were equipped with four twin torpedo tubes loaded with eight torpedoes except for the Sampsons ( which had four triple tubes carrying twelve torpedoes ) , but the Cassin and Aylwin classes were armed with 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedoes ; the rest with 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . The Sampsons were the only group originally equipped with anti @-@ aircraft guns , a pair of 1 @-@ pounder ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) guns with a caliber of 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 46 in ) . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The construction of the six Tucker @-@ class ships was allocated to four U.S. shipbuilders . The Fore River Shipbuilding Company and Bath Iron Works built one ship each , while William Cramp and New York Shipbuilding each constructed a pair of Tucker destroyers . The keels for all six ships were laid down between February and November 1914 , with Wadsworth being the first and Tucker the last . All were launched between April and July 1915 , with Wadsworth again being the first and Porter being the last . Wadsworth was commissioned in July 1915 , three months after her launch ; the rest were commissioned between January and May 1916 , with Wainwright the final ship to enter service . 
 = = Ships in class = = 
 All six members of the class served in the Atlantic throughout their U.S. Navy careers , and all were sent overseas to Queenstown , Ireland , for convoy escort and anti @-@ submarine duties after the United States entered World War I in April 1917 . Conyngham , Porter , Wadsworth , and Wainwright were in the first group of six American destroyers , arriving at Queenstown on 4 May ; Tucker and Jacob Jones followed as part of the second group , which arrived thirteen days later . Several of the ships had encounters with U @-@ boats during the war : Conyngham 's commander was commended for what was thought a probable " kill " of one U @-@ boat ; Jacob Jones was sunk by U @-@ 53 in December 1917 . All surviving ships of the class had returned to the United States by early 1919 and served in various roles over the next two years . Tucker was decommissioned in May 1921 , followed by Wainwright in May 1922 , and the remaining three in June 1922 . 
 Between 1924 and 1926 , four of the five ships — Conyngham and Porter in 1924 , Tucker and Wainwright in 1926 — were reactivated for service with the United States Coast Guard 's " Rum Patrol " . All were returned to the U.S. Navy in 1933 with the exception of Tucker , which followed in 1934 . Conyngham , Porter , and Wainwright were sold for scrapping in 1934 ; the other two in 1936 . 
 = = = USS Tucker ( DD @-@ 57 ) = = = 
 USS Tucker ( DD @-@ 57 ) , the lead ship of the class , was laid down by the Fore River Shipbuilding Company of Quincy , Massachusetts , in November 1914 and launched in May 1915 . She was the first U.S. Navy vessel named for Samuel Tucker . 
 After her April 1916 commissioning , Tucker sailed off the east coast and in the Caribbean . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Tucker was part of the second U.S. destroyer squadron sent overseas . Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland , Tucker made several rescues of passengers and crew from ships sunk by U @-@ boats . For her part in rescuing crewmen from the Dupetit @-@ Thouars in August 1918 , Tucker received a commendation from the Préfet Maritime . In June , Tucker was transferred to Brest , France , and spent the remainder of the war there . 
 Upon returning to the United State near the end of 1918 , Tucker underwent repairs at the Boston Navy Yard . After a New England recruiting tour through October 1919 , she was placed in reduced commission and then decommissioned in May 1921 . In March 1926 , Tucker was transferred to the United States Coast Guard to help enforce Prohibition as a part of the " Rum Patrol " . She operated under the name USCGC Tucker ( CG @-@ 23 ) until 1933 ; during her Coast Guard service , she was the first American ship to arrive at the crash site of Navy airship Akron . After her transfer back to the Navy later in 1933 , the ship was renamed DD @-@ 57 to free the name Tucker for another destroyer . She was sold for scrap and hulked in December 1936 . 
 = = = USS Conyngham ( DD @-@ 58 ) = = = 
 USS Conyngham ( DD @-@ 58 ) was laid down by the William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia in July 1914 and launched in July of the following year . She was the first U.S. Navy vessel named for Gustavus Conyngham . 
 After her January 1916 commissioning , Conyngham sailed off the east coast and in the Caribbean . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Conyngham was part of the first U.S. destroyer squadron sent overseas . Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland , Conyngham made several rescues of passengers and crew from ships sunk by U @-@ boats . Conyngham 's commander was commended for actions related to what was thought at the time to be a " probable " kill of a German submarine . 
 Upon returning to the United State in December 1918 , Conyngham underwent repairs at the Boston Navy Yard . She remained there in reduced commission through 1921 , with only brief episodes of activity . After returning to active service for about a year , she was decommissioned in June 1922 . In June 1924 , Conyngham was transferred to the United States Coast Guard to help enforce Prohibition as a part of the " Rum Patrol " . She operated under the name USCGC Conyngham ( CG @-@ 2 ) until 1933 , when she was returned to the Navy . Later that year , the ship was renamed DD @-@ 58 to free the name Conyngham for another destroyer . She was sold for scrap in August 1934 . 
 = = = USS Porter ( DD @-@ 59 ) = = = 
 USS Porter ( DD @-@ 59 ) was laid down by the William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia in August 1914 and launched in August of the following year . She was the second U.S. Navy vessel named in honor of both David Porter and his son David Dixon Porter . 
 After her April 1916 commissioning , Porter conducted her shakedown cruise in the Caribbean . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Porter was part of the first U.S. destroyer squadron sent overseas . Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland , Porter severely damaged the German submarine U @-@ 108 in April 1918 . 
 Upon returning to the United States after the war , Porter operated off the east coast until she was decommissioned in June 1922 . In June 1924 , Porter was transferred to the United States Coast Guard to help enforce Prohibition as a part of the " Rum Patrol " . She operated under the name USCGC Porter ( CG @-@ 7 ) until 1933 , when she was returned to the Navy . Later that year , the ship was renamed DD @-@ 59 to free the name Porter for another destroyer . She was sold for scrap in August 1934 . 
 = = = USS Wadsworth ( DD @-@ 60 ) = = = 
 USS Wadsworth ( DD @-@ 60 ) was laid down by the Bath Iron Works of Bath , Maine , in February 1914 and launched in April 1915 . She was the first U.S. Navy vessel named for Alexander Scammel Wadsworth . Wadsworth 's geared steam turbine power plant was a successful prototype that greatly influenced U.S. destroyer designs after 1915 . 
 After her July 1915 commissioning , Wadsworth served on the neutrality patrol off the east coast and in the Caribbean . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Wadsworth was the flagship of the first U.S. destroyer squadron sent overseas . Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland , Wadsworth reported several encounters with U @-@ boats in the first months overseas . She was transferred to Brest , France , in March 1918 , and spent the remainder of the war there . 
 Upon returning to the United State at the end of 1918 , Wadsworth underwent a five @-@ month overhaul . She served as a plane guard for the Navy 's transatlantic flight attempt by four Navy @-@ Curtiss flying boats in May . After two years in reduced commission in August , Wadsworth was reactivated in May 1921 . She was decommissioned in June 1922 , and spent nearly 14 years in reserve at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . She was struck from the Naval Vessel Register in January 1936 , sold in June , and scrapped in August . 
 = = = USS Jacob Jones ( DD @-@ 61 ) = = = 
 USS Jacob Jones ( DD @-@ 61 ) was laid down by the New York Shipbuilding of Camden , New Jersey , in August 1914 and launched in May of the following year . She was the first U.S. Navy vessel named in honor of Jacob Jones . 
 After her February 1916 commissioning , Jacob Jones conducted patrols off the New England coast . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Jacob Jones was sent overseas . Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland , Jacob Jones rescued the survivors of several ships , notably picking up over 300 from the sunken armed merchant cruiser Orama . 
 On 6 December , Jacob Jones was steaming independently from Brest , France , for Queenstown , when she was torpedoed and sunk by German submarine U @-@ 53 with the loss of 66 officers and men , becoming the first United States destroyer to ever be sunk by enemy action , and the only destroyer lost to the enemy by the US Navy in World War I. Jacob Jones sank in eight minutes without issuing a distress call ; the German submarine commander , Kapitänleutnant Hans Rose , after rescuing two badly injured Jacob Jones crewmen , radioed the American base at Queenstown with the coordinates for the survivors before leaving the area . 
 = = = USS Wainwright ( DD @-@ 62 ) = = = 
 USS Wainwright ( DD @-@ 62 ) was laid down by the New York Shipbuilding of Camden , New Jersey , in September 1914 and launched in June of the following year . She was the first U.S. Navy vessel named in honor of U.S. Navy officers Jonathan Wainwright and Jonathan Wainwright , Jr . ( father and son ) , and Commander Richard Wainwright ( cousin of the elder Jonathan ) . 
 After her May 1916 commissioning , Wainwright sailed off the east coast and in the Caribbean . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Wainwright was part of the first U.S. destroyer squadron sent overseas . Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland , Wainwright made several unsuccessful attacks on U @-@ boats , and rescued survivors of several ships sunk by the German craft . 
 Upon returning to the United State after the war , Wainwright resumed operations with the destroyers of the Atlantic Fleet until May 1922 , when she was decommissioned . In April 1926 , Wainwright was transferred to the United States Coast Guard to help enforce Prohibition as a part of the " Rum Patrol " . She operated under the name USCGC Wainwright ( CG @-@ 24 ) until April 1934 , when she was returned to the Navy . She was sold for scrap in August 1934 . 
 = Love . Angel . Music . Baby . = 
 Love . Angel . Music . Baby. is the debut solo album by American singer Gwen Stefani . It was released on November 12 , 2004 , by Interscope Records . Stefani , who had previously released five albums as rock band No Doubt 's lead singer , began recording solo material in early 2003 . She began working on Love . Angel . Music . Baby. as a side project that would become a full album after No Doubt went on hiatus . Stefani co @-@ wrote every song on the album , collaborating with various songwriters and producers including André 3000 , Dallas Austin , Dr. Dre , the Neptunes and Linda Perry . 
 Designed to sound like a 1980s record , Love . Angel . Music . Baby. was influenced by artists such as the Cure , Depeche Mode , Cyndi Lauper and Madonna . The album incorporates a diverse range of genres , including electropop , dance @-@ rock , new wave , R & B , hip hop , soul , and disco . Most of its songs are about fashion and wealth . Promotion of the album included the release of six commercially successful singles and the North American Harajuku Lovers concert tour . While promoting , Stefani was often accompanied by back @-@ up dancers called the Harajuku Girls . 
 Love . Angel . Music . Baby. received generally positive reviews from music critics , and the album and its songs were nominated for a total of six Grammy Awards , including Album of the Year , winning none . It peaked at number five on the American record charts , received multi @-@ platinum sales certifications in several countries and sold over seven million copies worldwide . 
 = = Background = = 
 During her time with the band No Doubt , Stefani began making solo appearances on albums by artists ; including Eve and Moby . In the production of its fifth studio album , Rock Steady ( 2001 ) , No Doubt collaborated with Prince , the Neptunes and David A. Stewart and had Mark " Spike " Stent mixing the album . While the band was on tour to promote the album , Stefani listened to Club Nouveau 's 1987 's single " Why You Treat Me So Bad " and considered recording material that modernized 1980s music . No Doubt 's bassist and her former boyfriend , Tony Kanal , introduced her to music by Prince , Lisa and Cult Jam , and Debbie Deb , and they talked about producing songs from Kanal 's bedroom . 
 In 2003 , Stefani began recording solo material . She stated she was considering recording singles to be used on soundtracks , continuing her collaborations or releasing an album under the pseudonym " GS " . Jimmy Iovine ( chairman and co @-@ founder of Interscope ) convinced Stefani to work on this album . On the second day of her sessions with Linda Perry , the two wrote a song about Stefani 's writer 's block and fears about the solo album . This became the track " What You Waiting For ? " . which was released as the lead single for the album . 
 When the two began working on a song that Stefani stated was too personal , she left to visit Kanal . He played her a track on which he had been working and which became " Crash " , the album 's final single . The two tried to write new material , but gave up after two weeks . They did not return to work until six months later , when Stefani began collaborating with other artists , commenting , " If I were to write the chorus of ' Yesterday ' by the Beatles , and that 's all I wrote , that would be good enough to be part of that history . " Stefani resumed work with Linda Perry , who invited Dallas Austin , and many other artists , including Outkast 's André 3000 , the Neptunes , and Dr. Dre . Stefani announced the album 's release in early 2004 , marketing it as a " dance record " and a " guilty pleasure " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music and lyrics = = = 
 Love . Angel . Music . Baby. takes influence from a variety of 1980s genres to the extent that one reviewer commented , " The only significant ' 80s radio style skipped is the ska punk revival that No Doubt rode to success " . Several songs employ synthesizer sounds characteristic of music from the 1980s . The album combines music genres such as electropop , dance @-@ rock , soul hip hop , R & B , and disco . New wave , present in some of No Doubt 's later work , continues to be incorporated into Love . Angel . Music . Baby . , drawing comparisons to The Go @-@ Go 's and Cyndi Lauper . Stefani cited Club Nouveau , Depeche Mode , Lisa Lisa , Prince , New Order , The Cure , and early Madonna as major influences for the album . 
 Like pop albums of the 1980s , Love . Angel . Music . Baby. focuses primarily on money , with songs such as " Rich Girl " and " Luxurious " that feature descriptions of riches and wealth . The album contains several references to Stefani 's clothing line , L.A.M.B. , and alludes to contemporary fashion designers such as John Galliano , Rei <unk> , and Vivienne Westwood . Stefani also released a series of dolls named the " Love . Angel . Music . Baby . Fashion Dolls " , designed after the costumes from her tour . Although Stefani intended for the album to be a light dance record , she stated that " no matter what you do , things just come out . " The album 's opening track " What You Waiting For ? " discusses her desire to be a mother and in 2006 , she and her husband , Bush singer Gavin Rossdale , had a son named Kingston Rossdale . The fourth track " Cool " discusses Stefani 's friendship with Kanal after he ended a romantic relationship with her in 1995 . 
 Love . Angel . Music . Baby. introduced the Harajuku Girls , an entourage of four Japanese women whom Stefani referred to as a figment of her imagination . The Harajuku Girls are discussed in several of the songs , including one named after and entirely dedicated to them . They appear in most of the music videos produced for the album and those for Stefani 's second album The Sweet Escape ( 2006 ) . Love . Angel . Music . Baby. includes various styles of music . Many songs are influenced by electro beats designed for club play . Producers Austin and Kanal incorporated R & B into the song " Luxurious " which contains a sample of The Isley Brothers ' 1983 single " Between the Sheets " . Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis incorporate new jack swing , a fusion genre of R & B that the pair had developed and popularized during the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The album opens with " What You Waiting For ? " , an electropop , new wave , dance @-@ rock , and funk song . Lyrically , the song discusses Stefani 's fears of beginning a solo career . " Rich Girl " , a collaboration with rapper Eve , is a dancehall and reggae reworking of the English duo Louchie Lou & Michie One 's 1994 song " If I Was a Rich Girl " , which itself interpolates the song " If I Were a Rich Man " from the 1964 musical Fiddler on the Roof . The Neptunes @-@ produced track " Hollaback Girl " combines 1980s hip hop with dance music . It was written as a response to a derogatory comment that grunge musician Courtney Love made , referring to Stefani as a cheerleader . 
 The fourth track " Cool " chronicles Stefani 's previous relationship with Tony Kanal , featuring a new wave and synthpop production . The song was compared to Cyndi Lauper and Madonna songs from the 1980s . " Bubble Pop Electric " , the fifth track , is an electro song featuring André 3000 's alias Johnny Vulture . It tells of the two having sex at a drive @-@ in movie , and it was generally well received by critics , who drew comparisons to the 1978 film Grease and its 1982 sequel Grease 2 . " Luxurious " is a 1990s @-@ inspired R & B song that lyrically talks about the desire to be rich in love , simultaneously comparing Stefani 's lover with luxuries . The seventh track , " Harajuku Girls " , is a synthpop song that was described as a tribute to Tokyo 's street culture , produced by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis . 
 " Crash " is an electroclash song that uses automobile metaphors to describe a relationship . " The Real Thing " was described as a vintage Europop song , and features guest appearances from New Order vocalist Bernard Sumner and bassist Peter Hook . The next track , the synthpop song " Serious " , drew comparisons to Madonna 's work during the early 1980s . A music video was produced for the song , but it was never officially released , although a snippet of the video surfaced on YouTube in October 2006 . " Danger Zone " , an electro @-@ rock song , was widely interpreted to be about Stefani 's husband Gavin Rossdale having an illegitimate daughter ; however , the song had been written before the discovery . The closing track " Long Way to Go " is an outtake from André 3000 's album The Love Below ( 2003 ) . The song discusses interracial dating and uses a sample of Martin Luther King 's " I Have a Dream " speech . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Stefani embarked on the Harajuku Lovers Tour on October 16 , 2005 to promote Love . Angel . Music . Baby . The tour consisted of only one leg , running for 42 dates across North America , ending on December 21 , 2005 . The hip hop group The Black Eyed Peas , rapper M.I.A. , and singer Ciara accompanied Stefani as opening acts for her tour . The tour was met with varying responses from contemporary critics , who despite praising Stefani 's vocals , were critical of other aspects of the show such as its musical material . According to Billboard , the tour grossed $ 22 million from 37 shows , 20 of which sold out . A video album of the concert titled Harajuku Lovers Live was released on DVD on December 4 , 2006 . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " What You Waiting For ? " was released as the lead single from Love . Angel . Music . Baby. on September 28 , 2004 . The single peaked at number 47 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and was commercially successful overseas , topping the chart in Australia and reaching the top 10 in several countries including France , Netherlands , New Zealand , Sweden , and the United Kingdom . " Rich Girl " , featuring Eve , was released as the album 's second single on December 14 , 2004 , becoming Stefani 's first top @-@ 10 hit as a solo artist in the US when it peaked at number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 . Elsewhere , the song performed equally as successfully as " What You Waiting For ? " . " Hollaback Girl " was released as the third single on March 15 , 2005 . It became the album 's best @-@ selling and most popular single , while also becoming the first single to sell one million digital downloads in the US . The song topped the Billboard Hot 100 within six weeks of its release , earning Stefani her first number @-@ one single on the chart . 
 " Cool " was released as the fourth single from the album on July 5 , 2005 . The song fared moderately on the charts , reaching the top 10 in Australia and New Zealand , as well as the top 20 in Denmark , Germany , Ireland , Norway , the UK and the US . " Luxurious " was released as the fifth single in October 2005 . The single version features rapper Slim Thug . The song was less successful than the previous singles from the album , peaking at number 21 on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Crash " was not originally planned as a single , but due to Stefani 's pregnancy , her second solo album was delayed , and the song was released as the sixth and final single from the album on January 24 , 2006 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Love . Angel . Music . Baby. received generally positive reviews from contemporary pop music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 71 , based on 22 reviews . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic called the album " intermittently exciting and embarrassing " , concluding that it is " stranger and often more entertaining than nearly any other mainstream pop album of 2004 . " Jennifer Nine of Yahoo ! Music praised the album as " the hottest , coolest , best @-@ dressed pop album of the year " and found it to be " sleek , shimmery , and dripping with all @-@ killer @-@ no @-@ filler musical bling " . Stylus Magazine 's Charles Merwin opined that Stefani was a contender to fill Madonna 's role , " [ b ] ut not enough to get seriously excited about her as the next great solo female careerist . " Lisa Haines of BBC Music was more emphatic , stating that Stefani rivaled Madonna and Kelis , while dubbing the album a " stunning and stylish effort that showcases Gwen 's credentials as a bonafide pop goddess . " 
 Despite stating that Stefani " shamelessly plunders " 1980s music , Krissi Murison of the NME referred to the album as " one of the most frivolously brilliant slabs of shiny retro @-@ pop anyone 's had the <unk> to release all year . " John Murphy of musicOMH found the album " enjoyable , if patchy " , but commented that it was too long . Rolling Stone 's Rob Sheffield described the album as " an irresistible party : trashy , hedonistic and deeply weird . " The magazine later placed the album at number 39 on its list of the top 50 albums of 2004 . Robert Christgau gave the album a three @-@ star honorable mention ( ) and wrote , " Turns out the problem wasn 't ska per se — it was No Doubt . " Edna Gundersen of USA Today called the album " [ f ] un , fizzy , frivolous " , while noting that Stefani 's " caffeinated electro @-@ pop amounts to little more than sly channeling of Lisa Lisa at a disco revival . " Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times viewed it as a " clever and sometimes enticing solo debut that doesn 't quite add up . " 
 The album was generally criticized for its large number of collaborations and producers . The Guardian 's Caroline Sullivan argued that although " others lend a hand [ ... ] it 's very much Stefani 's show " ; however , most others disagreed . Jason Damas of PopMatters compared the album to a second No Doubt greatest hits album , and Pitchfork Media 's Nick Sylvester felt that the large number of collaborators result in sacrificing Stefani 's identity on the album . Anthony Carew of Neumu expressed that the album 's fragmentation kept it from being " a bright @-@ and @-@ shiny pop @-@ music tour @-@ de @-@ force " . Most reviewers held that the collaborations prevented the album from having a solidified sound . Eric Greenwood wrote for Drawer B that " Stefani tries to be all things to all people here " , but that the result " comes off as manipulative and contrived . " Entertainment Weekly 's David Browne shared this opinion , stating that the album " is like one of those au courant retail magazines that resembles a catalog more than an old @-@ fashioned collection of , say , articles . " 
 Many reviewers focused on the album 's light lyrical themes . Entertainment Weekly called the references to Stefani 's clothing line " shameless " and stated that " each song becomes akin to a pricey retro fashion blurb " , and Pitchfork Media quipped that " the Joker 's free @-@ money parade through Gotham City was a much more entertaining display of wealth , and he had Prince , not just Wendy & Lisa . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine commented that the album 's " fashion fetish [ ... ] gives the album a sense of thematic cohesiveness " but that the " obsession with Harajuku girls borders on maniacal " . The Guardian disagreed with this perspective , arguing that " her affinity with Japanese pop culture [ ... ] yields a synthetic sheen [ ... ] that works well with the other point of reference , hip @-@ hop . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the Billboard Music Awards , Stefani won the Digital Song of the Year award for " Hollaback Girl " and the New Artist of the Year Award , and she performed " Luxurious " with Slim Thug at the event . At the 2005 Grammy Awards , Stefani received a nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for " What You Waiting For ? " and performed " Rich Girl " with Eve . At the next year 's awards , Stefani received five nominations for Record of the Year , Album of the Year , Best Female Pop Vocal Performance , Best Pop Vocal Album , and Best Rap / Sung Collaboration . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Love . Angel . Music . Baby. debuted at number seven on the Billboard 200 , selling 309 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . On the issue dated June 18 , 2005 , the album climbed to a new peak position of number five with 83 @,@ 000 copies sold . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the album triple platinum that December , and had sold four million copies by May 2009 . 
 The album had similar success in Europe . After entering the UK Albums Chart at number 14 with sales of 45 @,@ 484 copies , Love . Angel . Music . Baby. peaked at number four in its 25th week on the chart , on May 15 , 2005 , selling 21 @,@ 271 copies . The album was certified triple platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) on September 16 , 2005 , and has sold 1 @,@ 068 @,@ 242 copies in the United Kingdom as of March 2016 . The album was listed as the 20th best @-@ selling album of 2005 in the UK . It also reached the top 10 in Denmark , Finland , Ireland , Norway , and Sweden , and the top 20 in Austria , Belgium , France , Germany , Netherlands , and Switzerland . The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) certified the album platinum in May 2005 , denoting sales in excess of one million copies across Europe . 
 In Australia , Love . Angel . Music . Baby. topped the ARIA Albums Chart for two consecutive weeks in February 2005 and spent 56 weeks on the chart . It ended 2005 as the fourth best @-@ selling album , and was certified quadruple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 280 @,@ 000 copies . The album peaked at number three for two non @-@ consecutive weeks on the Canadian Albums Chart , and was certified five @-@ times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) in April 2006 for sales of over half a million copies . Love . Angel . Music . Baby. had sold seven million copies worldwide as of November 2006 , and became the 12th best @-@ selling album globally of 2005 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The success of the album 's urban contemporary @-@ oriented songs in the adult contemporary market allowed for the success of other artists while Stefani was pregnant and later recording The Sweet Escape . Nelly Furtado 's third album Loose was released in June 2006 and was primarily produced by and written with hip hop producers Timbaland and Danja . Furtado 's reinvention from a worldbeat singer @-@ songwriter was to Stefani 's previous forays into urban contemporary music . In his review of Loose , Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone stated that Timbaland aimed to " produce an <unk> multiformat blockbuster in the style of [ Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ] — but without Gwen . " The Black Eyed Peas member Fergie released her solo debut album The Dutchess in September 2006 . The cholas that accompanied Fergie in some of her music videos were viewed as derivatives of the Harajuku Girls and Stefani 's " Luxurious " music video . The album 's lead single " London Bridge " was paralleled to " Hollaback Girl " and the third single " Glamorous " to " Luxurious " . Fergie refuted accusations of piggybacking on Stefani 's music , stating that " this is all so ridiculous [ ... ] The Peas and I make music we love , and for others to speculate is their problem . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies an additional producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Love . Angel . Music . Baby . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Rochester Castle = 
 Rochester Castle stands on the east bank of the River Medway in Rochester , Kent , South East England . The 12th @-@ century keep or stone tower , which is the castle 's most prominent feature , is one of the best preserved in England or France . 
 Situated on the River Medway and Watling Street , Rochester served as a strategically important royal castle . During the late medieval period it helped protect England 's south @-@ east coast from invasion . The first castle at Rochester was founded in the aftermath of the Norman Conquest . It was given to Bishop Odo , probably by his half @-@ brother William the Conqueror . During the Rebellion of 1088 over the succession to the English throne , Odo supported Robert Curthose , the Conqueror 's eldest son , against William Rufus . It was during this conflict that the castle first saw military action ; the city and castle were besieged after Odo made Rochester a headquarters for the rebellion . After the garrison capitulated , this first castle was abandoned . 
 Between 1087 and 1089 , Rufus asked Gundulf , Bishop of Rochester , to build a new stone castle at Rochester . He established the current extent of the castle . Though much altered through the centuries , some parts of Gundulf 's work survive . In 1127 King Henry I granted the castle to the Archbishop of Canterbury in perpetuity . William de Corbeil built the massive keep that still dominates the castle today . Throughout the 12th century the castle remained in the custody of the archbishops . 
 During the First Barons ' War ( 1215 – 1217 ) in King John 's reign , baronial forces captured the castle from Archbishop Stephen Langton and held it against the king , who then besieged it . The Barnwell chronicler remarked " Our age has not known a siege so hard pressed nor so strongly resisted " . After resisting for just over seven weeks , the garrison surrendered . Although the castle had been greatly damaged , with breaches in the outer walls and one corner of the keep collapsed , it was hunger that eventually forced the defenders ' hand . The castle did not stay under John 's control for long : in 1216 it was captured by the French Prince Louis , who was the new leader of the baronial faction . John died and was succeeded by his son King Henry III in 1216 ; the next year , the war ended and the castle was taken under direct royal control . 
 Rochester was besieged for the third time in 1264 during the Second Barons ' War ( 1264 – 1267 ) . The castle 's royal constable , Roger de Leybourne , held Rochester in support of Henry III . Rebel armies led by Simon de Montfort and Gilbert de Clare entered the city and set about trying to capture the castle . Again the castle 's defenders resisted , though this time with a different outcome . After a week , the rebel armies raised the siege in the face of relief from Henry himself . Although the garrison did not surrender , the castle suffered extensive damage that was not repaired until the following century . The castle saw military action for the last time in 1381 when it was captured and ransacked during the Peasants ' Revolt . As Rochester Castle fell out of use its materials were reused elsewhere and custodianship relinquished by the Crown . The castle and its grounds were opened to the public in the 1870s as a park . At various points during the 19th and 20th centuries repairs were carried out . The castle is protected as a Grade I listed building and Scheduled Monument . Today the ruins are in the guardianship of English Heritage and open to the public . 
 = = Early history = = 
 Castles were introduced to England by the Normans in the 11th century and their construction , in the wake of the conquest of 1066 , helped the Normans secure their new territory . Rochester was an important city , built on the site of a Roman town at the junction of the River Medway and Watling Street , a Roman road . It has long been assumed that the first castle was located next to the river , just outside the south @-@ west corner of the town walls . The conjectural site of the early castle later became known as " Boley Hill " . Archaeologist Tom McNeill has suggested that these earliest castles in England may have been purely military in character , built to contain a large number of troops in hostile territory . 
 According to the Domesday Book of 1086 , the Bishop of Rochester was given land valued at 17s 4d in Aylesford , Kent , in compensation for land that became the site of Rochester Castle . Of the 48 castles mentioned in the survey , Rochester is the only one for which property @-@ owners were reimbursed when their land was taken to build the castle . From the 11th century the castle @-@ guard was a feudal obligation in England . This often took the form of knights garrisoning castles for their lords for a set period . There is no comprehensive list of which castles were owed service in this form , but military historian Cathcart King notes that they seem to have been predominantly high @-@ status castles . Rochester 's castle @-@ guard consisted of 60 knights ' fees , marking it as a particularly important fortification . 
 It was probably William the Conqueror who gave the city and its castle to Bishop Odo of Bayeux , the king 's half brother . On William 's death in September 1087 his territories were divided between his two sons . Robert , the elder , inherited the title of Duke of Normandy and William Rufus became King of England . A significant number of Norman barons objected to dividing Normandy and England , and Bishop Odo supported Robert 's claim to the English throne . Several others , including the earls of Northumberland and Shrewsbury and the Bishop of Coutances came out in support of Robert . Odo prepared Rochester Castle for war and it became one of the headquarters of the rebellion . Its position in Kent made it a suitable base for raids on London and its garrison could harry William 's forces in the county . William set off from London and marched towards Rochester to deal with the threat . Before he arrived , news reached the king that Odo had gone to Pevensey Castle , which was under the control of Robert , Count of Mortain . William turned away from Rochester and seized Pevensey . The captured Odo was forced to swear to hand over Rochester to William 's men . The king despatched a force with Odo in tow to demand Rochester 's surrender . Instead of yielding , the garrison sallied and captured the entire party . In response William laid siege to the city and castle . Contemporary chronicler Orderic Vitalis recorded that the siege began in May 1088 . Two siege @-@ castles were built to cut off the city 's supply lines and to protect the besiegers from sorties . Conditions within the city were dire : disease was rampant , exacerbated by the heat and flies . The garrison ultimately capitulated and terms were agreed . Odo , Eustace , Count of Boulogne , and Robert de Belleme , son of the Earl of Shrewsbury , were allowed to march away with their weapons and horses but their estates in England were confiscated . This marked the end of the castle 's role in the rebellion , and the fortification was probably abandoned shortly afterwards . The siege @-@ castles were abandoned after the conclusion of the siege and have since vanished . 
 After the abandonment of Rochester 's first castle it was replaced by another on the current site , in the south @-@ west corner of the town walls . Founded between 1087 and 1089 , some parts of the castle survive although it has been much altered by use and reuse in subsequent centuries . William the Conqueror had granted Lanfranc , Archbishop of Canterbury , the manor of Haddenham in Buckinghamshire – which as of the Domesday Survey had an annual income of £ 40 – for the duration of his life . In turn , the archbishop had granted the manor to Rochester 's monks , so on the Conqueror 's death Lanfranc and Gundulf , who was appointed Bishop of Rochester in 1077 , had to appeal for reconfirmation of the original grant from the new king . William Rufus demanded £ 100 in exchange for confirmation of the grant . The two bishops felt such a sum was beyond their means and sought a compromise . Instead it was agreed that Gundulf would build a new stone castle at Rochester . Initially the two bishops were concerned that the cost would exceed the king 's original request and that they would be responsible for the castle 's upkeep . However Henry , Earl of Warwick , convinced them that a castle suitable for the king could be constructed for £ 40 and that following its completion the castle would be handed over to someone else . The actual cost to Gundulf was £ 60 . The bishop was a skilled architect and supervised the construction of the Tower of London 's eponymous White Tower on behalf of William the Conqueror . Gundulf 's castle was adjacent to Rochester Cathedral . According to archaeologist Oliver Creighton , when castles were positioned close to churches or cathedrals it suggested a link between the two , and in this case both were owned by the Bishop of Rochester . Often the same craftsmen and architects would work on these closely related buildings , leading to similarities in some of their features . Along with Durham and Old Sarum , Rochester is one of the best examples of a closely linked castle and religious building . 
 In 1127 King Henry I granted Rochester Castle to the Archbishop of Canterbury , William de Corbeil , and his successors in perpetuity . He was given permission to build " a fortification or tower within the castle and keep and hold it forever " . Corbeil is responsible for building the great tower or keep that still stands today , albeit in an altered state . The 12th century saw many castles in England rebuilt in stone , an advancement in sophistication of design and technology . Although Rochester had already been given a stone curtain wall by Bishop Gundulf , the Keep dates from this period . It visually dominated the rest of the castle , towering above its outer walls , and acted as a residence containing the castle 's best accommodation . A sturdy fortification , it could also serve as a stronghold in the event of military action . Such was the importance of the keep as a symbol of Rochester it was depicted on the town 's seal in the 13th century . 
 Construction progressed at a rate of about 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) per year . It was probably finished before Corbeil died in 1138 and definitely before 1141 , when Robert , Earl of Gloucester , was imprisoned there during the Anarchy of King Stephen 's reign . It is likely that after the keep was built there was no further building activity in the 12th century , although the structure was maintained . Though held by the Archbishops of Canterbury under the king , the monarch was still responsible for financially supporting the castle . Continuous records of royal expenditures known as " Pipe Rolls " began in the reign of Henry II , and included in the rolls are details of expenditure on Rochester Castle 's upkeep . During the 12th century , these were generally small figures , but in 1172 – 1173 more than £ 100 was spent on the castle , coinciding with the rebellion of Henry II 's sons . Following the fall of Normandy in 1204 to the French forces of King Philip II , King John increased his expenditure on the castles in south @-@ east England in preparation for a possible invasion . Amongst these was Rochester and in 1206 John spent £ 115 on the castle 's ditches , keep , and other structures . Under England 's Angevin kings royal castles in south @-@ east England were invested in to protect the country from invasion ; Rochester was one of the most important . 
 = = King John = = 
 Custody of Rochester Castle remained with the Archbishops of Canterbury until the end of the 12th century . Despite ascending to the throne in 1199 King John did not confirm Hubert Walter as the castle 's custodian until July 1202 . John may have wished to regain direct control of what was an important castle . The crisis of John 's rule began in 1212 with the discovery of a plot to overthrow him . Defeat at the Battle of Bouvines in July 1214 marked the end of John 's ambitions to retake Normandy and exacerbated the situation in England . He returned to England in October and a few months later barons in the north of England were actively challenging his rule . A group of barons renounced their feudal ties to John in May 1215 , and they captured London , Lincoln , and Exeter . John persuaded Stephen Langton , the new Archbishop of Canterbury , to cede control of Rochester Castle to a royal constable , Reginald de Cornhill . Under the terms of the agreement , the castle was to revert to the control of the archbishop at Easter 1215 . This period was later extended to Easter 1216 . Letters Patent dated 25 May 1215 requested that other royal constables would take over from Cornhill . The castle would still be returned to the archbishop when the agreement expired or if peace was restored to the kingdom before Easter 1216 . In the meantime , control reverted to Langton whom John had asked to hold the castle " in such a way that by it no ill or harm shall come to us or our kingdom " . 
 John met the rebel barons at Runnymede , and on 19 June 1215 they renewed their vows of fealty . A peace treaty , which later became known as Magna Carta , was sealed . Shortly after the treaty the agreement between John and Langton to appoint a royal constable in charge of Rochester Castle was dissolved , returning control to the archbishop . The peace did not last and the First Barons ' War broke out . A group of rebels headed to Rochester to hold the city against John . The events surrounding the rebels ' takeover of the castle are unclear , but contemporary chronicler Ralph of Coggeshall recorded that the king demanded Langton hand over the castle to royal control and the archbishop refused . Although Langton held out against the king 's demands , the rebels feared he would eventually cave to pressure from the king and seized control of Rochester Castle for themselves . According to Ralph of Coggeshall , this was done with the consent of the castle 's constable , Reginald de Cornhill , who seems to have switched allegiance from the king to the archbishop after John appointed him as royal constable of the castle . Langton left the country that same month , leaving the castle in the hands of the king 's enemies . In a letter that year to justiciar Hubert de Burgh John expressed his anger towards Langton , calling him " a notorious traitor to us , since he did not render our castle of Rochester to us in our so great need . " After this point , Rochester Castle was no longer considered to be in the perpetual custody of the archbishops of Canterbury . 
 At the time , John was in south @-@ east England recruiting mercenaries in preparation for his war with the barons . Rochester blocked the direct route to London , which was also held by the rebels . According to Roger of Wendover , the rebels at Rochester were led by William d 'Aubigny , lord of Belvoir . Estimates of the size of Rochester 's garrison vary , with the chroniclers ' figures ranging from 95 to 140 knights , supported by crossbowmen , sergeants , and others . Hearing the news that the city was in enemy hands , John immediately rode to Rochester and arrived on 13 October . Royal forces had arrived ahead of John and entered the city on 11 October , taking it by surprise and laying siege to the castle . Rochester bridge was pulled down to prevent the arrival of a relief force from London . The siege that followed was the largest in England up to that point , and would take nearly two months . 
 Boley Hill to the south of the castle may have been used as John 's headquarters during the siege . According to the Barnwell chronicler , five siege engines hurled a barrage of stones at the castle 's wall day and night . These were supported by missiles from smaller bows and crossbows . Though the Barnwell chronicler claimed they smashed a hole in the castle 's outer walls , Roger of Wendover asserted they were ineffective and that John turned to other methods to breach the defences . A letter dated 14 October indicates John was preparing to undermine the castle 's walls . He wrote to Canterbury , asking for the production " by day and night of as many picks as you are able " and that they be sent to Rochester . On 26 October a relief force of 700 horse was sent from London . They turned back before arriving , perhaps because they heard the king was advancing to meet them . 
 When the castle 's outer walls were eventually breached , the defenders retreated to the relative safety of the keep . It too withstood the efforts of the siege engines , and once again John turned to mining to bring down the walls . The mine was dug beneath the south @-@ east corner of the keep . A letter sent from Rochester on 25 November offers insight into the methods of medieval siegecraft . John ordered Hugh de Burgh to " send to us with all speed by day and night forty of the fattest pigs of the sort least good for eating to bring fire beneath the tower " . The wooden props supporting the tunnel dug beneath the keep were set alight to collapse the mine , bringing down one corner of the keep . Still the garrison held out and sought safety behind the stone partition or cross @-@ wall in the keep , abandoning half the building . The Barnwell chronicler remarked that " for such was the structure of the stronghold that a very strong wall separated the half that had fallen from the other " . 
 Conditions within the keep worsened by the day and the garrison were reduced to eating horse flesh . In an attempt to reduce the demand on limited provisions , some members were sent out of the keep , beginning with those least capable of fighting . Some sources record that they had their hands and feet amputated by the besiegers . On 30 November the garrison eventually surrendered and were taken captive . Initially John wanted to execute them all as was the custom of the time when a garrison had forced a long and bloody conflict . Savaric de <unk> , one of John 's captains , persuaded the king otherwise , concerned that similar treatment would be shown to royal garrisons by the rebels . Only one person was executed : a <unk> who had previously been in the service of the king since childhood was hanged . Many of the rebels were imprisoned , sent to royal castles such as Corfe for safe @-@ keeping . Of the siege the Barnwell chronicler wrote , " Our age has not known a siege so hard pressed nor so strongly resisted ... Afterwards few cared to put their trust in castles " . Prince Louis of France , son of Philip II , was invited by the barons to become the new leader of the rebellion and become king in the event of their victory . In 1216 he arrived in England and captured Rochester Castle ; it is not known how , however , as no documentary evidence recording the event survives . 
 = = Henry III = = 
 John died in 1216 and was succeeded by his nine @-@ year @-@ old son , Henry , with the support of the barons . With no prospect of becoming King of England , Louis returned to France . Rochester Castle was returned to royal control in 1217 . Given the damage incurred during John 's siege , the castle was in dire need of repairs . Between 1217 and 1237 around £ 680 were spent on repairs , of which £ 530 were taken up by work on the keep . In 1225 and 1226 the town walls were enhanced by the addition of a ditch at the cost of £ 300 . The new ditch enclosed Boley Hill , possibly to deny the position to future aggressors who might attack the castle . Repairs began with the castle 's outer curtain wall . At the same time a chapel was built within the castle . In 1226 the hall , buttery , and dispensary were repaired . Work probably did not begin on the keep until 1226 . It was mostly repaired by 1227 , but work continued on it until 1232 . During 1230 and 1231 a stone wall dividing the castle 's enclosure into two parts was built which no longer survives . While attention was paid to making the castle a working fortification , Henry III also funded construction of residential and other buildings . In 1244 , £ 132 was spent on building a second chapel next to the royal apartments . Stables and an almonry were added in 1248 . The main gatehouse was rebuilt between 1249 and 1250 at a cost of over £ 120 . Further repairs were carried out on the keep in 1256 , this time costing more than £ 120 . Later in the decade further attention was paid to the castle 's defences , possibly in response to Henry III 's worsening relations with his barons . 
 Henry III 's reign was in crisis in 1258 . He had recently suffered defeat in Wales , there were agricultural problems leading to a famine , and relations with the pope were worsening . Discontent amongst England 's magnates led Henry to promise reform , but under continued pressure his authority disintegrated . A royal council of fifteen magnates was formed in June that year , and the rule of the country transferred from the king to the council . With foreign help Henry 's reign was restored in 1261 as the council were reluctant to start a civil war . Simon de Montfort , Earl of Leicester , raised a rebellion . In 1264 civil war broke out between those loyal to the king and the baronial forces led by de Montfort . 
 Rochester 's constable in 1264 , Roger de Leybourne , held the castle in support of Henry . John de Warenne , Earl of Surrey , was the garrison 's co @-@ commander . A baronial army led by Gilbert de Clare , Earl of Hertford , laid siege to the castle on 17 April that year . Having marched from the earl 's castle to Tonbridge the army attacked from the Rochester side of the river , either the south or west . While the army advanced towards the city the royalist garrison set alight the suburbs . The king 's hall within the castle was also burned down , although it is unclear why . An army under Simon de Montfort marched from London with the intention of attacking the city from another direction . The earl 's first two attempts to cross the Medway were fought back , but he was successful on 18 April , Good Friday . The method used is uncertain , although it involved a fire @-@ ship . The smoke may have been used as cover for the rebels , or the ship may have been used to burn the bridge while the army travelled by water . In a co @-@ ordinated attack that had been pre @-@ arranged , the armies of de Montfort and de Clare attacked the city . They entered Rochester in the evening and that night the cathedral was raided . The following day the rebels captured the castle 's outer enclosure and the royal garrison retreated to the keep . Because the next day was Easter Sunday there was no fighting , though hostilities resumed on the Monday . Siege engines were set up and targeted the keep . As in 1215 the keep proved resistant to missiles , and after a week had not succumbed . According to one contemporary source , the besiegers were about to dig a mine beneath the tower , but the siege was abandoned on 26 April when the earls received news of a relief force led by Henry III and his son , Prince Edward . 
 = = Later history = = 
 Though the garrison had held out within the keep , the rest of the castle had incurred severe damage , but no attempt was made to carry out repairs until the reign of Edward III ( 1327 – 1377 ) . It was noted in 1275 that the castle 's constables had not only failed to make any effort to repair the structure but had caused further damage : they stole stone from the castle for reuse elsewhere . In 1281 John of Cobham , the constable , was granted permission to pull down the castle 's hall and chambers which had been left as burnt @-@ out ruins after the 1264 siege . Numerous surveys in the following century bear testament to the castle 's sorry state and follow its steady decline . A survey from 1340 estimated that repairs would cost around £ 600 , however another conducted 23 years later stated that it would cost £ 3 @,@ 333 6s 8d . Natural weathering worsened the condition of the castle , and in 1362 a " great wind " damaged the structure . By 1369 few of the castle 's buildings still stood : the keep , gatehouses , a hall , kitchen , and stable were all that survived , and even then in a state of ruin . Although it too was in desperate need of repair , the keep was still in use and was the centre of the domestic life at the castle . 
 Between May 1367 and September 1370 repairs costing £ 2 @,@ 262 were carried out . Records show that sections of the curtain wall were repaired and two mural towers built , one of them replacing a tower on the same site . The towers were positioned north @-@ east of the keep and still stand . Although more work was undertaken between 1370 and 1377 , the year of Edward 's death , what it consisted of is unknown . The royal apartments built during Henry III 's reign were never repaired ; it has been suggested this was because by the 14th century , when considerable sums were being spent on repairs elsewhere in the castle , Rochester had fallen out of favour as a royal residence . As the castle 's importance as a high @-@ status residence waned , its role as a barracks and administrative centre came to the fore . The reign of Richard II ( 1377 – 1400 ) saw the investment of £ 500 in repairing the castle . This was in part in response to French raids on England 's southern coast during the Hundred Years ' War as England 's fortunes in the conflict worsened . The most significant of these works was the construction of a tower at the north end of the castle , overlooking the bridge over the Medway . Records document the sum of £ 350 spent on a new tower between 1378 and 1383 , and it mostly likely refers to the one guarding the bridge . Rochester Castle saw fighting for the final time during the Peasants ' Revolt of 1381 . It was besieged and captured by a group of rebels who plundered the castle and released a prisoner . It has been suggested that the £ 66 10s spent in 1384 – 1388 and the £ 91 13s spent in 1395 – 1397 may have been partially in response to damage incurred during the revolt . 
 During the reigns of Henry IV ( 1399 – 1413 ) and his successor Henry V ( 1413 – 1422 ) , Rochester Castle was in the guardianship of William , Earl of Arundel and his brother Richard . The castle was given to Henry V 's widow , Catherine of Valois , in 1423 as part of her dower to support her financially . She died in 1437 , at which point the castle came under the custodianship of the clerk of the King 's works . Despite this , there are no records of building work during the 15th century and almost nothing is known about Rochester Castle between then and the second half of the 16th century . The decline of the castle 's military significance is marked by the leasing of the surrounding ditch , beginning in 1564 at the latest . Between 1599 and 1601 stone from Rochester Castle was reused to build nearby Upnor Castle , an artillery fort . 
 Diarist Samuel Pepys commented on the condition of Rochester Castle , and as early as the 17th century the castle may have acted as a tourist attraction . By this time many castles were in a state of ruin , and Rochester was amongst those in need of repair , although still in use . In 1610 James I granted Sir Anthony Weldon control of the castle . During the English Civil War , Weldon declared for the Parliamentarian cause . The castle did not see fighting during the war , even though the city was captured by Royalists in 1648 ; this may indicate that the castle was not a serviceable fortification by this point . Weldon 's support for the Parliamentarians may have spared the castle from slighting ( demolition ) in the aftermath , a fate shared by many other castles . Walker Weldon inherited the castle and carried out the destruction of part of the outer wall in the 18th century to sell off the building material ; he had originally intended to dismantle more of the castle , but the plans were abandoned . A drawing from around this time suggests that the cross wall had been removed by this point . While other parts of the castle were dismantled , the two towers in the south @-@ east wall were still being used for accommodation . In 1743 prisoners were held at the castle , probably in huts . Rochester Castle descended through the Weldon family until it was bequeathed to Thomas Blechynden in the 18th century . By 1774 Robert Child was in possession of the castle , and it remained in the possession of his family until 1884 . There were unsuccessful plans in 1780 to reuse Rochester Castle as an army barracks , after the commander of the Royal Engineers for Chatham , Colonel Hugh <unk> , asked the Child family for permission . The castle ruins inspired a painting by artist J. M. W. Turner in the late 18th century , one of his first oil paintings . Turner was renowned for his love of nature and was at the forefront of the picturesque movement , during which such ruins became fashionable . 
 By the 19th century , gardens were created within the castle 's enclosure . Charles Dickens lived in Rochester and included the castle ruins in The Pickwick Papers and The Mystery of Edwin <unk> . Through the words of one of his characters , Dickens described the castle as a " glorious pile – frowning wall – tottering arches – dark nooks – crumbling stones " . Many of England 's historic buildings , particularly ruins , have acquired myths and legends , and some are rumoured to be haunted . Rochester is no exception , and is reportedly haunted by a white lady . Dickens is also said to haunt the moat on Christmas Eve . 
 The 19th century saw efforts to preserve the castle . In 1826 repairs were made to the well in the keep . At the same time a survey was carried out by A. W. N. Pugin and he excavated around the keep , investigating how it was built . He descended into the well in a bucket in an unsuccessful search for treasure . Victor Child Villiers , 7th Earl of Jersey , leased the castle to the Corporation of Rochester in 1870 for use as a public park ; when it opened to the public in 1872 , Rochester Castle was presented as a picturesque ruin , with trees planted in the enclosure and the walls overgrown with ivy . In 1884 the Corporation bought the castle for £ 6 @,@ 572 ( equivalent to £ 3 @.@ 4 million in 2009 terms ) . Between 1896 and 1904 , George Payne carried out repairs . In the first quarter of the century the gardens acquired a German field gun and a tank from the First World War , and a bandstand , though they were removed by 1961 . Ivy was removed from the keep between 1919 and 1931 and the planting in the castles scaled back . In 1960 the origin of Boley Hill was investigated archaeologically , but the excavations failed to provide firm dating evidence . 
 The castle 's state was assessed in 1961 , and the cost of repairs estimated at £ 30 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 1 @.@ 1 million in 2009 terms ) . The Ministry of Public Building and Works took over care of the castle from the Corporation of Rochester in 1965 . Records of the Ministry 's conservation work have gone missing , so precisely what was done is unclear . Between 1962 and 1965 the council removed buildings from the castle 's ditch . Guardianship transferred to English Heritage in 1984 . Since 1995 the City of Rochester has been responsible for daily management of the castle . <unk> at the start of the 21st century contributed to the decay of the keep , and one of the mural towers was in need of maintenance . Due to the decayed state of the keep , public access is restricted and netting has been erected to protect visitors . The possibility of adding floors and a roof to the keep was discussed in the 1970s and 1990s , but there were concerns that a roof would change the climate within the building . The castle is a Scheduled Monument , a " nationally important " historic building and archaeological site which has been given protection against unauthorised change . It is also a Grade I listed building , and recognised as an internationally important structure . The castle is open to the public . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Little is known about the design of the first castle at Rochester as it has since vanished , and even the exact site is uncertain . It most likely took the form of a motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle , with a mound and an outer enclosure defended by a timber palisade and earthen banks . Boley Hill has been suggested as the site of the first castle , an outwork reinforcing the castle 's defences , or an abandoned siege castle like those documented in the 1088 siege . Boley Hill is a natural outcrop of rock , and could have acted as a motte . 
 The castle built by Bishop Gundulf in the late 12th century was enclosed by a stone wall . Situated in the south @-@ west corner of the city , the castle used the remains of the Roman town walls as foundations . The circuit had at least one tower ; it was replaced in the 14th century . The original gateway was radically altered in the 13th or 14th century . From across the River Medway , the twin landmarks of Rochester 's castle and cathedral would have dominated the medieval landscape , symbolic of the authority of the church and nobility in the period . Most castles were built by secular nobles , but the work by Gundulf and his successor Corbeil provide examples of the role of the church in castle building . 
 According to military historian Allen Brown Rochester 's keep is " among the finest and oldest in all England " . Since its construction it underwent limited alteration , aside from the rebuilding of one corner , and although now in a state of ruin it remains significantly intact and is considered one of the most important surviving 12th @-@ century keeps in England and France . The keep was richly decorated with hangings and furnishings . Dating from the second quarter of the 12th century , it is Rochester Castle 's dominant feature . It had a square plan , and measures 70 by 70 feet ( 21 by 21 m ) externally with pilaster buttresses at each corner . The keep was built in the castle 's southern corner , close to the curtain wall . The primary building material was local Kentish Ragstone , although Caen stone used to face the keep was imported from Normandy . The same material was imported for the Tower of London 's White Tower in the 11th century . The tops of the turrets rise 125 feet ( 38 m ) above the ground , 12 ft above the battlements . Below the latter are rectangular holes , marking where wooden hoarding would have been attached . Though 12 ft thick at the base , the walls of the keep taper to 10 ft at the top . It is the tallest keep in England , and only those at Dover , the Tower of London , Colchester , and Norwich are larger . During John 's siege of Rochester in 1215 , the south @-@ east corner collapsed ; during Henry III 's reign it was rebuilt as a cylinder . The windows increase in size higher up the walls , although only the uppermost were decorated . A spiral staircase in the north @-@ east corner provided access to all floors , and another in the south @-@ west corner went from the first floor to the top floor . The north @-@ west corner tower contains small chambers , and the south @-@ east probably had a similar layout before it was rebuilt . 
 Keeps were traditionally built with an entrance at first @-@ floor level , and Rochester 's follows this pattern . A forebuilding attached to the north side guarded the entrance . A stone staircase began on the west side of the keep before turning and meeting the forebuilding , which could be entered by crossing a drawbridge across a gap 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) wide . There was another entrance in the west of the forebuilding , and at some point a new doorway was knocked through to the keep at the bottom of the drawbridge pit . The original door from the forebuilding into the keep was protected by a portcullis . 
 The stone @-@ built keeps of the 11th century generally had simple plans , with few rooms and an uncomplicated layout . Rochester 's keep bears testament to a developing complexity , and provides an early example of a keep divided into separate areas for the lord and his retinue . The thickness of the walls allowed rooms to be built into them , as can also be seen at the Hedingham Castle 's contemporaneous keep , or the slightly later one at Dover . The keep 's interior is divided for its entire height by a cross wall running east – west . The ground floor was used for storage , with the three storeys above providing accommodation . The first floor probably contained a hall and great chamber , divided by the cross wall . This level may have been the accommodation of the castle 's constable who looked after it during the owner 's absence . There is a room called " Gundulf 's Chamber " built into the thickness of the wall in the north @-@ west corner ; it may well have been the constable 's private chamber . The second floor contained the keep 's best accommodation and some of its most elaborate decoration . It is 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) high and surrounded by a gallery in its upper half built into the thickness of the walls . The floor also had a chapel measuring about 28 by 15 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 by 4 @.@ 6 m ) . At some unknown point in the post @-@ medieval period , a fire gutted the keep , leaving it in its present state without floors or a roof . On the second floor , there are openings in the cross wall , broken by a series of Romanesque columns between round @-@ headed arches . The cross wall carried a well shaft , with a well @-@ head at each floor . The third floor had a second chapel and access to the roof , and may have held additional accommodation . 
 The current entrance in the north @-@ east occupies the approximate location of the main gatehouse constructed by Gundulf and then rebuilt during 1249 – 1250 . It was pulled down in the 1870s when the enclosure was converted into a municipal garden . An engraving from 1735 by the Buck brothers gives some indication of the gatehouse 's form : the gate was an archway between two towers projecting from the curtain wall . It was reached by a stone causeway across a ditch , rather than a drawbridge . A tower containing a postern gate was located in the north @-@ west corner of the enclosure , built at the close of the 14th century to guard the bridge over the Medway . The tower and postern no longer stands , but 19th @-@ century antiquary and engineer G. T. Clark made some notes on the structure while it was still standing and commented that it had mechanisms to lift supplies for the castle from the river . The western part of the stone outer wall , a stretch facing the river , dates from when Gundulf built the first wall enclosing the castle . In the 19th century a revetment was added to strengthen the decaying wall . Like the keep , it was constructed using Kentish Ragstone . This part of Gundulf 's wall was 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) thick at the base , narrowing to 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) at the top ; it rose to a height of around 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) . Four embrasures were added to this part of the wall in the 13th century , although the builders imitated Norman design . At the northern end of the 12th @-@ century stretch of western wall are the remains of a building , probably a hall , dating from the 13th century . Although no longer standing , it is known it had a vaulted undercroft . 
 In the south Gundulf 's wall survived into the modern period , although has now been dismantled . The current wall is a 19th @-@ century replacement . At the eastern end of this wall , near the southern corner of the castle , is a two @-@ storey rounded tower 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) in diameter dating from the early 13th century . It was built to fill the breach in the curtain wall caused when John 's army besieged the castle and to reinforce a weak point in the defences . The section from the tower to the location of the former main gatehouse in the north @-@ east dates from about 1367 to 1370 . Two towers were built along the wall , each two storeys high and again using Kentish Ragstone . The one nearest the keep is relatively plain and the northernmost one more elaborate . The latter was intended for use as a residence and in the modern period was converted into a cottage . The wall between these two towers was reduced in the modern period , possibly to give a better view of the cathedral . Apart from the west side , the castle was surrounded by a ditch , much of which has since been filled in . 
 = Texas State Highway 168 = 
 State Highway 168 ( SH 168 or TX 168 ) is a short state highway located entirely within the city of Galveston in the U.S. state of Texas . The highway connects SH 87 to Coast Guard Station Galveston , on the eastern portion of Galveston Island . At just under 0 @.@ 9 miles ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) in length , the highway is the second @-@ shortest in the state , and the shortest signed highway ( <unk> , which is shorter , is officially designated but not signed ) . The road travels along the edge of residential area for most of its length before it bends northeast and runs through a small marsh . 
 The route was first proposed in 1933 ; it would have traveled through <unk> and Wilson counties . Portions of the proposal were replaced by SH 97 by at least 1936 , while the rest was cancelled . State Highway 87 first followed the routing of SH 168 , but was moved by 1961 . A short railroad spur was built along the course of the route , and SH 168 was officially designated in 1986 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Highway 168 begins at an at @-@ grade intersection with SH 87 , or Ferry Road , on the eastern portion of Galveston Island . The highway runs eastward for a short distance , being bordered by an apartment complex and a small gas station . After bending northward , the road enters rural areas , while following the course of a small , man @-@ made drainage creek . The roadway continues northwest , bordered by marsh and brushland to the east and several resorts and apartment complexes to the west . It bends northeast and proceeds past a small portion of a U.S. Coast Guard station . The route splits away from the creek and continues past Corps Woods Nature Sanctuary , a major birdwatching destination . The highway intersects a small access road to the Coast Guard station , before continuing northward to its northern terminus , the main entrance gate to the Coast Guard facility . A small road continues inside the station from the gate . 
 The highway is maintained by the Texas Department of Transportation ( TxDOT ) . Part of the TxDOT 's job is to measure traffic along the highway . These counts are taken using a metric called annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles that travel along a portion of the highway . The TxDOT usually measures AADT near an intersection . In 2011 , the highway 's AADT count was 1500 vehicles , taken at a point just after the intersection with SH 87 . This was an increase from the previous year , when the AADT at the same point was approximately 1400 vehicles . This was also an increase from 2009 , when the route 's AADT was just 1100 vehicles , also taken from the same point . No portion of the roadway is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 State Highway 168 was first proposed in 1933 , traveling from Campbellton in <unk> County northeastward to Floresville in Wilson County before bending further eastward and terminating at SH 81 . The proposal was listed as a conditional designation , meaning that it would not be maintained by the State Highway Commission . However , by 1935 , the portion traveling from Floresville to SH 81 , a distance of approximately 11 miles ( 18 km ) , was designated as a portion of SH 97 , while the rest of the proposed State Highway 168 was cancelled . On September 26 , 1939 , SH 87 was designated to a road that followed the general course of present @-@ day SH 168 . 
 By 1961 , the highway had been shifted westward , but a spur of the Gulf , Colorado and Santa Fe Railroad had been constructed along the approximate location of the highway 's present route . On October 24 , 1985 , SH 168 was approved for designation by the Texas Transportation Commission ( TTC ) , and on April 18 , 1986 the highway was officially designated by the TxDOT 's Administration Circle . At the time , the road was approximately 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) in length . By 1994 , the highway had been extended to approximately 0 @.@ 9 miles ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) in length , due to an extension of its northern terminus . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire highway is in Galveston , Galveston County . 
 = Alvin M. Weinberg = 
 Alvin Martin Weinberg ( April 20 , 1915 – October 18 , 2006 ) was an American nuclear physicist who was the administrator at Oak Ridge National Laboratory ( ORNL ) during and after the Manhattan Project . He came to Oak Ridge , Tennessee , in 1945 and remained there until his death in 2006 . He was the first to use the term " Faustian bargain " to describe nuclear energy . 
 A graduate of the University of Chicago , which awarded him his doctorate in mathematical biophysics in 1939 , Weinberg joined the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory in September 1941 . The following year he became part of Eugene Wigner 's Theoretical Group , whose task was to design the nuclear reactors that would convert uranium into plutonium . 
 Weinberg replaced Wigner as Director of Research at ORNL in 1948 , and became director of the laboratory in 1955 . Under his direction it worked on the Aircraft Nuclear Propulsion program , and pioneered many innovative reactor designs , including the pressurized water reactors ( PWRs ) and boiling water reactors ( BWRs ) , which have since become the dominant reactor types in commercial nuclear power plants , and Aqueous Homogeneous Reactor designs . 
 In 1960 , Weinberg was appointed to the President 's Science Advisory Committee in the Eisenhower administration and later served on it in the Kennedy administration . After leaving the ORNL in 1973 , he was named director of the Office of Energy Research and Development in Washington , D.C. , in 1974 . The following year he founded and became the first director of the Institute for Energy Analysis at Oak Ridge Associated Universities ( ORAU ) . 
 = = Early years in Chicago = = 
 Alvin Martin Weinberg was born April 20 , 1915 in Chicago , Illinois , the son of Jacob Weinberg and Emma Levinson Weinberg , two Russian Jewish emigrants who met in 1905 on board the boat carrying them to the United States . He had an older sister , Fay , who was born on November 30 , 1910 . She later became a sociology professor at the University of the Pacific . He attended Theodore Roosevelt High School in Chicago . 
 Weinberg entered the University of Chicago , from which he received his Bachelor of Science ( B.S. ) degree in Physics in 1935 , and his Master of Science ( M.S. ) in Physics the following year . He received his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in mathematical biophysics in 1939 , writing his thesis on Mathematical foundations for a theory of biophysical periodicity , under the supervision of Carl Eckart . Weinberg later lamented that , in restricting his thesis to linear systems , he had overlooked interesting nonlinear systems that Ilya Prigogine later received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for studying . 
 While at Chicago , Weinberg was hired by the family of Margaret Despres , a student at the University of Chicago , to tutor her in mathematics . They were married on June 14 , 1940 . They had two sons , David Robert Weinberg and Richard J. Weinberg . 
 = = Metallurgical Laboratory = = 
 Weinberg taught courses at Wright Junior College . He applied for and received a National Research Council fellowship to study under Kenneth S. Cole at Columbia University , but never took it up , as Cole came to Chicago to work on the Manhattan Project as a radiation biologist . Weinberg was recruited to work at its Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago in September 1941 by Eckart and Samuel Allison , who needed someone to work on the latter 's neutron capture calculations . 
 In early 1942 , Arthur Compton concentrated the Manhattan Project 's various teams working on plutonium at the University of Chicago . This brought in many top scientists including Herbert Anderson , Bernard Feld , Enrico Fermi , Leó Szilárd and Walter Zinn from Columbia , and Edward Creutz , Gilbert Plass , Eugene Wigner and John Wheeler from Princeton University . Weinberg became a protégé of Wigner . 
 Wigner led the Theoretical Group at the Metallurgical Laboratory that included Alvin Weinberg , Katharine Way , Gale Young and Edward Creutz . The group 's task was to design the production nuclear reactors that would convert uranium into plutonium . At the time , reactors existed only on paper , and no reactor had yet gone critical . In July 1942 , Wigner chose a conservative 100 MW design , with a graphite neutron moderator and water cooling . The choice of water as a coolant was controversial at the time . Water was known to absorb neutrons , thereby reducing the efficiency of the reactor , but Wigner was confident that his group 's calculations were correct and that water would work , while the technical difficulties involved in using helium or liquid metal as a coolants would delay the project . 
 After the United States Army Corps of Engineers took over the Manhattan Project , it gave responsibility for the detailed design and construction of the reactors to DuPont . There was friction between the company and Wigner and his team . Major differences between Wigner 's reactor design and DuPont 's included increasing the number of process tubes from 1 @,@ 500 in a circular array to 2 @,@ 004 in a square array , and cutting the power from 500 MW to 250 MW . As it turned out , the design decision by DuPont to give the reactor additional tubes came in handy when neutron poisoning became a problem for the B Reactor at the Hanford Site . The extra tubes allowed a greater fuel load to overcome the poisoning . Without them the reactor would have had to be run at low power until enough of the boron impurities in the graphite had been burned up to allow it to reach full power , which would have delayed full operation by up to a year . 
 As the reactors at Hanford came online , the Metallurgical Laboratory turned its attention back to theoretical designs . The discovery of spontaneous fission in reactor @-@ bred plutonium due to contamination by plutonium @-@ 240 led Wigner to propose switching to breeding uranium @-@ 233 from thorium , but the challenge was met by the Los Alamos Laboratory developing an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon design . Wigner was also intrigued by the possibility of doing away with much of the complexities of a reactor by having the uranium in solution or a slurry in heavy water . The Metallurgical Laboratory attempted to find a way of doing this . 
 Amongst the competing designs , Weinberg proposed the pressurized water reactor , which ultimately became the most common design . This was only one of the many possibilities discussed by Weinberg and his colleagues at Chicago and Oak Ridge . Later , he wrote : 
 In these early days we explored all sorts of power reactors , comparing the advantages and disadvantages of each type . The number of possibilities was enormous , since there are many possibilities for each component of a reactor — fuel , coolant , moderator . The fissile material may be 233U , 235U , or 239Pu ; the coolant may be : water , heavy water , gas , or liquid metal ; the moderator may be : water , heavy water , beryllium , graphite — or , in a <unk> neutron reactor , no moderator . I have calculated that , if one counted all the combinations of fuel , coolant , and moderator , one could identify about a thousand distinct reactors . Thus , at the very beginning of nuclear power , we had to choose which possibilities to pursue , which to ignore . 
 The ultimate success of the pressurized water reactor , he wrote , was due less to any superior characteristics of water , but rather to the decision to power the prototype of the Mark I submarine thermal reactor with a pressurized version of the Materials Testing Reactor at Oak Ridge . Once pressurized water was established , other possibilities became too expensive to pursue , but Weinberg remained interested in other possibilities . According to Freeman Dyson , he was the only nuclear pioneer who supported the wide universe of reactor designs . 
 = = Work at Oak Ridge = = 
 In 1945 , Wigner accepted a position as the Director of Research at the Clinton Laboratories in Oak Ridge , Tennessee , which then had a staff of about 800 . He took with him his protégés Gale Young , Katherine Way and Weinberg . Weinberg , who was the first to arrive at Oak Ridge in May 1945 , became head of the Physics Division in 1946 . But after the Atomic Energy Commission took over responsibility for the laboratory 's operations from the Manhattan Project at the start of 1947 , Wigner , feeling unsuited to a managerial role in the new environment , left Oak Ridge at the end of summer in 1947 and returned to Princeton University . 
 The administration of the Clinton Laboratories passed from Monsanto to the University of Chicago in May 1947 , and then to Union Carbide in December 1947 . The Atomic Energy Commission 's influential General Advisory Committee , chaired by J. Robert Oppenheimer , recommended that all work on reactors be concentrated at the Argonne National Laboratory , the successor to the Metallurgical Laboratory , near Chicago . There was also competition for staff and resources from the newly established Brookhaven National Laboratory near New York . Morale was low , and no one could be found to take on the job of Director of Research at the laboratory , renamed the Oak Ridge National Laboratory ( ORNL ) in January 1948 . At least six people turned down the job before Union Carbide 's acting Director , Nelson ( Bunny ) Rucker , asked Weinberg to become Director of Research in March 1948 . 
 Weinberg was subsequently appointed director in 1955 . He often sat in the front row at ORNL division information meetings and he would ask the first , often very penetrating , question after each scientific talk . For young scientists giving their first presentation , the experience could be frightening , but it was also exciting and stimulating . When asked how he found the time to attend every meeting , Weinberg replied jokingly , " We didn 't have a DOE in those days . " 
 = = = Reactor development = = = 
 The Aircraft Nuclear Propulsion ( ANP ) project was ORNL 's biggest program , using 25 % of ORNL 's budget . The ANP project 's military goal was to produce a nuclear @-@ powered aircraft ( a bomber ) to overcome the range limitations of jet @-@ fueled aircraft at that time . That the project had little chance of success was not overlooked , but it provided employment and allowed ORNL to stay in the reactor development business . ORNL successfully built and operated a prototype of an aircraft reactor power plant by creating the world 's first molten salt fueled and cooled reactor called the Aircraft Reactor Experiment ( ARE ) in 1954 , which set a record high temperature of operation of 1 @,@ 600 ° F ( 870 ° C ) . Due to the radiation hazard posed to aircrew , and people on the ground in the event of a crash , new developments in ballistic missile technology , aerial refueling and longer range jet bombers , President Kennedy canceled the program in June 1961 . 
 Weinberg had the Materials Testing Reactor converted into a mock @-@ up of a real reactor called the Low Intensity Test Reactor ( <unk> ) or " Poor Man 's Pile " . Experiments at the <unk> led to the design of both pressurized water reactors ( PWRs ) and boiling water reactors ( BWRs ) , which have since become the dominant reactor types in commercial nuclear power plants . Weinberg was attracted to the simplicity and self @-@ controlling features of nuclear reactors that used fluid fuels , such as Harold Urey and Eugene Wigner 's proposed Aqueous Homogeneous Reactor . Therefore , to support the Nuclear Aircraft project in the late 1940s , Weinberg asked ORNL 's reactor engineers to design a reactor using liquid instead of solid fuel . 
 This Homogeneous Reactor Experiment ( HRE ) was affectionately dubbed " Alvin 's 3P reactor " because it required a pot , a pipe , and a pump . The HRE went into operation in 1950 and , at the criticality party , Weinberg brought the appropriate spirits : " When piles go critical in Chicago , we celebrate with wine . When piles go critical in Tennessee , we celebrate with Jack Daniel 's . " The HRE operated for 105 days before it was closed down . Despite its leaks and corrosion , valuable information was gained from its operation and it proved a simple and safe reactor to control . During the time the HRE was online , Senators John F. Kennedy and Albert Gore , Sr. visited ORNL and were hosted by Weinberg . 
 = = = Molten salt reactors = = = 
 ORNL shifted its focus to a civilian version of the meltdown @-@ proof Molten Salt Reactor ( MSR ) away from the military 's " daft " idea of nuclear @-@ powered aircraft . The Molten @-@ Salt Reactor Experiment ( <unk> ) set a record for continuous operation and was the first to use uranium @-@ 233 as fuel . It also used plutonium @-@ 239 and the standard , naturally @-@ occurring uranium @-@ 235 . The MSR was known as the " chemist 's reactor " because it was proposed mainly by chemists ( ORNL 's Ray Briant and Ed Bettis ( an engineer ) and NEPA 's Vince Calkins ) , and because it used a chemical solution of melted salts containing the actinides ( uranium , thorium , and / or plutonium ) in a carrier salt , most often composed of beryllium ( BeF2 ) and lithium ( LiF ) ( isotopically depleted in Lithium @-@ 6 to prevent excessive neutron capture or tritium production ) – FLiBe . The MSR also afforded the opportunity to change the chemistry of the molten salt while the reactor was operating to remove fission products and add new fuel or change the fuel , all of which is called " online processing " . 
 = = = Biological and environmental studies = = = 
 Under Weinberg 's tenure as director , ORNL 's Biology Division grew to five times the size of the next largest division . This division was charged with understanding how ionizing radiation interacts with living things and to try to find ways to help them survive radiation damage , such as bone marrow transplants . In the 1960s Weinberg also pursued new missions for ORNL , such as using nuclear energy to <unk> seawater . He recruited Philip Hammond from the Los Alamos National Laboratory to further this mission and in 1970 started the first big ecology project in the United States : the National Science Foundation — Research Applied to National Needs Environmental Program . 
 = = = Leadership = = = 
 In 1958 , Weinberg coauthored the first nuclear reactor textbook , The Physical Theory of Neutron Chain Reactors , with Wigner . The following year , 1959 , he was elected president of the American Nuclear Society and , in 1960 , began service on the President 's Science Advisory Committee under the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations . Starting in 1945 with Patent # 2 @,@ 736 @,@ 696 , Weinberg , usually with Wigner , filed numerous patents on the light water reactor ( LWR ) technology that has provided the United States ' primary nuclear reactors . The main LWR types are Pressurized Water Reactors ( PWRs ) and Boiling Water Reactors ( BWRs ) , that serve in Naval propulsion and commercial nuclear power . In 1965 he was appointed vice president of Union Carbide 's Nuclear Division . 
 In a 1971 paper , Weinberg first used the term " Faustian bargain " to describe nuclear energy : 
 We nuclear people have made a Faustian bargain with society . On the one hand we offer — in the catalytic nuclear burner ( i.e. , the breeder ) — an inexhaustible source of energy . Even in the short range , when we use ordinary reactors , we offer energy that is cheaper than energy from fossil fuel . Moreover , this source of energy when properly handled is almost <unk> . Whereas fossil @-@ fuel burners emit oxides of carbon , nitrogen , and sulfur ... there is no intrinsic reason why nuclear systems must emit any pollutant except heat and traces of radioactivity . 
 But the price that we demand of society for this magical source is both a vigilance from and longevity of our social institutions that we are quite unaccustomed to . 
 Weinberg was fired by the Nixon administration from ORNL in 1973 after 18 years as the laboratory 's director , because he continued to advocate increased nuclear safety and molten salt reactors ( <unk> ) , instead of the Administration 's chosen Liquid Metal Fast Breeder Reactor ( <unk> ) that the AEC 's Director of Reactor Division , Milton Shaw , was appointed to develop . Weinberg 's firing effectively halted development of the MSR , as it was virtually unknown by other nuclear laboratories and specialists . There was a brief revival of MSR research at ORNL as part of the Carter administration 's nonproliferation interests , culminating in ORNL @-@ TM @-@ <unk> , " Conceptual Design Characteristics of a <unk> Molten @-@ Salt Reactor with Once @-@ Through <unk> " , by Engel , et al . , which is still considered by many to be the " reference design " for commercial molten salt reactors . 
 = = After Oak Ridge = = 
 = = = Washington and ORAU = = = 
 Weinberg was named director of the Office of Energy Research and Development in Washington , D.C. , in 1974 . The following year he founded and became the first director of Institute for Energy Analysis at Oak Ridge Associated Universities ( ORAU ) . This institute focused on evaluating alternatives for meeting future energy requirements . From 1976 to 1984 , the Institute for Energy Analysis was a center for study of diverse issues related to carbon dioxide and global warming . He worked at ORAU until retiring to become an ORAU distinguished fellow in 1985 . 
 In 1972 Weinberg published a landmark article in Minerva entitled Science and Trans @-@ science , in which he focused on the interface between science and policy matters , especially governmental policy decisions : 
 Many of the issues which arise in the course of the interaction between science or technology and society @-@ e.g. , the deleterious side effects of technology , or the attempts to deal with social problems through the procedures of science @-@ hang on the answers to questions which can be asked of science and yet which cannot be answered by science . I propose the term trans @-@ scientific for these questions since , though they are , <unk> speaking , questions of fact and can be stated in the language of science , they are unanswerable by science ; they transcend science . In so far as public policy involves trans @-@ scientific rather than scientific issues , the role of the scientist in contributing to the promulgation of such policy must be different from his role when the issues can be unambiguously answered by science . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Weinberg remained active in retirement . In 1992 he was named chairman of the International Friendship Bell Committee , which arranged for the installation of a Japanese bell in Oak Ridge . He also called for strengthening of the International Atomic Energy Agency and systems to defend against nuclear weapons . His first wife , Margaret , died in 1969 . He later married a stock broker , Genevieve <unk> , who died in 2004 . His son David died in 2003 . Weinberg died at his home in Oak Ridge on October 18 , 2006 . He was survived by his other son , Richard , and sister Fay <unk> . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The Alvin Weinberg Foundation is named for him . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Outstanding Young American of the Year Award ( 1951 ) 
 Ernest Orlando Lawrence Award ( 1960 ) 
 Atoms for Peace Award ( 1960 ) 
 Enrico Fermi Award ( 1980 ) 
 = = Books = = 
 The Physical Theory of Neutron Chain Reactors , Alvin M. Weinberg & Eugene P. Wigner , University of Chicago Press , 1958 . 
 Reflections on Big Science , Cambridge : M.I.T. Press , 1967 . 
 The Second Nuclear Era : A New Start for Nuclear Power , Alvin M. Weinberg ; Russ Manning , editor ; New York : Praeger , 1985 ; ISBN 0 @-@ 030 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Continuing the Nuclear Dialogue : Selected Essays , Alvin M. Weinberg ; selected and with introductory comments by Russell M. Ball ; La Grange Park , IL : American Nuclear Society , <unk> ; ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Strategic Defenses and Arms Control , Edited by Alvin M. Weinberg , Jack N. <unk> . New York : Paragon House , <unk> ; ISBN 0 @-@ 887 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Stability and Strategic Defenses , Edited by Jack N. <unk> and Alvin M. Weinberg , Washington , DC : Washington Institute Press , <unk> ; ISBN 0 @-@ 887 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Nuclear Reactions : Science and Trans @-@ Science , American Institute of Physics , 1992 ; ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 861 @-@ 9 . 
 The First Nuclear Era : The Life and Times of a Technological Fixer , New York : AIP Press , 1994 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 358 @-@ 2 . Weinberg 's autobiography , covering the period from the early 1940s to the early 1990s . 
 = Louis Laybourne Smith = 
 Louis Laybourne Smith CMG ( 1 April 1880 – 13 September 1965 ) was an architect and educator in South Australia . Born in the Adelaide inner @-@ southern suburb of Unley , he became interested in engineering and architecture while in the goldfields of Western Australia and later studied mechanical engineering at the School of Mines , serving an apprenticeship under architect Edward Davies . After graduating he accepted a position as a lecturer at the school , and was responsible for developing the first formal architecture course in the State in 1904 . Between 1905 and 1914 , he served as registrar at the school before leaving to join his long @-@ time friend , Walter Bagot , at the architectural firm of Woods , Bagot and Jory . He remained with the firm until his death in 1965 , and over the years was involved in a number of significant projects , including the South Australian National War Memorial and the original Australian Mutual Provident building on King William Street . 
 Along with his teaching and professional duties , Laybourne Smith was a member of the South Australian Institute of Architects , the Federal Council of the Australian Institute of Architects , and the Australian Institute of Architects , as well as being on numerous committees and advising the State Government in the formation of both the State Building Act of 1923 and the 1939 Architects Act . 
 During his life Laybourne Smith received a number of awards and honours , including Life Fellowship to the Royal Australian Institute of Architects and the Royal Institute of British Architects , the Royal Australian Institute of Architects Gold Medal , and was named a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George . Today , the architectural school which he founded ( now part of the University of South Australia ) bears his name — the Louis Laybourne Smith School of Architecture . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Louis Laybourne Smith was born to Joseph and Annie Laybourne Smith on 1 April 1880 , in Unley , South Australia . His parents had emigrated to Australia so that his father could take up a post as a chemist with F.H. <unk> & Co . However , it appears that Joseph Laybourne Smith found dentistry more to his liking , for he went on to gain qualifications in the field through the Australian College of Dentistry . Both Laybourne Smith 's primary and secondary education were obtained at the nearby Windham and Way colleges ; his education was interrupted in the mid @-@ 1890s when his parents decided to move to the goldfields of Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie in Western Australia . 
 According to Laybourne Smith , he became interested in machinery while in the goldfields . His parents decided to direct him towards architecture , as it " was the nearest thing to white @-@ collar engineering work that they could think of " . He was articled to A. A. E. <unk> for a period before returning to Adelaide in 1898 . Laybourne Smith 's parents had intended for him to study architecture at the University of Adelaide , but there were no courses available at the time . As a result , Laybourne Smith undertook to complete a mechanical engineering course part @-@ time at the School of Mines , and ( in order to pursue his interest in architecture ) he was articled to Edward Davies from 1901 . 
 He proved to be an excellent student , winning scholarships in both his second and third years , and was the first person to finish the course within the proscribed four years . He completed his apprenticeship with Davies in 1904 , and was admitted as an Associate to the South Australian Institute of Architects , although the ongoing impact of the depression made finding work difficult . In spite of this , he found employment as a draftsman , initially with Ernest Bayer and later with John Quinton Bruce . 
 After graduating at the School of Mines , Laybourne Smith continued his studies at the University of Adelaide , completing a Bachelor of Science in 1911 . This was surrendered in 1914 for a Bachelor of Engineering . 
 = = Teaching career = = 
 In 1903 , Laybourne Smith was invited to lecture in mechanical engineering at the School of Mines — a position which Page states that Laybourne Smith was " delighted " to accept . He was thereafter elected as the school 's registrar in 1905 , and continued in that post full @-@ time until 1914 , after which he ran the school part @-@ time until 1951 . Even then , Laybourne Smith 's involvement with the school did not end after Gavin Walkley took over , and he was still associated with the school when he died in 1965 . 
 While working at the school , Laybourne Smith initiated his own classes on architecture , gathering " a group of colleagues who instructed one another " in the field . After being approached in 1906 by the Council of the School of Mines , Laybourne Smith teamed with Walter Bagot to develop a new architecture course . The result was a three @-@ year part @-@ time Associate Diploma , although students were still expected to be articled to professional architects in order to gain more practical experience in the field . By 1916 the course was regarded as of sufficient quality to place its students " in the same rank as architectural students in other parts of the world " . 
 While the School of Mines no longer exists , the school of architecture founded by Laybourne Smith is now part of the University of South Australia , and since 1963 the Louis Laybourne Smith School of Architecture and Building has borne his name as its founder . 
 = = Architectural career = = 
 Upon leaving his full @-@ time position at the School of Mines , Laybourne Smith acted as a " stand @-@ in " for Walter Bagot at Bagot 's architectural firm , Woods , Bagot and Jory , while Bagot was overseas . Edward Woods died in 1913 , and three years later Laybourne Smith became a full partner in the newly named Woods , Bagot , Jory & Laybourne Smith . Laybourne Smith was to remain with the firm until his death in 1965 . 
 Laybourne Smith 's friendship with Walter Bagot had spanned many years prior to the partnership , but their respective working methods was " so different that they seemed unlikely partners " . While <unk> was " notorious " for the attention he gave to minor details in designs , Laybourne Smith was described as being just as happy to develop a sketch and to pass it on to the draftsmen to " work up " ( although it should be noted that this does not represent a lack of attention , as his designs were " sketched in tiny , neat detail " ) . In spite of these differences , their respective strengths tended to balance one another : Bagot was a traditionalist in design , while Laybourne Smith brought an engineer 's knowledge and " ingenuity " to the partnership . 
 = = = Works = = = 
 Laybourne Smith 's first major work with Woods , Bagot & Jory was the refurbishment of the National Bank building on King William Street , and from there he graduated to work on a number of notable buildings within South Australia and interstate . Both the firm in general and Laybourne Smith in particular were traditionalists in their designs , to the point where Page reports that Laybourne Smith took as a compliment a description of one of his works in 1965 as " striped pants and all " . This traditionalism was particularly evident in their work for the University of Adelaide . Between 1910 and 1945 , the firm served as architects to the University of Adelaide , and Bagot strove towards <unk> for the university . The result included a number of buildings that were designed by Laybourne Smith in a " Georgian revival " style , including the original heritage listed Student Union building and the main building of the Waite Agricultural Research Institute , which is also heritage listed and has been described as being " <unk> of the great English country houses " . Similarly , Laybourne Smith applied traditional designs to a number of ecclesiastical projects . These include St Cuthbert 's Anglican Church in North Adelaide , which is heritage listed as an example of Gothic Revival architecture ; and the romanesque St. Dominic 's Chapel at the Cabra Dominican College in Cumberland Park . 
 His background in engineering was put to good use on a number of projects . In particular , the John Martins store on Rundle Street ( now Rundle Mall ) , was constructed by raising the top floor of the building on hydraulic jacks , building two new floors underneath while the remainder of the store continued to operate normally . Another of Laybourne Smith 's buildings , the Australian Mutual Provident building on King William Street in Adelaide , was one of the first in the state to feature air conditioning , as this was considered to be quite an " innovative " addition in 1934 . 
 Other works by Laybourne Smith include the facade on the Balfours Cafe in Rundle Mall ( heritage listed in part due to the innovative " building envelope " , which is " independent of the internal structure " ) , the Repatriation General Hospital in Daw Park ( developed by Laybourne Smith from sketch plans produced by Melbourne firm Stephenson & Turner ) , and the South Australian National War Memorial . This last structure represents a collaboration between Laybourne Smith , Walter Bagot , and Sydney @-@ based sculptor Rayner Hoff . Although Walter Bagot produced the original design for the architectural competition in 1924 , his design was , ( along with the other entrants ) , deemed to be " unsuitable " . After the entries were destroyed by fire late that year , Laybourne Smith , working with artist Rayner Hoff , was able to redraw the design largely from memory in order to enter the subsequent 1926 competition . In doing so they built upon Bagot 's work , making the memorial " grander " in its scope — and this proved to be sufficient for the firm to be awarded the commission . 
 = = Professional activities and associations = = 
 Although Laybourne Smith continued to be involved in teaching and architectural design , he was also involved in professional organisations and committees . He was admitted to the South Australian Institute of Architects ( <unk> ) as an associate in 1904 , made a fellow in 1907 , elected to the council in 1909 , and served two terms as President ( 1921 – 1923 and 1935 – 1937 ) . In all , Laybourne Smith served on the <unk> council for 50 years , from 1909 to 1959 . 
 Laybourne Smith played a significant role in the formation of a national body of architects . He was a founding member of the Federal Council of the Australian Institute of Architects , first proposed in 1914 and officially formed in 1915 , which served as a " first step " towards the formation of a national body . Between 1991 and 1922 , he served as president of this body . After the Royal Australian Institute of Architects ( <unk> ) was formed ( now known as the Australian Institute of Architects ) , he served as a councillor for 11 years ( between 1933 and 1944 ) , and as the President of the institute from 1937 to 1938 . 
 In addition to his role on the councils , Laybourne Smith was an adviser during the development of the State Building Act of 1923 , and he was largely responsible for the framing of the 1939 Architects Act , ( which provided for the formal registration of architects in South Australia ) . Because of his work on the State Building act , Laybourne Smith sat on the Board of Referees responsible for adjudicating disputes , and his position on the Architects Board of South Australia was a direct result of his involvement in the creation of the Architects Act . 
 = = Influence and awards = = 
 Louis Laybourne Smith is regarded as being one of the " key practitioners " of architecture in South Australia . In particular , he had a significant influence on the direction of architectural education in South Australia . His career spanned more than half a century , with much of it directly involved in education , and during that time he ( and Walter Bagot ) served as one of the " last links with the distant past of South Australian architecture " — having known ( either directly or indirectly ) most of the architects of the colonial era , while being responsible for the training of many of those who were to follow . 
 Furthermore , he had a substantial impact on the development of architecture as a professional body through his involvement in the Architects Act of 1931 and the formation of a national body for architects . This political work also had a social dimension : his work on the Building Act Advisory Committee helped to highlight the low quality of the housing in the poorer areas of Adelaide , and this led to a change in how the public viewed what was acceptable as low @-@ income housing . The South Australian Housing Trust was a direct result of his actions , and led to the provision of low cost rental housing to working families in the state . 
 As well as having the architectural school named in his honour , in 1961 Laybourne Smith was awarded the Gold Medal by the Royal Australian Institute of Architects , and prior to that date , in 1948 , he was appointed as a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George . Two busts of his likeness have also been commissioned . One was by Rayner Hoff , with whom he had collaborated on the design for the South Australian National War Memorial , and is kept in the offices of Woods Bagot . The second was unveiled in 1961 , and was sculpted by South Australian artist John Dowie . It can be found at the Louis Laybourne Smith School of Architecture at the University of South Australia . 
 Laybourne Smith was a Life Fellow with both the Royal Australian Institute of Architects , ( awarded in 1944 ) , and a Fellow ( 1939 ) and Life Fellow ( 1944 ) of the Royal Institute of British Architects . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Described as a " dapper young man with a moustache waxed into long points " , he made for a " dynamic figure with a penetrating voice " , and was noted for riding his Douglas motorcycle through the 1920s and 30s in his khaki overalls as he traveled between his professional practice , teaching duties and home life . On the home front , Louis Laybourne Smith married Frances Maude Davies , the daughter of Edward Davies to whom he had been articled , on 9 April 1903 . They had three daughters and a son , Gordon Laybourne Smith , who ultimately followed his father into architecture . 
 Laybourne Smith " consistently overworked " ; architecture was said to be both his profession and his obsession . When his firm announced a retirement scheme he declared that he had no intention of retiring , and such proved to be the case — he died at his desk on 13 September 1965 at the age of 85 . 
 = Vatos = 
 " Vatos " is the fourth episode of the first season of the post @-@ apocalyptic horror television series , The Walking Dead . It originally aired on AMC in the United States on November 21 , 2010 . The episode was written by Robert Kirkman and directed by Johan Renck . In the episode , Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) , Daryl Dixon ( Norman Reedus ) , Theodore " T @-@ Dog " Douglas ( IronE Singleton ) , and Glenn Rhee ( Steven Yeun ) return to downtown Atlanta in search of Daryl 's brother , Merle . The group are later targeted by a Latino gang , whose leader threatens to kill them if they do not relinquish their weapons . Meanwhile , Lori Grimes ( Sarah Wayne Callies ) and Shane Walsh ( Jon Bernthal ) ' s relationship begins to crumble . 
 Major events in " Vatos " include the deaths of several recurring characters , including Amy ( Emma Bell ) and Ed Peletier ( Adam Minarovich ) . This episode was filmed in several locations in Atlanta , Georgia , including the Goat Farm Arts Center . " Vatos " was lauded by television commentators , who praised its storyline progression and character development . Upon initial airing , it attained 4 @.@ 75 million viewers and a 2 @.@ 4 / 6 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode became the highest @-@ rated cable program of the day , as well as the ninth most @-@ watched cable program of the week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the opening segment , sisters Andrea ( Laurie Holden ) and Amy ( Emma Bell ) are fishing in a boat . They discuss their childhoods — the two are twelve years apart — and express hope that maybe Florida , where their parents live , was not hit as hard by the zombie epidemic . After getting into a heated argument with Daryl ( Norman Reedus ) , sheriff 's deputy Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) returns to Downtown Atlanta with Daryl , Glenn ( Steven Yeun ) and T @-@ Dog ( IronE Singleton ) . They are searching both for the bag of guns Rick dropped , and for Merle Dixon ( Michael Rooker ) , Daryl 's brother , who was left handcuffed to a pipe on the roof of the department store ; T @-@ Dog and Rick feel guilty for leaving him there . The group ultimately fails to locate Merle , having only found his severed hand , a hacksaw and a blood trail . An enraged Daryl retrieves Merle 's hand and turns his crossbow on T @-@ Dog , but Rick puts his revolver to Daryl 's head and bloodshed is averted . Continuing the search , they follow Merle 's trail of blood through the building ; the group encounter two walkers that Merle had previously dispatched single @-@ handedly and a gas stove where he had cauterized the stump of his hand . 
 Back at camp , Jim ( Andrew Rothenberg ) begins digging holes , refusing to explain why or take a break despite the extreme heat . When the survivors confront him about his abrupt obsessive compulsive behavior , he lashes out with his shovel , which forces Shane Walsh ( Jon Bernthal ) to restrain him . Jim has an emotional breakdown and reveals that his family was attacked and eaten by a horde of walkers . When he comes to his senses again , he can no longer remember why he was digging the holes , only that a dream inspired him to do so . He tells Lori Grimes ( Sarah Wayne Callies ) to keep her son Carl ( Chandler Riggs ) safe and never let him out of her sight . 
 Glenn devises a plan to retrieve the nearby bag of guns , and urges the other men to hide out in alleys so they can wait for him . While Glenn is getting the bag , Daryl is approached by a young Latino . Frightened , the man calls repeatedly for help . Two other Latinos appear and attack Daryl . Rick and T @-@ Dog arrive to help him , whereupon the men kidnap Glenn and flee in a car leaving the first man , Miguel ( Anthony <unk> ) behind . The group begins to interrogate their hostage . Daryl retrieves his brother 's severed hand and throws it into the young Latino 's lap , telling him this is what they do to people who cross them . The frightened young man reveals that his companions were after the same bag of guns . The group go to meet the men for a prisoner exchange , but are rebuffed by the supposed gang 's leader , Guillermo ( Neil Brown , Jr . ) , who tells them to come back either ready to hand over the guns , or locked and loaded for a fight . 
 As the two groups prepare for a shootout , an elderly woman emerges looking for her grandson , Felipe ( Noel <unk> ) . It is revealed that the group is guarding a hidden nursing home , and Glenn was safe after all . Rick leaves some of the guns and ammunition with the Vatos , and his group begins to return to camp . Their vehicle , however , is nowhere to be seen ; the group suspects Merle stole it . Worried that he may be planning vengeance , they hurriedly race back to the quarry on foot . 
 Meanwhile at camp , the survivors ' dinner is interrupted when a horde of walkers invades the campsite . Several of the survivors are bitten and severely wounded , including Ed Peletier ( Adam Minarovich ) and Amy . Arriving back , Rick and the others finally fend off the remaining walkers . In the aftermath , Amy dies in Andrea 's arms ; Andrea sobs while everybody else watches in terror . Jim suddenly recalls his dream , stating that he now remembers why he dug the holes . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Vatos " was directed by Johan Renck and written by Robert Kirkman ; this episode became Kirkman 's first writing credit for the series . " I was pretty happy that the first death in the show was in an episode that I got to write , " he stated . " That was kind of cool . " The episode 's script was heavily modified by Kirkman and series creator Frank Darabont prior to airing . Neil Brown , Jr. initially collaborated with producers on directing the episode but eventually pulled out of the project . 
 Principal photography for the episode transpired at the Goat Farm Arts Center in the West Midtown neighborhood of Atlanta , Georgia . " Vatos " features a sequence near the conclusion of the episode , in which a horde of walkers invades and attacks the campgrounds . The scene was written by Robert Kirkman , who based it closely on a similar sequence in the comics . Kirkman stated that he was very excited to develop the sequence and added that it was a familiar task for him : 
 It was very exciting . I got to write the attack at the end of the episode — which was very much something that happened in the comic book series — so I knew I would be revisiting something I had already written . But as we were in the writers ' room , when things started shifting which led to all this new stuff that wasn 't in the comic book series , I thought that was great because it wasn 't me writing the same @-@ old same @-@ old or rewriting something I had already done and trying to make it interesting for myself . It was really an entirely new story : getting the gang members in there and getting to write Daryl [ ... ] which is one of my favorite characters on the show , despite the fact that he ’ s not in the comic book . It was a blast . 
 This episode marked the last regular appearance of Emma Bell ( Amy ) , whose character was killed off in the conclusion of the installment . Greg Nicotero , the show 's production designer , enacted the walker who bites Amy . Bell stated that Nicotero placed a skin @-@ colored prosthetic around her neck , which consisted of a layer of red viscous liquid and a hose . Once it was bitten into , the prosthetic exploded and resembled a severe flesh wound . Kirkman expressed that it was difficult for him to remove Bell from the cast but was thankful that she understood she would only be limited to a certain number of episodes ; he stated : 
 It 's something that 's very difficult for me . Because it is lines on paper when I do it in the comic book series . It 's like , ' Oh , okay , Charlie Adlard [ ... ] doesn ’ t have to draw that arrangement of lines anymore , that person is dead . ' But it 's very uncomfortable for me to be on set , because I see these actors that are there and , in the source material , I have killed all but two of them . I walk through the set and I 'm like , ' Yep , killed that one , killed that one , killed that one . ' And it is firing those people . I feel really bad for Emma Bell , just because she was great and I would have liked to have had her in the show . But , you know , this is The Walking Dead , characters have got to die . Thankfully , Emma was brought onto the show with the understanding that she was only going to be in a certain number of episodes and she knew that she was going to die from the very beginning . But it doesn ’ t really make it any easier . When they were shooting those scenes , I had to fly to Comic @-@ Con and so I wasn ’ t actually there for when she died . But it was very emotional on set and I know that she was very upset about having to leave the crew and the actors . You kind of become a family when you 're doing a TV show and it ’ s a little upsetting to have to get rid of somebody . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Vatos " originally aired on November 21 , 2010 in the United States on AMC . The episode attained 4 @.@ 75 million viewers upon airing , and garnered a 2 @.@ 7 / 4 HH rating . Additionally , it received a 2 @.@ 4 / 6 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . " Vatos " became the highest @-@ rated cable program of the night , and the ninth most @-@ watched cable program of the week . Ratings and total viewership for the episode moderately declined from the preceding installment , " Tell It to the Frogs " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 07 million viewers and a 2 @.@ 5 / 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . In the United Kingdom , the episode received 467 @,@ 000 viewers and became the highest @-@ rated cable program on FX of the week dated November 28 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Vatos " attained general acclaim from television critics . James Poniewozik of TIME asserted that the episode successfully made the viewers experience the daily life of the show 's characters , and HitFix 's Alan Sepinwall felt that " Vatos " was the strongest episode since the series ' pilot episode . In his 7 @.@ 9 out of 10 star review , Josh Jackson of Paste wrote : " The whole spectrum of human nature is on view when civilization is stripped away — the bigger the immediate threat , the more varied the response . And it ’ s this balance between action / horror and personal drama that makes The Walking Dead so compelling . " Los Angeles Times writer Gina McIntyre felt that Kirkman " seemed right at home adapting his characters for the screen . " 
 John Griffiths , writing for Us Weekly , felt the installment was haunting enough to " make viewers leave their lights on afterward " , and opined that the character development and the progression of the storylines served as the episode 's highlights . John Serba of The Grand Rapids Press stated that " Vatos " was the most emotionally poignant episode of The Walking Dead so far . Expressing similar sentiments , IGN 's Eric Goldman evaluated the episode as " strong " , ultimately giving it a nine out of ten , signifying an " amazing " rating . Leonard Pierce of The A.V. Club , who issued the episode a B grade , was less enthusiastic than the general consensus . Pierce felt that the bulk of the episode was " mushy " and concluded that it " didn 't solve anything involving the ongoing plot and introduced a bunch of arbitrary , needless complications that had no payoff , [ and ] bogged it down quite a bit . " 
 Critics praised the interactions between Amy and Andrea . Serba asserted that Kirkman effectively set up Amy 's death at the beginning of the episode , and added that it established a sisterly bond . Serba also acclaimed Laurie Holden 's performance ; he stated that she " powerfully conveys her grief and despair . " Pierce avouched that the opening sequence was likable , while Michelle Kung of The Wall Street Journal summated that the concluding scene was " an emotional release after a tense build @-@ up . " 
 Critics were divided about Rick Grimes ' return to Atlanta , as well as his stand off with Guillermo and his gang . Scott Meslow of The Atlantic compared Grimes to Mad Men 's Don Draper , and questioned his character development : " So far , every decision Rick has made has been both within his code and consequence @-@ free , " he said . Pierce opined : " Dramatically , this whole sequence plays out pretty <unk> . Guillermo 's dialogue is ridiculous , and the entire storyline plays like something out of an episodic social @-@ lesson @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week show . Since nothing ends up coming of it from a plot standpoint [ ... ] , it 's hard not to think of it as one of those comics where two <unk> [ sic ] have a big fight scene that turns out to be mistaken identity . " 
 = Vidya Balan = 
 Vidya Balan ( pronounced [ <unk> ̪ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 1 January 1978 ) is an Indian actress . She has established a career in Bollywood and is the recipient of several awards , including a National Film Award , five Filmfare Awards , and five Screen Awards , and was awarded the Padma Shri by the Government of India in 2014 . She is known for portraying strong female protagonists and has been acknowledged in the media for pioneering a change in the concept of a Hindi film heroine . 
 Vidya aspired to a career in film from a young age , and had her first acting role in the 1995 sitcom Hum Paanch . She pursued a master 's degree in sociology from the University of Mumbai and simultaneously made several unsuccessful attempts to start a career in film . She subsequently featured in various television commercials and music videos , and in 2003 made her feature film debut as the protagonist of the independent Bengali drama Bhalo Theko . In 2005 Vidya garnered praise for her first Hindi film , the drama Parineeta , and followed it with a leading role in the highly successful 2006 comedy film Lage Raho Munna Bhai . 
 This initial success was followed by roles in the romantic comedies Heyy Babyy ( 2007 ) and Kismat Konnection ( 2008 ) which met with negative reviews . The year 2009 marked the beginning of the most successful period in Vidya 's career as she portrayed five consecutive roles to wide critical acclaim in the 2009 drama Paa , the 2010 black comedy Ishqiya , the 2011 semi @-@ biographical thriller No One Killed Jessica , the 2011 biopic The Dirty Picture , and the 2012 thriller Kahaani . These roles established her as a leading actress of Hindi cinema . 
 In addition to acting in films , Vidya promotes humanitarian causes and supports the empowerment of women . She initially drew criticism for her fluctuating weight and " questionable " dress sense , but was later credited in the media for " not morphing herself to fit into any conventional slot " . She is married to the film producer Siddharth Roy Kapur . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Vidya Balan was born on 1 January 1978 in <unk> , <unk> , a town in the Palakkad District of Kerala , to parents of Tamilian descent . Her father , P. R. Balan , is the Executive Vice @-@ President of <unk> , and her mother , Saraswathy Balan , is a homemaker . According to Vidya , they speak a mix of Malayalam and Tamil at home . Her elder sister , Priya Balan , works in the field of advertising . The actress Priyamani is her second cousin . 
 Vidya grew up in the suburban neighbourhood of Chembur , Mumbai and was schooled at St. Anthony Girls ' High School . From a young age she aspired to a career in film and was inspired by the work of actors Shabana Azmi and Madhuri Dixit . At the age of sixteen , she starred in the first season of Ekta Kapoor 's sitcom Hum Paanch as Radhika , a bespectacled teenager . Following the success of the show , Vidya refused director Anurag Basu 's offer to star in a television soap opera , as she wanted to concentrate on a film career . Her parents were supportive of the decision but encouraged her to complete her education first , so she attended St. Xavier 's College to pursue a bachelor 's degree in sociology and later earned a master 's degree from the University of Mumbai . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Struggle and film debut ( 2000 – 04 ) = = = 
 While pursuing her master 's degree , Vidya was cast as the female lead in the Malayalam film Chakram , opposite Mohanlal and was subsequently signed on for twelve other Malayalam language films . However , due to production difficulties , Chakram was shelved . The postponement of a film starring Mohanlal was an unheard of occurrence in Malayalam cinema and film producers blamed Vidya for bringing " bad luck " to the project ; labelled her as a " jinx " and replaced her in all the films that she had been contracted for . She then shifted focus to Tamil cinema . In 2001 , she was cast as the female lead in N. Linguswamy 's Run ( 2002 ) . However , after completing the first shooting schedule of the film , she was unceremoniously dropped and replaced by Meera Jasmine . She was signed up under false pretences for a sex comedy , a genre she was then uncomfortable with , and thus decided to leave the project . Thereafter , she signed on for a third Tamil film , <unk> ( 2003 ) , but was replaced by Trisha as the director was dissatisfied with her work . Kalari Vikraman , another Malayalam film that she completed work for in 2003 , failed to get a theatrical release . 
 After failing to start a film career , Vidya appeared in approximately sixty television commercials and in music videos for Euphoria and Shubha Mudgal ; a majority of these were directed by Pradeep Sarkar . In 2003 , she was signed on by Goutam Halder for his independent Bengali drama Bhalo Theko ; her first film release . Her portrayal of <unk> , a young woman reminiscing about her past , won her an <unk> <unk> for Best Actress . 
 = = = Breakthrough ( 2005 – 08 ) = = = 
 In 2005 Vidya made her Hindi film debut with Pradeep Sarkar 's musical drama Parineeta . Before being cast for the film , she had to undergo extensive auditions for a period of six months . The film , an adaptation of Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay 's novel of the same name , narrated the love story of an idealist Lalita ( Vidya ) and a musician Shekhar ( Saif Ali Khan ) , the son of a capitalist businessman . Her performance in the film was praised by critics ; Derek Elley from Variety wrote , " An acting revelation is Tamil newcomer [ Vidya ] Balan , whose devoted but dignified Lalita is the picture 's heart and soul . " Parineeta fetched her a Best Female Debut award and a nomination for Best Actress at the annual Filmfare Awards ceremony . The following year , Vidya appeared opposite Sanjay Dutt in Rajkumar Hirani 's comedy film Lage Raho Munna Bhai . She portrayed the role of <unk> , a radio jockey and the love interest of the protagonist Munna Bhai . To prepare for her role , she met with a couple of radio jockeys and watched them at work . Her performance was critically well received , and the film emerged as a blockbuster with earnings of ₹ 1 @.@ 19 billion ( US $ 18 million ) . 
 In 2007 Vidya featured in a supporting role in Mani Ratnam 's semi @-@ biographical drama Guru as a woman suffering from multiple sclerosis . The film , which starred Mithun Chakraborty , Abhishek Bachchan , Aishwarya Rai Bachchan , and R. Madhavan in leading roles , performed well at the box office . However , film critics Khalid Mohamed and Raja Sen noted that her " talent was wasted " in a " minuscule role " . Her next release was Nikhil Advani 's Salaam @-@ e @-@ Ishq : A Tribute To Love , a romantic comedy featuring an ensemble cast , in which she was paired opposite John Abraham . The film , which narrated six individual love stories , saw Vidya play the role of a television reporter , <unk> Hussain , suffering from a memory loss condition . The film , which was a critical and commercial failure , generated positive reviews for Vidya . Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com wrote , " Vidya 's transformation from a self @-@ assured working woman to a helpless , vulnerable person is superb . " 
 Vidya then took a supporting role in Vidhu Vinod Chopra 's drama <unk> : The Royal Guard , alongside Amitabh Bachchan , Boman Irani , Sharmila Tagore , Saif Ali Khan , and Sanjay Dutt . The film , which failed commercially , met with positive critical reviews and was selected as India 's official entry to the Oscars for the 80th Academy Awards . She was later cast as Isha Sahni , a single mother , in Sajid Khan 's Heyy Babyy , alongside co @-@ stars Akshay Kumar , Ritesh Deshmukh , and Fardeen Khan . The comedy film was a box @-@ office success , but garnered negative reviews from critics , as did Vidya 's performance ; CNN @-@ IBN 's Rajeev Masand criticised her wardrobe and make @-@ up , and considered her the " sore thumb " of the film . 
 Vidya 's fifth and final film of 2007 was Priyadarshan 's Bhool Bhulaiyaa , a remake of the Malayalam film Manichitrathazhu ( 1993 ) . Vidya featured as Avani <unk> ( a character played by Shobana in the Malayalam original ) , a woman suffering from dissociative identity disorder . Co @-@ starring <unk> Ahuja , Akshay Kumar , and Ameesha Patel , Bhool Bhulaiyaa was a commercial success with a worldwide revenue of over ₹ 830 million ( US $ 12 million ) . Reviewers , while being generally negative of the film , were appreciative of Vidya 's performance . Writing for Hindustan Times , Khalid Mohamed described her as " <unk> likeable " and Bollywood Hungama 's Taran Adarsh labelled her as " splendid " . The role earned Vidya a second Filmfare nomination in the Best Actress category . 
 In 2008 's Halla Bol , Vidya played a supporting role alongside Ajay Devgn and Pankaj Kapur . The film was based on the life of activist Safdar Hashmi , who was killed by political rivals while performing on a street play ( by the name of Halla Bol ) in 1989 . The film was a critical failure . Later that year , she co @-@ starred with Shahid Kapoor in Aziz Mirza 's romantic comedy Kismat Konnection . <unk> poorly at the box office , the film and her performance generated a negative response ; critic Sonia Chopra commented , " [ Balan ] is made to look downright drab . The haircut is unflattering , the make @-@ up too plain , the clothes usually in off @-@ white or brown . Plus the character is repetitive and reminds us of the one she played in Lage Raho Munna Bhai . " 
 = = = Widespread success ( 2009 – 12 ) = = = 
 In 2009 Vidya played the role of an unwed gynaecologist struggling with her 12 @-@ year @-@ old son 's progeria syndrome , in the R. Balki @-@ directed dramedy Paa . Amitabh Bachchan played the role of Vidya 's son and Abhishek Bachchan played the title character . A critical and commercial success , the film has been described as a major turning point in her career . Sukanya Verma compared her acting style to that of Dimple Kapadia and noted , " Balan is poignant yet restrained and projects an impressive figure of grace and integrity " ; Nikhat Kazmi from The Times of India further argued that Vidya was successful in lending a " rare dignity to the image of the Bollywood mom . " Her portrayal garnered her several awards , including a Filmfare Award for Best Actress and a Screen Award for Best Actress . 
 Vidya followed the success of Paa with the Vishal Bhardwaj @-@ produced Ishqiya ( 2010 ) , a black comedy directed by debutant Abhishek Chaubey ; co @-@ starring Naseeruddin Shah , Arshad Warsi , and Salman Shahid . Vidya 's role was that of Krishna Verma , a sexually manipulative woman . Vidya described her character as " an epitome of grey " and a departure from the conventional portrayal of women in cinema . In preparation for her part , she undertook professional training to speak in the local Uttar Pradesh @-@ dialect . The feature as well as her performance received critical acclaim ; Anupama Chopra of NDTV stated , " Vidya Balan 's smoldering looks scorch the screen even as her eyes hint at tragedy . She proves that she is miles ahead of the cookie cutter Barbie dolls that clutter Bollywood and that sensuality has very little to do with showing skin . " Her work in the film earned Vidya a Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actress , a second consecutive Best Actress award at Screen and a nomination for Best Actress at Filmfare . 
 Raj Kumar Gupta 's semi @-@ biographical thriller No One Killed Jessica with Rani Mukerji was Vidya 's first release of 2011 . The film , based on the Jessica Lal murder case , saw her portray the real @-@ life character of Sabrina Lal , Jessica 's reticent sister . While preparing for the role , Vidya did not meet Lal on the insistence of Gupta as " the Sabrina [ ... ] today is different from the Sabrina a decade ago , [ when ] the story begins " . No One Killed Jessica met with contrasting reviews from critics , but Vidya 's performance was particularly praised . The Hindu remarked on Vidya 's ability to be " in sublime control over her emotions " and <unk> <unk> of Rediff.com added that " her hesitant body language , her faith , her helplessness , her rage , her sorrow and her gratitude all come across beautifully " . The film had earnings of ₹ 490 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 3 million ) and was noted for being a commercial success despite the absence of a male lead . Vidya earned another Filmfare nomination in the Best Actress category for the film . In March 2011 , a retrospective of Vidya 's films was held in Australia , as part of the film festival Bollywood & Beyond . That same year , Vidya featured in a guest appearance in Santosh Sivan 's Malayalam language fantasy film <unk> . 
 Vidya 's next appearance was in Ekta Kapoor 's production The Dirty Picture , a biopic based on the life and death of the controversial Indian actress Silk Smitha . Vidya was cast as Silk , who was — in Vidya 's words — " known for her brazenness and in @-@ your @-@ face sexuality . " She described the role as the " boldest " she had ever played , one that " required a lot of mental preparation , " and to look the part , she gained 12 kilograms ( 26 lb ) . The film opened to major critical acclaim , and Vidya received unanimous praise for her portrayal which several reviewers regarded as her best performance to date . Khalid Mohamed observed , " She 's extraordinary : gutsy , consistently in character and unafraid of exposing her darker side . Here 's the kind of complex performance which you haven 't evidenced in years and years . " Her director Milan Luthria described her as the contemporary claimant of the " sex @-@ symbol " title , and compared her " voluptuousness " to the likes of yesteryear actresses Sridevi and Vyjayanthimala . The film was eventually declared a blockbuster , earning ₹ 1 @.@ 14 billion ( US $ 17 million ) worldwide . Vidya won a second Filmfare Award , a third consecutive Screen Award , and a National Film Award for Best Actress . 
 For her next feature film , Vidya starred as Vidya Bagchi , a pregnant woman in search of her missing husband in Sujoy Ghosh 's Kahaani ( 2012 ) . The thriller , set in the city of Kolkata during the Durga Puja festivities , met with wide critical acclaim . To lend authenticity to her part , Vidya met several pregnant women and learnt about their lifestyle . She generated public and media attention by wearing a fake baby bump during the film 's promotional activities . Vidya received further appreciation for her performance in Kahaani . Subhash K. Jha praised Vidya 's portrayal of " grace under pressure " as " measured and skilled " ; Pratim D. Gupta of The Telegraph added that she " gets into the physicality of a pregnant woman with unfailing mastery " . Kahaani emerged as a major commercial success both at the domestic and international box office , with revenues of over ₹ 1 @.@ 04 billion ( US $ 15 million ) . Vidya won a fourth consecutive Best Actress Award at Screen and a third Best Actress Award at Filmfare . 
 = = = Commercial struggles ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 After completing the duties of a jury member at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival , Vidya starred opposite Emraan Hashmi as a boisterous Punjabi woman in <unk> , a comic @-@ thriller from director Raj Kumar Gupta . Critics were unenthusiastic about the film and it earned little at the box office . Vidya then provided the voice of Draupadi for Mahabharat , a 3D animation film based on the Indian epic of the same name . 
 The romantic comedy Shaadi Ke Side Effects was Vidya 's first film release of 2014 . Directed by Saket Chaudhary and co @-@ starring Farhan Akhtar , the film tells the story of a married couple who face a series of comic events after the birth of their first child . Critics found the film to be a " bit overstretched " , but praised both Akhtar and Vidya 's performances . Also that year , Vidya featured as the host of No More <unk> , a television special on women empowerment . She then starred in the comedy @-@ drama Bobby Jasoos , which saw her play the eponymous role of a Hyderabadi woman aspiring to be a detective . Vidya was drawn to the idea of playing a female detective , and identified with the character 's struggle to " do something unusual " in life . The role required her to sport twelve elaborate disguises , and she trained with a language coach to adopt a Hyderabadi accent . <unk> Gandhi of Mumbai Mirror wrote that Vidya 's " effervescence rubs off on the proceedings and gives it an energy that drives the film " . However , both Shaadi Ke Side Effects and Bobby Jasoos failed to find a wide audience . 
 In 2015 , Vidya reteamed with Hashmi in the Mohit Suri @-@ directed romantic drama Hamari <unk> Kahani . Penned by Mahesh Bhatt , the film tells the story of <unk> , a single mother trapped in an abusive marriage , who has an extra @-@ marital affair . Shubha Shetty @-@ Saha of Mid Day reviewed , " Vidya Balan , a fine actress with thousand emotions fleeting across her lovely face , has shown us what she 's capable of in her earlier movies . But here , saddled with a boring , outdated , weepy character , there was nothing much even she could do " . Vidya next took on the part of a police officer in <unk> ( 2016 ) , a thriller inspired by the 2013 South Korean film Montage , co @-@ starring Amitabh Bachchan and Nawazuddin Siddiqui . She was attracted to the idea of playing a " no @-@ nonsense police inspector who commands much respect " and was particularly drawn to her character 's " silent aggression " . NDTV 's Saibal Chatterjee criticised the decision to bill Vidya 's pivotal role as a special appearance and noted how much her presence benefited the film . Rajeev Masand was critical of the film 's predictable denouement , but wrote that Vidya " is reliably solid each time she ’ s on screen , raising her brow , curling her lip to effectively communicate more than words can " . She then portrayed the actress Geeta Bali in multiple songs for Ekk <unk> , a Marathi language biopic of the actor @-@ director Bhagwan Dada . 
 As of June 2016 , Vidya has three upcoming projects . She has completed work on a sequel to Kahaani , and is filming for the role of a procurer in Srijit Mukherji 's Begum Jaan , a Hindi language remake of the Bengali film <unk> ( 2015 ) , which is a drama set in a brothel during the partition of India in 1947 . In addition , Vidya will star in <unk> , a biopic on the controversial author Kamala <unk> , which will be filmed in Malayalam . 
 = = Personal life and off @-@ screen work = = 
 The mass media has often speculated about a romantic relationship between Vidya and her co @-@ actors , but she has strongly denied these reports . In 2009 , Vidya was involved in a controversy when she mentioned a previous relationship in which " caustic remarks " were made at her due to her weight . She said , " If someone who matters to you takes you down , it can break you . That someone whose approval mattered to me started to constantly find faults with me . At that point of time , it was important to walk away from that relationship . " Though she refused to name the person , tabloid reports suggested that she was referring to Shahid Kapoor ( her co @-@ star in Kismat Konnection ) . Kapoor , however , denied the allegations . During an interview in May 2012 , Vidya announced that she was dating Siddharth Roy Kapur , the CEO of UTV Motion Pictures . On 14 December 2012 , the couple were married in a private ceremony in Bandra , Mumbai . 
 Vidya is trained in carnatic music and briefly studied the dance forms of Bharatnatyam and Kathak . Regarding her religious affiliations , Vidya said , " I am a person with a lot of faith and I have conversations [ with God ] all the time but I am not so religious in the conventional , organised sense " . She practices vegetarianism and was listed as " India 's hottest vegetarian " in polls conducted by PETA in 2011 and 2012 . Her weight fluctuations over the years have been the subject of substantial media coverage in India . 
 Besides acting in film , Vidya promotes humanitarian causes and supports charitable institutions . In March 2011 , she endorsed World Wildlife Fund 's Earth Hour campaign in India . She campaigned for the cause of nutrition in India for Child In Need Institute ( <unk> ) , a non @-@ profit organisation based in Kolkata . In September 2012 , Vidya visited a village in Mirzapur , Uttar Pradesh , where she participated in a campaign to promote children 's education and the empowerment of women . For her attempts to empower women , Vidya was awarded The Prabha <unk> Puraskar 2012 by the Calcutta Chamber of Commerce ; she was the youngest recipient of the award . Vidya has also been appointed by the Government of India as their brand ambassador in the drive to improve the country 's sanitary condition . In August 2013 , she served as the grand marshal of the India Day parade held in New York City . In September that year , she launched a technology @-@ based learning platform for underprivileged children in the <unk> village of Uttar Pradesh . On the occasion of International Women 's Day in 2015 , Vidya wrote an opinion column in Hindustan Times on the issues faced by women in India . 
 = = Media image and artistry = = 
 Following the success of Parineeta and Lage Raho Munna Bhai , Vidya 's film roles were subject to wide critical analysis . Vir <unk> noted that the films Heyy Babyy and Kismat Konnection were " strange films [ ... ] in which she tried to pretend to be what she is not — a Bollywood <unk> . " Vidya described that particular phase in her career as a " struggle to be someone else " . Due to the criticism that her film choices evoked , Vidya decided to choose roles that she " believed in " rather than choose by convention . Members of the media have subsequently labelled her as " bold " and " daring " in her choices . 
 Her starring roles in Heyy Babyy and Kismat Konnection also led to considerable attention in the media for her " questionable wardrobe " . Several publications listed her as the " worst dressed actress " and her costume designers attributed her failure to carry off western clothes due to her weight and body structure . She was later praised in the media for wearing saris at public events ; designer <unk> Khan explained , " Vidya 's beauty lies in her curves . She 's comfortable in her voluptuousness , and therefore in a sari . " Vidya has since been identified as defying " an anglicised idea of sexuality " and embody the idea of " raw Indian sexuality " . 
 After portraying strong female protagonists in Paa , Ishqiya , No One Killed Jessica , The Dirty Picture and Kahaani , Vidya was credited in the media for pioneering a movement that breaks the stereotypical portrayal of heroines in Bollywood . The major commercial success of the latter two earned her the title of a " female hero " and Kalpana Nair of First Post noted that with these two films Vidya spearheaded a change in the roles that were offered to actresses over thirty . Film critic Mayank Shekhar predicted , " Just a few smart male actors can completely change the face of a commercial , star @-@ driven film industry . Looking at [ ... ] Vidya Balan [ ... ] it appears , that change could well originate from the leading lady instead . " India Today featured her in their listing of the " 25 Power Women " and noted that " she has toppled the all dominating hero , reducing him to a supporting role in a male dominated film industry " . 
 Vidya occupied the top slot in Rediff.com 's annual listing of " Bollywood 's Best Actress " for two consecutive years ( 2010 – 11 ) . She also featured in the list for the years 2005 , 2006 , 2009 , and 2012 . In 2010 , she featured in Filmfare 's listing of the " Women we love " . In 2012 , the magazine Verve listed her as one of India 's " Young Power Women " and wrote , " In a reel world peopled by size zero @-@ toned bodies and pretty @-@ as @-@ a @-@ picture heroines , Vidya comes across as completely real and natural – a woman who has followed her own instincts and dared to live her destiny by being her own person and not morphing herself to fit into any conventional slot . " In 2014 , Vidya was awarded the Padma Shri , the fourth highest civilian award in India , for her contributions to the entertainment industry . The following year , she received an honorary Doctor of Arts degree from Rai University ; the university also named a scholarship program for underprivileged girls after her . The chancellor of the university , <unk> Arora said , " Among the league of iconic actors , Vidya is a pioneer in every way . Her films epitomise a distinct Indianness and a powerful womanhood " . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 = = = Selected filmography = = = 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Among Vidya 's film awards are a National Film Award for Best Actress for The Dirty Picture ( 2011 ) , and five Filmfare Awards : Best Female Debut for Parineeta ( 2005 ) , Best Actress for Paa ( 2009 ) , The Dirty Picture ( 2011 ) , and Kahaani ( 2012 ) , and Critics Award for Best Actress for Ishqiya ( 2010 ) . 
 = Tyrannosauridae = 
 Tyrannosauridae ( or tyrannosaurids , meaning " tyrant lizards " ) is a family of coelurosaurian theropod dinosaurs which comprises two subfamilies containing up to eleven genera , including the eponymous Tyrannosaurus . The exact number of genera is controversial , with some experts recognizing as few as three . All of these animals lived near the end of the Cretaceous Period and their fossils have been found only in North America and Asia . 
 Although descended from smaller ancestors , tyrannosaurids were almost always the largest predators in their respective ecosystems , putting them at the apex of the food chain . The largest species was Tyrannosaurus rex , one of the largest known land predators , which measured up to 12 @.@ 3 metres ( 40 ft ) in length and up to 10 @.@ 2 tonnes ( 11 @.@ 2 short tons ) in weight . Tyrannosaurids were bipedal carnivores with massive skulls filled with large teeth . Despite their large size , their legs were long and proportioned for fast movement . In contrast , their arms were very small , bearing only two functional digits . 
 Unlike most other groups of dinosaurs , very complete remains have been discovered for most known tyrannosaurids . This has allowed a variety of research into their biology . Scientific studies have focused on their ontogeny , biomechanics and ecology , among other subjects . Soft tissue , both fossilized and intact , has been reported from one specimen of Tyrannosaurus rex . 
 = = Description = = 
 The tyrannosaurids were all large animals , with all species capable of weighing at least 1 metric ton . A single specimen of Alioramus of an individual estimated at between 5 and 6 metres ( 16 and 20 ft ) long has been discovered , although it is considered by some experts to be a juvenile . Albertosaurus , Gorgosaurus and Daspletosaurus all measured between 8 and 10 metres ( 26 and 33 ft ) long , while Tarbosaurus reached lengths of 12 metres ( 39 ft ) from snout to tail . The massive Tyrannosaurus reached 12 @.@ 3 metres ( 40 ft ) in the largest specimen , FMNH PR2081 . 
 Tyrannosaurid skull anatomy is well understood as complete skulls are known for all genera but Alioramus , which is known only from partial skull remains . Tyrannosaurus , Tarbosaurus , and Daspletosaurus had skulls which exceeded 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) in length , The largest discovered Tyrannosaurus skull measures up to 1 @.@ 45 metres ( 4 ft 9 in ) long . Adult tyrannosaurids had tall , massive skulls , with many bones fused and reinforced for strength . At the same time , hollow chambers within many skull bones and large openings ( fenestrae ) between those bones helped to reduce skull weight . Many features of tyrannosaurid skulls were also found in their immediate ancestors , including tall premaxillae and fused nasal bones . 
 Tyrannosaurid skulls had many unique characteristics , including fused parietal bones with a prominent sagittal crest , which ran longitudinally along the sagittal suture and separated the two supratemporal fenestrae on the skull roof . Behind these fenestrae , tyrannosaurids had a characteristically tall nuchal crest , which also arose from the parietals but ran along a transverse plane rather than longitudinally . The nuchal crest was especially well @-@ developed in Tyrannosaurus , Tarbosaurus and Alioramus . Albertosaurus , Daspletosaurus and Gorgosaurus had tall crests in front of the eyes on the lacrimal bones , while Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus had extremely thickened postorbital bones forming crescent @-@ shaped crests behind the eyes . Alioramus had a row of six bony crests on top of its snout , arising from the nasal bones ; lower crests have been reported on some specimens of Daspletosaurus and Tarbosaurus , as well as the more basal tyrannosauroid Appalachiosaurus . 
 The skull was perched at the end of a thick , S @-@ shaped neck , and a long , heavy tail acted as a counterweight to balance out the head and torso , with the center of mass over the hips . Tyrannosaurids are known for their proportionately very small two @-@ fingered forelimbs , although remnants of a vestigial third digit are sometimes found . Tarbosaurus had the shortest forelimbs compared to its body size , while Daspletosaurus had the longest . 
 Tyrannosaurids walked exclusively on their hindlimbs , so their leg bones were massive . In contrast to the forelimbs , the hindlimbs were longer compared to body size than almost any other theropods . Juveniles and even some smaller adults , like more basal tyrannosauroids , had longer tibiae than femora , a characteristic of fast @-@ running dinosaurs like ornithomimids . Larger adults had leg proportions characteristic of slower @-@ moving animals , but not to the extent seen in other large theropods like abelisaurids or carnosaurs . The third metatarsals of tyrannosaurids were pinched between the second and fourth metatarsals , forming a structure known as the arctometatarsus . 
 It is unclear when the arctometatarsus first evolved ; it was not present in the earliest tyrannosauroids like Dilong , but was found in the later Appalachiosaurus . This structure also characterized troodontids , ornithomimids and caenagnathids , but its absence in the earliest tyrannosauroids indicates that it was acquired by convergent evolution . 
 = = = Teeth = = = 
 Tyrannosaurids , like their tyrannosauroid ancestors , were heterodont , with premaxillary teeth D @-@ shaped in cross section and smaller than the rest . Unlike earlier tyrannosauroids and most other theropods , the maxillary and mandibular teeth of mature tyrannosaurids are not blade @-@ like but extremely thickened and often circular in cross @-@ section . Tooth counts tend to be consistent within species , and larger species tend to have lower tooth counts than smaller ones . For example , Alioramus had 76 to 78 teeth in its jaws , while Tyrannosaurus had between 54 and 60 . 
 William Abler observed in 2001 that Albertosaurus tooth serrations resemble a crack in the tooth ending in a round void called an ampulla . Tyrannosaurid teeth were used as holdfasts for pulling meat off a body , so when a tyrannosaur would have pulled back on a piece of meat , the tension could cause a purely crack @-@ like serration to spread through the tooth . However , the presence of the ampulla would have distributed these forces over a larger surface area , and lessened the risk of damage to the tooth under strain . The presence of incisions ending in voids has parallels in human engineering . Guitar makers use incisions ending in voids to , as Abler describes , " impart alternating regions of flexibility and rigidity " to the wood they work with . The use of a drill to create an " ampulla " of sorts and prevent the propagation of cracks through material is also used to protect airplane surfaces . Abler demonstrated that a plexiglass bar with incisions called " <unk> " and drilled holes was more than 25 % stronger than one with only regularly placed incisions . Unlike tyrannosaurs , ancient predators like phytosaurs and Dimetrodon had no adaptations to prevent the crack @-@ like serrations of their teeth from spreading when subjected to the forces of feeding . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 The first remains of tyrannosaurids were uncovered during expeditions led by the Geological Survey of Canada , which located numerous scattered teeth . These distinctive dinosaur teeth were given the name Deinodon ( " terrible tooth " ) by Joseph Leidy in 1856 . The first good specimens of a tyrannosaurid were found in the Horseshoe Canyon Formation of Alberta , and consisted of nearly complete skulls with partial skeletons . These remains were first studied by Edward Drinker Cope in 1876 , who considered them a species of the eastern tyrannosauroid Dryptosaurus . In 1905 , Henry Fairfield Osborn recognized that the Alberta remains differed considerably from Dryptosaurus , and coined a new name for them : Albertosaurus sarcophagus ( " flesh @-@ eating Alberta lizard " ) . Cope described more tyrannosaur material in 1892 , in the form of isolated vertebrae , and gave this animal the name Manospondylus gigas . This discovery was mostly overlooked for over a century , and caused controversy in the early 2000s when it was discovered that this material actually belonged to , and had name priority over , Tyrannosaurus rex . 
 In his 1905 paper naming Albertosaurus , Osborn described two additional tyrannosaur specimens that had been collected from in Montana and Wyoming during a 1902 expedition of the American Museum of Natural History , led by Barnum Brown . Initially , Osborn considered these to be distinct species . The first , he named Dynamosaurus imperiosus ( " emperor power lizard " ) , and the second , Tyrannosaurus rex ( " king tyrant lizard " ) . A year later , Osborn recognized that these two specimens actually came from the same species . Despite the fact that Dynamosaurus had been found first , the name Tyrannosaurus had appeared one page earlier in his original article describing both specimens . Therefore , according to the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature ( ICZN ) , the name Tyrannosaurus was used . 
 Barnum Brown went on to collect several more tyrannosaurid specimens from Alberta , including the first to preserve the shortened , two @-@ fingered forelimbs characteristic of the group ( which Lawrence Lambe named Gorgosaurus libratus , " balanced fierce lizard " , in 1914 ) . A second significant find attributed to Gorgosaurus was made in 1942 , in the form of a well @-@ preserved , though unusually small , complete skull . The specimen waited until after the end of World War II to be studied by Charles W. Gilmore , who named it Gorgosaurus <unk> . This skull was re @-@ studied by Robert T. Bakker , Phil Currie , and Michael Williams in 1988 , and assigned to the new genus Nanotyrannus . It was also in 1946 that paleontologists from the Soviet Union began expeditions into Mongolia , and uncovered the first tyrannosaur remains from Asia . Evgeny Maleev described new Mongolian species of Tyrannosaurus and Gorgosaurus in 1955 , and one new genus : Tarbosaurus ( " terrifying lizard " ) . Subsequent studies , however , showed that all of Maleev 's tyrannosaur species were actually one species of Tarbosaurus at different stages of growth . A second species of Mongolian tyrannosaurid was found later , described by Sergei Kurzanov in 1976 , and given the name Alioramus remotus ( " remote different branch " ) , though its status as a true tyrannosaurid and not a more primitive tyrannosaur is still controversial . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 While earlier tyrannosauroids are found on all three northern continents , tyrannosaurid fossils are known only from North America and Asia . Sometimes fragmentary remains uncovered in the Southern Hemisphere have been reported as " Southern Hemisphere tyrannosaurids , " although these seem to have been misidentified abelisaurid fossils . The exact time and place of origin of the family remain unknown due to the poor fossil record in the middle part of the Cretaceous on both continents , although the earliest confirmed tyrannosaurids lived in the early Campanian stage in western North America . 
 Tyrannosaurid remains have never been recovered from eastern North America , while more basal tyrannosauroids , like Dryptosaurus and Appalachiosaurus , persisted there until the end of the Cretaceous , indicating that tyrannosaurids must have evolved in or dispersed into western North America after the continent was divided in half by the Western Interior Seaway in the middle of the Cretaceous . Tyrannosaurid fossils have been found in Alaska , which may have provided a route for dispersal between North America and Asia . Alioramus and Tarbosaurus are found to be related in one cladistic analysis , forming a unique Asian branch of the family . This was later disproven with the discovery of Qianzhousaurus and the description of the tyrannosaur family Alioramini . Tyrannosaurid teeth from a large species of unknown variety were discovered in the Nagasaki Peninsula by researchers from the Fukui Prefectural Dinosaur Museum , further expanding the range of the group . The teeth were estimated to be 81 million years old ( Campanian Age ) . 
 Of the two subfamilies , tyrannosaurines appear to have been more widespread . <unk> are unknown in Asia , which was home to the tyrannosaurines such as Tarbosaurus and Zhuchengtyrannus , and Qianzhousaurus and Alioramus of the Alioramini . Both subfamilies of Tyrannosaurinae and Albertosaurinae were present in the Campanian and early Maastrichtian stages of North America , with tyrannosaurines like Daspletosaurus ranging throughout the Western Interior , while the albertosaurines Albertosaurus and Gorgosaurus are currently known only from the northwestern part of the continent . 
 By the late Maastrichtian , albertosaurines appear to have gone extinct , while the tyrannosaurine Tyrannosaurus roamed from Saskatchewan to Texas . This pattern is mirrored in other North American dinosaur taxa . During the Campanian and early Maastrichtian , lambeosaurine hadrosaurs and centrosaurine ceratopsians are common in the northwest , while hadrosaurines and chasmosaurines were more common to the south . By the end of the Cretaceous , centrosaurines are unknown and lambeosaurines are rare , while hadrosaurines and chasmosaurines were common throughout the Western Interior . A study published in the journal Scientific Reports on February 2 , 2016 by Steve Brusatte , Thomas Carr et al. indicates that during the later Maastrichtian , Tyrannosaurus itself might have been partially responsible for the extinction of the other tyrannosaurids in most of western North America . The study indicates that Tyrannosaurus might have been an immigrant from Asia as opposed to having evolved in North America ( possibly a descendent of the closely related Tarbosaurus ) that supplanted and outcompeted other tyrannosaurids . This theory is further supported by the fact that few to no other types of tyrannosaurid are found within Tyrannosaurus ' known range . 
 = = Physiology = = 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 Paleontologist Gregory Erickson and colleagues have studied the growth and life history of tyrannosaurids . Analysis of bone histology can determine the age of a specimen when it died . Growth rates can be examined when the age of various individuals are plotted against their size on a graph . Erickson has shown that after a long time as juveniles , tyrannosaurs underwent tremendous growth spurts for about four years midway through their lives . After the rapid growth phase ended with sexual maturity , growth slowed down considerably in adult animals . A tyrannosaurid growth curve is S @-@ shaped , with the maximum growth rate of individuals around 14 years of age . 
 The smallest known Tyrannosaurus rex individual ( LACM 28471 , the " Jordan theropod " ) is estimated to have weighed only 29 @.@ 9 kilograms ( 66 lb ) at only 2 years old , while the largest , such as FMNH PR2081 ( " Sue " ) most likely weighed about 5 @,@ 654 kg ( 12 @,@ 465 lb ) , estimated to have been 28 years old , an age which may have been close to the maximum for the species . T. rex juveniles remained under 1 @,@ 800 kg ( 4 @,@ 000 lb ) until approximately 14 years of age , when body size began to increase dramatically . During this rapid growth phase , a young T. rex would gain an average of 600 kg ( 1 @,@ 300 lb ) a year for the next four years . This slowed after 16 years , and at 18 years of age , the curve plateaus again , indicating that growth slowed dramatically . For example , only 600 kg ( 1 @,@ 300 lb ) separated the 28 @-@ year @-@ old " Sue " from a 22 @-@ year @-@ old Canadian specimen ( RTMP 81 @.@ 12 @.@ 1 ) . This sudden change in growth rate may indicate physical maturity , a hypothesis which is supported by the discovery of medullary tissue in the femur of an 18 @-@ year @-@ old T. rex from Montana ( MOR 1125 , also known as " B @-@ rex " ) . Medullary tissue is found only in female birds during ovulation , indicating that " B @-@ rex " was of reproductive age . 
 Other tyrannosaurids exhibit extremely similar growth curves , although with lower growth rates corresponding to their lower adult sizes . Compared to albertosaurines , Daspletosaurus showed a faster growth rate during the rapid growth period due to its higher adult weight . The maximum growth rate in Daspletosaurus was 180 kilograms ( 400 lb ) per year , based on a mass estimate of 1 @,@ 800 kg ( 4 @,@ 000 lb ) in adults . Other authors have suggested higher adult weights for Daspletosaurus ; this would change the magnitude of the growth rate but not the overall pattern . The youngest known Albertosaurus is a two @-@ year @-@ old discovered in the Dry Island bonebed , which would have weighed about 50 kg ( 110 lb ) and measured slightly more than 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) in length . The 10 @-@ metre ( 33 ft ) specimen from the same quarry is the oldest and largest known , at 28 years of age . The fastest growth rate is estimated to be around 12 – 16 years , reaching 122 kilograms ( 269 lb ) per year , based on an adult 1 @,@ 300 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 900 lb ) which is about five times slower than for <unk> For Gorgosaurus the calculated maximum growth rate is about 110 kilograms ( 240 lb ) during the rapid growth phase , which is comparable to that of Albertosaurus . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The end of the rapid growth phase suggests the onset of sexual maturity in Albertosaurus , although growth continued at a slower rate throughout the animals ' lives . Sexual maturation while still actively growing appears to be a shared trait among small and large dinosaurs as well as in large mammals such as humans and elephants . This pattern of relatively early sexual maturation differs strikingly from the pattern in birds , which delay their sexual maturity until after they have finished growing . 
 By tabulating the number of specimens of each age group , Erickson and his colleagues were able to draw conclusions about life history in <unk> populations . Their analysis showed that while juveniles were rare in the fossil record , subadults in the rapid growth phase and adults were far more common . Over half of the known T. rex specimens appear to have died within six years of reaching sexual maturity , a pattern that is also seen in other tyrannosaurs and in some large , long @-@ lived birds and mammals today . These species are characterized by high infant mortality rates , followed by relatively low mortality among juveniles . Mortality increases again following sexual maturity , partly due to the stresses of reproduction . While this could be due to preservation or collection biases , Erickson hypothesized that the difference was due to low mortality among juveniles over a certain size , which is also seen in some modern large mammals , like elephants . This low mortality may have resulted from a lack of predation , since tyrannosaurs surpassed all contemporaneous predators in size by the age of two . Paleontologists have not found enough Daspletosaurus remains for a similar analysis , but Erickson notes that the same general trend seems to apply . 
 The tyrannosaurids spent as much as half its life in the juvenile phase before ballooning up to near @-@ maximum size in only a few years . This , along with the complete lack of predators intermediate in size between huge adult tyrannosaurids and other small theropods , suggests these niches may have been filled by juvenile tyrannosaurids . This is seen in modern Komodo dragons , where hatchlings start off as tree @-@ dwelling insectivores and slowly mature into massive apex predators capable of taking down large vertebrates . For example , Albertosaurus have been found in aggregations that some have suggested to represent mixed @-@ age packs . 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 Locomotion abilities are best studied for Tyrannosaurus and there are two main issues concerning this : how well it could turn ; and what its maximum straight @-@ line speed was likely to have <unk> may have been slow to turn , possibly taking one to two seconds to turn only 45 ° – an amount that humans , being vertically oriented and tail @-@ less , can spin in a fraction of a second . The cause of the difficulty is rotational inertia , since much of Tyrannosaurus ’ mass was some distance from its center of gravity , like a human carrying a heavy timber . 
 Scientists have produced a wide range of maximum speed estimates , mostly around 11 metres per second ( 25 mph ) , but a few as low as 5 – 11 metres per second ( 11 – 25 mph ) , and a few as high as 20 metres per second ( 45 mph ) . Researchers have to rely on various estimating techniques because , while there are many tracks of very large theropods walking , so far none have been found of very large theropods running — and this absence may indicate that they did not run . 
 Jack Horner and Don Lessem argued in 1993 that Tyrannosaurus was slow and probably could not run ( no airborne phase in mid @-@ stride ) . However , Holtz ( 1998 ) concluded that tyrannosaurids and their close relatives were the fastest large theropods . Christiansen ( 1998 ) estimated that the leg bones of Tyrannosaurus were not significantly stronger than those of elephants , which are relatively limited in their top speed and never actually run ( there is no airborne phase ) , and hence proposed that the dinosaur 's maximum speed would have been about 11 metres per second ( 25 mph ) , which is about the speed of a human sprinter . Farlow and colleagues ( 1995 ) have argued that a 6 @-@ 8 ton Tyrannosaurus would have been critically or even fatally injured if it had fallen while moving quickly , since its torso would have slammed into the ground at a deceleration of 6 g ( six times the acceleration due to gravity , or about 60 meters / s ² ) and its tiny arms could not have reduced the impact . However , giraffes have been known to gallop at 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) , despite the risk that they might break a leg or worse , which can be fatal even in a " safe " environment such as a zoo . Thus it is quite possible that Tyrannosaurus also moved fast when necessary and had to accept such risks ; this scenario has been studied for Allosaurus too . Most recent research on Tyrannosaurus locomotion does not narrow down speeds further than a range from 17 to 40 kilometres per hour ( 11 to 25 mph ) , i.e. from walking or slow running to moderate @-@ speed running . A computer model study in 2007 estimated running speeds , based on data taken directly from fossils , and claimed that T. rex had a top running speed of 8 metres per second ( 18 mph ) . ( probably a juvenile individual ) . 
 = = = Feathers = = = 
 Long filamentous structures have been preserved along with skeletal remains of numerous coelurosaurs from the Early Cretaceous Yixian Formation and other nearby geological formations from Liaoning , China . These filaments have usually been interpreted as " protofeathers , " homologous with the branched feathers found in birds and some non @-@ avian theropods , although other hypotheses have been proposed . A skeleton of Dilong was described in 2004 that included the first example of " protofeathers " in a tyrannosauroid . Similarly to down feathers of modern birds , the " protofeathers " found in Dilong were branched but not pennaceous , and may have been used for insulation . The discovery and description of the 9 meter ( 30 ft ) feathered tyrannosauroid Yutyrannus in 2012 indicates the possibility large tyrannosaurids were also feathered as adults . 
 It has also been <unk> that tyrannosaurids had such protofeathers . However , rare skin impressions from adult tyrannosaurids in Canada and Mongolia show pebbly scales typical of other dinosaurs . While it is possible that protofeathers existed on parts of the body that have not been preserved , a lack of <unk> body covering is consistent with modern multi @-@ ton mammals , such as elephants , hippopotamus , and most species of rhinoceros . As an object increases in size , its ability to retain heat increases due to its decreasing surface area @-@ to @-@ volume ratio . Therefore , as large animals evolve in or disperse into warm climates , a coat of fur or feathers loses its selective advantage for thermal insulation and can instead become a disadvantage , as the insulation traps excess heat inside the body , possibly overheating the animal . <unk> may also have been secondarily lost during the evolution of large tyrannosaurids , especially in warm Cretaceous climates . A precedent can be seen in other dinosaur groups such as ornithischians , in which filamentous structures were lost , and scales reappeared . 
 = = = Vision = = = 
 The eye @-@ sockets of Tyrannosaurus are positioned so that the eyes would point forward , giving them binocular vision slightly better than that of modern hawks . Jack Horner also pointed out that the tyrannosaur lineage had a history of steadily improving binocular vision . It is hard to see how natural selection would have favored this long @-@ term trend if tyrannosaurs had been pure scavengers , which would not have needed the advanced depth perception that stereoscopic vision provides . In modern animals , binocular vision is found mainly in predators ( the principal exceptions are primates , which need it for leaping from branch to branch ) . Unlike Tyrannosaurus , Tarbosaurus had a narrower skull more typical of other tyrannosaurids in which the eyes faced primarily sideways . All of this suggests that Tarbosaurus relied more on its senses of smell and hearing than on its eyesight . In Gorgosaurus specimens , the eye socket was circular rather than oval or keyhole @-@ shaped as in other tyrannosaurid genera . In Daspletosaurus , this was a tall oval , somewhere in between the circular shape seen in Gorgosaurus and the ' keyhole ' shape of Tyrannosaurus . 
 = = = Bony crests = = = 
 Bony crests are found on the skulls of many theropods , including many tyrannosaurids . Alioramus , a possible tyrannosaurid from Mongolia , bears a single row of five prominent bony bumps on the nasal bones ; a similar row of much lower bumps is present on the skull of Appalachiosaurus , as well as some specimens of Daspletosaurus , Albertosaurus , and Tarbosaurus . In Albertosaurus , Gorgosaurus and Daspletosaurus , there is a prominent horn in front of each eye on the lacrimal bone . The lacrimal horn is absent in Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus , which instead have a crescent @-@ shaped crest behind each eye on the postorbital bone . These head crests may have been used for display , perhaps for species recognition or courtship behavior . 
 = = = Thermoregulation = = = 
 Tyrannosaurus , like most dinosaurs , was long thought to have an ectothermic ( " cold @-@ blooded " ) reptilian metabolism but was challenged by scientists like Robert T. Bakker and John Ostrom in the early years of the " Dinosaur Renaissance " , beginning in the late 1960s . Tyrannosaurus rex itself was claimed to have been endothermic ( " warm @-@ blooded " ) , implying a very active lifestyle . Since then , several paleontologists have sought to determine the ability of Tyrannosaurus to regulate its body temperature . Histological evidence of high growth rates in young T. rex , comparable to those of mammals and birds , may support the hypothesis of a high metabolism . Growth curves indicate that , as in mammals and birds , T. rex growth was limited mostly to immature animals , rather than the indeterminate growth seen in most other vertebrates . It has been indicated that the temperature difference may have been no more than 4 to 5 ° C ( 7 to 9 ° F ) between the vertebrae of the torso and the tibia of the lower leg . This small temperature range between the body core and the extremities was claimed by paleontologist Reese Barrick and geochemist William Showers to indicate that T. rex maintained a constant internal body temperature ( homeothermy ) and that it enjoyed a metabolism somewhere between ectothermic reptiles and endothermic mammals . Later they found similar results in Giganotosaurus specimens , who lived on a different continent and tens of millions of years earlier in time . Even if Tyrannosaurus rex does exhibit evidence of homeothermy , it does not necessarily mean that it was endothermic . Such thermoregulation may also be explained by gigantothermy , as in some living sea turtles . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 = = = Coexistence of Daspletosaurus and Gorgosaurus = = = 
 In the Dinosaur Park Formation , Gorgosaurus lived alongside a rarer species of the tyrannosaurine Daspletosaurus . This is one of the few examples of two tyrannosaur genera coexisting . Similarly @-@ sized predators in modern predator guilds are separated into different ecological niches by anatomical , behavioral or geographical differences that limit competition . Niche differentiation between the Dinosaur Park tyrannosaurids is not well @-@ understood . In 1970 , Dale Russell hypothesized that the more common Gorgosaurus actively hunted fleet @-@ footed hadrosaurs , while the rarer and more troublesome ceratopsians and ankylosaurians ( horned and heavily armoured dinosaurs ) were left to the more heavily built Daspletosaurus . However , a specimen of Daspletosaurus ( OTM 200 ) from the contemporaneous Two Medicine Formation of Montana preserves the digested remains of a juvenile hadrosaur in its gut region . Unlike some other groups of dinosaurs , neither genus was more common at higher or lower elevations than the other . However , Gorgosaurus appears more common in northern formations like the Dinosaur Park , with species of Daspletosaurus more abundant to the south . The same pattern is seen in other groups of dinosaurs . Chasmosaurine ceratopsians and hadrosaurine hadrosaurs are also more common in the Two Medicine Formation of Montana and in southwestern North America during the Campanian , while centrosaurines and lambeosaurines dominate in northern latitudes . Holtz has suggested that this pattern indicates shared ecological preferences between tyrannosaurines , chasmosaurines and hadrosaurines . At the end of the later Maastrichtian stage , tyrannosaurines like Tyrannosaurus rex , hadrosaurines like Edmontosaurus and chasmosaurines like Triceratops were widespread throughout western North America , while albertosaurines and centrosaurines became extinct , and lambeosaurines were rare . 
 = = = Social behavior = = = 
 There is limited evidence of social behavior among the tyrannosaurids . For example , the " Sue " <unk> specimen apparently died from a massive bite to the head , which could only have been inflicted by another tyrannosaur . Researchers reported that a subadult and a juvenile skeleton were found in the same quarry as the " Sue " specimen , which has been used to support the hypothesis that tyrannosaurs may have lived in social groups of some kind . While there is no evidence of gregarious behavior in Gorgosaurus , there is evidence of some pack behavior for Albertosaurus and Daspletosaurus . 
 A young specimen of the Dinosaur Park Daspletosaurus species ( TMP 94 @.@ 143 @.@ 1 ) shows bite marks on the face that were inflicted by another tyrannosaur . The bite marks are healed over , indicating that the animal survived the bite . A full @-@ grown Dinosaur Park Daspletosaurus ( TMP 85 @.@ 62 @.@ 1 ) also exhibits tyrannosaur bite marks , showing that attacks to the face were not limited to younger animals . While it is possible that the bites were attributable to other species , intraspecific aggression , including facial biting , is very common among predators . Facial bites are seen in other tyrannosaurs like Gorgosaurus and Tyrannosaurus , as well as in other theropod genera like Sinraptor and Saurornitholestes . Darren Tanke and Phil Currie hypothesize that the bites are due to intraspecific competition for territory or resources , or for dominance within a social group . 
 Evidence that Daspletosaurus lived in social groups comes from a bonebed found in the Two Medicine Formation of Montana . The bonebed includes the remains of three Daspletosaurus , including a large adult , a small juvenile , and another individual of intermediate size . At least five hadrosaurs are preserved at the same location . Geologic evidence indicates that the remains were not brought together by river currents but that all of the animals were buried simultaneously at the same location . The hadrosaur remains are scattered and bear many marks from tyrannosaur teeth , indicating that the Daspletosaurus were feeding on the hadrosaurs at the time of death . The cause of death is unknown . Currie speculates that the <unk> formed a pack , although this cannot be stated with certainty . Other scientists are skeptical of the evidence for social groups in Daspletosaurus and other large theropods ; Brian Roach and Daniel Brinkman have suggested that Daspletosaurus social interaction would have more closely resembled the modern Komodo dragon , where non @-@ cooperative individuals mob carcasses , frequently attacking and even cannibalizing each other in the process . 
 The Dry Island bonebed discovered by Barnum Brown and his crew contains the remains of 22 Albertosaurus , the most individuals found in one locality of any Cretaceous theropod , and the second @-@ most of any large theropod dinosaur behind the Allosaurus assemblage at the Cleveland Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry in Utah . The group seems to be composed of one very old adult ; eight adults between 17 and 23 years old ; seven sub @-@ adults undergoing their rapid growth phases at between 12 and 16 years old ; and six juveniles between the ages of 2 and 11 years , who had not yet reached the growth phase . The near @-@ absence of herbivore remains and the similar state of preservation between the many individuals at the Albertosaurus bonebed quarry led Phil Currie to conclude that the locality was not a predator trap like the La Brea Tar Pits in California , and that all of the preserved animals died at the same time . Currie claims this as evidence of pack behavior . Other scientists are skeptical , observing that the animals may have been driven together by drought , flood or for other reasons . 
 While it generally remains controversial , evidence does exist that supports the theory that at least some tyrannosaurids were social . In British Columbia 's Wapiti Formation , a trackway composed of the footprints of three individual tyrannosaurids ( named as the ichnogenus " <unk> <unk> " ) was discovered by a local outfitter named Aaron <unk> and described in the journal PLoS One by Richard McCrea et al . An examination of the trackway found no evidence of one trackway being left long after another had been made , further supporting the hypothesis that three individual tyrannosaurs were traveling together as a group . Further research revealed the animals were traveling at a speed of between 3 @.@ 9 and 5 @.@ 2 mph and likely had a hip height of around 7 to 9 feet . As three different genera of tyrannosaurids ( Gorgosaurus , Daspletosaurus , and Albertosaurus , respectively ) are known from the formation , it is unknown which genus was the maker of the trackway . 
