 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Tyrannosaur tooth marks are the most commonly preserved feeding traces of carnivorous dinosaurs . They have been reported from ceratopsians , hadrosaurs and other tyrannosaurs . Tyrannosaurid bones with tooth marks represent about 2 % of known fossils with preserved tooth marks . Tyrannosaurid teeth were used as holdfasts for pulling meat off a body , rather than knife @-@ like cutting functions . Tooth wear patterns hint that complex head shaking behaviors may have been involved in tyrannosaur feeding . 
 Speculation on the pack @-@ hunting habits of Albertosaurus were made by a few researchers who suggest that the younger members of the pack may have been responsible for driving their prey towards the adults , who were larger and more powerful , but also slower . Juveniles may also have had different lifestyles than adults , filling predator niches between those of the enormous adults and the smaller contemporaneous theropods , the largest of which were two orders of magnitude smaller than an adult Albertosaurus in mass . However , as the preservation of behavior in the fossil record is exceedingly rare , these ideas cannot readily be tested . Phil Currie speculates that the Daspletosaurus formed packs to hunt , although this cannot be stated with certainty . There is no evidence of such gregarious behavior in Gorgosaurus . 
 The debate about whether Tyrannosaurus was a predator or a pure scavenger is as old as the debate about its locomotion . Lambe ( 1917 ) described a good skeleton of Tyrannosaurus ’ close relative Gorgosaurus and concluded that it and therefore also Tyrannosaurus was a pure scavenger , because the Gorgosaurus ’ teeth showed hardly any wear . This argument is no longer taken seriously , because theropods replaced their teeth quite rapidly . Ever since the first discovery of Tyrannosaurus most scientists have agreed that it was a predator , although like modern large predators it would have been happy to scavenge or steal another predator 's kill if it had the opportunity . 
 Noted hadrosaur expert Jack Horner is currently the major advocate of the idea that Tyrannosaurus was exclusively a scavenger and did not engage in active hunting at all . Horner has presented several arguments to support the pure scavenger hypothesis . The presence of large olfactory bulbs and olfactory nerves suggests a highly developed sense of smell for sniffing out carcasses over great distances . The teeth could crush bone , and therefore could extract as much food ( bone marrow ) as possible from carcass remnants , usually the least nutritious parts . At least some of its potential prey could move quickly , while evidence suggests that it walked instead of ran . 
 Other evidence suggests hunting behavior in Tyrannosaurus . The eye @-@ sockets of tyrannosaurs are positioned so that the eyes would point forward , giving them binocular vision slightly better than that of modern hawks . Tyrannosaur @-@ inflicted damage has been found on skeletons of hadrosaurs and Triceratops that seemed to have survived initial attacks . Some researchers argue that if Tyrannosaurus were a scavenger , another dinosaur had to be the top predator in the <unk> Upper Cretaceous . The top prey were the larger marginocephalians and ornithopods . The other tyrannosaurids share so many characteristics with Tyrannosaurus that only small dromaeosaurs remain as feasible top predators . In this light , scavenger hypothesis adherents have suggested that the size and power of tyrannosaurs allowed them to steal kills from smaller predators . Most paleontologists accept that Tyrannosaurus was both an active predator and a scavenger . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The name Deinodontidae was coined by Edward Drinker Cope in 1866 for this family , and continued to be used in place of the newer name Tyrannosauridae through the 1960s . The type genus of the Deinodontidae is Deinodon , which was named after isolated teeth from Montana . However , in a 1970 review of North American tyrannosaurs , Dale Russell concluded that Deinodon was not a valid taxon , and used the name Tyrannosauridae in place of Deinodontidae , stating that this was in accordance with ICZN rules . Therefore , Tyrannosauridae is preferred by modern experts . 
 Tyrannosaurus was named by Henry Fairfield Osborn in 1905 , along with the family Tyrannosauridae . The name is derived from the Ancient Greek words <unk> / tyrannos ( ' tyrant ' ) and σαυρος / sauros ( ' lizard ' ) . The very common suffix -idae is normally appended to zoological family names and is derived from the Greek suffix <unk> / <unk> , which indicates a plural noun . 
 = = = Taxonomy = = = 
 Tyrannosauridae is a family in rank @-@ based Linnaean taxonomy , within the superfamily Tyrannosauroidea and the suborder Theropoda . 
 Tyrannosauridae is <unk> divided into two subfamilies . Albertosaurinae comprises the North American genera Albertosaurus and Gorgosaurus , while Tyrannosaurinae includes Daspletosaurus , Teratophoneus , Bistahieversor , Tarbosaurus , <unk> , Zhuchengtyrannus , and Tyrannosaurus itself . Some authors include the species Gorgosaurus libratus in the genus Albertosaurus and Tarbosaurus bataar in the genus Tyrannosaurus , while others prefer to retain Gorgosaurus and Tarbosaurus as separate genera . <unk> are characterized by more slender builds , lower skulls , and proportionately longer tibiae than tyrannosaurines . In tyrannosaurines , the sagittal crest on the parietals continues forward onto the frontals . Some authors , such as George Olshevsky and Tracy Ford , have created finer subdivisions or tribes for various combinations of tyrannosaurs within the subfamilies . However , these have not been phylogenetically defined , and usually consisted of genera which are now considered synonymous with other genera or species . 
 Additional subfamilies have been named for more fragmentary genera , including <unk> and <unk> . However , the genera Aublysodon and Deinodon are usually considered nomina dubia , so they and their eponymous subfamilies are usually excluded from taxonomies of tyrannosaurids . An additional tyrannosaurid , <unk> , was initially described as a more primitive tyrannosauroid , but likely represents a juvenile tyrannosaurine similar to Tarbosaurus . However , as it is known only from a juvenile specimen , it is also currently considered a nomen dubium . 
 In 2014 , <unk> Lü described the tribe Alioramini with the genera Qianzhousaurus and Alioramus . 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 With the advent of phylogenetic taxonomy in vertebrate paleontology , Tyrannosauridae has been given several explicit definitions . The original was produced by Paul Sereno in 1998 , and included all tyrannosauroids closer to Tyrannosaurus than to either Alectrosaurus , Aublysodon or Nanotyrannus . However , Nanotyrannus is often considered to be a juvenile Tyrannosaurus rex , while Aublysodon is usually regarded as a nomen dubium unsuitable for use in the definition of a clade . Definitions since then have been based on more well @-@ established genera . 
 Later in the same paper he proposed that Tyrannosauridae be defined as " all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of Tyrannosaurus and Aublysodon . " He also criticized definitions previously proposed by other workers , like one proposed by Paul Sereno , that the Tyrannosauridae was " all taxa closer to " Tyrannosaurus " than to Alectrosaurus , Aublysodon , and Nanotyrannus . " Holtz observed that since Nanotyrannus was probably a misidentified T. rex juvenile , Sereno 's proposed definition would have the family Tyrannosauridae as a <unk> of the genus Tyrannosaurus . Further , his proposed definition of the subfamily Tyrannosaurinae would also be limited to Tyrannosaurus . 
 A 2003 attempt by Christopher Brochu included Albertosaurus , Alectrosaurus , Alioramus , Daspletosaurus , Gorgosaurus , Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus in the definition . Holtz redefined the clade in 2004 to use all of the above as specifiers except for Alioramus and Alectrosaurus , which his analysis could not place with certainty . However , in the same paper , Holtz also provided a completely different definition , including all theropods more closely related to Tyrannosaurus than to Eotyrannus . The most recent definition is that of Sereno in 2005 , which defined Tyrannosauridae as the least inclusive clade containing Albertosaurus , Gorgosaurus and Tyrannosaurus . 
 Cladistic analyses of tyrannosaurid phylogeny often find Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus to be sister taxa , with Daspletosaurus more basal than either . A close relationship between Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus is supported by numerous skull features , including the pattern of sutures between certain bones , the presence of a crescent @-@ shaped crest on the postorbital bone behind each eye , and a very deep maxilla with a noticeable downward curve on the lower edge , among others . An alternative hypothesis was presented in a 2003 study by Phil Currie and colleagues , which found weak support for Daspletosaurus as a basal member of a clade also including Tarbosaurus and Alioramus , both from Asia , based on the absence of a bony prong connecting the nasal and lacrimal bones . Alioramus was found to be the closest relative of Tarbosaurus in this study , based on a similar pattern of stress distribution in the skull . 
 A related study also noted a locking mechanism in the lower jaw shared between the two genera . In a separate paper , Currie noted the possibility that Alioramus might represent a juvenile Tarbosaurus , but stated that the much higher tooth count and more prominent nasal crests in Alioramus suggest it is a distinct genus . Similarly , Currie uses the high tooth count of Nanotyrannus to suggest that it may be a distinct genus , rather than a juvenile Tyrannosaurus as most other experts believe . The discovery and description of Qianzhousaurus however , reveals that Alioramus is not a close relation to Tarbosaurus , instead belonging to a newly described family of tyrannosaurids ; the Alioramini . Qianzhousaurus further reveals that similar long @-@ snouted tyrannosaurids were widely distributed throughout Asia and would have shared the same environment while avoiding competition with larger and more robust tyrannosaurines by hunting different prey . 
 = = Timeline of genera = = 
 = SMS Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia = 
 SMS Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia ( " Empress and Queen Maria Theresa " ) was an armored cruiser used by the imperial Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy from 1895 to 1917 ; she was the first ship of that type built by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . The ship was a unique design , built by the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard in Trieste ; she was laid down in July 1891 , launched in April 1893 , and completed in November 1894 . Armed with a main battery of two 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns and eight 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns , the ship provided the basis for two subsequent armored cruiser designs for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . 
 In 1898 , Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia was deployed to the Caribbean to safeguard Austro @-@ Hungarian interests during the Spanish – American War ; she inadvertently arrived off Santiago de Cuba on the morning the Spanish squadron attempted to escape from the American blockade , and was nearly attacked herself . In 1900 , she was sent to China to assist in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion , and remained in East Asian waters until 1902 . She was heavily modernized between 1906 and 1910 , and served in the 1st Cruiser Division after returning to the fleet . She was used first as a harbor guard ship and then as a barracks ship during World War I. After the end of the war , she was surrendered to Britain as a war prize and broken up for scrap in 1920 . 
 = = Design = = 
 In the 1890s , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy began building large , modern cruisers , beginning with the protected cruisers of the Kaiser Franz Joseph I class . The <unk> , the executive committee of the Navy , decided to follow the Kaiser Franz Joseph I @-@ class ships with a more powerful vessel , a larger , better armed armored cruiser , as the type had begun to gain prominence in foreign navies . The Austro @-@ Hungarians requested design proposals from five British shipyards , though none of them were awarded the contract . The Navy gave the contract for " torpedo @-@ ram cruiser C " , as it was provisionally titled , to Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino , the Austrian dockyard in Trieste . The two subsequent armored cruisers , Kaiser Karl VI and Sankt Georg , were improved versions of this design . 
 Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia was 111 @.@ 67 meters ( 366 @.@ 4 ft ) long at the waterline and 113 @.@ 7 m ( 373 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 16 @.@ 25 m ( 53 @.@ 3 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 81 m ( 22 @.@ 3 ft ) . As designed , the ship displaced 5 @,@ 330 metric tons ( 5 @,@ 250 long tons ; 5 @,@ 880 short tons ) , and at full load she displaced 6 @,@ 026 t ( 5 @,@ 931 long tons ; 6 @,@ 643 short tons ) . She had a crew of 475 officers and men . The ship was powered by two 3 @-@ cylinder , horizontal triple expansion engines rated at 9 @,@ 755 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 274 kW ) . This gave the ship a top speed of 19 @.@ 35 knots ( 35 @.@ 84 km / h ; 22 @.@ 27 mph ) . 
 Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia was armed with a main battery of two 24 cm K L / 35 guns , manufactured by Krupp , and mounted in two single turrets , one forward and one aft . These guns were the primary offensive armament . For defense against torpedo boats , she also carried eight Krupp 8 cm SK L / 35 guns , twelve Skoda 4 @.@ 7 cm SK L / 44 guns , six Hotchkiss 47 mm L / 33 guns , and a pair of 7 cm L / 15 landing guns ; these guns were primarily mounted in casemates or sponsons . The landing guns could be taken ashore to provide support for a landing party . Her armament was rounded out by four 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , one in the bow , one in the stern , and one on each side . Both the main battery turrets and the armored belt were protected by 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick steel armor . The main deck was 38 to 57 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 2 in ) thick . The casemates were armored with 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) of steel , and the conning tower had 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia was laid down on 1 June 1891 , launched on 29 April 1893 , and commissioned into the fleet in November 1894 . In 1895 , Archduke Charles Stephen of Austria took a squadron of warships , including Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia , to Germany to participate in the celebrations for the opening of the Kiel Canal . The squadron called on the port of Brest , France on the way , and stopped in Portsmouth on the return voyage . In early 1897 , the ship joined the massive international fleet that demonstrated off Crete to protest the Greek annexation of the island from the Ottoman Empire . The Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet was the third largest contingent , after the Italians and British . The Austro @-@ Hungarians and Germans were dissatisfied with the compromise worked out , and so withdrew their contingents early , in March 1898 . 
 In 1898 , Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia was dispatched to Cuba during the Spanish – American War , to evacuate Austrian and German nationals in the city of Santiago . The ship arrived off Santiago on 3 July , the day the Spanish admiral Pascual Cervera y Topete attempted to break out of the harbor , through the American blockade . The American auxiliary vessel USS Resolute spotted Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia approaching US Army transports off Siboney and <unk> . Resolute informed the battleship USS Indiana about a " Spanish battleship " attacking the army ships , after which Indiana steamed to engage the supposed Spanish warship . After closing to 6 @,@ 000 yards ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) , Indiana 's captain identified Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia shortly before his gunners would have opened fire . The Austrian cruiser had similar run @-@ ins with other vessels of the American fleet as it sought permission from the American commander to perform its evacuation . After inspecting her , Admiral William T. Sampson , the American commander , permitted the Austrian cruiser to enter the harbor for her mission . After picking up the evacuees , Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia went to Port Royal , Jamaica , and remained in the Caribbean until the end of the war . On 9 May , she departed , bound for Pola , and arrived on 9 December . Over the winter of 1898 – 1899 , the ship served in the winter training squadron along with the battleship Budapest . 
 As anti @-@ foreign violence began to rise in China in early 1900 , the Great Powers began to send warships to the Far East to increase the pressure on the Chinese government to reign in the violence . At the peak of the Boxer Rebellion , Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia was deployed to the area under the command of Victor Ritter Bless von <unk> , along with numerous other European warships . She left Pola in June , and was followed by the cruisers Kaiserin Elisabeth and Aspern the next month . The ships joined the international fleet off Taku in September 1900 , though by that time , most of the fighting had already occurred . Nevertheless , Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia and Aspern remained in East Asian waters for an extended deployment . Captain Anton Haus took command of the ship , and in June 1901 , he took the ship to Hankow up the Yangtze River ; she was the largest ship to have steamed that far up the river . She returned to Austria @-@ Hungary in 1902 , and was replaced in China by the new armored cruiser Kaiser Karl VI . 
 Between 1906 – 1908 and 1909 – 1910 , the ship was rebuilt and equipped with more modern main guns . The 24 cm guns were replaced with quick @-@ firing 19 cm L / 42 guns manufactured by Skoda . Four 37 mm Vickers revolving cannon were also installed . The ship 's heavy fighting masts were removed . In 1912 , the ship was sent to Salonika to safeguard Austro @-@ Hungarian interests during the Balkan Wars . She was then assigned to the 1st Cruiser Division , and remained in that unit after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 . It consisted of the other two armored cruisers in the fleet , and three light cruisers , under the command of Vice Admiral Paul Fiedler . She was used as a harbor guard ship in Šibenik starting in 1914 . In 1916 , she was withdrawn from service and disarmed the following year for use as a barracks ship for German U @-@ boat crews operating out of the Austrian naval base at Pola . Her guns were converted for use on land and sent to the Italian front . After the end of the war , in 1920 , Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia was allocated to Britain as a war prize . The British sold her to an Italian ship @-@ breaking firm , which broke her up for scrap . 
 = CSI effect = 
 The CSI effect , also known as the CSI syndrome and the CSI infection , is any of several ways in which the exaggerated portrayal of forensic science on crime television shows such as CSI : Crime Scene Investigation influences public perception . The term most often refers to the belief that jurors have come to demand more forensic evidence in criminal trials , thereby raising the effective standard of proof for prosecutors . While this belief is widely held among American legal professionals , some studies have suggested that crime shows are unlikely to cause such an effect , although frequent CSI viewers may place a lower value on circumstantial evidence . As technology improves and becomes more prevalent throughout society , people may also develop higher expectations for the capabilities of forensic technology . 
 = = Background = = 
 The CSI effect is named for CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , a television program which first aired in 2000 . In CSI , a fictional team of crime scene investigators solve murders in the Las Vegas metropolitan area . In each episode , the discovery of a human corpse leads to a criminal investigation by members of the team , who gather and analyze forensic evidence , question witnesses , and apprehend suspects . The show 's popularity led to three spin @-@ offs : CSI : Miami , which debuted in 2002 , CSI : NY , first aired in 2004 , and CSI : Cyber , which premiered in 2015 . The CSI franchise 's success resulted in the production of many similar shows ; in turn , the " CSI effect " has been associated with other crime shows , including American Justice , Bones , Cold Case , Cold Case Files , Cold Squad , Criminal Minds , Crossing Jordan , Exhibit A : Secrets of Forensic Science , Forensic Files , NCIS , Numb3rs , Silent Witness , Waking the Dead , Wire in the Blood , and Without a Trace . Based on the Nielsen ratings , six of the top ten most popular television shows in the United States in 2005 were crime dramas , and CSI : Crime Scene Investigation reached the number one ranking in November 2007 . 
 Several aspects of popular crime shows have been criticized as being unrealistic . For instance , the show 's characters not only investigate ( " process " ) crime scenes , but they also conduct raids , engage in suspect pursuit and arrest , interrogate suspects , and solve cases , which falls under the responsibility of uniformed officers and detectives , not CSI personnel . Additionally , if CSIs process a crime scene it is inappropriate for them to also be involved in the examination and testing of any evidence collected from that scene as it would compromise the impartiality of scientific evidence . In real investigations , DNA and fingerprint data is often unobtainable and , when they are available , can take several weeks or months to process , whereas television crime labs usually get results within hours . In the first season of CSI , technicians made a plaster mold of the interior of a wound to determine the type of knife used to make the wound , which is not possible with current technology . Characters on television often use the word " match " to describe a definitive relationship between two pieces of evidence , whereas real forensic technicians tend to use terms that are less definite , which acknowledges that absolute certainty is often not possible . 
 Anthony E. Zuiker , creator of the CSI franchise , claimed that " all of the science is accurate " on the shows ; researchers , however , have described CSI 's portrayal of forensic science as " high @-@ tech magic . " Forensic scientist Thomas <unk> estimated that 40 percent of the scientific techniques depicted on CSI do not exist . In addition to using unrealistic techniques , CSI ignores all elements of uncertainty present in real investigations , and instead portrays experimental results as absolute truth . The notion that these inaccurate portrayals could alter the public perception of forensic evidence was dubbed the " CSI effect " , a term which began to appear in mainstream media as early as 2004 . By 2009 , more than 250 stories about the CSI effect had appeared in newspapers and magazines , including articles in National Geographic , Scientific American , and U.S. News & World Report . 
 Although the CSI effect is a recent phenomenon , it has long been recognized that media portrayals of the United States legal system are capable of significantly altering public awareness , knowledge , and opinions of it . A 2002 juror survey showed that viewers of the popular court show Judge Judy were greatly misinformed about the purpose of the judge within a courtroom . Earlier programs which may have affected public perception of " the legal or investigative systems " include Perry Mason ( 1957 – 66 ) , Quincy , M.E. ( 1976 – 83 ) and the Law & Order franchise ( 1990 – present ) . News media reports on criminal trials , extensive internet blogging , and the successes of the Innocence Project have also contributed to the increased public awareness of forensic science . Zuiker has stated that " ' The CSI Effect ' is , in my opinion , the most amazing thing that has ever come out of the series . " 
 = = Manifestations = = 
 = = = Trials = = = 
 The popularity of forensic crime television shows supposedly gives rise to many misconceptions about the nature of forensic science and investigation procedures among jury members . The CSI effect is hypothesized to affect verdicts in two main ways : first , that jurors expect more forensic evidence than is available or necessary , resulting in a higher rate of acquittal when such evidence is absent ; and second , that jurors have greater confidence in forensic and particularly DNA evidence than is warranted , resulting in a higher rate of conviction when such evidence is present . While these and other effects may be caused by crime shows , the most commonly reported effect is that jurors are wrongly acquitting defendants despite overwhelming evidence of guilt . In particular , prosecutors have reported feeling pressured to provide DNA evidence even when eyewitness testimony is available . In one highly publicized incident , Los Angeles County , California District Attorney Steve Cooley blamed actor Robert Blake 's acquittal on murder charges on the CSI effect . Cooley noted that the not guilty verdict came despite two witness accounts of Blake 's guilt , and claimed that the jury members were " incredibly stupid " . 
 By 2005 , some prosecutors had begun altering their trial preparations and procedures in an attempt to counter the CSI effect . Some ask questions about forensic television viewership during voir dire to target biased jurors ; others use opening statements and closing arguments to minimize the possible impact of the CSI effect , and instruct jurors to adhere to the court 's standards of evidence rather than those seen on television . Prosecutors have even hired expert witnesses to explain why particular forms of physical evidence are not relevant to their cases . In one Australian murder case , the defense counsel requested a judge @-@ only trial to avoid having DNA evidence misinterpreted by a jury . By 2006 , the CSI effect had become widely accepted as reality among legal professionals , despite little empirical evidence to validate or disprove it . A 2008 survey by researcher Monica Robbers showed that roughly 80 percent of all American legal professionals believed they had had decisions affected by forensic television programs . 
 New York University professor Tom R. Tyler argued that , from a psychological standpoint , crime shows are more likely to increase the rate of convictions than acquittals , as the shows promote a sense of justice and closure which is not attained when a jury acquits a defendant . The perceived rise in the rate of acquittals may be related to sympathy for the defendant or declining confidence in legal authorities . A 2006 survey of U.S. university students reached a similar conclusion : the influence of CSI is unlikely to burden prosecutors , and may actually help them . 
 One of the largest empirical studies of the CSI effect was undertaken in 2006 by Washtenaw County Circuit Court Judge Donald Shelton and two researchers from Eastern Michigan University . They surveyed more than 1 @,@ 000 jurors , and found that while juror expectations for forensic evidence had increased , there was no correlation between viewership of crime shows and tendency to convict . One alternate explanation for the changing perception of forensic evidence is the so @-@ called " tech effect " : as technology improves and becomes more prevalent throughout society , people develop higher expectations for the capabilities of forensic technology . Shelton described one instance in which a jury member complained because the prosecution had not dusted the lawn for fingerprints , a procedure which is impossible and had not been demonstrated on any crime show . A later study by the same authors found that frequent CSI viewers may place a lower value on circumstantial evidence , but their viewership had no influence on their evaluation of eyewitness testimony or their tendency to convict in cases with multiple types of evidence . 
 Many stories about the CSI effect assume that there has been an increase in acquittal rates , though this is often based entirely on anecdotal evidence . A 2009 study of conviction statistics in eight states found that , contrary to the opinions of criminal prosecutors , the acquittal rate has decreased in the years since the debut of CSI . The outcome of any given trial is much more strongly dependent on the state in which it took place , rather than whether it occurred before or after the CSI premiere . A 2010 study by the University of Wisconsin – Milwaukee suggests that , while there may be a correlation between crime show viewership and a perceived understanding of DNA evidence , there was no evidence that such viewership affected jury decision making . As of August 2010 , no empirical evidence has demonstrated a correlation between CSI viewership and acquittal rates . One researcher suggested that the perception of a CSI effect — and of other courtroom effects , such as Perry Mason syndrome and white coat syndrome — is caused not by the incompetence of jury members , but by a general distrust of the jury system as a whole . 
 = = = Academia = = = 
 The CSI effect has influenced the manner in which forensic scientists are educated and trained . In the past , those who sought to enter the field of forensics typically earned an undergraduate degree in a science , followed by a master 's degree . However , the popularity of programs such as CSI has caused an increase in the demand for undergraduate courses and graduate programs in forensic science . In 2004 , the forensics programs at Florida International University and the University of California , Davis doubled in size , reportedly as a result of the CSI effect . However , many students enter such programs with unrealistic expectations . Vocational interest in forensic science has proliferated among students in countries besides the United States , including Australia , the United Kingdom , and Germany . The increased popularity of the forensic science program at the University of Lausanne in Switzerland has also been attributed to the CSI effect . 
 Although the increased popularity of forensics programs means there are more applicants for jobs at crime labs , there is some concern that these courses do not adequately prepare students for real forensics work , as graduates often lack a firm grasp of basic scientific principles that would come from a science degree . Many forensics students are presented with streamlined exercises with overly clear answers , which may give them distorted perceptions of the power of forensic science . The Albuquerque Police Department has attempted to improve scientific literacy among future forensic scientists and jurors alike by developing a " Citizen CSI " course which <unk> local citizens with the " capabilities and limitations of authentic forensic science techniques . " 
 While forensic crime shows are often criticized for portraying technologies that do not exist , these may inspire inventors and research teams , as it is not uncommon for scientific innovations to be first portrayed in science fiction . 
 = = = Crimes = = = 
 The CSI effect may alter how crimes are committed . In 2000 , the year that CSI : Crime Scene Investigation debuted , 46 @.@ 9 percent of all rape cases in the United States were solved by police . By 2005 , the solve rate had fallen to 41 @.@ 3 percent . Some investigators attributed this decline to the CSI effect , as crime shows often explain in detail how criminals can conceal or destroy evidence . Several rape victims have reported that their assailants forced them to shower or clean themselves with bleach after their assaults . In December 2005 , Jermaine McKinney broke into a home in Trumbull County , Ohio , where he murdered two women . A fan of CSI , McKinney went to unusual lengths to remove evidence of his crime : he cleaned his hands with bleach , burned the bodies and his clothing , and attempted to dispose of the murder weapon in a lake . McKinney was eventually apprehended . Ray Peavy , head of the Los Angeles County homicide division , commented that , in addition to teaching criminals how to conceal evidence , crime shows may even " encourage them when they see how simple it is to get away with [ it ] on television . " 
 Others argue that shows like CSI are not having any educational effect on criminals . Max Houck , director of the Forensic Science Initiative at West Virginia University , said although CSI may be educating criminals , people who resort to a life of crime generally are not very intelligent to begin with . It is also possible that crime shows have the opposite effect , if attempts to conceal evidence generate more evidence . Houck gave an example of criminals who avoided licking envelopes because of the DNA in their saliva , but left fingerprints and hair samples on adhesive tape instead . Tammy Klein , the lead investigator on the McKinney case , said that the killings she investigates are committed by people " who for the most part are pretty stupid . " Larry <unk> , former president of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers , argued that because people who commit violent crimes generally do not take precautions , television forensics programs are unlikely to have any effect on their behavior . 
 Convicted serial rapist Jonathan Haynes forced his victims to destroy forensic evidence . He was only caught after one of his victims deliberately pulled out her own hair which was later discovered in his car , tying him to the attacks . She was inspired by watching the CSI television series . 
 = = = Police investigations = = = 
 Law enforcement officers often receive inquiries and demands about their investigations that stem from unrealistic portrayals on television . In a 2010 survey of Canadian police officers , some were frustrated by these CSI @-@ affected queries , though most saw them as opportunities to inform the public about real police work . New technologies and the increased public awareness of forensic science have stimulated new interest in solving cold cases and encouraged higher accountability among police investigators . However , the increased demand for forensic evidence can cause an unmanageable workload for forensic laboratories . Some crime labs process several thousand cases every year . Many law enforcement agencies have insufficient storage space for the increasing amount of physical evidence they collect . In some investigations , DNA evidence is not collected simply because there is not enough space to store it properly . 
 = Fighting Temptation = 
 " Fighting Temptation " is a song recorded by American R & B singer Beyoncé and American female rappers Missy Elliott , MC Lyte , and Free in 2003 . The song was used to promote the film The Fighting Temptations ( 2003 ) , in which Beyoncé stars . It was composed by the Beyoncé , Missy Elliott , Lana Moorer , Marie Wright , Jonathan Burks , <unk> Owens , Karriem Mack , and Walter Murphy . " Fighting Temptations " was released as the lead single from the soundtrack album of the movie on July 5 , 2003 through Columbia Records . 
 An R & B @-@ funk song , " Fighting Temptation " samples Uncle Louie 's " I Like Funky Music " ( 1979 ) . Lyrically , the song makes reference to fighting against negativity in life as well as waiting for the right person before falling in love . Music critics generally received the song with positive reception . They complimented the theme of the song , the vocals of Beyoncé , and the verse @-@ raps . " Fighting Temptation " received attention mainly in European countries , peaking at number eleven in the Netherlands and reaching the top fifty in Belgium as well as Switzerland . The accompanying music video for the song was directed by Antti Jokinen . 
 = = Context = = 
 The song is basically about a group of women 's strict " no sex " rule similar to a part of the film 's plot where Lilly ( played by Beyoncé ) does not want to start a sexual relationship with her boyfriend Darrin played by ( Cuba Gooding Jr . ) right away . However , in the film she assures him that they might start one in the near future but in the song , the women do not specify when they will be ready . 
 Darrin , a shallow New York advertising executive , traveled to a small town in the deep south upon receiving word that his aunt has died and left him a sizable inheritance . Once in town , Darrin is informed that he will only receive the money if he successfully leads a local gospel group to victory at an upcoming competition . Reluctant but strapped for cash , Darrin takes on the task of finding the best singers in town and shaping the group up . Along the way , he becomes acclimated to the town with the help of his cousin Lucius ( played by Mike Epps ) and meets Lilly , a single mother who not only possesses an incredible voice but also the ability to warm Darrin 's cold heart . 
 Although Gooding 's character , Darrin , was in love with Beyoncé 's character , Lilly , the latter did not always feel the same until later on in the film . Near the end of the film , he proposes to her and she accepts . They eventually get married ( offscreen ) and within eighteen months they had a baby son together , making Darrin a father and also stepfather to Lilly 's other son . 
 = = Conception = = 
 " Fighting Temptation " appeared on the soundtrack album of The Fighting Temptations as well as in the movie . As a whole , seven tracks featured the vocals of Beyoncé . The latter has a starring role in the film , along with a choir made up of gospel , R & B and hip @-@ hop recording artists . Faith Evans , Angie Stone , Melba Moore , Rev. Shirley Caesar , The O 'Jays , Montell Jordan , T @-@ Bone , and Zane are all seen on the film and perform on the soundtrack . " Fighting Temptations " features additional vocals from American female rappers Missy Elliott , MC Lyte , and Free . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 The soundtrack single was written by Beyoncé , Missy Elliott , Lana Moorer , Marie Wright , Jonathan Burks , <unk> Owens , Karriem Mack , Walter Murphy , and Gene <unk> . Production was handled by Elliott . " Fighting Tempation is an R & B @-@ funk song with a fun vibe . The song samples Uncle Louie 's 1979 song " I Like Funky Music " . Heather Phares of Allmusic wrote that the song 's lyrics make reference to a " celebration of ladies ' night out and waiting for true love . " According to Dani Boobyer of the United Kingdom @-@ based website , The Situation , " Fighting Temptation " has " a well worn message about striving for the best and fighting against negativity . " Ed Gonzalez of Slant Magazine found that Missy notices pleasure and joy in sins that make people go to church on Sundays , but in reality , the " party people " are no different from the churchgoers , who sin in their song and music . Lastly , the song 's strong female presence is only less that the song 's religious arrogance . 
 = = Release = = 
 During a string of soundtrack releases , Beyoncé commented on the song with Billboard stating , " A lot of music was written especially for the film . At first I was concerned about the timing of the soundtrack , [ because ] my solo album was supposed to come out way before the movie . But then the solo album got delayed . " While later announcing the release of the soundtrack album in a press release , Beyoncé said : 
 Once you hear the song ' Fighting Temptation ' , and all the music in this film , you can 't help but fall in love with it . You 'll definitely get emotional . You might become happy or even sad , but your heart will get full . All the songs are touching and spiritual , and that 's what the movie itself is like . 
 " Fighting Temptations " serviced as a CD single in Germany on July 5 , 2003 . It was sent to urban radio for airplay in the United States on August 18 , 2003 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Heather Phares of Allmusic wrote : " [ ... ] the seven tracks that feature Beyoncé on her own or with other collaborators are more striking : in particular , the movie 's title track , a surprisingly fun and funky celebration . " Dani Boobyer of The Situation ( UK ) , commented that the soundtrack album " <unk> with the explosive ' Fighting Temptation ' [ ... ] setting R & B princess Beyoncé 's sweet vocals against the hard sounds of Missy and MC Lyte 's raps . " Ed Gonzalez of Slant Magazine wrote that Beyonce , MC Lyte and Free are not fighting temptations like the song 's title says , but are looking for them . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Fighting Temptation " charted in mainland Europe in early 2004 . In the Netherlands it debuted at number twenty on the Dutch Top 40 in January 2004 . The following week , it ascended to number thirteen , which became its peak position . " Fighting Temptations " reached a high point of number thirty @-@ seven on its sixth week on the Belgian Singles Chart ( Flanders ) . It charted for a total of seven consecutive weeks until mid @-@ April 2004 . On August 29 , 2004 , the single debuted and peaked at number forty @-@ two on the Swiss Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for the song was directed by Antti Jokinen and it features Beyoncé , Elliott , MC Lyte and Free . It was shot in an abandoned mansion nearby Los Angeles by the end of June 2003 . Performance footage was seamlessly melded with clips from the movie . On the set , Beyoncé expressed herself : 
 " Basically , it 's kind of like a ladies ' night ' cause it 's all us females and the song is about basically all these temptations you have with this guy and you 're kind of fighting it . The house came from the movie because it kind of reminds me a lot of the house that we filmed in for the movie . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with Beyoncé in a red dress moving across a screen of multiple changing colors and then moves to multiple shots of Elliott rapping in a white and red jersey and matching hat , Lyte in a blue dress , and a church choir group . Next , Elliott is shown on roller skates in a white and black outfit rollerskating throughout the mansion . Shots are shown of Elliott in bed with a man and Beyoncé at a party with a guy and singing to the people there . As the song moves to Beyoncé singing the chorus , she is shown sitting on a bed and dancing in a room in a golden top and black shorts , while back at the party , she is singing for her lover and blowing him kisses . The song then moves to a verse by Mc Lyte and we see her dancing in the middle of a semi @-@ circle of men wearing orange prison jumpsuits . Scenes of the movie and of Mc Lyte in front of an ever @-@ changing background are intercut throughout this . 
 Beyoncé then sings the chorus again and dances in her red dress in front of the background . Mc Lyte and Free are seen at a backyard barbecue party as Mc Lyte 's verse begins and she mingles with the party guests , with Elliott as the party DJ . Again , Beyoncé comes back to sing the chorus of the song , now at the barbecue party , with scenes of her dancing in a room of the mansion and scenes from the movie in which she is singing on a stage in front of a large audience with a group of people behind her . With the end of the final chorus , the song moves back to Elliott and Lyte , with the former on her <unk> as in the beginning and the latter in front of the semi @-@ circle of men . The video ends with the four of them sitting at a picnic table at the barbecue party as two small girls clap hands on the opposite bench . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 European CD Single 
 " Fighting Temptation " – 3 : 51 
 " I Know " – 3 : 42 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Lisa the Beauty Queen = 
 " Lisa the Beauty Queen " is the fourth episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 15 , 1992 . In the episode , Homer enters Lisa into a beauty pageant to boost her confidence . Lisa is runner @-@ up , but gains the title of Little Miss Springfield after the original winner is injured . Little Miss Springfield 's duties include being a spokesperson for Laramie Cigarettes , which causes Lisa to speak out against smoking . As a result of her anti @-@ smoking protests , her title is taken away on a technicality . 
 Jeff Martin wrote the episode and its accompanying songs and music . The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland and Bob Hope made a guest appearance . The episode references various films , music , and historical events and was well received by critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Springfield Elementary School holds a school fair , where Lisa purchases a caricature of herself drawn at a carnival booth . She is horrified at the unflattering drawing and the reaction of the surrounding crowd . Homer wins the fair 's raffle , with the grand prize being a ride in the Duff Blimp . Back at home , Lisa is in tears because she feels unattractive . Homer sees a TV advertisement that says Laramie Cigarettes is sponsoring this year 's " Little Miss Springfield " pageant , and decides to enter Lisa to boost her self @-@ esteem . The entry fee for the pageant is $ 250 , so he sells his Duff Blimp ticket to Barney to raise the funds needed . Homer excitedly tells Lisa he has entered her in the pageant , but she refuses . However , Marge tells Lisa that Homer sold his Duff Blimp ticket to pay the entry fee , and she realizes her father 's sacrifice and enters the pageant . 
 At the pageant 's registration , Lisa meets a formidable competitor named Amber Dempsey , a blonde girl who cheated by using eyelash implants from Paraguay to make her look cuter . In preparation for the pageant Lisa receives makeovers at the beauty parlor , training from her brother , and encouragement from her family . The day of the pageant arrives , and on @-@ stage Lisa explains her aim to make Springfield a better place , while Amber wins the crowd 's adoration by batting her large eyelashes . Lisa 's talent is a jazzy medley of " America the Beautiful " and " Proud Mary " . After Krusty the Clown 's interview segment , Lisa is announced as the runner @-@ up and Amber the winner . At Amber 's first official appearance , a thunderstorm creates a lightning bolt which strikes her metal scepter . She is hospitalized for her injuries , and Lisa is crowned Little Miss Springfield . 
 One of Little Miss Springfield 's duties as spokesperson for pageant sponsor Laramie Cigarettes , is to lure a younger demographic into smoking . Instead , Lisa protests against the dangers of cigarettes at her appearances , and also vows to target the corruption of Mayor Quimby . Quimby and the Laramie officials look for a way to dethrone and silence Lisa . They find a technical error on her entry form : Homer wrote " OK " underneath the instruction " Do not write in this space " . Amber is <unk> Little Miss Springfield . At home , Homer is upset that he cost Lisa her title , but Lisa reminds Homer that he entered her in the pageant to help her self @-@ esteem , and thanks him because it worked . Homer requests that she remember it " the next time I wreck your life " , to which Lisa gladly agrees and embraces him . 
 = = Production = = 
 Many of The Simpsons ' writers had left the show or were absent at the beginning of season four , which left Al Jean and Mike Reiss to brainstorm plot ideas alone . After brainstorming " Homer the Heretic " , they thought of Lisa entering a beauty pageant . They assigned Jeff Martin to write the episode because they assumed he would fill it with songs , like he had done on previous episodes . Martin obliged , and wrote the episode and its music . He also based the episode on some of his own experiences , such as the scene where Lisa has a caricature of herself drawn . According to Jeff Martin , " I 'm not sure if we could do this episode today . People had a more innocent view of child beauty pageants before <unk> Ramsey . " 
 This episode featured then @-@ 89 @-@ year @-@ old Bob Hope as a guest star , with his part recorded at his house by Jeff Martin and Conan O 'Brien . He is however portrayed as his younger , Vietnam War @-@ era self . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode makes several references to popular culture and history . One of the opening scenes sees Principal Skinner knocking out a man in a very similar manner to Mick Dundee in Crocodile Dundee . The episode includes a scene based on Francis Ford Coppola 's Apocalypse Now , where Lisa and Bob Hope escape the Fort Springfield stage . It also makes two references to Star Wars , where the caricature artist displays a caricature of Darth Vader and a montage shows Lisa with a double @-@ bun hairdo like Princess Leia . The Springfield Waxworks ' Chamber of Horrors contains Mr. T , Ronald Reagan and Dr. Ruth , and Laramie 's mascot <unk> Moose is a parody of Joe Camel . Musically , Homer mournfully sings a song , " <unk> Boy " , to the tune of The Seekers ' " Georgy Girl " . Historically , there is a parody of the Hindenburg disaster , when the Duff Blimp crashes into the radio tower , to which Kent Brockman quotes " Oh , the humanity ! " When Lisa is sworn in as Little Miss Springfield on her front lawn , Marge is to her left wearing a pink suit @-@ dress in a pose similar to that of Jacqueline Kennedy in the famous photo of Lyndon B. Johnson being sworn in on Air Force One after John F. Kennedy 's assassination . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode finished 28th in the Nielsen ratings for the week of October 12 – 18 , 1992 with a rating of 12 @.@ 0 , seen by approximately 11 @.@ 1 million households . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said : " Another top @-@ notch episode " and adds that " Krusty gets some of his best lines in a few brief appearances . " The episode 's reference to Apocalypse Now was named the 29th greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . 
 The Church of England 's book Mixing it up with The Simpsons , which encourages children to reflect on life issues , explores self @-@ image through " Lisa the Beauty Queen " . 
 = Mr. Monk and the Man Who Shot Santa Claus = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Man Who Shot Santa Claus " is the tenth episode of the sixth season of the American comedy @-@ drama detective television series Monk , and the show 's 87th episode overall . The series follows Adrian Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) , a private detective with obsessive – compulsive disorder and multiple phobias , and his assistant Natalie Teeger ( Traylor Howard ) . In this episode , Monk is labeled by media as a social pariah as he is accused of killing a man dressed in Santa Claus apparel , and must prove his innocence . 
 It was written by Dan Schofield and Ben Gruber , and directed by Randall Zisk . Though it was filmed in August , " Mr. Monk and the Man Who Shot Santa Claus " is the third annual Christmas special of the series . When the episode first aired in the United States on the USA Network on December 7 , 2007 , it was watched by over 4 @.@ 5 million viewers . Critics gave it mixed reception , with most criticizing how Trudy , Monk 's deceased wife , was mentioned and that no more details were given . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Natalie Teeger ( Traylor Howard ) is fighting traffic to get Adrian Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) to his appointment with his psychiatrist , Dr. Kroger ( Stanley Kamel ) . Monk says he hates to miss his sessions . Natalie confides to her daughter Julie ( Emmy Clarke ) that Monk 's wife , Trudy , died in December ten years ago . They come to a dead stop when retired parole officer , Michael Kenworthy ( Randle Mell ) , in a Santa Claus outfit , showers toys on the street from a roof . Furious , Monk heads up , and Natalie and Julie hear shots . On the roof , they see Monk holding a gun , and Kenworthy shot . Captain Stottlemeyer ( Ted Levine ) and Lieutenant Disher ( Jason Gray @-@ Stanford ) arrest Monk . Monk says that Kenworthy is the owner of the gun , and he shot him in self @-@ defense , but Kenworthy denies this , saying Monk attacked him . 
 In another part of the city , reporter Brandy Barber ( Gina Philips ) dubs Monk as " The Man Who Shot Santa Claus " in a broadcast , and he and Natalie start to get harassed everywhere they go . Meanwhile , Stottlemeyer and Disher interrogate Kenworthy about his conversations with his ex @-@ cons , but Kenworthy soon kicks them out . That night , Alice Dubois ( Dorothy Constantine ) , a MacMillan Museum employee , is killed by Kenworthy . The next day , Kenworthy plans with his crew of ex @-@ cons to execute a burglary at the MacMillan Museum . 
 In session with Dr. Kroger , Monk remembers details of the shooting . Monk and Natalie return to the roof where the shooting took place . Monk remembers that there was a walkie @-@ talkie in Kenworthy 's bag . He explains that Kenworthy contacted his ex @-@ cons to carry out a heist of the museum , with Kenworthy acting as the diversion , dropping toys to stop traffic . However , the robbery was ruined when Kenworthy was shot . That day was chosen for the heist because one of Kenworthy 's accomplices , Carl , was on duty in the museum at the time . As Carl realized his hours were not good to carry out a second heist , Kenworthy killed Dubois , so Carl could fill in for her . 
 Hearing car horns , Natalie looks down and sees a truck stopped in the intersection . When she also sees Kenworthy , they realize the second heist is in progress . Monk races downstairs , instructing Natalie to call the police . Kenworthy is about to leave with the museum 's diamond when Monk runs towards him . Brandy also chases them . Monk pursues Kenworthy until Monk knocks him unconscious . Kenworthy and his accomplices are arrested , and the diamond is recovered . Brandy immediately goes on television , praising Monk as " The Man Who Saved Christmas . " Natalie and Julie spend Christmas Eve at his apartment , and coax Monk to smile for a group photograph . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Man Who Shot Santa Claus " was co @-@ written by Dan Schofield and Ben Gruber , and directed by Randall Zisk . After the airing of the ninth episode of the sixth season , " Mr. Monk Is Up All Night " , on September 14 , 2007 , Monk broadcast entered a hiatus until January . The cast and staff , however , returned in August to work on the second half of the show 's sixth season , which they called " Season 6 @.@ 5 " . Hayley <unk> , a series associate producer , remarked that it was difficult to have the " Christmas @-@ y feeling " in August in Los Angeles . <unk> also found difficulties to get a company that would agree to have their toys being thrown by " a not @-@ so @-@ nice Santa Claus " . 
 The staff had the idea to close the episode with a choir of children singing the Monk 's theme " It 's a Jungle Out There " . Additionally , it would feature a wide shot of the entire cast and crew who had been involved in the six seasons of the series , as well as network and studio executives , former guest stars and directors , and the theme 's singer Randy Newman . The centerpiece would be Howard along with her son Sabu . However , due to scheduling issues , they could not bring them all together . 
 Larry Miller , who previously appeared in third season episode " Mr. Monk Gets Stuck in Traffic " , returned as " the only notable guest appearance " , according to IGN 's James Chamberlin , for " Mr. Monk and the Man Who Shot Santa Claus " as Monk 's lawyer , Garrett Price . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Man Who Shot Santa Claus " was first broadcast in the United States on <unk> at 6 pm EST on December 7 , 2007 . The USA Network regular channel aired it at 9 pm EST on the same day . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 546 million viewers , making it the tenth most watched program on cable television that week . It was the day 's most watched among cable television shows , with 1 @.@ 6 million viewers among adults ages 18 to 49 , and 1 @.@ 8 million viewers among adults ages 25 to 54 . Time shifted viewing increased the episode 's audience to a total of 5 @.@ 138 million . 
 Critic David Bianculli included it on his list of the best programs to air episodes that day , comparing it to " Who shot J.R. ? " and " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " . Melanie McFarland from Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer commented that the idea of Monk shooting Santa Claus was " hilarious " . Michael Storey of the Arkansas Democrat @-@ Gazette called it " a hoot and well worth your time " , while United Feature Syndicate 's Kevin McDonough deemed it " exceptional " . Cinema Blend 's Kelly West said it had not enough of the " touchy @-@ feely stuff " expected in a Christmas @-@ themed episode , and that it was not " all that different from any other episode in terms of the story " , but felt it was " full of laughs and definitely worth watching , if only to see Monk throw down with Santa . " 
 James Chamberlin of IGN was " excited to see the show return " for a Christmas special but was disappointed in the underutilization of Miller 's character , and the lack of any further clues to the mystery surrounding the death of Adrian Monk 's wife , Trudy , despite several mentions of the event during the episode . Ted Cox of the Chicago @-@ area Daily Herald stated that the episode was " not even as good as last year 's Christmas special " ( " Mr. Monk Meets His Dad " ) , and also laments mention of Trudy 's unsolved murder without the " element of lost love " that " made the early ' Monks ' great " . In the same vein , Diane Werts , writing for Newsday , declared it was " [ a ] nother opportunity missed " to deepen into Trudy 's death . Comparing it to Psych episode " Gus 's Dad May Have Killed an Old Guy " , David Kronke of Los Angeles Daily News said " Psych manages [ to inveigle viewers to feel the holiday spirit ] tonight ; Monk , not so much . " Although the plot is " easy to figure out " , Chicago Tribune 's Maureen Ryan criticized how the episode " seem [ s ] a bit flat " . 
 = Ross Perot presidential campaign , 1992 = 
 The Ross Perot presidential campaign of 1992 began when Texas industrialist Ross Perot opened the possibility of running for President of the United States in the election of 1992 as an independent candidate on the February 20 , 1992 edition of Larry King Live . Though he had never served as a public official , Perot had experience as the head of several successful corporations and had been involved in public affairs for the previous three decades . Spawned by the American dissatisfaction with the political system , grassroots organizations sprang up in every state to help Perot achieve ballot access following his announcement . James Stockdale , a retired United States Navy vice admiral , was Perot 's vice presidential running mate . 
 Perot focused the campaign on his plans to balance the federal budget , further economic nationalism , strengthen the war on drugs and implement " electronic town halls " throughout the nation for direct democracy . His views were described as a combination of " East Texas populism with high @-@ tech wizardry . " Supporters saw Perot as a nonpolitical and witty " folk hero " , but critics described the candidate as " authoritarian " and " short @-@ tempered " . 
 Perot largely financed his own campaign and relied on marketing and wide grassroots support . In certain polls , Perot led the three @-@ way race with Republican nominee George H. W. Bush , the incumbent President , and Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas , the Democratic nominee . He dropped out in July 1992 amid controversy , but re @-@ entered in October , participating in all three presidential debates . Despite an aggressive use of campaign infomercials on prime time network television , his polling numbers never fully recovered from his initial exit . On Election Day , Perot appeared on every state ballot as a result of the earlier draft efforts . He won several counties and finished in third place , receiving close to 18 @.@ 97 percent of the popular vote , the most won by a third @-@ party presidential candidate since Theodore Roosevelt in 1912 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ross Perot had never been elected to public office , but he ran several successful corporations and was involved in public affairs for decades . After serving in the United States Navy in the 1950s , Perot joined IBM as a salesman . He surpassed his one @-@ year sales quota in just two weeks . After the company ignored his idea for electronic storage , he founded Electronic Data Systems in 1962 , which was then contracted by the United States Government to store Medicare records . Perot earned a fortune with the company , and by 1968 was named by Fortune as the " fastest , richest Texan . " Perot was known to run the company in a militaristic fashion , built on loyalty and duty . His best known venture with the company was in 1979 , when he sent a private militia into Iran in the midst of the Iranian Revolution to rescue two of his employees who had been imprisoned . The episode inspired the 1983 novel , On Wings of Eagles . Perot eventually sold his company to General Motors in 1984 for $ 2 @.@ 55 billion , and founded Perot Systems in 1988 . By 1992 , his fortune was judged to be $ 3 billion . 
 Perot was a hawk on the Vietnam War , an advocate for Americans held as prisoner of war and a supporter for their families . During the war , he aided soldiers by providing supplies and holding rallies for those returning home . In public affairs , he led the Texas War on Drugs Committee in 1979 at the behest of Republican Governor Bill Clements , and was put in charge of the Select Committee on Public Education in 1983 by Democratic Governor Mark White . Perot 's most dear political effort involved the Vietnam War POW / MIA issue . He worked extensively to free soldiers that he believed had been left behind , and even engaged in secret diplomatic talks with the Vietnamese government , to the chagrin of the Reagan White House . Perot had been supportive of President Ronald Reagan and labeled him as a " great president " in 1986 . He even pledged $ 2 @.@ 5 million to support his presidential library , but the relationship soured after Perot was sent on a trip to Hanoi , and determined afterwards that the administration was not taking the POW / MIA issue seriously . He revoked his pledge to the library in 1987 , based on the POW / MIA issue as well as his disillusionment from the administration 's actions during the Iran – Contra affair . He became a critic of the George H. W. Bush administration , and opposed the 1991 Gulf War . 
 = = Initial campaign = = 
 Ross Perot appeared on the February 20 edition of Larry King Live on CNN , his fourth appearance on the show since 1991 . After a lively interview concerning political issues , King directly asked Perot if there was " any scenario in which [ he ] would run for president . " Perot firmly stated that he did not want to run , but spontaneously affirmed that he would begin a campaign if " ordinary people " signed petitions and helped him achieve ballot access in all 50 states . He set up a phone bank at his office on March 12 , staffed with volunteers to inform interested voters and supporters on how they could assist Perot 's potential campaign . Supporters viewed the candidate as an " action man ... who can get things done ... [ and who ] takes care of his people " . They were angry at President Bush for reneging on his promise not to raise taxes . The New York Times speculated that Perot 's " iconoclastic , take @-@ no @-@ prisoners persona and anti @-@ politics politics " would appeal to the " angry frustrated electorate " . But Republican consultant Karl Rove characterized Perot as an " untested wild man " . He rejected any financial donations for more than $ 5 , and stated that he would personally fund a potential campaign . Perot spent $ 400 @,@ 000 of his own money in the first month , however , he largely spread this message via television , capped by a March 18 National Press Club speech , which aired on C @-@ SPAN . 
 = = = Draft efforts = = = 
 " Draft Perot " organizations opened throughout the nation , and petition drives were coordinated largely by Perot 's friend Tom Luce , and the real estate arm of Perot Systems , to help secure a place for the candidate on every state ballot . At the height of the efforts , 18 @,@ 000 simultaneous calls came into Perot 's telephone banks after he appeared on the Phil Donahue Show . At one point , 30 @,@ 000 telephone calls were received in one hour . MCI Communications Corporation reported that over a million calls came in during the first ten days that the phone banks were active . At the time , presidential polls showed Perot with 21 % support from the electorate , 14 points behind likely Democratic presidential nominee Bill Clinton and 16 points behind President Bush . Despite this , only one third of potential voters knew enough about Perot to form an opinion of him . A large segment of his support came from Reagan Democrats , entrepreneurs and suburban conservatives deemed " Perot Republicans " , who agreed with the central theme of his campaign , though they disagreed with his pro @-@ choice stance on abortion . Political newcomers were also involved in the volunteer efforts . 
 Twenty @-@ five states required that a presidential candidate have a running mate to appear on the ballot . As a result , Perot named retired Vice Admiral James B. Stockdale , who had been awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions during 7 1 ⁄ 2 years of captivity as a POW during the Vietnam War , as his " interim " running mate in late March . Stockdale would remain in the position throughout the campaign . A Boston Globe report suggested that Boston University President John Silber was also considered as a running mate . During an Associated Press interview in April , Perot commented that he might begin a campaign before his supporters achieved ballot access in all states . In New York , ballot access appeared to be the most difficult to attain . In a five @-@ week summer period , the campaign would be required to compile 20 @,@ 000 signatures from non @-@ primary voters , including 100 from each of half of the state 's Congressional districts . Perot conceded that he might not appear on the state 's ballot , but stated that he may run anyway . 
 Throughout April , the draft efforts continued , and Perot appeared on talk shows , discussing his plans and positions on political issues . During an appearance on Larry King Live , Perot stated that he was closer to a decision on a potential campaign , and that he was willing to spend $ 100 million of his own money to finance it . On the Today Show he was interviewed by Katie Couric , and proposed to cut Medicare and Social Security for " people who don 't need it " . He appeared on Face the Nation later in the month , and argued that wealthy Americans should spend more than average Americans to eliminate the budget deficit . His budget numbers were contested by Tim Russert on Meet the Press , during a heated interview , after which , a frustrated Perot considered dropping out of the race . C @-@ SPAN ran a speech by Perot , where he announced that he hoped to run a campaign without " political pros " to avoid the " dirty tricks " of past campaigns . After this appearance , campaign consultant Ray Strother explained to Perot that professionals such as pollster Mark Penn were essential to a successful campaign . In late April , Perot hired former Chicago Tribune editor James Squires as press spokesman to handle the large volume of interview requests from the media . At the end of the month , Perot realized that he had spent too much time visiting talk shows , and announced that he would spend his next few weeks focusing on the issues . 
 = = = <unk> status = = = 
 By May , Perot was leading presidential polls in both Texas and California . The Bush and Clinton campaigns became concerned about a candidacy , and publicly wondered if Perot could continue to " play by his own rules " . They attempted to downgrade Perot from his " folk hero status " to that of a politician , by highlighting his " alleged character flaws " . Meanwhile , Perot focused on sharpening his political positions as he promised . He hired John P. White , who served as a budget official under President Jimmy Carter , to work on his budget platform . Meanwhile , petition drives in every state reported that they had secured enough signatures to place Perot on the Election Day ballot . Speculation arose in the media that Perot would split the electoral college and force the United States House of Representatives to decide the presidency . Around this time , Hal Riney , who had worked on Ronald Reagan 's 1984 campaign and was known for the " Morning in America " ad , was hired as advertising consultant . When Riney revealed the cost of advertisements during a meeting , Perot reportedly " flipped out " , and asked " Why would I spend that when I could go on the ' Today ' show for free ? " Riney produced several ads during the campaign that never aired . 
 Although he did not campaign or advertise , Perot won a large share of the vote in both the Democratic and Republican primaries in Oregon and Washington in mid @-@ May . In the Oregon primary , he was written @-@ in by 13 % of Democrats and 15 % of Republicans . Exit polling showed Perot 's favorability at or above that of Clinton and Bush in their respective party 's primaries . At the end of May , Perot called on Bush to " climb in the ring " , claiming that the President was using surrogates to attack him . To strengthen his own team , Perot 's campaign interviewed Jimmy Carter 's 1976 campaign manager and White House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan and Ronald Reagan 's 1984 campaign manager Ed Rollins to fill a position in the campaign . Eventually , both were hired as co @-@ campaign managers . On May 29 , Perot ended his talk show hiatus after talking with Barbara Walters on 20 / 20 . He discussed his three @-@ part plan for balancing the budget , starting with a Congressional act to limit spending , followed by a cut in government waste , of which he would be more specific in coming weeks , and a reform of the existing tax system . During the interview , Perot also stated that he would avoid adding homosexuals to his cabinet to prevent " a point of controversy with the American people " . However , he commented that " what people do in their private lives is their business . " 
 Former Pat Buchanan pollster Frank Luntz was hired by the campaign , along with former Republican National Campaign Committee chairman Charles Leonard . The New York Times reported that Perot sought the help of operatives to search court and federal documents to find information that might reflect poorly on the potential candidate so that preparations could be made to respond . In the final round of Democratic and Republican primaries , most notably in California , exit polls revealed that 42 % of Republicans and 33 % of Democrats favored Perot . A Time Magazine poll found that Perot had 37 % support of all the electorate , ahead of both Bush and Clinton who tied for second at 24 % . At this time , Vice President Dan Quayle became the most senior member of the Bush administration to criticize Perot , calling him a " temperamental tycoon " . 
 Perot campaigned in California in mid @-@ June , and held a rally attended by 7 @,@ 000 in Sacramento where he was heckled by some who chanted " Talk about the issues ! " He privately spoke with black and Asian leaders in Los Angeles to discuss race relations following the L.A. race riots ; afterwards , he gave a speech to a mostly white audience in Orange County about race relations , but did not take a stand on affirmative action . Perot finished his California campaign swing in Irvine before traveling to events in Colorado and Massachusetts . At the end of the month , large nominating conventions were held in Washington and other states to put together the final pieces to include Perot on the ballot . Perot addressed the conventions , largely made up of " well dressed , middle aged " individuals , and spoke of improving the education system and restoring the America " where you leave the doors unlocked " . As June came to a close , speculation arose that Perot was planning a National Convention to follow the Democratic and Republican National Conventions . 
 = = Decline and withdrawal = = 
 In July , some of Perot 's past actions , including a private investigation of the Bush family in the late 1980s , circulated in the media , causing frustration for the campaign . Perot blamed the reports on a " Republican research team " and claimed that he was warned that since he had such a " clean record they have got to try to redefine you and destroy you " . Campaign officials tried to come up with a new strategy to combat the negative press , and to end Perot 's use of generalizations on the issues . Perot sought National Institutes of Health head Dr. <unk> Healy as his running mate , but she declined . Meanwhile , Perot faced obstacles on the campaign trail . During an Olympia rally , he was approached by a gay rights group , demanding that he address AIDS and gay rights ; he soon flipped on the issue and stated that he would allow gays to serve in the military and in his cabinet . During an address to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) , Perot faced his toughest demographic , and made the gaffe of referring to African Americans as " you people " . It was later revealed that Perot did not want to appear at the meeting or any other forum without his supporters . Press consultant Squires had written a speech for Perot for the occasion , but he instead used his own . After the speech , Perot was concerned that members of the New Black Panther Party were plotting his assassination . 
 By mid @-@ July , the Washington Post reported that Perot 's campaign managers were becoming increasingly disillusioned by his unwillingness to follow their advice to be more specific on issues , and his need to be in full control of operations with such tactics as forcing volunteers to sign loyalty oaths . Perot 's poll numbers began to slip to 25 % , and his advisers warned that if he continued to ignore them , he would fall into single digits . Co @-@ manager Hamilton Jordan threatened to quit , and on July 15 , Ed Rollins resigned after Perot fired advertisement specialist Hal Riney , who worked with Rollins on the Reagan campaign . Rollins later claimed that a member of the campaign accused him of being a Bush plant with ties to the CIA . Amidst the chaos , Perot 's support fell to 20 % . The next day , Perot announced on Larry King Live that he would not seek the presidency . He explained that he did not want the House of Representatives to decide the election if the result caused the electoral college to be split . He asked his supporters to look for other candidates to nominate for the race , and formed United We Stand to " influence the debate . " At this point , Perot had spent $ 12 million of his own money on the race . Bill <unk> , who produced a few unaired advertisements for the campaign , wrote that Perot 's withdrawal was a tactic to find temporary relief from the press . 
 Former advisors commented that Perot , who had achieved ballot access in 24 states , was unwilling " to spend money on things that mattered " including Rollins ' and Jordan 's proposed $ 150 million advertising campaign , was " obsessed " with his image , and lost interest in running after receiving negative press . Supporters were angry and distraught at Perot 's decision , and his popularity dropped among the American public . One woman called Perot and commented that " the tears have not stopped . " A class action lawsuit was filed in Florida to force him to remain in the race , but it was dropped . Later in July , the economic plan that Perot 's campaign had been working on was released . The fifty @-@ page proposal included cuts in domestic spending , investment in education , communication and transportation programs , an increase in income taxes for the wealthy , and an increase in the gasoline tax . The plan was projected to eliminate the budget deficit in five years . 
 After the Democratic Convention and Perot 's initial exit , Clinton opened up large leads against the President , polling near ( and often above ) 50 percent of the vote nationwide consistently , while Bush typically saw polling and approval numbers in the upper 30s . The campaign continued with a lopsided lead for Clinton through September , until Ross Perot decided to re @-@ enter the race . Ross Perot 's re @-@ entry in the race was welcome by the Bush campaign , as Fred <unk> , a poll taker for Bush , said , " He 'll be important if we accomplish our goal , which is to draw even with Clinton . " Initially , Perot 's return saw the Texas billionaire 's numbers stay low , until he was given the opportunity to participate in a trio of unprecedented three @-@ man debates . The race narrowed , as Perot 's numbers significantly improved as Clinton 's numbers declined , while Bush 's numbers remained more or less the same from earlier in the race as Perot and Bush began to hammer at Clinton on character issues once again . 
 = = Re @-@ entrance = = 
 On October 1 , Perot re @-@ entered the presidential race , with a desire to further explain his economic plans to the American people . The New York Times commented that Perot 's " chances of winning are much less than when he quit in July . His only dim practical hope is to confuse and destabilize the contest . " He hoped to spend more resources using paid advertisements than holding traditional rallies to spread his message . During the last month of campaigning , Perot left his headquarters in Dallas only to appear in the presidential debates and seven rallies . One aide later commented : " he wanted to do it just like he could go to the office every day , run for president , and go home and eat dinner . " Rather than using professional advisers , Perot employed " political amateurs " whose loyalty was unquestioned . Orson Swindle , whom he had known since the 1970s , was hired as the top aide . Perot 's son @-@ in @-@ law Clayton Mulford , who was involved in the early draft effort , was hired as legal adviser . Sharon Holman , who worked for Perot since 1969 , was hired as press secretary , and friend Murphy Martin was added as the media chief . 
 Perot employed a massive marketing strategy , spending $ 34 @.@ 8 million to buy half hour and hour segments on major television networks , memorably using charts to illustrate his ideas for the economy . His first infomercial was aired on October 6 , and viewed by 16 @.@ 5 million people . He used two dozen charts and a metal pointer during the ad , explaining that " We got into trickle @-@ down economics and it didn 't trickle . " He later concluded that " our President blames Congress , Congress blames the President , the Democrats and Republicans blame each other . Nobody steps up to the plate and accepts responsibility for anything . " He spent a large portion of the infomercial speaking into the camera while sitting at a desk in front of a bookshelf . Political experts commented that the nature of the ad was groundbreaking . Two days later , an ad campaign was unveiled that included three new 60 @-@ second commercials to air on ESPN , CNN and five other cable networks . One commercial entitled " Red Flag " displayed a waving red flag with a background drum roll and the statement : " While the Cold War is ending another war is upon us . In this new war , the enemy is not the red flag of Communism , but the red ink of our national debt , the red tape of our government bureaucracy . The casualties of this war are counted in lost jobs and lost dreams . " A second half hour infomercial was shown on October 9 . 
 = = = Debates = = = 
 Perot participated in the first of three presidential debates for the 1992 election , on October 11 in Clayton , Missouri , along with President Bush and Bill Clinton . It was the first time that a third party candidate was involved in a national televised debate since John B. Anderson in 1980 , and was the first presidential debate to ever feature three candidates . During the event , Perot discussed a wide range of issues including the budget deficit , education and drug use , and proclaimed that as president , he would eliminate the influence of lobbyists . He also had a few memorable quips . When asked to address detractors ' criticism of his lack of government experience , he remarked : " Well , they 've got a point . I don 't have any experience running up a $ 4 trillion debt . " When discussing what would happen if one of his opponents won , he commented : " then they will have heard the harsh reality of what we have to do . I 'm not playing Lawrence Welk music here tonight . " After the debate , three out of four polls declared Perot as the winner . The average of all four showed Perot at 37 % followed by Clinton with 30 % and Bush with 18 % , but election polls still showed Perot in third with 14 % , far behind both Bush and Clinton . His running mate , James Stockdale , participated in a Vice Presidential debate in Atlanta , with fellow Vice Presidential nominee Al Gore and Vice President Dan Quayle . Largely unknown to the general public , Stockdale memorably opened the debate by unexpectedly asking the philosophical question , " Who am I ? Why am I here ? " He was unprepared to deal with some of the substantive issues raised , and his struggling performance may have damaged the Perot campaign . 
 The second presidential debate was held on October 15 in Richmond , Virginia , and included questions from undecided voters , who kept the candidates focused on the issues . During his opening statement , Perot explained that there was a " giant sucking sound " caused by the rush of manufacturing jobs to Mexico . During one exchange , Perot commented that Democrats and Republicans were both to blame for the deficit , but that neither was willing to take responsibility . He joked " somewhere out there , there 's an extraterrestrial that 's doing this to us , I guess . " At the close of the debate , Perot described himself as " results ... [ and ] action oriented " , and explained that " if they want to keep slow dancing and talk about it and not do it , I 'm not your man . " Perot took part in the third debate held in East Lansing , Michigan , on October 19 . Throughout the debate , he plugged and referenced his infomercials . He criticized Bush 's economic plan to start off the debate , stating that it would not balance the budget . He later remarked that he would spend $ 60 million of his own money to finish the race . Notably , Perot brought up the fact that " both parties have foreign lobbyists on leaves and key roles in the campaigns . " After the debate , he ripped the media during a press conference , criticizing them for their use of " gotcha " stories and the lack of coverage concerning his opponent 's foreign lobbyists . Former pollster Frank Luntz explained , " When Ross Perot uses his head , he 's unbeatable . He 's focused , straightforward and compelling . When he uses his heart , sometimes his emotions get carried away . " 
 = = = Final stages = = = 
 Following the debates , Perot did not campaign and was not seen on television until later in the week when ABC aired a 30 @-@ minute sequel to an autobiographical infomercial shown on October 17 . The spot cost Perot $ 370 @,@ 000 . CBS aired an infomercial on October 24 entitled The Ross Perot Nobody Knows , and two days later another was shown on ABC , preceding the kickoff of Monday Night Football , which cost $ 940 @,@ 000 . Perot hoped to better explain his earlier exit as Election Day neared . Reports circulated that a security official from the campaign had contacted the Dallas Police in August to urge them to perform a sting operation targeting Bush campaign adviser James <unk> , in response to allegations that Republicans planned to wiretap Perot 's office . Perot claimed during an interview with 60 Minutes that " Republican operatives " also threatened to disrupt his daughter 's wedding , which forced him to withdraw in July . He reported the story to the FBI , but no evidence of any wrongdoing was found . The New York Times argued that the story could help Perot with voters and his overall image by presenting him as a man " who was willing to give up his goal to protect his family " ; nevertheless , his lack of evidence drew criticism . 
 By the end of October , Perot had reached 20 % in opinion polls , and his favorability ratings slightly increased . But as reports detailed Perot 's investigation of campaign volunteers and the prior use of " loyalty oaths " , the numbers remained stagnant . Aides hoped to shift the focus of the campaign and media reports back to the economy . Perot appeared on Larry King Live later in the week and opined that the early 1990s recession was not over " because of deficit spending and competition for money " . He was also interviewed on Talking with David Frost , where he affirmed a statement made by his running mate that the Vietnam War protests had prolonged the war effort . In the final days , it was estimated that Perot spent $ 5 million a day on advertisements . Overall he had spent $ 40 million in October alone , and $ 60 million during the course of the campaign . 
 In the lead up to Election Day , Perot attended a few rallies in Pennsylvania , New Jersey , and Denver . A major rally was staged in Tampa , and was attended by more than 10 @,@ 000 supporters . Perot also made stops in Kansas City , Los Angeles and Santa Clara . On the final night , infomercials aired on all three major networks . He held his final campaign event in Dallas outside his headquarters , and thanked his supporters , stating : " What you 've been through hasn 't been pretty , but by golly , you 're taking your country back . " At the end , his campaign song " Crazy " by Patsy Cline was played . In the final NBC @-@ Wall Street Journal poll , Perot was in third place with 15 % , behind Bush with 36 % and Clinton with 44 % . 
 = = Results = = 
 On Election Day , Perot finished in third place behind Clinton ( the winner ) and Bush . Perot received 19 @,@ 743 @,@ 821 votes , which accounted for 18 @.@ 91 % of the popular vote . He failed to win any states in the Electoral College because of the relatively even distribution of his support , but did win over 30 % of the vote in Maine and 27 % in Utah , finishing second in both states . Perot was the first third party candidate since George Wallace in 1968 to finish first in a county , winning in Alaska ( divided into boroughs ) , California , Nevada , Colorado , Kansas , Texas and Maine . He won his largest percentage in <unk> @-@ Susitna Borough , Alaska and Loving County , Texas with over 40 % . According to exit polls , 52 % of Perot 's supporters were male , 94 % were white , 63 % were aged between 18 and 44 , and about 2 / 3 had not received a college degree . The income of supporters mirrored the general public . In terms of ideology , 53 % identified as moderates , 27 % were conservative and 20 % were liberal , while two @-@ thirds were either members of the Democratic Party or were politically independent . 
 Perot 's performance satisfied the 5 % popular vote threshold for third party candidates , classifying it as successful under the criterion established by scholar Walter Dean Burnham . The legitimacy of this success has been questioned by scholars who dismiss the label of Perot as a typical third party candidate , largely due to the availability of campaign funds and financing of grassroots efforts . Others dispute these claims and point out that Perot forced the other candidates to change their rhetoric on the issues to gain the votes of his supporters , indicating an issues campaign . Exit polls revealed that 35 % of voters would have voted for Perot if they believed he could win . Contemporary analysis reveals that Perot could have won the election if the polls prior to the election had shown the candidate with a larger share , preventing the wasted vote mindset . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 The effect of Ross Perot 's candidacy has been a contentious point of debate for many years . In the ensuing months after the election , various Republicans asserted that Perot had acted as a spoiler , enough to the detriment of Bush to lose him the election . While many disaffected conservatives may have voted for Ross Perot to protest Bush 's tax increase , further examination of the Perot vote in the Election Night exit polls not only showed that Perot siphoned votes nearly equally among Bush and Clinton , but of the voters who cited Bush 's broken " No New Taxes " pledge as " very important , " two thirds voted for Bill Clinton . A mathematical look at the voting numbers reveals that Bush would have had to win 12 @.@ 55 % of Perot 's 18 @.@ 91 % of the vote , 66 @.@ 36 % of Perot 's support base , to earn a majority of the vote , and would have needed to win nearly every state Clinton won by less than five percentage points . Furthermore , Perot was most popular in states that strongly favored either Clinton or Bush , limiting his real electoral impact for either candidate . He gained relatively little support in the Southern states and happened to have the best showing in states with few electoral votes . Perot appealed to disaffected voters all across the political spectrum who had grown weary of the two @-@ party system . Perot 's anti @-@ NAFTA stance played a role in his support , and Perot voters were relatively moderate on hot button social issues such as abortion and gay rights . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the election , Perot continued to work with " United We Stand " , and focused his efforts to defeat the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) . In 1993 , he was involved in a highly publicized debate with Vice President Al Gore on Larry King Live over NAFTA . Perot formed the Reform Party of the United States of America in 1995 , and ran for president under the party 's banner the following year . During the election , he failed to appear in the presidential debates , and finished in third place with about 8 % of the vote , behind Republican nominee Bob Dole and President Bill Clinton . The Reform Party 's candidate , former professional wrestler Jesse Ventura , was elected as Governor of Minnesota in 1998 , which was connected to Perot 's performance in the presidential elections . His focus on a balanced budget during his campaigns is speculated to have brought the issue to the forefront , enabling the surplus of the late 1990s . Perot declined to run in the 2000 presidential election , and endorsed eventual winner Republican Governor George W. Bush of Texas . In 2008 , he endorsed Republican Governor Mitt Romney of Massachusetts for the presidency , and stated " the situation in 1992 was not nearly as bad as it is now ... if ever there was a time when it was necessary to put our house in order , it is now . " The members of the populist Tea Party movement have been compared to Perot advocates , for their support of a balanced budget . 
 = House of Jealous Lovers = 
 " House of Jealous Lovers " is a single by American indie rock band The Rapture , from their second studio album Echoes . The song is produced by James Murphy and Tim Goldsworthy of the DFA . It was originally released in March 2002 through DFA Records , but it was eventually re @-@ released in 2003 where it peaked at number 27 on the UK Singles Chart . The song was designed to market the band through dance music distributors . The accompanying music video for the song is influenced by punk imagery . Upon release , it became DFA 's best @-@ selling single and helped re @-@ establish dance @-@ punk . The song received acclaim from music critics and was rated 16th and 6th respectively on Pitchfork Media and NME 's tracks of the decade lists . The song was used in the soundtrack for the video game NBA 2K15 , which was curated by famed music producer Pharrell Williams . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 The Rapture moved from San Francisco to New York in 1999 and wrote " House of Jealous Lovers " the following year . They met James Murphy and Tim Goldsworthy of DFA Records at one of their first performances in New York . Murphy and <unk> took a long time to persuade the band to work together because of a concern that making a dance song would alienate their fans . 
 While mastering " House of Jealous Lovers " , Murphy used techno music as a benchmark for the track 's bass frequencies . After hearing the DFA 's mix , Sub Pop , the band 's record label at the time , and the band both reacted negatively and initially refused to release it . Vocalist Luke Jenner hated the mix , feeling that it sounded unfinished . On the way to a gig , Murphy played the mix for Jonathan Galkin ; Galkin credited it for his decision to join DFA Records . 
 The Rapture originally released the song in 2002 as a limited 12 " vinyl single , a format preferred by club DJs . The single included a remix by Morgan Geist of Metro Area as the second song on the A @-@ side and a song titled " Silent Morning " as the B @-@ side . The single format and remix were part of a strategy to market the single through dance music stores . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " House of Jealous Lovers " is a dance @-@ punk song . Its percussion section features disco hi @-@ hat patterns and snare drums doubled with handclaps . The DFA reshaped the percussion by layering and reversing the hi @-@ hats and chopping the drums . The song includes prominent cowbell rhythms that grow louder through the course of the song . Its jagged , coarse guitar is doubled with electronic effects . The sound follows British predecessors such as Gang of Four , Public Image Ltd , and Happy Mondays . 
 The track opens and closes with long instrumental sections and features lyrics largely consisting of the song 's title being repeated . Jenner said he was unsure of the subject of the song and wanted to project a sense of " invincibility " . His performance , described as a " deranged falsetto " , drew comparisons to the vocals of the Cure 's frontman Robert Smith . Geist 's remix removes the vocals and adds keyboard riffs . It introduces brass sections , performed by James Duncan , to the arrangement . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " House of Jealous Lovers " received acclaim from music critics . Stylus Magazine described the track as all four band members " playing their instruments as if they were leads " and continued that " nobody 's been able to pull this off so well since Joy Division " . AllMusic said that its rhythm section was " as dynamite as anything from the late- ' 70s U.K. post @-@ punk bands . " Pitchfork Media called the song " the unparalleled champion of 2002 's summer anthem sweepstakes " . 
 The song placed 9th on the 2002 Pazz & Jop list , and it appeared at 26th place the following year . Stylus Magazine and Spin each named it the 9th best single of 2002 . Pitchfork ranked " House of Jealous Lovers " 4th on its 2003 singles list . 
 Pitchfork placed the song 16th on its " 500 best tracks of the 2000s " list . Rolling Stone ranked the song 53rd on its list of the best songs of the 2000s , and Slant Magazine placed it at 45th . The NME listed the song sixth on its 2000s list . In October 2011 , NME placed the song at number 86 on its list " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " . Pitchfork included " House of Jealous Lovers " in its 2006 collection of The Pitchfork 500 . The Guardian listed the track in its " 1000 songs everyone must hear " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was directed by London @-@ based group <unk> and released in 2003 . The chaotic , surreal video was inspired by the collage style of old punk fliers . It features footage of the band , animated newspaper headlines , scrapbook paraphernalia , and scenes of military conflicts . Pitchfork Media listed the video as the 27th best music video of the 2000s . 
 = = Impact = = 
 " House of Jealous Lovers " became DFA 's best @-@ selling single , and the label sold 20 @,@ 000 vinyl copies of it . The single reached number 27 on the UK Singles Chart in September 2003 . 
 The song 's use in dance sets opened rock music for formats other than concerts . It has been credited for re @-@ establishing dance @-@ punk during a period when rock and dance music rarely intersected . Justin Timberlake and Timbaland have cited " House of Jealous Lovers " as an influence on their 2006 single " SexyBack " . Timberlake used the song for an entrance during his FutureSex / LoveShow tour . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = 7 " vinyl = = = 
 Vertigo <unk> @-@ 5 
 = = = 12 " vinyl = = = 
 <unk> 2121 
 = = = CD 1 = = = 
 = = = CD 2 = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = The System Has Failed = 
 The System Has Failed is the tenth studio album by American thrash metal band Megadeth . Released on September 14 , 2004 , it was the band 's second and final studio album distributed by Sanctuary Records . The System Has Failed was the first of three Megadeth records not to include original bassist and co @-@ founder David Ellefson . Instead , the album features session players , including former Megadeth guitarist Chris Poland on lead guitar . However , Poland only provided lead guitar parts and solos on a contractual basis and did not rejoin the band . 
 The System Has Failed received positive reception from critics and managed to debut at number 18 on the Billboard 200 . The album was generally thought of as being a return to form for the band , after the release of more commercially accessible albums through the 1990s . " Die Dead Enough " and " Of Mice and Men " were released as singles . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 In 2002 , frontman Dave Mustaine announced that he was disbanding Megadeth due to an arm injury that rendered him unable to play guitar . In a statement published on April 3 , 2002 , he stated that doctors expected that it would take about a year before he would recover from the injury . However , it was uncertain as to how complete of a recovery it would be . Mustaine stated his hopes to regain the ability to play guitar . He subsequently recovered following months of physical therapy . 
 The album was recorded at Oceanway and Emerald Entertainment in Nashville , Tennessee and at Phase Four Studios in Tempe , Arizona . In a promotional statement from Megadeth 's then @-@ label Sanctuary Records , Mustaine clarified that recording the album had been " liberating " , due to having more control over the record than he had had since the first two Megadeth records . Mustaine also noted that he initially took a casual approach to the album , starting out working three hours a night , four days a week . 
 Originally intended to be a solo album by Mustaine , the record was re @-@ branded with the Megadeth name as a result of contractual obligations owed to Mustaine 's publishing company . Mustaine co @-@ produced the record with Jeff Balding , who had previously engineered Cryptic Writings and Risk . Upon restarting Megadeth , Mustaine contacted bassist and founding member David Ellefson about resuming bass guitar duties for the band . Those efforts were ultimately fruitless , however . Ellefson claimed that Mustaine was not financially willing to pick up " where it was when [ the band ] broke up " and did not return to Megadeth . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 The cover art was designed by Mike Learn , and features Vic Rattlehead at a podium in front of the United States Supreme Court building selling a not @-@ guilty verdict to then U.S. President George W. Bush . Saluting is Hillary Clinton , next to former President Bill Clinton . Behind President Bush , Vice President Dick Cheney holds a briefcase labeled " plan B " . Behind Cheney are several other Bush Administration officials : Then National Security Advisor ( and later Secretary of State ) Condoleezza Rice , Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and Attorney General John Ashcroft . The $ 100 bills on the cover depict Vic Rattlehead 's face rather than the one of Benjamin Franklin . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The System Has Failed was released on September 14 , 2004 through Sanctuary Records . Three days previously , on September 11 , the album was made available for streaming on the VH1 website . The album debuted at number 18 on the Billboard 200 , with 46 @,@ 000 units sold in its first week . By December 2005 , The System Has Failed had sold 171 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In addition , the album had managed to chart in the top 20 in several other countries , including Canada , Finland , and Sweden . 
 Still needing a band with whom to tour , Mustaine hired longtime drummer Nick Menza , and newcomers James MacDonough ( bass ) and Glen Drover ( guitar ) . However , just five days before the start of the tour , Menza was sent home . His place was filled by Shawn Drover , brother of then @-@ recently hired guitarist Glen Drover . The album 's promotional tour , the Blackmail the Universe Tour , launched on October 23 , 2004 in Reno , Nevada and featured Earshot as a supporting act . This tour would also spawn the That One Night : Live in Buenos Aires double live album , released in 2007 . 
 Two music videos were also made to help promote the album . The first was " Die Dead Enough " , which was directed by Thomas Mignone . " Of Mice and Men " was selected as the second video from the album . In this video , the then @-@ new Megadeth lineup is shown performing . The majority of the video was filmed on January 20 , 2005 in Los Angeles . Many fans turned up to be in the video through a contest held by Sanctuary Records . A third video was made for " Back in the Day " in 2005 , but was unreleased until September 2014 , to celebrate ten years since the album 's release . " Back in the Day " was also featured in an episode of the Duck Dodgers TV series . The episode which the song was featured in , " In Space , No One Can Hear You Rock " , aired on November 4 , 2005 , after having been delayed a week . 
 = = Songs = = 
 " Die Dead Enough " was the lead single from The System Has Failed . Mustaine wrote it when he was asked to write a song for the movie Tomb Raider II , but the proposed budget for recording was too low and the deal fell through . Later on , the song was supposed to be featured in the film Saw , but ultimately was not for undisclosed reasons . This was later followed by the release of " Of Mice and Men " . Additionally , " Kick the Chair " was released as a free promotional download via Megadeth 's website in May 2004 , several months prior to the album 's release . This version of the song was described by Mustaine as being a final mix , but not the master that would appear on the record . " Tears in a Vial " was written by Mustaine shortly after Megadeth disbanded in 2002 about a decision to trade success for happiness . The next track on the album , " I Know Jack " , is an instrumental featuring a sample of a sample of Texas Senator Lloyd Bentsen 's famous response to Indiana Senator Dan Quayle during a 1988 vice @-@ presidential debate . " Shadow of Deth " consists of Mustaine reciting Psalm 23 . The Latin phrase heard at the beginning of the track , " <unk> meum a Domino , " translates to " My help comes from the Lord . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The System Has Failed has received mainly positive reviews from critics , with some of them describing the album as a return to form . AllMusic 's Jason Birchmeier commented that Megadeth hasn 't sounded this vital since Countdown to Extinction , and called the album " damn near perfect " . Brave Words & Bloody Knuckles reviewer Martin Popoff described the album as a mix of several previous records , and praised a number of the album 's tracks . Popoff acknowledged the fact that Mustaine only used hired session players on the album was the album 's only low point . Jeff Kerby of KNAC gave a positive , if at times slightly sarcastic review , as well as a detailed track @-@ by @-@ track commentary . David E. Gehlke of Blistering said despite that Mustaine 's best days were behind him , this record comes across as a " warm return " ; although the album fails to recapture past glory , it succeeds in being a solid , reliable metal album . In addition , Gehlke noted that Mustaine 's vocals were " as strong as ever " , but panned the album for the lack of any " thrash burners " . Neil Arnold of Metal Forces had a slightly different opinion , and credited this album for putting Megadeth " back on track " . He praised the album artwork , which reminded him of the 80 's style of graphics . Another positive review was posted on Entertainment Weekly . Reviewer Nancy Miller called The System Has Failed Megadeth 's best since 1990 's Rust in Peace and praised Mustaine 's collaboration with Poland , calling the result " Righteous ! " 
 In spite of a largely positive reception , not all reaction was completely positive . Tom Day of musicOMH had a mixed reaction to the album . Day called " Die Dead Enough " a " slice of classic ' Deth " , while noting its slightly more mainstream sound . Later in his review , however , he noted that with " Shadow of Deth " , it seemed that Mustaine had run out of ideas . Nick Lancaster from Drowned in Sound also reacted unenthusiastically towards the album , saying it was a " severe case of St. Anger syndrome " . However , he added there were " occasional moments of the old magic , but they 're few and far between " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Mustaine . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Production and performance credits are adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = 1948 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1948 Atlantic hurricane season featured the first tropical cyclone before the month of June since 1940 . The season officially began on June 15 , 1948 , and lasted until November 15 , 1948 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . There were 10 tropical cyclones ; six storms attained hurricane status , and four storms intensified into major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Operationally , it was believed that a weak tropical disturbance formed over the southeast Bahamas in May and moved northwest into the Georgia coast near Savannah . This system was later excluded from HURDAT . The seventh tropical cyclone was not operationally considered a tropical cyclone , but was later added to HURDAT . 
 The sixth and eighth systems , designated as Dog and Easy by the Air Weather Service in real time , respectively , were the most intense tropical cyclones of the season , peaking as a Category 4 hurricane with a minimum barometric pressure of 940 mbar ( 27 @.@ 76 inHg ) . The former caused eight deaths and $ 400 @,@ 000 ( 1948 USD ) in damage after bringing strong winds , rough seas , and heavy rainfall to Bermuda and Atlantic Canada . In Cuba and Florida , the eighth hurricane left 13 fatalities and at least $ 14 million in damage . The ninth hurricane , assigned the name Fox by the Air Weather Service , brought similar impact to Cuba and Florida about two weeks later . In May , the first tropical cyclone killed 80 people from flooding in the Dominican Republic . Collectively , the storms of this season left around $ 28 @.@ 8 million in damage and 112 fatalities . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 15 , 1948 . However , tropical cyclogenesis began on April 15 , about two months before the official start of the season . There was a total of ten tropical storms , six of which strengthened into hurricanes . Further , four of the six hurricanes deepened into major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Of the nine tropical disturbances detected operationally , five struck the United States with winds of 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) or greater , while the other tropical systems affected islands , remained over the open ocean , or affected the country with winds below tropical storm intensity . Three hurricanes made landfall in the United States , while the three other storms with winds of at least 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) largely remained at sea . Collectively , the storms of this season left around $ 28 @.@ 8 million in damage and 112 fatalities . 
 The strongest storms of the season attained Category 4 intensity ; two of the major hurricanes formed in the western Caribbean Sea and affected the United States in late September and October . A minimal hurricane struck southern Louisiana on September 4 , causing tides of 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and winds of 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) in New Orleans . A minimal tropical storm made landfall near Destin in July . An intense hurricane attained Category 4 strength and produced extensive damage and 100 mph ( 160 km / ) wind gusts on Bermuda in mid @-@ September . A Category 4 hurricane struck the Florida Keys and the Everglades in September , resulting in $ 12 million of damages in the state . After the passage of one week , another hurricane affected the region as a Category 2 storm , after crossing Cuba with winds of 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) . Only three direct fatalities occurred in the United States , largely because of improved evacuations and adherence to warnings and advisories . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 95 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 A broad area of low pressure in the central Caribbean Sea developed into a tropical depression early on May 22 . The circulation moved northward , and it made landfall in southwest Haiti around 1200 UTC with winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) . Over the next day , the system crossed Hispaniola and the Turks and Caicos Islands with winds unchanged . Turning to the northeast , it strengthened into a tropical storm at 1200 UTC on May 24 while over the southwest Atlantic . Shortly afterward , the tropical cyclone turned to the north . On May 25 , the storm 's forward motion slowed to a crawl ; within a few hours , the storm attained its estimated peak intensity of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , as reported by reconnaissance aircraft , though no ships reported gale @-@ force winds . The next day , the cyclone started to weaken , and on May 27 , the system began to accelerate northward . The system diminished to a tropical depression on May 29 shortly prior to dissipation . 
 The tropical system brought heavy precipitation to Hispaniola , and widespread flooding took place across the region . In Dominican Republic , the capital city of Santo Domingo ( then known as Ciudad Trujillo ) was impacted significantly , where 9 in ( 229 mm ) of rain fell in 24 hours . More than 20 bridges were swept away , isolating the city from the rest of the country . Several people went missing in the floodwaters and it is estimated that 80 people died . The storm ranks as the deadliest Atlantic tropical cyclone to form in the off @-@ season . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 After nearly two months of inactivity , an area of disturbed weather developed in the northern Gulf of Mexico . The area organized into a tropical depression over the north @-@ central Gulf of Mexico on July 7 . The depression strengthened slightly and became a weak tropical storm early on July 9 , when it peaked with maximum sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Several hours later , the system made landfall east of Pensacola , Florida , but quickly weakened to a depression as it moved inland . The remnants moved north through southeastern Alabama on July 10 , and the circulation dissipated over southern Tennessee on July 11 . The system produced minimal effects along the Florida Panhandle . Winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) were measured at Pensacola during the passage of a thunderstorm , and the tropical cyclone caused heavy precipitation over northern Florida , southern Alabama , and southern Georgia . Overall damage was minimal . 
 = = = Hurricane Three ( Able ) = = = 
 A strong tropical storm , named Able by the Air Weather Service in real time , was first identified on August 26 about 300 mi ( 485 km ) northeast of Saint John , as ship reports indicated winds of Force 9 . However , it is likely that Able formed much farther east , possibly as a Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane . The tropical cyclone quickly intensified to a hurricane , and it continued to steadily progress northwest . The storm strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane on August 27 , and while turning west @-@ northwestward it continued to intensify . The cyclone peaked as a 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) Category 3 hurricane by 1800 UTC on August 28 , which was measured by a reconnaissance aircraft flight . Its forward motion slowed on August 29 , and it began to weaken as it turned to the north on August 30 . The tropical system weakened to a minimal hurricane , and it accelerated to the northeast on August 31 . The storm soon became extratropical before striking southern Newfoundland on September 2 . Over the next several days , the system slowly weakened , and its remnants turned east before dissipating south of southern Iceland on September 5 . 
 In anticipation of the storm , the U.S. Weather Bureau posted hurricane warnings from Wilmington to Cape Hatteras . On August 30 , as the tropical cyclone began to turn to the north , the center was expected to pass over or near Cape Hatteras . High tides occurred along the North Carolina coastline , which prompted evacuations and precautions in the area . The remnants of the storm brought strong winds to Atlantic Canada . In Nova Scotia , the storm severely disrupted electricity and communications between Halifax and Sydney . At the latter , many trees were uprooted , with several falling on streets and cars . In Newfoundland , a wind gust as strong as 81 mph ( 130 km / h ) was observed . The community of Port au Port was hard hit . Among the structures damaged included a store , which lost its roof , and a church , which the storm completely destroyed . Port au Port alone suffered about $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1948 CAD ) in damage . Along the shore , a number of pleasure crafts were wrecked . Some other structures , trees , and boats were impacted or destroyed throughout the province . The communities along the south coast of Newfoundland collectively experienced about $ 400 @,@ 000 ( 1948 CAD ) in damage . Overall , the storm left over $ 989 @,@ 000 ( 1948 CAD ) in damage in Canada . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Four ( Baker ) = = = 
 On August 30 , a tropical storm named Baker by the Air Weather Service in real time , was first detected about 275 mi ( 445 km ) east of Barbados , by a ship that reported high easterly seas and winds of Force 10 . Upon being initially observed , Baker was already at its peak maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The small system moved rapidly westward and slowly weakened to a marginal tropical cyclone on August 31 . On the morning of September 1 , Baker passed between Saint Lucia and Martinique , when a reconnaissance aircraft mission reported a minimum pressure of 1007 mbar ( 29 @.@ 73 inHg ) . Subsequent missions failed to detect a center of circulation , and the tropical cyclone quickly degenerated to a tropical depression . Baker dissipated over the eastern Caribbean Sea on September 1 . The storm brought heavy rainfall to several eastern Caribbean islands , though most of it was beneficial . On Puerto Rico , water supplies and crops were replenished . 
 = = = Hurricane Five ( Charlie ) = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather organized into a 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) tropical storm – named Charlie by the Air Weather Service in real time – on September 1 over the western Gulf of Mexico . On the morning of September 2 , the poorly defined center moved northeast , and Charlie gradually intensified . It attained hurricane intensity on September 3 and then slowly accelerated toward the upper Gulf Coast . The rapidly reached its peak intensity of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , and it crossed the coastline west of Golden Meadow , Louisiana , on September 4 . The center moved inland over Orleans Parish , and the weakening tropical cyclone diminished to a strong tropical storm prior to moving over southern Mississippi . Charlie continued to weaken and fell to tropical depression intensity on September 5 . The remnants turned to the north , and the circulation dissipated over northwestern Indiana on September 6 . 
 On September 4 , the U.S. Weather Bureau advised residents that the storm was expected to strike land between Morgan City and Grand Isle around midnight , as its forward motion had increased to 15 mph ( 24 km / h ) . The weather service also noted that abnormally high tides were expected from the Mississippi River to Pensacola , as the center was predicted to pass east of New Orleans and move to the west of Biloxi shortly before dawn . About 1 @,@ 000 people left their homes in Terrebonne Parish and took shelter in a courthouse and school buildings in Houma . As winds increased , city officials in New Orleans ordered 2 @,@ 000 people to evacuate from a wartime housing project into an auditorium for shelter . Offshore , oil drilling platforms and equipment were destroyed by high seas near Grand Isle . The island itself was cutoff from the mainland after 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) inundated roadways . 
 Throughout southeastern Louisiana , beans were destroyed north of Lake Pontchartrain , while sugar cane and corn were flattened , especially in Lafourche , Jefferson , St. Charles , and Terrebonne parishes . Pecan and tung nut crops also suffered damage in southeastern Mississippi . The hurricane produced gusts of 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) at <unk> Airport , and tides ranged from 3 @.@ 4 to 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 0 to 1 @.@ 8 m ) along the coast from Mississippi to the Florida Panhandle . The maximum tide reached 4 @.@ 7 ft ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) in New Orleans , and winds caused damage to small boats , trees , and power and communication lines . The remnants of the hurricane brought rainfall far inland , including 0 @.@ 82 in ( 21 mm ) of precipitation observed in Detroit , Michigan . Total damage in the United States reached $ 900 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Hurricane Six ( Dog ) = = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the west coast of Africa on September 3 and was designated as Tropical Storm Dog by the Air Weather Service in real time on the following day . The cyclone tracked a general westward path for much of its initial stages as it gradually intensified , reaching tropical storm intensity shortly after development and then hurricane intensity a day later . After reaching a longitude roughly equal to that of the Lesser Antilles , Dog began to curve northward on a parabolic track , bringing it near Bermuda at peak intensity as a Category 4 hurricane on September 13 . The hurricane then began to accelerate northeastward and weaken . The waning Dog grazed Cape Race , Newfoundland , before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone on September 15 ; these remnants persisted for an additional day . 
 Although the storm never making landfall , Dog disrupted numerous shipping lanes and inflicted damage on Bermuda and Newfoundland . In the former , the hurricane brought winds in excess of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , downing power lines and trees . Property damage also resulted from the strong winds , totaling about $ 400 @,@ 000 . After passing west of Bermuda , the tropical cyclone tracked across numerous shipping lanes . Two ships , the Leicester and Gaspar , encountered the hurricane and became stricken in open waters . Though most people were rescued from both ships , six people perished on the former while one died on the latter . Beginning on September 15 , the hurricane tracked east of Newfoundland , producing heavy rainfall on land . The precipitation flooded roads and caused streams to overflow , inundating additional areas . On the island , one person were killed . Overall , the hurricane caused eight fatalities . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Seven = = = 
 Operationally , this storm was not considered a tropical cyclone . Late on September 7 , an extratropical system transitioned into a tropical storm about 355 mi ( 570 km ) northeast of Bermuda . The storm curved northwestward and peaked with maximum sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 993 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) . After turning northward and then northeastward , the storm began losing tropical characteristics and reverted to an extratropical cyclone on September 10 while situated about 215 mi ( 345 km ) southwest of Sable Island , Nova Scotia . The remnants continued northeastward until dissipating just offshore Newfoundland . 
 = = = Hurricane Eight ( Easy ) = = = 
 The eighth storm , designated as Tropical Storm Easy by the Air Weather Service in real time , developed from a tropical wave over the Caribbean Sea on September 18 . Early the next day , Easy strengthened into a hurricane while moving westward . Thereafter , it curved northwestward and continued to deepen . By September 20 , the system turned northward and later that day made landfall along the Zapata Peninsula of Cuba as a Category 3 hurricane on the modern day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Another landfall occurred in Cuba early the next day to the south of Güines . Severe destruction was reported on the island , with winds up to 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) observed in Havana . Over 700 buildings were destroyed . Ten deaths occurred and damage totaled at least $ 2 million , while other sources estimate " several million dollars . " 
 After emerging into the Straits of Florida on September 21 , Easy resumed intensification , before striking near Boca Chica Key , Florida , with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . By early on September 22 , the system peaked as a Category 4 hurricane with sustained winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , another landfall occurred near Chokoloskee at the same intensity . Severe damage was reported in the state due to strong winds . The storm was considered the worst in Key West since 1919 . Throughout the state , 1 @,@ 200 homes were severely damaged or destroyed , while 40 businesses were demolished and 237 suffered impact . There were three deaths and about $ 12 million in damage , over half of which was inflicted on crops . The storm rapidly weakened while crossing the state and emerged into the Atlantic Ocean as only a Category 1 hurricane later on September 22 . Slight fluctuations in intensity occurred before the hurricane became extratropical early on September 24 , while located northwest of Bermuda . The remnants accelerated to the east @-@ northeastward and continued to weaken , before dissipating hundreds of miles east of Newfoundland on September 26 . 
 = = = Late September tropical depression = = = 
 On September 25 , a westward moving tropical wave near the Lesser Antilles began appearing in historical weather map . A reconnaissance aircraft flight into the system when it was over the central Caribbean Sea indicated wind gusts up to 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) , but no circulation . During a separate fight on September 29 , it was noted that , " [ a ] complete search of area shows well @-@ organized circle of storm but open to west and northwest " . Although no circulation was detected , westerly winds were reported , making it likely that a tropical depression developed that day over the western Caribbean . Subsequently , the depression moved over the northern Yucatán Peninsula , which may have disrupted the poorly @-@ defined circulation . By October 1 , the system entered the Gulf of Mexico , where it began degenerating into an open trough on October 3 . Cold air and the development of Hurricane Fox in the western Caribbean prevented re @-@ generation . The remnants continued northeastward into North Florida and deepened while producing strong gales along the coasts of North Carolina and Virginia . It is possible that the remnants lasted until October 8 , when it was absorbed by Fox . 
 = = = Hurricane Nine ( Fox ) = = = 
 On October 3 , a tropical depression developed over the northwestern Caribbean Sea . The storm intensified into a tropical storm , designated as Tropical Storm Fox by the Air Weather Service in real time , early on October 4 . Several hours later , the storm became a hurricane . Fox then significantly deepened , peaking as a Category 3 intensity with maximum sustained winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) early on October 5 . Around that time , Fox made landfall in eastern Pinar del Río Province of Cuba . Fox crossed the island and emerged into the Straits of Florida a few hours later . Late on October 5 , the hurricane made landfall on Bahia Honda Key , Florida , with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and near Flamingo about two hours later . Fox emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near Fort Lauderdale early on October 6 . The storm moved northeastward and later curved to the east @-@ northeast . Late on October 7 , Fox made landfall on Bermuda with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Fox weakened over the next several days and later executed a large cyclonic loop . By October 16 , it became extratropical while well east @-@ southeast of Newfoundland . 
 In Cuba , homes and cattle were swept away by flash flooding . Eleven deaths and about 300 injuries were attributed to the tropical cyclone . Damage in the country reached about $ 6 million . The storm brought strong winds to Florida , with a sustained wind speed of 122 mph ( 196 km / h ) at Naval Air Station Key West . Heavy rainfall exceeding 9 @.@ 5 in ( 240 mm ) in Miami and three tornadoes also contributed to the damage in South Florida . Throughout the state , 674 homes were severely damaged or destroyed , while 45 other buildings were demolished . Overall , damage in Florida reached $ 5 @.@ 5 million and there were no deaths , but 36 injuries , none of which were serious . In Bermuda , buildings were unroofed and the sides of some structures were knocked down . Electrical light wires and telephone lines were toppled across the island . Damage totaled over $ 1 million . 
 = = = Hurricane Ten ( George ) = = = 
 A tropical storm developed about midway between Bermuda and Puerto Rico on November 8 . Designated as George by the Air Weather Service in real time , the storm moved quickly west @-@ northwestward . Early on November 10 , George is believed to have reached hurricane intensity after reconnaissance aircraft flights recorded a small area of winds ranging from 70 to 80 mph ( 110 to 130 km / h ) . Peaking as a Category 1 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 990 mbar ( 29 inHg ) , George then curved north @-@ northwestward . Later that day , the hurricane began to become disorganized and weakened to a tropical storm . Early on November 11 , George degenerated into an area of disturbed weather while located about 195 mi ( 315 km ) east of Virginia Beach , Virginia . As the hurricane threatened the coast of North Carolina on November 10 , hurricane warnings were issued between Cape Lookout and Cape Hatteras . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 In addition to the ten systems that became a tropical storm and the other tropical depression , there were a few tropical cyclones that failed to strengthen beyond tropical depression intensity . A weak broad low pressure area formerly associated with a trough developed into a tropical depression well northeast of the Lesser Antilles on April 15 . A barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 005 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) was observed that day . The depression moved northward and then became stationary by April 17 , before degenerating into a trough on the next day . The next tropical depression developed from a northward moving tropical wave over the eastern Gulf of Mexico on July 31 . Although the depression continued northward , it cannot be determined if the system made landfall in the Florida Panhandle before dissipating on August 2 . Tampa recorded a 5 @-@ minute sustained wind speed of 34 mph ( 55 km / h ) on July 31 . By August 13 , another tropical depression formed from area of disturbed weather well offshore the Mid @-@ Atlantic . The system moved rapidly northeastward and became extratropical early on August 14 . It may have been a tropical storm , based on barometric pressure of 995 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) observed by a ship shortly after extratropical transition . On September 16 , a trough of low pressure developed into a tropical depression over the western Gulf of Mexico . Unfavorable conditions caused the depression to dissipated by the following day . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 = The Valley Library = 
 The Valley Library is the primary library of Oregon State University and is located at the school 's main campus in Corvallis in the U.S. state of Oregon . Established in 1887 , the school built its first library building in 1918 , what is now Kidder Hall . The current building opened in 1963 as the William Jasper Kerr Library and was expanded and renamed in 1999 as The Valley Library . The library is named for philanthropist F. Wayne Valley , who played football for Oregon State . 
 One of three libraries for Oregon State , The Valley Library stores more than 1 @.@ 4 million volumes , 14 @,@ 000 serials , and more than 500 @,@ 000 maps and government documents . It is designated as a Federal Depository Library and is also a repository for state documents . The six @-@ story library building is of a contemporary , neoclassical style with a red @-@ brick exterior highlighted by white sections along the top and on part of the eastern side . The eastern side includes a white @-@ faced rotunda that includes a two @-@ story atrium on the main floor . 
 = = History = = 
 Oregon State University was established in 1868 . The Oregon Legislative Assembly appropriated $ 1 @,@ 000 to the school to buy books for a library in 1876 , marking the first instance of the legislature giving funds to the school for a library . In 1887 , the library was established at the school , and in 1890 , May Warren was hired as the first full @-@ time librarian . By 1893 the library 's collection had grown to 1 @,@ 950 volumes . After adding 2 @,@ 600 volumes from 1899 to 1900 , the collection stood at 5 @,@ 000 volumes . At that time the library was a free , general library with both circulating and reference collections with A. J. Stimpson serving as the librarian . The library also had 6 @,@ 000 pamphlets at that time and the annual circulation was 8 @,@ 000 . 
 By 1909 , the collection had grown to 10 @,@ 000 volumes and 10 @,@ 000 pamphlets , with R. J. Nichols as the librarian . The library collection continued to grow and totaled 36 @,@ 478 volumes in 1918 . In February 1917 , the state legislature gave the school $ 65 @,@ 000 towards construction of a building to house the library . 
 Oregon Agricultural College opened a new library in 1918 , marking the first time that the library had its own building . Prior to 1918 the library had been housed on the second floor of the college 's administration building , Benton Hall . When the new building was completed , the school built a temporary trellis from neighboring Benton Hall 's second floor to the second floor of the new building in order to more easily transfer the books to their new location . Initially , the new building also housed offices and classrooms , but within a decade the library expanded to occupy all of the structure . John V. <unk> designed the new building , as well as many of the campus buildings constructed during that period . By 1922 the collection had grown to 73 @,@ 000 volumes , and Lucy M. Lewis served as the school 's librarian . 
 The new library was remodeled on several occasions , with a new wing added in 1941 . The 1918 building was located on the southeast corner of Campus Way and Waldo Place and after the 1941 addition , had about 76 @,@ 000 square feet ( 7 @,@ 100 m2 ) of space spread over three floors and a full basement . Designed in the neoclassical style , the exterior was made of bricks and contained decorative plaques constructed of concrete , with the gabled roof covered with tile . The original design had two @-@ story reading rooms , which were converted to single @-@ story rooms in the 1950s . A mural painted by J. Leo Fairbanks was added to the main reading room in 1929 as a gift from the school 's class of 1925 . The mural was titled Recorded Information and was the second mural in that room by Fairbanks , who was the longtime head of the school 's art department . 
 Beginning in 1932 , Mary J. L. McDonald made the then @-@ largest donation of books to the library when she donated volumes worth just over $ 10 @,@ 000 . She donated a total of over 1 @,@ 000 items that included a complete works of Abraham Lincoln valued at $ 4 @,@ 800 . In 1936 , the Works Progress Administration gave a decorative archway to the library to be installed over the south entrance to the building . The library was among several buildings vandalized by University of Oregon students in October 1945 during the run @-@ up to the Civil War football game between the two schools . The library received a bequest of about 5 @,@ 500 volumes valued at about $ 15 @,@ 000 in December 1947 from William H. Galvani 's estate . This donation overtook that of McDonald to become the largest received by the library up to that time . 
 By 1940 , the collections at the library had increased to total of about 130 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 400 serials . Included in the collections were a variety of rare items , such as a page from the 1642 printing of the Polychronicon , a 1628 book of poems written in Latin , and a 1769 bible printed by John Baskerville , among others . At that time the building was open from 7 : 50 am until 10 pm on weekdays , and 2 pm to 5 pm on Sundays . Construction on the new wing of the library started in 1940 and was designed by John V. <unk> , the same architect who designed the original structure . He also designed a matching wing for the other side as well , but that wing was never added . 
 = = = Kerr Library = = = 
 The school 's library collection grew to 193 @,@ 479 volumes in 1943 . Previously known simply as The Library , the building and library were renamed in 1954 as the William Jasper Kerr Library . Kerr was Oregon State 's longest serving president , holding the office from 1907 until 1932 when he became the first chancellor of what is now the Oregon University System . 
 In May 1960 , the then Oregon State College was advanced $ 19 @,@ 000 by the federal government to plan for a new $ 2 @,@ 170 @,@ 000 building . The new building was designed by architects Hamlin & Martin , and the cost rose to $ 2 @.@ 4 million by the time the school accepted bids on the project in April 1962 . Ground was broken on the project on May 1 , 1962 , with Shields Construction Company as the general contractor for the project . The new building would double the size of Oregon State 's library . 
 Completed in 1963 , the new library was built on Jefferson Street , its present location , and the name was transferred from the old building . At that time the building was four stories tall , but the school planned for a future expansion . During the original construction , slabs for two additional floors were placed on the roof . Oregon State began construction in the Fall of 1970 to add these new floors , with completion coming in the Fall of 1971 . The old library building was remodeled and became Kidder Hall in 1964 , named in honor of former librarian Ida Mae Kidder . Previously , Fairbanks Hall had carried the moniker of Kidder Hall , starting in 1927 . By 1968 the collection had increased to 538 @,@ 000 volumes . 
 Rodney K. Waldron served as the head of the library from 1954 until 1984 . In the same year as Waldron 's departure , Melvin R. George took over as director of the library , which at that time had a $ 4 @.@ 5 million annual budget and 72 employees . In 1986 , a room was added to the library to accommodate a donation from alumnus Linus Pauling , which consisted of his papers and two Nobel Prizes . 
 = = = The Valley Library = = = 
 The collections of the library continued to grow , reaching 1 @,@ 275 @,@ 473 volumes in 1993 . In 1999 , the building was renamed as The Valley Library after an extensive expansion and renovation . Renovations took three years and cost $ 47 million to complete . That year the library was selected by The Library Journal as the Library of the Year , the first time an academic library had won the distinction . 
 Librarians at Valley Library began using text messaging in March 2010 to communicate with some library patrons , and earlier started to loan out Amazon 's Kindle reader . In April , the school started allowing students to use the library 24 @-@ hours @-@ a @-@ day from Sunday through Thursday to test whether there was enough demand to allow 24 @-@ hour access on a permanent basis . The program was sponsored by the Associated Students of Oregon State University and paid for by university technology funds , and was due in part to the closure of some computer labs that had been 24 @-@ hour study areas . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The Valley Library is a six @-@ story , rectangular building with a rotunda on the east side . Designed in a contemporary , neoclassical style , the structure has a veneer of red brick , with white @-@ colored aluminum solar screening on the rotunda and the fifth floor of the north side added for decoration . The internal support structure consists of steel beams and concrete slabs . 
 Below ground @-@ level on the north side , the first floor includes a cafe and study rooms . The main floor , which is the second floor , includes a two @-@ story atrium as well as the circulation desk and main entrance . The third floor contains the OSU Archives , and along with the fourth floor , houses the library 's offices . A children 's library and the special collections are located on the fifth floor , while the sixth floor only covers the southern two @-@ thirds of the structure . 
 Directly north of the building is the Library Quad , originally known as the East Quadrangle . The approximately 2 @.@ 6 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 1 ha ) area was laid out about 1910 and is part of the Oregon State University Historic District listed on the National Register of Historic Places in June 2008 . A bell tower , or campanile , was added on the eastern edge of the quad in 2001 . Dedicated to alumnus H. Dean <unk> , the 68 @-@ foot ( 21 m ) tall tower has five bells and a clock . 
 = = Operations = = 
 One of three libraries for Oregon State University , The Valley Library serves as the main library , and is located on the main campus in Corvallis . The other two libraries are the Marilyn Potts Guin Library at the Hatfield Marine Science Center in Newport and the library at the Cascades Campus in Bend . Faye Chadwell is the University Librarian as well as the OSU Press Director . 
 As of 2008 , the libraries , combined , employed about 120 people ( FTE ) , of which 23 were librarians . The three had a total of almost 1 @.@ 6 million volumes in the collections , 16 @,@ 992 serials , 2 @.@ 1 million microform documents , and 3 @,@ 849 e @-@ books . The Valley Library alone contained 1 @.@ 4 million volumes and 14 @,@ 000 serials out of those totals . Valley also has over 500 @,@ 000 government documents and maps , as it has served as a Federal Depository Library since 1907 and is a deposit library for the state government as well . The three libraries combined had a budget of $ 10 @.@ 8 million and a circulation of 347 @,@ 000 while servicing 24 @,@ 000 inter @-@ library loans and averaging about 34 @,@ 000 people per week at the libraries . 
 = = = Collections = = = 
 The Valley Library includes a variety of special collections in addition to its main collection . Most notably are the Ava Helen and Linus Pauling Papers that contain 4 @,@ 111 books and 2 @,@ 230 boxes of material from the two alums of Oregon State . Separate from the library , the school is also home to the Linus Pauling Institute . 
 Other collections in the Special Collections and Archives Research Center include the Atomic Energy and Nuclear History Collections that contains 294 feet ( 90 m ) of items , the McDonald Collection with 2 @,@ 680 items that date back as far as 2000 BC , two collections concerning the history of science , and 30 linear feet in the Nursery and Seed Trade Catalogues , among others . Also contained in the Special Collections and Archives are around 200 @,@ 000 photographs , memorabilia , campus publications , and a variety of other specimens related to the history of Oregon State University and its faculty 's work . 
 The Special Collections and Archives Research Center also include the papers of Bernard Malamud , William Appleman Williams , Milton Harris , Paul Emmett , David P. Shoemaker , Ewan Cameron , Fritz Marti , Eugene Starr , and Roger Hayward . The library is decorated throughout with 120 pieces of the Northwest Art Collection , and serves as an art gallery . Oregon 's Percent for Art law set aside one percent of construction costs for artwork , which was then selected by the library along with the Oregon Arts Commission . 
 = Barbara McClintock = 
 Barbara McClintock ( June 16 , 1902 – September 2 , 1992 ) was an American scientist and <unk> who was awarded the 1983 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine . McClintock received her PhD in botany from Cornell University in 1927 . There she started her career as the leader in the development of maize cytogenetics , the focus of her research for the rest of her life . From the late 1920s , McClintock studied chromosomes and how they change during reproduction in maize . She developed the technique for visualizing maize chromosomes and used microscopic analysis to demonstrate many fundamental genetic ideas . One of those ideas was the notion of genetic recombination by crossing @-@ over during meiosis — a mechanism by which chromosomes exchange information . She produced the first genetic map for maize , linking regions of the chromosome to physical traits . She demonstrated the role of the telomere and centromere , regions of the chromosome that are important in the conservation of genetic information . She was recognized among the best in the field , awarded prestigious fellowships , and elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1944 . 
 During the 1940s and 1950s , McClintock discovered transposition and used it to demonstrate that genes are responsible for turning physical characteristics on and off . She developed theories to explain the suppression and expression of genetic information from one generation of maize plants to the next . Due to skepticism of her research and its implications , she stopped publishing her data in 1953 . 
 Later , she made an extensive study of the cytogenetics and ethnobotany of maize races from South America . McClintock 's research became well understood in the 1960s and 1970s , as other scientists confirmed the mechanisms of genetic change and genetic regulation that she had demonstrated in her maize research in the 1940s and 1950s . Awards and recognition for her contributions to the field followed , including the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine , awarded to her in 1983 for the discovery of genetic transposition ; she is the only woman to receive an unshared Nobel Prize in that category . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Barbara McClintock was born Eleanor McClintock on June 16 , 1902 in Hartford , Connecticut , the third of four children born to physician Thomas Henry McClintock and Sara Handy McClintock . Thomas McClintock was the child of British immigrants , and Sara Handy , born Grace , descended from an old American Mayflower family . Marjorie , the oldest child , was born in October 1898 ; Mignon , the second daughter , was born in November 1900 . The youngest , Malcolm Rider ( called Tom ) , was born 18 months after Barbara . As a young girl , her parents determined that Eleanor , a " feminine " and " delicate " name , was not appropriate for her , and chose Barbara instead . McClintock was an independent child beginning at a very young age , a trait she later identified as her " capacity to be alone " . From the age of three until she began school , McClintock lived with an aunt and uncle in Brooklyn , New York in order to reduce the financial burden on her parents while her father established his medical practice . She was described as a solitary and independent child , and a tomboy . She was close to her father , but had a difficult relationship with her mother , tension that began when she was young . 
 The McClintock family moved to Brooklyn in 1908 and McClintock completed her secondary education there at Erasmus Hall High School ; she graduated early in 1919 . She discovered her love of science and reaffirmed her solitary personality during high school . She wanted to continue her studies at Cornell University 's College of Agriculture . Her mother resisted sending McClintock to college , for fear that she would be unmarriageable . McClintock was almost prevented from starting college , but her father intervened just before registration began , and she matriculated at Cornell in 1919 . 
 = = Education and research at Cornell = = 
 McClintock began her studies at Cornell 's College of Agriculture in 1919 . There , she participated in student government and was invited to join a sorority , though she soon realized that she preferred not to join formal organizations . Instead , McClintock took up music , specifically jazz . She studied botany , receiving a BSc in 1923 . Her interest in genetics began when she took her first course in that field in 1921 . The course was based on a similar one offered at Harvard University , and was taught by C. B. Hutchison , a plant breeder and geneticist . Hutchison was impressed by McClintock 's interest , and telephoned to invite her to participate in the graduate genetics course at Cornell in 1922 . McClintock pointed to Hutchison 's invitation as the reason she continued in genetics : " Obviously , this telephone call cast the die for my future . I remained with genetics thereafter . " Although it has been reported that women could not major in genetics at Cornell , and therefore her MA and PhD — earned in 1925 and 1927 , respectively — were officially awarded in botany , recent research has revealed that women did earn graduate degrees in Cornell 's Plant Breeding Department during the time that McClintock was a student at Cornell . 
 During her graduate studies and postgraduate appointment as a botany instructor , McClintock was instrumental in assembling a group that studied the new field of cytogenetics in maize . This group brought together plant breeders and cytologists , and included Marcus Rhoades , future Nobel laureate George Beadle , and Harriet Creighton . Rollins A. Emerson , head of the Plant Breeding Department , supported these efforts , although he was not a <unk> himself . 
 She also worked as a research assistant for Lowell Fitz Randolph and then for Lester W. Sharp , both Cornell Botanists . 
 McClintock 's cytogenetic research focused on developing ways to visualize and characterize maize chromosomes . This particular part of her work influenced a generation of students , as it was included in most textbooks . She also developed a technique using carmine staining to visualize maize chromosomes , and showed for the first time the morphology of the 10 maize chromosomes . This discovery was made because she observed cells from the <unk> as opposed to the root tip . By studying the morphology of the chromosomes , McClintock was able to link specific chromosome groups of traits that were inherited together . Marcus Rhoades noted that McClintock 's 1929 Genetics paper on the characterization of triploid maize chromosomes triggered scientific interest in maize cytogenetics , and attributed to her 10 of the 17 significant advances in the field that were made by Cornell scientists between 1929 and 1935 . 
 In 1930 , McClintock was the first person to describe the cross @-@ shaped interaction of homologous chromosomes during meiosis . The following year , McClintock and Creighton proved the link between chromosomal crossover during meiosis and the recombination of genetic traits . They observed how the recombination of chromosomes seen under a microscope correlated with new traits . Until this point , it had only been hypothesized that genetic recombination could occur during meiosis , although it had been shown genetically . McClintock published the first genetic map for maize in 1931 , showing the order of three genes on maize chromosome 9 . This information provided necessary data for the crossing @-@ over study she published with Creighton ; they also showed that crossing @-@ over occurs in sister chromatids as well as homologous chromosomes . In 1938 , she produced a cytogenetic analysis of the centromere , describing the organization and function of the centromere , as well as the fact that it can divide . 
 McClintock 's breakthrough publications , and support from her colleagues , led to her being awarded several postdoctoral fellowships from the National Research Council . This funding allowed her to continue to study genetics at Cornell , the University of Missouri , and the California Institute of Technology , where she worked with E. G. Anderson . During the summers of 1931 and 1932 , she worked at Missouri with geneticist Lewis Stadler , who introduced her to the use of X @-@ rays as a mutagen . Exposure to X @-@ rays can increase the rate of mutation above the natural background level , making it a powerful research tool for genetics . Through her work with X @-@ ray @-@ <unk> maize , she identified ring chromosomes , which form when the ends of a single chromosome fuse together after radiation damage . From this evidence , McClintock hypothesized that there must be a structure on the chromosome tip that would normally ensure stability . She showed that the loss of ring @-@ chromosomes at meiosis caused variegation in maize foliage in generations subsequent to irradiation resulting from chromosomal deletion . During this period , she demonstrated the presence of the nucleolus organizer region on a region on maize chromosome 6 , which is required for the assembly of the nucleolus . In 1933 , she established that cells can be damaged when <unk> recombination occurs . During this same period , McClintock hypothesized that the tips of chromosomes are protected by telomeres . 
 McClintock received a fellowship from the Guggenheim Foundation that made possible six months of training in Germany during 1933 and 1934 . She had planned to work with Curt Stern , who had demonstrated crossing @-@ over in Drosophila just weeks after McClintock and Creighton had done so ; however , Stern emigrated to the United States . Instead , she worked with geneticist Richard B. Goldschmidt , who was the head of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute . She left Germany early amidst mounting political tension in Europe , and returned to Cornell , remaining there until 1936 , when she accepted an Assistant Professorship offered to her by Lewis Stadler in the Department of Botany at the University of Missouri @-@ Columbia . While still at Cornell , she was supported by a two @-@ year Rockefeller Foundation grant obtained for her through Emerson 's efforts . 
 = = University of Missouri = = 
 During her time at Missouri , McClintock expanded her research on the effect of X @-@ rays on maize cytogenetics . McClintock observed the breakage and fusion of chromosomes in irradiated maize cells . She was also able to show that , in some plants , spontaneous chromosome breakage occurred in the cells of the endosperm . Over the course of mitosis , she observed that the ends of broken chromatids were rejoined after the chromosome replication . In the anaphase of mitosis , the broken chromosomes formed a chromatid bridge , which was broken when the chromatids moved towards the cell poles . The broken ends were rejoined in the interphase of the next mitosis , and the cycle was repeated , causing massive mutation , which she could detect as variegation in the endosperm . This breakage – rejoining – bridge cycle was a key cytogenetic discovery for several reasons . First , it showed that the rejoining of chromosomes was not a random event , and second , it demonstrated a source of large @-@ scale mutation . For this reason , it remains an area of interest in cancer research today . 
 Although her research was progressing at Missouri , McClintock was not satisfied with her position at the University . She recalled being excluded from faculty meetings , and was not made aware of positions available at other institutions . In 1940 , she wrote to Charles Burnham , " I have decided that I must look for another job . As far as I can make out , there is nothing more for me here . I am an assistant professor at $ 3 @,@ 000 and I feel sure that that is the limit for me . " Initially , McClintock 's position was created especially for her by Stadler , and might have depended on his presence at the university . McClintock believed she would not gain tenure at Missouri , even though according to some accounts , she knew she would be offered a promotion from Missouri in the spring of 1942 . Recent evidence reveals that McClintock more likely decided to leave Missouri because she had lost trust in her employer and in the University administration , after discovering that her job would be in jeopardy if Stadler were to leave for Caltech , as he had considered doing . The university 's retaliation against Stadler amplified her sentiments . 
 In early 1941 , she took a leave of absence from Missouri in hopes of finding a position elsewhere . She accepted a visiting Professorship at Columbia University , where her former Cornell colleague Marcus Rhoades was a professor . Rhoades also offered to share his research field at Cold Spring Harbor on Long Island . In December 1941 , she was offered a research position by <unk> <unk> , the newly appointed acting director of the Carnegie Institution of Washington 's Department of Genetics Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory ; McClintock accepted his invitation despite her qualms and became a permanent member of the faculty . 
 = = Cold Spring Harbor = = 
 After her year @-@ long temporary appointment , McClintock accepted a full @-@ time research position at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory . There , she was highly productive and continued her work with the breakage @-@ fusion @-@ bridge cycle , using it to substitute for X @-@ rays as a tool for mapping new genes . In 1944 , in recognition of her prominence in the field of genetics during this period , McClintock was elected to the National Academy of Sciences — only the third woman to be elected . That same year , she became the first female president of the Genetics Society of America ; she was elected its vice @-@ president in 1939 . In 1944 she undertook a cytogenetic analysis of Neurospora crassa at the suggestion of George Beadle , who used the fungus to demonstrate the one gene – one enzyme relationship . He invited her to Stanford to undertake the study . She successfully described the number of chromosomes , or karyotype , of N. crassa and described the entire life cycle of the species . Beadle said " Barbara , in two months at Stanford , did more to clean up the cytology of Neurospora than all other cytological geneticists had done in all previous time on all forms of mold . " N. crassa has since become a model species for classical genetic analysis . 
 = = = Discovery of controlling elements = = = 
 In the summer of 1944 at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , McClintock began systematic studies on the mechanisms of the mosaic color patterns of maize seed and the unstable inheritance of this <unk> . She identified two new dominant and interacting genetic loci that she named Dissociator ( Ds ) and Activator ( Ac ) . She found that the Dissociator did not just dissociate or cause the chromosome to break , it also had a variety of effects on neighboring genes when the Activator was also present , which included making certain stable mutations unstable . In early 1948 , she made the surprising discovery that both Dissociator and Activator could transpose , or change position , on the chromosome . 
 She observed the effects of the transposition of Ac and Ds by the changing patterns of coloration in maize kernels over generations of controlled crosses , and described the relationship between the two loci through intricate microscopic analysis . She concluded that Ac controls the transposition of the Ds from chromosome 9 , and that the movement of Ds is accompanied by the breakage of the chromosome . When Ds moves , the <unk> @-@ color gene is released from the suppressing effect of the Ds and transformed into the active form , which initiates the pigment synthesis in cells . The transposition of Ds in different cells is random , it may move in some but not others , which causes color <unk> . The size of the colored spot on the seed is determined by stage of the seed development during dissociation . McClintock also found that the transposition of Ds is determined by the number of Ac copies in the cell . 
 Between 1948 and 1950 , she developed a theory by which these mobile elements regulated the genes by inhibiting or modulating their action . She referred to Dissociator and Activator as " controlling units " — later , as " controlling elements " — to distinguish them from genes . She hypothesized that gene regulation could explain how complex multicellular organisms made of cells with identical genomes have cells of different function . McClintock 's discovery challenged the concept of the genome as a static set of instructions passed between generations . In 1950 , she reported her work on Ac / Ds and her ideas about gene regulation in a paper entitled " The origin and behavior of mutable loci in maize " published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . In summer 1951 , when she reported her work on the origin and behavior of mutable loci in maize at the annual symposium at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , presenting a paper of the same name . The paper delved into the instability caused by Dc and As or just As in four genes , along with the tendency of those genes to unpredictably revert to the wild phenotype . She also identified " families " of transposons , which did not interact with one another . 
 Her work on controlling elements and gene regulation was conceptually difficult and was not immediately understood or accepted by her contemporaries ; she described the reception of her research as " puzzlement , even hostility " . Nevertheless , McClintock continued to develop her ideas on controlling elements . She published a paper in Genetics in 1953 , where she presented all her statistical data , and undertook lecture tours to universities throughout the 1950s to speak about her work . She continued to investigate the problem and identified a new element that she called <unk> @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) , which , although similar to Ac / Ds , acts in a more complex manner . Like Ac / Ds , some versions could transpose on their own and some could not ; unlike Ac / Ds , when present , it fully suppressed the expression of mutant genes when they normally would not be entirely suppressed . Based on the reactions of other scientists to her work , McClintock felt she risked alienating the scientific mainstream , and from 1953 stopped publishing accounts of her research on controlling elements . 
 = = = The origins of maize = = = 
 In 1957 , McClintock received funding from the National Academy of Sciences to start research on indigenous strains of maize in Central America and South America . She was interested in studying the evolution of maize through chromosomal changes , and being in South America would allow her to work on a larger scale . McClintock explored the chromosomal , morphological , and evolutionary characteristics of various races of maize . After extensive work in the 1960s and 1970s , McClintock and her collaborators published the seminal study The Chromosomal Constitution of Races of Maize , leaving their mark on paleobotany , ethnobotany , and evolutionary biology . 
 = = = Rediscovery of McClintock 's controlling elements = = = 
 McClintock officially retired from her position at the Carnegie Institution in 1967 , and was made a Distinguished Service Member of the Carnegie Institution of Washington . This honor allowed her to continue working with graduate students and colleagues in the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory as scientist emerita ; she lived in the town . In reference to her decision 20 years earlier to stop publishing detailed accounts of her work on controlling elements , she wrote in 1973 : 
 Over the years I have found that it is difficult if not impossible to bring to consciousness of another person the nature of his tacit assumptions when , by some special experiences , I have been made aware of them . This became painfully evident to me in my attempts during the 1950s to convince geneticists that the action of genes had to be and was controlled . It is now equally painful to recognize the fixity of assumptions that many persons hold on the nature of controlling elements in maize and the manners of their operation . One must await the right time for conceptual change . 
 The importance of McClintock 's contributions was revealed in the 1960s , when the work of French geneticists Francois Jacob and Jacques Monod described the genetic regulation of the lac operon , a concept she had demonstrated with Ac / Ds in 1951 . Following Jacob and Monod 's 1961 Journal of Molecular Biology paper " Genetic regulatory mechanisms in the synthesis of proteins " , McClintock wrote an article for American Naturalist comparing the lac operon and her work on controlling elements in maize . McClintock 's contribution to biology is still not widely acknowledged as amounting to the discovery of genetic regulation . 
 McClintock was widely credited for discovering transposition after other researchers finally discovered the process in bacteria , yeast , and bacteriophages in the late 1960s and early 1970s . During this period , molecular biology had developed significant new technology , and scientists were able to show the molecular basis for transposition . In the 1970s , Ac and Ds were cloned by other scientists and were shown to be Class II transposons . Ac is a complete <unk> that can produce a functional transposase , which is required for the element to move within the genome . Ds has a mutation in its transposase gene , which means that it cannot move without another source of transposase . Thus , as McClintock observed , Ds cannot move in the absence of Ac . <unk> has also been characterized as a <unk> . Subsequent research has shown that transposons typically do not move unless the cell is placed under stress , such as by irradiation or the breakage @-@ fusion @-@ bridge cycle , and thus their activation during stress can serve as a source of genetic variation for evolution . McClintock understood the role of transposons in evolution and genome change well before other researchers grasped the concept . Nowadays , Ac / Ds is used as a tool in plant biology to generate mutant plants used for the characterization of gene function . 
 = = Honors and recognition = = 
 In 1947 , McClintock received the Achievement Award from the American Association of University Women . She was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1959 . In 1967 , McClintock was awarded the Kimber Genetics Award ; three years later , she was given the National Medal of Science by Richard Nixon in 1970 . She was the first woman to be awarded the National Medal of Science . Cold Spring Harbor named a building in her honor in 1973 . She received the Louis and Bert Freedman Foundation Award and the Lewis S. <unk> Award in 1978 . In 1981 , she became the first recipient of the MacArthur Foundation Grant , and was awarded the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research , the Wolf Prize in Medicine and the Thomas Hunt Morgan Medal by the Genetics Society of America . In 1982 , she was awarded the Louisa Gross Horwitz Prize from Columbia University for her research in the " evolution of genetic information and the control of its expression . " 
 Most notably , she received the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1983 , the first woman to win that prize unshared , credited by the Nobel Foundation for discovering " mobile genetic elements " ; it was more than 30 years after she initially described the phenomenon of controlling elements . She was compared to Gregor Mendel in terms of her scientific career by the Swedish Academy of Sciences when she was awarded the Prize . 
 She was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society ( ForMemRS ) in 1989 . McClintock received the Benjamin Franklin Medal for Distinguished Achievement in the Sciences of the American Philosophical Society in 1993 . She was awarded 14 Honorary Doctor of Science degrees and an Honorary Doctor of Humane Letters . In 1986 she was inducted into the National Women 's Hall of Fame . During her final years , McClintock led a more public life , especially after Evelyn Fox Keller 's 1983 biography of her , A Feeling for the Organism , brought McClintock 's story to the public . She remained a regular presence in the Cold Spring Harbor community , and gave talks on mobile genetic elements and the history of genetics research for the benefit of junior scientists . An anthology of her 43 publications The Discovery and Characterization of <unk> Elements : The Collected Papers of Barbara McClintock was published in 1987 . 
 = = Later years = = 
 McClintock spent her later years , post Nobel Prize , as a key leader and researcher in the field at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island , New York . McClintock died of natural causes in Huntington , New York , on September 2 , 1992 at the age of 90 ; she never married or had children . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since her death , McClintock has been the subject of a biography by the science historian Nathaniel C. Comfort 's The Tangled Field : Barbara McClintock 's Search for the Patterns of Genetic Control . Comfort 's biography contests some claims about McClintock , described as the " McClintock Myth " , which he claims was perpetuated by the earlier biography by Keller . Keller 's thesis was that McClintock was long ignored or met with derision because she was a woman working in the sciences . For example , when McClintock presented her findings that the genetics of maize did not conform to Mendelian distributions , geneticist Sewall Wright expressed the belief that she did not understand the underlying mathematics of her work , a belief he had expressed towards other women at the time . In addition , geneticist Lotte Auerbach recounted that Joshua Lederberg returned from a visit to McClintock 's lab with the remark : ' By God , that woman is either crazy or a genius . ' " As Auerbach tells it , McClintock had thrown Lederberg and his colleagues out after half an hour ' because of their arrogance . She was intolerant of arrogance ... She felt she had crossed a desert alone and no one had followed her . ' " 
 Comfort , however , asserts that McClintock was well regarded by her professional peers , even in the early years of her career . Although Comfort argues that McClintock was not a victim of gender discrimination , she has been widely written about in the context of women 's studies . Most recent biographical works on women in science feature accounts of her experience . She is held up as a role model for girls in such works of children 's literature as Edith Hope Fine 's Barbara McClintock , Nobel Prize Geneticist , Deborah <unk> 's Barbara McClintock : Alone in Her Field and Mary Kittredge 's Barbara McClintock . A recent biography for young adults by Naomi Pasachoff , Barbara McClintock , Genius of Genetics , provides a new perspective , based on the current literature . 
 On 4 May 2005 , the United States Postal Service issued the " American Scientists " commemorative postage stamp series , a set of four 37 @-@ cent self @-@ adhesive stamps in several configurations . The scientists depicted were Barbara McClintock , John von Neumann , Josiah Willard Gibbs , and Richard Feynman . McClintock was also featured in a 1989 four @-@ stamp issue from Sweden which illustrated the work of eight Nobel Prize @-@ winning geneticists . A small building at Cornell University and a laboratory building at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory were named for her . A street has been named after her in the new " <unk> Development Society " science park in Berlin . 
 Some of McClintock 's personality and scientific achievements were referred to in Jeffrey Eugenides 's 2011 novel The Marriage Plot , which tells the story of a yeast geneticist named Leonard who suffers from bipolar disorder . He works at a laboratory loosely based on Cold Spring Harbor . The character reminiscent of McClintock is a reclusive geneticist at the fictional laboratory , who makes the same discoveries as her factual counterpart . 
 = = Key publications = = 
 McClintock , B. ( 1929 ) . " A Cytological and Genetical Study of <unk> Maize " . Genetics 14 ( 2 ) : 180 – 222 . PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 Creighton , H. B. ; McClintock , B. ( 1931 ) . " A Correlation of Cytological and Genetical Crossing @-@ Over in Zea Mays " . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 17 ( 8 ) : 492 – 497 . Bibcode : <unk> ... 17 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1073 / <unk> PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 McClintock , B. ( 1931 ) . " The Order of the Genes C , Sh and <unk> in Zea Mays with Reference to a <unk> Known Point in the Chromosome " . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 17 ( 8 ) : 485 – 491 . Bibcode : <unk> ... 17 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1073 / <unk> PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 McClintock , B. ( 1941 ) . " The Stability of Broken Ends of Chromosomes in Zea Mays " . Genetics 26 ( 2 ) : 234 – 282 . PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 McClintock , B. ( 1945 ) . " Neurospora . I. Preliminary Observations of the Chromosomes of Neurospora crassa " . American Journal of Botany 32 ( 10 ) : 671 – 678 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 McClintock , B. ( 1950 ) . " The origin and behavior of mutable loci in maize " . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 36 ( 6 ) : 344 – 355 . Bibcode : <unk> ... 36 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1073 / <unk> PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 McClintock , B. ( 1953 ) . " Induction of Instability at Selected Loci in Maize " . Genetics 38 ( 6 ) : 579 – 599 . PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 McClintock , B. ( 1961 ) . " Some Parallels Between Gene Control Systems in Maize and in Bacteria " . The American Naturalist 95 ( 884 ) : 265 – 277 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1086 / <unk> . 
 McClintock , B. , Kato <unk> , T. A. & <unk> , A. ( 1981 ) . Chromosome constitution of races of maize . Its significance in the interpretation of relationships between races and varieties in the Americas . <unk> , Mexico : Escuela de Nacional de Agricultura , Colegio de <unk> . 
 = = = Archives and research collections = = = 
 The Barbara McClintock Papers – Profiles in Science , National Library of Medicine . 
 Barbara McClintock Papers , 1927 – 1991 at the American Philosophical Society 
 = Battle of Bardia = 
 The Battle of Bardia was fought over three days between 3 and 5 January 1941 , as part of Operation Compass , the first military operation of the Western Desert Campaign of the Second World War . It was the first battle of the war in which an Australian Army formation took part , the first to be commanded by an Australian general and the first to be planned by an Australian staff . Major General Iven Mackay 's 6th Division assaulted the strongly held Italian fortress of Bardia , Libya , assisted by air support and naval gunfire , and under the cover of an artillery barrage . The 16th Infantry Brigade attacked at dawn from the west , where the defences were known to be weak . Sappers blew gaps in the barbed wire with Bangalore torpedoes and filled in and broke down the sides of the anti @-@ tank ditch with picks and shovels . This allowed the infantry and 23 Matilda II tanks of the 7th Royal Tank Regiment to enter the fortress and capture all their objectives , along with 8 @,@ 000 prisoners . 
 In the second phase of the operation , the 17th Infantry Brigade exploited the breach made in the perimeter , and pressed south as far as a secondary line of defences known as the Switch Line . On the second day , the 16th Infantry Brigade captured the township of Bardia , cutting the fortress in two . Thousands of prisoners were taken , and the Italian garrison now held out only in the northern and southernmost parts of the fortress . On the third day , the 19th Infantry Brigade advanced south from Bardia , supported by artillery and the Matilda tanks , now reduced in number to just six . Its advance allowed the 17th Infantry Brigade to make progress as well , and the two brigades reduced the southern sector of the fortress . Meanwhile , the Italian garrisons in the north surrendered to the 16th Infantry Brigade and the Support Group of the British 7th Armoured Division outside the fortress . In all , some 36 @,@ 000 Italian prisoners were taken . 
 The victory at Bardia enabled the Allied forces to continue the advance into Libya and ultimately capture almost all of Cyrenaica . In turn this would lead to German intervention in the fighting in North Africa , changing the nature of the war in that theatre . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Italian invasion of Egypt = = = 
 Italy declared war on the United Kingdom on 10 June 1940 . Bordering on the Italian colony of Libya was the Kingdom of Egypt . Although a neutral country , Egypt was occupied by the British under the terms of the Anglo @-@ Egyptian Treaty of 1936 , which allowed British military forces to occupy Egypt if the Suez Canal was threatened . A series of cross @-@ border raids and skirmishes began on the frontier between Libya and Egypt . On 13 September 1940 , an Italian force advanced across the frontier into Egypt , reaching Sidi Barrani on 16 September , where the advance was halted until logistical difficulties could be overcome . 
 Italy 's position in the centre of the Mediterranean made it unacceptably hazardous to send ships from Britain to Egypt via that route , so British reinforcements and supplies for the area had to travel around the Cape of Good Hope . For this reason , it was more convenient to reinforce General Sir Archibald Wavell 's Middle East Command with troops from Australia , New Zealand and India . Nonetheless , even when Britain was threatened with invasion after the Battle of France and equipment was urgently required to re @-@ equip the British Expeditionary Force after its losses in the Dunkirk evacuation , troops and supplies were still despatched to the Middle East Command . A convoy that departed the United Kingdom in August 1940 brought guns , stores , ammunition , and three armoured regiments , including the 7th Royal Tank Regiment , equipped with Matilda II tanks . 
 On 9 December 1940 the Western Desert Force under the command of Major General Richard O 'Connor attacked the Italian position at Sidi Barrani . The position was captured , 38 @,@ 000 Italian soldiers were taken prisoner , and the remainder of the Italian force was driven back . The Western Desert Force pursued the Italians into Libya , and the 7th Armoured Division established itself to the west of Bardia , cutting off land communications between the strong Italian garrison there and Tobruk . On 11 December , Wavell decided to withdraw the 4th Indian Division and send it to the Sudan to participate in the East African Campaign . Major General Iven Mackay 's 6th Australian Division was brought forward from Egypt to replace it . Mackay assumed command of the area on 21 December 1940 . 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 Unlike the Great Sand Sea , the coastal portion of the Libyan Desert is stony rather than sandy , but it is no less arid , and supports little vegetation . Close to the coast , the ground was broken by wadis . Military vehicles could traverse the stony desert with little difficulty , although the heat , dust and wind caused their rapid deterioration . Because it was so thinly populated , bombs and shells could be used with minimal risk of civilian casualties . Winter nights could be bitterly cold , yet the days could still be uncomfortably hot . There was almost no food or water , and little shelter from the cold , the heat or the wind . The desert was , however , relatively free from disease . 
 = = Planning and preparation = = 
 = = = Italian = = = 
 After the disaster at Sidi Barrani and the withdrawal from Egypt , Lieutenant General Annibale Bergonzoli 's XXIII Corps faced the British from within the strong defences of Bardia . Mussolini wrote to Bergonzoli : " I have given you a difficult task but one suited to your courage and experience as an old and intrepid soldier — the task of defending the fortress of Bardia to the last . I am certain that ' Electric Beard ' and his brave soldiers will stand at whatever cost , faithful to the last . " Bergonzoli replied : " I am aware of the honour and I have today repeated to my troops your message — simple and unequivocal . In Bardia we are and here we stay . " 
 Bergonzoli had approximately 45 @,@ 000 defenders under his command . The Italian divisions defending the perimeter of Bardia included remnants of four divisions . The northern ( " <unk> " ) sector was held by the 2nd " 28 October " Blackshirt Division ; the centre ( " Ponticelli " ) sector by the 1st " 23 March " Blackshirt Division and elements of the 62nd " <unk> " Infantry Division ; and the southern ( " <unk> " ) sector by the 63rd " <unk> " Infantry Division and the rest of the 62nd " <unk> " Infantry Division . Bergonzoli also had the remnants of the disbanded 64th " <unk> " Infantry Division , some 6 @,@ 000 Frontier Guard ( <unk> ) troops , three companies of Bersaglieri , part of the dismounted Vittorio Emanuele cavalry regiment , and a machine gun company of the 60th " <unk> " Infantry Division . 
 These divisions guarded an 18 @-@ mile ( 29 km ) perimeter which had an almost continuous antitank ditch , extensive barbed wire fence , and a double row of strong points . The strong points were situated approximately 800 yards ( 730 m ) apart . Each had its own antitank ditch , concealed by thin boards . They were each armed with one or two 47 mm antitank guns and two to four machine guns . The weapons were fired from concrete sided pits connected by trenches to a deep underground concrete bunker which offered protection from artillery fire . However , the trenches had no fire steps and the weapons pits lacked overhead cover . Each post was occupied by a platoon or company . The inner row of posts were similar , except that they lacked the antitank ditches . The posts were numbered sequentially from south to north , with the outer posts bearing odd numbers and the inner ones even numbers . The actual numbers were known to the Australians from the markings on maps captured at Sidi Barrani and were also displayed on the posts themselves . In the southern corner was a third line of posts , known as the Switch Line . There were six defensive minefields , and a scattering of mines in front of some other posts . The major tactical defect of this defensive system was that if the enemy broke through , the posts could be picked off individually from the front or rear . 
 The defence was supported by a strong artillery component that included 41 Breda Model 35 20 mm antiaircraft guns ; 85 47 mm antitank guns ; 26 Solothurn S @-@ 18 / 1000 anti @-@ tank rifles ; 41 Cannone da 65 / 17 modello 13 65 mm infantry support guns ; 147 Cannone da 75 / 32 modello 37 75 mm and 77 mm field guns ; 76 Skoda 100 mm Model 1916 and Canon de 105 mle 1913 Schneider 105 mm guns ; and 27 120 mm and <unk> da 149 / 12 modello 14 149 mm medium howitzers . The large number of different gun models , many of them quite old , created difficulties with the supply of spare parts . The older guns often had worn barrels , which caused problems with accuracy . Ammunition stocks were similarly old and perhaps as many as two @-@ thirds of the fuses were out of date , resulting in excessive numbers of dud rounds . There were also multiple models of machine guns , with seven different types of ammunition in use . The Breda 30 , the principal light machine gun , had a low rate of fire and a reputation for jamming . The Fiat @-@ Revelli Modello 1914 was a bulky and complicated weapon that was also prone to stoppages . Some of these had been rebuilt as Fiat @-@ Revelli Modello <unk> which , while an improvement , were still unreliable . The principal medium machine gun , the Breda M37 , had its shortcomings , the main one being that it used 20 @-@ round strips of cartridges , which gave it a reduced rate of fire . Shortages of raw materials , coupled with the increased technological sophistication of modern weapons , led to production problems that frustrated efforts to supply the entire Italian Army with the best available equipment . The result was that the firepower of the Italian defenders was neither as great nor as effective as it should have been . 
 As a " mobile reserve " there were 13 M13 / 40 medium tanks and 115 L3 / 35 tankettes . While the <unk> were generally worthless , the M13 / 40s were effective medium tanks with four machine guns and a turret @-@ mounted 47 mm antitank gun for its main armament that were " in many ways the equal of British armoured fighting vehicles " . However , their 20 mm armour , while much thicker than that of the tankettes , could still be penetrated by the British 2 pounder and the tankettes were no match for the British Matildas in either armour or firepower . None of the tanks at Bardia were fitted with a radio , making a coordinated counter @-@ attack difficult . 
 Bergonzoli knew that if Bardia and Tobruk held out , a British advance further into Libya eventually must falter under the logistical difficulties of maintaining a desert force using an extended overland supply line . Not knowing how long he had to hold out , Bergonzoli was forced to ration his stocks of food and water so that O 'Connor could not simply starve him out . Consequently , hunger and thirst adversely affected the morale of the Italian defenders that had already been shaken by the defeat at Sidi Barrani . So too did medical conditions undermine morale , particularly lice and dysentery , the results of poor sanitation . 
 = = = Allied = = = 
 The 6th Division had been formed in September 1939 as part of an expeditionary force , the Second Australian Imperial Force . Prime Minister Robert Menzies ordered that all commands in the division were to go to reservists rather than to regular officers , who had been publicly critical of the defence policies of right wing politicians . These policies favoured the Royal Australian Navy , which received the majority of defence spending in the interwar period . The result was that when war came , the Army 's equipment was of World War I vintage , and its factories were only capable of producing small arms . Fortunately , these World War I @-@ era small arms , the Lee – Enfield rifle and the Vickers machine gun , were solid and reliable weapons that would remain in service throughout the war ; they were augmented by the more recent Bren light machine gun . Most other equipment was obsolescent and would have to be replaced , but new factories were required to produce the latest items , such as 3 @-@ inch mortars , 25 @-@ pounders and motor vehicles , and War Cabinet approval for their construction was slow in coming . The 6th Division 's training in Palestine , while " vigorous and realistic " , was therefore hampered by shortages of equipment . These shortages were gradually remedied by deliveries from British sources . Similarly , No. 3 Squadron RAAF had to be sent to the Middle East without aircraft or equipment , which had to be supplied by the Royal Air Force , at the expense of its own squadrons . 
 Despite the rivalry between regular and reserve officers , the 6th Division staff was an effective organisation . Brigadier John Harding , the chief of staff of XIII Corps , as the Western Desert Force was renamed on 1 January 1941 , had been a student at Staff College , Camberley along with Mackay 's chief of staff , Colonel Frank Berryman , at a time when O 'Connor had been an instructor there . Harding later considered the 6th Division staff " as good as any that I came across in that war , and highly efficient . " Australian doctrine emphasised the importance of initiative in its junior leaders and small units were trained in aggressive patrolling , particularly at night . 
 As it moved into position around Bardia in December 1940 , the 6th Division was still experiencing shortages . It had only two of its three artillery regiments , and only the 2 / 1st Field Regiment was equipped with the new 25 @-@ pounders , which it had received only that month . The 2 / 2nd Field Regiment was still equipped with twelve 18 @-@ pounders and twelve 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch howitzers . Only A Squadron of the 2 / 6th Cavalry Regiment was on hand , as the rest of the regiment was deployed in the defence of the frontier posts at Al @-@ <unk> and Siwa Oasis . The 2 / 1st Machine Gun Battalion had been diverted to Britain . Its place was taken by a British Army machine @-@ gun battalion , the 1st Northumberland Fusiliers . The 2 / 1st Antitank Regiment had likewise been diverted , so each infantry brigade had formed an antitank company but 2 @-@ pounders were in short supply , and only eleven guns were available instead of the 27 required . The infantry battalions were particularly short of mortars , and ammunition for the Boys anti @-@ tank rifle was in short supply . 
 To make up for this , O 'Connor augmented Brigadier Edmund Herring 's 6th Division Artillery with part of the XIII Corps artillery : the 104th ( Essex Yeomanry ) Regiment , Royal Horse Artillery , equipped with sixteen 25 pounders ; F Battery , Royal Horse Artillery , with twelve ; the 51st Field Regiment , Royal Artillery , with twenty four ; and the 7th Medium Regiment , Royal Artillery , which was equipped with two 60 @-@ pounders , eight 6 @-@ inch howitzers , and eight 6 @-@ inch guns . There were also two antitank regiments , the 3rd and 106th Regiments , Royal Horse Artillery , equipped with 2 @-@ pounders and Bofors 37 mm guns . 
 Italian gun positions were located using sound ranging by the British 6th Survey Regiment , Royal Artillery . These positions disclosed themselves by firing at Australian patrols , which now went out nightly , mapping the antitank ditch and the barbed wire obstacles . Aerial photographs of the positions were taken by Westland Lysander aircraft of No. 208 Squadron RAF , escorted by Gloster Gladiator biplane fighters of No. 3 Squadron RAAF . British Intelligence estimated the strength of the Italian garrison at 20 to 23 @,@ 000 with 100 guns , and discounted reports of six medium and seventy light tanks as exaggerated — a serious intelligence failure . 
 At a meeting with Mackay on Christmas Eve , 1940 , O 'Connor visited Mackay at 6th Division headquarters and directed him to prepare an attack on Bardia . O 'Connor recommended that this be built around the 23 Matilda tanks of Lieutenant Colonel R. M. <unk> 's 7th Royal Tank Regiment that remained in working order . The attack was to be made with only two brigades , leaving the third for a subsequent advance on Tobruk . Mackay did not share O 'Connor 's optimism about the prospect of an easy victory and proceeded on the assumption that Bardia would be resolutely held , requiring a well @-@ planned attack similar to that required to breach the Hindenburg Line in 1918 . The plan developed by Mackay and his chief of staff , Colonel Frank Berryman , involved an attack on the western side of the Bardia defences by Brigadier Arthur " Tubby " Allen 's 16th Infantry Brigade at the junction of the <unk> and Ponticelli sectors . Attacking at the junction of two sectors would confuse the defence . The defences here were weaker than in the <unk> sector , the ground was favourable for employment of the Matilda tanks , and good observation for the artillery was possible . There was also the prospect that an attack here could split the fortress in two . Brigadier Stanley Savige 's 17th Infantry Brigade would then exploit the breach in the fortress defences in the second phase . Most of the artillery , grouped as the " Frew Group " under British Lieutenant Colonel J. H. Frowen , would support the 16th Infantry Brigade ; the 17th would be supported by the 2 / 2nd Field Regiment . In the event , the artillery density — 96 guns for an attack on an 800 @-@ yard ( 730 m ) front — was comparable to the Battle of St. Quentin Canal in September 1918 , when 360 guns supported an attack on a 7 @,@ 000 @-@ yard ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) front . Mackay insisted that the attack required 125 rounds per gun . It had to be postponed to 3 January in order for this ammunition to be brought forward . 
 Much depended on the Western Desert Force 's ability to move fuel , water and supplies forward . The 6th Division 's Assistant Adjutant General and Quartermaster General ( AA & QMG ) , Colonel George Alan Vasey declared : " This is a Q war . " Captured Italian vehicles and fuel were used to haul supplies where possible . On 12 December , a Reserve Mechanical Transport company took over 80 Italian 5- and 6 @-@ ton diesel trucks that had been captured at Sidi Barrani . They were joined on 15 December by 50 7 ½ -ton trucks that arrived from Palestine . However , the British were unfamiliar with diesel engines , and a lack of spare parts , indifferent maintenance , and hard use under desert conditions soon took their toll , leading to many breakdowns . By the end of December the Western Desert Force 's vehicle fleet was only 40 % of its establishment strength . 
 Supplies were stocked at 8 Field Supply Depot at Sallum , where a jetty was constructed by the Royal Engineers . Troops of the British 16th Infantry Brigade began working the port on 18 December . They were soon joined by two pioneer companies of the Cyprus Regiment and a pioneer detachment from the Palestine Regiment . Stores were hauled to 8 Field Supply Depot by the New Zealand 4th Mechanical Transport Company . 
 The port was subject to long range shelling by medium guns in Bardia , known to the Australians as " Bardia Bill " , and to Italian air attacks . Only one antiaircraft battery could be spared for Sallum . An air raid on Christmas Eve killed or wounded 60 New Zealanders and Cypriots . Without a proper warning network , interception was very difficult . However , on 26 December eight Gloster Gladiators of No. 3 Squadron RAAF sighted and attacked ten Savoia @-@ Marchetti SM.79 bombers escorted by 24 Fiat CR.42 biplane fighters over the Gulf of Sallum . The Australians claimed to have shot down two CR 42s , while three Gladiators were damaged . 
 On 23 December the water carrier <unk> arrived at Sallum with 3 @,@ 000 tons of water , while the monitor HMS Terror brought another 200 tons . The water was taken to storage tanks at Fort Capuzzo . Efforts were made to stock 8 Field Supply Depot with seven days ' supply of fuel and stores , and 500 rounds per gun of ammunition . The effort to do so proceeded satisfactorily despite Italian air raids and blinding sand storms . Last @-@ minute efforts were made to rectify the 6th Division 's remaining equipment shortages . Over the last few days before the battle , some 95 additional vehicles were obtained , of which 80 were assigned to hauling ammunition . A consignment of 11 @,@ 500 sleeveless leather <unk> for protection against the cold and barbed wire were distributed , as were 350 sets of captured Italian wire cutters . The 17th Infantry Brigade finally received its 3 @-@ inch mortars but found them lacking their sights . An officer dashed back to Cairo to obtain these in time . Some 300 pairs of gloves and 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) of marking tape arrived with only hours to go . The gloves were distributed , but the tape did not reach the 16th Infantry Brigade in time , so rifle cleaning <unk> was torn into strips and used instead . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Air and naval operations = = = 
 A series of air raids were mounted against Bardia in December , in the hope of persuading the garrison to withdraw . Once it became clear that the Italians intended to stand and fight , bombing priorities shifted to the Italian airbases around Tobruk , Derna and Benina . Air raids on Bardia resumed in the lead @-@ up to the ground assault , with 100 bombing sorties flown against Bardia between 31 December 1940 and 2 January 1941 , climaxing with a particularly heavy raid by Vickers Wellington bombers of No. 70 Squadron RAF and Bristol Bombay bombers of No. 216 Squadron RAF on the night of 2 / 3 January 1941 . Lysanders of No. 208 Squadron RAF directed the artillery fire . Fighters from No. 33 Squadron RAF , No. 73 Squadron RAF and No. 274 Squadron RAF patrolled between Bardia and Tobruk . 
 A naval bombardment was carried out on the morning of 3 January by the Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships HMS Warspite , Valiant and Barham and their destroyer escorts . The aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious provided aircraft for spotting and fighter cover . They withdrew after firing 244 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) , 270 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) and 240 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 110 mm ) shells , handing over to HMS Terror and the Insect @-@ class gunboats HMS Ladybird , Aphis and Gnat , which continued firing throughout the battle . At one point fire from Terror caused part of the cliff near the town to give way , taking Italian gun positions with it . 
 = = = Break in = = = 
 The assault troops rose early on 3 January 1941 , ate a meal and drank a tot of rum . The leading companies began moving to the start line at <unk> . The artillery opened fire at 0530 . On crossing the start line the 2 / 1st Infantry Battalion , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth Eather , came under Italian mortar and artillery fire . The lead platoons advanced accompanied by sappers of the 2 / 1st Field Company carrying Bangalore torpedoes — 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) pipes packed with ammonal — as Italian artillery fire began to land , mainly behind them . An Italian shell exploded among a leading platoon and detonated a Bangalore torpedo , resulting in four killed and nine wounded . The torpedoes were slid under the barbed wire at 60 yards ( 55 m ) intervals . A whistle was blown as a signal to detonate the torpedoes but could not be heard over the din of the barrage . Colonel Eather became anxious and ordered the engineering party nearest him to detonate their torpedo . This the other teams heard , and they followed suit . 
 The infantry scrambled to their feet and rushed forward while the sappers hurried to break down the sides of the antitank ditch with picks and shovels . They advanced on a series of posts held by the 2nd and 3rd Battalions of the Italian 115th Infantry Regiment . Posts 49 and 47 were rapidly overrun , as was Post 46 in the second line beyond . Within half an hour Post 48 had also fallen and another company had taken Posts 45 and 44 . The two remaining companies now advanced beyond these positions towards a low stone wall as artillery fire began to fall along the broken wire . The Italians fought from behind the wall until the Australians were inside it , attacking with hand grenades and bayonets . The two companies succeeded in taking 400 prisoners . 
 Lieutenant Colonel F. O. Chilton 's 2 / 2nd Infantry Battalion found that it was best to keep skirmishing forward throughout this advance , because going to ground for any length of time meant sitting in the middle of the enemy artillery concentrations that inflicted further casualties . The Australian troops made good progress , six tank crossings were readied and mines between them and the wire had been detected . Five minutes later , the 23 Matildas of the 7th Royal Tank Regiment advanced , accompanied by the 2 / 2nd Infantry Battalion . Passing through the gaps , they swung right along the double line of posts . 
 At 0750 Lieutenant Colonel V. T. England 's 2 / 3rd Infantry Battalion , accompanied by the Bren gun carriers of Major Denzil MacArthur @-@ Onslow 's A Squadron , 2 / 6th Cavalry Regiment moved off for Bardia . Major J. N. Abbot 's company advanced to the Italian posts , and attacked a group of <unk> . The Italian defenders were cleared with grenades . By <unk> all companies were on their objectives and they had linked with 2 / 1st Infantry Battalion . However , the Bren gun carriers encountered problems as they moved forward during the initial attack . One was hit and destroyed in the advance and another along the Wadi <unk> . The 2 / 3rd Infantry Battalion was now assailed by half a dozen Italian M13 / 40 tanks who freed a group of 500 Italian prisoners . The tanks continued to rumble to the south while the British crews of the Matildas " enjoying a brew , dismissed reports of them as an Antipodean exaggeration " . Finally , they were engaged by an antitank platoon of three 2 pounders mounted on <unk> . Corporal A. A. Pickett 's gun destroyed four of them until his portee was hit , killing one man and wounding Pickett . The survivors got the gun back into action and knocked out a fifth tank . The portee was again hit by fire from the sixth tank , fatally wounding another man ; but it too was soon knocked out by another 2 pounder . By midday , 6 @,@ 000 Italian prisoners had already reached the provosts at the collection point near Post 45 , escorted by increasingly fewer guards whom the rifle companies could afford to detach . The Italian perimeter had been breached and the attempt to halt the Australian assault at the outer defences had failed . 
 = = = Follow up = = = 
 Major H. Wrigley 's 2 / 5th Infantry Battalion of Brigadier Stanley Savige 's 17th Infantry Brigade , reinforced by two companies of Lieutenant Colonel T. G. Walker 's 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion , now took over the advance . The battalion 's task was to clear " The Triangle " , a map feature created by the intersection of three tracks north of Post 16 . Wrigley 's force had a long and exhausting approach , and much of its movement forward to its jump off point had been under Italian shellfire intended for the 16th Infantry Brigade . Awaiting its turn to move , the force sought shelter in Wadi Scemmas and its tributaries . Wrigley called a final coordinating conference for 1030 , but at 1020 he was wounded by a bullet and his second in command , Major G. E. Sell took over . At the conference the forward observer from the 2 / 2nd Field Regiment reported that he had lost contact with the guns and could not call in artillery fire . A wounded British tank troop commander also reported that one of his tanks had been knocked out and the other three were out of fuel or ammunition . No tank support would be available until these had been replenished . Sell decided that the attack must be carried out without them . 
 The artillery barrage came down at 1125 , and five minutes later the advance began . The sun had now risen , and Captain C. H. Smith 's D Company came under effective fire from machine guns and field artillery 700 yards ( 640 m ) to the north east . Within minutes , all but one of the company 's officers and all its senior non @-@ commissioned officers had been killed or wounded . C Company 's Captain W. B. Griffiths pulled his company back to the Wadi and called on a detachment of 3 @-@ inch mortars and a platoon of Vickers machine guns of the 1st Battalion , Northumberland Fusiliers to fire at the Italian positions . This proved effective , and Griffith 's company and a platoon of A Company worked along the Wadi Scemmas , eventually collecting 3 @,@ 000 prisoners . 
 Meanwhile , Captain D. I. A. Green 's B Company of the 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion had captured Posts 26 , 27 and 24 . After Post 24 had been taken , two Matildas arrived and helped to take Post 22 . As the prisoners were rounded up , one shot Green dead , then threw down his rifle and climbed out of the pit smiling broadly . He was immediately thrown back and a Bren gun emptied into him . Lieutenant C. W. Macfarlane , the second @-@ in @-@ command , had to prevent his troops from bayoneting the other prisoners . The incident was witnessed by the Italians at Post 25 some 450 yards ( 410 m ) away , who promptly surrendered . With the help of the Matildas , Macfarlane was able to quickly capture Posts 20 and 23 . At this point , one tank ran out of ammunition ; anti @-@ tank fire already had blown off the track of another in the attack on Post 20 . Nonetheless , Posts 18 and 21 were captured without armoured support , using the now @-@ familiar tactics of grenades , wire cutting and assault . With darkness approaching , Macfarlane attempted to capture Post 16 , but the defenders beat him off . He retired to Post 18 for the night . 
 Upon hearing of the losses to the 2 / 5th Infantry Battalion , Brigade Major G. H. Brock sent Captain J. R. Savige 's A Company of the 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion to take " The Triangle " . Savige gathered his platoons and , with fire support from machine guns , attacked the objective , 3 @,@ 000 yards ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) away . The company captured eight field guns , many machine @-@ guns and nearly 200 prisoners on the way , but casualties and the need to detach soldiers as prisoner escorts left him with only 45 men at the end of the day . 
 Lieutenant Colonel A. H. L. Godfrey 's 2 / 6th Infantry Battalion was supposed to " stage a demonstration against the south west corner of the perimeter " , held by the 1st Battalion , Italian 158th Infantry Regiment and 3rd Battalion , Italian 157th Infantry Regiment . Instead , in what military historians consider one of the most " disastrous example of a CO seeking to make his mark " , Godfrey decided instead to launch an attack , in defiance of the clear instructions he had received , and against all basic military logic and common sense . Although poorly planned and executed , Godfrey 's attack managed to capture Post 7 and part of Post 9 , but Post 11 resisted stubbornly . 
 That evening , Brigadier Savige came forward to the 2 / 5th Infantry Battalion 's position to determine the situation , which he accurately evaluated as " extremely confused ; the attack was stagnant . " Savige adopted a plan of Walker 's for a night attack , which began at 1230 . Macfarlane advanced on Post 16 . He sent a platoon around the flank to silently cut the wire on the western side , while he led another platoon against the northern side . A Bren gunner opening fire prematurely , alerting the defenders , but Macfarlane 's men were able to overrun the post . The same tactic was used to capture Post R11 . Macfarlane was supposed to capture Post R9 , but was unable to find it in the dark . His troops attempted to capture it at dawn , but the defenders were alert and they responded with heavy fire . With the help of a 2 @-@ inch mortar , the second attempt was successful . 
 Meanwhile , Captain G. H. Halliday 's D Company moved southwards against Post 19 . He drew the defenders ' attention with a demonstration by one platoon in front of the post while the rest of the company moved around the post and attacked silently from the rear . This maneuver took the defenders by surprise and D Company captured the post — and 73 prisoners — at 0230 . Halliday repeated this tactic against Post 14 , which was taken at 0400 with 64 prisoners . Capturing the two posts cost one Australian killed and seven wounded . A third attempt against Post 17 failed : the previous attacks had alerted the post and D Company came under heavy mortar and machine gun fire . A furious battle raged until the post fell shortly before dawn . Another 103 Italians were captured at a cost of two Australians killed and nine wounded . Between casualties and men detached as prisoner escorts , D Company strength fell to 46 men , and Halliday elected to halt for the night . 
 Although the Australian progress had been slower than that achieved during the break @-@ in phase , the 17th Infantry Brigade had achieved remarkable results . Another ten posts , representing 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) of perimeter had been captured , the Switch Line had been breached , and thousands of Italian defenders had been captured . For the Italians , halting the Australian advance would be an immensely difficult task . 
 = = = Bardia falls = = = 
 On the afternoon of 3 January , Berryman met with Allen , Jerram and Frowen at Allen 's headquarters at Post 40 to discuss plans for the next day . It was agreed that Allen would advance on Bardia and cut the fortress in two , supported by Frowen 's guns , every available tank , MacArthur @-@ Onslow 's Bren gun carriers and the 2 / 8th Infantry Battalion , which Mackay had recently allocated from reserve . Allen gave orders accordingly . During the afternoon the 6th Cavalry Regiment was pulled back to become the brigade reserve and the 2 / 5th Infantry Battalion relieved the 2 / 2nd to free it to advance the next day . That evening , Berryman came to the conclusion that unless the Italian defence collapsed soon , the 16th and 17th Infantry Brigades would become incapable of further effort and Brigadier Horace Robertson 's 19th Infantry Brigade would be required . Mackay was more sanguine about the situation , and reminded Berryman that his orders had been to capture Bardia with only two brigades . While they were discussing the matter , O 'Connor and Harding arrived at 6th Division headquarters , and O 'Connor readily agreed to the change of plan . 
 The 2 / 1st Infantry Battalion began its advance on schedule at 0900 , but the lead platoon came under heavy machine gun fire from Post 54 , and Italian artillery knocked out the supporting mortars . The 3rd Regiment Royal Horse Artillery engaged the Italian guns and the platoon withdrew . Colonel Eather then organised a formal attack on Post 54 for 1330 , following a bombardment of the post by artillery and mortars . The Italian guns were silenced when an Australian shell detonated a nearby ammunition dump . The Australians then captured the post . About a third of its defenders had been killed in the fighting . The remaining 66 surrendered . This prompted a general collapse of the Italian position in the north . Posts 56 and 61 surrendered without a fight and white flags were raised over Posts 58 , 60 , 63 and 65 , and the gun positions near Post 58 . By nightfall , Eather 's men had advanced as far as Post 69 and only the fourteen northernmost posts still held out in the Gerfan sector . 
 Colonel England 's 2 / 3rd Infantry Battalion was supported by the guns of the 104th Regiment Royal Horse Artillery and a troop of the 7th Royal Tank Regiment . The tanks were late in arriving , and England postponed his attack to 1030 . The battalion came under artillery fire , mostly from a battery north of Bardia that was then engaged and silenced by the 104th Regiment Royal Horse Artillery . The advance resumed , only to come under machine gun and artillery fire from Wadi el Gerfan . An eight @-@ man section under Lance Corporal F. W. Squires was sent to reconnoitre the wadi but attacked a battery position instead and returned with 500 prisoners . The wadi was found to contain large numbers of Italian soldiers from technical units who , untrained for combat , surrendered in large numbers . One company captured over 2 @,@ 000 prisoners , including 60 officers . 
 The brigade major , Major I. R. Campbell , ordered MacArthur @-@ Onslow , whose carriers were screening England 's advance , to seize <unk> el <unk> , the high ground overlooking the road to the township of Bardia . MacArthur @-@ Onslow 's carriers discovered an Italian hospital with 500 patients , including several Australians , and 3 @,@ 000 unwounded Italians . Leaving a small party at the hospital under Corporal M. H. Vause , who could speak some Italian , MacArthur @-@ Onslow pressed on with two carriers to the <unk> el <unk> , where they took over 1 @,@ 000 prisoners . The tanks and the remainder of A Squadron continued along the road to Bardia under intermittent artillery fire , followed by C Company of the 2 / 3rd Infantry Battalion . The column entered the town at 1600 , its tanks firing the occasional shot . 
 The 2 / 2nd Infantry Battalion , supported by the three Matilda tanks and the guns of the 7th Medium Regiment , advanced down the Wadi Scemmas towards an Italian fort on the southern headland of Bardia . After some hours of climbing , the 2 / 2nd reached the headland and attacked the fort at 1645 . Inside the fort were two 6 inch guns , two field guns and five other guns of the fort . Fortunately , the 6 inch guns were for coastal defence and were unable to fire inland . One of the tanks made straight for the gate of the fort . The Italians opened the gate , and the tanks moved inside , taking the garrison of 300 prisoners . D Company then followed a goat track that led to lower Bardia . Thousands of prisoners were taken , most from service units . Two carriers of the 2 / 5th Infantry Battalion patrolling near the coast captured 1 @,@ 500 prisoners . Captain N. A. Vickery , a forward observer from the 2 / 1st Field Regiment , attacked an Italian battery in his Bren gun carrier and captured 1 @,@ 000 prisoners . 
 By the end of the second day , tens of thousands of defenders had been killed or captured . The remaining garrisons in the Gerfan and Ponticelli sectors were completely isolated . The logistical and administrative units were being overrun . Recognising that the situation was hopeless , General Bergonzoli and his staff had departed on foot for Tobruk during the afternoon , in a party of about 120 men . General Giuseppe <unk> , the commander of the Italian Tenth Army , considered the possibility of sending a force to relieve the Bardia fortress but in the end concluded that such an operation had no chance of success . 
 = = = Final drive = = = 
 On the morning of 5 January , the 19th Infantry Brigade launched its attack on the Meriega sector , starting from the Bardia road and following a creeping barrage southward with the support of six Matilda tanks , all that remained in working order . The others had been hit by shells , immobilised by mines , or had simply broken down . The company commanders of the lead battalion , the 2 / 11th Infantry Battalion , did not receive their final orders until 45 minutes before start time , at which point the start line was 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) away . As a consequence , the battalion arrived late , and the intended two company attack had to be carried out by just one : Captain Ralph Honner 's C Company , albeit with all six Matildas at his disposal . Honner 's men had to literally chase the barrage , and had only just caught up with it before it ceased . As they advanced , they came under fire from the left , the right , and in front of them , but casualties were light . Most positions surrendered when the infantry and tanks came close , but this did not reduce the fire from posts further away . By 1115 , C Company had reached the Switch Line and captured Post R5 and then R7 . B Company , following on the left , cleared Wadi Meriega , capturing Lieutenant General Ruggero <unk> and Brigadier General Alessandro de Guidi , the commanders of the 62nd and 63rd Infantry Divisions respectively . At this point , Honner stopped to consolidate his position and allow Lieutenant Colonel Ivan Dougherty 's 2 / 4th Infantry Battalion to pass through . However , Honner took the surrender of Posts 1 , 2 and 3 and his men did not stop advancing . 
 Meanwhile , the Italian garrisons in the north were surrendering to the 16th Infantry Brigade and the Support Group of the 7th Armoured Division outside the fortress ; the 2 / 8th Infantry Battalion had taken the area above Wadi Meriega ; and the 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion had captured Posts 10 , 12 and 15 . Colonel Godfrey was astonished to discover that the 2 / 11th Infantry Battalion had captured Post 8 . The carrier platoon of the 2 / 6th Infantry Battalion attacked and captured Post 13 while the 2 / 11th captured Post 6 . The only post still holding out was now Post 11 . The 2 / 6th Infantry Battalion renewed its attack , with the infantry attacking from the front and its carriers attacking from the rear . They were joined by Matildas from the vicinity of Post 6 . At this point the Italian post commander , who had been wounded in the battle , lowered his flag and raised a white one . Some 350 Italian soldiers surrendered at Post 11 . Inside , the Australians found two field guns , 6 antitank guns , 12 medium machine guns , 27 light machine guns , and two 3 inch mortars . Godfrey sought out the Italian post commander — who wore a British Military Cross earned in the First World War — and shook his hand . " On a battlefield where Italian troops won little honour " , Gavin Long later wrote , " the last to give in belonged to a garrison whose resolute fight would have done credit to any army . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 The victory at Bardia enabled the Allied forces to continue their advance into Libya and capture almost all of Cyrenaica . As the first battle of the war to be commanded by an Australian general , planned by an Australian staff and fought by Australian troops , Bardia was of great interest to the Australian public ; congratulatory messages poured in and AIF recruitment surged . John Hetherington , a war correspondent , reported that , 
 Men who since childhood had read and heard of the exploits in battle of the First AIF , who had enlisted and trained under the shadow of their fathers ' reputation as soldiers , had come through their ordeal of fire and built a reputation of their own . 
 In the United States , newspapers praised the 6th Division . Favourable articles appeared in The New York Times and the Washington Times @-@ Herald , which ran the headline " Hardy Wild @-@ Eyed Aussies Called World 's Finest Troops " . An article in the Chicago Daily News told its readers that Australians " in their realistic attitude towards power politics , prefer to send their boys to fight far overseas rather than fighting a battle in the suburbs of Sydney " . During the battle , Wavell had received a cable from General Sir John Dill stressing the political importance of such victories in the United States , where President Franklin D. Roosevelt was attempting to get the Lend @-@ Lease Act passed . It was finally enacted in March 1941 . 
 Mackay wrote in a diary note on 6 January that the " Germans cannot possibly keep out of Africa now . " In Germany , the Chancellor , Adolf Hitler , was unconcerned by the military implications of the loss of Libya but deeply troubled by the prospect of a political reverse that could lead to the fall of Mussolini . On 9 January 1941 , he revealed his intention to senior members of the Wehrmacht to send German troops to North Africa , in Unternehmen Sonnenblume ; henceforth , German troops played an important role in the fighting in North Africa . 
 Within the 6th Division , there were recriminations over what was seen as Berryman showing favouritism towards Robertson , a fellow regular soldier and Royal Military College , Duntroon graduate , in an effort to prove that regular officers could command troops . Savige felt that some of the difficulties of the 17th Infantry Brigade were caused by Berryman , through an over @-@ prescriptive and complicated battle plan . The 6th Division was fortunate to have drawn a " set piece " type of battle , the type that most suited its Great War @-@ based doctrine and training . Confidence and experience was generated and leaders and staffs took away important tactical lessons from the battle . The Australian official historian , Gavin Long considered Bardia " a victory for bold reconnaissance , for audacious yet careful planning , for an artillery scheme which subdued the enemy 's fire at the vital time , and a rapid and continuing infantry assault which broke a gap in the enemy 's line . " To attribute success to the tanks or artillery was " to present Hamlet without the prince . " 
 In 2010 , Stockings wrote that the Italians were hampered by a faulty defensive concept and poorly designed and built outposts , were weakened by previous casualties , inappropriate doctrine , inferior weaponry ( particularly artillery ) and lacked the means to counter British tanks . Although a significant victory , a belief that the Australians had forced their way through " impenetrable " Italian fortifications , against overwhelming odds and numerical disadvantage , is incorrect since the bulk of the Italian garrison had been placed in the rear . The numerical and technical advantage at the front , " was more often than not in favour of the attackers themselves " . Stockings wrote that the idea arose in ANZAC tradition that it was a " David and Goliath " struggle , between a small band of resolute attackers against hordes of Italian defenders , as presented in history books is not true ; analysis reveals that " Anzac @-@ oriented explanations are found wanting " . The importance of the Battle of Bardia , lay in the challenge it might represent to the wider field of Australian military history and its historians , " when national mythology meets military history " . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 An estimated 36 @,@ 000 Italian soldiers were captured at Bardia , 1 @,@ 703 ( including 44 officers ) were killed and 3 @,@ 740 ( including 138 officers ) were wounded A few thousand ( including General Bergonzoli and three of his division commanders ) escaped to Tobruk on foot or in boats . The Allies captured 26 coast defence guns , 7 medium guns , 216 field guns , 146 anti @-@ tank guns , 12 medium tanks , 115 <unk> , and 708 vehicles . Australian losses totalled 130 dead and 326 wounded . 
 = = = Subsequent events = = = 
 Bardia did not become an important port as supply by sea continued to run through Sollum but became an important source of water , after the repair of the large pumping station that the Italians had installed to serve the township and Fort Capuzzo . Axis forces reoccupied the town in April 1941 , during Operation Sonnenblume Rommel 's first offensive in Cyrenaica . Further fighting occurred from 31 December 1941 – 2 January 1942 , before Bardia was re @-@ taken by the 2nd South African Division . Bardia changed hands again in June 1942 , being occupied by Axis forces for a third time and was re @-@ taken for the last time in November unopposed , following the Allied victory at the Second Battle of El Alamein . 
 = Rosebud ( The Simpsons ) = 
 " Rosebud " is the fourth episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 21 , 1993 . The episode begins by showing how on the eve of his birthday , Mr. Burns starts to miss his childhood teddy bear Bobo . The bear ends up in the hands of Maggie Simpson and Burns does everything in his power to get Bobo returned to him . 
 " Rosebud " was written by John Swartzwelder and was the first episode to be executive produced by David Mirkin , who was the show runner for the fifth and sixth seasons of the show . Directed by Wes Archer , supervising director David Silverman describes the episode as " one of the more challenging ones " to direct . The Ramones ( Joey Ramone , Johnny Ramone , C. J. Ramone and Marky Ramone ) guest star in the episode as themselves . The episode is largely a parody of the 1941 film Citizen Kane and the title references Charles Foster Kane 's dying word " Rosebud " . The episode also contains references to The Wizard of Oz , Planet of the Apes , actor George Burns , Charles Lindbergh , and Adolf Hitler . 
 Critical reaction to " Rosebud " was largely positive and in 2003 Entertainment Weekly placed the episode in second place on their list of the 25 best episodes of The Simpsons . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Smithers finds Mr. Burns having a nightmare in which he constantly murmurs the name " Bobo " . In a flashback , it is revealed that as a child , Burns lived with his family and cherished his teddy bear Bobo , but he dropped it in the snow when he left to live with a " twisted , loveless billionaire " . Meanwhile , preparations for Burns ' birthday are underway and , after the Ramones perform , Homer is chosen to entertain the party guests with a comedy routine ; however , Burns finds Homer 's routine offensive and angrily orders his security guards to break up the party . 
 Burns reveals to Smithers that he misses his cherished bear Bobo and desperately wants it back but has no idea where it is . Another flashback reveals Bobo 's history : after Burns leaves it behind , the bear eventually finds its way to Charles Lindbergh , who tosses the bear into a crowd , where it is caught by Adolf Hitler . In 1945 , Hitler blames Bobo for losing World War II and tosses him away . Bobo is seen again in 1957 on board the USS Nautilus headed for the North Pole . Bobo becomes encased in a block of ice until picked up by an ice @-@ gathering expedition in 1993 . The bag of ice with Bobo in it is sent to the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart in Springfield . Bart buys the bag of ice , finds Bobo inside and gives it to Maggie to play with . 
 Mr. Burns starts looking for his bear , and Homer finally realizes that Maggie 's new toy is Bobo . Homer negotiates with Burns and agrees to give it back in exchange for " a million dollars and three Hawaiian islands . The good ones , not the leper ones . " However , when Maggie refuses to give Bobo up , Homer decides to stick up for his daughter and sends Burns away . Mr. Burns is outraged and promises vengeance on Homer unless he gets his teddy bear back . 
 After many failed attempts to steal the teddy bear , in desperation , Burns has Smithers literally beg Homer for the bear . Homer tells Burns that it is Maggie 's now , and she is the only one that can return it . Burns decides to talk to Maggie and becomes deeply depressed and asks Maggie to look after his bear . Maggie , in an act of pity , lets the desperate Burns have the bear . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Rosebud " was written by John Swartzwelder and was the first episode to be executive produced and run by David Mirkin . Mirkin enjoyed working on the episode so much that he spent " an enormous amount of time on post production " experimenting with various elements of the episode . Originally , the backstory for Bobo included several much darker scenes , including one where the bear was involved in the assassination of John F. Kennedy . The scenes were cut because the writers felt it was in bad taste . The ending of the episode was originally longer , but two segments were cut . The first saw Washington D.C. destroyed by invading Canadian troops , who found Bobo . The second featured the entire planet being overrun by giant Redwoods and spotted owls . 
 David Silverman describes the episode as " one of the more challenging ones " to direct . Guest stars The Ramones were " gigantic obsessive Simpsons fans " and their characters were designed by Wes Archer . Marky Ramone later called their appearance " a career highlight " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode is largely a parody of the 1941 Orson Welles film Citizen Kane . The title is a reference to Charles Foster Kane 's dying word " Rosebud " ; the teddy bear Bobo is a substitute for Rosebud in this episode , even down to the fact that Burns discards it in the snow when offered a new life of riches and power . The scene where he drops a snow globe , while whispering the name of his lost toy , also parodies Kane 's death scene at the start of the film . The guards outside Mr. Burns 's manor chant and march similarly to the Wicked Witch of the West 's guards from the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz . The last scene where Mr. Burns 's robotic body runs off with Bobo is a reference to the film Planet of the Apes in which herds of humans are enslaved by humanoid apes . Burns and Smithers ' attempt to steal Bobo from the Simpsons mirrors Mission : Impossible , and their sitcom is similar to The Honeymooners . Both Mr. Burns and Homer make references to the cancellation of the TV series The Misadventures of Sheriff Lobo . Mr. Burns ' brother is revealed to be comedian George Burns , and both Charles Lindbergh and Adolf Hitler were once in possession of Bobo . During the tribute to Burns , the curtain portrays his visage in a more youthful manner , evoking the characteristic style of illustrator Al Hirschfeld . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Rosebud " finished 33rd in the ratings for the week of October 18 – 24 , 1993 . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 9 . The episode was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week after Married ... with Children . 
 In 2003 , Entertainment Weekly 's placed " Rosebud " second on their top 25 The Simpsons episode list , writing that " despite being one of The Simpsons ' most spectacularly overstuffed episodes , " Rosebud " has plenty of heart " . IGN.com ranked The Ramones 's performance as the fifteenth best guest appearance in the show 's history . In 2007 , Vanity Fair named it the best episode of the show , calling it , " A perfect episode . Mr. Burns 's lamentations for his childhood bear , Bobo , lead to a show @-@ long parody of Citizen Kane . At once a satire and a tribute , the episode manages to both humanize Mr. Burns and delve deep into Homer 's love for his oft @-@ forgotten second daughter , Maggie . " 
 In his book Planet Simpson , author Chris Turner listed " Rosebud " as one of his five favorite episodes of The Simpsons , calling the episode " genius " . He added that the Ramones gave " possibly the finest guest musical performances ever . " David Silverman and Matt Groening describe the sequence where Homer eats 64 slices of American cheese as " one of the most hilarious segments ever done " . The episode 's reference to Rosebud was named the 14th greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . 
 = Troll ( research station ) = 
 Troll is a research station located at Jutulsessen , 235 kilometers ( 146 mi ) from the coast in the eastern part of Princess Martha Coast in Queen Maud Land , Antarctica . It is Norway 's only all @-@ year research station in Antarctica , and is supplemented by the summer @-@ only station Tor . Troll is operated by the Norwegian Polar Institute and also features facilities for the Norwegian Meteorological Institute , the Norwegian Institute for Air Research . 
 Contrary to most other research stations on the continent , Troll is constructed on the snow @-@ free slope of solid rock breaking through the ice sheet at Jutulsessen , located 1 @,@ 275 meters ( 4 @,@ 183 ft ) above mean sea level . The station opened as a summer @-@ only station in 1990 and was taken into use as an all @-@ year station in 2005 . It has an overwintering capacity of eight people and a summer capacity of 40 . It is served by Troll Airfield , which is the base for the Dronning Maud Land Air Network . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Troll is located in the eastern part of Princess Martha Coast in Queen Maud Land , which Norway claims as a dependent territory . The station is located on the nunatak bare ground area Jutulsessen , at 1 @,@ 270 meters ( 4 @,@ 170 ft ) above mean sea level . It is completely surrounded by the Antarctic ice sheet . This is unlike most other Antarctic research stations , which are located on snow . Troll is 235 kilometers ( 146 mi ) from the coast . 
 The station facilities are owned by the Government of Norway through the Norwegian Directorate of Public Construction and Property . Operation of the facility is done by another government agency , the Norwegian Polar Institute . The facilities consist of a module @-@ built new section that is 300 square meters ( 3 @,@ 200 sq ft ) , and the old section that is 100 square meters ( 1 @,@ 100 sq ft ) . The new section consists of eight bedrooms , a gym , a sauna , a kitchen , a communication center and office space . In addition , there are several smaller buildings which are used as laboratories , provision stores , generators and garages . The old station is used partially for storage and partially as a summer station . The facility also features an emergency facility for eight people , located at a safe distance from the main base , in case of fire or other accidents . The station is dimensioned to tolerate temperatures down to − 60 ° C ( − 76 ° F ) and wind speeds of 60 meters per second ( 200 ft / s ) . 
 The facility attempts to minimize its environmental impact through several mechanisms , including minimizing area usage . Energy consumption is reduced by using recirculating excess heat to melt snow and ice for drinking water and heating . Waste is minimized through purchase planning and recycling ; the remaining waste is compressed and transported away from the Antarctic . Fuel is handled in such a way that even small spills are minimized . In 2016 a solar PV plant with 7 @.@ 3 kilowatt peak has been installed on one of the roof tops . It serves as a pilot installation for the declared middle term target of reducing the oil consumption of the research station significantly , by extending the solar PV plant over the next few years . 
 The station has a cold and dry climate , being located in a desert . The annual mean temperature is − 25 ° C ( − 13 ° F ) , with the summer temperature able to reach about 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) and the lowest during the winter at − 50 ° C ( − 58 ° F ) . Storms , which can occur throughout the year , can occasionally make outdoor activity impossible . Being located south of the Antarctic Circle , Troll has midnight sun in the summer and polar night during the winter . 
 = = Research = = 
 The Norwegian Institute for Air Research ( <unk> ) maintains air and atmospheric measurement equipment at Troll . Combined with a similar measuring station , Zeppelin in Ny @-@ Ålesund , Svalbard , Norway . This allows the institute to collect such data from both polar regions . In particular , the facility measures aerosols , organic and inorganic pollution , ozone and ultraviolet ( UV ) radiation . <unk> also creates air samples annually to generate data for trend analysis . The weekly air pollution measurements are compared to equivalent measurements at Zeppelin . Ground measurements are taken of ozone and mercury , two of the greatest pollution threats in the polar regions . Stratosphere measurements are conducted to measure ozone and UV levels , in particular to gain additional information about ozone depletion and the Antarctic ozone hole . 
 Kongsberg Satellite Services , a joint venture between Kongsberg Group and the Norwegian Space Center , operates TrollSat , a satellite ground station which allows downloading of data . In conjunction with SvalSat , located in Longyearbyen , Svalbard , TrollSat targets satellites in a polar orbit . TrollSat consists of a single radome with an 7 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 24 ft ) low Earth orbit antenna capable of S band and X band reception . To relay the information , TrollSat has a 4 @.@ 8 @-@ meter ( 16 ft ) and a 7 @.@ 6 @-@ meter ( 25 ft ) C band uplink to provide broadband connection to Europe and North America . TrollSat will be one of 30 ground stations for the European satellite navigation system Galileo , and is Norway 's main contribution to the project . 
 The Norwegian Meteorological Institute operates a manned weather station at Troll . It measures air pressure , temperature , humidity and wind , both at the station itself and at the airfield . 
 = = History = = 
 During the 1980s , it became increasingly important for the Government of Norway to have a permanent base in Queen Maud Land . The area had been annexed as a dependency on 14 January 1939 , at the time mainly based on Norwegian whaling interests in the Antarctic . From 1956 , Norway operated the research station Norway Station , but this was given to South Africa in 1959 . From the 1960s through the 1980s , Norway 's research activities in Antarctica were sporadic and without a fixed base . This gave the advantage that the research was not bound geographically , but it weakened the Norwegian claim for Queen Maud Land and the right to participate as a consultative member of the Antarctic Treaty . In 1989 , any party to the Treaty could ask for it to be renegotiated , and Norwegian authorities saw the need for a permanent base to strengthen Norway 's claim to Queen Maud Land . 
 The Norwegian Polar Institute decided to establish a summer station . This was built during the summer of 1989 and 1990 , resulting in a 100 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 1 @,@ 100 sq ft ) building with room for eight people . Construction required 300 tonnes ( 300 long tons ; 330 short tons ) of materials to be hauled from the coast and the station was officially opened on 17 February 1990 . The station took its name from the surrounding jagged mountains , which resemble trolls of Norse mythology . The first overwintering occurred in 2000 , when a South Pole expedition used the camp as a base . 
 To ease logistics , Norway took the initiative to establish Dronning Maud Land Air Network ( DROMLAN ) , a cooperation between the countries with bases in Queen Maud Land to streamline transport costs . Having an airfield at Troll allows quicker transport to the research stations in western Queen Maud Land , which are located further away from the incumbent airfields at Henriksenskjera and Novolazarevskaya . The first flight that was a preliminary to DROMLAN was made in 2000 from Cape Town , South Africa , to Henriksenskjera , where a Twin Otter was used onwards to Troll . 
 In 2003 , it was decided that Norway was to extend its operations in Antarctica by establishing an all @-@ year research station . By then , Norway was the only country with a territorial claim to Antarctica to not have an all @-@ year research station on the continent . The government stated that the investment was motivated to improve climate research , to strengthen Norway as a bi @-@ polar research nation and to strengthen Norway 's role as a premise @-@ maker in the environmental policy of the Antarctic . 
 Construction of the expansion was done from December 2004 through February 2005 by the Norwegian Directorate of Public Construction and Property , who contracted the job to AF Gruppen . About 700 tonnes ( 690 long tons ; 770 short tons ) of equipment was hauled to the base from the ice shelf . The base was prefabricated and only required the modules to be connected at site . New infrastructure included a new generator , emergency station , garage , provision stores , container ramps for equipment and fuel , and more laboratories . At the same time , the Norwegian Meteorological Institute established a meteorological station at Troll . 
 The construction of the runway itself required the filling of crevasses and the removal of stones . Troll Airfield was opened on 11 February 2005 by Queen Sonja of Norway and the new research station the following day . After the opening , another power station was built in 2005 . In 2006 , a satellite base station was built by Kongsberg Satellite Services . This resulted in the need for a broadband connection for the base . During the winter season of 2006 , there was no overwintering due to lack of funding , but from 2007 this has been re @-@ instated . In 2008 , a windmill was taken into use to provide some of the power . 
 Norwegian Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg visited Troll in January 2008 , when he among other things opened TrollSat . At the same time , as part of the International Polar Year , a Norwegian – United States expedition traveled from Troll to the Amundsen – Scott South Pole Station and back . On 23 February 2009 , Norwegian Minister of the Environment Erik Solheim hosted a meeting for environment ministers from 15 countries to discuss climate change and learn about recent research in the field . 
 = Somebody That I Used to Know = 
 " Somebody That I Used to Know " is a song written by Belgian @-@ Australian singer @-@ songwriter Gotye , featuring New Zealand singer / guitarist Kimbra . The song was released in Australia and New Zealand by Eleven Music on 5 January 2012 as the second single from Gotye 's third studio album , Making Mirrors ( 2011 ) . It was later released by Universal Music in December 2011 in the United Kingdom , and in January 2012 in the United States and Ireland . " Somebody That I Used To Know " was written and recorded by Gotye at his parents ' house on the Mornington Peninsula in Victoria and is lyrically related to the experiences he has had with relationships . 
 " Somebody That I Used to Know " is a mid @-@ tempo , indie pop ballad . It samples Luiz Bonfá 's song " Seville " from his 1967 album Luiz <unk> Plays Great Songs . The song received a positive reception from critics , who noted the similarities between the song and works by Sting , Peter Gabriel , and American folk band Bon Iver . In Australia , the song won the Triple J Hottest 100 poll at the end of 2011 , as well as ARIA Awards for song of the year and best video , while Kimbra was voted best female artist and Gotye was named best male artist and producer of the year . The song came ninth in the Triple J Hottest 100 of the Past 20 Years , 2013 . In 2013 , the song won two Grammy Awards for Best Pop Duo / Group Performance and Record of the Year . 
 Commercially , " Somebody That I Used to Know " is Gotye 's most successful and signature song . It has topped charts in the US , UK , and Australia , as well as 23 other national charts , and reached the top 10 in more than 30 countries around the world . The song has sold more than 13 million copies worldwide , becoming one of the best @-@ selling digital singles of all time . It was also placed at the top of a number of year @-@ end charts by Billboard Magazine ( including the Hot 100 , Adult Pop Songs , and Alternative Songs ) and other record chart companies around the world . 
 " Somebody That I Used To Know " has been performed several times on major US TV shows such as The Voice , American Idol , and Saturday Night Live . It was covered by Canadian indie rock group Walk off the Earth using a single guitar played simultaneously by all five band members . The hit song 's accompanying music video was directed by Australian artist Natasha Pincus . The video , which has received over 790 million views on YouTube as of June 2016 , premiered on 5 July 2011 . It shows Gotye and Kimbra naked against a white backdrop . While they sing , a pattern of paint gradually covers their skin and the backdrop via stop motion animation . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 Gotye discussed writing " Somebody That I Used to Know " in an interview with Sound on Sound : 
 " Writing ' Somebody ' was a gradual and linear process . I started with the Luiz <unk> sample , then I found the drums , and after that I started working on the lyric and the melody , and added the wobbly guitar @-@ sample melody . After that , I took a break , and a few weeks later I came back to the session and decided on the chorus chord progression , wrote the chorus melody , and combined that with sounds like the Latin loop and some of the percussion and the flute sounds that further filled the space . At that point I hit a brick wall . I was thinking : ' This is pretty good , how can I get to the end really quickly ? ' and I was trying to take lazy decisions to finish the song . I considered repeating the chorus , an instrumental bridge , a change in tempo or key , I even considered finishing the song after the first chorus . But nothing felt like it was strong enough . So the third session was all about writing the female part and changing the perspective . The arrangement of ' Somebody ' is reflective of me moving towards using sounds that provide me with inspiration for a texture or a platform for an idea , and then through sonic manipulation and coming up with original melodies and harmonic ideas to make it my own . I guess the balance of sounds taken from records and samples I created myself is perhaps 50 @-@ 50 . " 
 " Somebody That I Used to Know " is an indie pop song that is four minutes and five seconds long . Gotye uses a sample of Brazilian jazz guitarist Luiz Bonfá 's 1967 instrumental song " Seville " , with additional instrumentations of beats and a xylophone . It was written and produced by Gotye himself , while in his parents ' barn on the Mornington Peninsula , Victoria . Gotye commented that he wrote the song " in quite a linear way " , explaining that " I wrote the first verse , the second verse , and I 'd got to the end of the first chorus and for the first time ever I thought , ' There 's no interesting way to add to this guy 's story ' . It felt weak " . 
 The track was recorded between January and May 2011 with Gotye struggling to find a suitable female vocalist , as a " ' high profile ' female vocalist " cancelled the collaboration at the last minute , and Kimbra " lucked out as the replacement " . He tested his girlfriend , Tash Parker , but " somehow their happiness meant that it didn 't work out " so he followed the recommendation of the song 's mixer and used Kimbra 's vocals . Martin Davies from Click Music considered the song " instantly captivating " , and named Kimbra 's voice " clean and sugar @-@ soaked " , further commenting that it bears an " uncanny resemblance " to singer Katy Perry . 
 Gotye stated that the song was " definitely drawn from various experiences I 've had in relationships breaking up , and in the parts of the more reflective parts of the song , in the aftermath and the memory of those different relationships and what they were and how they broke up and what 's going on in everyone 's minds . Yeah , so it 's an amalgam of different feelings but not completely made up as such " . In an interview with Rolling Stone ( Australia ) , he described the song as " a curated reflection of multiple past relationships " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews , winning the Grammy for Record of the Year . Take 40 Australia elaborated on the audience 's reception at the July 2011 Splendour in the Grass festival , " Gotye 's latest song featuring Kimbra ' Somebody That I Used To Know ' had become somewhat of an unofficial anthem for the festival ... every car was cranking it over their speakers all day , every day ... and the question on everyone 's lips was whether or not Kimbra would join him on the track . Fortunately , dreams came true ... he smashed out an incredible set climaxing with a version of the song with Kimbra on co @-@ lead vocals that people couldn 't stop talking about all weekend long " . Allmusic 's Jon O 'Brien felt the track was an " unexpected chart @-@ topper ... [ it ] is an oddball break @-@ up song whose stuttering rhythms , reggae hooks , and hushed vocals sound like The Police as remixed by the XX " . 
 Writing for Digital Spy , Lewis Corner rated the song four stars out of five and described it as " a Bon Iver @-@ styled ballad for the music @-@ buying masses " . Martin Davies from Click Music gave the song five stars out of five and stated that the song is " that rare example of a track that hits you squarely between the eyes " . 
 In November 2011 , music blog This Must Be Pop predicted the song as a post @-@ Christmas UK hit . John Watson , who co @-@ manages Gotye with Danny Rogers , said of the single 's success : " We 've never seen any song make a deeper or more immediate connection with so many people . It 's a really special recording and video " . Talking about the overwhelming reception and the amount of coverage received , Gotye commented that " I don 't really feel like it [ the song ] belongs to me anymore . " He further explained that " sometimes I feel like I 'm a bit sick of it . My inbox , on any given day , has at least five covers or parodies or remixes of it and there 's only so many times you can listen to the one song . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 In the week commencing 18 July 2011 , " Somebody That I Used To Know " debuted at number 27 on the ARIA Singles Chart . It was released on 5 July 2011 in Australia and New Zealand by Eleven Music as the second single from his third studio album , Making Mirrors ( 2011 ) . Despite an initial lack of airplay on major radio stations , the song reached number 1 in the week ending 15 August , becoming the first single by either artist to do so and their most successful single . Until 2014 , the song was one of the two second @-@ longest @-@ running Australian number @-@ one songs , with eight weeks at the top , tied with Savage Garden 's 1997 song " Truly Madly Deeply " , and behind Daddy Cool 's 1971 hit " Eagle Rock " , which stayed there for ten weeks . On August 2011 the song was released in Belgium and the Netherlands . After a few weeks in the charts , it reached number 1 in both countries , topping the Belgian Singles Chart for 12 weeks . Also in August , " Somebody That I Used To Know " debuted at number 4 in New Zealand on the RIANZ Singles Chart , reaching number 1 three weeks later , thus making Gotye the first Australian artist to reach number 1 since Guy Sebastian did so in February 2011 with " Who 's That Girl " . The song debuted on the Irish Singles Chart on 13 January 2012 at number 47 , later reaching number 1 position . In the United Kingdom , " Somebody That I Used To Know " spent five non @-@ consecutive weeks at number 1 . 
 In the United States , it debuted at number 91 on the Billboard Hot 100 on 14 January 2012 . In its fifteenth week on the chart – after it was performed by Matt Bomer and Darren Criss on Glee on 10 April ; by Phillip Phillips and Elise <unk> on the eleventh season of American Idol before more than 16 million viewers on 11 April ; and by Gotye and Kimbra on Saturday Night Live on 14 April – the song rose to number 1 , where it stayed for eight consecutive weeks. thus becoming the longest @-@ running number 1 by a solo male artist since Flo Rida 's " Low " led for ten weeks in 2008 . The song had the fourth highest @-@ selling single week ever with 542 @,@ 000 digital downloads sold , and was the first Australian single to top the Hot 100 since Savage Garden 's " I Knew I Loved You " in 2000 . The song also topped the Alternative Songs chart for twelve weeks tying with Fuel 's Hemorrhage ( In My Hands ) and Linkin Park 's Numb and New Divide , as well as topping the Radio Songs , Digital Songs , On @-@ Demand Songs , Pop Songs , Adult Pop Songs , Adult Contemporary , and Hot Dance Club Songs charts in that country . On 2 May 2012 the song became the first to reach digital sales of at least 400 @,@ 000 for three consecutive weeks , and the following week it became the first to simultaneously top the Alternative Songs , Hot Dance Club Songs , and Dance Mix Show Airplay charts . It also became the number 1 song of 2012 on the Alternative Songs , Adult Pop Songs , and Billboard Hot 100 charts . By 22 February 2013 , the song became the tenth longest @-@ charting song in the history of the Billboard Hot 100 , at 59 weeks on the chart . As of October 2015 , the song has sold 7 @.@ 9 million copies in the US , making it the country 's fourth all @-@ time best @-@ selling digital single . 
 " Somebody That I Used To Know " reached number one in more than 23 national charts and charted inside the top ten in more than 30 countries around the world . By the end of 2012 , the song became the best @-@ selling song of that year with 11 @.@ 8 million copies sold , ranking among the best @-@ selling digital singles of all time . As of April 2012 , it is the most downloaded song ever in Belgium , as well as being the third best @-@ selling digital single in Germany with sales between 500 @,@ 000 and 600 @,@ 000 copies , and the most successful song in the history of the Dutch charts . As of January 2013 it has received eleven Platinum certifications in Australia , accounting for shipments exceeding 770 @,@ 000 units . In New Zealand , it was certified four times Platinum . The song was the best @-@ selling single of 2012 in the UK with 1 @,@ 318 @,@ 000 copies sold . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 On 15 July 2011 , the song finished third in the 2011 Vanda & Young Songwriting Competition , with the winning song , " Cameo Lover " , by Kimbra . Earlier that year , Gotye had first noticed Kimbra when both were short @-@ listed as finalists for the competition . At the ARIA Music Awards of 2011 , " Somebody That I Used To Know " won Single of the Year , Best Pop Release , Best Video ( for Natasha Pincus ) , Engineer of the Year ( for François <unk> ) and Producer of the Year ( for Gotye ) . Gotye also won Best Male Artist for the song while Kimbra won Best Female Artist for her previous single , " Cameo Lover " . At the APRA Music Awards of 2012 , " Somebody That I Used To Know " won Most Played Australian Work and Song of the Year and Gotye won Songwriter of the Year . It was also nominated at the 2012 Teen Choice Awards for " Choice Rock Song " and " Choice Break @-@ Up Song " . The song was nominated at the 55th Grammy Awards for Record of the Year and Best Pop Duo / Group Performance , winning both awards . The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop annual critics ' poll ranked " Somebody That I Used to Know " at number eight to find the best music of 2012 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Somebody That I Used to Know " was directed and produced by Australian artist Natasha Pincus . It shows Gotye and Kimbra naked throughout the clip , and as they sing , his skin is gradually painted into the backdrop via stop motion animation . In the director 's cut , it features concealed nudity . The director 's cut was never posted . The painting used in the video 's background , painted by Howard Clark , is based on a 1980s artwork created by Gotye 's father , Frank de Backer , who also designed the cover art for the related album , Making Mirrors . Emma Hack , an Australian artist and skin illustrator based in Adelaide , was hired by Pincus to work on the body paintings for Gotye and Kimbra . Melbourne Scenic Artist Howard Clark painted the backdrop . According to Hack , it took more than 23 hours to paint both Gotye and Kimbra to fit with Howard 's background . Their painting symbolises their combined relationship . 
 Before its official premiere , the music video was leaked on Take 40 Australia 's website . According to Pincus , " It was stolen out of our system . I guess it 's always wanted to get out there . Within five minutes it was everywhere " . On 30 July 2011 it was officially premiered on YouTube and on the Australian music show Rage . The music video was well received for its artistic style , picking up 200 @,@ 000 views in its first two weeks , as well as receiving promotion on Twitter by actor Ashton Kutcher and Katy Perry . 
 " What a video ! " Snow Patrol 's Gary Lightbody enthused to Q. " I have become obsessed with it and not just because I 'm in love with Kimbra . Gotye himself is an engaging character for sure ... his solemnly expressive eyes finish a journey his lyrics only begin . ' Told myself that you were right for me but felt so lonely in your company ' – simple , pure , and devastating . None more than the title line when it speaks of the end of love with prosaic brutality : ' Now you 're just somebody that I used to know . ' Great video , powerful lyrics , and a stunning voice . Oh , and Kimbra ... my poor heart ... " 
 As of June 2016 , the video has been viewed over 790 million times on YouTube . The video for " Somebody That I Used to Know " was voted number 1 in the annual Rage Fifty countdown . Andy Samberg and Taran Killam parodied the video in a Saturday Night Live " digital short " that coincided with Gotye 's 14 April 2012 performance on the show . The video was nominated for Video of the Year and Best Editing in a Video at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards . As of January 2015 , Billboard named the video as one of the 20 best of the 2010s ( so far ) . 
 = = Cover versions and media appearances = = 
 " Somebody That I Used To Know " has been covered by several artists including a cappella group Pentatonix who created a viral YouTube video in February 2012 and released the track on their EP , " PTX Volume 1 " on 26 June 2012 In addition Ingrid Michaelson , The <unk> , and Sam Tsui have covered the song . In February 2012 , Rita Ora covered the song at BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge . A cover by Right the Stars featuring <unk> , which was also uploaded to YouTube , was recommended by Miley Cyrus . Dutch DJ Tiësto remixed the song for his album Club Life : Volume Two Miami . Phillip Phillips and Elise <unk> covered the song on the eleventh season of American Idol on 11 April 2012 . 
 In February 2012 , Gotye made his American television debut on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! where he performed the song . The song has since been featured on the TV series 90210 , Gossip Girl , and The Voice of Ireland by Andy Mac <unk> . The song was featured in the film Boyhood . On 16 May 2012 , <unk> along with Paramore 's front vocalist Hayley Williams covered the song at BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge . On 23 May 2012 , Internet cartoon band Your Favorite Martian did a cover of the song . " Somebody That I Used To Know " was also first played live by Coheed and Cambria on 29 April 2012 , as a frequent feature on their 2012 headlining tour . In May 2012 , American duo Karmin made a cover of the song on Sirius XM Hits . 
 The song was covered in the Glee episode " Big Brother " and performed by Darren Criss ( as Blaine Anderson ) and Matt Bomer ( as Cooper Anderson ) . It sold 152 @,@ 000 digital downloads in its first week of release and debuted on the Digital Songs chart at number 10 and the Hot 100 at number 26 . 
 Samples of the song were also used in <unk> 's Without You . 
 Gotye paid tribute to the overwhelming number of cover versions of the song by personally creating a video remix , released in August 2012 , using segments from hundreds of online covers to create a new , unique version of the track , titled " <unk> : A YouTube Orchestra " . Gotye states the concept " was directly inspired here by <unk> 's Thru @-@ You project " , released in March 2009 , which edited numerous YouTube videos to create a new cohesive song . A similar mixing style is seen in the performance of " Since U Been Gone " in the September 2012 film release Pitch Perfect . " Weird Al " Yankovic recorded a cover as part of his polka medley " NOW That 's What I Call Polka ! " for his 2014 album Mandatory Fun . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Wally de Backer – songwriter , producer , assistant mixer , recording , lead and backing vocals , guitar , xylophone , flutes , percussion , samples 
 François <unk> – mixer , engineer 
 Lucas Taranto – bass guitar 
 Kimbra – lead and backing vocals 
 William Bowden – mastering 
 Frank de Backer – artwork ( back and inside cover painting , handwriting ) 
 Kat <unk> – artwork ( front cover painting ) 
 Credits adapted from " Somebody That I Used to Know " CD single liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 Since May 2013 RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Walk Off The Earth version = = 
 In January 2012 , Canadian indie rock group Walk Off The Earth uploaded a cover of " Somebody That I Used To Know " to YouTube . Their version uses a single guitar played simultaneously by all five band members . As of April 2012 , the song had sold 187 @,@ 000 units in the United States . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 CD single 
 " Somebody That I Used To Know " – 4 : 08 
 " Somebody That I Used To Know " ( Music video ) – 4 : 25 
 CD maxi @-@ single 
 " Somebody That I Used To Know " – 4 : 08 
 " Money Tree " – 3 : 13 
 " Joan and Bobby " – 3 : 38 
 " From Me to You " – 1 : 48 
 " Somebody That I Used To Know " ( Video ) – 4 : 25 
 = = Glee Cast version = = 
 The song was covered in the Glee episode " Big Brother " and performed by Darren Criss ( as Blaine Anderson ) and Matt Bomer ( as Cooper Anderson ) . It sold 152 @,@ 000 digital downloads in its first week of release and debuted on the Digital Songs chart at number 10 and the Hot 100 at number 26 . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Mayday Parade version = = 
 The alternative rock band Mayday Parade released a cover of this song for fifth edition of the compilation album Punk Goes Pop , which features bands of the punk , alternative , and hardcore genres covering hit pop songs . Their cover became the first single from a Punk Goes ... compilation album to chart on a Billboard chart , reaching number 18 on US Rock Songs . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = Jonathan Krohn = 
 Jonathan Lee Krohn ( born March 1 , 1995 ) is an American journalist and writer . He has written for The Guardian , The Atlantic , Salon , and Mother Jones , among others . In March 2013 , Krohn was made the International Affairs and Politics fellow for Kurdish media company <unk> 's English language news site . 
 Prior to his work in journalism , Krohn wrote and self @-@ published the book Defining Conservatism , in which he sought to outline core conservative principles . He gained national attention when he addressed the 2009 Conservative Political Action Conference ( CPAC ) , at age 13 . Krohn convinced skeptical organizers to allow him to speak for three minutes at the CPAC event on February 27 , 2009 . His speech was well received by the audience and later gained popularity on the internet , garnering Krohn attention on national news programs on CNN and the Fox News . In 2009 , he was a finalist for Time magazine 's Time 100 for the year . His second book , Defining Conservatism : The Principles That Will Bring Our Country Back , was released on February 9 , 2010 . 
 In 2011 , Krohn openly declared he no longer held conservative views , a change he attributed to his study of philosophers and maturing with age . He was criticized by some conservatives for this reversal . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Krohn , an only child , was born on March 1 , 1995 to Doug Krohn , a computer system integrator , and Marla Krohn , a sales representative and middle @-@ school drama and speech teacher . Krohn 's family lived in Duluth , Georgia , and has been active in a Baptist church . In 2006 , he was voted " Atlanta 's Most Talented Child " by Inside Edition . Krohn became interested in politics at age eight , after hearing about a Democratic filibuster on judicial nominations in the United States Senate . The event prompted him to research American history and governmental rules and policies , and he developed an affinity for conservatism and began to listen regularly to conservative talk radio , particularly Morning in America with William Bennett , to whom he became a regular caller . 
 Krohn wrote Defining Conservatism , which was self @-@ published in 2008 , when he was 13 years old , because he felt the term conservatism was often misused . The book was in part a response to criticism that John McCain , the 2008 Republican presidential candidate , received regarding his conservative credentials . The book outlines four fundamental principles of conservative thought : support for the United States Constitution , opposition to abortion , less government , and more personal responsibility . Krohn went on to apply the principles to current events and define whether specifically cited actions violated those principles . The book was dedicated to Ronald Reagan , William F. Buckley , Jr. and Barry Goldwater , whom Krohn describes as his political heroes , along with South Carolina Senator Jim DeMint . Krohn paid to have the book published from his own savings . He described it as a " first effort " and immediately planned to write a second one , which he said would focus in part on Alexander Hamilton and James Monroe . 
 In January 2009 , Krohn contacted organizers of the Conservative Political Action Conference and asked to speak at the event . Organizers were reportedly skeptical , but gave him a three @-@ minute spot on a panel about grassroots activists . He delivered the speech , on February 27 , 2009 and described the conservative principles outlined in his book . When the speech was over , the panel moderator said , " Watch out , David Keene , " referring to the chairman of the American Conservative Union . The next day at the conference , William Bennett said , " I used to work for Ronald Reagan and now I 'm a colleague of Jonathan Krohn 's ! " The speech attracted the attention of national media outlets , and became popular online . Sam Stein of The Huffington Post said of the speech , " It was filled with the type of rhetorical flow and emotional pitch one would expect from a seasoned hand . Except , [ he ] is more than four years away from being able to vote . " 
 After the conference , Krohn 's parents received hate mail accusing them of brainwashing their son , but both insist Krohn developed his own political thinking . Within a week of the speech , Krohn appeared on numerous TV and radio shows . A staff member for a potential candidate for Georgia governor also asked to meet with him . Several Facebook fan pages were started for him , including one called " Jonathan Krohn 2032 " , a reference to the first year he will be eligible to run for President of the United States . 
 Krohn wrote a column for Human Events , a weekly conservative newspaper . Krohn wrote a second book , Defining Conservatism : The Principles That Will Bring Our Country Back , released February 2010 . The book was praised by former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich and syndicated radio host Mike Gallagher , who said of it , " Any time I am depressed about the state of the country or the future of the modern conservative movement , I consider two words : Jonathan Krohn . " Gingrich offered to write the foreword for the book , but Krohn wanted it to be written by William Bennett . Krohn attended the 2010 Conservative Political Action Conference , but did not have a speaking role . Krohn also spoke at several Tea Party protests . 
 = = Change in political views = = 
 In 2011 , the French conservative media Nouvelles de France revealed that Jonathan Krohn was not conservative anymore . In 2012 , he confirmed to Politico that he no longer considers himself a conservative , and in fact takes a liberal point of view on many issues , including same @-@ sex marriage and the Affordable Care Act . He also said that if he were old enough to vote in the 2012 presidential election , he would vote for Barack Obama . However , he refused to describe himself as liberal , instead rejecting ideological labels entirely . Krohn attributes his change to reading works of philosophers such as Nietzsche and Wittgenstein . He said that he rejected social conservatism first , before rejecting other conservative viewpoints . Krohn stated that he had matured and described his 13 @-@ year @-@ old self as " naive " . 
 In a Salon article , Krohn was critical of partisan politics in general , and conservatives in particular , describing his conservative critics as " scorned right @-@ wingers showing all the maturity of a little boy . " In an interview with Jian Ghomeshi on CBC Radio subsequent to the Salon article , Krohn pointed out that his critics were so shallow that they claimed he shouldn 't have been reading philosophy at only 17 years of age . 
 = Cynesige = 
 Cynesige ( or <unk> ; died 1060 ) was a medieval English Archbishop of York between 1051 and 1060 . Prior to his appointment to York , he was a royal clerk and perhaps a monk . As archbishop , he built and adorned his cathedral as well as other churches , and was active in consecrating bishops . After his death in 1060 , the bequests he had made to a monastery were confiscated by the queen . 
 = = Life = = 
 Cynesige perhaps came from Rutland , as he owned the manor of <unk> there later in life . The Liber Eliensis claimed that he had been born by Caesarian section , but this is most likely a later accretion to his <unk> , added after his death because of efforts to have him declared a saint . The belief was that for an infant to survive a caesarian section was a miracle , and thus a fitting beginning for a future saint . 
 Cynesige had been a royal clerk prior to his appointment to York in 1051 , although the monks of Peterborough Abbey maintained that he had been a monk in their house . It is possible he was both a monk and a royal clerk . He delayed his visit to Rome to receive his pallium until 1055 , when he was given it by Pope Victor II . During his time as archbishop he was claimed to have consecrated both John and <unk> as Bishops of Glasgow , although the two bishops probably never lived in their diocese . John may have ended up as the Bishop of Mecklenburg in Germany . Cynesige dedicated the church of the Abbey of Waltham Holy Cross in the presence of King Edward the Confessor around 3 May 1060 . This was at the invitation of Earl Harold Godwinson of Wessex . The chronicle of Waltham Abbey states that Cynesige did the consecration because the archbishopric of Canterbury was vacant . However , there was an occupant of Canterbury , Stigand , but his election to Canterbury was not considered canonical by the papacy , and Harold may have excluded him because of concerns about Stigand 's canonical status . 
 Cynesige expanded and embellished York Minster and other churches in his archdiocese , and built the tower at Beverley , as well as giving books and other items to the church there . He consecrated <unk> as Bishop of Llandaff at a council held at London in 1056 , although this information is only attested in the Book of Llandaff , a sometimes unreliable source . In 1059 he , along with Earl Tostig and Æthelwine Bishop of Durham , escorted King Malcolm III of Scotland to King Edward 's court at Gloucester when Malcolm came south , probably to thank Edward for his help in restoring Malcolm to the Scottish throne , and perhaps to acknowledge the English king as Malcolm 's lord . 
 Cynesige died on 20 December 1060 and was buried at Peterborough , in what is now Peterborough Cathedral . After his death , he was honoured as a saint by the monks at Peterborough , although the cult does not seem to have spread far . His bones , along with those of his predecessor Ælfric Puttoc , were found in 1643 . His reputation for sanctity and poverty was based on his actions , as he often traveled on foot , and spent much time preaching and giving alms . The Northumbrian Priests ' Law which is usually attributed to Wulfstan II , Archbishop of York , might have been authored instead by Cynesige , or possibly Cynesige 's predecessor Ælfric Puttoc . He gave gifts to Peterborough in his will , but the gifts were taken by Queen Edith instead . 
 = Lowell Mill Girls = 
 The " Mill Girls " were female workers who came to work for the textile corporations in Lowell , Massachusetts , during the Industrial Revolution in the United States . The workers initially recruited by the corporations were daughters of propertied New England farmers , between the ages of 15 and 30 . ( There also could be " little girls " who worked there about the age of 13 . ) By 1840 , at the height of the Industrial Revolution , the textile mills had recruited over 8 @,@ 000 women , who came to make up nearly seventy @-@ five percent of the mill workforce . 
 During the early period , women came to the mills of their own accord , for various reasons : to help a brother pay for college , for the educational opportunities offered in Lowell , or to earn a supplementary income for themselves . While their wages were only half of what men were paid , many were able to attain economic independence for the first time , free from controlling fathers and husbands . As a result , while factory life would soon come to be experienced as oppressive , it enabled these women to challenge assumptions of female inferiority and dependence . 
 As the nature of the new " factory system " became clear , however , many women joined the broader American labor movement , to protest the dramatic social changes being brought by the Industrial Revolution . While they decried the deteriorating factory conditions , worker unrest in the 1840s was directed mainly against the loss of control over economic life . This loss of control , which came with the dependence on the corporations for a wage , was experienced as an attack on their dignity and independence . In 1845 , after a number of protests and strikes , many operatives came together to form the first union of working women in the United States , the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association . The Association adopted a newspaper called the Voice of Industry , in which workers published sharp critiques of the new industrialism . The Voice stood in sharp contrast to other literary magazines published by female operatives , such as the Lowell Offering , which painted a sanguine picture of life in the mills . 
 = = Industrialization of Lowell = = 
 In 1813 , businessman Francis Cabot Lowell formed a company , the Boston Manufacturing Company and built a textile mill next to the Charles River in Waltham , Massachusetts . Differing from the earlier Rhode Island System , where only carding and spinning were done in a factory while the weaving was often put out to neighboring farms to be done by hand , the Waltham mill was the first integrated mill in the United States , transforming raw cotton into cotton cloth in one mill building . 
 In 1821 , Francis C. Lowell 's business associates , looking to expand the Waltham textile operations , purchased land around the Pawtucket Falls on the Merrimack River in East Chelmsford , Massachusetts . Incorporated as the Town of Lowell in 1826 , by 1840 , the textile mills employed almost 8 @,@ 000 workers — mostly women between the ages of 16 and 35 . 
 The " City of Spindles , " as Lowell came to be known , quickly became the center of the Industrial Revolution in America . New , large scale machinery , which had come to dominate the production of cloth by 1840 , was being rapidly developed in lockstep with the equally new ways of organizing workers for mass production . Together , these mutually reinforcing technological and social changes produced staggering increases : between 1840 and 1860 , the number of spindles in use went from 2 ¼ million to almost 5 ¼ million ; bales of cotton used from 300 @,@ 000 to nearly 1 million , and the number of workers from 72 @,@ 000 to nearly 122 @,@ 000 . This tremendous growth translated directly into large profits for the textile corporations : between 1846 and 1850 , for instance , the dividends of the Boston @-@ based investors , the group of textile companies that founded Lowell , averaged 14 percent per year . Most corporations recorded similarly high profits during this period . 
 = = Work and living environment = = 
 The social position of the factory girls had been degraded considerably in France and England . In her autobiography , Harriet Hanson Robinson ( who worked in the Lowell mills from 1834 – 1848 ) suggests that " It was to overcome this prejudice that such high wages had been offered to women that they might be induced to become mill girls , in spite of the opprobrium that still clung to this degrading occupation . … " 
 = = = Factory conditions = = = 
 The Lowell System combined large @-@ scale mechanization with an attempt to improve the stature of its female workforce and workers . A few girls who came with their mothers or older sisters were as young as ten years old , some were middle @-@ aged , but the average age was about 24 . Usually hired for contracts of one year ( the average stay was about four years ) , new employees were given assorted tasks as spare hands and paid a fixed daily wage while more experienced loom operators would be paid by the piece . They were paired with more experienced women , who trained them in the ways of the factory . 
 Conditions in the Lowell mills were severe by modern American standards . Employees worked from 5 : 00 am until 7 : 00 pm , for an average 73 hours per week . Each room usually had 80 women working at machines , with two male overseers managing the operation . The noise of the machines was described by one worker as " something frightful and infernal , " and although the rooms were hot , windows were often kept closed during the summer so that conditions for thread work remained optimal . The air , meanwhile , was filled with particles of thread and cloth . 
 The English novelist Charles Dickens , who visited in 1842 , remarked favorably on the conditions : " I cannot recall or separate one young face that gave me a painful impression ; not one young girl whom , assuming it to be matter of necessity that she should gain her daily bread by the labour of her hands , I would have removed from those works if I had had the power " " However , there was concern among many workers that foreign visitors were being presented with a sanitized view of the mills , by textile corporations who were trading on the image of the ‘ literary operative ’ to mask the grim realities of factory life . “ Very pretty picture , ” wrote an operative in the Voice of Industry , responding to a rosy account of life and learning in the mills , “ but we who work in the factory know the sober reality to be quite another thing altogether . ” The “ sober reality ” was twelve to fourteen hours of dreary , exhausting work , which many workers experienced as hostile to intellectual development . 
 = = = Living quarters = = = 
 The investors or factory owners built hundreds of boarding houses near the mills , where textile workers lived year @-@ round . A curfew of 10 : 00 pm was common , and men were generally not allowed inside . About 25 women lived in each boarding house , with up to six sharing a bedroom . One worker described her quarters as " a small , comfortless , half @-@ ventilated apartment containing some half a dozen occupants " . Trips away from the boarding house were uncommon ; the Lowell girls worked and ate together . However , half @-@ days and short paid vacations were possible due to the nature of the piece @-@ work ; one girl would work the machines of another in addition to her own such that no wages would be lost . 
 These close quarters fostered community as well as resentment . Newcomers were mentored by older women in areas such as dress , speech , behavior , and the general ways of the community . Workers often recruited their friends or relatives to the factories , creating a familial atmosphere among many of the rank and file . The Lowell girls were expected to attend church and demonstrate morals befitting proper society . The 1848 Handbook to Lowell proclaimed that " The company will not employ anyone who is habitually absent from public worship on the Sabbath , or known to be guilty of immorality . " 
 = = = Working Class Intellectual Culture = = = 
 For many young women , the allure of Lowell was in the opportunities afforded for further study and learning . Most had already completed some measure of formal education and were resolutely bent on self @-@ improvement . Upon their arrival , they found a vibrant , lively working class intellectual culture : workers read voraciously in Lowell ’ s city library and Reading Rooms , and subscribed to the large , informal “ circulating libraries ” which trafficked in novels . Many even pursued literary composition . Defying factory rules , operatives would affix verses to their spinning frames , “ to train their memories , ” and pin up mathematical problems in the rooms where they worked . In the evenings , many enrolled in courses offered by the mills and attended public lectures at the Lyceum , a theatre built at company expense ( offering 25 lectures per season for 25 cents ) . The Voice of Industry is alive with notices for upcoming lectures , courses , and meetings on topics ranging from astronomy to music . ( " Lectures and Learning " , Voice of Industry ) 
 The corporations happily publicized the efforts of these “ literary mill girls ” , boasting that they were the “ most superior class of factory operative , ” which greatly impressed foreign visitors to Lowell . But this masked the bitter opposition of many workers to the twelve to fourteen hours of monotonous , exhausting work , which they saw was corrosive to their desire to learn and educate themselves . “ Who , ” asked an operative writing in the Voice , “ after thirteen hours of steady application to monotonous work , can sit down and apply her mind to deep and long continued thought ? … Where is the opportunity for mental improvement ? ” A former Lowell operative , looking back on her experience in the mills , expressed a similar view : “ After one has worked from ten to fourteen hours at manual labor , it is impossible to study History , Philosophy , or Science , ” she wrote , “ I well remember the chagrin I often felt when attending lectures , to find myself unable to keep awake … I am sure few possessed a more ardent desire for knowledge than I did , but such was the effect of the long hour system , that my chief delight was , after the evening meal , to place my aching feet in an easy position , and read a novel . ” 
 = = The Lowell Offering = = 
 In October 1840 , the Reverend Abel Charles Thomas of the First Universalist Church organized a monthly publication by and for the Lowell girls . As the magazine grew in popularity , women contributed poems , ballads , essays and fiction – often using their characters to report on conditions and situations in their lives . 
 The Offering 's contents were by turns serious and farcical . In a letter in the first issue , " A Letter about Old Maids " , the author suggested that " sisters , spinsters , lay @-@ nuns , & c " were an essential component of God 's " wise design " . Later issues – particularly in the wake of labor unrest in the factories – included an article about the value of organizing and an essay about suicide among the Lowell girls . 
 = = Strikes of 1834 and 1836 = = 
 The initial effort of the investors and managers to recruit female textile workers brought generous wages for the time ( three to five dollars per week ) , but with the economic depression of the early 1830s , the Board of Directors proposed a reduction in wages . This , in turn , led to organized " turn @-@ outs " or strikes . 
 In February 1834 , the Board of Directors of Lowell 's textile mills requested the managers or agents to impose a 15 % reduction in wages , to go into effect on March 1 . After a series of meetings , the female textile workers organized a " turn @-@ out " or strike . The women involved in " turn @-@ out " immediately withdrew their savings causing " a run " on two local banks . 
 The strike failed and within days the protesters had all returned to work at reduced pay or left town , but the " turn @-@ out " or strike was an indication of the determination among the Lowell female textile workers to take labor action . This dismayed the agents of the factories , who portrayed the turnout as a betrayal of femininity . William Austin , agent of the Lawrence Manufacturing Company , wrote to his Board of Directors , " notwithstanding the friendly and disinterested advice which has been on all proper <unk> [ sic ] communicated to the girls of the Lawrence mills a spirit of evil omen … has prevailed , and overcome the judgment and discretion of too many " . 
 Again , in response to a severe economic depression and the high costs of living , in January 1836 , the Board of Directors of Lowell 's textile mills absorbed an increase in the textile workers ' rent to help in the crisis faced by the company boarding house keepers . As the economic calamity continued in October 1836 , the Directors proposed an additional rent hike to be paid by the textile workers living in the company boarding houses . The female textile workers responded immediately in protest by forming the Factory Girls ' Association and organizing a " turn @-@ out " or strike . Harriet Hanson Robinson , an eleven @-@ year @-@ old <unk> at the time of the strike , recalled in her memoirs : " One of the girls stood on a pump and gave vent to the feelings of her companions in a neat speech , declaring that it was their duty to resist all attempts at cutting down the wages . This was the first time a woman had spoken in public in Lowell , and the event caused surprise and consternation among her audience . " 
 This " turn @-@ out " or strike attracted over 1 @,@ 500 workers – nearly twice the number two years previously - causing Lowell 's textile mills to run far below capacity . Unlike the " turn @-@ out " or strike in 1834 , in 1836 there was enormous community support for the striking female textile workers . The proposed rent hike was seen as a violation of the written contract between the employers and the employees . The " turn @-@ out " persisted for weeks and eventually the Board of Directors of Lowell 's textile mills rescinded the rent hike . Although the " turn @-@ out " was a success , the weakness of the system was evident , and worsened further in the Panic of 1837 . 
 = = Lowell Female Labor Reform Association = = 
 The sense of community that arose from working and living together contributed directly to the energy and growth of the first union of women workers , the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association . Started by twelve operatives in January 1845 , its membership grew to 500 within six months , and continued to expand rapidly . The Association was run completely by the women themselves : they elected their own officers and held their own meetings ; they helped organize the city ’ s female workers , and set up branches in other mill towns . They organized fairs , parties , and social gatherings . Unlike many middle @-@ class women activists , the operatives found considerable support from working @-@ class men who welcomed them into their reform organizations and advocated for their treatment as equals . 
 One of its first actions was to send petitions signed by thousands of textile workers to the Massachusetts General Court demanding a ten @-@ hour work day . In response , the Massachusetts Legislature established a committee chaired by William Schouler , Representative from Lowell , to investigate and hold public hearings , during which workers testified about conditions in the factories and the physical demands of their twelve @-@ hour days . These were the first investigations into labor conditions by a governmental body in the United States . The 1845 Legislative Committee determined that it was not state legislature 's responsibility to control the hours of work . The LFLRA called its chairman , William Schouler , a " tool " and worked to defeat him in his next campaign for the State Legislature . A complex election Schouler lost to another Whig candidate over the issue of railroads . The impact of working men [ Democrats ] and working women [ non @-@ voting ] was very limited . The next year Schouler was re @-@ elected to the State Legislature . 
 The Lowell female textile workers continued to petition the Massachusetts Legislature and legislative committee hearings became an annual event . Although the initial push for a ten @-@ hour workday was unsuccessful , the LFLRA continued to grow , affiliating with the New England Workingmen 's Association and publishing articles in that organization 's Voice of Industry , a pro @-@ labor newspaper . This direct pressure forced the Board of Directors of Lowell 's textile mills to reduce the workday by 30 minutes in 1847 . The <unk> 's organizing efforts spilled over into other nearby towns . In 1847 , New Hampshire became the first state to pass a law for a ten @-@ hour workday , although there was no enforcement and workers were often requested to work longer days . By 1848 , the LFLRA dissolved as a labor reform organization . Lowell textile workers continued to petition and pressure for improved working conditions , and in 1853 , the Lowell corporations reduced the workday to eleven hours . 
 The New England textile industry was rapidly expanding in the 1850s and 1860s . Unable to recruit enough Yankee women to fill all the new jobs , to supplement the workforce textile managers turned to survivors of the Great Irish Famine who had recently immigrated to the United States in large numbers . During the Civil War , many of Lowell 's cotton mills closed , unable to acquire bales of raw cotton from the South . After the war , the textile mills reopened , recruiting French Canadian men and women . Although large numbers of Irish and French Canadian immigrants moved to Lowell to work in the textile mills , Yankee women still dominated the workforce until the mid @-@ 1880s . 
 = = Political character of labor activity = = 
 The Lowell girls ' organizing efforts were notable not only for the " unfeminine " participation of women , but also for the political framework used to appeal to the public . Framing their struggle for shorter work days and better pay as a matter of rights and personal dignity , they sought to place themselves in the larger context of the American Revolution . During the 1834 " turn @-@ out " or strike – they warned that " the oppressing hand of avarice would enslave us , " the women included a poem which read : 
 Let oppression shrug her shoulders , 
 And a haughty tyrant frown , 
 And little upstart Ignorance , 
 In mockery look down . 
 Yet I value not the feeble threats 
 Of Tories in disguise , 
 While the flag of Independence 
 O 'er our noble nation flies . 
 In the 1836 strike , this theme returned in a protest song : 
 Oh ! isn 't it a pity , such a pretty girl as I 
 Should be sent to the factory to pine away and die ? 
 Oh ! I cannot be a slave , I will not be a slave , 
 For I 'm so fond of liberty , 
 That I cannot be a slave . 
 The most striking example of this political overtone can be found in a series of tracts published by the Female Labor Reform Association entitled Factory Tracts . In the first of these , subtitled " Factory Life As It Is " , the author proclaims " that our rights cannot be trampled upon with impunity ; that we WILL not longer submit to that arbitrary power which has for the last ten years been so abundantly exercised over us . " 
 This conceptualization of labor activity as philosophically linked with the American project in democracy has been instrumental for other labor organizing campaigns , as noted frequently by MIT professor and social critic Noam Chomsky , who has cited this extended quote from the Lowell Mill Girls on the topic of wage slavery : 
 " When you sell your product , you retain your person . But when you sell your labour , you sell yourself , losing the rights of free men and becoming vassals of mammoth establishments of a monied aristocracy that threatens annihilation to anyone who questions their right to enslave and oppress . 
 " Those who work in the mills ought to own them , not have the status of machines ruled by private despots who are entrenching monarchic principles on democratic soil as they drive downwards freedom and rights , civilization , health , morals and intellectuality in the new commercial feudalism . " 
 = A New Day in the Old Town = 
 " A New Day in the Old Town " is the season premiere and first episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 21st episode overall . It was co @-@ written by J.J. Abrams and Akiva Goldsman , with Goldsman directing . The episode followed the aftermath of Olivia 's journey to the parallel universe in the last season 's finale , while also introducing the idea of shapeshifters . It guest starred actors Luke Goss , Ari Graynor , Meghan Markle , and Tegan Moss . 
 It first aired on Fox in the United States on September 17 , 2009 to generally positive reviews . It was watched by an estimated 9 @.@ 96 million viewers , and received a 2 @.@ 43 ratings share among viewers 18 – 49 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A mysterious man involved in a downtown Manhattan collision with a SUV flees the scene to a nearby apartment building . He enters the building and attacks a random man , hooking up equipment to the man 's inner mouth , which allows him to adopt his external appearance and shapeshift . The crashed SUV is discovered to be Olivia 's ( Anna Torv ) , though she is not inside . Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) and Walter ( John Noble ) arrive and investigate the scene while being accosted by a new junior agent , Amy Jessup ( Meghan Markle ) , who wonders what they do for the FBI . After Walter searches through the SUV , he shuts the door and Olivia suddenly ejects through the windshield . She is rushed to the hospital and declared brain dead . Peter and Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) drink at a bar together in sorrow , and Broyles reveals the Fringe Division is being shut down because of their failure to provide " usable results " . Suspicious and curious of Fringe Division , Jessup begins a personal investigation into their past activities . 
 After talking to Rachel about her sister , Peter visits Olivia , who is scheduled to be taken off life support the following morning . However , Olivia suddenly wakes up , crying the Greek phrase Na <unk> <unk> <unk> apo ton patera tou . She does not remember getting injured , and incoherently tells Peter there is something they need to do , and their " lives may depend on it , " but cannot remember who told her this , or why . Peter tries to enter the FBI building , but is denied until Jessup agrees to accompany him . She questions him about Fringe Division , and they begin investigating the driver who hit Olivia . When they arrive at his apartment , they discover what appears to be the driver 's body , but he has been dead longer than when the accident took place . 
 The shapeshifted man makes contact with his group via typewriter ( an allegedly nonexistent model of IBM Selectric , controlled by its image in a mirror ) , and is told his mission to prevent a " meeting " was unsuccessful , as Olivia is still alive . He is told to interrogate her , and then kill her . Meanwhile , Peter introduces Jessup to their lab at Harvard , and upon performing an autopsy on the man found in the apartment , they find three holes in the roof of his mouth . Walter shows them archived footage of one of his 1970s experiments of a drugged up girl who says she sees <unk> soldiers from an parallel universe that can " look like any of us " . 
 After being visited by her partner , Agent Charlie Francis ( Kirk Acevedo ) and given a gun , Olivia is unsuccessfully questioned by the shapeshifter , who has adopted the appearance of a female nurse . The nurse attempts to kill Olivia , but is shot and flees from Jessup . Peter , Charlie , and Jessup follow her into nearby tunnels , but become separated . Peter and Jessup hear gunshots and arrive to see that Charlie has apparently killed the shapeshifter . Peter returns to Olivia , and tells her the Greek phrase means " be a better person than your father , " and was told to him every night by his mother . 
 After being told by a panel of Senators that Fringe Division is not worth the human or fiscal cost , Broyles is given the transformation device by Peter so Broyles can justify Fringe Division remaining active . In a separate scene , Agent Jessup is shown working at a computer , annotating an image of the creature from The Transformation with biblical verses , notably from the Book of Revelation . The final scene reveals that Charlie is actually the shapeshifter , who disposes of the real agent 's body in a furnace beneath the hospital . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In February 2009 , Fox announced that if they renewed Fringe for a second season , they were moving the show 's production from New York City to Vancouver , as the American city 's tax breaks had expired . Fox officially renewed Fringe for a second season on May 4 , 2009 , and in July announced the new season would premiere on September 23 , behind a new episode of Bones . Later reports indicated the episode would premiere on September 17 . 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 " A New Day in the Old Town " was co @-@ written by consulting producer Akiva Goldsman and co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams , with Goldsman also serving as director . In the DVD special features , actor Joshua Jackson explained the second season begins less than a day after the previous season 's finale , " so the characters have only just barely had a chance to catch their breath from all the madness in the first season , and launch right back into the second one " . Co @-@ executive producer Jeff Pinkner considered beginning the second season directly after first season 's final scene between Olivia and William Bell , but changed his mind because he thought it would be more interesting to show how Olivia 's disappearance and reappearance affected the Fringe team , as well as the rest of the season . The scene between Olivia and Bell is consequently not shown until the season 's fourth episode , " Momentum Deferred " . The premiere began the " gun arc " storyline , which commenced with Olivia hurtling out of her SUV and becoming too weak to control her gun during her physical recovery , and ended with the killing of the shapeshifter posing as Charlie Francis in " Momentum Deferred " . 
 The production team used new technology called a " breakway windshield , " as well as air cannons to eject the stuntwoman , Melissa Stubbs , from the vehicle . Instead of using wires , they used pneumatic rams to push her ; cables and pulleys made it similar to a " catapult " . The stuntwoman rehearsed with a helmet on , but took it off when the scene was ready to be shot . She wore a small <unk> , a mouthguard , and some <unk> , and used her elbows to break the windshield upon being ejected . Stubbs commented that shooting the scene " all went as planned , and was very anticlimactic " because of the lack of problems . Anna Torv later called the stunt " one of the most humbling experiences in my life " . She elaborated , " I don ’ t do any of the stuff that ’ s dangerous ... Melissa Stubbs is the fantastic stuntwoman who did that [ stunt ] . They put a rocket for her in the back of the car , and they had that breakaway glass for the windshield . She has nothing on extra , except maybe elbow pads . Then they shoot her out of this rocket , through the windshield , and she rolls on the ground and lands on her mark . The guy goes in . She 's OK . Everybody claps . Then I have to go in , lay in the same position , so they can get a close @-@ up of my eyes opening . That was kind of humbling . " 
 Prop master Rob Smith created the shapeshifter device and later regretted its design . He had joined the series during its second season , and had to quickly manufacture props while working under time and budget constraints . He explained , " [ My ] first episode we had to make the shape @-@ shifter device , the thing that you put into your mouth and it transforms one person into another person . I was brand new here and I wasn ’ t happy with the way that turned out , and it came back in about 5 or 6 episodes . Every time it came back I was like , ‘ Oh , I wish I could have that time over again to redo this one . " He added , " A lot of the time , I [ didn 't ] actually see [ the prop ] on set , so I watched the episode to see how everything comes together . " 
 In June 2009 , Fox put out a casting call for several new characters for the second season . One of these , Lloyd Parr , was described as a guest star in " his 30 's to early 50 's , an average guy . We need a strong character actor who can play hyper @-@ competent . Like someone in a John Frankenheimer movie " . Actor Luke Goss was cast in the role after episode writer Akiva Goldsman personally called his house and asked him to join the show . On June 24 , 2009 , TV Guide announced the casting of Meghan Markle as " an attractive , brash and quick @-@ witted junior agent " . 
 The producers considered screening the first part of the season premiere at Comic @-@ Con in San Diego , but ultimately decided against it because they thought the scene " ends in such an exciting way that we were afraid to let it out " . As a promotion , Fox did send out a DVD " screener " package of the premiere to certain journalists , which included a copy of the New York Times article shown in the first season finale as well as a piece of paper with a list of typed phrases . The paper was a copy of the instructions one of the shapeshifters received on the typewriter , which included phrases like " Mission Accomplished " and " Target Terminated " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In May 2010 , Fox announced Fringe would be moving from Tuesdays to Thursdays for the second season . Fox 's entertainment president , Kevin Reilly , explained the move , " The door is more open on this night than it has been in a long time . Fringe is a real alternative to both [ Grey 's and CSI ] . " As the season premiere , " A New Day in the Old Town " was the first episode of the season to air in its new timeslot on Thursdays . 
 In its initial broadcast in the United States , the episode was watched by an estimated 7 @.@ 817 million viewers and earned a 3 @.@ 0 / 8 rating for viewers 18 – 49 . After time shifted viewing was taken into account , Fringe increased to a 3 @.@ 95 rating for the 18 – 49 demographic . It earned a 4 @.@ 7 / 8 ratings share among all households , which caused it to be the series ' worst rated episode yet . It was also more than 25 percent lower than its average audience from the first season . These lower ratings have been attributed to a lower @-@ rated lead @-@ in ( Bones , instead of the previous season 's American Idol and House ) , and tough competition from CBS 's CSI : Crime Scene Investigation and NBC 's The Office . The rest of the season 's ratings would continue to stay lower than the previous season , leading many to question Fox 's decision to move the show in the first place . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Critical reviews of the episode were generally positive . Hilary Rothing from UGO Networks enjoyed the perceived parallels to The Wire and praised the further development of Anna Torv 's character Olivia ; " With tonight 's premiere , the writing feels tighter , the pace is fast but not so much so that the story begins to trip over itself - and if that 's any indication of how the rest of the season shapes up , then Fox will have my full attention every Thursday from 9 @-@ 10pm " . Noel Murray from A.V. Club graded the episode an A- , writing that he enjoyed how the writers made the show " new @-@ viewer @-@ friendly without making existing fans too impatient " . After receiving a DVD copy of the premiere in advance , IGN 's Ramsey Isler rated the episode 9 @.@ 0 / 10 , explaining " Everything that made season one special is still here : Walter 's still crazy and obsessed with food , Peter 's still a smart @-@ ass , and Olivia ... well , there 's a lot going on with Olivia , as usual " . Isler thought newcomer Meghan Markle was " cute , and spunky , but ... not quite a good fit here " , and praised the cliffhanger as " surprising in a special way " . MTV 's Josh Wigler praised all the main actors ' performances , and thought the episode gave the second season a " strong start " . 
 TV Squad writer Jane Boursaw praised Olivia 's entrance in the episode , calling it a " Nice set @-@ up for the focal point of this episode ... Really nice storyline to heave us face @-@ first into the new season " . She lauded the Charlie @-@ shapeshifter plot twist , stating " The possibilities are endless with that storyline , and it 'll be fun to see how it all plays out " . SFScope columnist Sarah Stegall praised Joshua Jackson and Lance Reddick 's performances , giving Jackson " top honors " as he " once again shows us the fangs behind that cherubic smile " . Stegall also noted the allusions to The X @-@ Files , which included an episode playing during the first shapeshifter 's transformation , " Which is fine , as far as I 'm concerned . If I can 't have Mulder and Scully , I 'll take Walter and Peter , and even Astrid and Charlie ... I 'm happy to see another show on TV that deals with the unknowable and the possibly fascinating , with an actual budget in hand . If this show started out as X @-@ Files Light , it 's developing some serious weight now . " 
 Writing for the Los Angeles Times , critic Andrew Hanson heralded the return of the series , declaring " Fringe comes crashing headlong back onto television . That 's not just a metaphor . Before we even fade in we have two cars smashing into each other . What a way to return : an accident in which one driver is nowhere to be found and the other flees into a nearby apartment , <unk> his face and then uses a strange device to rearrange his appearance . That 's my good old Fringe . " The Futon Critic rated " A New Day in the Old Town " the sixteenth best television episode of 2010 , while website blogger io9 listed it as one of the " crucial " episodes new viewers must watch to get into the show . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Writers J.J. Abrams and Akiva Goldsman submitted " A New Day in the Old Town " for consideration in the Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series category at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards . They did not receive a nomination . 
 = Take Your Daughter to Work Day ( The Office ) = 
 " Take Your Daughter To Work Day " is the eighteenth episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's twenty @-@ fourth episode overall . It was written by Mindy Kaling and directed by Victor Nelli , Jr . It first aired on March 16 , 2006 on NBC . The episode guest stars Jazz <unk> as Melissa Hudson , Delaney Ruth Farrell as Sasha Flenderson , Spencer Daniels as Jake Palmer , and Jake Kalender as a young Michael Scott . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Take Your Daughter to Work Day results in four children spending the day at the office — Toby Flenderson 's ( Paul Lieberstein ) daughter Sasha , Stanley Hudson 's ( Leslie David Baker ) daughter Melissa , Kevin Malone 's ( Brian Baumgartner ) fiancee 's daughter Abby , and Meredith Palmer 's ( Kate Flannery ) son Jake . Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) tries to befriend at least one child , Melissa develops a crush on Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) tries to impress the children by claiming he was a child star , and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) struggles to show secret girlfriend Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) that he can be stern with Jake . 
 " Take Your Daughter to Work Day " was one of the last episodes filmed for the season . Due to the presence of actual children on the set , all of the main cast members had to tone down their behavior , making sure that no one cursed or told inappropriate jokes . The installment received largely positive reviews from television critics . " Take Your Daughter to Work Day " received a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 2 and was seen by 8 @.@ 8 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) is frustrated that Take Your Daughter to Work Day will force him to tone down his office antics . Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) and Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) bring their daughters , Sasha and Melissa respectively , Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) brings his fiancée 's daughter , Abby , and Meredith Palmer ( Kate Flannery ) brings her son , Jake . Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) is determined to befriend one child by the end of the day . She tries with Abby , who instead takes a liking to Jim . Pam watches , clearly endeared to Jim 's way with kids . Sasha walks into Michael 's office and plays with his toys , and after his jokes she is quite fond of him . Melissa develops a crush on Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) and asks for his number , while Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) alerts Stanley that Ryan may be up to something . Stanley angrily reprimands a confused Ryan for his " motives " , which Ryan later described as the " most terrifying moment " of his life . 
 Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) begins to read one of his childhood horror stories to the children , but Michael enters and insists that he stop upsetting the kids . Michael decides to show the children and the office a video of him as a child ( Jake Kalender ) during an appearance on a kid 's show , where he revealed his dream was to " get married and have 100 kids , so I can have 100 friends , and no one can say ' no ' to being my friend . " He retreats into his office when he realizes that he never came close to that dream . Toby talks to Michael , who decides to start online dating ( with the user name " Little Kid Lover " ) . After being tormented by Jake all day , Dwight is finally stern with him , which quietly pleases Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) . Pam wins over Jake with the paper shredder . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) leaves the office early to go on a date , to Pam 's chagrin . Michael and Dwight end the party by singing to the children . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Take Your Daughter to Work Day " was written by Mindy Kaling , who portrayed Kelly Kapoor on the series . The entry was directed by Victor Nelli , Jr , making it his second directoral credit after the earlier episode " The Carpet " . The episode was one of the last installments filmed for the season . In addition , the episode took five days to film . Each day , over twelve hours was devoted to filming . The episode guest stars Jazz <unk> as Melissa Hudson , Delaney Ruth Farrell as Sasha Flenderson , Spencer Daniels as Jake Palmer , and Jake Kalender as a young Michael Scott . 
 Jenna Fischer noted that , due to the presence of actual children on the set , " everyone had to be on their best behavior " , meaning that there was no " cursing and no dirty jokes allowed " . She later said that " we aren 't a ' G @-@ rated ' bunch by nature . " Fischer later joked that " candy is one of my weaknesses " , but she was able to get through the filming of the episode without eating any of it . She explained that during the filming of the earlier second season episodes " Halloween " and " Valentine 's Day " , she had eaten a majority of the candy the crew put on her desk . 
 The second season DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include the Party Planning Committee squabbling over what food to serve , Stanley complaining that his daughter is spoiled , Dwight discovering an eraser in his coffee courtesy of Jake , Kelly complaining to Pam that " Stanley 's daughter is such a slut " , and Jim giving Abby an official certificate of appreciation . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Pam notes that by putting out candy to lure in children , she is acting just like the witch in the fairy tale " Hansel and Gretel " . Michael complains about having to censor himself with children around ; he compares himself to Eddie Murphy in his movie Raw and notes " they " want to make him into Murphy in Daddy Day Care . Michael , Jim , Dwight get into an argument about super heroes . Michael claims that he is like Superman defending Gotham City . Both Jim and Dwight correct him , and he says that he is more like Aquaman . 
 Jim and Abby discuss the book From the Mixed @-@ Up Files of Mrs. Basil E. <unk> and talk whether they would want to spend a night in the Metropolitan Museum of Art or an aquarium . Sasha asks Phyllis if she is Mother Goose . Dwight later reads the short story " Die Geschichte vom <unk> " from Heinrich Hoffmann 's 1845 book Struwwelpeter . Michael later refers to it as a book that Dwight 's " Nazi war @-@ criminal " grandmother read to him . This starts a short discussion about Nazis . Michael argues that Dunder Mifflin is better than Office Depot with the children . He later shows them his performance on <unk> Bundle , a parody of " those crappy little local kids ' shows that used to fill time on Saturday mornings before there were such things as infomercials " . Michael and Dwight end the party by performing Crosby , Stills , Nash & Young 's " Teach Your Children " . 
 = = Reception = = 
