 " Take Your Daughter to Work Day " originally aired on NBC on the March 16 , 2006 . The episode received a 4 @.@ 2 rating / 11 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 2 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 8 million viewers , and retained 93 percent of its lead @-@ in My Name is Earl audience . 
 The episode received largely positive reviews from critics . Francis Rizzo III of DVD Talk called the scene where the office realizes Michael 's loneliness " absolutely one of the saddest moments I 've seen in recent memory " and noted that " you can 't help but feel for him " . M. Giant of Television Without Pity gave the episode an " A " . Brendan Babish of DVD Verdict called the entry " another great episode " for the series and awarded it an " A – " . He noted that by bringing the supporting characters ' kids into the office " hilarity ensues " . Babish applauded the lack of an arching plot , allowing " Michael 's faux pas " to take center stage . Michael Sciannamea of AOLTV called " Take Your Daughter to Work Day " the " best episode yet this season " and noted that " the writers will be hard @-@ pressed to come up with a better story than this one . " Sciannamea called " the transformation of Michael 's indifference over the kids to one of acceptance and pure enjoyment of having them around " as the " most interesting aspect of the episode " . He also called Dwight and Michael 's sing @-@ along near the end " the single funniest moment of the season " . 
 = Donna Jackson = 
 Donna Jackson is a fictional character from the BBC medical drama Holby City , played by actress Jaye Jacobs . She appeared in the programme from its sixth series in 2004 , to its thirteenth in 2011 . Donna entered the series as a staff nurse , characterised as a wild @-@ child with a chaotic personal life . During her tenure , she grew to take her work more seriously , becoming a ward sister and accepting more personal responsibilities by adopting her half @-@ niece Mia ( Jada Wallace @-@ Mitchell ) . A tart with a heart character , Donna had many romantic liaisons with her colleagues , including a one @-@ night stand with midwife Mickie Hendrie ( Kelly Adams ) . She ultimately fell in love with agency nurse <unk> Callaghan ( Barry Sloane ) , and departed to be with him after he was injured in Afghanistan as part of the Territorial Army . 
 Jacobs ' casting was chronicled in the documentary Making It at Holby . She made appearances as Donna in both Holby City 's sister show Casualty , and two crossover editions of the programmes , broadcast as Casualty @ Holby City . After seven years , Jacobs resigned from Holby City in order to pursue new projects . Donna 's relationship with her terminally ill father Derek ( Clarke Peters ) attracted praise from critics . Her affair with married consultant Michael Spence ( Hari Dhillon ) proved less popular , with several critics opining that Donna deserved better treatment . She was named " Best Emerging Talent " at the 2005 Screen Nation Awards for her portrayal of Donna , and was nominated for two further awards while part of the series . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Holby City = = = 
 Donna arrives at Holby City Hospital as a staff nurse on the general surgery ward , making a poor first impression by being disorganised and insolent . Mistakenly believing that living with her superior will ensure her an easy time at work , Donna invites herself to move in with nurse Lisa Fox ( Luisa Bradshaw @-@ White ) . The two have a strained relationship : within weeks , Donna is evicted for falling behind on her rent , and when she is later allowed to move back in , she lets bailiffs take Lisa 's possessions after failing to keep up her own loan repayments . Forced to run a shift in charge of the hospital 's Acute Assessment Unit as recompense , Donna struggles to manage and learns a new respect for Lisa . During this period , Donna has a friendship with midwife Mickie Hendrie ( Kelly Adams ) . Mickie is questioning her sexuality , and the two have sex while drunk . Mickie is disappointed when Donna states that it was just a one @-@ night stand , but they are able to reconcile their friendship . When the general surgery ward is downsized , Donna is forced to reapply for her job . Although she gives a good interview and impresses Lisa , other candidates have more experience , so she is unable to retain her position and has to work as a bank nurse . 
 Following a short @-@ lived relationship with physiotherapist Justin Fuller ( Ben Richards ) , Donna moves on to date hospital manager Bradley Hume ( Scott Adkins ) . Their relationship is terminated by the discovery that Bradley has been running a pharmaceutical scam , resulting in the death of one of Donna 's patients due to a morphine overdose . After entering into a <unk> syndicate at work , Donna wins £ 20 @,@ 000 . She refuses to share her winnings with the others and resigns from her job , making plans to travel to Australia . On her last day , a patient with bi @-@ polar disorder steals and re @-@ distributes her money . Donna misses her flight , and is forced to remain in Holby . She goes on to begin an affair with consultant general surgeon Michael Spence ( Hari Dhillon ) , despite the fact he is married . When Michael 's wife <unk> ( Anna @-@ Louise Plowman ) begins working at the hospital as a locum anaesthetist , she suspects that Michael has been unfaithful to her and confronts Donna , who confesses the affair and apologises profusely . 
 Donna is shocked when her estranged father Derek ( Clarke Peters ) is admitted to the hospital and diagnosed with cancer . He dies soon thereafter , and when dealing with his effects , Donna learns that he unknowingly fathered another daughter . Though her half @-@ sister is recently deceased , Donna meets her half @-@ niece Mia ( Jada Wallace @-@ Mitchell ) , who is being raised by her grandmother , Patti ( Barbara Drennan ) . Within weeks , Patti also dies , and Donna decides to adopt Mia . She and her friend Maria ( Phoebe Thomas ) compete for a ward sister position on the general surgery ward . Although Maria is the successful applicant , she realises that Donna needs the job in order to support Mia , and withdraws her candidacy so Donna is appointed sister . Donna falls in love with agency nurse Kieran Callaghan ( Barry Sloane ) , and is devastated when he is called to serve in Afghanistan with the Territorial Army ( TA ) . Kieran asks her to marry him , but Donna refuses , terminating their relationship with the intention of giving Mia stability . When Kieran is injured by an improvised explosive device ( IED ) , Donna reconsiders , supporting him through the amputation of his leg . Upon learning that he will be transferred to a rehabilitation unit in Liverpool , Donna resigns in order to move there with him . 
 = = = Casualty @ Holby City ; Casualty = = = 
 Donna has appeared in two editions of Casualty @ Holby City — crossovers with Holby City 's sister show Casualty , which is set in the hospital 's emergency department ( ED ) . In the first such crossover , originally broadcast in December 2004 , Donna works alongside ED staff members when a fuel tanker crashes into the hospital . She reappears in the fourth edition of Casualty @ Holby City , originally broadcast in December 2005 , when she is involved in a car crash en route to the staff Christmas party . She and paramedic Paul " Woody " Joyner ( Will Thorp ) then inadvertently cause a tunnel to collapse while trying to rescue a trapped baby . In 2010 , Donna appeared in Casualty itself , for the launch of the show 's twenty @-@ fifth series . She was included in the episode at the bequest of its writer , Mark <unk> . Casualty 's series producer Oliver Kent deemed her " hilariously funny " and " one of Holby 's best characters " . During the episode , the ED staff work through the aftermath of a school shooting . Jacobs explained that Donna finds the shift difficult and is " really quite scared " , as she is used to working with routine rather than emergency patients . In contrast to her typical disorganisation and laziness , Donna is forced to work hard and " put herself on the line " to keep up with the other staff members . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and characterisation = = = 
 Jacobs was cast as Donna immediately after leaving drama school , and considers herself " completely blessed " for having won the role . She was cast alongside fellow series six newcomer Kelly Adams , as midwife Mickie Hendrie . A BBC documentary entitled Making It at Holby chronicled their casting process , which entailed seven weeks of auditions , including group workshops to allow the series producers to gauge candidates ' personalities . Adams originally auditioned as Donna , however the casting directors felt that she would be better suited to Mickie , the quieter character , and " mild mannered " counterpart to Donna 's " sassy staff nurse " . She and Jacobs were paired together during a three @-@ hour workshop , and the producers detected an " instant spark " between them , leading to their dual casting . Following her successful audition , Jacobs was mentored by actress Jan Pearson , who played ward sister Kath Fox . 
 Jacobs characterised Donna as " a working class tart " . Upon her arrival in the programme , Donna was said to be a recent college graduate . Lacking career ambition , she selected nursing as the most exciting role available to her , hoping to meet a wealthy surgeon . The BBC stated that , despite her lack of ambition , Donna was likely to succeed on her chosen career path due to her propensity to " land on her feet " . On the series ' official website , Donna was described as a party girl with a " wild @-@ child reputation " . Her negative characteristics included being easily led and materialistic , easily bored , and " outspoken , stubborn and lazy " . The website also highlighted her determination to " live life to the full " , her fun @-@ loving and straight @-@ talking nature , bravery , honesty and loyalty , and the fact that " her heart 's in the right place . " 
 Donna 's costume initially involved short skirts , tight @-@ fitting tops , multi @-@ coloured hair extensions and a nose @-@ stud . Jacobs , who affected a Bristolian accent for the role , commented that Donna had " no sense of what she should keep covered up . " A size 12 , Jacobs was not pressured to lose weight for the role , and considered Donna 's figure " part of her loveable charm " . In early episodes , the character was seen to partake in recreational drug use and arrive for work hungover . Jacobs described her as " everything that you secretly want to be , but can 't get away with in normal society " , calling her " very gregarious " and immune to maturing . The Guardian 's Grace Dent deemed her " weak @-@ willed " in a 2006 feature on television medics , and in 2008 , the Daily Mirror 's Jane Simon branded her unintelligent . 
 A 2006 review by Simon noted that Donna lacked dedication to her job , and was easily distracted by her love life . Following an April 2008 interview with Jacobs , the itv.com website for the entertainment show This Morning observed that despite Donna 's " chaotic " personal life , she had grown more serious about her work . Ultimately , adopting her half @-@ niece Mia forced Donna to grow up , focussing on her career by attaining promotion to ward sister and accepting the resultant responsibilities . Reflecting on Donna 's development in January 2011 , Jacobs observed that she had changed a great deal from her early days , when she was used as a comical character with " bumbling one @-@ liners " , into a serious , more responsible person . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Donna was raised by her grandmother Shirley ( Lynda Baron ) , who appears in the series eight episode " Bad Blood " . Clarke Peters , star of American drama series The Wire , was cast as her estranged father in 2009 . He appeared from 14 July to 11 August 2009 , suffering from cancer of the <unk> flexure , pancreas and abdominal wall . Jacobs was " thrilled " by Peters ' casting , and reported that his first appearance rendered the programme 's crew " star @-@ struck " for the first time in her five years on the show . His appearance allowed Donna to confront her father over his abandonment of her as a child , and rendered her devastated upon learning that he had accepted his impending death . Peters assessed that his appearance had an " enormous impact " on Donna , explaining that his role allowed the audience to discover more about her life , as : " This is a way to get into these characters rather than just seeing them as one @-@ dimensional characters , dealing with whatever happens at Holby . " Producers Diana Kyle and Tony McHale intended the storyline to reveal a new side to Donna , depicting her attempting to cope , in contrast to the " smiling party girl " viewers were familiar with . 
 Following her father 's death , Donna adopted her half @-@ niece Mia . Discussing the development in the context of her 2010 Casualty appearance , Jacobs explained that it made her ED shift particularly stressful as " she now has little Mia to look after – if anything happens to Donna , Mia is completely on her own . " She expanded that , " The stakes have really moved on for Donna over the last couple of years . She 's had to accept some responsibility and it 's not now just about which man she 's going to sleep with next " . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 <unk> " unlucky in love " , Donna fits the tart with a heart stereotype . Her numerous romances during her tenure earned her the nickname " Nurse ' Action ' Jackson " . In 2004 , she had a lesbian liaison with Mickie . The scene in which they kissed was edited to half its original length after being deemed too explicit for pre @-@ watershed broadcast . Later that year , Jacobs stated that her ideal storyline would be for Donna to find a good man and gain a promotion , hoping she would find someone who would treat her well and help her give up her recreational drug habit . Her love interests included physiotherapist Justin Fuller , registrars Ed Keating ( Rocky Marshall ) and <unk> Hussein ( Ian Aspinall ) , manager Bradley Hume , senior house officer Sean Thompson ( Chinna <unk> ) , and a love triangle with married consultant Michael Spence and his cardiothoracic colleague Connie Beauchamp ( Amanda Mealing ) . Although Michael did not initially disclose to Donna that he was married , Jacobs stated that her character was aware of this " deep down " , but was unfortunately unperturbed . He treated her badly , to the point that he would only have sex with her in a toilet stall ; nonetheless Jacobs assessed that Donna was in love with him , believing him to be " the one " and different from her previous lovers , branding her deluded in this respect . 
 In a November 2007 article for the Daily Mirror , television critic Jim Shelley described Donna as a " nymphomaniac " , though qualified his comment with the addendum " to be fair , sex addiction is a job requirement in Holby . " His Mirror colleague Simon branded Donna supremely unsubtle in her pursuit of Michael , deeming her " unsinkable " , and in a later piece for The Guardian , Shelley commented on Donna 's proclivity for sleeping with senior staff members at inopportune moments , to the detriment of patient care . She was dubbed " man crazy " by Tina Miles of the Liverpool Echo , and " shameless " by the Mirror 's Clare Raymond , who noted that she would " stop at nothing to snare a rich doctor " . 
 Despite her numerous sex scenes , Donna did not have a genuinely romantic storyline until beginning a slow @-@ burning romance with agency nurse Kieran Callaghan in late 2010 . She initially disliked him , suspecting him of shirking his work duties , and at one point requested that he never return to her ward . Jacobs assessed that Donna was attracted to him , but would not allow herself to accept it at first , having had so many failed relationships with men ill @-@ suited to her . They went on to begin a relationship , with Jacobs describing Kieran as " Donna 's dream come true " , and co @-@ star Sloane deeming the two a " great match " . Their relationship was impeded by Kieran 's commitment to the TA and tour of duty in Afghanistan . Sloane felt that Kieran did not sufficiently explain the extent of his involvement with the TA , and assessed that Donna failed to understand his " soldier mentality " , stating that their problems stemmed from a mutual stubbornness . Following Kieran 's deployment , television magazine What 's on TV noted a change in Donna 's demeanour , observing that she had " soured " in contrast to her former " bubbly " friendliness . In a plot designed to " bring home the horrors of war " , Kieran lost a leg in an IED explosion . In the aftermath , he and Donna reunited , before moving away together . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 Jacobs departed from Holby City in 2011 , wanting to " broaden [ her ] horizons " after seven years in the programme . The thirteenth series saw the departure of many regular cast members , and the arrival of a group of new ones , including Guy Henry , Laila Rouass , and Jimmy <unk> . Jacobs deemed it " a new era with a new cast " , one which she was not part of , and stated that the time felt right to leave . She had some input in her exit storyline , the focal point of which was Donna 's relationship with Kieran , as they moved away to begin a new life together . Jacobs relayed feedback she had received from the general public with regards to how Donna should leave , and this was incorporated into her departure . The actress felt personal pressure to get Donna 's last scenes right , wanting to give the best performance possible . She found the filming " overwhelming " , explaining " it was incredibly emotional and intense , and it made it all very hard , and raw . [ ... ] It wasn 't until later that I realised I 'd put myself under a hideously stressful situation , and that I should just be enjoying the experience . " She stated : " I 've absolutely loved playing Donna . I know that I 'm going to look back very fondly on the time I had with her . I really got to know the character , and she had so many facets and was always fun to play . " 
 = = Reception and impact = = 
 Jacobs won the " Best Emerging Talent " accolade at the 2005 Screen Nation Awards for her role as Donna . She was also nominated for the " Best Newcomer " award at the 2004 National Television Awards , and the " Favourite Female TV Star " Screen Nation award in 2008 . Discussing public reaction to her character , Jacobs stated that real nurses enjoyed her " man @-@ eating antics " , and were envious that Donna got away with wearing so much make @-@ up . She commented , " I 've never met anyone who has been sensitive about Donna throwing herself at men . The women I meet seem to appreciate her tactics . " In the aftermath of the Donna / Mickie storyline , the BBC banned its actresses from appearing in raunchy photo @-@ shoots , after Jacobs and Adams were photographed in intimate poses while dressed in nurses uniforms for various " lads ' mags " . 
 In November 2007 , Shelley deemed Donna one of Holby City 's few " really good , realistic , characters " . He named Peters ' casting as Donna 's father his " Worst TV moment of the year " in 2009 , however found their relationship " deeply moving " . Donna 's farewell speech to Derek was again called moving by both a reviewer for the Liverpool Daily Post , and Simon , though she had previously despaired at Donna 's optimism despite Derek 's terminal prognosis . The following year , What 's on TV named Donna one of their favourite characters , praising her for taking a stance against Director of Surgery Henrik Hanssen ( Guy Henry ) in defence of her fellow nurses . 
 Donna 's relationship with Michael proved unpopular with critics . In an editorial discussing the boundaries between fiction and reality , The Guardian 's Scott Murray and Barney Ronay declared their love for Donna , commending the way she " always has time for people " and recommending that she stay away from Michael as she deserves better . Bree Treacy of RTÉ.ie believes that Michael had better chemistry with Donna than with his wife <unk> , however similarly commented that he did not deserve Donna , never having seen her as more than " a notch on his stethoscope " . Following her promotion to ward sister , Treacy hoped that the series producers would give Donna a man who would see her " as more than just a good time girl . " Simon criticized Donna for failing to observe correct organ donation protocol in an attempt to win Michael 's affection , commenting that she had " thrown her own heart <unk> at the first good @-@ looking doctor she s [ aw ] with an ego the size of Texas . " She later branded her " selfish to a fault " for her negative reaction to Kieran 's posting to Afghanistan , but opined that Kieran " makes a far more suitable partner for her " than Michael did . 
 Several of Donna 's pivotal episodes were selected as recommended viewing by critics . " Myself , Coming Back " , the series ten episode in which she goes on a road @-@ trip and discovers the existence of her niece , Mia , was named a televisual highlight by the Daily Mirror , Birmingham Post , and Liverpool Daily Echo , with the latter publication deeming it " refreshingly different " following the " doom and gloom " of preceding episodes . Many regional newspapers named " Promises " , in which she decides to adopt Mia , a " pick of the day " , and Sarah Morgan of the Daily Record cited Jacobs ' appearance as Donna in the premiere episode of Casualty 's twenty @-@ fifth series as a positive example of the BBC " pull [ ing ] out all the stops to make sure the first edition in this latest run is something of a cracker . " 
 = Covenant ( Halo ) = 
 The Covenant are a fictional theocratic military alliance of alien races who serve as the main antagonists in the first trilogy of the Halo video game series . They are composed of a variety of diverse species , united under the religious worship of the Forerunners and their belief that Forerunner ringworlds known as Halos will provide a path to salvation . After the Covenant leadership — the High Prophets — declare humanity an affront to their gods , the Covenant prosecute a lengthy genocidal campaign against the technologically inferior human race . 
 The Covenant were first introduced in the 2001 video game Halo : Combat Evolved as enemies of the playable character , a human supersoldier known as the Master Chief . Not realizing the Halos were meant as weapons of destruction rather than salvation , the Covenant attempt to activate the rings on three separate occasions throughout the series , inadvertently releasing a virulent parasite known as the Flood in the process . 
 To develop a distinctive look for the various races of the Covenant , Bungie artists drew inspiration from reptilian , ursine , and avian characteristics . A Covenant design scheme of purples and reflective surfaces was made to separate the aliens from human architecture . The Covenant were generally well received by critics who appreciated the challenge they provided to players ; several critics lamented the change of the main enemies from Elites to Brutes in Halo 3 and conversely praised their return in the later Halo : Reach . 
 = = Game development = = 
 Like most of the other characters and species in the Halo universe , the Covenant were slowly developed during the initial concept phase and refined as Halo : Combat Evolved progressed . During the course of development of Halo , the designers decided upon three " schools " of architecture , for each of the races represented — the humans , the Covenant , and the Forerunners . For the Covenant , the team decided on " sleek and shiny " , with reflective surfaces , organic shapes , and use of purples . 
 Like the character designs , Covenant technology , architecture , and design continually changed throughout development , occasionally for practical reasons as well as aesthetics . According to Eric Arroyo , the Covenant cruiser Truth and Reconciliation , which plays a major role in Halo : Combat Evolved , was to be boarded by the player by a long ramp . However , due to technical considerations of having a fully textured ship so close to the player , the designers came up with a " gravity lift " , which allowed the ship to be farther away ( thus not requiring as much processing power for detail ) as well as adding a " visually interesting " component of Covenant technology . 
 The art team also spent a large amount of time on Covenant weaponry , in order to make them suitably alien yet still recognizable to players . At the same time , the designers wanted all aspects of Covenant technology , especially the vehicles , to act plausibly . Bungie ended up looking at films and other media for inspiration on almost every aspect of the race . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 To design the various species of the Covenant , Bungie 's artists looked at live animals and films for inspiration ; as a result , the species within the Covenant bear simian , reptilian , avian , and ursine characteristics . 
 = = = = Elites ( Sangheili ) = = = = 
 One of the strongest and toughest foes and allies of the game , Elites ( who are from Sanghelios ) are called Sangheili in the fictitious Covenant language . They stand around 8 ft 0 in ( 2 @.@ 44 m ) and feature recharging personal shields . The Elites initially had simple mouths , which developed into pairs of split mandibles substituting for the lower jaws . Bungie concept artist Shi Kai Wang noted that project lead Jason Jones had , at one point , been insistent on giving the Elites a tail . While Wang thought it made the aliens look too animalistic , the idea was eventually dropped due to practical considerations , including where the tail would go when the Elites were driving vehicles . " At one point , we considered just having the Elites tuck their tails forward , between their legs , " Wang noted , " But [ we ] abandoned that ... for obvious reasons . " According to Paul Russel , when Bungie was bought by Microsoft and Halo was turned into an Xbox launch title , Microsoft took issue with the design of the Elites , as they felt that the Elites had a resemblance to cats that might alienate Japanese consumers . 
 = = = = Grunts ( Unggoy ) = = = = 
 Among the other races developed were Grunts , or Unggoy ( from the planet <unk> ) , viewed in game 's fiction as cannon fodder . Depicted as squat and cowardly fighters , Grunts panic and run if a player or an NPC kills their leaders . In the novels Halo : Fall of Reach and Halo : The Flood , it is told that the Grunts are methane breathers and described as dog @-@ like . They have methane suits that allow them to remove the breathing apparatuses they usually wear to sustain them in a non @-@ methane atmosphere . In Halo Reach , if a player kills a Grunt in a particular way , their methane tank will ignite causing them to fly and bounce around the area out of control , causing damage if they hit the player . 
 = = = = Jackals and Skirmishers ( Kig @-@ Yar ) = = = = 
 Jackals , or Kig @-@ Yar , ( from the moon of <unk> , orbiting Chu 'ot ) carry energy shields or ranged weaponry . Shield or armor colors denotes the rank of each caste . In some cases , such as with the Jackals , the overall design was honed once the enemy 's role was clearly defined . They look like bird @-@ like creatures or raptors . This particular species did not come into the Covenant in the same way as other species . They work as mercenaries , as their culture is based on piracy and do not follow the religious beliefs like the other species . In the Halo book , Halo : Contact Harvest , it was revealed that Jackals were the first species in the Covenant to encounter humanity . The resulting events initiated the start of the Human @-@ Covenant War . 
 = = = = Hunters ( <unk> ) = = = = 
 In addition to basic troops , there are Hunters , or <unk> , ( from the planet Te ) who according to Bungie 's mythology are actually collectives of alien insects singularly known as <unk> encased in tough armor . Initial concepts were less humanoid @-@ looking and softer than the final shape , with angular shields and razor @-@ sharp spines . 
 = = = = Engineers ( Huragok ) = = = = 
 Floating , serene aliens known as Engineers , or Huragok , were pulled from Combat Evolved , but made later appearances in the Halo novels . They also appeared in Halo Wars , Halo 3 : ODST , and Halo : Reach . They serve no actual combat role , although in Halo 3 : ODST , Halo Wars and Halo Reach they can aid players or enemies . They are actually artificial lifeforms created by the vanished technologically superior race known as the Forerunners , and are enslaved by the Covenant to build , repair and maintain their technology . 
 = = = = Prophets ( San 'Shyuum ) = = = = 
 The Prophets , or San 'Shyuum , ( from the planet <unk> Qom ) serve as the royal rulers of the Covenant , and were primarily designed by Shi Kai Wang and Eric Arroyo . Originally , the Prophets were built in a more unified way , with the gravity thrones they used for flotation and movement fused with the Prophet 's organic structures . The characters were also designed to be feeble , yet sinister . The three Prophet Hierarchs were each individually designed . 
 = = = = Brutes ( Jiralhanae ) = = = = 
 Brutes ( from the planet <unk> ) are one of the new fighting forces that were added in Halo 2 . They were made physically taller and stronger than the Elites , with their society organized around tribal chieftains . Inspired by the animators watching biker films , the Brutes incorporated simian and ursine elements while retaining an alien look . Wang 's final concept for the creature , replete with bandoliers and human skulls , was simplified for the game . Brutes were meant to typify the abusive alien menace of the Covenant and in the words of design lead Jaime Griesemer , to serve as " barbarians in Rome " . 
 For the final installment in the Halo trilogy , Halo 3 , designers had to refine the Covenant for the move to more powerful Xbox 360 hardware . Bungie was dissatisfied with the Brutes in Halo 2 ; they were added in late in development , resulting in the Brutes functioning merely as " damage sponges " and " not interesting to fight . " Their design was also limited , being little more than hairy apes with a <unk> ( reminiscent of the Star Wars character Chewbacca ) . With the Elites leaving the Covenant in the game 's story , the Brutes became the player 's main enemy , necessitating radical changes in the character 's behavior and design . For the new look of the Brutes , concept artists took inspiration from rhinoceros and gorillas . The designers added armor with buckles , gauntlets , and leather straps to bring them more in line with the Covenant aesthetic . The more seasoned the Brute , the more ornate clothing and helmets ; the armor was designed to convey a culture and tradition to the species , and emphasize their mass and power . Designs for Halo 3 took cues from ancient Greek Spartans . Character animators recorded intended actions for the new Brutes in a padded room at Bungie . A new addition to the Brute artificial intelligence was a pack mentality ; leader Brutes direct large @-@ scale actions simultaneously , such as throwing grenades towards a player . 
 = = = = Drones ( <unk> 'e ) = = = = 
 Another addition to the fighting force debuting in Halo 2 were Drones , or <unk> 'e ( from the planet <unk> ) ; the animators found the creatures challenging , as they had to be animated to walk , run , crawl , or fly on multiple surfaces . Old concept art from Combat Evolved was re @-@ purposed in influencing the Drone 's final shape , which took cues from cockroaches , grasshoppers , and wasps . 
 = = = Society = = = 
 Technologically , the Covenant are described in The Flood and First Strike to be imitative rather than innovative — most of the Covenant 's sophisticated weaponry and propulsion systems are based on Forerunner artifacts , rather than the Covenant 's own research . Covenant weapons are generally based on Forerunner technology and utilize plasma . These weapons are built around a battery that generates plasma and discharges it at a target . Frank O 'Connor , Bungie 's former public relations head , hinted that there may be something more to the Covenant 's weaponry , saying " the actual technology is not plasma as we know it , but something far more dangerous , arcane , and destructive . " A few of the Covenant 's weapons are not plasma @-@ based , including the Needler , which fires razor @-@ sharp pink needles capable of " homing in " on organic foes and exploding . A weapons expert noted parallels between the Needler and ancient Greek Amazons painting their daggers pink as a psychological weapon in an issue of gaming magazine Electronic Gaming Monthly . 
 Bungie designed the majority of Covenant technology to mirror the aesthetic of the Elites ; the exteriors are sleek and graceful , with a more angular and complex core underneath hinting at the fictional Forerunner origins of the technology . In contrast to the sleek Elite @-@ based designs of the Covenant at large , the Brutes were given their own visual design distinct from the other Covenant . Weaponry was designed to reflect the Brute 's " souls " distilled to its purest form — conveyed by dangerous shapes , harsh colors , and objects that looked " dangerous to be around " . A UNSC weapon designed for Combat Evolved in 1999 that was discarded at the time was re @-@ purposed as the Brute 's " Mauler " weapon . 
 Covenant society is a caste system composed of many races , some of which were forcibly incorporated . Each race is required to provide a specific number of troops to remain within the Covenant . In the games , the races are identified by their common UNSC designation ; their Covenant names are supplied by the " Halo 2 " Limited Edition and " Halo 3 " Limited Edition manuals and several novels . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 The majority of events in the story arc of the Halo series occur during the " Ninth Age of Reclamation . " The Covenant 's organization of time and dates is not elaborated on in detail in the game or during any of the novelizations ; Bungie cinematic director Joseph Staten , in an interview on Halo fansite <unk> , said that the Covenant 's date system is split into seven epochs , split into the following Ages : Abandonment , Conflict , Discovery , Reconciliation , Conversion , Doubt , and Reclamation . 
 The 2001 and 2007 novels Halo : The Fall of Reach and Halo : Contact Harvest describe humanity 's first contact with the Covenant in the year 2525 . In The Fall of Reach , a lone Covenant ship bombards the Harvest colony with plasma , turning the planet 's crust into molten glass . The lone ship , broadcasts the Covenant edict , " Your destruction is the will of the gods , and we are their instrument " , and destroys several United Nations Space Command ( UNSC ) ships sent to attack it . Contact Harvest describes a lengthy ground engagement between human militia and Covenant before the total assault on Harvest . The Covenant claim that humans are an offense to their gods , but in reality , three Covenant Prophets have learned from a relic left by their gods , the Forerunners , that humans , who may possibly be genetically related to the Forerunners , have been chosen by the Forerunners as their <unk> . Realizing such a revelation would splinter the Covenant , the newly crowned Hierarchs decide to obliterate the humans instead and declare that a new Age of the Covenant has begun . 
 The Covenant 's superior technology allow them to annihilate the outer human colonies within four years ; the Covenant begin to destroy the inner colonies soon thereafter . As a defensive measure , the UNSC creates the " Cole Protocol " ; human ships are prohibited from directly traveling to human worlds to avoid detection by the Covenant , and destruction of a ship 's navigation databases and artificial intelligence if threatened with capture . In 2552 , the Covenant track the UNSC ship Iroquois to the world of Reach , Earth 's most well @-@ defended colony , by a hidden transmitter . A massive Covenant fleet arrives at Reach and lays waste to much of the planet . 
 The Covenant 's first appearance in the video games is in Halo : Combat Evolved ( 2001 ) , which picks up towards the end of The Fall of Reach . A detachment of Covenant follow the human vessel Pillar of Autumn from Reach to Halo , a ring @-@ shaped Forerunner relic that the Covenant believe sacred . Wary of accidentally damaging the ring , the Covenant are forced to fight the humans on foot , and accidentally release the Flood . The Flood , a virulent parasite that infests sentient life , attack human and Covenant alike and threaten to capture a Covenant cruiser to escape their prison on Halo . Meanwhile , the human " Spartan " supersoldier Master Chief detonates the Pillar of Autumn 's engines , destroying the ring and the Covenant armada . The novelization of the game , Halo : The Flood ( 2003 ) , describes additional events not seen in the game . In the novel First Strike , The Master Chief , survivors of the Autumn and surviving Spartans from Reach destroy a Covenant fleet they learn is preparing to strike Earth , and race home to warn of the impending attack . 
 In the video game Halo 2 ( 2004 ) , a member of the Covenant Prophet triumvirate , Regret , arrives at Earth with a fleet . Most of his fleet is destroyed ; Regret 's ship flees to another ring , Delta Halo , and is followed by the human ship In Amber Clad and the Master Chief aboard her . The Chief kills Regret before the majority of the Covenant fleet arrives at Delta Halo , along with the Covenant 's holy city of High Charity . The death of Regret leads the remaining Prophets to promote the Brutes as their guards , replacing the Elites . The Elites , outraged , threaten to resign from the Covenant high council ; in turn the Prophets give the Brutes carte blanche to kill the Elites , sparking a civil war . In the midst of these developments , the Flood are again released ; the High Prophet Mercy is killed by the parasite , while the last remaining leader , Truth , flees to Earth in a Forerunner ship , entrusting the activation of Halo to the Brute Tartarus . The Elites ally with the humans of In Amber Clad to stop the firing of the ring , but inadvertently set all the remaining Halo rings to be remotely activated from a location known as the Ark , placed outside the range of the Halo Array to protect certain species from the firing of the Halo rings , built as a foundry for the rings including replacing any that get destroyed . 
 By the events of Halo 3 ( 2007 ) , the Flood intelligence known as the Gravemind infests and captures High Charity , while the Elites assist humans on Earth in defending themselves . Truth 's forces excavate a portal to the Ark , located outside the Milky Way . The Elites follow Truth , and the Covenant Arbiter , or holy warrior , kills Truth . After High Charity arrives at the Ark , the Arbiter and Master Chief decide to activate a partially built Halo ring ( the replacement for the ring that the Master Chief destroyed in the first game ) destroying the Flood and sparing the rest of the galaxy . The remaining humans and Elites escape back through the portal . The Human @-@ Covenant war ends in March 2553 , and the Arbiter leads his Elites back to their homeworld . 
 The Covenant were featured in Halo 4 ( 2012 ) , in the form of a rogue splinter group led by Sangheili Jul ' Mdama . This faction still follows the ideology of the old Covenant religion and seeks to find a powerful weapon on Requiem , the fictional planet on which the majority of Halo 4 is set . 
 The group also appears in Halo 5 : Guardians , although they are not the game 's main antagonists . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The reception of the Covenant as enemies in Combat Evolved was generally favorable . The ability to experience the storyline of Halo 2 from the Covenant perspective was described as a " brilliant stroke of game design " . Allowing the player to assume the role of an Elite was described as providing an unexpected plot twist , and allowing the player to experience a " newfound complexity to the story " . In addition , some reviewers thought that this provided the series with a significant plot element — IGN referred to it as the " intriguing side story of the Arbiter and his Elites " — and its elimination in Halo 3 was pointed to as responsible for reducing the role of the Arbiter within the series plot . In 2010 IGN ranked Covenant 26th in the " Top 100 Videogames Villains " . 
 = 1997 – 98 Tennessee Lady Volunteers basketball team = 
 The 1997 – 98 Tennessee Lady Volunteers basketball team , coached by Pat Summitt , is considered to be one of the greatest teams in the history of U.S. women 's college basketball , going 39 – 0 , and winning their third consecutive national championship , while playing one of the toughest schedules in the nation . The Lady Vols started off the season ranked number one in the nation , a ranking that would not change . ESPN called it one of the top ten moments in women 's sports of the 20th century . After the season , Summitt authored a book about the season , entitled " Raise the Roof " . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 The Lady Vols had just come off of a somewhat bittersweet season . While they had won the national championship , they had lost ten games , including two to rival Louisiana Tech . That team was the first Lady Vols team since 1991 that did not win either the SEC regular season or tournament championship . 
 However , the team did return several players , including All @-@ American Chamique Holdsclaw , and had a freshman class that was being called the greatest ever , which included Tamika Catchings , Semeka Randall , Teresa Geter , and Kristen Clement . Tamika Catchings won Miss Basketball titles in two states : Illinois , her sophomore year , and Texas , her senior year . Additionally , she led her high school to a state championship and a 40 – 0 season her senior year . She also performed a quintuple @-@ double in one of her games . Semeka Randall was also accomplished , named Parade 's Player of the Year her senior year , a two @-@ time Miss Basketball , as well as a two @-@ time state tournament MVP . Kristen " Ace " Clement came out of Pennsylvania , where she had broken Wilt Chamberlain 's scoring record in Philadelphia of 2 @,@ 205 with 2 @,@ 256 points . The record had stood for 40 years . The fourth freshman , Teresa Geter , was not as well @-@ known , but was considered to be the best player in South Carolina , and had been named Miss Basketball , just like the others . Chamique , Tamika , and Semeka would become known as " The Meeks " as the season progressed . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 = = = Mississippi = = = 
 After an exhibition rout of US Armed Forces , the Lady Vols opened up the season unusually , with a conference game against Mississippi . Semeka Randall did not start the game . However , four minutes into the game , the Lady Vols were only up 4 – 2 . At this point , Randall was put into the game , and Tennessee scored fifteen straight , on a run fueled by her . Randall scored 24 , and star Chamique Holdsclaw added 23 . This season opener has caused a lot of anticipation , as it was expected that this would be the game where all four of Tennessee 's freshman played together . However , during a November practice , Clement had injured her foot , resulting in a stress fracture . After a discussion with the team doctor , Clement agreed to sit out the Mississippi game in order to be able to play the next game , against Louisiana Tech . 
 = = = Louisiana Tech = = = 
 The Louisiana Tech Lady <unk> were ranked second in the country and was expected to challenge Tennessee for the national title . Tech returned all five of its starters from a team that had beaten the Vols twice the previous year . Tech came out on a 9 – 2 run , but led at the half by only a point . The teams played evenly for the beginning of the second half , before Louisiana Tech raised the lead to five with just over twelve minutes remaining . Summitt put her four freshman into the line @-@ up , which went on a 12 – 0 run , giving Tennessee a lead they would never relinquish . Holdsclaw finished with a double @-@ double ( 24 points , 11 rebounds ) , and Catchings contributed 17 points . Teresa Geter was a big contributor , as well , with five blocked shots . Clement was able to play the game , but it set her rehab back , and she would not play again for over a month . 
 = = = Tennessee @-@ Martin , Stanford , Portland , Texas , and the Big Apple Classic = = = 
 The next game was against Summitt 's alma mater , Tennessee @-@ Martin . Martin was naming their court after Summitt , and the game was just an excuse to attract a large number of people . Their meeting was not much of a game , as Tennessee won 73 – 32 . Summitt 's team followed this game with a 40 @-@ point rout of Vermont . The team next went on a road trip to the West Coast for their annual game against rival Stanford . Stanford lit up the court in the first half , sinking 57 percent of their shots , but it was not enough to keep the Lady Vols away . Down by one at the half , the Lady Vols played great defense in the second , allowing just five field goals and winning by 18 . Holdsclaw had 25 points , and Catchings had 20 . The Lady Vols next traveled to Portland , as part of Summitt 's yearly effort to play at least one game near the hometown of each player . This game was meant more as a homecoming for Laurie Milligan , instead of an actual challenge , and they cruised to a 74 – 51 victory . December opened up with a game against rival Texas , who shot out to a 47 – 32 lead at halftime , and went on to win by 34 , behind Catchings ' 26 points . Next up was the Big Apple Classic , a home trip for Holdsclaw . The Ladies rolled over both opponents , beating George Mason and Manhattan by 30 and 50 respectively . 
 = = = SEC / Big @-@ 10 Challenge = = = 
 The Vols then returned home for the SEC / Big @-@ 10 challenge . Florida lost by 10 to Purdue , and the Vols ' game was against the Illinois . The game featured an interesting match @-@ up as Catchings ' sister , <unk> , was a sophomore at Illinois at the time . Tennessee had a horrific start as they fell behind 41 – 19 . By halftime , the lead had been cut to 41 – 24 , despite only shooting 23 % . In the second half , Tennessee cut the lead slowly , through turnovers and defense , finally taking the lead with 9 : 25 remaining . The Vols ended the game with a ten @-@ point win . 
 = = = Northern Lights Invitational = = = 
 The next trip was up to Anchorage , for the Northern Lights Invitational , a three @-@ day , eight @-@ team tournament . The first game was an easy win against Akron , in which Summitt played her bench frequently . The semi @-@ final game , against Texas A & M , was not much more difficult . The Ladies won handily , 105 – 81 , leading by as much as 25 . Texas A & M 's 81 points would end up being the most a team would score on Tennessee that season . The championship game was against Wisconsin , a team ranked in the top 10 , but this ranking did not mean much , as the team ended 1997 with an 87 – 66 victory . The Meeks were named to the All @-@ Tournament team . 
 = = = Arkansas and UConn = = = 
 A rare New Year 's Day game was played against SEC foe Arkansas , who was ranked just inside the top 25 . Tennessee forced 26 turnovers , including 14 steals , en route to an 88 – 58 victory . This game was followed up with a home match with main rival UConn , who was ranked third in the nation . UConn led the series 4 – 3 , but the Lady Vols had won the last matchup , and the undefeated Huskies wanted revenge . Thompson @-@ Boling Arena seated nearly 25 @,@ 000 fans , an NCAA women 's record , and , as an experiment , the game was played in four quarters instead of two halves . The Lady Vols started off on a 10 – 0 run , but the lead was cut to 23 – 17 by the end of the first quarter . The second quarter saw Tennessee expand the lead , ending the quarter with a fourteen @-@ point lead . However , UConn did not want to go away , and went on a tear in the third quarter , as a 20 – 7 run cut the Lady Vols lead to one point , before the team responded , ending the quarter with seven unanswered points . The final quarter was all Tennessee , and the game ended in an 84 – 69 win . 
 = = = South Carolina and Florida = = = 
 The team started their SEC schedule back up with a trip to South Carolina . The Gamecocks were not much of an opponent , as the ladies more than doubled their points at the half ( 53 – 26 ) , and finished the game 94 – 52 . This game was followed up with another highly ranked opponent , the twelfth @-@ ranked Gators . Once again , the Vols ran a talented team into the ground , as they only allowed 18 first half points , ultimately winning by a score of 99 – 60 . 
 = = = Georgia , Kentucky , and DePaul = = = 
 Tennessee had a three @-@ game road trip up next , starting with the Bulldogs in Athens . Tennessee started the game strong , grabbing the lead , and finished the half on a 13 – 0 run . However , Georgia came back , cutting the lead down to nine with seven minutes remaining in the game . It was at this point that Semeka Randall scored thirteen points , sealing a 96 – 71 victory . This is the largest margin of victory in the Lady Bulldogs @-@ Lady Vols series . Tennessee had 19 steals in the game , while shooting over 50 % , and Holdsclaw and Catchings both scored over 20 . The next game , against Kentucky , also had Tennessee making a late first half run , giving them a 19 @-@ point lead at the break . This lead was never given up , as the Lady Vols won by twenty @-@ eight . The final game of the road trip was against DePaul , a good team who was , however , missing their two best players . Without these players , it was not much of a game , as Summitt 's team started the game with twenty @-@ one straight points and ended the game with a 125 – 46 victory , giving the team a 20 – 0 record . The team 's 125 points were the second most in the history of the program . 
 = = = Vanderbilt and Georgia = = = 
 The Lady Vols returned home and resumed their SEC schedule against in @-@ state foe Vanderbilt , who was ranked in the top 10 . Throughout the first half , the game was about even , until the Lady Vols got a slight lead with under seven minutes left , which they took to the locker room , 37 – 31 . The second half , however , started out much differently , beginning with a 20 – 0 Lady Vols run . Tennessee led by as many as 35 points in the game , and ended the game with an 86 – 54 win . Catchings was named the SEC Player of the Week for her role in the DePaul and Vanderbilt games , scoring 35 and 22 points respectively . The final game of the month was the rematch with Georgia . It ended up being a blowout . Tennessee shot better than 60 % , and Holdsclaw scored more points in the first half than the entire Georgia team . Tennessee broke the 20 @-@ steal mark , as well as the 100 @-@ point mark , winning 102 – 43 . 
 = = = Alabama , Old Dominion , and Mississippi State = = = 
 February began with another SEC match @-@ up , this time against unranked Alabama . Starter Kyra Elzy tore her ACL during the game ending her season , during this game , while going up for a rebound . Meanwhile , Alabama was keeping close to the Lady Vols , by slowing the game down . At half time , Tennessee only had a 13 @-@ point lead . The team never did shake off the Crimson Tide , but did manage to pull out the win , 73 – 66 . A trip to Ole Miss was next , and the team started off much better , score the first ten points of the game and having a 54 – 17 lead at halftime . Summitt let the bench play the rest of the game , ultimately winning 91 – 45 . This game was followed up by a non @-@ conference match against longtime rival Old Dominion , whom Tennessee had beaten in the previous year 's national championship . The game was even for fifteen minutes , but in the last five minutes of the half , Tennessee was able to build a twelve @-@ point lead . Holdsclaw took over the second half for the Lady Vols , scoring 24 points for an 85 – 61 victory , <unk> 's biggest loss in four years . This match was followed up with another conference game , this time against the Mississippi State Bulldogs . UT started out sloppily , and ended the half with only a nine @-@ point lead . However , once again the team came out strong to open the second half , raising their lead and eventually had double State 's points , with ten minutes remaining . The Bulldogs cut the lead to eleven , but then Summitt put Holdsclaw back in , scoring eight in a row , giving Tennessee another victory , 74 – 52 . 
 = = = Memphis , Auburn , Vanderbilt , and LSU = = = 
 After a two @-@ day rest , the Lady Vols resumed their season with three games in five days , starting with their final non @-@ conference opponent , Memphis , on the road . UT started strong , taking a 16 – 6 lead to open up the game , only to give it back up . Memphis delighted its home crowd by taking a 38 – 31 lead with two minutes to go in the half , but Tennessee rallied and took a two @-@ point lead to the locker room . Once again , Tennessee pulled away in the second half , 91 – 65 , behind three players who scored over twenty : Holdsclaw ( 31 ) , Randall ( 21 ) , and Catchings ( 20 ) . The next game was against Auburn , a program that is traditionally competitive within the conference . Once again , Summitt 's team started the game strong , leading 32 – 16 before Auburn woke up , cutting the lead to five by the half . However , the Tigers would not get any closer than this , as Holdsclaw 's 39 points helped Tennessee to yet another win , 79 – 63 . The final game of this stretch was the rematch with Vanderbilt , played on President 's Day in front of a sellout crowd at the Commodores ' quirky Memorial Gymnasium and a national television audience on ESPN . The Commodores started off strong , taking a 16 – 7 lead in front of their home crowd . However Tennessee responded with seventeen straight points to take the lead , and led by nine at the halftime . As in previous games , the Lady Vols made a big run to open up the second half to put the game out of reach . UT won 91 – 60 , with UT shooting over fifty percent yet again . The final game of the regular season came against LSU , a respectable SEC team which beat the Lady Vols the previous season in Baton Rouge , but still a few seasons away from becoming a national power . Tennessee played well on Senior Night , starting with a 32 – 8 lead that would never be given up . Tennessee completed the season with a 90 – 58 win , giving them a perfect 30 – 0 regular season . 
 = = SEC tournament = = 
 After their first round bye , Tennessee faced Mississippi State again . Instead of Tennessee starting quickly , however , the Bulldogs did , taking a 9 – 2 lead . At this point though , the Vols went on one of their runs , this time a 15 – 2 one . State did not recover from this , and Tennessee advanced to the semi @-@ finals , 88 – 60 . Catchings had a double @-@ double by halftime . In the semi @-@ finals , UT met Vanderbilt for the third time , with an even better performance than the previous two . Catchings again had a double @-@ double by halftime and the team shot 6 of 7 from beyond the three point line , as they advanced to the championship 106 – 45 . The SEC Championship was against Alabama , who had played within seven points of the Lady Vols in their previous match @-@ up . Alabama used the same , slow style they had previously employed , and at the break were only down by three . Tennessee was able to slowly up the lead to ten during the first ten minutes of the second period , eventually reaching a fourteen @-@ point lead , before Alabama started a comeback , cutting the lead to five with just over forty seconds remaining . Alabama was able to score the five points , but Tennessee made their foul shots , and won the title , 67 – 63 . After the game , Holdsclaw was named the tournament 's most outstanding player . UT was now 33 – 0 , with the NCAA tournament coming up next . 
 = = NCAA tournament = = 
 = = = Opening Games = = = 
 The Lady Vols were awarded the No. 1 seed in the Mideast Regional where their opponent was , oddly enough , also undefeated . The 28 – 0 Lady Flames of Liberty were the champions of the Big South conference , giving them a berth in the tournament as a No. 16 seed . The usual # 1- # 16 blowout occurred , with Tennessee winning 102 – 58 , although in another region this blowout did not occur : No. 16 seed Harvard upset injury @-@ depleted No. 1 seed Stanford 71 – 67 in the West regional . This is the only time that a 16 @-@ seed has beaten a 1 @-@ seed in the NCAA tournament — men 's or women 's . Holdsclaw led Tennessee with 22 points , although Liberty 's Sharon Wilkerson led all scorers with 26 . Four other Lady Vols reached double figures , and both Holdsclaw and Catchings had double @-@ doubles . 
 UT 's second round opponent was 8 @-@ seeded Western Kentucky , who had lost only by to one to Louisiana Tech in the Sun Belt Tournament , and had defeated Stephen F. Austin in the first round , 88 – 76 . Tennessee started slowly and Randall picked up two early fouls , resulting in Ace Clement taking her place in the lineup where she scored five quick points and helped the team to a twelve @-@ point halftime lead . Western Kentucky pulled to within six early on in the second half , only to follow their run up by going 0 for 6 on their next shots . However , the Hilltoppers pulled back within six a second time . Once again , their run was short lived , as it was followed up with a spree of turnovers . The Lady Vols took advantage of this drought , and went on to win 82 – 62 . Holdsclaw led all scorers with 34 and Catchings contributed 20 , while Le Johnson was Western Kentucky 's highest scorer , with 17 . 
 The Regional Finals were not all that far away from Knoxville – the Lady Vols only had to travel a couple of hours , to Nashville , where they faced 5th @-@ seeded Rutgers , 22 – 9 . Rutgers had survived two close games to reach this point , defeating 12th @-@ seeded Oregon , 79 – 76 , in the first round , and then upsetting 4th @-@ seeded Iowa State , 62 – 61 in the second . Their third round game was not quite so close . Although Rutgers only trailed by two towards the end of the first period , UT was able to outscore Rutgers by six to close it out , and opened the second half up by building the lead to sixteen . The Scarlet Knights never recovered , losing 92 – 60 . Holdsclaw and Catchings were again the leading scorers , with 25 and 23 . The Lady Vols shot 52 @.@ 2 % from the field and forced Rutgers to 27 turnovers . This game gave Tennessee their 36th win , breaking Connecticut 's record of 35 , as the Lady Vols advanced to the Regional Finals . 
 The Regional Championship matched Tennessee with the 2nd @-@ seeded Tar Heels , who were coming off of a 6 @-@ point victory over 3rd @-@ seeded Illinois . Summitt 's team started off with a 17 – 11 lead , only to falter and allow Carolina to tie it up at 21 . Tennessee responded with a 12 – 6 run to end the first , but Carolina answered by opening the second half with the first seven points , giving them a one @-@ point lead , 34 – 33 , and the first time an opponent had held a lead over Tennessee in over three months . Carolina slowly extended the lead as the game continued , until they were eventually leading 61 – 49 , at which point Summitt sent several players , including Holdsclaw ( who was on the bench due to a poor shooting performance ) back onto the floor . A minute later , Tennessee had cut the deficit to five , and by the five @-@ minute mark the game was tied again , at 62 . The teams traded baskets , tying the game at 64 and 66 , before Tennessee reached a 70 – 67 lead , with less than ninety seconds remaining . Carolina was soon forced to start fouling the Lady Vols , who made their free throws and advanced to the Final Four , 76 – 70 . Holdsclaw once again led all scorers , this time with 29 , and Semeka Randall had 20 . North Carolina was led by Wright and Reid , who had 21 and 20 . 
 = = = Final Four = = = 
 Tennessee 's first Final Four game was against SEC foe , Arkansas , the 9th @-@ seed out of the West Region . The Razorbacks had upset three different teams to reach the Final Four , Hawaiʻi , Kansas , and 2nd @-@ seeded Duke . Despite a poor first half shooting performance , the Vols led 39 – 28 halfway through the game . The second half saw the Lady Vols make over half their shots , propelling the team to the national championship with an 86 – 58 , the largest margin of victory in the Women 's National Semifinals history . 
 Louisiana Tech knocked off N.C. State in their semifinal match , 84 – 65 , making the national championship a match @-@ up between the two teams that started the season ranked first and second . The game was not close . Seven and a half minutes through the first half , the Lady Vols were up by fifteen , and by halftime the score was 55 – 32 . The 55 points was a record for most points in a half in a national championship game . Tech was not able to make a run until late in the second half , when they were able to cut the lead down to eighteen , only to see Kellie Jolly hit back @-@ to @-@ back three pointers . The final score was 93 to 75 . Three different Lady Vols scored twenty or more points : Holdsclaw ( 25 ) , Catchings ( 27 ) , and Jolly ( 20 ) . Holdsclaw , who was named the Final Four MVP , her second consecutive , also won her seventh straight title ( 3 NCAA , 4 State ) . After the game , Louisiana Tech head coach Leon <unk> proclaimed this Lady Vols squad to be the " best ever " , something Old Dominion Hall of Famer Nancy Lieberman has stated back in February . However , not everyone was positive , as ESPN analyst Mimi Griffin stated that Tennessee 's dominance was becoming a detriment to the women 's game . 
 The Lady Vols did not win another national championship until 2007 , defeating Rutgers in the championship game in Cleveland . Tennessee lost three times to Connecticut in championship games ( 2000 , 2003 , 2004 ) , but also suffered a humiliating loss to Xavier in the 2001 Sweet 16 , marking only the second time since the NCAA first sanctioned women 's basketball championships in 1982 the Lady Vols did not reach at least the Elite Eight . Connecticut would later match the Lady Vols ' 39 – 0 mark in 2002 , 2009 , and 2010 before Baylor eclipsed the record in 2012 and tied by UConn themselves in 2014 , as the only teams to win 40 straight games in a season . 
 = = Scores = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 = = Records = = 
 = = = NCAA records = = = 
 Most games played in a season ( individual ) – 39 ( tied : Chamique Holdsclaw , Teresa Geter , Tamika Catchings , Kellie Jolly , <unk> Stephens ( All 1997 – 98 Tennessee ) ) 
 Most points in a season ( team ) – 3 @,@ 464 
 Most free throw attempts in a season ( team ) – 1 @,@ 110 
 Most victories in a season – 39 ( tied : UConn , 2001 – 02 ) 
 Most games played in a season ( team ) – 39 ( tied : UConn , 2001 – 02 ) 
 Most field goals in an NCAA tournament ( player ) – 64 ( Chamique Holdsclaw ) 
 Most field goals attempted in an NCAA tournament ( player ) – 131 ( Chamique Holdsclaw ) 
 = = = SEC records = = = 
 Most points in a season ( team ) – 3 @,@ 464 
 Most free throw attempts in a season ( team ) – 1 @,@ 110 
 Most free throws made in a season ( team ) – 782 
 Most blocks in a season ( team ) – 238 
 = = = School records = = = 
 Most free throws made in a season ( player ) – 166 ( Chamique Holdsclaw ) 
 Most blocks in a season ( player ) – 93 ( Teresa Geter ) 
 Most points in a season ( team ) – 3 @,@ 464 
 Most free throw attempts in a season ( team ) – 1 @,@ 110 
 Most free throws made in a season ( team ) – 782 
 Most blocks in a season ( team ) – 238 
 Most wins in a season – 39 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = Team players drafted into the WNBA = = 
 = 2013 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 2013 Atlantic hurricane season was a well below average Atlantic hurricane season and the first since 1994 with no major hurricanes , and the first since 1968 with no storms of at least Category 2 intensity on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The first tropical cyclone of this hurricane season , Andrea , developed on June 5 , while the final cyclone , an unnamed subtropical storm , dissipated on December 7 . Throughout the year , only two storms – Humberto and Ingrid – reached hurricane intensity ; this was the lowest seasonal total since 1982 . 
 The season 's impact was minimal ; although 15 tropical cyclones developed , most were weak or remained at sea . Tropical Storm Andrea killed four people after making landfall in Florida and moving up the East Coast of the United States . In early July , Tropical Storm Chantal moved through the Leeward Islands , causing one fatality , but minimal damage overall . Tropical storms Dorian and Erin and Hurricane Humberto brought only squally weather to the Cape Verde Islands . Mexico , where Hurricane Ingrid , Tropical Depression Eight , and tropical storms Barry and Fernand all made landfall , was the hardest hit ; Ingrid alone caused at least 32 deaths and $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( 2013 USD ) in damage . In early October , Karen brought showers and gusty winds to the central Gulf Coast of the United States . 
 All major forecasting agencies predicted an above @-@ average season . All reduced their seasonal predictions in early August , but even the revised predictions were too high . The lack of activity was primarily caused by an unexpected significant weakening of the Atlantic Ocean thermohaline circulation between winter and spring . This resulted in continuation of the spring weather pattern over the Atlantic Ocean , with strong vertical wind shear , mid @-@ level moisture , and atmospheric stability , which suppressed tropical cyclogenesis . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts = = 
 In advance of , and during , each hurricane season , several forecasts of hurricane activity are issued by national meteorological services , scientific agencies , and noted hurricane experts . These include forecasters from the United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) ' s National Hurricane and Climate Prediction Center , Tropical Storm Risk , the United Kingdom 's Met Office , and Philip J. Klotzbach , William M. Gray and their associates at Colorado State University ( CSU ) . The forecasts include weekly and monthly changes in significant factors that help determine the number of tropical storms , hurricanes , and major hurricanes within a particular year . According to NOAA and CSU , the average Atlantic hurricane season between 1981 and 2010 contained roughly 12 tropical storms , six hurricanes , three major hurricanes , and an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) index of 66 – 103 units . NOAA typically categorizes a season as either above @-@ average , average , or below @-@ average based on the cumulative ACE Index , but the number of tropical storms , hurricanes , and major hurricanes within a hurricane season are considered occasionally as well . 
 = = = Pre @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 Multiple agencies predicted above average activity , citing forecasts for slower @-@ than @-@ average trade winds , warmer @-@ than @-@ normal sea surface temperatures , abnormally low wind shear , and the unlikelihood of an El Niño developing prior to the peak of the season . On December 5 , 2012 , Tropical Storm Risk ( TSR ) , a public consortium consisting of experts on insurance , risk management , and seasonal climate forecasting at University College London , issued an extended @-@ range forecast . In its report , the organization called for 15 @.@ 4 ( ± 4 @.@ 3 ) named storms , 7 @.@ 7 ( ± 2 @.@ 9 ) hurricanes , 3 @.@ 4 ( ± 1 @.@ 6 ) major hurricanes , and a cumulative Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) index of 134 . While no value was placed on the number of expected landfalls during the season , TSR stated that the landfalling ACE index was expected to be above average . Four months later , on April 5 , Tropical Storm Risk issued its updated forecast , continuing to call for an above @-@ average season with 15 @.@ 2 ( ± 4 @.@ 1 ) named storms , 7 @.@ 5 ( ± 2 @.@ 8 ) hurricanes , 3 @.@ 4 ( ± 1 @.@ 6 ) major hurricanes , and an ACE index of 131 ; the landfalling ACE index was once again forecast to be higher than normal . 
 Meanwhile , on April 8 , Weather Services International ( WSI ) issued its first forecast for the hurricane season . In its report , the organization forecast 16 named storms , nine hurricanes , and five major hurricanes . On April 10 , Colorado State University ( CSU ) issued its first forecast for the season , calling for a potentially hyperactive season with 18 named storms , nine hurricanes , four major hurricanes , and an ACE index of 165 . The probabilities of a major hurricane hitting the Gulf Coast and East Coast were well above average . On May 15 , the United Kingdom Met Office ( UKMO ) predicted 14 named storms , with a 70 % chance that the number would be between 10 and 18 , and nine hurricanes with a 70 % chance that the number would be between 4 and 14 . It also predicted an ACE index of 130 with a 70 % chance that the index would be in the range 76 to 184 . On May 23 , 2013 , NOAA issued its first seasonal outlook for the year , stating there was a 70 % likelihood of 13 to 20 named storms , of which seven to eleven could become hurricanes , including three to six major hurricanes ; these ranges are greater than the seasonal average of twelve named storms , six hurricanes and three major hurricanes . On May 30 , the Florida State University Center for Ocean @-@ Atmospheric Prediction Studies , FSU COAPS , issued its first and only prediction for the season . The organization called for 12 to 17 named storms , of which five to ten would further intensify into hurricanes ; no forecast was given for the number of major hurricanes . In addition , an ACE index of 135 units was forecast . 
 = = = Mid @-@ season outlooks = = = 
 In June , predictions from CSU and TSR were similar to pre @-@ season forecasts due to the a lack of an El Niño and warmer @-@ than @-@ average sea surface temperatures across the Atlantic Ocean . However , by July and August , CSU and TSR all adjusted their forecasts downward because of predictions of cooler @-@ than @-@ average sea surface temperatures and above @-@ average wind shear . NOAA also decreased the amount of activity in its final outlook , despite predicting a wetter @-@ than @-@ average western Africa and above @-@ average sea surface temperatures in its report . On June 3 , CSU issued its first mid @-@ season prediction for the remainder of the year . In its report , the organization continued to predict well above @-@ average activity , with eighteen named storms , nine hurricanes , four major hurricanes , and an ACE index of 165 units . CSU stated that there was a 72 % chance of at least one major hurricane impacting any stretch of the United States coastline ; the chances of a major hurricane hitting the East Coast and Gulf Coast were 48 % and 47 % , respectively . The following day , Tropical Storm Risk issued its third forecast for the 2013 Atlantic hurricane season , calling for sixteen named storms , eight hurricanes , four major hurricanes , and an ACE of 134 units ; this activity was predicted to be roughly 30 % above the 1950 – 2012 long @-@ term mean . TSR gave a 65 % probability that the landfalling ACE index would be above @-@ average . A month later , TSR lowered its numbers to 15 named storms , seven hurricanes , and three major hurricanes . On August 2 , Colorado State University issued another update for the season , lowering its numbers slightly . However , the organization continued to state that there was an above @-@ average probability of a United States and Caribbean major hurricane landfall . Finally , on August 8 , NOAA issued its second and final outlook for the season , predicting 13 to 19 named storms , six to nine hurricanes , and three to five major hurricanes ; these numbers were down slightly from its May outlook . 
 = = = Post @-@ season review = = = 
 With 13 tropical storms , two hurricanes , and no major hurricanes , activity fell far below the predictions . Brian <unk> at the University of Miami noted several reasons why NOAA should not cease seasonal predictions , including the variability of hurricane seasons and the value of supplementing climatology with seasonal forecasts . Further , <unk> argued that forecasting a hurricane season " challenges us to better understand how the atmosphere works . " On November 29 , Dr. Phil Klotzbach of CSU noted that " [ Dr. Gray and I ] have been doing these forecasts for 30 years and that 's probably the biggest forecast bust that we 've had . " The program , which had already lost contributions from an insurance company in June , was defunded further following the botched season forecasts . However , Gray and Klotzbach were able to issue predictions for the 2014 season . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 2013 . It was a below average season in which 14 tropical cyclones and one subtropical cyclone formed . Thirteen of the fifteen designated cyclones attained tropical storm status . However , only two of those became hurricanes , the fewest since 1982 . Thus , this was a mainly quiet season . None intensified into major hurricanes , for the first time since 1994 . By default , 2013 extended the period without major hurricane landfalls in the United States to eight years , with the last such system being Hurricane Wilma in 2005 . Further , no hurricane exceeded Category 1 intensity , for the first time since 1968 . Throughout the season , NOAA and the United States Air Force Reserve flew a total of 45 reconnaissance missions over the Atlantic basin , totaling 435 hours ; this was the lowest number of flight hours since at least 1966 . One hurricane and three tropical storms made landfall during the season and caused 47 deaths and about $ 1 @.@ 51 billion in damage . Tropical Storm Chantal also caused losses and fatalities , though it did not strike land . The last storm of the season dissipated on December 7 , a week after the official end of hurricane season on November 30 , 2013 . 
 Activity was primarily suppressed by significant weakening of the Atlantic Ocean thermohaline circulation ( THC ) early in the year , representing the largest reduction in strength of the THC since NCEP / NCAR Reanalysis began . The weakening of the THC was possibly the result of lowered ocean salinity and a decrease in North Atlantic Deep Water formation . Oceanic and atmospheric gyres were able to strengthen in the subtropical Atlantic , allowing southward advection of cold air and water . Consequently , there was a significant cooling of sea surface temperatures over portions of the north Atlantic . This resulted in a continuation of the spring weather pattern over the Atlantic Ocean , with strong vertical wind shear , mid @-@ level moisture , and atmospheric stability . The weak THC resulted in slightly stronger low @-@ level trade winds , an increase in upper @-@ level zonal winds and vertical wind shear , higher environmental air pressures and less low @-@ level mass wind convergence and rainfall in the Intertropical Convergence Zone , and reduced middle @-@ level moisture . Collectively , these factors worked to suppress tropical cyclogenesis . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began in early June , with the development of Tropical Storm Andrea in the Gulf of Mexico on June 5 . Twelve days later , Tropical Storm Barry formed in the northwestward Caribbean Sea . Two named storms originated in the month of July – tropical storms Chantal and Dorian . Similarly , there were two tropical storms in August , Erin and Fernand . In September , four tropical cyclones formed , three of which strengthened into tropical storms ; two of those reached hurricane status . The most intense tropical cyclone – Hurricane Humberto – peaked with maximum sustained winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) on September 11 , which is a Category 1 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The other hurricane , Ingrid , was the most devastating storm of the season and peaked at slightly less intensity . Activity began to slow in October , with the development of only two tropical storms , Karen and Lorenzo . Tropical cyclogenesis then halted for almost a month , until Tropical Storm Melissa formed over the eastern Atlantic Ocean on November 18 . This was the only tropical cyclone in the month of November . The final system was an unnamed subtropical storm that developed south of the Azores on December 5 . After meandering for two days , it degenerated into a remnant low @-@ pressure area on December 7 . 
 = = = Accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) = = = 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 36 , which was well below the 1981 – 2010 median of 92 , and the lowest value since 1994 . Broadly speaking , ACE is a measure of the power of a tropical or subtropical storm multiplied by the length of time it existed . Therefore , a storm with a longer duration , such as Humberto , will have high values of ACE . It is only calculated for full advisories on specific tropical and subtropical systems reaching or exceeding wind speeds of 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) . Accordingly , tropical depressions are not included here . After the storm has dissipated , typically after the end of the season , the NHC reexamines the data , and produces a final report on each storm . These revisions can lead to a revised ACE total either upward or downward compared to the operational value . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Andrea = = = 
 An area of low pressure in the eastern Gulf of Mexico developed into Tropical Storm Andrea on June 5 . Despite strong wind shear and an abundance of dry air , the storm strengthened while initially heading north @-@ northeastward , before turning northeastward later that day . Andrea intensified and peaked as a strong tropical storm with winds at 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) on June 6 . A few hours later , the storm weakened slightly and made landfall near Steinhatchee , Florida . It began losing tropical characteristics while tracking across Florida and Georgia . Andrea transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over South Carolina on June 7 , though the remnants continued to move along the East Coast of the United States until being absorbed by another extratropical system off Maine on June 10 . 
 The precursor to Andrea dropped nearly 12 in ( 300 mm ) of rainfall on the Yucatán Peninsula . In Cuba , the storm brought flooding , with over 1 @,@ 000 people fleeing their homes , mainly along the Cuyaguateje River in Pinar del Río Province . In the area , five tornadoes were spawned , one of which damaged three homes . In Florida , the storm brought heavy rainfall to some areas , causing localized flooding . There were 10 tornadoes , the worst of which touched down in The Acreage . The twister downed power lines and trees , causing significant roof damage to several houses ; there was also one injury . A surfer went missing in South Carolina and was presumed to have drowned . The remnants of Andrea spawned one tornado in North Carolina , though damage was minor . Additionally , flooding was reported in some areas of the Northeastern United States . Three fatalities occurred due to weather @-@ related traffic accidents in Virginia and New Jersey . The remnants of Andrea brought gusty winds to Atlantic Canada , causing thousands of power outages in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Barry = = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on June 8 . The system moved westward and an area of low pressure developed over the southwestern Caribbean Sea on June 16 . The low then moved across Honduras , where heavy rainfall triggered flooding that damaged 60 homes and affected 300 people . The low later re @-@ emerged into the Caribbean Sea and developed into a tropical depression at 12 : 00 UTC on June 17 , while situated 60 mi ( 95 km ) east of Monkey River Town . About 10 hours later , it made landfall near Big Creek , Belize . In that country , an estimated 10 in ( 250 mm ) of rain fell in 24 hours , causing several rivers to overflow their banks . In some areas , culverts were washed away . At least 54 people living along Hope Creek were relocated to shelters . In El Salvador , flooding and lightning caused one fatality each . 
 Despite decreasing wind speeds as the storm crossed land , the circulation became better @-@ defined . Early on June 19 , the depression emerged into the Bay of Campeche and began strengthening due to warm sea surface temperatures . Around 12 : 00 UTC , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Barry . After about 12 hours , Barry attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 003 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . At 11 : 15 UTC on June 20 , Barry made landfall near Veracruz at the same intensity . The storm rapidly weakened and degenerated into a remnant low early on June 21 . In the Mexican state of Yucatán , wind gusts up to 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) and heavy rains downed trees and power lines . More than 26 @,@ 000 residents temporarily lost power after lightning struck a nearby power station , leading to a fire . Four deaths were reported in Mexico due to drowning . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Chantal = = = 
 A large tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on July 4 . The system moved rapidly westward under the influence of a subtropical ridge . Scatterometer passes indicating a closed circulation confirmed that Tropical Storm Chantal had developed by 12 : 00 UTC on July 7 , while located about 1 @,@ 250 mi ( 2 @,@ 010 km ) east @-@ southeast of Barbados . Chantal continued to move swiftly west @-@ northwestward and was one of the fastest moving tropical cyclones in the deep tropics during the satellite era . While approaching the Lesser Antilles , it became disorganized due to wind shear , but at 12 : 00 UTC on July 9 , Chantal peaked with sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , it crossed through the Lesser Antilles and continued weakening in the Caribbean Sea . By late on July 10 , Chantal diminished into a tropical wave while located south of Hispaniola . 
 The storm brought heavy rainfall to the Lesser Antilles . In Dominica , several mudslides were reported . Wind gusts up to 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) were observed on the island , de @-@ roofing houses and causing power outages . Strong winds were reported on Martinique , with gusts up to 76 mph ( 122 km / h ) observed in Fort @-@ de @-@ France . Trees were knocked onto roads and power lines , leaving about 33 @,@ 000 homes without electricity . Elsewhere , damage reported in the Lesser Antilles was minimal , and there were no casualties . Although sustained winds in Puerto Rico remained below tropical storm force , a weather station at Las <unk> in Guayama observed a wind gust of 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) late on July 9 . Winds toppled trees and power lines , blocking several roads . In Hispaniola , heavy rains caused flooding over portions of the island , but the fast @-@ moving nature of the system precluded a more severe flooding event . In the Dominican Republic , a firefighter from the community of <unk> was killed as he was swept away by flood waters while attempting to clear a clogged storm drain . Chantal 's remnant moisture interacted with a surface boundary over northeastern Florida , contributing to widespread thunderstorms that produced locally heavy rainfall and gusty winds . Overall , the storm caused less than $ 10 million in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dorian = = = 
 Early on July 22 , a tropical wave and associated low @-@ pressure area emerged off the western coast of Africa . Based on satellite data , the wave was upgraded to a tropical depression at 18 : 00 UTC on July 23 while located about 175 mi ( 280 km ) south of the Cape Verde Islands , and further intensified into Tropical Storm Dorian by 06 : 00 UTC the following day . The storm tracked swiftly west @-@ northwest over warm ocean temperatures and within an environment of low wind shear initially , allowing it to attain peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) by July 25 . However , the entrainment of drier mid @-@ level air and cooler ocean waters caused a weakening trend . 
 Late July 27 , a closed low @-@ level circulation ceased to exist and Dorian degenerated into an open trough . The remnants continued west @-@ northwest until August 1 , at which time the disturbance reached the western extend of a ridge and curved northward . Despite continued unfavorable wind shear , a broad area of low pressure formed off the east coast of Florida and became increasingly better defined . The convection gained enough organization for the system to be re @-@ designated as a tropical depression by 18 : 00 UTC on August 2 . However , strong northerly winds caused the depression to deteriorate into a remnant low about 24 hours later , southeast of Charleston , South Carolina . On August 4 , the remnant low was absorbed into a trough off North Carolina . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Erin = = = 
 A tropical wave , accompanied by a misshapen center of surface low pressure and a large area of disorganized showers and thunderstorms , emerged from the west coast of Africa on August 15 . The wave moved west @-@ northwestward along the southern periphery of a ridge to its north . The system quickly organized and its circulation became more defined , warranting its classification as a tropical depression early on August 15 . At the time , the depression was situated about 70 mi ( 110 km ) south of Praia , Cape Verde , prompting the issuance of tropical storm warnings for the southernmost islands . Deep convection continued to develop over the center and the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Erin six hours after its initial designation . However , dry air quickly became entrained into the circulation and convection waned . 
 Operationally ( in real @-@ time ) , Erin was briefly downgraded to a tropical depression on August 16 , though post @-@ storm analysis indicated it retained tropical storm intensity that day . Early on August 17 , the ship British Cygnet measured 44 mph ( 71 km / h ) winds in relation to the cyclone ; around this time , it was estimated that Erin attained its peak intensity with sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 006 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 71 inHg ) . A temporary northwesterly turn occurred around this time as the storm moved through a weakness in the ridge . Later on August 17 , increasing wind shear took its toll on Erin and convection became displaced from the center . The following day , Erin degenerated into a remnant low about halfway between the Lesser Antilles and the west coast of Africa . The remnants proceeded westward on the low @-@ level trade winds before opening up into a trough early on August 20 , and ultimately dissipated several days later . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fernand = = = 
 On August 10 , a tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa . Another tropical wave , which spawned Tropical Storm Erin , emerged into the Atlantic on August 13 . The waves moved westward and merged into a single area of disturbed weather east of the Lesser Antilles . Further development did not occur until it crossed the Caribbean Sea and reached the Bay of Campeche on August 25 . A tropical depression formed around 12 : 00 UTC that day , about 40 mi ( 64 km ) north @-@ northeast of Coatzacoalcos , Veracruz . Six hours later , the depression deepened into Tropical Storm Fernand . Early on August 26 , Fernand peaked with sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . At 04 : 45 UTC , the storm made landfall near <unk> , Veracruz , at the same intensity . Fernand weakened to a tropical depression later on August 26 , hours before dissipating . 
 On August 25 , a tropical storm warning was posted for the Gulf Coast of Mexico from Veracruz northward to Tampico . Warnings were canceled north of Barra de Nautla , Veracruz early on August 26 , and discontinued entirely after Fernand weakened to a tropical depression . The Mexican Navy helped people in Veracruz evacuate their homes efficiently . Classes at all levels of education in the state were closed during the storm 's passage . Impact from the storm in Mexico was most severe in Veracruz , where 13 people were killed by landslides : nine in <unk> , three in Tuxpan , and one in <unk> . In the city of Veracruz , heavy rainfall flooded roads , while downed trees caused power outages . In Boca del Río , flooding stranded people at a shopping plaza . Damage was reported in 19 municipalities , mostly in northern and central Veracruz . The storm damaged 457 homes and caused 4 rivers to overflow . In Oaxaca , a man died after being swept away by a swollen river . After the storm , Veracruz governor Javier Duarte declared a state of emergency for 92 municipalities , which allowed farmers who sustained damage to receive aid . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Gabrielle = = = 
 In late August , a tropical wave accompanied by a broad area of low pressure exited the west coast of Africa . While the wave was south of Puerto Rico , another tropical wave reached the system and enhanced deep convection . Late on September 4 , a tropical depression developed about 115 mi ( 185 km ) south @-@ southeast of Puerto Rico . Operationally , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Gabrielle early on September 5 . However , in post @-@ analysis , it was determined that Gabrielle was never a tropical storm in the Caribbean . The depression moved west @-@ northwestward and lost its closed circulation near the eastern tip of Hispaniola late on September 5 . During a 48 @-@ hour period , the disturbance brought 6 to 8 in ( 150 to 200 mm ) of rain to some areas of Puerto Rico . A mudslide detached part of a small bridge on Highway 184 . On Saint Croix , minor street flooding was reported , and several trees were downed . 
 The remnant system was monitored for regeneration . By September 9 , wind shear began decreasing and the system re @-@ developed into a tropical depression early on September 10 . Six hours later , the depression moved northward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Gabrielle . By 12 : 00 UTC on September 10 , it peaked with maximum sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 003 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . The storm passed about 25 mi ( 40 km ) east of Hamilton , Bermuda early on September 11 . Strong winds on the island downed trees branches , caused minor infrastructural damage , and left minor power outages . After marked oscillations in intensity on September 12 , Gabrielle finally succumbed to wind shear midway between Bermuda and Cape Cod . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eight = = = 
 The eighth tropical depression of the season originated from a tropical wave that crossed the western coast of Africa on August 23 . Tracking westward , the wave reached the Caribbean Sea and became increasingly ill @-@ defined while in the central Caribbean . An increase in convection was observed on September 1 and the subsequent day as the wave entered the western Caribbean . After moving into the Bay of Campeche , a broad low @-@ pressure area formed in association with the system on September 5 . An increase in deep convection on September 6 led to the formation of a tropical depression by 12 : 00 UTC , located approximately 30 mi ( 50 km ) east @-@ northeast of Tampico , Mexico . The cyclone then moved west @-@ southwest under the influence of an anticyclone . 
 Around 18 : 00 UTC on September 6 , the depression made landfall near Tampico . Once inland , the depression quickly diminished to a remnant low by 06 : 00 UTC on September 7 . It dissipated six hours later . Heavy rains across Tamaulipas and Veracruz triggered flooding in areas that had been affected by Tropical Storm Fernand just two weeks prior . The most significant effects were in Veracruz where hundreds of homes were inundated . Record @-@ breaking rains in Mexico City , falling at rates of 3 @.@ 3 in ( 84 mm ) per hour , caused significant flooding . Many streets were inundated , paralyzing traffic and prompting water rescues . An estimated 20 @,@ 000 homes were damaged by the floods and officials opened four shelters in the area . 
 = = = Hurricane Humberto = = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on September 7 and spawned a low pressure area by the following day . At 18 : 00 UTC on September 8 , a tropical depression developed about 225 mi ( 360 km ) west @-@ southwest of Dakar , Senegal . The depression moved steadily westward and intensified into Tropical Storm Humberto early on September 9 . Despite moderate wind shear , Humberto continued to strengthen while passing south of Cape Verde , due to a moist atmosphere and warm ocean temperatures . The storm brought squalls to Cape Verde . The southwestern islands experienced wind gusts exceeding 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) which downed several trees . Heavy rains in many areas triggered flooding that washed out roads and damaged homes . Offshore , the freighter Rotterdam went missing with a crew of six amid 10 to 16 ft ( 3 to 5 m ) swells . The vessel eventually reached São Tomé and Príncipe , though that country 's port institute and coast guard denied her entrance . Later on September 10 , the storm 's deepening briefly halted as it curved northwest in response to a developing mid @-@ level trough over the central Atlantic . 
 At 12 : 00 UTC on September 11 , Humberto reached hurricane status while turning northward . About six hours later , it peaked with sustained winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . By late on September 12 , increasing wind shear , cooling sea surface temperatures , and a more stable atmosphere led to a weakening trend of the storm . Around 12 : 00 UTC on the next day , Humberto fell to tropical storm intensity , while curving west @-@ northwestward in the low @-@ level flow south of the Azores surface high pressure . Early on September 14 , the storm degenerated into a remnant low . However , deep convection began re @-@ developing later that day . At 00 : 00 UTC on September 15 , Humberto regenerated into a tropical storm about 1 @,@ 095 mi ( 1 @,@ 760 km ) southwest of Ponta Delgada , Azores . An approaching mid- to upper @-@ level cyclone began to capture Humberto , causing the storm to decelerate between late on September 16 and early on September 17 . When Humberto 's low @-@ level circulation became vertically stacked under the non @-@ tropical cyclone , the system transitioned into a subtropical storm on September 17 . Humberto then weakened to a subtropical depression early the next day , about 1 @,@ 120 mi ( 1 @,@ 800 km ) south of Ponta Delgada . The subtropical depression continued north @-@ northwestward until degenerating into an open trough , and was soon absorbed by a cold front . 
 = = = Hurricane Ingrid = = = 
 A tropical wave spawned an area of low pressure in the Bay of Campeche early on September 12 . Several hours later , it matured into a tropical depression about 170 mi ( 280 km ) east @-@ southeast of the city of Veracruz . Initially , the depression moved slowly due to weak steering currents . Around midday on September 13 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Ingrid . After initially moving westward toward Veracruz , the storm turned northeastward away from the coast . Favorable conditions allowed it to attain hurricane status on September 14 , and the next day Ingrid attained peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Subsequently , heightened wind shear eroded the storm 's convection . Caught between a trough over eastern Mexico and a ridge over the Southeastern United States , the storm turned sharply northwestward and later to the west . On September 16 , Ingrid made landfall just south of La Pesca , Tamaulipas in northeastern Mexico as a strong tropical storm . Early on September 17 , the storm weakened to a tropical depression , shortly before degenerating into an area of low pressure . 
 Ingrid struck shortly after Hurricane Manuel on Mexico 's Pacific coast , creating the first instance of two landfalling tropical cyclones in the nation within the same 24 @-@ hour period since 1958 . The combined impacts of hurricanes Ingrid and Manuel affected two @-@ thirds of Mexico , killing 192 people and causing $ 75 billion pesos ( MXN , $ 5 @.@ 7 billion USD ) in damage . Most of the destruction has been attributed to Manuel , but Ingrid was directly responsible for at least 23 deaths and $ 20 billion pesos ( MXN , $ 1 @.@ 5 billion USD ) in losses . The two storms produced approximately 5 @.@ 7 trillion cu ft ( 160 billion m3 ) of rainwater , equivalent to the combined volume of every reservoir in Mexico . Rainfall from the storm peaked at 20 @.@ 1 inches ( 511 mm ) in Tuxpan , Veracruz . The rains caused widespread flooding that damaged at least 14 @,@ 000 houses and hundreds of roads and bridges . In Tamaulipas , where the storm made landfall , the rainfall damaged crops and flooded rivers . The effects of the storm spread into southern Texas , causing high tides and some flooding . After Ingrid 's onslaught , the Mexican government declared states of emergency in several municipalities . Relief agencies distributed food and other aid to the hardest hit areas , though in Tamaulipas , residents had to rely on assistance from the local Gulf Cartel . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Jerry = = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on September 24 . Interaction with a mid- to upper @-@ level low pressure forced the wave to split , with the southern portion spawning Tropical Storm Octave in the eastern Pacific Ocean on October 12 . As evidenced by scatterometer wind data , the northern portion moved north @-@ northwestward and transitioned into a low pressure area early on September 28 . After convection gradually became better organized , a tropical depression developed early on September 29 , about 910 mi ( 1 @,@ 460 km ) east @-@ northeast of the Leeward Islands . The depression moved northeastward and initially struggled to intensify due to the presence of dry mid @-@ level air . 
 However , early on September 30 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Jerry while curving eastward . Shortly thereafter , vigorous deep convection developed , allowing the storm to deepen further . At 00 : 00 UTC on October 1 , Jerry attained its peak intensity with sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 005 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . However , strong wind shear soon weakened Jerry . Later on October 1 , a blocking high pressure ridge briefly impeded the storm 's northeastward motion , but it resumed moving in that direction by the following day . After losing all deep convection late on October 3 , Jerry became extratropical at about 770 mi ( 1 @,@ 240 km ) southwest of the central Azores . The remnants persisted for a few days , until being absorbed by a larger extratropical low on October 6 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Karen = = = 
 On September 16 , a tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa . Minimal tropical cyclogenesis occurred until the wave reached the western Caribbean Sea on September 27 . Around that time , the wave encountered an upper @-@ level trough , generating deep convection over the region . On September 28 , a broad area of low pressure formed southeast of Jamaica . Based on surface observations , it is estimated that Tropical Storm Karen developed near the northeastern tip of the Yucatán Peninsula early on October 3 . Despite a deteriorating cloud pattern , Karen deepened and peaked with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) later that day . Wind shear and dry air caused the storm to weaken beginning early on October 4 . Throughout the day , only sporadic bursts of deep convection occurred . The storm moved northwestward at inconsistent forward speeds around a low- to mid @-@ level ridge . Early on October 6 , Karen weakened to a tropical depression , and several hours later disintegrated into an open trough off the coast of Louisiana , and was further absorbed into a much larger storm complex that was producing blizzard conditions and a tornado outbreak at the time . 
 Since the beginning of reconnaissance flights in 1943 , Karen was one of few named storms to dissipate in the Gulf of Mexico without making landfall . While the storm was threatening the Gulf Coast of the United States , the NHC issued several tropical cyclone warnings and watches as Karen approached . Additionally , states of emergency were issued in portions of Alabama , Louisiana , Mississippi , and Florida . The mayor of the town of Grand Isle , Louisiana evacuated the island on October 4 , while residents were also ordered to flee Lafourche and Plaquemines parishes . The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) and the United States Department of the Interior called back workers , furloughed because of the government shutdown , to assist state and local agencies . Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal authorized the mobilization of the state 's National Guard members to active duty . 
 Abnormally high tides were reported along the coast of Louisiana . At Grand Isle , tar balls from the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010 were washed ashore . In Texas , the storm brought minor coastal flooding to Brazoria County . Additionally , the moisture associated with the remnants of Karen was absorbed into a frontal system and caused minor flooding in a few states , including Delaware , Georgia , New Jersey , and Pennsylvania . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Lorenzo = = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa and entered the Atlantic on October 11 . Four days later , a mid- to upper @-@ level trough increased convection along the northern portion of the wave . The southern portion of the wave continued westward , while the northern portion moved slowly west @-@ northwestward and developed into a surface trough . Eventually , the system transitioned into a broad surface low . Despite southwesterly vertical shear , deep convection began to increase by late on October 20 . After becoming better defined , the system developed into a tropical depression at 06 : 00 UTC on October 21 while located about 620 mi ( 1 @,@ 000 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . Six hours later , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Lorenzo . 
 On October 21 , the storm moved north @-@ northeastward around the northwestern periphery of a mid @-@ level ridge . Lorenzo strengthened further and peaked with sustained winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mbar ( 30 inHg ) at 12 : 00 UTC on October 22 . Around that time , satellite imagery indicated increased banding and an eye @-@ like feature . The cyclone then turned eastward in weak westerly low- to mid @-@ level flow . Early on October 23 , strong wind shear began impacting Lorenzo , causing the circulation to become exposed to deep convection . At 00 : 00 UTC on the following day , Lorenzo weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated into a remnant low 12 hours later . The low persisted for a few days , until it degenerated into an open trough on October 26 . The remnants of Lorenzo fueled the St. Jude storm , which struck northern Europe with hurricane @-@ force winds on October 27 and October 28 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Melissa = = = 
 Early on November 17 , an extratropical low developed along a stationary front over the central Atlantic . It moved northward and became co @-@ located with an upper @-@ level low . After the fronts dissipated , deep convection began to initiate near the center . As a result , Subtropical Storm Melissa developed at 12 : 00 UTC on November 18 , about 720 mi ( 1 @,@ 160 km ) east @-@ southeast of Bermuda . Melissa moved generally northward and strengthened slightly on November 19 , but weakened later that day after convection diminished . Early on November 20 , convection increased again , and after the storm acquired a warm core , it was reclassified as a tropical storm . 
 After becoming a tropical cyclone on November 20 , Melissa accelerated northeastward and slowly strengthened . Later that day , the storm attained its peak intensity with sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 980 mbar ( 29 inHg ) . Amid colder ocean temperatures , Melissa lost all of its deep convection and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone at 00 : 00 UTC on November 22 , at about 140 mi ( 230 km ) north @-@ northeast of Flores Island , Azores . The remnants merged with another system several hours later . 
 = = = Unnamed Subtropical Storm = = = 
 In early December , an upper @-@ level trough stalled to the south of a ridge in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean . Late on December 3 , an extratropical storm formed about 415 mi ( 260 km ) south of the Azores , and with the ridge to the north , it executed a cyclonic loop . Amplified by an upper @-@ level low to the west , the storm produced a large area of gale @-@ force winds . Early on December 4 the winds began to decrease . With low wind shear and water temperatures of 72 ° F ( 22 ° C ) , the system developed an area of convection near the center . At around 18 : 00 UTC on December 4 , the NHC noted in a tropical weather outlook that further development was possible before the cyclone encountered more unfavorable conditions . 
 Early on December 5 , the associated frontal features dissipated and the convection became better organized , while the center had a warm core and was co @-@ located with an upper @-@ level low . It was estimated that the system transitioned into a subtropical storm at that time with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . The NHC operationally treated it as a non @-@ tropical low . After becoming subtropical , the storm turned northward due to an upper @-@ level system . The wind field gradually became smaller while the convection organized into weak rain bands . Separating from the upper @-@ level low aloft , the storm became more tropical in nature , although it was unable to complete the transition . On December 6 , the storm turned eastward due to increased upper @-@ level flow , which also increased wind shear . The circulation became distanced from thunderstorm activity , which soon dissipated entirely . After turning back to the north , the storm weakened further due to cooler water temperatures , degenerating into a remnant low on December 7 . The storm produced sustained winds of 37 mph ( 59 km / h ) on Santa Maria Island in the Azores , with gusts to 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) . Late on December 7 , the system degenerated into a remnant trough about 110 mi ( 180 km ) south of the Azores . 
 The storm was recognized as a subtropical storm by the National Hurricane Center during its post @-@ season analysis . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the North Atlantic in 2013 . The names not retired from this list will be used again in the 2019 season . This is the same list used in the 2007 season , except for Dorian , Fernand , and Nestor , which replaced Dean , Felix , and Noel respectively . The names Dorian and Fernand were used for the first time this year , but Nestor was not used . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On April 10 , 2014 , at the 36th session of the RA IV hurricane committee , the name Ingrid was retired due to the damage and deaths it caused . The name was replaced with Imelda for the 2019 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 The following table lists all of the storms that have formed in the 2013 Atlantic hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , landfall ( s ) ( in parentheses ) , damages , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but were still related to that storm . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical , a wave , or a low , and all of the damage figures are in 2013 USD . 
 = Interstate 87 = 
 Interstate 87 ( I @-@ 87 ) is a 333 @.@ 49 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 536 @.@ 70 km ) Interstate Highway located entirely within the U.S. state of New York , and is part of the main highway between New York City and Montreal . The highway begins in the Bronx borough of New York City , just north of the Triborough Bridge . From there , the route runs northward through the Hudson Valley , the Capital District , and the easternmost part of the North Country to the Canadian border in the Town of Champlain . At its north end , I @-@ 87 continues into Quebec as Autoroute 15 ( A @-@ 15 ) . I @-@ 87 connects with several regionally important roads : I @-@ 95 in New York City , New York State Route 17 ( NY 17 ; future I @-@ 86 ) near Harriman , I @-@ 84 near Newburgh , and I @-@ 90 in Albany . The route is the longest intrastate Interstate Highway in the Interstate Highway System . 
 I @-@ 87 was assigned in 1957 as part of the establishment of the Interstate Highway System . The portion of I @-@ 87 south of Albany follows freeways that predate the Interstate Highway designation , namely , the Major Deegan Expressway in New York City and the New York State Thruway from the New York City line to Albany . North of Albany , I @-@ 87 follows the Adirondack Northway , a highway built in stages between 1957 and 1967 . Early proposals for I @-@ 87 called for the route to take a more easterly course through the Hudson Valley and extreme southwestern Connecticut between New York City and Newburgh . These plans were scrapped in 1970 when I @-@ 87 was realigned onto the Thruway between Westchester County and Newburgh . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 87 is part of a major strategic corridor between New York City , the largest metropolitan area in the U.S. , and Montreal , the second largest metropolitan area in Canada . The New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) considers the route important for commerce , as it connects with numerous highways in the region and serves approximately 80 million people along the Mid @-@ Atlantic States , New England , and Quebec . Motorists can connect to multiple highways on 87 to travel further south along I @-@ 95 through the mid @-@ Atlantic states , or through numerous other highways to travel further east into New England . 
 = = = South of Albany = = = 
 = = = = Major Deegan Expressway = = = = 
 I @-@ 87 begins in the Bronx at the northern approach to the Triborough Bridge , where it connects to the Bruckner Expressway ( I @-@ 278 ) at a directional T interchange . The route heads west from the interchange , paralleling loosely with the Harlem River through Mott Haven . After 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , the highway makes a turn to the north , mirroring a change in the nearby river 's course . It passes by Yankee Stadium on its way to Highbridge , where the Deegan connects to the Cross Bronx Expressway ( I @-@ 95 and U.S. Route 1 or US 1 ) at the eastern approach to the Alexander Hamilton Bridge . The Deegan remains in close proximity to the Harlem River until the waterway turns westward at Kingsbridge to form the northern edge of Manhattan . 
 North of Kingsbridge , I @-@ 87 generally follows a northeastern alignment , passing through the center of Van Cortlandt Park as it connects to Mosholu Parkway and Jerome Avenue . Mosholu Parkway also links I @-@ 87 to the Henry Hudson and Saw Mill River parkways , which run parallel to the Major Deegan Expressway through the western Bronx and Manhattan . Past Jerome Avenue , the freeway gains a pair of service roads and heads north to the New York City – Yonkers border . 
 = = = = New York State Thruway = = = = 
 At the New York City – Yonkers border , I @-@ 87 changes to the New York State Thruway as the mainline proceeds northward through Yonkers and southern Westchester County . It connects with Central Park Avenue ( NY 100 ) at exit 1 , the first of 12 exits within the county . The first few exits serve various local streets , with exit 2 providing access to Yonkers Raceway and exit 3 serving the Cross County Shopping Center . At exit 4 , I @-@ 87 connects to the Cross County Parkway , an east – west parkway providing access to the Saw Mill River , Bronx River , and Hutchinson River parkways . The north @-@ south parkways and I @-@ 95 run parallel to the Thruway through Southern Westchester . The Bronx River parkway leaves to the northeast midway through Yonkers , while the Saw Mill and Sprain Brook parkways follow the Thruway out of the city . 
 All three highways take generally parallel tracks to Elmsford , where I @-@ 87 directly intersects the Saw Mill River Parkway at exit 7A . Not far to the north is exit 8 , a semi @-@ directional T interchange with I @-@ 287 ( the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway ) . I @-@ 287 joins the Thruway here , following I @-@ 87 west across the Hudson River into Rockland County on the Tappan Zee Bridge . I @-@ 87 and I @-@ 287 remain overlapped for 15 miles ( 24 km ) through the densely populated southern portion of Rockland County , meeting the Palisades Interstate Parkway and the New York segment of the Garden State Parkway at exits 13 and 14A , respectively . The Thruway continues generally westward to Suffern , where I @-@ 87 and I @-@ 287 split at a large semi @-@ directional T interchange ( exit 15 ) near the New Jersey border . At this point , I @-@ 287 heads south into New Jersey while I @-@ 87 and the Thruway turn northward into the valley of the Ramapo River . 
 The Thruway continues north through the river valley toward Harriman , where it encounters the Woodbury toll barrier , the southeastern end of the mainline 's major closed ticket system . The barrier is located on the mainline within exit 16 ( NY 17 ) , a trumpet interchange . Along with the mainline barrier in Harriman , a separate toll plaza exists on the exit 16 ramp midway between the Thruway and NY 17 exit 131 ( NY 32 ) . Now a completely tolled highway , the Thruway heads northward , roughly paralleling the Hudson River to the river 's west as it serves the city of Newburgh , the village of New Paltz , and the city of Kingston , indirectly connecting to the short I @-@ 587 in the latter . 
 Past Kingston , the highway runs closer to the river as it parallels U.S. Route 9W ( US 9W ) through the towns of Saugerties , Catskill , Coxsackie , and Ravena . Just north of Ravena , the Thruway meets the west end of the Berkshire Connector , a spur linking the Thruway mainline to the Massachusetts Turnpike 25 miles ( 40 km ) to the east . The highway continues into the vicinity of Albany , where it connects to Troy via I @-@ 787 at exit 23 and intersects I @-@ 90 at exit 24 . The latter of the two junctions is the busiest of the Thruway 's exits , serving an estimated 27 million vehicles a year . I @-@ 87 then runs across the capital city 's residential suburbs for 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) to exit 24 , a complex interchange with I @-@ 90 . At this point , I @-@ 87 leaves the Thruway to access the nearby south end of the toll @-@ free Adirondack Northway , also known simply as the Northway , while I @-@ 90 merges in from the east to follow the Thruway toward Pennsylvania . 
 = = = Adirondack Northway = = = 
 Off the Thruway , I @-@ 87 and I @-@ 90 overlap for a half @-@ mile along I @-@ 90 's toll @-@ free path through the Albany area . The brief concurrency ends at exit 1 of the Adirondack Northway in Guilderland , a junction also numbered as exit 1 on I @-@ 90 . Here , I @-@ 87 turns to head north toward the Canadian border at Champlain while I @-@ 90 continues east toward downtown Albany and Rensselaer County . South of this point , the Northway feeds into a 0 @.@ 86 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 38 km ) expressway spur known locally as Fuller Road Alternate , which links I @-@ 87 and I @-@ 90 to US 20 . Fuller Road Alternate is designated as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route , by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) . In 2004 , NYSDOT ceremonially designated the entire 176 @-@ mile ( 283 km ) Northway as the Adirondack Veterans Memorial Highway . 
 = = = = Albany and Saratoga counties = = = = 
 I @-@ 87 heads northeast from I @-@ 90 as a six @-@ lane freeway with three lanes in each direction . It immediately traverses the Albany Pine Bush Preserve and passes west of Rensselaer Lake before crossing CSX Transportation 's Hudson Subdivision and running parallel to Wolf Road , a business thoroughfare through the town of Colonie . Wolf Road itself begins adjacent to exit 2 , a cloverleaf interchange with NY 5 ( Central Avenue ) . Heading northbound , the ramp for exit 2E feeds directly into the intersection of NY 5 and Wolf Road , located just west of Colonie Center , one of the Capital District 's largest enclosed shopping malls . I @-@ 87 continues to run alongside Wolf Road to exit 4 , a modified diamond interchange serving County Route 151 ( CR 151 , named Albany Shaker Road ) and Albany International Airport . Wolf Road ends south of the exit ; however , another section begins north of the junction , carrying NY 155 away from the airport . Prior to the Thruway , there was no break in Wolf Road ; in essence , Exit 4 was built on top of Wolf Road 's intersection with Watervliet Shaker Road . I @-@ 87 and NY 155 meet at exit 5 , with the latter routed along Watervliet Shaker Road . 
 After a brief stretch of housing tracts , I @-@ 87 connects to NY 2 and NY 7 at exit 6 , a single @-@ point urban interchange , in a commercialized part of Latham . NY 7 joins I @-@ 87 here , following the freeway for roughly 0 @.@ 8 miles ( 1 @.@ 3 km ) to exit 7 , the west end of a limited @-@ access highway previously known locally as Alternate Route 7 . While NY 7 heads east toward Troy , I @-@ 87 continues north past gradually less commercialized areas as it approaches the northern county line . The businesses ultimately give way to stretches of homes and subdivisions as the highway crosses into Saratoga County by way of the Thaddeus Kosciusko Bridge , called by locals " the twin bridges " , spanning the Mohawk River . The northern portion of the Northway through Colonie and Saratoga County is now a heavily @-@ traveled commuter route as a six @-@ lane freeway . Since the highway 's construction , Saratoga County has become the fastest growing area of the Capital District , and indeed all of upstate New York . 
 For its first few miles in Saratoga County , I @-@ 87 runs across lightly developed parts of the towns of Halfmoon and Clifton Park . Near exit 9 , however , the freeway passes through the commercial center of Clifton Park as it connects to NY 146 . Clifton Park Center , one of several shopping plazas at the junction , is situated southwest of the exit . Past exit 9 , the commercial development subsides as I @-@ 87 traverses another area dominated by housing tracts . Just north of the exit , the freeway passes a rest area for northbound traffic . The freeway continues on , passing to the west of the centers of Round Lake at exit 11 and Malta at exit 12 . After Malta , I @-@ 87 turns slightly to the northeast and begins to loosely parallel the northwestern edge of Saratoga Lake as it crosses <unk> Creek and enters Saratoga Springs . 
 As the route comes close to downtown Saratoga Springs , it meets NY 9P at exit 14 . The junction is adjacent to the regionally popular Saratoga Race Course and thus receives heavy traffic during the racing season . A southbound @-@ only entrance ramp exists off Nelson Avenue Extension about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of exit 14 , designed to handle traffic exiting the track at Saratoga Race Course and the Saratoga Casino and Raceway . The highway continues around the eastern edge of Saratoga Springs to exit 15 , where the relatively undeveloped areas east of I @-@ 87 are briefly replaced by Wilton 's commercial district along NY 50 . As I @-@ 87 continues northeast through Wilton , it heads across significantly less developed areas , with open fields becoming the most common feature along the road . It continues into Moreau , connecting to US 9 and serving Moreau Lake State Park by way of exit 17 , a cloverleaf interchange , before crossing the Hudson River and entering Warren County . 
 = = = = Warren and Essex counties = = = = 
 Between the bridge and exit 18 , I @-@ 87 passes two rest areas , one for each direction . The road 's northward course through Queensbury quickly brings it to the outskirts of Glens Falls , and as such the highway heads across another swath of residential neighborhoods . Exits 18 and 19 are the main exits for the city , with the latter connecting to NY 254 near the commercial center of Queensbury . Just east of the exit is Aviation Mall , located on NY 254 just west of the route 's junction with US 9 . A northwestern turn in the freeway takes I @-@ 87 past the Great Escape amusement park and lodge , both of which are accessed from exit 20 and NY 149 . Past exit 20 , I @-@ 87 runs across increasingly remote areas of Queensbury as the road enters Adirondack Park and heads toward Lake George . The freeway closely follows US 9 northwest to the village of Lake George , where I @-@ 87 meets NY 9N via exits 21 and 22 . 
 North of Lake George , I @-@ 87 narrows from six to four lanes as it runs alongside US 9 to Warrensburg , a small hamlet on the Schroon River served by exit 23 . While US 9 heads northwest into the community , I @-@ 87 turns northward to follow the east bank of the Schroon River for 17 miles ( 27 km ) through a deep , remote valley . The stretch ends at exit 27 , where I @-@ 87 reconnects to US 9 at the southern tip of Schroon Lake . At this point , I @-@ 87 makes a slight turn to the northeast to follow US 9 as the latter road runs along the western shoreline of Schroon Lake . Both roads pass a handful of lakefront properties on their way into Essex County and the town of Schroon , where the lake comes to an end and NY 74 begins its eastward trek to Ticonderoga at exit 28 . The Schroon River resumes north of the exit , and I @-@ 87 and US 9 follow the river and its rural valley to the northeast for 15 miles ( 24 km ) to the town of North Hudson . 
 In North Hudson , the valley becomes less pronounced as the Schroon River reaches its source near exit 30 . Here , US 9 and I @-@ 87 cross paths again , with the former heading northwest toward Keene and the latter continuing northeast in a narrow valley formed by Ash Craft Brook . After 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) , the stream reaches its source at Lincoln Pond , leaving the Northway to climb in elevation and wind its way northeastward across the surrounding mountains . It reaches slightly more level ground in Westport , where I @-@ 87 connects to NY 9N at exit 31 . From here , the highway takes a generally northerly track across the Bouquet River to the town of Lewis , rejoining US 9 as both roads head toward Clinton County . They split again after 7 miles ( 11 km ) as US 9 veers more easterly than I @-@ 87 to serve Keeseville . The Northway , meanwhile , heads to the northwest , bypassing the village to cross the Ausable River and enter Clinton County . 
 = = = = Clinton County = = = = 
 Just across the county line , I @-@ 87 intersects NY 9N again at exit 34 , the southernmost junction to feature bilingual guide signs in English and French due to the road 's proximity to Quebec . Past NY 9N , the Northway curves to the north , running along the west side of Keeseville before entering another rural but fairly level stretch that follows I @-@ 87 out of Adirondack Park . Now outside the park , the highway encounters more frequent pockets of development as it follows NY 22 into the town of Plattsburgh . Just inside the town line , the Northway crosses over the Salmon River and intersects NY 22 at exit 36 , a junction serving nearby Plattsburgh International Airport . While NY 22 heads northeast into the city of Plattsburgh , I @-@ 87 runs north through its western suburbs , passing over the Saranac River and intersecting NY 3 at exit 37 . The Northway and NY 22 meet again north of downtown at exit 38 . 
 The section of I @-@ 87 between exits 38 and 39 crosses a marshy area surrounding Dead Creek , a stream feeding into nearby Cumberland Bay . Access to the bay shore is provided off to the northeast by exit 39 , a modified cloverleaf interchange for NY 314 . Continuing away from the junction , I @-@ 87 comes within 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of Lake Champlain as it follows US 9 away from Plattsburgh and northward across open , rolling fields in the towns of Beekmantown and Chazy . Outside of the hamlet of Chazy , the Northway begins to run across a series of wetlands along the west side of US 9 . The marshy terrain follows I @-@ 87 into the town of Champlain , where I @-@ 87 encounters the northernmost community along its course , the village of Champlain . I @-@ 87 veers slightly westward to avoid the village , and in doing so it meets US 11 at exit 42 , a diamond interchange just west of the village limits . 
 I @-@ 87 takes a northerly track from US 11 , crossing the Great Chazy River and briefly entering the village limits , where it runs past a series of homes and businesses built up along nearby US 9 . As both roads head north out of the village , US 9 connects to the Northway one last time at exit 43 , the last interchange on I @-@ 87 before the Canadian border . Past the exit , the highway doubles in width , becoming eight lanes wide as it begins to run past the customs facilities on the American side of the border . The Northway and I @-@ 87 end shortly thereafter at the Canadian border , where the highway continues past the Champlain @-@ St. Bernard de <unk> Border Crossing into Quebec as A @-@ 15 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Designation and early construction = = = 
 I @-@ 87 was assigned on August 14 , 1957 , as part of the establishment of the Interstate Highway System . The highway initially utilized the pre @-@ existing New York State Thruway from Albany to Newburgh and in lower Westchester County , and the Major Deegan Expressway in New York City . From Newburgh to the Elmsford area , I @-@ 87 was to follow a new highway running parallel to US 9 northward along the eastern bank of the Hudson River to Fishkill . I @-@ 87 would then have followed the proposed I @-@ 84 across the Hudson to rejoin the Thruway outside of Newburgh . After the Hudson River Expressway proposal was cancelled in the 1960s , the alignment of I @-@ 87 was shifted further east to follow a newly @-@ completed freeway in the Route 22 corridor that started at I @-@ 287 in White Plains , then cut north through the extreme southwest corner of Connecticut before re @-@ entering New York and reaching I @-@ 84 at Brewster . I @-@ 87 then followed I @-@ 84 west to Newburgh . In 1970 , the I @-@ 87 designation was shifted to the New York State Thruway between Newburgh and the Deegan Expressway ; its previous alignment between Brewster and White Plains was redesignated as Interstate 684 . Meanwhile , all of the Adirondack Northway , the portion of I @-@ 87 slated to extend from Albany north to the Canadian border , had yet to be built . Fuller Road Alternate , the spur leading south from the Adirondack Northway to US 20 , was originally intended to be part of the Southern Albany Expressway , a proposed highway which would have connected the Northway with I @-@ 787 and run parallel to the Thruway between exits 23 and 24 . 
 The Northway was built in segments , which became I @-@ 87 as they were completed and linked to the pre @-@ existing route . Construction began in the late 1950s on the portion of the Northway between the Thruway and NY 7 near Latham . This segment was open to traffic by 1960 , by which time work had begun on two additional segments from Latham to Malta ( at NY 67 ) and from US 9 in northern Saratoga County to US 9 and NY 149 midway between Glens Falls and Lake George village . The expressway was completed between Latham and Clifton Park ( NY 146 ) and from US 9 south of Glens Falls to the Hudson River c . 1961 . The US 9 – NY 149 section of the highway was finished on May 26 , 1961 , at a total cost of $ 9 @.@ 5 million ( equivalent to $ 75 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) . Work on the Latham – Malta segment concluded on November 22 on that year with the opening of a $ 6 @.@ 6 million piece ( equivalent to $ 52 @.@ 3 million in 2016 ) between NY 146 and NY 67 . When the Latham – Malta segment was opened , it featured one of the few railroad grade crossings on an Interstate Highway , just south of the Thaddeus Kosciusko Bridge over the Hudson . This at @-@ grade crossing was removed within a couple of years when the railroad line was cut backwards and the crossing was no longer needed . Construction on the portion of highway between the two segments began c . 1962 . The 1 @.@ 8 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) part between NY 9P and NY 50 near Saratoga Springs was finished on July 19 , 1963 , and the entire NY 67 – US 9 segment was completed by 1964 . An extension linking NY 149 to NY 9N south of Lake George village opened in mid @-@ 1963 . 
 By July 1963 , the Northway was completed from the Canadian border south to exit 34 at Keeseville . Additionally , the existing Albany – Lake George section was extended slightly by May 1966 to serve the northern part of Lake George . At the time , I @-@ 87 curved around the western outskirts of the village to end at NY 9N north of the village on a highway built c . 1964 . In mid @-@ 1966 , the state opened a $ 23 million section ( equivalent to $ 168 million in 2016 ) of the Northway between Lake George and exit 26 at Pottersville . I @-@ 87 was reconfigured slightly near Lake George as a result : instead of heading east to NY 9N , it continued north on a parallel routing to US 9 . The Northway 's former routing to NY 9N , known infrequently today as the Lake George Connector , is now NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route 0 @.@ 66 miles ( 1 @.@ 06 km ) in length . NY <unk> has one intermediate interchange with US 9 . On March 5 , 1967 , the Lake George – Pottersville portion of I @-@ 87 was chosen as America 's Most Scenic New Highway of 1966 by Parade Magazine . It became the second New York highway to win the award , as a stretch of NY 17 in Broome and Delaware counties was selected for the title in 1964 . 
 = = = Filling the gaps = = = 
 The gap in the Northway between Pottersville and Keeseville was narrowed considerably by July 1967 with the completion of a 25 @-@ mile ( 40 km ) segment from Pottersville to exit 30 at Underwood . It was closed further on July 25 , 1967 , with the opening of a 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) stretch near Keeseville between exits 34 and 33 . The last section of the Northway to be built , a 30 @-@ mile ( 48 km ) stretch between Underwood and Keeseville ( exit 33 ) , was finished on August 31 , 1967 . The completion of the Northway linked New York City with Montreal by way of a direct , limited @-@ access highway , with I @-@ 87 becoming A @-@ 15 at the Canadian border . The total cost to build the Adirondack Northway was $ 208 million ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 48 billion in 2016 ) . 
 Another gap in I @-@ 87 existed in downstate New York , as the plan to build I @-@ 87 along the proposed Hudson River Expressway had been scrapped by 1962 . Instead , I @-@ 87 was now proposed to begin in Port Chester and follow a new routing through Purchase , Armonk , and Katonah to Brewster , where it would join I @-@ 84 . The routing was modified slightly by 1968 : I @-@ 87 still began in New York City , then overlapped with I @-@ 287 east to Purchase . From there , I @-@ 87 headed north along the now @-@ open expressway to Armonk , where it ended at NY 22 . Another portion of the highway , from Goldens Bridge ( NY 138 ) to Brewster , was open as well while the part from Armonk to Katonah was under construction . This segment , as well as the part from Katonah to Goldens Bridge , was completed by 1971 . On January 1 , 1970 , I @-@ 87 was rerouted between Elmsford and Newburgh to follow the mainline of the Thruway instead , leaving the Purchase – Brewster freeway to become I @-@ 684 . 
 = = = Tappan Zee Bridge replacement = = = 
 State and federal agencies are in the process of replacing the Tappan Zee Bridge over New York 's Hudson River . The original Tappan Zee bridge is a cantilever bridge built during 1952 – 55 . The bridge is three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) long and spans the Hudson at its second @-@ widest point . The deteriorating current structure bears an average of 138 @,@ 000 vehicles per day , substantially more traffic than its designed capacity . During its first decade , the bridge carried fewer than 40 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . Part of the justification for replacing the bridge stems from its construction immediately following the Korean War on a low budget of only $ 81 million . Unlike other major bridges in metropolitan New York , the Tappan Zee was designed to last only 50 years . The Federal Highway Administration issued a report in October 2011 designating the Tappan Zee 's replacement to be a dual @-@ span twin bridge . The new bridge is now under construction a few yards to the north of the existing bridge , and will connect to the existing highway approaches of the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 87 / I @-@ 287 ) on both river banks . Construction began in 2013 , with opening targeted for 2018 . When completed in 2018 , the new Tappan Zee Bridge will be one of the longest cable @-@ stayed spans in the nation . 
 = = = Other developments = = = 
 A long stretch of the Northway through the Adirondack Park had been an <unk> zone for cellular telephone service . In 2007 , a driver who crashed off the road was unable to summon help , prompting messages from local governments to telephone companies to add new wireless towers to address the problem and warning signs to inform travelers of the so @-@ called " dark zone " . Throughout this area , roadside emergency call boxes are located approximately every two miles on both sides of the roadway . These boxes use a two @-@ way UHF radio network to connect directly to New York State Police dispatchers . The first of 13 new cellular phone towers along I @-@ 87 was installed in October 2008 . A second cellular phone tower was completed just one month later . 
 Exit 6 on the Adirondack Northway was originally a diamond interchange . Construction to convert the junction into a single @-@ point urban interchange began in mid @-@ 2008 and was completed on September 12 , 2010 . The total cost of the project was $ 41 @.@ 9 million . 
 There is no exit 3 on the Northway section of I @-@ 87 , as this number was reserved for an interchange with the cancelled I @-@ 687 . A project to improve access to the Albany International Airport at exit 4 is currently underway . The two old bridges at exit 4 that carry 102 @,@ 000 vehicles a day are deteriorating and subsequently are being replaced . Once the new replacement bridges are built , the old bridges will be demolished . Construction began in February 2015 and is expected to be completed by October 31 , 2015 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The list below contains the exits along the Adirondack Northway . For exits within New York City , see the Major Deegan Expressway 's exit list . For exits along the New York State Thruway , see Exits 1 to 24 of the Thruway mainline 's exit list . 
 The mileposts below follow actual signage , where mile 0 @.@ 00 is located just north of the overpass with I @-@ 90 . 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 The road has three current spur routes , all located along the Thruway portion of I @-@ 87 . I @-@ 287 serves as a 99 @-@ mile ( 159 km ) bypass around New York City , beginning at the New Jersey Turnpike in Middlesex County , New Jersey , and ending at I @-@ 95 ( the New England Thruway ) near the Connecticut border in Rye . I @-@ 287 and I @-@ 87 overlap for 19 miles ( 31 km ) across Westchester and Rockland counties . East of the concurrency , I @-@ 287 is known as the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway . The other two spurs , the 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) I @-@ 587 and the 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) I @-@ 787 , link I @-@ 87 to the cities of Kingston and Albany , respectively . 
 Two other spurs of I @-@ 87 were planned but never constructed . In the Hudson Valley , I @-@ 487 would have run along the Hudson River from I @-@ 87 and I @-@ 287 in Tarrytown to I @-@ 84 east of Beacon . The other spur , I @-@ 687 , would have connected I @-@ 90 in Albany to I @-@ 87 near Albany International Airport in Colonie . Both routes were cancelled in the 1970s as a result of public opposition . 
 = 2010 Carfax 400 = 
 The 2010 Carfax 400 was a NASCAR Sprint Cup Series stock car race that was held on August 15 , 2010 at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn , Michigan . Contested over 200 laps , it was the twenty @-@ third race of the 2010 Sprint Cup Series season . The race was won by Kevin Harvick for the Richard Childress Racing team . Denny Hamlin finished second , and Carl Edwards , who started twenty @-@ fourth , clinched third . 
 Pole position driver Kasey Kahne maintained his lead into the first corner to begin the race , but Jimmie Johnson , who started in the second position on the grid , took the lead before the first lap was over . Afterward , Greg Biffle became the leader , and would eventually lead to the race high of 66 laps . Tony Stewart led after the final pit stops , ahead of Hamlin and Harvick . Harvick helped Hamlin to become the leader , but with twelve laps left , Harvick gained on Hamlin and claimed the first position with eleven lap remaining . Harvick maintained his position to claim his first Sprint Cup victory at Michigan International Speedway . 
 There were five cautions and nineteen lead changes among nine different drivers throughout the course of the race , Harvick 's third win of the season . The result maintained the first position in the Drivers ' Championship and clinched him a position in the Chase . He remained 293 points ahead of second place driver Jeff Gordon and 353 ahead of Denny Hamlin . Chevrolet maintained its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , thirty points ahead of Toyota and sixty @-@ one ahead of Ford , with thirteen races remaining in the season . A total of 105 @,@ 000 people attended the race , while 4 @.@ 917 million watched it on television . 
 = = Race report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Michigan International Speedway is one of six superspeedways to hold NASCAR races ; the others are Daytona International Speedway , Auto Club Speedway , Indianapolis Motor Speedway , Pocono Raceway and Talladega Superspeedway . The standard track at Michigan International Speedway is a four @-@ turn superspeedway that is 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at eighteen degrees , while the front stretch , the location of the finish line , is banked at twelve degrees . The back stretch , has a five degree banking . Michigan International Speedway had a seating capacity of 119 @,@ 500 people for the race . 
 One team chose to replace their regular driver with a substitute . Prior to the first practice session , <unk> decided to cancel their sponsorship with Front Row Motorsports , prompting the team to replace Kevin Conway with Tony Raines . During the week leading up to the race , Gordon 's wife gave birth to their son , Leo Benjamin Gordon . Gordon said that he was not planning to retire until his son could see him in victory lane . 
 Before the race , Kevin Harvick led the Drivers ' Championship with 3 @,@ 210 points , and Jeff Gordon stood in second with 3 @,@ 025 points . Jeff Burton was third in the Drivers ' Championship with 2 @,@ 895 points , Kurt Busch was fourth with 2 @,@ 892 points , and Jimmie Johnson was in fifth with 2 @,@ 882 points . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet was leading with 158 points , twenty @-@ seven points ahead of their rival Toyota . Ford , with 102 points , was nine points ahead of Dodge in the battle for third . Brian Vickers was the race 's defending champion . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — one on Friday and two on Saturday . The first session lasted 90 minutes . The Saturday morning session lasted 45 minutes , and the final practice session was 60 minutes in length . During the first practice session , Jeff Burton was quickest with a time of 38 @.@ 479 , ahead of Juan Pablo Montoya and Kevin Harvick in second and third . Carl Edwards followed in the fourth position , ahead of Greg Biffle in fifth . In the Saturday morning session , Biffle was quickest , ahead of Ryan Newman and Kasey Kahne in second and third . Burton and Kurt Busch followed in the fourth and fifth positions . In the final practice session for the race , Jimmie Johnson was quickest with a time of 38 @.@ 742 . David Ragan followed in second , ahead of Jeff Gordon and Harvick in third and fourth . Biffle , who was quickest in second practice , only managed fifth quickest . 
 Denny Hamlin , who won at Michigan International Speedway in the spring , was having a difficult time trying to improve the car handling of the race car he won with . Hamlin said , " It 's going all right . We were about like we were here in [ June ] as far as speed . We 're a little bit slow on speed as far as qualifying , but we feel like the race stuff is pretty competitive . " His teammate Kyle Busch was also struggling , adding , " Our [ car ] was loose off . We jumped back and forth in practice from tight to loose . We picked up from practice , but we couldn 't rotate the center like I wanted to . " 
 During qualifying , forty @-@ seven cars were entered , but only forty @-@ three will be able to race because of NASCAR 's qualifying procedure . Kasey Kahne clinched his eighteenth career pole position , with a time of 38 @.@ 465 . After his qualifying run , Kahne commented , " [ Turns ] 1 and 2 were really strong . Coming to the green , I felt like I was a little bit free , and it was the same through 1 and 2 , but I got through there really good and carried a lot of speed down the backstretch . Then , when I got to Turn 3 , I couldn 't get it to turn enough , so I kind of just floored it and actually used up a lot of the racetrack , went up the track a little bit loose off [ the corner ] and definitely didn 't have as good a 3 and 4 as I would have liked . At that point , I thought I probably gave the pole away , but we were able to still hang on just from the speed that we had in 1 and 2 . " He was joined on the front row of the grid by Jimmie Johnson . Clint Bowyer qualified third , Tony Stewart took fourth , and Montoya started fifth , after being scored ninth in the final practice session . The four drivers that did not qualify were J. J. Yeley , Scott Riggs , Casey Mears , and Mike Bliss . 
 = = = Race summary = = = 
 The race , the twenty @-@ third out of a total of thirty @-@ six in the season , began at 1 p.m. EDT and was televised live in the United States on ESPN . Conditions were partly cloudy with a high of 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) . Pastor Doug Bradshaw began pre @-@ race ceremonies by giving the invocation . Next , Virgin Records recording artists Saving Abel performed the national anthem , and Virginia Craig and Evander Holyfield gave the command for drivers to start their engines . 
 Kasey Kahne held the lead going through the first corner but was passed by Jimmie Johnson before the second lap . Tony Stewart then passed Kahne for the second position . Five laps later , Greg Biffle emerged in third . By lap ten , Johnson had built 1 @.@ 7 second lead over Stewart , who was passed by Biffle for second . Biffle caught Johnson by lap 14 , but he did not snatch the lead until lap 15 . On lap 18 , Stewart took second place from Johnson , as Kevin Harvick emerged in fourth . Harvick moved into third after passing Johnson on the next lap . On lap 23 , Michael McDowell and P.J. Jones drove to the garage , followed by Joe Nemechek two laps later . On lap 28 , Harvick began closing in on Biffle , but before he could pass him , the first cautions was called . Kurt Busch 's engine had failed . On lap 39 , Biffle led the drivers in the restart . Juan Pablo Montoya moved to fifth after passing Clint Bowyer on the next lap . Johnson reclaimed third position on lap 41 but was passed by Harvick after five laps . By lap 48 , Harvick had caught and passed Stewart for the second position , and by lap 55 , Harvick had caught Biffle . Five laps later , light rain falling in turn three ( the turn following the back stretch ) prompted the second caution . On lap 61 , teams made their pit stops for fuel and tires . Biffle remained the leader when the green flag waved on lap 66 . 
 On lap 70 , Joey Logano collided with Paul Menard , and both sustained minor damage . After starting thirty @-@ sixth , Jeff Gordon moved into the tenth position by lap 73 . Eleven laps later , Stewart took the lead from Biffle . On lap 92 , Harvick passed Biffle to claim the second position . Gordon passed Johnson for seventh as Montoya and David Reutimann began a run of green flag pit stops on lap 98 . They were followed by Johnson , Kyle Busch , and Denny Hamlin two laps later . When Stewart went to pit the next lap , Harvick became the leader . Stewart managed to reclaim the lead on lap 103 . Seven laps later , Bowyer passed Kahne for the fourth position , and Harvick moved into the first position . 
 On lap 116 , Gordon emerged in fourth while Harvick held a 1 @.@ 5 second lead over Stewart . Ten laps later , Gordon moved into the third position . By lap 129 , Harvick had a 6 @.@ 45 second lead over Biffle , who had passed Stewart for second . On lap 137 , green flag pit stops began for the second time . Two laps later , Biffle made his pit stop . Harvick stayed on the track for another lap before pitting fast enough to hold off Biffle , therefore remaining the leader at the conclusion of the pit stops . On lap 148 , Joey Logano and Ryan Newman collided , causing Newman 's car to turn sideways , causing the third caution flag to be waved . On lap 152 , Harvick led the drivers to the green flag . Two laps later , the fourth caution came out because Jeff Gordon and Jeff Burton sustained damage to their race cars . Most drivers made a pit stop for fuel only , but Elliott Sadler stayed on track to leader the race . Sadler led on the restart , but Martin Truex , Jr. and David Ragan passed him on the following lap , relegating him to third position . 
 On lap 166 , Ragan passed Truex , Jr. for the lead . The next lap , Stewart emerged in the first position as the fifth caution came out because of debris on the track . On lap 169 , Stewart , Harvick , Regan Smith , Scott Speed , and Hamlin stayed out on the track while the rest of the field made pit stops . Stewart led on the restart , followed by Harvick . On lap 174 , Hamlin passed Harvick for the second position and Biffle moved into fourth . Harvick helped Hamlin into the lead four laps later , but passed him for the lead on lap 189 . By lap 193 , Harvick had a 1 @.@ 35 second lead over Hamlin . Carl Edwards passed Stewart for third on the next lap . Kevin Harvick crossed the finish line in first to take his third win of the season . Denny Hamlin followed in second , ahead Edwards in third , Biffle in fourth , and Matt Kenseth in fifth . The race had five cautions and ten lead changes among five different drivers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Kevin Harvick appeared in victory lane after his victory lap to start celebrating his third win of the season , and his first Sprint Cup win at Michigan International Speedway , in front of a crowd of 105 @,@ 000 people . " Our cars had run good here before , but I hadn 't . The last couple of times we 've really committed ourselves to driving in different spots on the race track and doing different things from inside the car and trying to manage the practice as well as we can to not fool ourselves , " said Harvick of his triumph . 
 Although Denny Hamlin was leading the race near the end , Harvick passed him with eleven laps left . Hamlin , who finished second , said , " He would catch me getting into turn three , I would pull away in three and four . He was quite a bit better than me in one and two . So it was kind of split . It 's pretty much all we had . Obviously the fastest car won today . So it was at least good to see that . " In the subsequent press conference , Harvick stated , " A lot of the places we would classify as places we don 't run good , we 've ran as good at those places this year as we do at the short tracks , road courses , the places you can typically count on us running good . " Richard Childress , the owner of Richard Childress Racing , expressed his enjoyment of winning the race after reminiscing about one of his other victories at the track : 
 " I remember winning here and how proud we were to win for GM <unk> back in those days and to win in a GM product up here . There ’ s a lot of pride . It ’ s great to be here today and win . " 
 Harvick spoke about the difficulty of winning at the track , saying " It 's just a lot of years of getting beat by people running up there to be honest with you . I never really could figure it out . So probably end of last year ... I went home and watched some tapes of Dale [ Earnhardt ] Jr . , some of his previous races here , because he always seemed to have a good handle on running the top groove . It was just more of a rhythm thing and some things that I needed to change in my approach to run up there . For us , I think the biggest change was not only the race cars being good , but just the approach to where we ran on the race track during the race and making that commitment . It worked out for us today . " The race result left Harvick leading the Driver 's Championship with 3 @,@ 400 points , assuring him a position in the Chase for the Sprint Cup . Jeff Gordon , who finished twenty @-@ seventh , was second on 3 @,@ 107 , sixty points ahead of Hamlin and eighty @-@ seven ahead of Tony Stewart . Jimmie Johnson was fifth with 3 @,@ 014 points . Chevrolet maintained their lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship with 167 points . Toyota placed second with 147 points , and Ford followed with 106 points , ten ahead of Dodge in fourth . 4 @.@ 917 million people watched the race on television . The race took two hours , forty @-@ six minutes and thirty @-@ eight seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 1 @.@ 731 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Blek = 
 Blek is a 2013 puzzle video game for iOS and Android by Kunabi Brother , a team of brothers Denis and Davor Mikan . The player draws a snakelike black line that recurs in pattern and velocity across the screen to remove colored dots and avoid black dots . It is minimalist in design , features excerpts of Erin Gee , and takes inspiration from Golan Levin , the Bauhaus , and Japanese calligraphy . The brothers designed the game as a touchscreen adaptation to classic game Snake and worked on the game for over six months . It was released in December 2013 for iPad , and was later released for other iOS devices and Android . 
 The game received positive reviews , and critics praised the game 's degree of unrestricted play . The game reached the top of the Apple App Store charts several months after its release . It received a 2014 Apple Design Award , and has sold over one million copies . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Blek is a puzzle game in which the player draws a " snake @-@ like " black line on the screen that is recorded and played back like a pattern , recurring repeatedly across the screen . The object is to draw a line that it will remove colored dot targets when it repeats across the screen without hitting a black dot . Lines that travel off the top or bottom of the screen reset the level , while lines that travel off the left or right of the screen reflect back towards the dots . Aside from repeating the player 's drawn pattern , the stroke mimics the player 's pace in drawing the stroke . The game begins with no prompt or tutorial other than to use a finger on the screen and experiment . The first puzzles are " on open , white canvasses " where the player can solve the simple puzzles " by accident " . The 80 levels progress in difficulty and require more complex solutions . Added elements include a " chain reaction " dot that launches other dots when struck . Its sound consists of a " whoosh " that accompanies the traveling stroke , a " chime " when colored dots are hit , and a human " disappointed grumble " when black dots are hit , resetting the level . The game is depicted in flat , plain colors , with no pause feature and no option menu other than Game Center achievements . Players navigate between puzzles using three small onscreen icons . There are no in @-@ app purchases or in @-@ game advertisements . 
 = = Development = = 
 Blek was built for iOS by brothers Denis and Davor Mikan . While both had coding experience , neither were game developers by trade . This was their first game together as Kunabi Brother . Denis had published short stories and a novel , and Davor released music on a Crónica <unk> . Davor previously made Flash games and developed the idea for Blek from this experience . He approached Denis about converting the video game Snake for touchscreens , and Denis returned with the idea of " a line representing an idea that springs to life after it has been drawn " . This thought was likely inspired by the calligraphy and ink drawings in a book by Japanese poet Matsuo Basho that Denis was reading . They had several prototypes by mid @-@ 2013 , when Davor joined an Parisian artist in residence program , where he felt he was treated differently when he introduced himself as a game developer instead of as a musician . This experience invigorated his interest in the game medium and led to the brothers ' push to finish the game over the next six months . 
 The Austrian brothers ' main influences were Golan Levin 's 1998 interactive <unk> and Wassily Kandinsky 's Point and Line to Plane book , from his time teaching at the Bauhaus . The sound design uses excerpts from Erin Gee 's " Yamaguchi Mouthpiece I " , and their game design influences include Thatgamecompany and Patrick Smith of Vectorpark and Windosill , though they felt that other games did not singularly influence Blek 's design . They were interested in video games as toys and " as meaningful experiences " . The game was written in the Unity game engine and tested by the developers ' friends . Since the core game mechanics were set , their feedback pertained to the level design . As their primary interests were in a " unification of art , craft , and technology " , the game had no public relations or marketing campaign and its creators expressed little interest in the app 's business and marketing , though they did share the game directly with media outlets . 
 Blek was released for iPad in December 2013 , and an iPhone and iPod Touch version followed on January 7 , 2014 . Four months after the release , they reinvested their earnings from the game into marketing . After a few YouTube campaigns , Blek was listed in Apple 's App Store lists . An Android version was released in July . Kunabi Brother are not planning a sequel , though they intend to further " experiment with touchscreens " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Blek received " generally favorable reviews " , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Though the game first released in December 2013 to little fanfare , critics " widely praised " the game , and it became popular in April 2014 . It appeared in the top ten paid App Store games chart in April , reached the top by May , and was listed into June . Blek received a 2014 Apple Design Award and was featured in their Indie Game Showcase . While it had sold 30 @,@ 000 copies by February 2014 , upon being featured in the App Store , it sold 500 @,@ 000 copies by May , and over a million copies by June . Edge compared its aesthetic to iOS puzzle game Hundreds . Reviewers praised the game for the amount of freedom it affords its players . 
 Edge called Blek " a thing of elegant , intuitive beauty " . They compared it to a " modernist , freeform , touchscreen " Snake , albeit much calmer , and described Blek as less a puzzle game than " pure intuition " and " an act of freeform creation " that privileged the process of experimentation over the goal of solving puzzles . The magazine wrote that the trial and error , muddling process of refining one 's stroke led to delightful discoveries that turned " maddening " complex prospects into " natural " solutions . In a piece for Polygon , Rod Green compared Blek to Tetris and Threes ! as a " simple premise , beautifully executed " that lends towards imitation , and added that the game would be harder to " clone " than the others due to its handmade levels . Kotaku 's Mike Fahey called it " the most brilliant iPad game " he played in 2013 . 
 Christian Donlan of Eurogamer wrote that the game is personal . He compared its core mechanics to handwriting and doodling , noting that the recurring stroke also captures the player 's " speed and hesitancy " . Donlan wrote that the game is " lots of kinds of puzzle games " as the player may read negative spacing or try to predict the motion of a reflected stroke , and compared the later stages to mazes or minefields . Shaun Musgrave of TouchArcade noted that the game 's difficulty increases around level 20 , where player precision is required , and considered this part a low point . He felt that the small margin of error in later levels lent towards frustration . Jared Nelson of the same website wrote that the game was uniquely suited for the touchscreen . 
 = Para @-@ snowboarding classification = 
 Para @-@ snowboarding classification is the classification system for para @-@ snowboarding . The sport originally called Adaptive Snowboard is now practiced by hundreds of athletes around the world . The International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) defines two classes : SB @-@ LL for athletes with a physical impairment affecting one or both legs , and SB @-@ UL for athletes with a physical impairment affecting one or both arms who compete standing . The sport made its official Winter Paralympic debut in the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi , Russia . 
 = = Eligibility = = 
 Classifications exist for deaf competitors , blind competitors , people with physical disabilities and those with intellectual disabilities . The IPC eligibility rules provide for athletes with a physical impairment such as limb loss or limb deficiency , spinal cord injury , nerve damage , or cerebral palsy . As of 2014 , athletes with other impairments , such as visual impairments , are not eligible . The IPC defines two classes : 
 SB @-@ LL for athletes with a physical impairment affecting one or both legs . Athletes may use a prosthesis or modified equipment to compete . 
 SB @-@ UL for athletes with a physical impairment affecting one or both arms who compete standing . 
 The World Snowboard Federation ( WSF ) has a more elaborate classification system , with classes SB1 to SB12 for snowboarders with limb disabilities : 
 SB1 for athletes with severe disabilities in both lower limbs 
 <unk> for athletes with severe disabilities in one lower limb 
 <unk> for athletes with moderate disabilities in both lower limbs 
 <unk> for athletes with moderate disabilities in one lower limbs 
 SB5 for athletes with disabilities in both upper limbs 
 <unk> for athletes with disabilities in one upper limb 
 <unk> for athletes with disabilities in one upper and one lower limb 
 <unk> sitting class for athletes with disabilities in both lower limbs and trunk 
 <unk> sitting class for athletes with disabilities in both lower limbs and partial trunk function 
 SB12 sitting class for athletes with disabilities in lower limbs and good trunk function 
 The WSF also defines three visual impairment class , B1 , B2 and B3 , identical to those used by the International Blind Sports Federation ( IBSA ) for other sports for visually impaired athletes . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The sport widely called Adaptive Snowboarding held its first official competition at the 2000 <unk> Nationals in Waterville Valley NH , USA . The <unk> <unk> adaptive snowboarding competitions in North America through 2008 , after which the World Snowboard Federation accepted international governance beginning in 2009 . It is now practiced by hundreds of athletes around the world , and governed by the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) . The IPC and the WSF signed a memorandum of understanding in July 2009 under which the WSF would continue to govern the sport until 2014 , after which the situation would be reassessed . Both organisations would continue their efforts to develop the sport . IPC Alpine Skiing governs snowboarding as well as alpine skiing , and the two share a common set of regulations . In explaining the change of the name of the sport , the WSF stated that : 
 The change was made to bring the sport into alignment with the common terminology for sports ( except sledge hockey and wheelchair curling , which are not referred to as " para @-@ hockey " and " para @-@ curling " ) used by the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) . This was done in consultation with the IPC , and is part of the process of preparing the sport for inclusion in the Paralympic Winter Games . 
 The prefix " para " is of Greek origin , and means " alongside " . It is used to illustrate how the Olympic and Paralympic movements exist side by side . 
 Para @-@ Snowboard and Adaptive Snowboarding do not necessarily refer to the same thing , though both are practised by people with disabilities . The new name describes competitive adaptive snowboarding , and its acceptance into the Paralympic movement . 
 For Australian competitors in this sport , the sport and classification is managed the national sport federation with support from the Australian Paralympic Committee . There are three types of classification available for Australian competitors : Provisional , national and international . The first is for club level competitions , the second for state and national competitions , and the third for international competitions . 
 = = At the Paralympic Games = = 
 After initially rejecting the sport in August 2011 , the International Paralympic Committee changed its mind and added Para @-@ snowboarding to the Alpine Skiing programme on 2 May 2012 . The President of the Sochi 2014 Olympic Organizing Committee , Dmitry <unk> , welcomed the addition of the new sport , saying : 
 Snowboarding is a young and exciting sport and one which is attracting new audiences and participants everywhere . Its inclusion in the Paralympics programme will give a further boost to the promotion of Paralympic sports across Russia and highlights the opportunities that sport provides to everyone . 
 The sport made its official Winter Paralympic debut in the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi , Russia . There were men 's and women 's standing snowboard cross . Only events in the SB @-@ LL class were offered . The events were run in a time @-@ trial format ( one rider on course at a time ) , <unk> unlike some other Paralympic events , results were calculated without factors that adjust times based on disability classification . Each athlete got three runs over a course of jumps , bumps and turns . Times from the best two were added together for their final total . 
 Both events were run on 14 March 2014 . The women 's event was won by <unk> <unk> @-@ Spee from the Netherlands in a time of 1 minute 57 @.@ 43 seconds . France 's Cecile Hernandez Ep <unk> came second with a time of 2 minutes 07 @.@ 31 seconds . America 's Amy Purdy came third in 2 minutes 14 @.@ 29 seconds . The men 's event was a clean sweep for the United States . Evan Strong won in 1 minute 43 @.@ 61 seconds , followed by Michael Shea with a time of 1 : 44 @.@ 18 and Keith Gabel with a time of 1 : 47 @.@ 10 . 
 = = Future = = 
 The snowboarding cross events at Sochi were a success , with tickets for para @-@ snowboarding events being among the first to sell out . In April 2014 the IPC announced plans to add slalom to the events at 2018 Winter Paralympics in Pyeongchang , South Korea . Consideration was also given to having the snowboard cross event run with pairs of athletes competing against each other rather than as a time trial . There were still no plans to add non @-@ standing or visually impaired events . As of 2014 , visually impaired events were not , considered for medal events at WSF Para @-@ Snowboard competitions due to the small numbers of internationally competitive athletes . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Isabel in North Carolina = 
 The effects of Hurricane Isabel on North Carolina were the worst from a hurricane since Hurricane Floyd made landfall in 1999 . Hurricane Isabel formed from a tropical wave on September 6 , 2003 in the tropical Atlantic Ocean . It moved northwestward , and within an environment of light wind shear and warm waters it steadily strengthened to reach peak winds of 165 mph ( 265 km / h ) on September 11 . After fluctuating in intensity for four days , Isabel gradually weakened and made landfall on the Outer Banks of North Carolina with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) on September 18 . It quickly weakened over land and became extratropical over western Pennsylvania the next day . 
 Isabel produced moderate to heavy damage across eastern North Carolina , totaling $ 450 million ( 2003 USD , $ 579 million 2016 USD ) . Damage was heaviest in Dare County , where storm surge flooding and strong winds damaged thousands of houses . The storm surge produced a 2 @,@ 000 foot ( 600 m ) wide inlet on Hatteras Island , isolating Hatteras by road for two months . Strong winds downed hundreds of trees of across the state , leaving up to 700 @,@ 000 residents without power . Most areas with power outages had power restored within a few days . The hurricane directly killed one person and indirectly killed two in the state . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 By 4 days before Isabel made landfall , most computer models predicted Isabel to make landfall between North Carolina and New Jersey , and the National Hurricane Center consistently forecast a landfall on North Carolina . Initially , forecasters predicted a landfall in the northeastern portion of the state , though as the hurricane neared land the predicted landfall position was much closer to where it ultimately was . From three days in advance , the average track forecast error for its landfall was only 36 miles ( 58 km ) , and for 48 hours in advance the average track error was 18 miles ( 29 km ) . Strong confidence in Isabel 's final landfall prompted the National Hurricane Center to issue a hurricane watch for the entire North Carolina coastline about 50 hours before Isabel struck land . 38 hours before the hurricane made landfall , the National Hurricane Center upgraded the watch to a hurricane warning for the landfall area . The Newport Weather Forecast Office issued a flood potential statement two days before landfall , which indicated a threat for flash flooding . The office began preparing for the hurricane one week before landfall , and brought additional staff members to assist with hurricane related duties . 
 Evacuation orders began on September 16 , when officials issued a voluntary evacuation for portions of four counties and one entire county . By around 24 hours before landfall , mandatory evacuations were ordered for eight counties , all of which but one were for the entire counties . All coastal counties from Cape Fear northward were under a mandatory evacuation . A survey of 603 residents in northeastern North Carolina indicated 57 % of residents along the Outer Banks and 77 % of residents in storm surge @-@ prone areas of the Pamlico Sound did not evacuate despite being under a mandatory evacuation . The two primary reasons stated for the residents ' evacuation decisions were the hurricane 's strength and track . The media and statements from officials were two other reasons . 70 % of people along the Outer Banks heard the official evacuation notices , though only 30 % of residents near the Pamlico Sound heard the notices . A majority of the respondents to the survey who heard the evacuation notices left the area . None of the surveyed evacuees from the Outer Banks went to a public shelter ; 60 % went to a friend or a relative 's house and 24 % went to a motel . Evacuees on the Outer Banks generally went elsewhere in North Carolina or to Virginia . For evacuees around the Pamlico Sound , only 9 % left for a public shelter , while 75 % left for a friend or relative 's house . Most near the Pamlico Sound remained in their own neighborhood or own county . Of the 19 North Carolina counties issuing evacuation orders , the duration of the evacuation process varied between 3 hours to 12 hours in Dare County . Five counties reported heavy amounts of traffic , while traffic problems included stalled cars along roads , inadequate route signing , and flooded or damaged roads . 
 By the morning of the hurricane 's landfall , 65 shelters were prepared with a capacity of 95 @,@ 000 people . The American Red Cross prepared 100 feeding vehicles in staging areas , and deployed two mobile kitchens each with the capacity to provide 10 @,@ 000 meals per day . Additionally , five Southern Baptist Convention kitchens were on standby , in total being able to provide 20 @,@ 000 meals per day . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Isabel produced hurricane @-@ force wind gusts throughout eastern North Carolina . The winds downed hundreds of trees , leaving up to 700 @,@ 000 without power across the state . Damage from the hurricane totaled about $ 450 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 579 million 2016 USD ) ) . Three people were killed in the state , a utility worker attempting to restore electricity and two by falling trees . 
 = = = Outer Banks = = = 
 Hurricane Isabel first began affecting North Carolina about 15 hours before it struck land . Upon making landfall along the Outer Banks , the hurricane produced strong waves of 15 to 25 feet ( 4 @.@ 5 to 6 m ) in height and a storm surge of about 6 to 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) . Waters reached a height of 7 @.@ 15 feet ( 2 @.@ 18 m ) in Hatteras . Storm tides along the coast peaked at 7 @.@ 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) in Cape Hatteras , though the total could be higher there due to the tide gage being destroyed by the hurricane . The surge and waves created a new inlet by washing out a portion of Hatteras Island between Hatteras and Frisco . Unofficially named Isabel Inlet , the break was 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 600 m ) wide and 15 feet ( 5 m ) deep , and consisted of three distinct channels . The formation of the inlet destroyed a portion of North Carolina Highway 12 , and also washed out three homes , dunes , power lines , and utility pipes . The new inlet destroyed all utility connections to Hatteras Village , isolating the residents there . The storm surge and waves from Isabel also resulted in a breach between Hatteras and Hatteras Inlet . The breach , which nearly became an inlet , formed from the flow of ocean water across the island , though it was not deep enough for a constant water flow . The breach occurred in an area without roads or houses , and had little impact on Hatteras residents . Rough surf and storm surge caused overwash and severe beach erosion throughout the Outer Banks , with flooding in Ocracoke reportedly being up to waist @-@ high . The hurricane produced an estimated 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of rain throughout most of the Outer Banks , with Duck reporting a peak of 4 @.@ 72 inches ( 120 mm ) . Wind gusts in association with the hurricane peaked at 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) in Ocracoke , with several other locations reporting hurricane @-@ force gusts . 
 Wind and water damage across the Outer Banks was extensive . Strong waves and the storm surge from Hurricane Isabel knocked about 30 to 40 houses and several motels off of their pilings . Two families who did not evacuate were nearly swept out to sea when their home was destroyed . Local rescue was unable to reach them ; however , they were ultimately able to reach safety . The rough waves greatly affected piers in Nags Head , Rodanthe , and Frisco , with three being completely destroyed . Several locations along North Carolina Highway 12 were partially washed out or covered with debris , and 15 foot ( 4 @.@ 5 m ) sections of pavement on both sides of a bridge near Ocracoke were washed away . Strong waves destroyed a beach access ramp , as well . Several thousand homes and businesses were damaged by the passage of the hurricane , and damage in Dare County totalled nearly $ 350 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 450 million 2016 USD ) ) . In the Outer Banks , no deaths or injuries were reported . 
 = = = Southeast North Carolina = = = 
 The effects of Hurricane Isabel were generally light in the southeastern portion of the state . Sustained winds reached 72 mph ( 116 km / h ) offshore in the Frying Pan Shoals , where a gust of 82 mph ( 132 km / h ) was also reported . Sustained winds were lighter along the coast , peaking at 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) at the Wilmington International Airport , while gusts reached 66 mph ( 106 km / h ) at a North Carolina State Ports Authority facility in Wilmington . Tropical storm force wind gusts were reported as far inland as Lumberton , where gusts reached 52 mph ( 54 km / h ) . The large circulation of Isabel dropped moderate rainfall across the area , peaking at 4 @.@ 51 inches ( 115 mm ) in <unk> . Additionally , weather radars estimated over 5 inches ( 125 mm ) of precipitation fell in portions of New Hanover County . The rainfall resulted in ponding on roadways , though no severe flooding was reported . Storm tides were generally around 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 3 m ) above normal , though Wilmington reported a storm tide of 3 @.@ 22 feet ( 1 m ) . Rough waves resulted in moderate beach erosion near Cape Fear and minor erosion along eastward @-@ facing beaches north of Cape Fear . 
 Damage was minor in southeast North Carolina . Moderate winds inflicted isolated shingle and siding damage along barrier islands . The winds downed several trees , some onto cars and houses . Brief power outages were also reported . Beach erosion damaged a bridge in Bald Head Island , as well . In Chowan County , a business parking lot was under several feet of water due to flash flooding . One person was indirectly killed in Carteret County when trying to restore electricity . 
 = = = Inland = = = 
 Isabel produced strong winds throughout inland areas of eastern North Carolina . Plymouth , located 75 miles ( 120 km ) from where the hurricane made landfall , reported gusts to 95 mph ( 155 km / h ) . Sustained winds were lighter , with only a few locations receiving tropical storm strength winds . The passage of the hurricane resulted in moderate rainfall of up to 6 @.@ 02 inches ( 153 mm ) in Havelock . Upon making landfall , Isabel produced moderate to severe storm surges along the Pamlico and Neuse Rivers , with a location in Craven County reporting a storm tide of 10 @.@ 5 feet ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) above normal . 
 The strong storm surge produced significant flooding in Harlowe and Oriental . Several other locations also reported flooding of streets and low @-@ lying areas . The rise of water flooded many homes in Craven County and the eastern portions of Carteret and Pamlico counties . Emergency personnel performed many rescues to people who had not evacuated and had become trapped by storm surge flooding . Several eyewitnesses reported high velocity , waist deep water moving homes , trailers , and other objects many yards inland . As the water retreated , these objects were then dragged back towards the sound . A 5 to 8 foot ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) storm surge struck the western portion of the Albemarle Sound , with significant surge flooding occurring to the west of Edenton . There , the surge destroyed four homes , two of which were moved up to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) off their concrete block foundations . Nearly 60 percent of all homes and business in Chowan County suffered some structural damage due to wind , many of which were the result of large falling trees . One female died when a tree fell on her vehicle in Chowan County . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Hundreds of residents were stranded in Hatteras following the formation of the new inlet created by rising waters . Many parts of North Carolina Highway 12 were partially washed or damaged , which slowed recovery efforts and the return of homeowners in the Outer Banks . Sections of the highway were closed to one lane . The ferry between Hatteras Island and Ocracoke Island was temporarily closed due to damage after the hurricane , though a small passenger ferry remained available for Hatteras Village residents and emergency workers . People who were not residents were not allowed to be on the Outer Banks for two weeks after the hurricane due to damaged road conditions . When visitors were allowed to return , many ventured to see the new inlet , despite a 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) walk from the nearest road . 
 Initially , long @-@ term solutions to the Isabel Inlet such as building a bridge or a ferry system were considered , though they were ultimately cancelled in favor of pumping sand and filling the inlet . Coastal geologists were opposed to the solution , stating the evolution of the Outer Banks is dependent on inlets from hurricanes . Dredging operations began on October 17 , about a month after the hurricane struck . The United States Geological Survey used sand from the ferry channel to the southwest of Hatteras Island , a choice made to minimize impact to submerged aquatic vegetation and due to the channel being filled somewhat during the hurricane . On November 22 , about two months after the hurricane struck , Highway 12 and Hatteras Island were reopened to public access . On the same day , the ferry between Hatteras and Ocracoke was reopened . The breach on the southern end of Hatteras Island was filled in with sand , as well . 
 Hardware stores experienced great demand for portable generators , chain saws , dehumidifiers , and air movers following the passage of the hurricane . Utility crews from across the country came to the state to assist in returning power , though power outages persisted for several days . Over 2 @,@ 500 utility members worked , in some cases around the clock , to restore the power . One power company restored power to 68 % of its affected customers by the day after Isabel passed through the area . By four days after landfall , 83 @,@ 000 customers were without power , down from its peak of several hundred thousand . 
 Hours after Isabel made landfall , President George W. Bush issued a major disaster declaration for 26 North Carolina counties , which allowed the use of federal personnel , equipment and lifesaving systems and the delivery of heavy @-@ duty generators , plastic sheeting , tents , cots , food , water , medical aid and other essential supplies and materials for sustaining human life . The declaration also allocated federal funds for the long @-@ term recovery of hurricane @-@ stricken residents and business owners , as well as providing federal funds for the state and local governments to pay 75 percent of the eligible cost for debris removal and emergency services related to the hurricane , including requested emergency work undertaken by the federal government . By four days after the emergency declaration , assistance checks were mailed and used by residents to pay for what was not covered by their insurance . 
 By four days after landfall , FEMA served around 68 @,@ 000 meals to displaced families . More than a dozen disaster recovery centers were initiated throughout the state . FEMA provided 125 @,@ 000 pounds of ice in the first few days , and prepared 200 @,@ 000 pounds of ice and 180 @,@ 000 liters of water for the following week for the remaining communities without water . By six days after Isabel struck the state , all hospitals were opened and all roads excluding North Carolina Highway 12 were passable due to emergency crews clearing roads with debris . By about one month after the hurricane struck , 32 @,@ 560 North Carolina residents applied for federal assistance , with disaster aid totaling about $ 50 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 64 @.@ 3 million 2016 USD ) ) . Subsequent disaster declarations ultimately declared 47 North Carolina counties as disaster areas . By 12 weeks after the hurricane passed through the state , 54 @,@ 425 residents applied for federal assistance , with disaster aid totaling $ 155 @.@ 2 million ( 2003 USD , ( $ 200 million 2016 USD ) ) . 
 = Raglan Castle = 
 Raglan Castle ( Welsh : Castell <unk> ) is a late medieval castle located just north of the village of Raglan in the county of Monmouthshire in south east Wales . The modern castle dates from between the 15th and early 17th @-@ centuries , when the successive ruling families of the Herberts and the Somersets created a luxurious , fortified castle , complete with a large hexagonal keep , known as the Great Tower or the Yellow Tower of Gwent . Surrounded by parkland , water gardens and terraces , the castle was considered by contemporaries to be the equal of any other in England or Wales . During the English Civil War the castle was held on behalf of Charles I and was taken by Parliamentary forces in 1646 . In the aftermath , the castle was slighted , or deliberately put beyond military use ; after the restoration of Charles II , the Somersets declined to restore the castle . Raglan Castle became first a source of local building materials , then a romantic ruin , and is now a modern tourist attraction . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history of the castle = = = 
 Following the Norman invasion of Wales , the area around the village of Raglan was granted to William FitzOsbern , the Earl of Hereford . Some historians , such as John Kenyon , suspect that an early motte and bailey castle may have been built on the Raglan site during this period : the location had strategic importance and archaeologists have discovered the remains of a possible bailey ditch on the site . The local manor was held by the Bloet family from the late 12th @-@ century until the late 14th @-@ century and the family built a manor house somewhere on the site during this period , surrounded by a park . By the late medieval period the Raglan site was surrounded by the large deer parks of Home Park and Red Deer Park , the latter being enclosed at the end of the period . 
 = = = 15th - 16th centuries = = = 
 The current Raglan Castle was begun by Sir William ap Thomas , the lesser son of a minor Welsh family who rose through the ranks of mid @-@ 15th century politics , profiting from the benefits of the local offices he held . William married first Elizabeth , a wealthy heiress , and then <unk> ap Thomas , another heiress who would prove to be a powerful regional figure in her own right . In 1432 William purchased the manor of Raglan , where he had already been staying as a tenant , for 1 @,@ 000 marks ( £ 666 ) and commenced a programme of building work that established the basic shape of the castle as seen today , although most of it — with the exception of the South Gate and the Great Tower — was later built over . 
 William 's son dropped the Welsh version of his name , calling himself William Herbert . He continued to rise in prominence , supporting the House of York during the War of the Roses , fighting in the Hundred Years War in France but making his fortune from the Gascon wine trade . He was also closely associated with Welsh politics and status , being the first Welshman to be made an earl and being described by contemporary poets as the " national deliverer " who might achieve Welsh independence . In the 1460s William used his increasing wealth to remodel Raglan on a much grander scale . The symbolism of the castle architecture may have reflected the Welsh family roots — historian Matthew Johnson has suggested that the polygonal towers were possibly designed to imitate those of Caernarvon Castle , whose architecture carries numerous allusions to the eventual return of a Roman Emperor to Wales . The resulting castle was what historian Anthony Emery has described as one of the " last formidable displays of medieval defensive architecture " . 
 There was an important link between the Raglan Castle and the surrounding parkland , in particular the Home Park and the Red Deer Park . Historian Robert Liddiard suggests that on the basis of the views from the castle at this time , the structured nature of the parks would have contrasted with the wilderness of the mountain peaks framing the scene beyond , making an important statement about the refinement and cultured nature of the castle lord . In the 15th century there were also extensive orchards and fish ponds surrounding the castle , favourably commented upon by contemporaries . 
 William Herbert was executed in 1469 as a Yorkist supporter after the Battle of Edgecote Moor . Building work may have stopped for a period under his son , also called William Herbert , before recommencing in the late 1470s . By 1492 , the castle passed to Elizabeth Somerset , William Herbert 's daughter , who married Sir Charles Somerset , passing the castle into a new family line . 
 Sir Charles Somerset was politically successful under both Henry VII and Henry VIII , being made the Earl of Worcester . His son , Henry Somerset , died shortly after inheriting Raglan , but not before using lead reclaimed from Tintern Abbey to help the building work at Raglan Castle during the dissolution of the monasteries . His son and grandson , William Somerset and Edward Somerset , proved to be what John Kenyon describes as " wealthy , brilliant and cultured men " . William rebuilt much of the Pitched Stone Court , including the hall , adding the Long Gallery and developing the gardens into the new Renaissance style . The Somerset family owned two key castles in the region , Raglan and Chepstow , and these appeared to have figured prominently as important status symbols in paintings owned by the family . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 Edward Somerset made minor improvements to the interior of the castle at the start of the 17th century , but focused primarily on the exterior , expanding and developing the gardens and building the moat walk around the Great Tower . The resulting gardens were considered the equal of any other others in the kingdom at the time . 
 Upon inheriting Raglan in 1628 , Henry Somerset , then the 5th Earl of Worcester , continued to live a grand lifestyle in the castle in the 1630s , with a host of staff , including a steward , Master of Horse , Master of Fishponds , surveyors , auditors , ushers , a falconer and many footmen . The interior walls were hung with rich tapestries from Arras in France , while an inventory taken in 1639 recorded a large number of silver and gilt plate kept in the Great Tower , including a basket for the consumption of oranges and lemons , then luxury items in Wales . Mead was a popular drink in the castle , but contemporaries described the castle as being a particular sober and respectful community . Henry developed the entrance route to the castle , including building the Red Gate . His son Edward , Lord Herbert became famous for building a " water commanding machine " in the Great Tower , which used steam to pump a huge spout of water high into the air from the moat . 
 However , in 1642 civil war broke out between the rival Royalist supporters of King Charles I and Parliament . Raglan Castle was still held by Henry , then an elderly man , supported by his son , Lord Herbert . Both men were firm royalists . King Charles sent his own son , Prince Charles , on a fund @-@ raising tour of friendly regions , starting with Raglan Castle in October 1642 , following which Henry was promoted to be the first Marquess of Worcester . Tensions grew in the immediate region , partially driven by religious tensions between some of the more Protestant local people and the Roman Catholic Marquess ; on one of these occasions a local group attempted to search the castle , but were reportedly driven away by the sudden noise of Lord Herbert 's steam @-@ engine . The defences of Raglan were improved after this , with modern earthwork bastions built around the castle and a powder mill created ; a garrison of around 300 men was established at a cost of £ 40 @,@ 000 . Heavier cannon were installed in the bastions , with lighter pieces placed in the castle towers . 
 Lord Herbert left the castle to join the campaign against Parliament , returning at intervals to acquire more funds for the war . Charles I himself visited the castle twice , first in June 1645 after the battle of Naseby and again in 1646 , when he enjoyed playing bowls on the castle 's green . The Royalist cause was now close to military collapse , and the Marquess started to send some valuables , including the oak panelling from the parlour , some plaster ceiling and many pictures , to his brother at nearby Troy House for safe @-@ keeping . Lord Herbert was captured in Ireland , and an attack on Raglan itself appeared imminent . 
 In the expectation of a siege , the castle garrison was increased to around 800 soldiers ; the avenue of trees outside the castle gates were cut down , and neighbouring buildings destroyed to avoid them being used by Parliamentary forces . Large amounts of food were brought in to support the growing castle community , which also included a number of the wider Herbert family and other regional Royalist leaders who had sought shelter there . The first Parliamentary army arrived in early June , under the command of Colonel Morgan and Sir Trevor Williams . After several calls for the castle to surrender , a siege ensued , lasting through the summer months . In August , additional Parliamentary forces under General Fairfax arrived , and calls for the castle to surrender were renewed . Fairfax 's men began to dig trenches towards the castle , and used these to move mortars forward , probably including the famous " Roaring Meg " , bringing the interior of the castle into artillery range . Facing a hopeless situation , the Marquess surrendered the castle on 19 August on relatively generous terms for the garrison . The Marquess himself was arrested and sent to Windsor Castle , where he died shortly afterwards . 
 Fairfax ordered the castle to be totally destroyed under the supervision of Henry Herbert , a descendant of William ap Thomas . The fortifications proved too strong , however , and only a few of the walls were destroyed , or slighted . Historian Matthew Johnson describes the event as having the atmosphere of a " community festival " , as local people dredged the castle moat in search of treasure , and emptied the fishponds of valuable carp . The castle 's library , including an important collection of Welsh documents and books , was either stolen or destroyed . 
 Despite some immediate confiscations after the siege , by the time of the Restoration of Charles II , the Somerset family had managed to recover most of their possessions , including Raglan Castle . Henry Somerset , the 3rd <unk> , decided to prioritise the rebuilding of his other houses at Troy and Badminton , rather than Raglan , reusing some of the property sent away for safety before the war , or salvaged after the slighting . 
 = = = 18th to 21st centuries = = = 
 For the first half of the 18th century , the castle continued to deteriorate , with the Somerset family allowing their stewards to quarry stone from the castle for the repair of other estate buildings . One particular estate surveyor called Hopkins became known as the " Grand <unk> " , due to the number of chimneys , window frames and staircases he had removed from the castle . Henry Somerset , the 5th Duke , finally put an end to this practice in 1756 , and the castle became a tourist attraction , part of the popular Wye Tour . Seats , fences and bridges were installed , and first guidebook to the site was published in the early 19th century . The Great Hall was temporarily re @-@ roofed in the 1820s , when the castle was used for a " Grand Entertainment " by the Somersets , and in 1830 Jeffrey <unk> was employed to reinstate the Grand Staircase . In 1938 Henry Somerset , the 10th Duke , gave Raglan Castle to the Commissioner of Works , and the castle became a permanent tourist attraction . 
 Today , the castle is classed as a Grade I listed building and as a Scheduled Monument , administered by Cadw . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Raglan Castle was built in several phases , initial work occurring in the 1420s and 1430s , a major phase in the 1460s , with various alterations and additions at the end of the 16th century . The castle was built in stone , initially pale sandstone from <unk> , and later Old Red Sandstone , with Bath Stone used for many of the detailed features . Like similar properties of the period , the castle of the 1460s was almost certainly designed to be approached and entered in a particular way , maximising the aesthetic and political value of the fortification . At Raglan , the design highlighted the Great Tower : a typical senior visitor would ride through Raglan village , and first the tower and then the rest of the castle would appear suddenly over the slight rise on the hill . A visitor would have needed to circle the Great Tower and the moat , before coming in through the gatehouse , into the Pitched Stone Court , around the edge of the communal hall , before reaching the previously hidden , and more refined , inner Fountain Court . Only then would a privileged guest be able to enter the Great Tower itself , overlooking the Herbert family 's own chambers . Many less senior visitors or servants would never have entered this far , seeing only the external elements of the castle , but perhaps having been impressed by the outside of the Great Tower as they arrived . 
 There has been much discussion amongst academics about the extent to which Raglan was influenced by contemporary French designs ; one school of thought suggests that it was heavily influenced by designs that were then popular in the south of France ; others oppose this " diffusionist " school of thought , and argue that there is insufficient evidence to draw such a conclusion . Another line of debate has been over the nature of the castle 's defences , in particular its gunloops . Many castles built around the same time as Raglan appear to have been built with less concern for defences than in the past , their military features more symbolic than real . At Raglan , there are numerous gunloops throughout the castle 's defences , but many were ill @-@ placed if the intention was to use them in a conflict ; some could barely have been used at all . Traditionally , an evolutionary explanation for this was given : Raglan 's gunloops were of an early period , later surpassed in other castles . More recent explanations emphasis the prestigious symbolism of gunloops for the Herbert family when they built the castle , even if many might have been impossible to use . Anthony Emery notes that Raglan 's gunloops were better sited than many at the time , and at least " the owner was up to date in his symbolism " ; Robert Liddiard suggests that the poor placing of some of the gunloops for aesthetic purposes might have actually been a conversation point for those visitors with experience of fighting in France and the " correct " placing of such defences . 
 = = = Gatehouse and Closet Tower = = = 
 The three @-@ storey gatehouse to Raglan Castle dates from the 1460s and is approached over a stone bridge restored in 1949 . Characterised by extensive machicolations and gunloops , the gatehouse would originally have had a twin @-@ set of portcullises and a drawbridge . The intention of the design was at least partially defensive , but was also intended to provide a dramatic and impressive entrance for senior visitors to the castle . The upper part of the gatehouse provided chambers for the constable of the castle . Immediately to the west of the gatehouse was the castle library , once famous for its collection of Welsh literature . On the east side of the gatehouse is the three @-@ storey Closet Tower ; this was designed to be integral to the gatehouse , and may have contained the original castle treasury , conveniently accessible by the constable . The Closet Tower was partly altered in later years , possibly to allow the basement to be used as a magazine in the English Civil War . 
 = = = Pitched Stone Court and Fountain Court = = = 
 The Pitched Stone Court forms the north @-@ east corner of the castle , and provided a centre for the castle services and servants ; it takes its name from the late @-@ Tudor cobbling , or pitched stones . On the east side of the court is the former office wing , a 16th @-@ century construction mostly destroyed during the siege of 1646 . The castle kitchens and pantries are on the north side , containing two large fireplaces and storage facilities for food and supplies in their cellars . In the 1460s , the first floors to these buildings included chambers for the senior servants . The buttery in the north @-@ west corner would have been used to store and serve beer and wine . 
 On the south @-@ west side of the court is the hall , a 16th @-@ century design incorporating an earlier hall on the same site . 64 by 28 feet ( 19 @.@ 5 by 8 @.@ 5 metres ) wide , the hall was originally 42 feet ( 13 metres ) high , with a roof made of Irish oak , lit and ventilated by a cupola in the middle . A large oriel window lit the end of the hall occupied at dinner by the earls of Worcester , which by the time Raglan was built would have been used only for larger formal occasions . Originally , the hall would have been fitted with carved wooden panelling and a minstrel 's gallery . The Fountain Court lies to the west of the Pitched Stone Court , and is named after a marble fountain that once stood in the centre of it , featuring a white horse on a black marble base , complete with a flow of running water . The fountain was probably installed somewhat after the initial construction of the court in the 1460s , dating instead to Edward Somerset in the late 16th @-@ century ; the horse symbolised Edward 's prestigious role as Master of the Horse . The Fountain Court was built to provide luxurious accommodation for the family and guests — by the 15th century , it was important to be able to provide private chambers for visitors , and this court could hold up to four distinct groups of visitors in comfort . The Fountain Court as a whole is marked by what Augustus Pugin described as extremely fine , elegant and delicate stonework . 
 The castle chapel runs alongside the east side of the court , 41 feet ( 12 metres ) long and originally laid with bright yellow and tiles and decorated with gold and silver vestments . The Long Gallery stretches across the whole east first @-@ floor of the Fountain Court and , although now ruined , would have been a show @-@ piece for the earls ' wealth and power . The gallery was 126 feet ( 38 metres ) long and during the Tudor period it would have been wood @-@ panelled throughout and lined with tapestries and paintings . The Long Galley was intended to allow family and guests to relax inside and to admire the gardens , water gardens and the deer park to the north of the castle . Although most of this decoration has since been lost , two <unk> statues can still be seen on the walls of the Long Galley , modelled on a work by the French artist Hugues <unk> . 
 The west side of the Fountain Court comprises the apartments , with a number of bay windows and window seats facing west and north across the park . The Grand Staircase divides the apartments ; restored between 2010 and 2011 , the staircase would originally have had a substantial porch , similar to the one that survives in the Pitched Stone Court , and would have been a centre @-@ piece of the Fountain Court . The apartments to the west of the staircase are more complex than the others , designed to create somewhat greater privacy , and overlooked the gardens to the west of the castle . On the south side of the court is the South Gate , the original entrance to the castle prior to the 1460s reconstruction . The fan vaulted gatehouse closely resembles the contemporary cloisters at Gloucester Cathedral , but by the 16th century had been converted to the entrance to the bowling green in the terrace beyond . 
 On the south @-@ east side of the court were the 16th @-@ century parlour and , on the first @-@ floor , the dining room , both 49 by 21 feet ( 14 @.@ 9 by 6 @.@ 4 m ) . These were intended to provide rooms that were more private than the main hall , but more public than a personal chamber . Now ruined , they would originally have been decorated with carved wainscoting and elaborate , carved chimney @-@ pieces . Alongside these rooms , overlooking the Great Tower , were the private rooms for the lord 's family , of higher quality than the other accommodation in the castle . Some of the carved badges and shields on the external walls of these state apartments still remain intact , as in the hall ; these were a popular contemporary feature of 15th @-@ century great castles , and would have created a similar effect to those at Warkworth and Raby Castle . 
 = = = Great Tower = = = 
 The Great Tower at Raglan Castle , sometimes called the Yellow Tower of Gwent , sits outside the rest of the castle , protected by a moat and linked to the Fountain Court by a bridge . The fortification is representative of a trend during the 15th and 16th centuries in British castle building : tower keeps such as this , large , solid buildings designed for private accommodation , probably inspired by those in France , had started to appear in the 14th century at Dudley and Warkworth . In the 15th century the fashion spread , with the creation of French @-@ influenced palatial castles featuring complex tower keeps , such as those at Wardour and Tattershall . These were expensive buildings to construct , each built to a unique design and , as historian Norman Pounds has suggested , " were designed to allow very rich men to live in luxury and splendour " . 
 The hexagonal Great Tower was probably begun in the 1430s and 1440s , possibly on the motte of a previous castle . The tower today has lost not only one of its walls but part of its upper structure , and would originally have been three storeys high with probably additional machicolations on top similar to those on the gatehouse . It was designed to be a self @-@ contained fortification , with its own water and food supplies , and luxurious quarters lit by large windows on the upper floors . Originally the tower was reached by a bascule drawbridge , usually considered to be drawn from contemporary French designs , such as those at Ferté @-@ Milon and Vannes . This drawbridge was designed to have two parts — a wide , heavy bridge that would be raised or lowered when the family was in residence , and a thinner bridge , easier to lift , designed for the use of servants at other times . The Herberts used the bridge as their badge , and it can be seen in the carved window designs around the castle . The drawbridge was replaced with a grander stone bridge in the 1460s , probably at a cost of around £ 900 to £ 1000 . An apron wall with six turrets was also added around the tower at around the same time . 
 The original moat around the tower would have been a simple design , but it was redesigned in the 1460s to provide a walkway around the outside of the Great Tower . The niches in the walls of the walkway are of 17th @-@ century origin , and would originally have held classical statues - the walkway would have provided a dignified way of admiring the Great Tower . It is likely that fish would have been bred in the moat . 
 = = = Landscape and gardens = = = 
 The former 16th and 17th @-@ century gardens of Raglan Castle are still visible in the form of several long terraces to the north of the castle , overlooking the lower ground beyond . First created in the second half of the 16th @-@ century , these terraces would originally have included a number of knot gardens , probably with Italianate sculpture and carved stone balustrades . The gardens at their peak would have probably resembled those at Nonsuch Palace , where the Somersets also had an interest as the royal keepers . The valley below retains some signs of the drainage ditches that once formed part of the water gardens that flooded the bottom of the site , although the original " water @-@ parterre " to the north @-@ west of the castle , another water garden in the south , and the extensive gardens around the south @-@ west of the castle are now no longer visible . The castle 's bowling green still survives , on a terrace just beyond the South Gate entrance . The castle 's parks reverted to agricultural use by the 19th century , and Raglan is now surrounded by fields . 
 = Wahrlich , wahrlich , ich sage euch , BWV 86 = 
 Wahrlich , wahrlich , ich sage euch ( Truly , truly I say to you ) , BWV 86 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Leipzig for Rogate , the fifth Sunday after Easter , and first performed it on 14 May 1724 . 
 An unknown poet began the text with a quotation from the farewell discourses of Jesus . He used a stanza of Georg Grünwald 's hymn " Kommt her zu mir , spricht Gottes Sohn " in movement 3 and as the closing chorale a stanza from " Es ist das Heil uns kommen her " by Paul Speratus ( 1524 ) . Bach structured the cantata in six movements , a gospel quotation in the beginning , chorales as movements 3 and 6 , otherwise recitatives and arias . He scored it for three vocal soloists , a four @-@ part choir and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of two oboes d 'amore , strings and continuo . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach composed the cantata in Leipzig in his first annual cycle as Thomaskantor for the fifth Sunday after Easter , called Rogate . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the Epistle of James , " doers of the word , not only listeners " ( James 1 : 22 – 27 ) and from the Gospel of John , from the farewell discourses of Jesus , prayers will be fulfilled ( John 16 : 23 – 30 ) . The theme of the cantata is a quotation from the gospel at the beginning , the promise of Jesus " Verily , verily , I say unto you , whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name , he will give you " . An unknown poet used as movement 3 the 16th stanza of Georg Grünwald 's hymn " Kommt her zu mir , spricht Gottes Sohn " ( 1530 ) , and as the closing chorale the eleventh stanza of " Es ist das Heil uns kommen her " by Paul Speratus ( 1524 ) . The poet hints at the question how the promise can be understood looking at the reality of life . In movement 2 he uses the image of a rose with thorns to illustrate two conflicting aspects . In movements 3 and 4 he confirms the promise which has to be seen in the perspective of time . Movement 5 refers to the waiting for a promise being kept , and the closing chorale assures that God knows the right time . The structure of the six movements – a gospel quotation in the beginning , chorales as movements 3 and 6 , the sequence of recitative and arias – is similar to Wo gehest du hin ? BWV 166 , first performed one week earlier . 
 Bach first performed the cantata on 14 May 1724 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in six movements , beginning with a biblical quotation for the vox Christi , Jesus speaking . An aria is followed by a chorale for the soprano , a set of recitative and aria , and the closing chorale , the only movement for choir . Bach scored the work for three vocal soloists ( alto , tenor , bass ) , a four @-@ part choir and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of two oboes d 'amore ( Oa ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) and basso continuo . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The gospel quotation , " Wahrlich , wahrlich , ich sage euch , so ihr den Vater <unk> bitten werdet in meinem <unk> , so wird er 's euch geben . " ( Truly , truly I say to you , whatever you ask of the Father in My name , so will it be given to you . ) , is given to the bass as the vox Christi , the voice of Jesus . The instruments , strings probably doubled by oboe d 'amore , introduce vocal motifs which the voice picks up . The bass sings the text three times , while the instruments continue playing the same motifs . Julian Mincham observes : " The richness of the text , the unobtrusive nature of the melodic ideas and the gently flowing rhythms combine to create an appropriate atmosphere of dignified restraint " . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 In the alto aria , " Ich will doch wohl Rosen <unk> " ( I will yet indeed pluck roses ) , the voice is accompanied by the strings and a violin obbligato in virtuoso figuration , which may illustrate the heavenly light promised as the final fulfillment . John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage in 2000 , interprets the solo violin 's motif as an image of plucking a rose , who notes that the solo violin is silent when fulfillment is reached ( " For He has pledged His word " ) . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 In the chorale , " Und was der ewig <unk> Gott in <unk> Wort <unk> hat " ( And whatever the eternally merciful God has promised with His word ) , the unadorned cantus firmus in the soprano is embedded in a trio of the two oboes d 'amore and the continuo . Gardiner notes that the oboes ' music may illustrate the " stratospheric circling of the angelic host " which the hymn text refers to . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 In a short tenor recitative for tenor , " Gott macht es nicht <unk> die Welt , die viel <unk> und <unk> <unk> " ( God does not do as the world does , that promises much and upholds little ) , the musicologist Julian Mincham notes " a moment of harsh severity in the melody at the mention of the world ′ s failings " . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 In the tenor aria , " Gott <unk> <unk> ; wird gleich die <unk> <unk> " ( God helps indeed ; even if that help is delayed ) , a motif on the first line is introduced by the violin , repeated by the voice , and repeated several times . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 The closing chorale , " Die Hoffnung wart ' der <unk> Zeit " ( Hope awaits the right time ) , is set for four parts . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The selection is taken from the listing on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs are roughly marked as large by red background ; vocal groups with one voice per part ( OVPP ) and instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted green . 
 = = = Complete cycles = = = 
 = Napoleon Dynamite ( TV series ) = 
 Napoleon Dynamite is a 2012 American animated sitcom television comedy series based on the 2004 indie film of the same name . Set in the small town of Preston , Idaho , it follows the adventures of the titular 16 @-@ year @-@ old boy , who thinks he is skilled at everything . The series was created by the film 's co @-@ writers and directors Jared and Jerusha Hess , who developed it with Mike Scully and proposed it to Fox . 
 The series received mixed reviews ; critics were divided on how well the source material translated to animation . The premiere episode had a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 5 million viewers , but the ratings later dropped and the last four episodes averaged only 4 million viewers . The series ranked sixth in viewership among teenagers . In the United States , Napoleon Dynamite originally ran on Fox 's Animation Domination lineup from January 15 to March 4 , 2012 for six episodes , before being cancelled . The show is now airing reruns in Canada on Adult Swim . 
 = = History = = 
 Married couple Jared and Jerusha Hess were co @-@ writers and directors of the 2004 film Napoleon Dynamite , and had wanted to do an animated version since the film 's release . They thought animation was the best way to continue the world of Napoleon Dynamite as the original actors had grown too old to play teenage characters . Following the film 's success , Fox Searchlight Pictures wanted a sequel , but the Hesses delayed due to commitments to other projects and fear that audiences would tire of the Napoleon Dynamite characters . 
 Development of the series began in 2009 when Jared Hess met with writer @-@ producer Mike Scully to propose an animated version of the film to him . Scully stated that " Napoleon Dynamite as an animated series made " perfect sense " to him , and the two presented a nine @-@ minute pilot episode to Fox in 2010 . That May , Fox officially confirmed that an animated series with the original cast was in development with close involvement from the Hesses . Fox placed an order for six episodes as a trial run , and in July 2011 ordered seven additional scripts to be put into production if the series was renewed for a second season . The show was overseen by the Hesses and Scully . 
 The series premiered on January 15 , 2012 , as a mid @-@ season replacement for the animated series Allen Gregory . During its six @-@ episode run , Napoleon Dynamite had no consistent schedule ; it was constantly shifted on the Fox schedule in favor of football and award shows . On May 15 , 2012 , Fox announced a schedule for its 2012 – 13 season that dropped Napoleon Dynamite from the listings . The complete series was released on a single DVD in November 2014 by Olive Films . 
 = = Premise = = 
 The Hesses set the series towards the end of the Napoleon Dynamite film ; Scully said they transferred the characters and premise , but not the events of the film . In the film , set in the small town of Preston , Idaho , Napoleon ( Jon Heder ) is an awkward 16 @-@ year @-@ old who loves practicing ninja moves , soul dancing and drawing pictures of the liger , an animal he says is bred for its skills in magic . He makes up stories about himself about hunting wolverines in Alaska and a gang wanting him to join because of his skill with a bo staff . His brother Kip ( Aaron <unk> ) is an unemployed 32 @-@ year @-@ old ; flimsy and gawky , he is the target of Napoleon 's <unk> , although he often brags of his wrestling abilities and overall coolness ; he spends his days in an internet chat room talking to a woman named <unk> . The two live with their grandmother , <unk> ( Sandy Martin ) , who enjoys riding all @-@ terrain vehicles . Deborah " Deb " Bradshaw ( Tina Majorino ) is shy outcast who is infatuated with Napoleon . Napoleon 's uncle Rico ( Jon Gries ) is a middle @-@ aged man who lives in a camper van and is obsessed with his failed football career and with attempts at get rich quick schemes . Rex Kwon Do ( Diedrich Bader ) is a self @-@ declared martial @-@ arts master who runs a dojo . 
 Napoleon becomes friends with a new student , a Mexican immigrant named Pedro Sánchez ( <unk> Ramirez ) who rarely conveys emotion or speaks . Pedro runs for class president after seeing a poster at the school dance . On the election day , he gives a mediocre speech in front of the student body . Napoleon does a dance routine as Pedro 's skit for the election and receives a standing ovation , saving the campaign and winning Pedro the election . Following the campaign , Kip and <unk> meet each other in real life and are wed . Jared Hess has stated that the series takes place before the marriage , but after Pedro 's election , and several new characters are introduced . 
 Main cast of Napoleon Dynamite 
 = = Series overview = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews for the show 's premiere episode were mixed . Linda Stasi of the New York Post praised its humor as almost as funny as the film , and Nancy Smith of The Wall Street Journal called it " a dream come true " for fans of the film . Ed Bark of <unk> enjoyed the show and said it was " far funnier " than the Fox animated comedies Bob 's Burgers and Allen Gregory . Simon Moore of Flickering Myth compared the show 's " left @-@ field laughs " favorably to the humor in The Simpsons and Futurama . 
 David Wiegand of the San Francisco Chronicle found the writing not funny , writing that he could not see " Jon Heder 's expressionless face " as he talked in the animation . The Staten Island Advance said the change to animation freed Napoleon from real @-@ world limitations , but thought it " lessen [ ed ] the overall appeal of the character and setting " . Lori Rackl of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times did not like the movie and liked the animated series even less ; she thought the emotions and physical humor were lost in the change to animation . 
 Brian Lowry of Variety gave the show a neutral review : " To say the show represents an improvement over Allen Gregory is not much of an endorsement , but there is something amusing about Heder 's monotonic voice and Napoleon 's utter lack of self @-@ awareness , along with fast @-@ paced gags like a miniature golf course where hitting the ball into Hitler 's mouth wins a free round . " Robert Bianco of USA Today called the first episode a " vulgarized premiere " that detracted from the film 's qualities , but called the second one a " sweeter , funnier improvement " . Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times wrote of the pacing that the " satirical silence or non @-@ sequitur scenes slowly compiled to establish tone " in the film , but were sacrificed for the faster pace of a network TV <unk> Valerio 
 Simon Moore of Flickering Myth disagreed the faster pace was to the show 's detriment , calling the film 's " snail @-@ like pace ... its biggest flaw " . 
 Despite canceling the show , Fox touted in a press release that it had an averaged 2 @.@ 8 / 7 Nielsen share and 5 @.@ 8 million viewers for the six episodes , and that it ranked sixth in teenage viewership against other television networks . The show ranked # 56 in the adults 18 @-@ 49 ratings and # 103 in the total viewership rankings for the 2011 @-@ 12 television season . 
 = = Syndication = = 
 On August 20 , 2015 , Adult Swim Canada announced they would begin airing reruns of the series in September 2015 . 
 = = International broadcasting = = 
 = Q Who = 
 " Q Who " is the 16th episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . The episode first aired in broadcast syndication on May 5 , 1989 . It was written by executive producer Maurice Hurley and directed by Rob Bowman . " Q Who " marked the first appearance of the Borg , who were designed by Hurley and originally intended to appear in the first season episode " The Neutral Zone " . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the Starfleet crew of the Federation starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , the omnipotent entity known as " Q " ( John de Lancie ) arrives on the Enterprise and decides that Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) was acting in an arrogant manner . Q then sends the ship across the galaxy where the crew make first contact with the cybernetically enhanced assimilating race known as the Borg . After the crew fail to defeat a Borg vessel , Picard is forced to beg for Q 's help . 
 Costume designs were created by Dorinda Wood , while Michael Westmore developed the prosthetics worn on the actor 's heads . The designs were reminiscent of creations of H. R. Giger and the character Lord Dread from the television series Captain Power and the Soldiers of the Future . The episode went over budget and nearly required additional filming time . " Q Who " was watched by 10 @.@ 3 million viewers . The critical reception has been positive , with the episode described as the first " great episode " of the series . It was nominated for three Emmy Awards , winning two . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On his way back to his quarters , Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) steps off a turbolift and instead of finding himself in a corridor onboard the Enterprise , ends up on board a shuttlecraft with Q ( John de Lancie ) at the controls . Picard demands to be returned to the Enterprise , but Q refuses until Picard agrees to at least hear Q 's requests . Q then transports them to Ten Forward , where Guinan ( Whoopi Goldberg ) , who recognizes him , warns Picard not to trust him . Q reveals that he wants to join the crew to assist them as they push further into unexplored regions of the galaxy , asserting they are not ready for the threats they will encounter . Picard chooses to make their own way into the unknown , and rejects Q 's offer . Irritated by Picard 's arrogance , Q sends the Enterprise thousands of light years across the galaxy , then disappears . Lt. Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) reports that the nearest starbase is over two years away at maximum warp . An agitated Guinan warns Picard to set course for home immediately , but Picard is curious to explore the new area . 
 They discover a nearby planet that shows signs of a previous civilization but has been stripped of all industrial and mechanical elements , and are then met by a much larger cube @-@ shaped vessel which does not answer their hails . Guinan warns Picard that the ship belongs to the Borg , a powerful , cyborg @-@ like race that nearly wiped out her people , scattering the survivors across the galaxy , and again urges Picard to leave immediately . Though Picard orders the Enterprise 's shields raised , a single Borg transports into Engineering and begins to probe the Enterprise 's computer systems . Lt. Worf ( Michael Dorn ) initially attempts to incapacitate the intruder with his phaser set on stun , which has no effect , and is forced to increase power to kill the Borg instead . Immediately afterwards , a second Borg appears to continue probing the computer , and proves to be immune to phaser fire . Completing its mission , it strips several components from the dead Borg and disappears . The Borg ship then contacts the Enterprise and demands their surrender . When Picard refuses , the Borg use a cutting beam to slice into the Enterprise 's saucer section and remove a cross @-@ section of the ship , killing eighteen people . 
 Picard orders return fire , and the Enterprise appears to disable the Borg ship . Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) takes an away team to the Borg cube where they find that the Borg are still active but focusing their attention on repairing their ship 's damage . The away team returns , and Picard orders that they depart at maximum warp . The Borg ship immediately reactivates and begins pursuit , gaining on the Enterprise . Q appears on the bridge and warns Picard that the Borg will never stop chasing them , and cannot be defeated . Picard attempts to fight back against the Borg to no avail , and finally admits he needs Q 's help . Q obliges , returning the Enterprise to its last position in Federation space . Picard , though thankful for Q 's lesson , blames Q for the deaths of his crew . Q disappears , but not before reminding them again of their ill @-@ preparedness . Guinan warns Picard that now that the Borg are aware of the Federation 's presence , they will be coming . Picard reflects that perhaps Q did the right thing for the wrong reasons by bringing forward their encounter with the Borg , as it has prepared the Federation for what lies ahead of them as they continue to explore . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode featured the third appearance of de Lancie as Q after " Encounter at Farpoint " and " Hide and Q " , the latter of which had been written by Hurley under a pseudonym . Lycia Naff was introduced as Ensign Sonia Gomez , who was intended to be a recurring character in the same manner as Chief Miles O 'Brien played by Colm Meaney ( who also appeared in this episode ) . However , Naff only made one further appearance as Gomez , in the following episode , although the character later appeared in the Starfleet Corps of Engineers series of novellas . 
 " Q Who " went $ 50 @,@ 000 over budget and at one point had an eighth day of shooting arranged , although this was subsequently cancelled . The overspending on this episode and " Elementary , Dear Data " resulted in the budget @-@ saving production of the clip show " Shades of Gray " . Director Rob Bowman was concerned with " Q Who " for a while , saying that " we didn 't know day to day if we were making a stinker or a winner " . 
 = = = The Borg = = = 
 Gene Roddenberry was keen not to re @-@ use aliens from The Original Series , and so the Ferengi were developed to be the main villains for The Next Generation . After the new aliens ' first few appearances , it was decided that they were too comical to suit such a role , and instead the production team began looking for a new adversary for Starfleet . Writer and co @-@ executive producer Maurice Hurley developed the idea of an insectoid race with a shared hive consciousness . This idea would become the cybernetic Borg due to budget constraints , with the idea of a hive mind remaining . The new race would go on to appear in five further episodes of The Next Generation , as well as the film Star Trek : First Contact . The Borg also appeared in the pilot of Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , the Star Trek : Enterprise episode " Regeneration " and repeatedly in Star Trek : Voyager from the end of season three onwards . 
 It had been originally planned to include the Borg in the first season episode " The Neutral Zone " , but due to the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike , the time to write the script was cut short . Hurley developed the episode over a day and a half with the Borg elements directly removed . The episode was originally conceived as having two parts , with the Romulans and Federation teaming up in the second part , but that plan was subsequently dropped . This plot may have been linked to the aliens seen in " Conspiracy " . " The Neutral Zone " instead simply made reference to the destruction of a series of outposts by an unknown enemy . 
 The design of the Borg were reminiscent of Lord Dread from the television series Captain Power and the Soldiers of the Future and the designs of H. R. Giger . The first designs for the new race were created by costume designer Dorinda Wood after she received the script to " Q Who " . While her design showed a suit with tubes running in and out of it , she left the head design up to make @-@ up supervisor Michael Westmore . The headpieces and the main costumes were made at the same time by the two different departments , with Wood and Westmore working together at times to ensure that they matched . The base of the head pieces was made from foam , and while Westmore initially made casts of model kits using polyurethane for the electronic parts , he found it more effective to use actual electronics from damaged equipment . He designed a latex attachment to allow for tubes to be attached to skin so that there was not a great deal of bare skin left on the actors ' bodies . That skin was covered in a white base make @-@ up in order to achieve a zombie @-@ like appearance . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Q Who " was first shown on May 5 , 1989 in broadcast syndication within the United States . It was watched by 10 @.@ 3 million viewers , making it the most watched episode since " The Royale " , some four episodes earlier in the season . " Q Who " was watched by more viewers than any other episode for the rest of season two and the first five episodes of season three . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode following the end of the series . Keith DeCandido reviewed " Q Who " for Tor.com , describing it as " one of the best hours of TNG " . He called de Lancie 's performance a " triumphant return " , said that Goldberg brought " mystery and depth " to her role and that Stewart " just kills " as Picard . He said that the introduction of the Borg was " phenomenal " , and gave the episode a score of ten out of ten . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club said that the plot was " brilliant " because Q was proved right . He thought that had the crew been able to come to some sort of solution then it would have been a " strong " episode , but because Picard is forced to plead with Q it made it the first " great episode " of the series because " it admits that these humans ... can be arrogant , and weak , and that they can be bested " . He gave the episode an " A " grade . 
 SFX described the episode as " thrilling " in their review of the season two Blu @-@ ray release , while IGN referred to it as a " classic " . In a list of the great episodes of The Next Generation created by Juliette Harrison in 2012 for Den of Geek , " Q Who " was listed fifth - the earliest episode of the series to be featured in the list . 
 The episode was nominated for three Emmy Awards in 1989 , winning two for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series and Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series . It failed to win for Outstanding Special Visual Effects , with the award going to the miniseries War and Remembrance instead . 
 = = Home media and cinematic release = = 
 The first home media release of " Q Who " was on VHS cassette , appearing on October 12 , 1994 in the United States and Canada . The episode has been included in three DVD box sets . The first was the Season Two set , released in on May 7 , 2002 , and subsequently as part of the Star Trek : Fan Collective - Borg on March 7 , 2006 and Star Trek : Fan Collective - Q on June 6 , 2006 . The most recent release was as part of the Season Two Blu @-@ ray set on December 4 , 2012 . That release included an audio commentary for the episode featuring Rob Bowman , Dan Curry and Michael and Denise Okuda . " Q Who " received a cinematic release alongside an extended version of " The Measure of a Man " for one night on November 29 , 2012 to promote the Blu @-@ ray release . This was the second time that a pair of The Next Generation episodes received a cinematic release to promote the release of a Blu @-@ ray season box set . 
 = Lemon Drop = 
 A Lemon Drop is a vodka @-@ based cocktail that has a lemony , sweet and sour flavor , prepared using lemon juice , triple sec and simple syrup . It has been described as a variant of , or as " a take on " , the Vodka Martini . It is typically prepared and served straight up – chilled with ice and strained . 
 The drink was invented sometime in the 1970s by Norman Jay Hobday , the founder and proprietor of Henry Africa 's bar in San Francisco , California . Some variations of the drink exist , such as blueberry and raspberry Lemon Drops . It is served at some bars and restaurants in the United States , and in such establishments in other areas of the world . 
 = = Overview = = 
 A Lemon Drop is a cocktail with a lemony , sweet and sour flavor , whereby the sweet and sour ingredients serve to contrast and balance one another . It is a vodka @-@ based cocktail that is prepared with the addition of lemon juice , triple sec and simple syrup . Plain or citrus @-@ flavored vodka may be used in its preparation , such as citron vodka . Lemon @-@ flavored vodka is also sometimes used . Lemon juice that has been freshly squeezed may be used , which can produce a superior drink compared to using commercially @-@ prepared lemon juice . Some versions are prepared using the juice from Meyer lemons . 
 <unk> @-@ brand triple sec is used in some versions , and it may be prepared using a simple syrup that has been infused with lemon juice . Some versions are prepared using sour mix , a cocktail mixer . A garnish of a sliced lemon wheel , wedge , zest , rind or a lemon twist is sometimes used . Lemon is also sometimes included within the drink , such as a lemon wheel . Additional ingredients may also be used in the drink 's preparation , such as ginger syrup and lavender extract . 
 A Lemon Drop is typically prepared straight up , meaning that it is shaken or stirred with ice , strained , and served in a stemmed glass , such as a martini glass . The glass may be prepared with a sugared rim , performed by dipping the rim of the glass in water or lemon juice and then dipping it into a <unk> ( a shallow tray used in bartending ) , filled with sugar . <unk> sugar ( also called " bar sugar " , " caster sugar " , " castor sugar " and " ultrafine sugar " ) , which is more finely ground compared to standard granulated sugar , is sometimes used for this purpose . 
 = = History = = 
 The Lemon Drop was invented sometime in the 1970s by Norman Jay Hobday , the founder and proprietor of Henry Africa 's , a fern bar in the Russian Hill neighborhood of San Francisco , California that opened in 1969 . It was originally served in a cocktail glass . The Lemon Drop was most likely named after lemon drop candy . After its invention , the drink swiftly spread to many San Francisco saloons . In the early 1990s , it was often prepared as a shooter or served in a shot glass . 
 = = Variations = = 
 Variations of the drink include Lemon Drops prepared with blueberries and raspberries , which may use vodkas or other liquors flavored with these respective berries . These drinks may also be served or garnished with these berries , or with lemon . A blueberry Lemon Drop may be prepared with muddled blueberries , and a raspberry Lemon Drop may be prepared with puréed or crushed raspberries . 
 The glass may have a sugared rim , and colored sugar may be used , prepared by adding food coloring to the sugar . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In 2006 , preparation of the Lemon Drop was presented on The Oprah Winfrey Show , prepared by Oprah Winfrey and Rachael Ray . The drink 's popularity increased during this time . 
 = Soviet cruiser Kirov = 
 Kirov ( Russian : <unk> ) was a Project 26 Kirov @-@ class cruiser of the Soviet Navy that served during the Winter War , World War II and into the Cold War . She attempted to bombard Finnish coast defense guns during action in the Winter War , but was driven off by a number of near misses that damaged her . She led the Evacuation of Tallinn at the end of August 1941 , before being blockaded in Leningrad where she could only provide gunfire support during the Siege of Leningrad . She bombarded Finnish positions during the Vyborg – Petrozavodsk Offensive in mid @-@ 1944 , but played no further part in the war . Kirov was reclassified as a training cruiser on 2 August 1961 and sold for scrap on 22 February 1974 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Kirov was 191 @.@ 3 metres ( 627 ft 7 in ) long , had a beam of 17 @.@ 66 metres ( 57 ft 11 in ) and had a draft between 5 @.@ 75 to 6 @.@ 15 metres ( 18 ft 10 in to 20 ft 2 in ) . She displaced 7 @,@ 890 tonnes ( 7 @,@ 765 long tons ) at standard load and 9 @,@ 436 tonnes ( 9 @,@ 287 long tons ) at full load . Her steam turbines produced a total of 113 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 84 @,@ 637 kW ) and she reached 35 @.@ 94 knots ( 66 @.@ 56 km / h ; 41 @.@ 36 mph ) on trials . 
 Kirov carried nine 180 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) 57 @-@ caliber B @-@ 1 @-@ P guns in three electrically powered MK @-@ 3 @-@ 180 triple turrets . Her secondary armament consisted of six single 100 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) 56 @-@ caliber B @-@ 34 anti @-@ aircraft guns fitted on each side of the rear funnel . Her light AA guns consisted of six semi @-@ automatic 45 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) 21 @-@ K AA guns and four DK 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) machine guns . Six 533 @-@ millimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) 39 @-@ Yu torpedo tubes were fitted in two triple mountings . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 By 1944 Kirov exchanged her 45 mm guns for ten fully automatic 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 70 @-@ K AA guns with a thousand rounds per gun , two extra DK machine guns and one Lend @-@ Lease quadruple Vickers .50 machine gun MK III mount . 
 Kirov lacked any radar when war broke out in 1941 , but by 1944 was equipped with British Lend @-@ Lease models . One Type 291 was used for air search . One Type 284 and two Type 285 radars were for main battery fire control , while anti @-@ aircraft fire control was provided by two Type 282 radars . 
 = = = Post @-@ war refit = = = 
 Kirov was completely overhauled from 1949 to 1953 . Her secondary armament was upgraded with electrically powered , fully automated 100 mm B @-@ <unk> mountings and her fire @-@ control system was replaced with a Zenit @-@ 26 system with SPN @-@ 500 stabilized directors . All of her light AA guns were replaced with nine twin gun water @-@ cooled 37 mm V @-@ 11 mounts . All of her radars were replaced with Soviet systems : Rif surface search , Gyuys air search , Zalp surface gunnery and Yakor ' anti @-@ aircraft gunnery radars . All anti @-@ submarine weapons , torpedo launchers , aircraft equipment and boat cranes were removed . While expensive , about half the cost of a new Project <unk> Sverdlov @-@ class cruiser , it was deemed a success and allowed Kirov to serve for another two decades . 
 = = Service = = 
 Kirov was laid down at the Ordzhonikidze Yard , Leningrad on 22 October 1935 . She was launched on 30 November 1936 and was completed on 26 September 1938 . She was commissioned into the Baltic Fleet in the autumn of 1938 , but was still being worked on into early 1939 . Kirov sailed to Riga on 22 October when the Soviet Union began to occupy Latvia , continuing on to Liepāja the following day . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 During the Winter War , Kirov , escorted by the destroyers <unk> and <unk> <unk> , attempted to bombard Finnish coast defense guns at Russarö , 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) south of Hanko on 30 November . She only fired 35 rounds before she was damaged by a number of near misses and had to return to the Soviet naval base at Liepāja for repairs . She remained there for the rest of the Winter War and afterwards was under repair at Kronstadt from October 1940 to 21 May 1941 . 
 Based near Riga at the time of the German attack on the Soviet Union in June 1941 , Kirov was trapped in the Gulf of Riga by the rapid enemy advance . She supported minelaying sorties by Soviet destroyers in the western half of the Irben Strait on the evenings of 24 – 25 and 26 – 27 June . Off @-@ loading her fuel and ammunition to reduce her draft , she passed through the shallow Moon Sound Channel ( between Muhu island and the Estonian mainland ) with great difficulty , and managed to reach Tallinn by the end of June . Kirov provided gunfire support during the defense of Tallinn and served as the flagship of the evacuation fleet from Tallinn to Leningrad at the end of August 1941 . For most of the rest of the war she was blockaded in Leningrad and Kronstadt by Axis minefields and could only provide gunfire support for the defenders during the Siege of Leningrad . She was damaged by a number of German air and artillery attacks , most seriously on 4 – 5 April 1942 when she was hit by three bombs and one 15 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) shell that damaged all six 100 mm AA guns , the aft funnel , the mainmast , and killed 86 sailors and wounded 46 . Repairs took two months during which her catapult was removed ; a lighter pole mainmast was fitted and her anti @-@ aircraft armament increased . After Leningrad was liberated in early 1944 , Kirov remained there , and took no further part in the war except to provide gunfire support for the Soviet Vyborg – Petrozavodsk Offensive in mid – 1944 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 Kirov was damaged by a German magnetic mine while leaving Kronstadt on 17 October 1945 and was under repair until 20 December 1946 . She was refitted from November 1949 to April 1953 , during which her machinery was completely overhauled and her radars , fire control systems and anti @-@ aircraft guns were replaced by the latest Soviet systems . She participated in fleet maneuvers in the North Sea during January 1956 . She was reclassified as a training cruiser , regularly visiting Poland and East Germany , on 2 August 1961 and sold for scrap on 22 February 1974 . When Kirov was decommissioned , two gun turrets were installed in Saint Petersburg as a monument . 
 = Music of Final Fantasy XI = 
 The music of the MMORPG Final Fantasy XI was composed by Naoshi Mizuta along with regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu and Kumi Tanioka . The Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack , a compilation of almost all of the music in the game , was released by DigiCube in 2002 , and subsequently re @-@ released by Square Enix in 2004 . Final Fantasy XI Rise of the Zilart Original Soundtrack was released by DigiCube in 2003 after the release of the Rise of the Zilart expansion for Final Fantasy XI , and re @-@ released by Square Enix in 2004 . Final Fantasy XI Chains of Promathia Original Soundtrack was produced by Square Enix in 2004 after the release of the Chains of Promathia expansion , and in 2005 Square Enix published Music from the Other Side of Vana 'diel , a collection of arranged tracks from the game performed by The Star Onions , a group composed of Square Enix composers including Naoshi Mizuta , Kumi Tanioka and Hidenori Iwasaki . Final Fantasy XI Treasures of Aht Urhgan Original Soundtrack was released by Square Enix in 2006 for the Treasures of Aht Urhgan expansion . 
 In 2007 , Square Enix released the Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack Premium Box , a collection of all of the previously released albums , as well as the as yet unreleased Final Fantasy XI Unreleased Tracks and Piano Collections Final Fantasy XI , an album of unreleased music from the game and its expansions and an album of piano arrangements of music from the game , respectively . After the release of the fourth expansion for the game , Final Fantasy XI Wings of the Goddess Original Soundtrack was released in 2008 by Square Enix . Additionally , in summer 2008 another Piano Collections Final Fantasy XI album , completely separate from the previous piano collections album , will be released by Square Enix . 
 The music has received mixed reviews ; while reviewers have praised some of the associated albums such as Final Fantasy XI Rise of the Zilart Original Soundtrack and Final Fantasy XI Treasures of Aht Urhgan Original Soundtrack , other albums , such as Final Fantasy XI Chains of Promathia Original Soundtrack and Music from the Other Side of Vana 'diel , were not as universally liked . Several songs , especially " Distant Worlds " , remain popular today , and have been performed numerous times in orchestral concert series , as well as been published in arranged and compilation albums by Square as well as outside groups . 
 = = Creation and influence = = 
 The music of Final Fantasy XI was scored by Nobuo Uematsu , Naoshi Mizuta , and Kumi Tanioka . Composer Yasunori Mitsuda was also asked to contribute , but he was busy scoring Xenosaga . The expansion packs were scored by Mizuta alone after Tanioka left to pursue other projects and Uematsu left Square Enix , although their names remain in the credits for those albums due to the inclusion of versions of songs they had previously composed for the game . The opening of the game features choral music with lyrics in Esperanto . According to Uematsu , the choice of language was meant to symbolize the developers ' hope that their online game could contribute to cross @-@ cultural communication and cooperation . He also noted the increased difficulty of scoring a game for which there was no linear plotline , a major change from the previous Final Fantasy games . It was the first game in the series for which he composed while he was no longer a Square employee . New music has been employed for special events , such as a holiday score titled Jeuno <unk> <unk> which can be heard in the city of Jeuno each mid to late December since 2004 . Some of the game 's music has been released on iTunes for download , such as the vocal " Distant Worlds " , which was released on the Japanese iTunes Music Store on September 13 , 2005 , having been put in the game in a July 2005 patch . 
 = = Albums = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack is the soundtrack album of Final Fantasy XI . The album contains musical tracks from the game , composed by Nobuo Uematsu , Naoshi Mizuta , and Kumi Tanioka . The soundtrack was released on June 5 , 2002 by DigiCube with the catalog numbers SSCX @-@ <unk> @-@ 70 , and re @-@ released on May 10 , 2004 by Square Enix with the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . The album spans 51 tracks over two disks and covers a duration of 1 : 51 : 57 . 
 Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack reached # 25 on the Japan Oricon charts . It received mixed reviews by critics , with Ben Schweitzer of RPGFan finding it to be a " strong " album , if " slower " and " more repetitive than previous Final Fantasy scores " . Liz Maas of RPGFan enjoyed the album , advising any fan of the series , even if not of the game itself , to buy the album . Joe <unk> of Soundtrack Central , on the other hand , found it to be " a collection of bland melodies , dull chord progressions , and aged tapestries of musical technique " and , while praising the sound quality , termed it overall a " disappointment " . Chris of Square Enix Music Online , however , felt that while it was " not instantly likable " that it had " the potential to become a favorite with multiple listens " . 
 = = = Final Fantasy XI Rise of the Zilart Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy XI Rise of the Zilart Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of the Final Fantasy XI Rise of the Zilart expansion . The album contains musical tracks from the game , composed by Naoshi Mizuta and Nobuo Uematsu and arranged by Naoshi Mizuta . The soundtrack was released on May 21 , 2003 by DigiCube with the catalog number SSCX @-@ <unk> , and re @-@ released on September 23 , 2004 by Square Enix with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . The album spans 19 tracks and covers a duration of 70 : 12 . 
 Final Fantasy XI Rise of the Zilart Original Soundtrack reached # 53 on the Oricon charts . It was well received by critics such as Patrick Gann of RPGFan , who called it " a solid OST " of " well @-@ developed compositions " . Chris of Square Enix Music Online agreed , terming it " a very well @-@ produced soundtrack " and " a consistent and fitting effort " . 
 = = = Final Fantasy XI Chains of Promathia Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy XI Chains of Promathia Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of the Final Fantasy XI Chains of Promathia expansion . The album contains musical tracks from the game , composed by Naoshi Mizuta , Kumi Tanioka , and Nobuo Uematsu and arranged by Naoshi Mizuta and Kumi Tanioka . The soundtrack was released on November 17 , 2004 by Square Enix with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . It covers a duration of 78 : 20 over 24 tracks . 
 Unlike the first expansion soundtrack , Promathia was not received well by critics , though it reached # 57 on the Oricon charts . Patrick Gann expressed himself as " disappointed " and said that the album was full of " boring , repetitive string @-@ work " instead of Mizuta 's usual " strong , raw instrumentation " . Chris of Square Enix Music Online termed it " the least accessible Final Fantasy XI soundtrack " and disliked its " grating synth use " , but also termed it " an excellent in @-@ game accompaniment " . 
 = = = Music from the Other Side of Vana 'diel = = = 
 Music from the Other Side of Vana 'diel is an arranged album of tracks from Final Fantasy XI and its expansions , performed by The Star Onions , a group composed of Square Enix composers , including Naoshi Mizuta , Kumi Tanioka and Hidenori Iwasaki . The album was released by Square Enix on August 24 , 2005 under the catalog number SQEX @-@ 10050 . The album consists of newly arranged versions of songs from Final Fantasy XI and its first two expansions . The album contains 10 tracks and covers a duration of 53 : 21 . The majority of the tracks are smooth jazz , with the exception of Awakening and Blessed in Her Glorious Light - The Grand Duchy of Jeuno , which encompass electronica and gospel respectively . 
 The album received widely varied reviews by critics and reached # 55 on the Oricon charts . Mike Wilson of RPGFan termed it a " high caliber soundtrack " and said that it was full of " extremely well done " tracks . Ryan Mattich of RPGFan was slightly less impressed , saying that while " each track is a masterpiece " , that the album as a whole lacked cohesion . Chris of Square Enix Music Online was much harsher towards the album , finding it to be " fundamentally flawed " due to a lack of coherence and disliked several of the tracks , especially the ones arranged by Mizuta . 
 = = = Final Fantasy XI Treasures of Aht Urhgan Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy XI Treasures of Aht Urhgan Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of the Final Fantasy XI Treasures of Aht Urhgan expansion . The album contains musical tracks from the game , composed by Naoshi Mizuta and Nobuo Uematsu and arranged by Naoshi Mizuta . The soundtrack was released on May 24 , 2006 by Square Enix with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . It covers a duration of 64 : 48 over 21 tracks . 
 Final Fantasy XI Treasures of Aht Urhgan Original Soundtrack was well received by critics , with Patrick Gann describing it as " wonderful " , and saying that " nearly every song has its own memorable feel " . Chris of Square Enix Music Online agreed , terming it " a solid mixture of continuity and change " . It reached position # 50 on the Oricon charts . 
 = = = Final Fantasy XI Unreleased Tracks = = = 
 Final Fantasy XI Unreleased Tracks is a collection of Final Fantasy XI music composed by Naoshi Mizuta that had not been released as part of any of the official albums for Final Fantasy XI or its expansions . It spans 18 tracks and covers a duration of 50 : 43 . It has not been released as a single album , but rather can only be found as part of the Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack Premium Box , which was released on March 28 , 2007 , by Square Enix with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . Final Fantasy XI Unreleased Tracks was well received by critics such as Patrick Gann , who said that it was an album full of " interesting pieces " . 
 = = = Piano Collections Final Fantasy XI = = = 
 Piano Collections Final Fantasy XI is a collection of Final Fantasy XI music composed by Nobuo Uematsu , Naoshi Mizuta , and Kumi Tanioka and arranged for the piano by Kaoru Ishikawa . It spans 10 tracks and covers a duration of 38 : 42 . It has not been released as a single album , but rather can only be found as part of the Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack Premium Box , which was released on March 28 , 2007 , by Square Enix with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . The album received varied reviews by critics . Patrick Gann termed it " excellent " and praised the technical skills of the performers , though he disliked the short length of the album . Jillian of Square Enix Music Online , on the other hand , was " disappointed " with the album , finding the arrangements to be " simplistic " and the performances , while good technically , to be lacking in passion . The box set reached # 35 on the Oricon charts . 
 = = = Final Fantasy XI Wings of the Goddess Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy XI Wings of the Goddess Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of the Final Fantasy XI Wings of the Goddess expansion . The album contains musical tracks from the game , composed by Naoshi Mizuta , as well as three bonus tracks containing songs from the Treasures of Aht Urhgan expansion that were not included in the soundtrack . The soundtrack was released on the April 23 , 2008 by Square Enix with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> and spans a duration of 77 : 44 over 25 tracks . 
 Final Fantasy XI Wings of the Goddess Original Soundtrack received mixed reviews from reviewers , with Patrick Gann saying that " It is consistently good , but rarely is it mind @-@ blowing " . He did , however , praise Mizuta , saying that " Mizuta has grown ... to the point where I imagine he can take on nearly any project " . It reached position # 47 on the Oricon charts . 
 = = = Piano Collections Final Fantasy XI ( 2008 ) = = = 
 Piano Collections Final Fantasy XI is a collection of Final Fantasy XI music composed by Nobuo Uematsu and Naoshi Mizuta , arranged for the piano by Kaoru Ishikawa , and performed by Ayumi Iga and Kasumi <unk> . It spans 11 tracks and covers a duration of 41 : 30 . Although it has the same name as the album from the Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack Premium Box , it is an entirely separate album . It was released on June 25 , 2008 by Square Enix with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . 
 The album was well received by critics , with Patrick Gann praising its " high @-@ quality arrangements , and extremely high @-@ quality recording and production value " . It made it to position # 25 on the Oricon charts and remained on the charts for four weeks . 
 = = = Sanctuary = = = 
 Sanctuary is the second arranged album of tracks from Final Fantasy XI and its expansions by The Star Onions . The album was released by Square Enix on May 20 , 2009 under the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . The album consists of newly arranged versions of songs from Final Fantasy XI and its first four expansions . The album contains 11 tracks and covers a duration of 52 : 40 . The majority of the tracks are new age , combining the smooth jazz of their previous album with strings , funk , and classical . Sanctuary reached # 60 on the Oricon charts . It was well received by Patrick Gann , who termed the arrangements as strong and balanced , and called the total album a " lovely little surprise " . 
 = = = Memories of Dusk and Dawn = = = 
 Final Fantasy XI 8th Anniversary : Memories of Dusk and Dawn is a compilation album of tracks from the game and its expansions . It was released on May 12 , 2010 by Square Enix with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . The tracks were selected through a vote by fans , which ended on March 8 , 2010 . The album has 27 tracks and has a length of 1 : 18 : 32 . The majority of the tracks have appeared on previous albums , with only some music from the PlayOnline service as newly released . Memories of Dusk and Dawn was noted by Gann as a good " best of " album , but of no use to fans of the music who have other albums from the series ; it reached # 27 on the Oricon charts when released . 
 = = = Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack PLUS = = = 
 Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack PLUS is a two @-@ disc soundtrack album containing mostly previously unreleased music . The music on the first disc was composed by Naoshi Mizuta and comes from the Wings of the Goddess expansion , the three add @-@ on scenarios and the <unk> trilogy . The second disc contains the background tracks of the PlayOnline Viewer composed by Noriko Matsueda and Kumi Tanioka of which only two had been previously released as part of the Memories of Dusk and Dawn compilation . The soundtrack was released on November 9 , 2011 by Square Enix with the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 and spans a duration of 2 : 15 : 40 over 40 tracks . 
 Track list 
 = = = Final Fantasy XI Seekers of Adoulin Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy XI Seekers of Adoulin Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of the Final Fantasy XI Seekers of Adoulin expansion . The album contains musical tracks from the game , composed by Naoshi Mizuta . The soundtrack was released on March 27 , 2013 by Square Enix with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> and spans a duration of 50 : 08 over 13 tracks . An additional EP , Forever Today : Final Fantasy XI Seekers of Adoulin OST PLUS , was released for the Seekers of Adoulin expansion by Square Enix on November 11 , 2014 . The EP was released digitally only and has a catalog number of SQEX @-@ <unk> . It also contains music composed by Mizuta , and spans a duration of 31 : 34 over 8 tracks . 
 Final Fantasy XI Seekers of Adoulin Original Soundtrack received tepid reviews from reviewers , with Derek Heemsbergen of RPGFan calling it " a fine demonstration of how Mizuta has evolved as a musician " , though he described several of the tracks as " safe " and " not the best " . It reached position # 125 on the Oricon charts for one week . Forever Today : Final Fantasy XI Seekers of Adoulin OST PLUS received better reviews , with Patrick Gann of RPGFan terming it a " digital @-@ only nugget of goodness " containing a few solid tracks by Mizuta . 
 Track list 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Black Mages , a band led by Nobuo Uematsu that arranges music from Final Fantasy video games into a rock music style , have arranged " Distant Worlds " in the album Darkness and Starlight , published in 2008 . Uematsu continues to perform certain pieces in his Dear Friends : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . The music of Final Fantasy XI has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums , such as the Distant Worlds - Music from Final Fantasy concert tour , where " Opening Theme " and " Distant Worlds " were performed as a medley by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra , while " Ronfaure " was performed by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . Selections of music from Final Fantasy XI also appear on Japanese remix albums , called dōjin music , and on English remixing websites . 
 = Thomas Blamey = 
 Field Marshal Sir Thomas Albert Blamey , GBE , KCB , CMG , DSO , ED ( 24 January 1884 – 27 May 1951 ) was an Australian general of the First and Second World Wars , and the only Australian to attain the rank of field marshal . 
 Blamey joined the Australian Army as a regular soldier in 1906 , and attended the Staff College at Quetta . During the First World War he participated in the landing at Anzac Cove on 25 April 1915 , and served as a staff officer in the Gallipoli Campaign , where he was mentioned in despatches for a daring raid behind enemy lines . He later served on the Western Front , where he distinguished himself in the planning for the Battle of Pozières . He rose to the rank of brigadier general , and served as chief of staff of the Australian Corps under Lieutenant General Sir John Monash , who credited him as a factor in the Corps ' success in the Battle of Hamel , the Battle of Amiens and the Battle of the Hindenburg Line . 
 After the war Blamey was Deputy Chief of the General Staff , and was involved in the creation of the Royal Australian Air Force . He resigned from the regular Army in 1925 to become Chief Commissioner of the Victoria Police , but remained in the Militia , rising to command the 3rd Division in 1931 . As Chief Commissioner , Blamey set about dealing with the grievances that had led to the 1923 Victorian Police strike , and implemented innovations such as police dogs and equipping vehicles with radios . His tenure as Chief Commissioner was marred by a scandal in which his police badge was found in a brothel , and a later attempt to cover up the shooting of a police officer led to his forced resignation in 1936 . He later made weekly broadcasts on international affairs on Melbourne radio station 3UZ . Appointed chairman of the Commonwealth Government 's Manpower Committee and Controller General of Recruiting in 1938 , he headed a successful recruiting campaign which doubled the size of the part @-@ time volunteer Militia . 
 During the Second World War Blamey commanded the Second Australian Imperial Force and the I Corps in the Middle East . In the latter role he commanded Australian and Commonwealth troops in the disastrous Battle of Greece . In the former role , he attempted to protect Australian interests against British commanders who sought to disperse his forces on all manner of missions . He was appointed Deputy Commander in Chief Middle East Command , and was promoted to general in 1941 . In 1942 , he returned to Australia as Commander in Chief of the Australian Military Forces and Commander of Allied Land Forces in the South West Pacific Area under the command of General Douglas MacArthur . On the orders of MacArthur and Prime Minister John Curtin , he assumed personal command of New Guinea Force during the Kokoda Track campaign , and relieved Lieutenant General Sydney Rowell and Major General Arthur Allen under controversial circumstances . During the Salamaua – Lae Campaign Blamey planned and executed a major and victorious campaign . Nonetheless , during the final campaigns of the war he faced vociferous criticism of the Army 's performance . He signed the Japanese Instrument of Surrender on behalf of Australia at Japan 's ceremonial surrender in Tokyo Bay on 2 September 1945 , and later personally accepted the Japanese surrender at Morotai on 9 September . He was promoted to field marshal in June 1950 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The seventh of ten children , Blamey was born on 24 January 1884 in Lake Albert , near Wagga Wagga , New South Wales . He was the son of Richard Blamey , a farmer who had emigrated from Cornwall at the age of 16 in 1862 , and his Australian @-@ born wife , Margaret ( née Murray ) . After farming failures in Queensland and on the Murrumbidgee River near Wagga Wagga , his father Richard moved to a small 20 @-@ acre ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) property in Lake Albert , where he supplemented his farm income working as a drover and shearing overseer . 
 Blamey acquired the bush skills associated with his father 's enterprises and became a sound horseman . He attended Wagga Wagga Superior Public School ( now Wagga Wagga Public School ) , where he played Australian football , and was a keen member of the Army Cadet unit . He transferred to Wagga Wagga Grammar when he was 13 , and was head cadet of its unit for two years . 
 Blamey began his working life in 1899 as a trainee school teacher at Lake Albert School . He transferred to South Wagga Public School in 1901 , and in 1903 moved to Western Australia , where he taught for three years at Fremantle Boys School . He coached the rifle shooting team of its cadet unit there to a win in the Western Australian Cup . He was raised in the Methodist faith and remained involved with his church . By early 1906 he was a lay preacher , and church leaders in Western Australia offered him an appointment as an associate minister in Carnarvon , Western Australia . 
 = = Early military career = = 
 With the creation of the Cadet Instructional Staff of the Australian Military Forces , Blamey saw a new opportunity . He sat the exam and came third in Australia , but failed to secure an appointment as there were no vacancies in Western Australia . After correspondence with the military authorities he persuaded the Deputy Assistant Adjutant General , Major Julius Bruche , that he should be given the option of taking up an appointment for one of the vacancies in another state . He was appointed to a position in Victoria with the rank of lieutenant , commencing duty in November 1906 with responsibility for school cadets in Victoria . 
 In Melbourne , Blamey met Minnie Millard , the daughter of a Toorak stockbroker who was involved in the Methodist Church there . They were married at her home on 8 September 1909 . His first child was born on 29 June 1910 , and named Charles Middleton after a friend of Blamey 's who had died in a shooting accident ; but the boy was always called Dolf by his family . A second child , a boy named Thomas , was born four years later . 
 Blamey was promoted to captain on 1 December 1910 , and became brigade major of the 12th Brigade Area . He then set his sights on attending staff college . There were two British staff colleges , at Camberley in England and Quetta in India , and from 1908 one position was set aside for the Australian Army at each every year . No Australian officers managed to pass the demanding entrance examinations , but this requirement was waived to allow them to attend . In 1911 , Blamey became the first Australian officer to pass the entrance examination . He commenced his studies at Quetta in 1912 , and performed very well , completing the course in December 1913 . 
 The usual practice was for Australian staff college graduates to follow their training with a posting to a British Army or British Indian Army headquarters . He was initially attached to the 4th Battalion , King 's Royal Rifle Corps at Rawalpindi , and then the staff of the Kohat Brigade on the North @-@ West Frontier . Finally , he was assigned to the General Staff at Army Headquarters at <unk> . In May 1914 , he was sent to Britain for more training , while his family returned home to Australia . He visited Turkey ( including the Dardanelles ) , Belgium , and the battlefields of the Franco @-@ Prussian War en route . In England he spent a brief time on attachment to the 4th Dragoon Guards at Tidworth before taking up duties on the staff of the Wessex Division , at that time entering its annual camp . On 1 July 1914 , he was promoted to major . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Following the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 , Blamey was transferred to the War Office , where he worked in the Intelligence Branch preparing daily summaries for the King and the Secretary of State for War , Lord Kitchener . Fully trained staff officers were rare and valuable in the Australian Army , and while still in Britain , Blamey was appointed to the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) as General Staff Officer , Grade 3 ( Intelligence ) , on the staff of Major General William Bridges 's 1st Division . As such , he reported to the 1st Division 's GSO1 , Lieutenant Colonel Brudenell White . In November 1914 he sailed for Egypt with Colonel Harry Chauvel , to join the Australian contingent there . 
 = = = Gallipoli = = = 
 Along with Bridges , White , and other members of 1st Division headquarters , Blamey left the battleship HMS Prince of Wales in a trawler and landed on the beach at Anzac Cove at 07 : 20 on 25 April 1915 . He was sent to evaluate the need for reinforcements by Colonel James McCay 's 2nd Brigade on the 400 Plateau . He confirmed that they were needed , and the reinforcements were sent . 
 On the night of 13 May 1915 , Blamey , in his capacity as 1st Division intelligence officer , led a patrol consisting of himself , Sergeant J. H. Will and Bombardier A. A. Orchard , behind the Turkish lines in an effort to locate the Olive Grove guns that had been harassing the beach . Near Pine Ridge , an enemy party of eight Turks approached ; when one of them went to bayonet Orchard , Blamey shot the Turk with his revolver . In the action that followed , six Turks were killed . He withdrew his patrol back to the Australian lines without locating the guns . For this action , he was mentioned in despatches . 
 Blamey was always interested in technical innovation , and was receptive to unorthodox ideas . He was instrumental in the adoption of the periscope rifle at Gallipoli , a device which he saw during an inspection of the front line . He arranged for the inventor , Lance Corporal W. C. B. Beech , to be seconded to division headquarters to develop the idea . Within a few days , the design was perfected and periscope rifles began to be used throughout the Australian trenches . 
 In July 1915 Blamey was given a staff appointment as a General Staff Officer , Grade 2 ( GSO2 ) , and in September he was promoted to temporary lieutenant colonel and joined the staff of the newly formed 2nd Division in Egypt as its Assistant Adjutant and Quartermaster General ( AA & QMG ) – the senior administrative officer of the division . Its commander , Major General James Gordon Legge , preferred to have an Australian colonel in this post as he felt that a British officer might not take such good care of the troops . The 2nd Division Headquarters embarked for Gallipoli on 29 August 1915 , but Blamey was forced to remain in Egypt as he had just had an operation for haemorrhoids . He finally returned to Anzac on 25 October 1915 , remaining for the rest of the campaign . 
 = = = Western Front = = = 
 After the Australian forces moved to the Western Front in 1916 , Blamey returned to the 1st Division as GSO1 . At the Battle of Pozières , he developed the plan of attack which captured the town , for which he received another mention in despatches , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order in the 1917 New Year Honours . He was considered as a possible brigade commander , but he had never commanded a battalion , which was usually regarded as a prerequisite for brigade command . He was therefore appointed to command the 2nd Infantry Battalion on 3 December 1916 . On 28 December , Blamey , as senior ranking battalion commander , took over as acting commander of the 1st Infantry Brigade . On 9 January 1917 , he went on leave , handing over command to Lieutenant Colonel Iven Mackay . However , when General Headquarters ( GHQ ) BEF found out about this use of a staff college graduate , it reminded I ANZAC Corps that " it is inadvisable to release such officers for command of battalions unless they have proved to be unequal to their duties on staff " . 
 Blamey therefore returned to 1st Division Headquarters . Lieutenant General Sir William Birdwood did , however , promote Blamey to full colonel , backdated to 1 December 1916 , thereby making him technically senior to a number of recently promoted brigadier generals , that rank being only held temporarily . His division commander , Major General H. B. Walker , had Blamey mentioned in despatches for this period of battalion and brigade command , although the battalion had spent most of the time out of the line and there had been no significant engagements . Blamey was also acting commander of the 2nd Brigade during a rest period from 27 August to 4 September 1917 . On 8 September he was hospitalised with vomiting and coughing . He was sent to England where he was admitted to the 3rd London General Hospital for treatment for debilitating psoriasis on 22 September , and did not return to duty until 8 November 1917 . He was made a Companion of St Michael and St George in the 1918 New Year 's list , and received another mention in despatches in May 1918 . 
 On 1 June 1918 , Lieutenant General John Monash succeeded Birdwood as commander of the Australian Corps , and Blamey was promoted to the rank of brigadier general to replace White as the corps Brigadier General General Staff ( <unk> ) . He played a significant role in the success of the Australian Corps in the final months of the war . He remained interested in technological innovation . He was impressed by the capabilities of the new models of <unk> and pressed for their use in the Battle of Hamel , where they played an important part in the success of the battle . Monash acknowledged Blamey 's role in the Australian Corps ' success in the Battle of Amiens in August and the Battle of the Hindenburg Line in September . The Major General General Staff ( <unk> ) of the British Fourth Army , of which the Australian Corps was a part during these battles , Major General Archibald Montgomery @-@ Massingberd , was a former instructor of Blamey 's at Quetta . He declared himself " full of admiration for the staff work of the Australian Corps . " Monash later wrote : 
 No reference to the staff work of the Australian Corps during the period of my command would be complete without a tribute to the work and personality [ of ] Brigadier General T. A. Blamey , my Chief of Staff . He possessed a mind cultured far above the average , widely informed , alert and prehensile . He had [ an ] infinite capacity for taking pains . A Staff College graduate , but not on that account a pedant , he was thoroughly versed in the technique of staff work , and in the minutiae of all procedure . 
 He served me with an exemplary loyalty , for which I owe a debt of gratitude which cannot be repaid . Our temperaments adapted themselves to each other in a manner which was ideal . He had an extraordinary faculty for self @-@ effacement , posing always and conscientiously as the instrument to give effect [ to ] my policies and decisions . Really helpful whenever his advice was invited , he never <unk> his own opinions , although I knew that he did not always agree with me . 
 Blamey 's loyalty to Monash would continue after the latter 's death in 1931 . For his services as Corps Chief of Staff , Blamey was appointed Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1919 , mentioned in despatches twice more , and was awarded the French Croix de guerre . 
 = = Inter @-@ war years = = 
 = = = General staff = = = 
 Blamey arrived back in Australia on 20 October 1919 after an absence of seven years , and became director of Military Operations at Army Headquarters in Melbourne . His AIF appointment was terminated on 19 December 1919 , but he retained his wartime rank of a brigadier general as an honorary rank . He was promoted to a substantive colonel in January 1920 , and in May 1920 was appointed Deputy Chief of the General Staff . 
 His first major task was the creation of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . The government established a joint Army – Navy board to provide recommendations on the matter , with Blamey and Lieutenant Colonel Richard Williams as the Army representatives . Blamey supported the creation of a separate air force , albeit one still subordinate to the Army and Navy . He refused to yield , however , on his opposition to the Navy 's demand that Lieutenant Colonel Stanley Goble become its first chief . 
 In November 1922 Blamey embarked for London to be the Australian representative on the Imperial General Staff . He reported that the " conception of an Imperial General Staff ... was absolutely dead " . The British Army saw little use in the concept of a combined staff which could coordinate the defence of the British Empire . He became involved with the development of the Singapore strategy , and he briefed Prime Minister Stanley Bruce on it for the 1923 Imperial Conference , at which it was formally adopted . Even in 1923 , though , Blamey was sceptical about the strategy . 
 When White retired as Chief of General Staff in 1923 , Blamey was widely expected to succeed him , as he had as chief of staff of the Australian Corps in France , but there were objections from more senior officers , particularly Major General Victor <unk> , at being passed over . Instead , the Inspector General , Lieutenant General Sir Harry Chauvel , was made Chief of General Staff as well , while Blamey was given the new post of Second CGS , in which he performed most of the duties of Chief of General Staff . 
 Seeing no immediate prospects for advancement , Blamey transferred from the Permanent Military Forces to the Militia on 1 September 1925 . For the next 14 years he would remain in the Army as a part @-@ time soldier . On 1 May 1926 he assumed command of the 10th Infantry Brigade , part of the 3rd Division . Blamey stepped up to command the 3rd Division on 23 March 1931 , and was promoted to major general , one of only four Militia officers promoted to this rank between 1929 and 1939 . In 1937 he was transferred to the unattached list . 
 = = = Chief Commissioner of the Victoria Police = = = 
 In 1923 , the Victoria Police went on strike , and Monash and McCay established a Special Constabulary Force to carry out police duties . After the Chief Commissioner , Alexander Nicholson , resigned for ill @-@ health in 1925 , Chauvel recommended Blamey for the post . He became Chief Commissioner on 1 September 1925 for a five @-@ year term , with a salary of £ 1 @,@ 500 per annum ( A $ 100 @,@ 227 in 2008 dollars ) . Blamey set about addressing the grievances that had caused the strike , which he felt " were just , even if they went the wrong way about them " . Blamey improved pay and conditions , and implemented the recommendations of the Royal Commission into the strike . He attempted to introduce faster promotion based on merit , but this was unpopular with the Police Association , and was abandoned by his successors . As in the Army , he showed a willingness to adopt new ideas . He introduced police dogs , and increased the number of police cars equipped with two @-@ way radios from one in 1925 to five in 1930 . He also boosted the numbers of policewomen on the force . 
 Blamey became involved in his first and greatest scandal soon after taking office . During a raid on a brothel in Fitzroy on 21 October 1925 , the police encountered a man who produced Blamey 's police badge , No. 80 . Blamey later said that he had given his key ring , which included his badge , to a friend who had served with him in France , so that the man could help himself to some alcohol in Blamey 's locker at the Naval and Military Club . His story was corroborated by his friend Stanley Savige , who was with him at the time . Blamey protected the man in question , whom he said was married with children , and refused to identify him . The man has never been identified , but the description given by the detectives and the brothel owner did not match Blamey . 
 During the 1920s , Victoria had repressive and restrictive drinking laws , including the notorious six o 'clock closing . Blamey took the position that it was the job of the police to enforce the laws , even if they did not support them . Many members of the public did not agree with this attitude , maintaining that the police should not uphold such laws . Almost as controversially , Blamey drew a sharp distinction between his personal life and his job . His presence in a hotel after closing time was always welcome , as it meant that drinking could continue , for it was known that it would not be raided while he was there ; but other citizens felt that it was unjust when they were arrested for breaking the same laws . 
 As Police Commissioner Blamey defended the actions of the police during the 1928 Waterside Workers ' Federation dispute , during which police opened fire , killing a striking worker who was also a Gallipoli veteran , and wounding several others . His treatment of the unionists was typical of his hard line anti @-@ communist beliefs and as such his relations with left @-@ wing governments were tense . Along with many senior army and ex @-@ army officers , he was a leading member of the clandestine far @-@ right @-@ wing League of National Security . This was reportedly a response to the rise of communism in Australia . Its members stood ready to take up arms to stop a Catholic or communist revolution . 
 Blamey was re @-@ appointed as Chief Commissioner in 1930 , but at a reduced salary of £ 1 @,@ 250 per annum . A year later it was reduced still further , to £ 785 , due to cutbacks as a result of the Great Depression . Minnie became an invalid , and by 1930 no longer accompanied him in public . His son Dolf , now an RAAF flying officer , was killed in an air crash at RAAF Base Richmond in October 1932 , and Minnie died in October 1935 . Blamey was knighted in the 1935 New Year Honours , and in 1936 he was appointed a Commander of the Venerable Order of Saint John . 
 A second scandal occurred in 1936 when Blamey attempted to cover up details of the shooting of the superintendent of the Criminal Investigation Branch , John O 'Connell Brophy , whom Blamey had appointed to the post . Brophy had taken two women friends along with him to a meeting with a police informant . While they were waiting for the informant , they had been approached by armed bandits , and Brophy had opened fire and had himself been wounded . In order to cover up the identities of the two women involved , Blamey initially issued a press release to the effect that Brophy had accidentally shot himself . The Premier , Albert Dunstan , gave Blamey the choice of resigning or being dismissed . The latter meant the loss of pension rights and any future prospects of employment in the Public Service or the Army . He reluctantly submitted his resignation on 9 July 1936 . 
 From March 1938 Blamey supplemented his income by making weekly broadcasts on international affairs on Melbourne radio station 3UZ under the pseudonym " the Sentinel " . Like the station 's general manager , Alfred Kemsley , Blamey felt that Australians were poorly informed about international affairs , and set about raising awareness of matters that he believed would soon impact them greatly . He was appalled at Nazi Germany 's persecution of Jews , and saw a clear and growing menace to world peace from Nazi Germany and the Empire of Japan . His 15 @-@ minute weekly talks continued until the end of September 1939 , by which time the war that he had warned was coming had started . 
 In November 1938 , Blamey was appointed chairman of the Commonwealth Government 's Manpower Committee and Controller General of Recruiting . As such , he laid the foundation for the expansion of the Army in the event of war with Germany or Japan , which he now regarded as inevitable . In 1938 and 1939 , he headed a successful recruiting campaign which doubled the size of the part @-@ time volunteer Militia from 35 @,@ 000 in September 1938 to 70 @,@ 000 in March 1939 . On 5 April 1939 he married Olga Ora Farnsworth , a 35 @-@ year @-@ old fashion artist , at St John 's Anglican Church , Toorak . 
 Henry Somer Gullett and Richard Casey , who had served with Blamey at Gallipoli and in France , put Blamey 's name forward to Prime Minister Joseph Lyons as a possible commander in chief in the event of a major war . " We 've got some brilliant staff officers , " Casey told Lyons , " but Blamey is a commander . That 's the difference . " Lyons initially had concerns about Blamey 's morals , but Casey and Lyons summoned Blamey to a meeting in Canberra , after which Lyons designated him for the job . Lyons died on 7 April 1939 , and was replaced as prime minister by Robert Menzies , another prominent supporter of Blamey 's . Two other officers , Major Generals Gordon Bennett and John Lavarack , were considered , and also had strong and well @-@ connected supporters , but unlike Blamey they were public critics of the government 's defence policies . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
