 On 13 October 1939 , a month after the outbreak of the Second World War , Blamey was promoted to lieutenant general , and appointed to command the 6th Division , the first formation of the new Second Australian Imperial Force , and received the AIF service number <unk> . Menzies limited his choice of commanders by insisting that they be selected from the Militia rather than the Permanent Military Forces ( PMF ) , the Army 's full @-@ time , regular component . For brigade commanders he chose Brigadiers Arthur Allen , Leslie Morshead and Stanley Savige . He selected Brigadier Edmund Herring to command the 6th Division artillery , Colonel Samuel Burston for its medical services , and Lieutenant Colonels Clive Steele and Jack Stevens for its engineers and signals . All except Allen had previously served with him during his time commanding the 3rd Division in Melbourne . For his two most senior staff officers , he chose two PMF officers , Colonel Sydney Rowell as GSO1 and Lieutenant Colonel George Alan Vasey as AA & QMG . 
 In February 1940 , the War Cabinet decided to form a second AIF division , the 7th Division , and group the 6th and 7th Divisions together as I Corps , with Blamey as its commander . On Blamey 's recommendation , Major General Iven Mackay was appointed to succeed him in command of the 6th Division , while Lieutenant General John Lavarack , a PMF officer , assumed command of the 7th Division . Blamey took Rowell with him as his corps chief of staff , and picked Major General Henry Wynter as his administrative officer . Blamey flew to Palestine on a Qantas flying boat in June 1940 . He refused to allow his troops to perform police duties in Palestine , and established warm relations with the Jewish community there , becoming a frequent guest in their homes . 
 As commander of the AIF , Blamey was answerable directly to the Minister of Defence , rather than to the Military Board , with a charter based on that given to Bridges in 1914 . Part of this required that his forces remain together as cohesive units , and that no Australian forces were to be deployed or engaged without the prior consent of the Australian government . Blamey was not inflexible , and permitted Australian units to be detached when there was a genuine military need . Because the situation in the Middle East lurched from crisis to crisis , this resulted in his troops becoming widely scattered at times . When the crises had passed , however , he wanted units returned to their parent formations . This resulted in conflicts with British commanders . The first occurred in August 1940 when the British Commander in Chief Middle East Command , General Sir Archibald Wavell , and Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Winston Churchill , ordered the 16th Infantry Brigade to move to Egypt . Blamey refused on the grounds that the brigade was not yet fully equipped , but eventually compromised , sending it on the understanding that it would soon be joined by the rest of the 6th Division . 
 I Corps assumed responsibility for the front in Cyrenaica on 15 February 1941 , but within days Blamey was informed that his troops would be sent on the expedition to Greece . Blamey has been criticised for allowing this when he knew it was extremely hazardous , after he was told that Menzies had approved . He insisted , however , on sending the veteran 6th Division first instead of the 7th Division , resulting in a heated argument with Wavell , which Blamey won . He was under no illusions about the odds of success , and immediately prepared plans for an evacuation . His foresight and determination saved many of his men , but he lost credibility when he chose his son Tom to fill the one remaining seat on the aircraft carrying him out of Greece . The campaign exposed deficiencies in the Australian Army 's training , leadership and staff work that had passed unnoticed or had not been addressed in the Libyan Campaign . The pressure of the campaign opened a rift between Blamey and Rowell , which was to have important consequences . While Rowell and Brigadier William Bridgeford were extremely critical of Blamey 's performance in Greece , this opinion was not widely held . Wavell reported that " Blamey has shown himself a fine fighting commander in these operations and fitted for high command . " 
 The political fallout from the disastrous Battle of Greece led to Blamey 's appointment as Deputy Commander in Chief Middle East Command in April 1941 . However , to ensure that command would not pass to Blamey in the event of something happening to Wavell , the British government promoted Sir Henry Maitland Wilson to General in June . Soon afterwards , Wavell was replaced by General Sir Claude Auchinleck . Blamey was subsequently promoted to the same rank on 24 September 1941 , becoming only the fourth Australian to reach this rank , after Monash , Chauvel and White . During the Syrian campaign against the Vichy French , Blamey took decisive action to resolve the command difficulties caused by Wilson 's attempt to direct the fighting from the King David Hotel in Jerusalem by interposing Lavarack 's I Corps headquarters . 
 During Blamey 's absence in Greece , AIF units had become widely scattered , with forces being deployed to Cyprus , and the 9th Division and the 18th Infantry Brigade coming under siege in Tobruk . Blamey would spend the rest of the year attempting to reassemble his forces . This led to a clash with Auchinleck over the relief of Tobruk , where Blamey accepted Burston 's advice that the Australian troops there should be relieved on medical grounds . Menzies , and later his successor , John Curtin , backed Blamey , and Auchinleck and Churchill were forced to give way resulting in the relief of most of the Australian troops by the British 70th Division . For his campaigns in the Middle East , Blamey was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath on 1 January 1942 . He was Mentioned in Despatches for the eighth time , and was awarded the Greek War Cross , First Class . 
 = = = Papuan campaign = = = 
 The defence of Australia took on a new urgency in December 1941 with the entry of Japan into the war . Within the Army there was a concern that Bennett or Lavarack would be appointed as Commander in Chief . In March 1942 , Vasey , Herring and Steele approached the Minister for the Army , Frank Forde , with a proposal that all officers over the age of 50 be immediately retired and Major General Horace Robertson be appointed Commander in Chief . This " revolt of the generals " collapsed with the welcome news that Blamey was returning from the Middle East to become Commander in Chief Australian Military Forces . 
 General Douglas MacArthur arrived in Australia in March 1942 to become Supreme Commander South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) . In addition to his duties as Commander in Chief , Blamey became Commander of Allied Land Forces , South West Pacific Area . In the reorganisation that followed his return to Australia on 23 March , Blamey appointed Lavarack to command the First Army , Mackay to command the Second Army , and Bennett to command the III Corps in Western Australia . Vasey became Deputy Chief of the General Staff ( DCGS ) , while Herring took over Northern Territory Force , and Robertson became commander of the 1st Armoured Division . Blamey 's Allied Land Forces Headquarters ( LHQ ) was established in Melbourne , but after MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) moved to Brisbane in July 1942 , Blamey established an Advanced LHQ in nearby St Lucia , Queensland . 
 The Allied command structure was soon put under strain by Australian reverses in the Kokoda Track campaign . MacArthur was highly critical of the Australian performance , and confided to the Chief of Staff of the United States Army , General George Marshall , that " the Australians have proven themselves unable to match the enemy in jungle fighting . Aggressive leadership is lacking . " MacArthur told Curtin that Blamey should be sent up to New Guinea to take personal command of the situation . Curtin later confessed that " in my ignorance ( of military matters ) I thought that the Commander in Chief should be in New Guinea . " Jack Beasley suggested that Blamey would make a convenient scapegoat : " Moresby is going to fall . Send Blamey up there and let him fall with it ! " 
 Blamey felt he had no choice , but his assumption of command of New Guinea Force sat uneasily with Rowell , the commander of I Corps there , who saw it as displaying a lack of confidence in him . A petulant Rowell would not be mollified , and , after a series of disagreements , Blamey relieved Rowell of his command , replacing him with Herring . More reliefs followed . Herring relieved Brigadier Arnold Potts of the 21st Infantry Brigade , replacing him with Brigadier Ivan Dougherty on 22 October . Five days later , Blamey replaced Allen as the 7th Division 's commander with Vasey . Nor were generals the only ones to be removed . Blamey cancelled Chester Wilmot 's accreditation as a war correspondent in October 1942 for spreading a false rumour that Blamey was taking payments from the laundry contractor at Puckapunyal . Wilmot was reinstated , but on 1 November 1942 , Blamey again terminated Wilmot 's accreditation , this time for good . 
 Blamey made a controversial speech to the 21st Infantry Brigade on 9 November 1942 . According to the official historian , Dudley McCarthy : 
 [ Blamey ] said that the Jap was like a gorilla ; he would get into a hole and he would not surrender ; while in his hole and protected by it he would kill ; to be dealt with he had to be got out of his holes and put on the run . Blamey added that it was like shooting rabbits : while the rabbits were in their burrows they could not be shot ; they had to be got on the run and then the man with the gun could get them . " It never entered my head as I stood there on parade that the general had any idea he was being offensive , or that he intended to be so " , wrote Brigadier Dougherty ( then a newcomer to the brigade ) afterwards . " But the brigade gave to what he said the interpretation that ' they ran like rabbits ' . This interpretation of what he said spread throughout New Guinea and indeed back home , and resulted in bitter feelings . Following his address to the whole brigade [ General Blamey ] addressed the officers separately . He was direct with them and said that a few officers in the brigade had failed . This caused bitterness . But after both addresses Blamey told me that he thought highly of the brigade , and repeated to me what he had told the whole brigade — that I , as their new brigade commander , would be very proud of them . " 
 The implication of cowardice was seen as contrasting with his own inability to stand up to MacArthur and the Prime Minister . Rowell felt that Blamey " had not shown the necessary ' moral courage ' to fight the Cabinet on an issue of confidence in me . " When American troops suffered serious reverses in the Battle of Buna – Gona , Blamey turned the tables on MacArthur . According to Lieutenant General George Kenney , the commander of Allied Air Forces , Blamey " frankly said he would rather send in more Australians , as he knew they would fight ... a bitter pill for MacArthur to swallow " . In January 1943 , he visited the Buna – Gona battlefield , surprising Vasey at how far forward he went , seemingly unconcerned about his safety . Blamey was impressed by the strength of the Japanese fortifications that had been captured , later telling correspondents that Australian and American troops had performed miracles . 
 At the Battle of Wau in January 1943 , Blamey won the battle by acting decisively on intelligence , shifting the 17th Infantry Brigade from Milne Bay in time to defeat the Japanese attack . The official historian , Dudley McCarthy , later wrote : 
 At the very peak of this leadership development was General Blamey himself . His greatness was demonstrated almost daily by a knowledge unparalleled in Australia of how an army should be formed and put to work ; by his exercise of the vital field command at the same time as he kept within his grasp a vastly detailed control of the Australian Army as a whole ; by his sagacity and strength in meeting the rapidly changing demands of a difficult political situation ; by his ability speedily to encompass the requirements of the new war and plan far ahead of the events of the day as he controlled them ; by his generally unappreciated humanity . 
 For the Papuan Campaign , MacArthur awarded Blamey the American Distinguished Service Cross , and Blamey was created a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire on 28 May 1943 . This was unusual as it was the Australian Labor Party 's policy not to award knighthoods , but was done as a response to the British government 's awards to British and American officers for the North African campaign . Blamey 's and Herring 's knighthoods would be the last that the Labor government would award to Australian soldiers . 
 = = = New Guinea Campaign = = = 
 The relationship between MacArthur and Blamey was generally good , and they had great respect for each other 's abilities . MacArthur 's main objection was that as Commander in Chief AMF as well as Commander Allied Land Forces , Blamey was not wholly under his command . Official Historian Gavin Long argued that : 
 Nothing substantial would have been gained by this arrangement and much would have been lost : notably the existence of a single commander who could advise the Australian Government on all the problems of its army and be answerable to that Government for the manner in which it was employed both at home and in the field . 
 The next operation was MacArthur 's Operation Cartwheel , an advance on the major Japanese base at Rabaul . The Australian Army was tasked with the capture of the Huon Peninsula . Blamey was ordered to again assume personal command of New Guinea Force . His concept , which he developed with Herring and Frank Berryman , who had replaced Vasey as DCGS , was to draw the Japanese forces away from Lae with a demonstration against Salamaua , and then capture Lae with a double envelopment . Blamey remained a devotee of new technology . His plan called for the use of the landing craft of the 2nd Engineer Special Brigade , and he intended to cross the Markham River with the aid of paratroops . Supplies would be brought across the river using DUKWs , a relatively new invention . He also attempted to acquire helicopters , but met resistance from the RAAF , and they were never delivered . MacArthur accepted a number of changes that Blamey made to his strategy , probably the most notable of which was putting the landing on New Britain before Blamey 's attack on Madang . 
 The campaign started well ; Lae was captured well ahead of schedule . Blamey then handed over command of New Guinea Force to Mackay and returned to Australia . The 7th Division then advanced through the Ramu Valley while the 9th Division landed at Finschhafen . The campaign then slowed owing to a combination of logistical difficulties and Japanese resistance . Blamey responded to a request from Mackay to relieve Herring , whose chief of staff had been killed in an aircraft accident . He immediately sent Morshead . In February 1944 there was criticism in Parliament of the way that Blamey had " side tracked " various generals ; the names of Bennett , Rowell , Mackay , Wynter , Herring , Lavarack , Robertson , Morshead and Clowes were mentioned . Blamey responded , 
 We had twelve divisions to fight the Jap . On arrival of other equipment , other considerations came in and we now have six divisions . Can you tell me what should have been done with the surplus generals ? I do know that on every occasion I proposed to terminate a general 's appointment , politicians have tried to stop it . 
 Frank Forde criticised Blamey for having too many generals . Blamey could only reply that the Australian Army had one general for 15 @,@ 741 men and women compared to one per 9 @,@ 090 in the British Army . 
 Blamey was annoyed by the media campaign run against him by William Dunstan and Keith Murdoch of The Herald and Weekly Times newspaper group , but success in New Guinea led to a change of heart at the newspaper , and Blamey even accepted a dinner invitation from Murdoch in 1944 . There was another victory , though , far more significant . The Army had taken heavy casualties from malaria in the fighting in 1942 . Blamey took the advice of Edward Ford and Neil Hamilton Fairley , and strongly backed their ultimately successful efforts to control the disease . To acquaint himself with the issues , Blamey read through Manson 's Tropical Diseases , the standard medical textbook on the subject . Blamey also promoted the work of Howard Florey on the development of penicillin , and wrote to Curtin urging that £ 200 @,@ 000 be earmarked for Florey 's vision of a national institute for medical research in Canberra , which ultimately became the John Curtin School of Medical Research . 
 Blamey was involved in discussions with the government over the size of the Army to be maintained . Now that the danger of invasion of Australia had passed , the government reconsidered how the nation 's resources , particularly of manpower , should be distributed . Blamey pressed for a commitment to maintain three AIF divisions , as only they could legally be sent north of the equator where the final campaigns would be fought . He urged that the Empire Air Training Scheme be curtailed , and opposed MacArthur 's proposal to use the Australian Army primarily for logistic support and leave combat roles principally to American troops . 
 = = = Final campaigns = = = 
 On 5 April 1944 , Blamey departed for San Francisco on board SS <unk> for the first leg of a voyage to attend the 1944 Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conference in London as part of Curtin 's party . The journey was made by sea and rail due to Curtin 's fear of flying . Also on board the ship were American military personnel returning to the United States , and some 40 Australian war brides . Blamey " was always attractive to women and attracted by them . Advancing years had not reduced either his taste for amorous adventures or his capacity to enjoy them " , and he brought with him several cases of spirits . The rowdy goings @-@ on in Blamey 's cabin did not endear him to the Prime Minister , who was a reformed alcoholic . The party travelled by train to Washington , DC , where Blamey was warmly greeted by the Joint Chiefs of Staff , and briefed the Combined Chiefs of Staff on the progress of the war in SWPA . In London Blamey had a series of meetings with the Chief of the Imperial General Staff , Field Marshal Sir Alan Brooke , and was briefed on Operation Overlord by General Sir Bernard Montgomery and Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder . Blamey was disappointed to have to turn down an offer to accompany the invasion as a guest of General Dwight Eisenhower because Curtin feared that the invasion would lead to retaliatory German bombing , and wanted to be far away before it started . 
 As a matter of policy , Curtin wanted Australian forces to be involved in liberating New Guinea . MacArthur therefore proposed that Australian troops relieve the American garrisons on New Britain , Bougainville and New Guinea . However , MacArthur baulked at Blamey 's proposal to replace the seven American divisions with just seven Australian brigades , resulting in the 6th Division being employed as well . The larger garrisons permitted offensive operations , and demanded them if the 6th Division was to be freed for employment elsewhere . These operations aroused considerable criticism on the grounds that they were unnecessary , that the troops should have been employed elsewhere , and that the Army 's equipment and logistics were inadequate . Blamey vigorously defended his aggressive policy to reduce the bypassed Japanese garrisons and free the civilian population , but some felt that he went too far in putting his case publicly in a national radio broadcast . He was also criticised for not spending enough time in forward areas , although he spent more than half his time outside Australia in 1944 , and between April 1944 and April 1945 travelled 65 @,@ 000 miles ( 105 @,@ 000 km ) by air , 7 @,@ 000 miles ( 11 @,@ 000 km ) by sea and 7 @,@ 500 miles ( 12 @,@ 100 km ) by land . Blamey urged that the 7th Division not be sent to Balikpapan , an operation that he regarded as unnecessary . On this occasion , he was not supported by the government , and the operation went ahead as planned . 
 Gavin Long wrote : 
 Some of the reasons for Blamey 's lack of popularity with several of the Ministers and part of the public can probably be discovered only by exploring traits in the Australian national character of those days ; other reasons are easier to unearth . Throughout the war Blamey commanded an army whose senior appointments were shared between regular and citizen officers . In some places this created tensions and rivalry which adversely affected Blamey 's reputation , through no fault of his own ; also the ambiguous relationship between his headquarters and MacArthur 's led to disagreements of which at least the Ministers were aware . A man of greater tact , however , could have managed these problems more smoothly . But Blamey was not a man of great tact . 
 On 2 September 1945 , Blamey was with MacArthur on USS Missouri and signed the Japanese surrender document on behalf of Australia . He then flew to Morotai and personally accepted the surrender of the remaining Japanese in the South West Pacific . He insisted that Australia should be represented in the Allied occupation of Japan . 
 = = After the war = = 
 MacArthur abolished SWPA on 2 September 1945 , and on 15 September Blamey offered to resign . The war was over , and the post of Commander in Chief was now a purely administrative one . His offer was not accepted , but on 14 November , the government abruptly announced that it had accepted his resignation , effective 30 November . A farewell party was held in Melbourne , which was attended by 66 brigadiers and generals . Blamey was given time to write up his despatches , and was formally retired on 31 January 1946 . Forde asked Blamey if he wanted anything in way of recognition for his services , and Blamey asked for knighthoods for his generals , but Forde could not arrange this . In the end , Forde decided to give Blamey the Buick staff car he had used during the war , which had clocked up 50 @,@ 000 miles ( 80 @,@ 000 km ) in the Middle East and the South West Pacific . 
 Blamey returned to Melbourne , where he devoted himself to business affairs , to writing , and to promoting the welfare of ex @-@ service personnel . In September 1948 , Blamey paid a visit to Japan , where he was warmly greeted on arrival at Iwakuni by Horace Robertson , the commander of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force , who also provided an RAAF honour guard . MacArthur sent his own aircraft , the Bataan , to collect Blamey and bring him to Tokyo , where he met Blamey at the airport and gave him another warm greeting . In the late 1940s Blamey became involved with The Association , an organisation similar to the earlier League of National Security , which was established to counter a possible communist coup . He was the head of the organisation until ill health forced him to stand down in favour of Morshead in 1950 . 
 Menzies became prime minister again in December 1949 , and he resolved that Blamey should be promoted to the rank of field marshal , something that had been mooted in 1945 . The recommendation went via the Governor @-@ General , William McKell , to the War Office in London , which replied that a dominion officer could not be promoted to the rank . Menzies pointed out that Jan Smuts already had . The War Office then claimed that Blamey could not be promoted to field marshal because he was a retired officer , which was not true . Menzies then restored Blamey to active duty . Blamey was duly promoted to field marshal in the King 's Birthday Honours of 8 June 1950 . 
 A few days afterwards , Blamey became seriously ill and was forced to receive his field marshal 's baton from McKell in a bedside ceremony at the Heidelberg Repatriation Hospital . Blamey died there of hypertensive cerebral haemorrhage on 27 May 1951 . His body lay in state at the Shrine of Remembrance , where 20 @,@ 000 people filed past . Crowds estimated at 300 @,@ 000 lined the streets of Melbourne at his state funeral . Ten of his lieutenant generals served as pallbearers : Frank Berryman , William Bridgeford , Edmund Herring , Iven Mackay , Leslie Morshead , John Northcott , Sydney Rowell , Stanley Savige , Vernon Sturdee and Henry Wells . His body was cremated at the Fawkner Crematorium and Memorial Park . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Blamey is honoured in Australia in various ways , including a square named after him which is situated outside the Russell Offices headquarters of the Australian Defence Force and Department of Defence in the national capital , Canberra . A statue of Blamey stands in Kings Domain , Melbourne , on the corner of Government House Drive and Birdwood Avenue , opposite that of John Monash . It was sculptured from granite and bronze by Raymond B. <unk> and presented to the city in February 1960 . Controversially , Blamey is mounted on a jeep instead of the traditional horse . Blamey Barracks at Kapooka , where the Army Recruit Training Centre is located , is also named in his honour , as is Blamey Street and Blamey Park in North Ryde , New South Wales . His papers are held in the Australian War Memorial , where his field marshal 's baton is on display . 
 = Songs of Experience ( album ) = 
 Songs of Experience is the second studio album by American composer and producer David Axelrod , released in October 1969 by Capitol Records . It was composed , arranged , and produced by Axelrod , who worked with session musicians such as guitarist Al Casey , drummer Earl Palmer , and conductor Don Randi . As with his 1968 debut album Song of Innocence , Axelrod composed musical interpretations of English poet William Blake 's Songs of Innocence and of Experience , an 18th @-@ century illustrated collection of poems . 
 A jazz fusion album , Songs of Experience explores darker sounds than its predecessor , as the poems Axelrod drew on for inspiration dealt with the darker side of humanity . Its music was partly inspired by composer Gunther Schuller 's Third Stream concept . Axelrod composed Baroque orchestrations with rock , R & B , pop , and folk music elements . 
 Songs of Experience received retrospective acclaim from music critics , who found Axelrod 's compositions musically varied and innovative . Contemporary musicians praised it as a source for sampling in hip hop production . Some of its songs have been sampled frequently by hip hop artists and producers . In 2000 , the album was reissued by EMI . 
 = = Background = = 
 As he had on his 1968 debut album Song of Innocence , Axelrod composed musical interpretations of the works of English poet William Blake on Songs of Experience . He used eight poems from Blake 's Songs of Experience ( 1794 ) . The album 's gatefold featured Blake 's poems reprinted for each song and liner notes that stated , " an anthology of awareness after birth ... based on the 18th century poems of William Blake . " Blake 's poems began with the premise of birth and innocence , and explored themes of life experience , rite of passage , and changes of perspective in life . 
 = = Composition = = 
 A jazz fusion album , Songs of Experience was partly inspired by Gunther Schuller 's Third Stream concept , which fused American jazz with European classical music . Axelrod supported his Baroque orchestrations on the album with rhythms and melodies from rock , R & B , and pop music . The album 's suite is more orchestral and less rock @-@ oriented than Song of Innocence . Its symphony is embellished with percussive sounds , British and Irish folk song elements , and stylistic innovations from contemporary arranger Gerald Wilson . 
 With Songs of Experience , Axelrod explored darker sounds , as the poems he had chosen dealt with the darker side of humanity . For " The Human Abstract " , he used ascending piano , bass , and percussion instruments to evoke the ghost described in Blake 's poem . It is a bass @-@ driven , funky song that juxtaposes augmented sevenths strummed on an electric guitar against an acoustic piano and muted horns . According to music critic Thom Jurek , " The Divine Image " and " A Little Girl Lost " elicit feelings of majesty and " pastoral sadness " , respectively . " London " was recorded by Axelrod as a tone poem to reflect Blake 's opening stanza about the spiritual climate of London at the onset of the Industrial Revolution : " I wander thro ' each charted 'd street / Near where the chart 'd Thames does flow / And mark in every face I meet / Marks of weakness , marks of woe . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Songs of Experience was released in October 1969 by Capitol Records on stereo LP . In a retrospective review , AllMusic 's Thom Jurek gave the album four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars and said that Axelrod " succeeded in spades " in his search for a sound that " best exemplified not only his feelings but also the heady text he sought to sonically illustrate . " Jurek felt that his compositions were diverse , lush , and able to resemble literature by " using as much space as they do sound for dramatic and dynamic effect " , and that Axelrod created original palettes for rock instrumentation through his complex use of the horn section 's " various colors " . <unk> George of the Los Angeles Times called it a " prescient , genre @-@ defying " solo project , and NME viewed it as a " landmark " album . Mojo cited the album , along with Song of Innocence , as Axelrod 's artistic peak and particularly praised " The Human Abstract " as " beautiful and blank " , evoking " the view from Arthur Lee 's castle of an endless pale blue sky and the vast deathly city beneath it . " Songs of Experience was reissued on CD in 2000 by EMI . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Songs from the album have been sampled frequently by hip hop producers and artists , including Black Moon , who sampled " A Divine Image " , and DJ Shadow , who sampled the luminous piano line from " The Human Abstract " on his 1996 song " Midnight in a Perfect World " . English hip hop producer <unk> called Songs of Experience one of his favorite sources for sampling music and said of the album in an interview for Hip Hop Connection : " You could sample everything on this record , and I think everyone already has . Axelrod is pretty much a sound library in himself – the quality is amazing . " American musician John McEntire ranked it third on his list of top @-@ five albums and called it " early crate @-@ digger stuff . Great , funky rhythm @-@ section playing , crazy , overblown string arrangements . " In a 2000 interview for The Wire , rapper and producer Mike Ladd viewed the song " London " as " crazy stuff " that deviates from the one @-@ dimensional rhythm loops of contemporary hip hop production and stated , " This is definitely the kind of stuff I 'm planning to do for the next album , incorporate more fusion elements and stuff like that . This is a really good production . I like it because it 's little parts with gaps , which I don 't normally have . Somebody told me I should listen to [ Axelrod ] . This is one I 'm definitely going to buy I 'd like to do more stuff with complicated melodies , everybody playing together , drum breaks , things like that . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs were composed , arranged , and produced by David Axelrod . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = Chair Model = 
 " Chair Model " is the fourteenth episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's sixty @-@ seventh episode overall . Written by B. J. Novak , and directed by Jeffrey Blitz , the episode first aired in the United States on April 17 , 2008 on NBC . The episode guest @-@ stars Brooke Dillman and Robert R. Shafer as Bob Vance . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) finds himself lonely and wanting a relationship after breaking up with Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) . While looking through an office @-@ supplies catalog , he falls in love with a chair model . Meanwhile , Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) and Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) fight to reclaim lost parking spaces , and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) tells Pam Beesley ( Jenna Fischer ) that he is going to propose . 
 The final scene was originally going to be a parody of " Candle in the Wind " by Elton John , but John refused permission . The scene was then re @-@ written to feature a parody of the song " American Pie " by Don McLean ( see below : Plot ) . " Chair Model " received mostly positive reviews from critics , although some fans were alienated due to the dark nature of the storyline . The episode received 5 @.@ 8 Nielsen rating and was watched by 9 @.@ 86 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While browsing an office @-@ chair catalog , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) , who has broken up with Jan Levenson , becomes enamored of one of the female chair models . As a result , he decides to resume dating with the help of the office employees , even going so far as threatening to fire them if they do not help . No one in the office wants to set up any of their friends with Michael , but when Michael learns that the chair model had died in a car crash some time ago , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) takes pity and sets him up on a blind date with her landlady ( Brooke Dillman ) . The date does not go well , beginning with Michael pretending he is not who she was supposed to be meeting . After Michael admits his own blind date was a failure , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) convinces him that he needs closure on this person he loved who is gone . The two end up in a cemetery at the grave of the chair model , where Michael " grieves " . They are both singing " American Pie " by Don McLean and dancing on her grave . 
 With Michael busy , Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) and Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) work to reclaim parking spaces that they have lost due to construction in a neighboring office . They arrange a meeting with the bosses of the office park , and are given the parking spots back . The spaces are retrieved , Kevin feels happy to have won one , as his fiancée Stacy broke off their engagement and it 's been a hard time for him . 
 While flirting , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) reveals he is ready to propose to Pam , even going as far as telling her that he is not going to do it at work ( " because that would be rather lame " ) and when he does it , it will " kick her ass " . Pam is not sure if he 's joking . Alone with the camera , Jim reveals that he was not joking and shows an engagement ring that he bought " the week after [ they ] started dating . " After work , while walking back to his car , he stops and gets down on one knee . When Pam stops and looks he says he has a question to ask her . After a second or so of hesitation , he asks her if she will wait while he ties his shoes . She laughs and they continue walking hand in hand . At the end of the episode , Michael and Dwight are seen singing " American Pie " and dancing in the same cemetery at night , presumably having never left . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Chair Model " was the third episode of the series directed by Jeffrey Blitz . Blitz had previously directed " The Convict " and " The Negotiation " . The episode was written by B. J. Novak , who plays temporary worker turned corporate manager Ryan Howard . Novak was originally going to name the episode " Michael Dating " , but the title could have potentially been a spoiler because fans with DVRs would have seen it before " Dinner Party " aired and deduced that Michael and Jan 's relationship had completely fallen apart . For a while , " Parking " was going to be the title , but even that was decided against because that refers to the subplot , and also because it was generic and boring even by the show 's no @-@ frills @-@ titles standard . Eventually , someone suggested " Chair Model " , which was eventually kept as the name . Originally , Novak wrote Jim putting Dwight through a " phony management training " , but NBC pointed out that it felt like the writers had done it before even though they had not . As a group , the writers tried to think of a new idea for the plot ; they considered having Pam move in with Jim , but they thought that first the two should be engaged . 
 There was an auditioning process for both the chair model and the young blond woman that Michael sees in the coffee shop . According to writer B. J. Novak , the chair model was supposed to be " pretty " and " perhaps even prettier than your average model " , but more of just an " average single girl " , because the episode is more about Michael wanting to start dating again than the model herself . In the scene with the " Five Families " , one of the actors , Paul Faust was the only first @-@ time actor . Faust is the cousin of writer Paul Lieberstein , and had been on a tour of the set and talked to many of the writers . He made a good impression and so the character of " Cool Guy Paul " was based on him . The day before they were scheduled to shoot , the show still had not cast anyone for the role , so they called Paul in New York City and had him read the lines into a camera and e @-@ mail to them . In less than an hour , Faust had landed the part and was flown out to Los Angeles . 
 Although Novak wrote the majority of the episode , Jennifer Celotta and Paul Lieberstein were actually the ones that came up with the graveyard scene in the end . The original song for Michael to sing was going to be a parody of " Candle in the Wind " by Elton John . Elton John however , refused to give The Office permission to use the song , because 30 Rock had requested permission for a parody of " Candle in the Wind " that offended Elton John , and he did not want to have his song parodied again . So then , the writers wrote parodies of " Legs " by ZZ Top and " Ruby Tuesday " by The Rolling Stones , but eventually " American Pie " by Don McLean cleared , so the writers went with that . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Michael calls Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) an " Oscar Mayer Weiner Lover " , a reference to both the sausage of the same name , as well as Oscar 's homosexuality . Andy and Kevin hold a meeting with the head of the " Five Families " of the office building , a reference to the " Five Families " from " The Godfather " trilogy . Michael later tries to phone a " hot and juicy redhead " named Wendy , but it turns out it was the number for the Wendy 's restaurant . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Chair Model " first aired on NBC on April 17 , 2008 . The episode received 5 @.@ 8 / 9 percent share in the households demographic in the Nielsen ratings . This means that 5 @.@ 8 percent of all households watched the episode , and nine percent had their televisions tuned to the channel at any point . The episode was watched by 9 @.@ 86 million viewers total , as well as 6 @.@ 49 million viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 " Chair Model " was generally well received by critics , although some fans were alienated by the darkness of the episode . Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it a " B + " . He noted that the episode " fell on the wrong side of the funny / creepy divide for a lot of Office fans " , but that he enjoyed the entry , calling the grave scene " unexpectedly sweet " . He also enjoyed the maturation of Andy , describing him as " coming into his own [ and becoming ] something more than just a foil for Dwight " . M. Giant of Television Without Pity awarded the episode an " A " . BuddyTV senior writer Oscar Dahl wrote that " The Office is sharp as ever " and Jim saying he was going to propose was " a big time moment in the Jim / Pam story " . Dahl also praised the parking lot storyline , saying " what started as merely a joke ( Kevin was dumped ) , became a feel @-@ good moment . " 
 IGN 's Travis Fickett said that Michael falling in love with the chair model was " a hysterical turn and highlights just how deluded Michael – and Dwight – can be " . Fickett was critical of the " parking " storyline , saying that it was " a bit over the top and runs a bit thin " , but he did think that the scene at the end with Kevin was " a sweet and genuine moment " . Aubry D 'Arminio of Entertainment Weekly stated that , in relation to the previous episode " Dinner Party " , " Last night 's show took another approach . Don 't get me wrong . It was a blinder — but a totally different animal , so to speak . " D 'Arminio went on to praise the dual plots of the episode . 
 = Venues of the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics = 
 The 2016 Winter Youth Olympics are scheduled in and around Lillehammer , Norway , between 12 February and 21 February 2016 . Nine competition and twelve non @-@ competition venues are to be used ; all except the Youth Olympic Village in Lillehammer and a training ice rink being are existing venues . All the competition venues and some of the non @-@ competition venues were built ahead of the 1994 Winter Olympics . The games will be held in four municipalities : Lillehammer , Hamar , Gjøvik and Øyer . 
 Lillehammer has five competition venues , Birkebeineren Ski Stadium , Kristins Hall , Kanthaugen Freestyle Arena , Lillehammer Olympic Bobsleigh and Luge Track and the Lysgårdsbakken ski jumping hill . In addition , the Olympic Village , the ceremonies stadium Stampesletta , the media center and various cultural venues , such as Lillehammer Art Museum and Maihaugen , are located in Lillehammer . Two skating halls , Hamar Olympic Amphitheatre and Vikingskipet , are located in Hamar , along with a hotel used as a sub @-@ site Olympic Village . Alpine skiing will take place at Hafjell in Øyer and short @-@ track speed skating will take place at Gjøvik Olympic Cavern Hall . 
 = = Background = = 
 Originally proposed in 1981 , Lillehammer 's bid for the 1992 Winter Olympics was unsuccessful . Lillehammer then made a new bid for the 1994 Olympics , which it won on 15 September 1988 . Venue construction ran from spring 1990 to December 1993 , with all the competition and most of the non @-@ competition venues purpose @-@ built for the games . For the first time in Olympic history , environmental and sustainability issues were considered in venue construction . 
 Two venues , Kristins Hall and Hafjell , were built before Lillehammer had been awarded the Olympics , although the former was only used for training during the Olympics . Lillehammer 's incumbent ski jumping hill , Balbergbakken , was found to be unsuitable and Lysgårdsbakken was built instead . In the bid , the speed skating events were to be held at Stampesletta , an outdoor track and field stadium in Lillehammer . Only after Lillehammer had been awarded the 1994 Winter Olympics was it decided that an indoor venue would have to be built for the games . This started a debate about the location of the various ice rinks and resulted in the neighboring towns of Hamar and Gjøvik also receiving venues . 
 Lillehammer failed at its bid to host the 2012 Winter Youth Olympics , but was awarded the 2016 edition as the only bidder . The bid was based on reuse of the heritage and venues from the 1994 Olympics . Beyond the construction of an Olympic Village , the only major upgrade to the venues is the addition of a curling rink in Kristins Hall . 
 = = Competition venues = = 
 In Lillehammer , the twin ski jumping hill of Lysgårdsbakken has a spectator capacity of 35 @,@ 000 . The large hill has a hill size of 138 and a K @-@ point of 120 , while the normal hill has a hill size of 100 and a K @-@ point of 90 . Birkebeineren Ski Stadium will host cross @-@ country skiing , biathlon and Nordic combined . The stadium has a capacity for 31 @,@ 000 spectators during cross @-@ country skiing and 13 @,@ 500 during biathlon . Spectators can also watch from along the tracks . Kanthaugen Freestyle Arena has a capacity for 15 @,@ 000 spectators and will host freestyle skiing and half @-@ pipe snowboarding . 
 Lillehammer Olympic Bobsleigh and Luge Track is located at Hunderfossen and is the only bobsleigh , luge and skeleton track in the Nordic countries . Kristins Hall will host ice hockey and curling . Gjøvik Olympic Cavern Hall is located in a man @-@ made cave and will feature the short @-@ track speed skating events . In Hamar , Vikingskipet will host long track speed skating and Hamar Olympic Amphitheatre will host figure skating . Alpine skiing and slopestyle snowboarding will take place at Hafjell in Øyer . 
 All the competition venues were built ahead of the 1994 Winter Olympics . Kristins Hall was the only venue not used during those games , while Håkons Hall and <unk> were used , but will not be used for the Youth Olympics . The area has hosted world cup or world championship @-@ level competitions in the majority of the events since the 1994 Olympics . The main international access point to the games is Oslo Airport , Gardermoen , located 145 kilometers ( 90 mi ) south of Lillehammer . It is connected to Lillehammer via the Dovre Line and European Road E6 . 
 The following list contains the nine venues scheduled to be used during the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics . They are listed by their name , as well as containing the sports held at the venue , the municipality where they are located and the spectator capacity . 
 = = Non @-@ competition venues = = 
 Stampesletta , a multi @-@ sports complex next to Kristins Hall , will host the opening and closing ceremonies . The medal ceremonies will take place in the town plaza . There are five designated cultural venues in Lillehammer : <unk> <unk> , Lillehammer Art Museum , Lillehammer University College , Maihaugen and the Nansen Academy . The Main Media Centre will be located at <unk> Upper Secondary School , which is adjacent to Stampesletta . 
 Athlete and leader accommodation will be provided at two Olympic Villages , one in Lillehammer for the Lillehammer and Øyer @-@ based events , and one in Hamar for the Hamar and Gjøvik @-@ based events . The Olympic Village in Hamar will make use of the 239 @-@ room Hotel Scandic Hamar , located between the two venues . It will serve as a village for all skating sports ( long @-@ track , short @-@ track and figure ) , which take place in Hamar and Gjøvik . Travel distance from Hamar to Gjøvik is 50 kilometers ( 30 mi ) . 
 The Youth Olympic Village in Lillehammer will be the only facilities of any size constructed for the Youth Olympics and is located at Stampesletta , 600 meters ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) from the town center . This allows the village to be within walking distance from three of the competition venues : Kristins Hall , Lysgårdsbakken and Kanthaugen . The village will consist of the existing Birkebeineren Hotel & Apartments plus new residential buildings . The complex will have 1 @,@ 786 beds . Dining will take place at Håkons Hall . Construction of the new residential areas are the responsibility of the Student Welfare Organisation in Oppland and Lillehammer Cooperative Housing Association . Travel distance to the event venues ranges from walking distance to 18 kilometers ( 11 mi ) . 
 The following list contains the twelve non @-@ competition venues scheduled to be used during the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics . They are listed with their function , location and capacity . 
 = Jerry Pentland = 
 Alexander Augustus Norman Dudley Pentland , MC , DFC , AFC ( 5 August 1894 – 3 November 1983 ) , known as Jerry Pentland , was an Australian fighter ace in World War I. Born in Maitland , New South Wales , he commenced service as a <unk> with the Australian Imperial Force in 1915 , and saw action at Gallipoli . He transferred to the Royal Flying Corps the following year , rising to captain . Credited with twenty @-@ three aerial victories , Pentland became the fifth highest @-@ scoring Australian ace of the war , after Robert Little , Stan Dallas , Harry Cobby and Roy King . He was awarded the Military Cross in January 1918 for " conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty " on a mission attacking an aerodrome behind enemy lines , and the Distinguished Flying Cross that August for engaging four hostile aircraft single @-@ handedly . 
 Pentland served in the fledgling Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , and later the Royal Air Force , before going into business in 1927 . His ventures included commercial flying around the goldfields of New Guinea , aircraft design and manufacture , flight instruction , and charter work . In the early 1930s , he was employed as a pilot with Australian National Airways , and also spent time as a dairy farmer . Soon after the outbreak of World War II , he re @-@ enlisted in the RAAF , attaining the rank of squadron leader and commanding rescue and communications units in the South West Pacific . Perhaps the oldest operational pilot in the wartime RAAF , Pentland was responsible for rescuing airmen , soldiers and civilians , and earned the Air Force Cross for his " outstanding courage , initiative and skill " . He became a trader in New Guinea when the war ended in 1945 , and later a coffee planter . Retiring in 1959 , he died in 1983 at the age of eighty @-@ nine . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Alexander Augustus Norman Dudley Pentland was born in Maitland , New South Wales , on 5 August 1894 . His father Alexander was Irish , and his mother Annie Norma ( née Farquhar ) was Scottish . Educated at The King 's School , Sydney , and Brighton Grammar , Melbourne , Pentland went on to study dairy farming at Hawkesbury Agricultural College , and later worked as a jackaroo . His father was a physician who joined the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) during World War I and served as a major in the Australian Army Medical Corps . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Pentland enlisted as a private in the AIF on 5 March 1915 , sailing for Egypt with the 12th Light Horse Regiment aboard HMAT A29 Suevic on 13 June . In August , his unit deployed to Gallipoli , where he fought as a machine gunner before being hospitalised the following month , suffering from typhoid fever ; he was evacuated to England in December . Determined to leave the trenches behind after recovering , he volunteered for the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) and was discharged from the AIF on 21 February 1916 to take up his commission as a temporary second lieutenant in the RFC . His first solo flight in a Maurice Farman Longhorn at Brooklands , after two hours of dual instruction , ended with him overshooting the runway and crashing in a sewage farm , but he was unhurt and immediately undertook a second solo attempt , landing successfully . It was at Brooklands that he was first nicknamed " Jerry " . After completing pilot training , he was posted to France in June , flying B.E.2s with No. 16 Squadron . Though the slow and vulnerable B.E.2 was considered " Fokker fodder " by its crews , Pentland and his observer quickly managed to score the former 's first aerial victory , bringing down a German Eindecker over <unk> on 9 June . He was then posted to No. 29 Squadron and was converting to DH.2 " pusher " fighters when he broke his leg playing rugby . After recovering , he instructed at London Colney until June 1917 , when he joined No. 19 Squadron , flying SPAD <unk> This would become Pentland 's favourite type due to its strength and manoeuvrability , even though it had to be ' flown ' constantly and was unforgiving at low speed . 
 On 20 July 1917 , soon after arriving at his new unit in France , Pentland achieved his first victory in the SPAD when he shared in the destruction of an Albatros two @-@ seater . He followed this up with a solo " kill " on 12 August . Four days later , after stopping an enemy truck convoy in its tracks by crippling its lead vehicle with machine @-@ gun fire , he reportedly engaged ten Albatros fighters single @-@ handedly ; by the time he had driven them off , four bullets had penetrated his leather flying suit without injuring him , while his plane had absorbed so much punishment that it had to be scrapped when he got back to base . After sharing another Albatros two @-@ seater on 20 August , Pentland led a raid on <unk> aerodrome , home of Baron von Richthofen 's Jasta 11 , on 26 August . On the way , he helped bring down a DFW C.V , then achieved complete surprise at the airfield , which he and his flight proceeded to shoot up . On the return journey , he strafed an enemy train until his guns jammed and then , having managed to clear them , engaged two more German scouts . His part in the raid earned him the Military Cross , promulgated in the London Gazette on 9 January 1918 : 
 For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty . On a recent occasion he flew to an aerodrome fifteen miles behind the enemy lines , descended to within twenty feet of the ground , and fired into eight hostile machines . On his return journey he attacked a train with considerable effect from a low altitude . He has in addition brought down several enemy machines , and has always set a splendid example of fearlessness and devotion to duty in attacking enemy balloons and troops on the ground . 
 Credited with one more victory during August 1917 , and another four the following month , Pentland 's score stood at ten when he was injured on 26 September after an artillery shell struck his SPAD and forced him to crash land . Following his recovery , he again spent time instructing before being posted back to a front @-@ line unit , this time No. 87 Squadron , operating Sopwith Dolphins . Promoted captain , he returned to France in April 1918 , having transferred the same month with the rest of the RFC to the newly formed Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . Pentland went on to achieve thirteen victories with No. 87 Squadron , where his aggressive tactics saw him dubbed the " Wild Australian " by colleagues . Appointed commander of ' B ' Flight , he also frequently acted as a " lone wolf " , actively seeking dogfights with enemy aircraft on his own . On 18 June , he was alone on patrol when he engaged a flight of four Rumpler high @-@ altitude reconnaissance aircraft , forcing down three of them . This action earned him the Distinguished Flying Cross , gazetted on 3 August : 
 A gallant flight commander , who in the last three months has destroyed two enemy machines and driven down four out of control . Recently , whilst on special patrol , he , single @-@ handed , attacked four enemy aeroplanes ; having driven down one out of control , he engaged the leader , damaged his engine , and compelled him to glide to his lines . One of the remaining machines followed the leader , but he attacked the other and drove it down in a steep dive . 
 On 25 August , Pentland attacked and destroyed two German planes , a DFW two @-@ seater and Fokker D.VII , before himself being shot down and wounded in the foot . These would be his last victories ; his grand total of twenty @-@ three included eleven destroyed , one of which was shared , and twelve out of control , three of them shared . This score ranked him fifth among the Australian aces of the war after Robert Little , Stan Dallas , Harry Cobby and Roy King . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Pentland relinquished his RAF commission and returned to Australia at the end of the war , earning money by giving joyrides in an Avro 504K . Looking for a more secure future , he joined the newly established Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) in August 1921 , following an interview with Wing Commander Stanley Goble , a wartime acquaintance through the RAF . Ranked flight lieutenant , Pentland was put in charge of the RAAF 's complement of S.E.5 fighters at Point Cook , Victoria , part of the Imperial Gift recently donated by Great Britain . The young Air Force had the atmosphere of a flying club , where everyone knew everyone else . Tensions sometimes arose between those who had served with British forces during the war , and those who had belonged to the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) ; the former considered that they were discriminated against when it came to filling senior positions , and came the day Pentland and fellow ex @-@ RAF member Hippolyte De La Rue threw an " uppity " AFC man into a mess fireplace . Deciding that his RAAF career was not progressing , Pentland applied for a short @-@ service commission as a flying officer with the RAF in 1923 , which was granted as of 23 April . He journeyed to Britain with new wife Madge ( née Moffat ) , who he married on 5 March , just before departing Australia ; they had one daughter , Carleen , the following year . Pentland completed the course at Central Flying School , <unk> , and became an instructor there , gaining promotion to flight lieutenant before leaving the RAF on 20 July 1926 and returning to Australia . 
 In 1927 , Pentland formed Mandated Territory Airways with entrepreneur Albert Royal to fly freight to and from the goldfields of New Guinea . The pair bought a DH.60 Moth biplane , which Pentland ferried to the firm 's base at Lae in February 1928 . The business prospered in the short term , to the extent that the partners took on another Moth and more pilots . By the end of the year , however , Pentland was suffering from malaria and had to abandon the venture , selling one of the planes to Guinea Airways and returning to Australia with the other . After recovering in the new year , he embarked on a series of new enterprises , including aircraft manufacture , a flying school , and charter work . In February 1929 , he formed the General Aircraft Company with Royal and another partner to produce an Australian @-@ designed aeroplane , the <unk> , of which eight were eventually sold . With the Moth from Mandated Territory Airways , he established Pentland 's Flying School at Mascot , New South Wales . He also flew charters with a Moth owned by The Sun newspaper , using the same aircraft that September to compete in the East @-@ West Air Race from Sydney to Perth , as part of the celebrations for the Western Australia Centenary . The event attracted several veteran aviators of World War I , including Horrie Miller — the eventual winner on handicap — and Charles " Moth " Eaton , whom Pentland beat into fifth place across the line . 
 Lack of patronage led to Pentland folding his businesses and taking a job in 1930 as a pilot with Australian National Airways ( ANA ) , a new airline founded by Charles Kingsford @-@ Smith and Charles Ulm . By 1932 , ANA was in trouble as well , and Pentland left to set up as a dairy farmer on a property he bought at Singleton . Within two years , drought forced him to sell the land and he returned to earning his living as a pilot , instructing at aero clubs in Queensland and New South Wales . By late 1937 , he was again employed as a transport pilot in New Guinea , where he was known as a practical joker who liked to hold a map in front of his face in apparent short @-@ sightedness and ask his passengers if they could see a landing ground anywhere . He returned to Australia after war was declared in September 1939 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Having offered his services to the Australian government on his return from New Guinea , Pentland rejoined the RAAF on 17 June 1940 . He undertook the course at Central Flying School in Camden , New South Wales , and was posted as an instructor to elementary flying training schools in eastern Australia , including Brisbane , Tamworth , Temora , Bundaberg , and Lowood . Addressed by a young pilot at one school as " Pop " , Pentland responded in front of the large audience , " I 'm sorry son , but I don 't remember sleeping with your mother " . He was promoted to flight lieutenant in October 1941 , and joined No. 1 Communication Flight in June 1942 . Based in Victoria at Laverton and , later , Essendon , it was primarily engaged in army and naval cooperation , and operated as far afield as the Northern Territory and New Guinea . 
 Promoted to squadron leader , in November 1942 Pentland was posted to Port Moresby , New Guinea , as commanding officer ( CO ) of No. 1 Rescue and Communication Squadron , better known as " Pentland 's Flying Circus " . The official history of Australia in the war described this as the RAAF 's " most unusual operational unit " , asserting that its " strange assortment of light aircraft was as varied and as appropriate to its task as was the flying record of its commander ... " . Its inventory included such types as the de Havilland Tiger Moth , DH.84 Dragon , Fox Moth , Dragon Rapide , and Avro Anson . Perhaps the RAAF 's oldest pilot in any theatre of operations , Pentland was responsible for the rescue of downed US airmen , as well as the evacuation of civilians and soldiers . He also organised aerial surveys around Daru and Milne Bay , developing new bases and emergency airfields at locales such as Bena Bena , Abau , <unk> , and Port Moresby . 
 Posted back to Australia after relinquishing command of No. 1 Rescue and Communication Squadron in June 1943 , Pentland received radar training and helped to set up the RAAF 's early warning grid in northern Australia . He returned to New Guinea in March 1944 as CO of No. 8 Communication Unit , Goodenough Island , which had been formed in November 1943 from Pentland 's old Rescue and Communications Squadron . Operating Tiger Moth , Supermarine Walrus , Consolidated PBY Catalina , Dornier Do 24 , Bristol Beaufort , CAC Boomerang , Bristol Beaufighter , and Vultee Vengeance aircraft , the unit performed reconnaissance and bombing sorties over New Britain and north @-@ eastern New Guinea , as well as rescue and survey missions . In July 1945 , Pentland was posted to Mascot as CO of No. 3 Communication Unit , serving until September . His achievements in New Guinea earned him the Air Force Cross , the citation being promulgated on 22 February 1946 and concluding : 
 Squadron Leader <unk> has , at all times , displayed outstanding courage , initiative and skill , and these qualities , together with his excellent knowledge of New Guinea and its climatic conditions , have made his services invaluable , not only to the R.A.A.F. , but to the U.S. Army Air Forces and the New Guinea Forces as well . 
 = = Later life = = 
 With the end of hostilities in the Pacific , Pentland was discharged from the RAAF on 2 November 1945 . He took the opportunity to purchase surplus military equipment in New Guinea and established himself as a trader in Finschhafen , later expanding to Lae and Wau . In 1948 , he went into business as a coffee planter in Goroka , and also recruited labour from the highlands for industries on the coast . Prospering as a planter , he contributed to development of the region by building Goroka 's original constant @-@ flowing water supply and encouraging other businesses to set up there . His ongoing commitments in New Guinea meant that he was not invested with his Air Force Cross until 1950 . In 1959 , he sold his interests in Goroka and retired with Madge to their seaside home in Bayview , New South Wales . Madge Pentland died in 1982 , and Jerry eighteen months later , on 3 November 1983 , at the War Veterans Home in Collaroy . He was survived by daughter Carleen , and cremated on 7 November . 
 = Mystery Train ( film ) = 
 Mystery Train is a 1989 independent anthology film written and directed by Jim Jarmusch and set in Memphis , Tennessee . The film comprises a triptych of stories involving foreign protagonists unfolding over the course of the same night . " Far From Yokohama " features a Japanese couple ( played by Youki Kudoh and Masatoshi Nagase ) on a blues pilgrimage , " A Ghost " focuses on an Italian widow ( Nicoletta Braschi ) stranded in the city overnight , and " Lost in Space " follows the misadventure of a newly single and unemployed Englishman ( Joe Strummer ) and his companions ( Rick Aviles and Steve Buscemi ) . They are linked by a run @-@ down flophouse overseen by a night clerk ( played by Screamin ' Jay Hawkins ) and his dishevelled bellboy ( Cinqué Lee ) , a scene featuring Elvis Presley 's " Blue Moon " , and a gunshot . 
 The starting point for the script was the ensemble cast of friends and previous collaborators Jarmusch had conceived characters for , while the tripartite formal structure of the film was inspired by his study of literary forms . Cinematographer Robby Müller and musician John Lurie were among the many contributors who had been involved in earlier Jarmusch projects and returned to work on the film . Mystery Train 's US $ 2 @.@ 8 million budget ( financed by Japanese conglomerate JVC ) was considerable compared to what the director had enjoyed before , and allowed him the freedom to rehearse many unscripted background scenes . It was the first of Jarmusch 's feature films to depart from his trademark black @-@ and @-@ white photography , though the use of color was tightly controlled to conform with the director 's intuitive sense of the film 's aesthetic . 
 Mystery Train was released theatrically by Orion Classics under a restricted rating in the United States , where it grossed over $ 1 @.@ 5 million . It enjoyed critical acclaim on the film festival circuit , and like the director 's earlier films premiered at the New York Film Festival and was shown in competition at Cannes , where Jarmusch was awarded the Best Artistic Achievement Award . The film was also shown in the Edinburgh , London , Midnight Sun , Telluride , and Toronto film festivals , and was nominated in six categories at the Independent Spirit Awards . Critical reaction was overwhelmingly positive , with reviewers praising the structure , humor , and characters of the film , though there were discontented rumblings that the director had not been sufficiently adventurous . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film consists of three stories that take place on the same night in downtown Memphis . The three stories are linked together by the Arcade Hotel , a run @-@ down flophouse presided over by the night clerk ( Screamin ' Jay Hawkins ) and bellboy ( Cinqué Lee ) , where the principal characters in each story spend a part of the night . Every room in the hotel is adorned with a portrait of Elvis Presley . 
 The first story , " Far From Yokohama " , features Mitsuko ( Youki Kudoh ) and Jun ( Masatoshi Nagase ) , a teenage couple from Yokohama making a pilgrimage to Memphis during a trip across America . Mitsuko is obsessed with Elvis to the point where she believes that there is a mystical connection between Elvis , Madonna and the Statue of Liberty . The film follows the couple as they travel from the train station , through downtown Memphis and an exhausting tour of Sun Records , to the Arcade hotel . 
 The second story , " A Ghost " , is about an Italian widow , Luisa ( Nicoletta Braschi ) , who is stranded in Memphis while escorting her husband 's coffin back to Italy . Luisa , who has been conned twice and stuck with <unk> of magazines , is forced to share a room at the hotel with Dee Dee ( Elizabeth Bracco ) , a young woman who has just left her boyfriend ( Johnny from the final story ) and who plans to leave the city in the morning . Luisa is kept awake by Dee Dee 's constant talking , and when the young woman finally does go to sleep , she is visited by an apparition of Memphis ' most famous icon – Elvis Presley . 
 The final story , " Lost in Space " , introduces Johnny ( Joe Strummer ) . Upset after losing his job and his girlfriend ( Dee Dee ) , Johnny – known , much to his chagrin , as Elvis – drunkenly brandishes a gun in a bar before leaving with his friend Will Robinson ( Rick Aviles ) and his ex @-@ girlfriend 's brother Charlie ( Steve Buscemi ) , who believes Johnny to be his brother @-@ in @-@ law . They stop at a liquor store , which Johnny robs using the gun and severely wounds the owner in the process . Fearing the consequences of the incident , Johnny , Will and Charlie retire to the hotel to hide out for the night ; there , Johnny gets further drunk . Charlie realizes that Will shares the same name as the character Will Robinson from the television show Lost in Space , which Johnny has never heard of . Charlie and Will proceed to tell him about the show , and Will comments that that is how he feels then with Charlie and Johnny : lost in space . The next morning , Charlie discovers that Johnny isn 't really his brother @-@ in @-@ law , which angers him because of what they 've been through . Johnny attempts to shoot himself , and while struggling to prevent him , Charlie is shot in the leg . Leaving the hotel , the three rush to escape a police car that isn 't even looking for them . The closing credits show the train , the airport and the final views of the characters from the first two stories . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = " Far From Yokohama " = = = 
 = = = " A Ghost " = = = 
 = = = " Lost in Space " = = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Script and casting = = = 
 Jarmusch wrote the script for the film under the working title " One Night in Memphis " , without ever having been to the southern city . The idea for " Far From Yokohama " , the first segment , he took from a one @-@ act play he had been writing before filming Down by Law ( 1986 ) . The play – unrelated to Elvis or Memphis – concerned a constantly argumentative young couple , one of whom gradually comes to realize that their fighting is a unifying force in the relationship . The interconnected stories were inspired by Jarmusch 's dwelling on literary forms , and specifically the work of Chaucer , Italian episodic films and Japanese ghost story cinema . As with his other films , Jarmusch 's starting point for writing Mystery Train was the actors and characters he had foremost in mind . The great number of these collaborators contributed to it being " the most complicated film to write and execute " according to the director . 
 The role of Johnny was written by Jarmusch specifically for Joe Strummer , who had been the frontman of The Clash , the director 's favorite 1980s rock band . Jarmusch had conceived the part a few years previously while the two were together in Spain , and although the musician had been in a period of depression at the time following the collapse of the band , he was drawn by the Memphis setting of the film . Unlike the jovial Steve Buscemi , Strummer did not stay on set to joke with the veteran actors between shots , but instead preferred to keep his own company , focusing intensively on orienting himself to the role . 
 Jarmusch had met blues singer Screamin ' Jay Hawkins after featuring his music prominently in his breakthrough feature film debut Stranger Than Paradise ( 1984 ) . Although reticent about acting , Hawkins responded favorably to the director 's offer to appear . The part of Luisa was also written by the director with the star – actress Nicoletta Braschi – in mind ; the two had previously collaborated on Down by Law ( 1986 ) . Cinqué Lee is the younger brother of director Spike Lee , a longtime friend of Jarmusch from their days at New York University 's film school , while Youki Kudoh was cast after the director saw her performance in <unk> Ishii 's The Crazy Family ( 1984 ) while promoting Down by Law in Japan . Repeat Jarmusch collaborators who worked on the film included John Lurie who provided the original music , cinematographer Robby Müller , and singer Tom Waits , who in a voice appearance reprised his role of radio DJ Lee Baby Sims from Down by Law . Other cameos include Jarmusch 's long @-@ time girlfriend Sara Driver as an airport clerk , Rufus Thomas as the man in the train station who greets the Japanese couple , Rockets <unk> as the clerk of the liquor store , Vondie Curtis @-@ Hall as Ed , Sy Richardson as the news vendor , and Richard Boes and Tom Noonan as diner patrons . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Mystery Train was filmed in Memphis in the summer of 1988 . After arriving in the city during a snowstorm to scout for shooting locations , Jarmusch drove around without direction before coming to the intersection of a disused train station , the Arcade Luncheonette diner , and the dilapidated Arcade Hotel that would become the film 's core setting . He would later recount the experience in a March 1990 interview in Spin : " Man , ... this crossroad is filled with so many ghosts . You know Robert Johnson walked down that street , you know Muddy Waters was in that train station . " The locale of the intersection was one of the film 's primary formal elements ; the effect of Jarmusch returning to the setting with different characters under different circumstances was one of variations on a theme . 
 The film was shot in bright , primary colors rather than the black @-@ and @-@ white of the director 's previous features , but it retained his usual languid pacing . Jarmusch characterized the color choice as " intuitive " . He deliberately chose a cool color palette , eschewing yellows and oranges and using only sporadic dashes of red ( as in the Japanese couple 's ubiquitous suitcase ) . This motif of flashes of red was later described by Suzanne Scott of Reverse Shot as " giving the impression of a failed attempt to grab a bit of Elvis ’ s glamor and try it on for size , only to inevitably discover that it looks cartoonish out of context " . Stills from the film as well as on @-@ location shots of the actors and the film crew by photographer Masayoshi <unk> were published to accompany the film as the photo collection Mystery Train : A Film by Jim Jarmusch . 
 Mystery Train was the first American independent film to be financed by Japanese conglomerate JVC , and was produced on a budget – $ 2 @.@ 8 million – that was considerable by Jarmusch 's modest standards . The company was enthusiastic about underwriting the film despite the director insisting on retaining full creative control , and went on to fund his next three features . The substantial budget and time available gave Jarmusch the opportunity to shoot in color and to rehearse with the actors many scenes not in the script , including several from the courtship of Mitsuko and Jun. At a Memphis nightclub with the Japanese actors during production , the director had Masatoshi Nagase – who spoke little English but was an accomplished mimic – try chat @-@ up lines on the female clientele as an acting exercise . Jarmusch took advantage of the production to make the second installment of his Coffee and Cigarettes series , a collection of short vignettes featuring acquaintances of the director sitting about drinking coffee and smoking cigarettes . The " Memphis Version " , titled Twins , starred bickering twins Cinqué and Joie Lee alongside Steve Buscemi as an obtuse waiter who expounds his theory of Elvis having an evil twin to a hostile reception . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film had its domestic premiere at the 27th New York Film Festival in 1989 , thereby emulating the director 's previous features Stranger Than Paradise in 1984 , and Down by Law in 1986 . The Miami Herald declared it the " quiet triumph " of the festival . The film was picked up for theatrical distribution by Orion Classics in the United States , where it was released under an R @-@ rating due to scenes featuring brief nudity and mild profanity . Its total domestic gross was $ 1 @,@ 541 @,@ 218 , making it the 153rd highest @-@ grossing film of 1989 , and the 70th highest R @-@ rated film of the year . Internationally , it was first shown in competition at the 1989 Cannes Film Festival on May 13 and 14 , 1989 , and subsequently featured in the Edinburgh , London , Midnight Sun , Telluride and Toronto film festivals . 
 Mystery Train was released on DVD on March 28 , 2000 with an aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 85 : 1 and Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 / 2 surround sound . The DVD release was criticized by Anna <unk> of <unk> who awarded it two stars out of five compared to four for the film itself , citing the paltry special features of 24 scene selections and a collectible behind @-@ the @-@ scenes booklet . A Criterion Collection DVD and Blu @-@ ray were released on June 15 , 2010 , utilizing a new restored high @-@ definition digital transfer . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Like Jarmusch 's previous films , Mystery Train enjoyed a warm reception from critics . This was particularly evident at Cannes , where the film was nominated for the Palme d 'Or and Jarmusch was commended for the festival 's Best Artistic Achievement . It was nominated in six categories at the 1989 Independent Spirit Awards : Best Picture , Best Screenplay ( Jim Jarmusch ) , Best Director ( Jim Jarmusch ) , Best Cinematography ( Robby Müller ) , Best Actress ( Youki Kudoh ) , and Best Supporting Actor ( Steve Buscemi and Screamin ' Jay Hawkins ) . 
 Entertainment Weekly reviewer Ira Robbins gave the film a B + rating , complimenting it as " conceptually ambitious " and concluding that its " offbeat characters , fine cinematography , and novel structure make for entertaining viewing " . Robert Fulford of The National Post hailed it as " eccentric and deliriously funny " , while Rolling Stone 's Phil Whitman remarked that the director 's " bracing , original comedy may be mostly smoke and air , but it 's not insubstantial " . In The New York Times , Vincent Canby called it " thoroughly fascinating , a delight " and the director 's best effort to date , drawing note to its retention of the " same kind of dour , discordant charm " exhibited by Stranger Than Paradise . He praised Jarmusch 's development as a screenwriter – citing the restrained dialogue , humor and subtlety of the narrative and the careful construction of the plot – and the performances he elicited from the ensemble cast . John Hartl , in The Seattle Times , also drew a comparison with Stranger Than Paradise , judging Mystery Train to be the more accessible work while retaining the dry wit of its predecessor . 
 Hal Hinson of The Washington Post was unimpressed with the film , calling it Jarmusch 's " least engaging , and the first in which his bohemian posturing actually becomes an irritant " . Of the film 's characters , critic Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader wrote that some were " beautifully imagined and realized , while others seem drawn from a more familiar stockpile , designed for reuse rather than discovery " . David Denby , concluding a mixed review of the film for New York Magazine , mused that " one feels Jarmusch has pushed <unk> and cool about as far as they can go , and that isn 't nearly far enough . " This reproach was echoed by other reviewers who found that the film 's style did not stray far from that of the director 's earlier work – a critical backlash that would be amplified two years later following the release of Night On Earth ( 1991 ) . 
 Postmodern cultural critic bell hooks cited the interaction in the Memphis train station between Thomas and the Japanese couple as one of the few examples of nuanced , deconstructive and subversive treatment of blackness in American film . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times ' Roger Ebert proclaimed that " [ t ] he best thing about Mystery Train is that it takes you to an America you feel you ought to be able to find for yourself , if you only knew where to look . " In an April 2000 retrospective of Jarmusch 's work for Sight & Sound , Shawn Levy concluded that the film was " as much a valentine to the allure of the American way of pop culture as it is a cheeky bit of structural legerdemain without terribly much resonating significance " . 
 = Plymouth = 
 Plymouth ( / <unk> / ) is a city on the south coast of Devon , England , about 37 miles ( 60 km ) south @-@ west of Exeter and 190 miles ( 310 km ) west @-@ south @-@ west of London , between the mouths of the rivers Plym to the east and Tamar to the west where they join Plymouth Sound to form the boundary with Cornwall . 
 Plymouth 's early history extends to the Bronze Age , when a first settlement emerged at Mount Batten . This settlement continued as a trading post for the Roman Empire , until it was surpassed by the more prosperous village of Sutton , now called Plymouth . In 1620 , the Pilgrim Fathers departed Plymouth for the New World and established Plymouth Colony – the second English settlement in what is now the United States of America . During the English Civil War the town was held by the Parliamentarians and was besieged between 1642 and 1646 . 
 Throughout the Industrial Revolution , Plymouth grew as a commercial shipping port , handling imports and passengers from the Americas , and exporting local minerals ( tin , copper , lime , china clay and arsenic ) while the neighbouring town of Devonport became a strategic Royal Naval shipbuilding and dockyard town . In 1914 three neighbouring independent towns , viz . , the county borough of Plymouth , the county borough of Devonport , and the urban district of East Stonehouse were merged to form a single County Borough . The combined town took the name of Plymouth which , in 1928 , achieved city status . The city 's naval importance later led to its targeting and partial destruction during World War II , an act known as the Plymouth Blitz . After the war the city centre was completely rebuilt and subsequent expansion led to the incorporation of Plympton and Plymstock along with other outlying suburbs in 1967 . 
 The city is home to 261 @,@ 546 ( mid @-@ 2014 est . ) people , making it the 30th most populous built @-@ up area in the United Kingdom and the second @-@ largest city in the South West , after Bristol . It is governed locally by Plymouth City Council and is represented nationally by three MPs . Plymouth 's economy remains strongly influenced by shipbuilding and seafaring including ferry links to Brittany ( Roscoff and St Malo ) and Spain ( Santander ) , but has tended toward a service @-@ based economy since the 1990s . It has the largest operational naval base in Western Europe – HMNB Devonport and is home to Plymouth University . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Upper Palaeolithic deposits , including bones of Homo sapiens , have been found in local caves , and artefacts dating from the Bronze Age to the Middle Iron Age have been found at Mount Batten showing that it was one of the main trading ports of the country at that time . An unidentified settlement named ' <unk> <unk> ' ( mouth / estuaries of the Tamar ) is listed in Ptolemy 's Geographia and is presumed to be located in the area of the modern city . 
 The settlement of Plympton , further up the River Plym than the current Plymouth , was also an early trading port , but the river silted up in the early 11th century and forced the mariners and merchants to settle at the current day Barbican near the river mouth . At the time this village was called Sutton , meaning south town in Old English . The name Plym Mouth , meaning " mouth of the River Plym " was first mentioned in a Pipe Roll of 1211 . The name Plymouth first officially replaced Sutton in a charter of King Henry VI in 1440 . See Plympton for the derivation of the name Plym . 
 = = = Early defence and Renaissance = = = 
 During the Hundred Years ' War a French attack ( 1340 ) burned a manor house and took some prisoners , but failed to get into the town . In 1403 the town was burned by Breton raiders . In the late fifteenth century , Plymouth Castle , a " castle quadrate " , was constructed close to the area now known as The Barbican ; it included four round towers , one at each corner , as featured on the city coat of arms . The castle served to protect Sutton Pool , which is where the fleet was based in Plymouth prior to the establishment of Plymouth Dockyard . In 1512 an Act of Parliament was passed for further fortifying Plymouth , and a series of fortifications were then built , including defensive walls at the entrance to Sutton Pool ( across which a chain would be extended in time of danger ) . Defences on St Nicholas Island also date from this time , and a string of six artillery blockhouses were built , including one on Fishers Nose at the south @-@ eastern corner of the Hoe . This location was further strengthened by the building of a fort ( later known as Drake 's Fort ) in 1596 , which itself went on to provide the site for the Citadel , established in the 1660s ( see below ) . 
 During the 16th century locally produced wool was the major export commodity . Plymouth was the home port for successful maritime traders , among them Sir John Hawkins , who led England 's first foray into the Atlantic slave trade , as well as Sir Francis Drake , Mayor of Plymouth in 1581 and 1593 . According to legend , Drake insisted on completing his game of bowls on the Hoe before engaging the Spanish Armada in 1588 . In 1620 the Pilgrim Fathers set sail for the New World from Plymouth , establishing Plymouth Colony – the second English colony in what is now the United States of America . 
 During the English Civil War Plymouth sided with the Parliamentarians and was besieged for almost four years by the Royalists . The last major attack by the Royalist was by Sir Richard Grenville leading thousands of soldiers towards Plymouth , but they were defeated by the <unk> at Freedom Fields Park . The civil war ended as a Parliamentary win , but monarchy was restored by King Charles II in 1660 , who imprisoned many of the Parliamentary heroes on Drake 's Island . Construction of the Royal Citadel began in 1665 , after the Restoration ; it was armed with cannon facing both out to sea and into the town , rumoured to be a reminder to residents not to oppose the Crown . Mount Batten tower also dates from around this time . 
 = = = Plymouth Dock , naval power and Foulston = = = 
 Throughout the 17th century Plymouth had gradually lost its pre @-@ eminence as a trading port . By the mid @-@ 17th century commodities manufactured elsewhere in England cost too much to transport to Plymouth and the city had no means of processing sugar or tobacco imports , although it did play a relatively small part in the Atlantic slave trade during the early 18th century . 
 In the nearby parish of Stoke Damerel the first dockyard , HMNB Devonport , opened in 1690 on the eastern bank of the River Tamar . Further docks were built here in 1727 , 1762 and 1793 . The settlement that developed here was called " Dock " or " Plymouth Dock " at the time , and a new town , separate from Plymouth , grew up . In 1712 there were 318 men employed and by 1733 it had grown to a population of 3 @,@ 000 people . 
 Before the latter half of the 18th century , grain , timber and then coal were Plymouth 's main imports . During this time the real source of wealth was from the neighbouring town of Plymouth Dock ( renamed in 1824 to Devonport ) and the major employer in the entire region was the dockyard . The Three Towns conurbation of Plymouth , Stonehouse and Devonport enjoyed some prosperity during the late 18th and early 19th century and were enriched by a series of neo @-@ classical urban developments designed by London architect John Foulston . Foulston was important for both Devonport and Plymouth and was responsible for several grand public buildings , many now destroyed , including the Athenaeum , the Theatre Royal and Royal Hotel , and much of Union Street . 
 Local chemist William <unk> established his short @-@ lived Plymouth Porcelain venture in 1768 to exploit the deposits of china clay that he had discovered in Cornwall . He was acquainted with engineer John Smeaton , the builder of the third Eddystone Lighthouse . 
 The 1 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 2 km ) Breakwater in Plymouth Sound was designed by John Rennie in order to protect the fleet moving in and out of Devonport ; work started in 1812 . Numerous technical difficulties and repeated storm damage meant that it was not completed until 1841 , twenty years after Rennie 's death . In the 1860s , a ring of Palmerston forts was constructed around the outskirts of Devonport , to protect the dockyard from attack from any direction . 
 Some of the greatest imports to Plymouth from the Americas and Europe during the latter half of the 19th century included maize , wheat , barley , sugar cane , guano , sodium nitrate and phosphate Aside from the dockyard in the town of Devonport , industries in Plymouth such as the gasworks , the railways and tramways and a number of small chemical works had begun to develop in the 19th century , continuing into the 20th century . 
 = = = Plan for Plymouth 1943 = = = 
 During the First World War , Plymouth was the port of entry for many troops from around the Empire and also developed as a facility for the manufacture of munitions . Although major units of the Royal Navy moved to the safety of Scapa Flow , Devonport was an important base for escort vessels and repairs . Flying boats operated from Mount Batten . 
 In the First World War , Devonport was the headquarters of Western Approaches Command until 1941 and Sunderland flying boats were operated by the Royal Australian Air Force . It was an important embarkation point for US troops for D @-@ Day . The city was heavily bombed by the Luftwaffe , in a series of 59 raids known as the Plymouth Blitz . Although the dockyards were the principal targets , much of the city centre and over 3 @,@ 700 houses were completely destroyed and more than 1 @,@ 000 civilians lost their lives . This was largely due to Plymouth 's status as a major port . Charles Church was hit by incendiary bombs and partially destroyed in 1941 during the Blitz , but has not been demolished , as it is now an official permanent monument to the bombing of Plymouth during World War II . 
 The redevelopment of the city was planned by Sir Patrick Abercrombie in his 1943 Plan for Plymouth whilst simultaneously working on the reconstruction plan for London . Between 1951 and 1957 over 1000 homes were completed every year mostly using innovative prefabricated systems of just three main types ; by 1964 over 20 @,@ 000 new homes had been built transforming the dense overcrowded and unsanitary slums of the pre @-@ war city into a low density , dispersed suburbia . Most of the city centre shops had been destroyed and those that remained were cleared to enable a zoned reconstruction according to his plan . In 1962 the modernist high rise of the Civic Centre was constructed , an architecturally significant example of mid twentieth century civic slab @-@ and @-@ tower set piece allowed to fall into disrepair by its owner Plymouth City Council but recently grade II listed by English Heritage to prevent its demolition . 
 Post @-@ war , Devonport Dockyard was kept busy refitting aircraft carriers such as the Ark Royal and , later , nuclear submarines while new light industrial factories were constructed in the newly zoned industrial sector attracting rapid growth of the urban population . The army had substantially left the city by 1971 , with barracks pulled down in the 1960s , however the city remains home to the 42 Commando of the Royal Marines . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = Local government history = = = 
 The first record of the existence of a settlement at Plymouth was in the Domesday Book in 1086 as <unk> , Saxon for south farm , located at the present day Barbican . From Saxon times , it was in the hundred of <unk> . In 1254 it gained status as a town and in 1439 , became the first town in England to be granted a Charter by Parliament . Between 1439 and 1934 , Plymouth had a Mayor . In 1914 the county boroughs of Plymouth and Devonport , and the urban district of East Stonehouse merged to form a single county borough of Plymouth . Collectively they were referred to as " The Three Towns " . 
 In 1919 Nancy Astor was elected the first ever female member of parliament to take office in the British Houses of Parliament for the constituency of Plymouth Sutton . Taking over office from her husband Waldorf Astor , Lady Astor was a vibrantly active campaigner for her resident constituents . Plymouth was granted city status on 18 October 1928 . The city 's first Lord Mayor was appointed in 1935 and its boundaries further expanded in 1967 to include the town of Plympton and the parish of Plymstock . 
 In 1945 , Plymouth @-@ born Michael Foot was elected Labour MP for the war @-@ torn constituency of Plymouth Devonport and after serving as Secretary of State for Education and responsible for the 1974 Health and Safety at Work Act , went on to become one of the most distinguished leaders of the Labour party . 
 The 1971 Local Government White Paper proposed abolishing county boroughs , which would have left Plymouth , a town of 250 @,@ 000 people , being administered from a council based at the smaller Exeter , on the other side of the county . This led to Plymouth lobbying for the creation of a <unk> county , to include Plymouth , Torpoint , Saltash , and the rural hinterland . The campaign was not successful , and Plymouth ceased to be a county borough on 1 April 1974 with responsibility for education , social services , highways and libraries transferred to Devon County Council . All powers returned when the city become a unitary authority on 1 April 1998 under recommendations of the Banham Commission . 
 In the Parliament of the United Kingdom , Plymouth is represented by the three constituencies of Plymouth Moor View , Plymouth Sutton and Devonport and South West Devon and within the European Parliament as South West England . In the 2015 general election all three constituencies returned Conservative MPs , who were Oliver <unk> ( for Sutton and <unk> ) , Gary Streeter ( for Sutton and Devonport ) and Johnny Mercer for Moor View . 
 = = = City Council = = = 
 The City of Plymouth is divided into 20 wards , 17 of which elect three councillors and the other three electing two councillors , making up a total council of 57 . Each year a third of the council is up for election for three consecutive years – there are no elections on the following " fourth " year , which is when County Council elections take place . The total electorate for Plymouth was 188 @,@ 924 in April 2015 . The local election of 7 May 2015 resulted in a political composition of 28 Labour councillors , 26 Conservative and 3 UKIP resulting in a Labour administration . Plymouth City Council is formally twinned with : Brest , France ( 1963 ) , Gdynia , Poland ( 1976 ) , Novorossiysk , Russia ( 1990 ) San Sebastián , Spain ( 1990 ) and Plymouth , United States ( 2001 ) . 
 Plymouth was granted the dignity of Lord Mayor by King George V in 1935 . The position is elected each year by a group of six councillors . It is traditional that the position of the Lord Mayor alternates between the Conservative Party and the Labour Party annually and that the Lord Mayor chooses the Deputy Lord Mayor . Conservative councillor Dr John Mahony is the incumbent for 2015 – 16 . 
 The Lord Mayor 's official residence is 3 Elliot Terrace , located on the Hoe . Once a home of Waldorf and Nancy Astor , it was given by Lady Astor to the City of Plymouth as an official residence for future Lord Mayors and is also used today for civic hospitality , as lodgings for visiting dignitaries and High Court judges and it is also available to hire for private events . The Civic Centre municipal office building in Armada Way became a listed building in June 2007 because of its quality and period features , but has become the centre of a controversy as the council planned for its demolition estimating that it could cost £ 40m to refurbish it , resulting in possible job losses . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Plymouth lies between the River Plym to the east and the River Tamar to the west ; both rivers flow into the natural harbour of Plymouth Sound . Since 1967 , the unitary authority of Plymouth has included the , once independent , towns of Plympton and Plymstock which lie along the east of the River Plym . The River Tamar forms the county boundary between Devon and Cornwall and its estuary forms the Hamoaze on which is sited Devonport Dockyard . 
 The River Plym , which flows off Dartmoor to the north @-@ east , forms a smaller estuary to the east of the city called <unk> . Plymouth Sound is protected from the sea by the Plymouth Breakwater , in use since 1814 . In the Sound is Drake 's Island which is seen from Plymouth Hoe , a flat public area on top of limestone cliffs . The Unitary Authority of Plymouth is 79 @.@ 84 square kilometres ( 30 @.@ 83 sq mi ) . The topography rises from sea level to a height , at <unk> , of about 509 feet ( 155 m ) above Ordnance Datum ( AOD ) . 
 Geologically , Plymouth has a mixture of limestone , Devonian slate , granite and Middle Devonian limestone . Plymouth Sound , Shores and Cliffs is a Site of Special Scientific Interest , because of its geology . The bulk of the city is built upon Upper Devonian slates and shales and the headlands at the entrance to Plymouth Sound are formed of Lower Devonian slates , which can withstand the power of the sea . 
 A band of Middle Devonian limestone runs west to east from Cremyll to Plymstock including the Hoe . Local limestone may be seen in numerous buildings , walls and pavements throughout Plymouth . To the north and north east of the city is the granite mass of Dartmoor ; the granite was mined and exported via Plymouth . Rocks brought down the Tamar from Dartmoor include ores containing tin , copper , tungsten , lead and other minerals . There is evidence that the middle Devonian limestone belt at the south edge of Plymouth and in Plymstock was quarried at West Hoe , Cattedown and Radford . 
 = = = Urban Form = = = 
 On 27 April 1944 Sir Patrick Abercrombie 's Plan for Plymouth to rebuild the bomb @-@ damaged city was published ; it called for demolition of the few remaining pre @-@ War buildings in the city centre to make way for their replacement with wide , parallel , modern boulevards aligned east – west linked by a north – south avenue ( Armada Way ) linking the railway station with the vista of Plymouth Hoe . A peripheral road system connecting the historic Barbican on the east and Union Street to the west determines the principal form of the city centre , even following pedestrianisation of the shopping centre in the late 1980s , and continues to inform the present ' Vision for Plymouth ' developed by a team led by Barcelona @-@ based architect David MacKay in 2003 which calls for revivification of the city centre with mixed @-@ use and residential . In suburban areas , post @-@ War <unk> had already begun to appear by 1946 , and over 1 @,@ 000 permanent council houses were built each year from 1951 – 57 according to the Modernist zoned low @-@ density garden city model advocated by Abercrombie . By 1964 over 20 @,@ 000 new homes had been built , more than 13 @,@ 500 of them permanent council homes and 853 built by the Admiralty . Plymouth is home to 28 parks with an average size of 45 @,@ 638 square metres ( 491 @,@ 240 sq ft ) . Its largest park is Central Park , with other sizeable green spaces including Victoria Park , Freedom Fields Park , Alexandra Park , Devonport Park and the Hoe . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Plymouth has a temperate oceanic climate ( Köppen Cfb ) which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England . This means a wide range of exotic plants can be grown . The annual mean temperature is approximately 11 ° C ( 52 ° F ) . Due to the modifying effect of the sea the seasonal range is less than in most other parts of the UK . As a result of this summer highs are lower than its southerly latitude should warrant , but as a contrast the coldest month of February has mean minimum temperatures as mild as between 3 and 4 ° C ( 37 and 39 ° F ) . Snow is rare , not usually equating to more than a few flakes , but there have been exclusions , namely the European winter storms of 2009 @-@ 10 which , in early January , covered Plymouth in at least 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) of snow ; more on higher ground . Another period of notable snow occurred from 17 – 19 December 2010 when up to 8 inches ( 20 cm ) of snow fell through the period – though only 2 inches ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) would lie at any one time due to melt . Over the 1961 – 1990 period , annual snowfall accumulation averaged less than 7 cm ( 3 in ) per year . July and August are the warmest months with mean daily maxima over 19 ° C ( 66 ° F ) . 
 South West England has a favoured location when the Azores High pressure area extends north @-@ eastwards towards the UK , particularly in summer . Coastal areas have average annual sunshine totals over 1 @,@ 600 hours . 
 Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection . The Atlantic depressions are more vigorous in autumn and winter and most of the rain which falls in those seasons in the south @-@ west is from this source . Average annual rainfall is around 980 millimetres ( 39 in ) . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , with June to August having the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 Typically , the warmest day of the year ( 1971 – 2000 ) will achieve a temperature of 26 @.@ 6 ° C ( 80 ° F ) , although in June 1976 the temperature reached 31 @.@ 6 ° C ( 89 ° F ) , the site record . On average , 4 @.@ 25 days of the year will report a maximum temperature of 25 @.@ 1 ° C ( 77 ° F ) or above . During the winter half of the year , the coldest night will typically fall to − 4 @.@ 1 ° C ( 25 ° F ) although in January 1979 the temperature fell to − 8 @.@ 8 ° C ( 16 ° F ) . Typically , 18 @.@ 6 nights of the year will register an air frost . 
 = = Education = = 
 The University of Plymouth enrolls 25 @,@ 895 total students as of 2014 / 15 ( 22nd largest in the UK out of 165 ) . It also employs 3 @,@ 000 staff with an annual income of around £ 160 million . It was founded in 1992 from Polytechnic South West ( formerly Plymouth Polytechnic ) following the Further and Higher Education Act 1992 . It has courses in maritime business , marine engineering , marine biology and Earth , ocean and environmental sciences , surf science , shipping and logistics . The university formed a joint venture with the fellow Devonian University of Exeter in 2000 , establishing the Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry . The college is ranked 8th out of 30 universities in the UK in 2011 for medicine . Its dental school was established in 2006 , which also provides free dental care in an attempt to improve access to dental care in the South West . 
 The University of St Mark & St John ( known as " <unk> " or " <unk> " ) specialises in teacher training , and offers training across the country and abroad . 
 The city is also home to two large colleges . The City College Plymouth provides courses from the most basic to Foundation degrees for approximately 26 @,@ 000 students . Plymouth College of Art offers a selection of courses including media . It was started 153 years ago and is now one of only four independent colleges of art and design in the UK . 
 Plymouth also has 71 state primary phase schools , 13 state secondary schools , eight special schools and three selective state grammar schools , Devonport High School for Girls , Devonport High School for Boys and Plymouth High School for Girls . There is also an independent school Plymouth College . 
 The city was also home to the Royal Naval Engineering College ; opened in 1880 in Keyham , it trained engineering students for five years before they completed the remaining two years of the course at Greenwich . The college closed in 1910 , but in 1940 a new college opened at <unk> . This was renamed Dockyard Technical College in 1959 before finally closing in 1994 ; training was transferred to the University of Southampton . 
 Plymouth is home to the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom ( MBA ) which conducts research in all areas of the marine sciences . The Plymouth Marine Laboratory is an offshoot of the MBA . Together with the National Marine Aquarium , the Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Sciences , Plymouth University 's Marine Institute and the Diving Diseases Research Centre , these marine @-@ related organisations form the Plymouth Marine Sciences Partnership . The Plymouth Marine Laboratory , which focuses on global issues of climate change and sustainability . It monitors the effects of ocean acidity on corals and shellfish and reports the results to the UK government . It also cultivates algae that could be used to make biofuels or in the treatment of waste water by using technology such as photo @-@ bioreactors . It works alongside the Boots Group to investigate the use of algae in skin care protects , taking advantage of the chemicals they contain that adapt to protect themselves from the sun . 
 = = Demography = = 
 From the 2011 Census , the Office for National Statistics published that Plymouth 's unitary authority area population was 256 @,@ 384 ; 15 @,@ 664 more people than that of the last census from 2001 , which indicated that Plymouth had a population of 240 @,@ 720 . The Plymouth urban area had a population of 260 @,@ 203 in 2011 ( the urban sprawl which extends outside the authority 's boundaries ) . The city 's average household size was 2 @.@ 3 persons . At the time of the 2011 UK census , the ethnic composition of Plymouth 's population was 96 @.@ 2 % White ( of 92 @.@ 9 % was White British ) , with the largest minority ethnic group being Chinese at 0 @.@ 5 % . The white Irish ethnic group saw the largest decline in its share of the population since the 2001 Census ( <unk> % ) , while the Other Asian and Black African had the largest increases ( 360 % and 351 % respectively ) . This excludes the two new ethnic groups added to the 2011 census of Gypsy or Irish Traveller and Arab . The population rose rapidly during the second half of the 19th century , but declined by over 1 @.@ 6 % from 1931 to 1951 . 
 Plymouth 's gross value added ( a measure of the size of its economy ) was 5 @,@ 169 million GBP in 2013 making up 25 % of Devon 's GVA . Its GVA per person was £ 19 @,@ 943 and compared to the national average of £ 23 @,@ 755 , was £ 3 @,@ 812 lower . Plymouth 's unemployment rate was 7 @.@ 0 % in 2014 which was 2 @.@ 0 points higher than the South West average and 0 @.@ 8 points higher than the average for Great Britain ( England , Wales and Scotland ) . 
 A 2014 profile by the National Health Service showed Plymouth had higher than average levels of poverty and deprivation ( 26 @.@ 2 % of population among the poorest 20 @.@ 4 % nationally ) . Life expectancy , at 78 @.@ 3 years for men and 82 @.@ 1 for women , was the lowest of any region in the South West of England . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Because of its coastal location , the economy of Plymouth has traditionally been maritime , in particular the defence sector with over 12 @,@ 000 people employed and approximately 7 @,@ 500 in the armed forces . The Plymouth Gin Distillery has been producing Plymouth Gin since 1793 , which was exported around the world by the Royal Navy . During the 1930s , it was the most widely distributed gin and has a controlled term of origin . Since the 1980s , employment in the defence sector has decreased substantially and the public sector is now prominent particularly in administration , health , education , medicine and engineering . 
 Devonport Dockyard is the UK 's only naval base that refits nuclear submarines and the Navy estimates that the Dockyard generates about 10 % of Plymouth 's income . Plymouth has the largest cluster of marine and maritime businesses in the south west with 270 firms operating within the sector . Other substantial employers include the university with almost 3 @,@ 000 staff , as well as the Tamar Science Park employing 500 people in 50 companies . Several employers have chosen to locate their headquarters in Plymouth , including Hemsley Fraser . 
 Plymouth has a post @-@ war shopping area in the city centre with substantial pedestrianisation . At the west end of the zone inside a grade II listed building is the <unk> Market that was completed in 1959 – <unk> meaning " basket " from French , so it translates as " basket market " . In terms of retail floorspace , Plymouth is ranked in the top five in the South West , and 29th nationally . Plymouth was one of the first ten British cities to trial the new Business Improvement District initiative . The <unk> Pool is situated at the foot of the Hoe and became a grade II listed building in 1998 before being restored to its 1930s look for £ 3 @.@ 4 million . 
 = = = Plymouth 2020 = = = 
 As of 2003 , Plymouth Council has been undertaking a project of urban redevelopment called the " Vision for Plymouth " launched by the architect David Mackay and backed by both Plymouth City Council and the Plymouth Chamber of Commerce ( PCC ) . Its projects range from shopping centres , a cruise terminal , a boulevard and to increase the population to 300 @,@ 000 and build 33 @,@ 000 dwellings . 
 In 2004 the old Drake Circus shopping centre and Charles Cross car park were demolished and replaced by the latest Drake Circus Shopping Centre , which opened in October 2006 . It received negative feedback before opening when David Mackay said it was already " ten years out of date " . In contrast , the Theatre Royal 's production and education centre , <unk> , which was built on wasteland at Cattedown , was a runner @-@ up for the RIBA Stirling Prize for Architecture in 2003 . 
 There is a project involving the future relocation of Plymouth City Council 's headquarters , the civic centre , to the current location of the <unk> bus station ; it would involve both the bus station and civic centre being demolished and a rebuilt together at the location with the land from the civic centre being sold off . Other suggestions include the demolition of the Plymouth Pavilions entertainment arena to create a canal " boulevard " linking Millbay to the city centre . Millbay is being regenerated with mixed residential , retail and office space alongside the ferry port . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The A38 dual @-@ carriageway runs from east to west across the north of the city . Within the city it is designated as ' The Parkway ' and represents the boundary between the urban parts of the city and the generally more recent suburban areas . Heading east , it connects Plymouth to the M5 motorway about 40 miles ( 65 km ) away near Exeter ; and heading west it connects Cornwall and Devon via the Tamar Bridge . Regular bus services are provided by Plymouth Citybus , Stagecoach South West and Target Travel . There are three Park and ride services located at <unk> , <unk> ( Plympton ) and George Junction ( Plymouth City Airport ) , which are operated by Stagecoach South West . 
 A regular international ferry service provided by Brittany Ferries operates from Millbay taking cars and foot passengers directly to France ( Roscoff ) and Spain ( Santander ) on the three ferries , MV <unk> , MV Bretagne and MV Pont @-@ Aven . There is a passenger ferry between Stonehouse and the Cornish hamlet of Cremyll , which is believed to have operated continuously since 1204 . There is also a pedestrian ferry from the Mayflower Steps to Mount Batten , and an alternative to using the Tamar Bridge via the Torpoint Ferry ( vehicle and pedestrian ) across the River Tamar . 
 The city 's airport was Plymouth City Airport about 4 miles ( 6 km ) north of the city centre . The airport was home to the local airline Air Southwest , which operated flights across the United Kingdom and Ireland . In June 2003 , a report by the South West RDA was published looking at the future of aviation in the south @-@ west and the possible closure of airports . It concluded that the best option for the south @-@ west was to close Plymouth City Airport and expand Exeter International Airport and Newquay Cornwall Airport , although it did conclude that this was not the best option for Plymouth . In April 2011 , it was announced that the airport would close , which it did on 23 December . However , <unk> plans to reopen the city airport by 2018 , which will provide daily services to various destinations including London . 
 Plymouth railway station , which opened in 1877 , is managed by Great Western Railway and also sees trains on the CrossCountry network . Smaller stations are served by local trains on the Tamar Valley Line and Cornish Main Line . First Great Western have come under fire recently , due to widespread rail service cuts across the south @-@ west , which affect Plymouth greatly . Three MPs from the three main political parties in the region have lobbied that the train services are vital to its economy . 
 The Exeter to Plymouth railway of the LSWR needs to be reopened to connect Cornwall and Plymouth to the rest of the UK railway system on an all weather basis . There are proposals to reopen the line from Tavistock to Bere Alston for a through service to Plymouth . On the night of 4 February 2014 , amid high winds and extremely rough seas , part of the sea wall at Dawlish was breached washing away around 40 metres ( 130 ft ) of the wall and the ballast under the railway immediately behind . The line was closed . Network Rail began repair work and the line reopened on 4 April 2014 . In the wake of widespread disruption caused by damage to the mainline track at Dawlish by coastal storms in February 2014 , Network Rail are considering reopening the Tavistock to Okehampton and Exeter section of the line as an alternative to the coastal route . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Plymouth has about 150 churches and its Roman Catholic cathedral ( 1858 ) is in Stonehouse . The city 's oldest church is Plymouth Minster , also known as St Andrew 's Church , ( Anglican ) located at the top of Royal Parade — it is the largest parish church in Devon and has been a site of gathering since AD 800 . The city also includes five Baptist churches , over twenty Methodist chapels , and thirteen Roman Catholic churches . In 1831 the first Brethren assembly in England , a movement of conservative non @-@ denominational Evangelical Christians , was established in the city , so that Brethren are often called Plymouth Brethren , although the movement did not begin locally . 
 Plymouth has the first known reference to Jews in the South West from Sir Francis Drake 's voyages in 1577 to 1580 , as his log mentioned " Moses the Jew " – a man from Plymouth . The Plymouth Synagogue is a Listed Grade II * building , built in 1762 and is the oldest Ashkenazi Synagogue in the English speaking world . There are also places of worship for Islam , Bahá 'í , Buddhism , Unitarianism , Chinese beliefs and Humanism . 
 58 @.@ 1 % of the population described themselves in the 2011 census return as being at least nominally Christian and 0 @.@ 8 % as Muslim with all other religions represented by less than 0 @.@ 5 % each . The portion of people without a religion is 32 @.@ 9 % ; above the national average of 24 @.@ 7 % . 7 @.@ 1 % did not state their religious belief . Since the 2001 Census , the number of Christians and Jews has decreased ( <unk> % and -7 % respectively ) , while all other religions have increased and non @-@ religious people have almost doubled in number . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Built in 1815 , Union Street was at the heart of Plymouth 's historical culture . It became known as the servicemen 's playground , as it was where sailors from the Royal Navy would seek entertainment of all kinds . During the 1930s , there were 30 pubs and it attracted such performers as Charlie Chaplin to the New Palace Theatre . It is now the late @-@ night hub of Plymouth 's entertainment strip , but has a reputation for trouble at closing hours . 
 Outdoor events and festivals are held including the annual British Firework Championships in August , which attracts tens of thousands of people across the waterfront . In August 2006 the world record for the most amount of simultaneous fireworks was surpassed , by Roy Lowry of the University of Plymouth , over Plymouth Sound . Since 1992 the Music of the Night has been performed in the Royal Citadel by the 29 Commando Regiment and local performers to raise money for local and military charities . 
 The city 's main theatres are the Theatre Royal ( 1 @,@ 315 capacity ) , its Drum Theatre ( 200 capacity ) , and its production and creative learning centre , The <unk> . The Plymouth Pavilions has multiple uses for the city staging music concerts , basketball matches and stand @-@ up comedy . There are also three cinemas : Reel Cinema at <unk> Cross , Plymouth Arts Centre at Looe Street and a Vue cinema at the Barbican Leisure Park . The Plymouth City Museum and Art Gallery is operated by Plymouth City Council allowing free admission – it has six galleries . The Plymouth Athenaeum , which includes a local interest library , is a society dedicated to the promotion of learning in the fields of science , technology , literature and art . From 1961 to 2009 it also housed a theatre . 
 Plymouth is the regional television centre of BBC South West . A team of journalists are headquartered at Plymouth for the ITV West Country regional station , after a merger with ITV West forced ITV Westcountry to close on 16 February 2009 . The main local newspapers serving Plymouth are The Herald and Western Morning News with Radio Plymouth , BBC Radio Devon , Heart South West , and Pirate FM being the main local radio stations . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Plymouth is home to Plymouth Argyle F.C. , who play in the fourth tier of English football league known as Football League Two . The team 's home ground is called Home Park and is located in Central Park . It links itself with the group of English non @-@ conformists that left Plymouth for the New World in 1620 : its nickname is " The Pilgrims " . The city also has four Non @-@ League football clubs ; Plymouth Parkway F.C. who play at Bolitho Park , <unk> Villa F.C. who play at Haye Road , <unk> Oak Villa F.C. who play at Weston Mill and Plymstock United F.C. who play at Deans Cross . All four clubs play in the South West Peninsula League . 
 Other sports clubs include Plymouth Albion R.F.C. and the Plymouth Raiders basketball club . Plymouth Albion Rugby Football Club is a rugby union club that was founded in 1875 and are currently competing in the third tier of Professional English Rugby . They play at the Brickfields . Plymouth Raiders play in the British Basketball League – the top tier of British basketball . They play at the Plymouth Pavilions entertainment arena and were founded in 1983 . Plymouth cricket club was formed in 1843 , the current 1st XI play in the Devon Premier League . Plymouth Devils are a speedway team in the British Premier League . Plymouth was home to an American football club , the Plymouth Admirals until 2010 . Plymouth is also home to Plymouth <unk> Hockey Club , with their 1st XI playing in the National League last season . 
 Plymouth is an important centre for watersports , especially scuba diving and sailing . The Port of Plymouth Regatta is one of the oldest regattas in the world , and has been held regularly since 1823 . In September 2011 , Plymouth hosted the America 's Cup World Series for nine days . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Since 1973 Plymouth has been supplied water by South West Water . Prior to the 1973 take over it was supplied by Plymouth County Borough Corporation . Before the 19th century two leats were built in order to provide drinking water for the town . They carried water from Dartmoor to Plymouth . A watercourse , known as Plymouth or Drake 's Leat , was opened on 24 April 1591 to tap the River <unk> . The Devonport Leat was constructed to carry fresh drinking water to the expanding town of Devonport and its ever growing dockyard . It was fed by three Dartmoor rivers : The West Dart , <unk> and <unk> . It seems to have been carrying water since 1797 , but it was officially completed in 1801 . It was originally designed to carry water to Devonport town , but has since been shortened and now carries water to <unk> Reservoir , which feeds most of the water supply of Plymouth . <unk> Reservoir is located about 5 miles ( 8 km ) north of the city and was constructed in 1898 and expanded in 1928 . 
 Plymouth City Council is responsible for waste management throughout the city and South West Water is responsible for sewerage . Plymouth 's electricity is supplied from the National Grid and distributed to Plymouth via Western Power Distribution . On the outskirts of Plympton a combined cycle gas @-@ powered station , the Langage Power Station , which started to produce electricity for Plymouth at the end of 2009 . 
 Her Majesty 's Courts Service provide a Magistrates ' Court and a Combined Crown and County Court in the city . The Plymouth Borough Police , formed in 1836 , eventually became part of Devon and Cornwall Constabulary . There are police stations at Charles Cross and Crownhill ( the Divisional HQ ) and smaller stations at Plympton and Plymstock . The city has one of the Devon and Cornwall Area Crown Prosecution Service Divisional offices . Plymouth has five fire stations located in Camel 's Head , Crownhill , Greenbank , Plympton and Plymstock which is part of Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service . The Royal National Lifeboat Institution have an Atlantic 85 class lifeboat and Severn class lifeboat stationed at Millbay Docks . 
 Plymouth is served by Plymouth Hospitals NHS Trust and the city 's NHS hospital is Derriford Hospital 4 miles ( 6 km ) north of the city centre . The Royal Eye Infirmary is located at Derriford Hospital . South Western Ambulance Service NHS Foundation Trust operates in Plymouth and the rest of the south west ; its headquarters are in Exeter . 
 The mid @-@ 19th century burial ground at Ford Park Cemetery was reopened in 2007 by a successful trust and the City council operate two large early 20th century cemeteries at Weston Mill and <unk> both with crematoria and chapels . There is also a privately owned cemetery on the outskirts of the city , Drake Memorial Park which does not allow headstones to mark graves , but a brass plaque set into the ground . 
 = = Landmarks and tourist attractions = = 
 After the English Civil War the Royal Citadel was built in 1666 on the east end of Plymouth Hoe , to defend the port from naval attacks , suppress <unk> Parliamentary leanings and to train the armed forces . Guided tours are available in the summer months . Further west is Smeaton 's Tower , which was built in 1759 as a lighthouse on rocks 14 miles ( 23 km ) off shore , but dismantled and the top two thirds rebuilt on the Hoe in 1877 . It is open to the public and has views over the Plymouth Sound and the city from the lantern room . Plymouth has 20 war memorials of which nine are on The Hoe including : Plymouth Naval Memorial , to remember those killed in World Wars I and II , and the Armada Memorial , to commemorate the defeat of the Spanish Armada . 
 The early port settlement of Plymouth , called " Sutton " , approximates to the area now referred to as the Barbican and has 100 listed buildings and the largest concentration of cobbled streets in Britain . The Pilgrim Fathers left for the New World in 1620 near the commemorative Mayflower Steps in Sutton Pool . Also on Sutton Pool is the National Marine Aquarium which displays 400 marine species and includes Britain 's deepest aquarium tank . 
 One mile ( two kilometres ) upstream on the opposite side of the River Plym is the Saltram estate , which has a Jacobean and Georgian mansion . 
 On the northern outskirts of the city , Crownhill Fort is a well restored example of a " Palmerston 's Folly " . It is owned by the Landmark Trust and is open to the public . 
 To the west of the city is Devonport , one of Plymouth 's historic quarters . As part of Devonport 's millennium regeneration project , the Devonport Heritage Trail has been introduced , complete with over 70 <unk> outlining the route . 
 Plymouth is often used as a base by visitors to Dartmoor , the Tamar Valley and the beaches of south @-@ east Cornwall . <unk> , Cawsand and <unk> Bay are popular . 
 The Roland <unk> building , the landmark building of the University of Plymouth , is located in the city 's central quarter . Designed by leading architect Henning Larsen , the building was opened in 2008 and houses the University 's Arts faculty . It has been consistently considered one of the UK 's most beautiful university buildings . 
 Images of landmarks 
 = = Notable people = = 
 People from Plymouth are known as <unk> or less formally as <unk> . Its meaning is described as a person from Devon , deriving from Cousin Jan ( the Devon form of John ) , but more particularly in naval circles anyone from the Plymouth area . 
 The Elizabethan navigator , Sir Francis Drake was born in the nearby town of Tavistock and was the mayor of Plymouth . He was the first Englishman to circumnavigate the world and was known by the Spanish as El Draco meaning " The Dragon " after he raided many of their ships . He died of dysentery in 1596 off the coast of Puerto Rico . In 2002 a mission to recover his body and bring it to Plymouth was allowed by the Ministry of Defence . His cousin and contemporary John Hawkins was a Plymouth man . Painter Sir Joshua Reynolds , founder and first president of the Royal Academy was born and educated in nearby Plympton , now part of Plymouth . William <unk> born in Kingsbridge set up his successful porcelain business in the city and was a close friend of John Smeaton designer of the Eddystone Lighthouse . On 26 January 1786 , Benjamin Robert Haydon , an English painter who specialised in grand historical pictures , was born here . The naturalist Dr William Elford Leach FRS , who did much to pave the way in Britain for Charles Darwin , was born at Hoe Gate in 1791 . 
 Antarctic explorers Robert Falcon Scott and Frank Bickerton both lived in the city . Artists include Beryl Cook whose paintings depict the culture of Plymouth and Robert <unk> , whose paintings investigated themes of vagrancy , sexual behaviour and suicide , lived in the city from the 1960s until his death in 2002 . Illustrator and creator of children 's series Mr Benn and King Rollo , David McKee , was born and brought up in South Devon and trained at Plymouth College of Art . Jazz musician John Surman , born in nearby Tavistock , has close connections to the area , evidenced by his 2012 album Saltash Bells . The avant garde prepared guitarist Keith Rowe was born in the city before establishing the jazz free improvisation band AMM in London in 1965 and <unk> in 1997 . The musician and film director Cosmo Jarvis has lived in several towns in South Devon and has filmed videos in and around Plymouth . In addition , actors Sir Donald Sinden and Judi Trott . George Passmore of Turner Prize winning duo Gilbert and George was born in the city , as was Labour politician Michael Foot whose family reside at nearby <unk> Castle . 
 Notable athletes include swimmer <unk> Davies , diver Tom Daley , dancer Wayne Sleep , and footballer Trevor Francis . Other past residents include composer journalist and newspaper editor William Henry Wills , Ron Goodwin , and journalist Angela Rippon and comedian Dawn French . Canadian politician and legal scholar Chris <unk> hails from Plymouth . America based actor Donald Moffat , whose roles include American Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson in the film The Right Stuff , and fictional President Bennett in Clear and Present Danger , was born in Plymouth . 
 = Grove Church Cemetery = 
 The Grove Church Cemetery is a nonsectarian cemetery , located on the western slope of the Hudson Palisades , along with several other cemeteries in a string of green open space , in Hudson County , New Jersey , United States . The Grove Church , who owns the cemetery , is one of the oldest religious bodies in the area , and it has had an operating cemetery since 1847 . Throughout its history , prominent families have been buried there , as well as American Civil war veterans . There have also been reports of vandalism and misuse of the property since the 19th century , and in 2007 some of the cemetery grounds were occupied by the homeless . 
 = = Location = = 
 Grove Church Cemetery is located at 1132 46th Street in North Bergen , New Jersey . The cemetery also fronts Kennedy Boulevard which in the 19th century was known as <unk> Road , or <unk> Road . Overlooking into the Secaucus , it starts at the top and extends onto the middle of the western face of the Hudson Palisades . Grove Church Cemetery is one of several burial sites on the western slope , along with <unk> Cemetery , Hoboken Cemetery and Weehawken Cemetery , which is only a few blocks away from Grove Church along with Palisades Cemetery . These grounds constitute a string of green open spaces in North Hudson County . The gated entrance is across the street , east of the <unk> Avenue station of the Hudson Bergen Light Rail in Union City , New Jersey . 
 = = History = = 
 Located in then both Union Hill and New Durham , the Reformed Church at New Durham which was also known as the " Grove Church " , was for many years the only Methodist church in the area . It has been operational since April 12 , 1843 , and was one of the first religious bodies established in the wilds of North Hudson , the Bergen Woods . The first pastor was Reverend Philip <unk> who acted until 1844 , and was succeeded by William Taylor , a Rutgers graduate who later acted as pastor for a nearby Jersey City congregation . Taylor was succeeded by William Mabon in 1846 . The land at the cemetery has been used for burial purposes since 1847 , which has made it one of the oldest burial grounds in Hudson County . Typical grave depths are approximately five feet , and the grounds bare dry soils of yellowish earth , loose drift gravel , and pockets of sand , as well as occurrences of trap rock . Before the turn of the 20th century , there were two vaults on the premises , one made of brick and the other of stone ; there are many more now . Overall , the grounds at Grove Church Cemetery are roughly 8 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 ha ) . Because of the natural descent of the cemeteries location on the western side of the Palisades , ground water flows into the surrounding marshes in Secaucus , and contamination of wells , springs , and water @-@ courses in the surrounding area is very low . Other than having a relatively large congregation , many of the church members were of wealth , and owned plots and vaults in the cemetery . 
 In the year 1890 , Edwin B. Young , a descendant of United Empire Royalists and a colonel in the King 's Royal , was made superintendent of the grounds . A particular wealthy family , the Gardners , had large granite vaults built very visibly to pedestrians along then <unk> Road . It was reported by the New York Sun that grave robbers had broken into various vaults at Grove Church . The Gardner vault had been found opened , which required the vandal to smash locks as well as break the iron railing , which was believed to be achieved by the use of hammers and chisels stolen from on adjoined marble yard . Robert Gardner 's metallic coffin was found opened , removed from the shelf upon which it sat . The investigation , led by Superintendent Young , left those involved unsure of why the perpetrators would have broken in , and with no apparent objective or reason , they concluded that it may have been done simply to desecrate the resting place of the dead . Young held that position of superintendent until 1899 , for the pursuit of real estate . 
 It is owned and maintained by the Reformed Grove Church , and is still active and well kept , and the offices are located on the cemetery grounds . There are 31 American Civil War veteran graves at Grove Church Cemetery . 
 = = Use by the homeless = = 
 Called " a cemetery for the living " , it was reported in 2007 that between 30 and 135 homeless people were squatting in the Grove Church Cemetery . An investigation had been brought on by a sexual assault of a woman , who was near the <unk> Avenue Station of the Hudson Bergen Light Rail , and by knife @-@ point was brought into the cemetery and assaulted . Upon searching the grounds , police found remnants of living activity , namely mattresses , pillows , and blankets , as well as garbage strewn across the lawn . Also , small shacks had been built along the perimeter . To the dismay of neighbors , who had complained about the noise and feeling unsafe , there was not much that the police could do to remove the people off of the premises ; there is no law against loitering in public places . One victim , however , claimed that there were bronze urns stolen from his relative 's tomb , and Reverend Douglas Shepler , the pastor of the Grove Reformed Church , reported a woman visiting a grave had her necklace ripped off and stolen by one of the men . In addition , the Reformed Grove Church had been supporting the homeless by providing them with meals , as it is within their rights and devotion to charity that they will not turn away anyone seeking help . It has a few times over the course of several years removed the homeless who were squatting there , but they manage to relocate there . 
 The homeless , who were by majority South and Central American males , said that they came into the area from their respective countries in promise of work . A particular individual who was interviewed said that the work he was told about had only been short term and , along with many of the others , had nowhere else to go . Most who had been approached about relocation into nearby homeless shelters express their hesitation to leave the Grove Church Cemetery grounds , fearful that they would lose the freedom they had on the public property . Measures were taken to remove and clean up the cemetery , and it is believed that while some may have entered into shelters , others likely still reside in the general area , while some had moved into the wooded eastern side of the Palisades hills in Union City , where many shacks can be seen supporting the homeless . 
 = = Notable burials = = 
 James Buttersworth ( 1817 – 1894 ) , English painter who specialized in maritime art . 
 William <unk> ( 1825 – 1870 ) , American Civil War major . 
 Horace Grant Underwood ( 1859 - 1916 ) , transferred to <unk> Foreigners ' Cemetery 
 = Lost : Missing Pieces = 
 Lost : Missing Pieces is a series of thirteen video clips ranging in length from one to four minutes that aired during the hiatus between the 3rd and 4th seasons of the television show Lost , from which the series is spun off . They generally became available to Verizon Wireless users on Mondays from November 2007 to January 2008 and were uploaded onto the ABC 's website a week later for free streaming . The " mobisodes " , which have also been referred to as " webisodes " , were shot in Honolulu , Hawaii , and produced by the same crew with the same cast as the television series ; thus , all content is considered to be canonical . Lost : Missing Pieces were included as special features in the fourth season 's 2008 DVD releases . 
 The project was announced in November 2005 as the Lost Video Diaries ; however , production was delayed several times due to contractual restrictions . Lost 's writer @-@ producers originally proposed the mobisodes as a self @-@ contained story that would focus on two previously unseen characters of the Lost fictional universe . These characters would be played by actors who were not part of the Screen Actors Guild ; however the entertainment guilds refused to support such a project . After months of unsuccessful negotiating , the series was seemingly shelved by ABC . In June 2007 , it was announced that the mobisodes , which would be renamed Lost : Missing Pieces , would star the regular characters of Lost in thirteen short video clips unrelated to each other . Twelve scenes were newly shot ; one was a deleted scene from the television series . Critical response to Lost : Missing Pieces was mixed . The series was nominated for an Emmy Award in 2008 . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 In November 2005 , while the early second season of Lost was airing , The Hollywood Reporter reported that twenty @-@ two mobisodes — each spanning several minutes — were expected to be produced in December for a January 2006 release . Zap2it reported that they would later be present on the second season 's DVD set and that six would be exclusive to the DVD . Unlike the television series , it would not be produced by ABC Studios ( known then as " Touchstone Television " ) and would star non @-@ Screen Actors Guild members ; however it would be produced under the oversight of Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse , like the television series . In response to fan inquiries about Lost 's thirty @-@ odd background characters , the Lost Video Diaries would focus on a self @-@ contained story about two survivors of the crash of Oceanic Flight 815 who had not previously been introduced . The Los Angeles Times confirmed in January 2006 – the month originally scheduled to launch the series – that the mobisodes would be originally broadcast on V CAST from Verizon Wireless and that each mobisode would span only two minutes . Verizon would ultimately pay ABC $ 400 @,@ 000 for the mobisodes . 
 = = = Postponement = = = 
 Production was delayed when the actors , directors and writers guilds refused to support the spin @-@ off . A deal previously unheard of was negotiated in April , which allowed guild members involved to collect residuals . This agreement prompted Lindelof and Cuse to develop a storyline for the Video Diaries that would include Lost 's regular characters , although not all of Lost 's regular cast signed contracts . According to Touchstone 's executive vice president for production Barry <unk> , who would eventually serve as an executive producer on the mobisodes , " They seem to be under the impression that we 'll make millions of dollars and they won 't " . Variety reported that the mobisodes would be produced and aired alongside the third season of Lost . At Comic @-@ Con International in July , Lindelof and Cuse announced that only thirteen mobisodes would be produced . They would run during the third season 's winter hiatus , with none saved exclusively for the third season 's DVD set . A sneak peek of the Video Diaries was also shown at Comic @-@ Con. The new premise featured Hurley Reyes ( played by Jorge Garcia ) finding a functional Dharma Initiative video camcorder that had Dharma orientation films on it . In the clip , he films Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) and James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) . During the hiatus , no mobisodes were to be found and clips from upcoming episodes called Lost Moments aired instead , on television and then ABC.com. In January 2007 , Wizard discovered that ABC was still negotiating the actors ' contracts ; thus , no mobisodes had been produced , aside from the Comic @-@ Con teaser . In February , Lost 's script coordinator , responding to a fan question , suspected the mobisodes had seemingly been put on hold indefinitely due to an inability to reach a contract agreement . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In June , Lindelof and Cuse were interviewed by The Hollywood Reporter and they revealed the ultimate plan for the mobisodes . The mobisodes would air during the hiatus between the third and fourth seasons and would give viewers interesting information that would probably not be found in the show ; the average mobisode would only be one and a half minutes long . In the third season , the writers tried to integrate two previously unseen crash survivors named Nikki Fernandez ( Kiele Sanchez ) and Paulo ( Rodrigo Santoro ) into the story , but the pair was negatively received for their abrupt appearance and the writers killed them off after seven appearances . Lindelof and Cuse learned from their mistake and decided that the mobisodes would focus on the regular Lost cast . The writers were paid $ 800 per mobisode , whereas the actors received $ 425 per mobisode . Actors were contracted to receive more money if the mobisode were reused in another medium . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 In regard to writing , co @-@ executive producer Edward Kitsis said that " sometimes it was a scene we always wanted to do , a scene that never got shot , sometimes it was just something interesting " . " Buried Secrets " revisits the first season storylines of sexual tension between Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) and Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) and the mutual detestation between Sun 's husband Jin ( Daniel Dae Kim ) and Michael . These conflicts were going to be further explored in the first season ; however , positive fan reaction to Sun and Jin as a couple and good chemistry between the actors playing Michael and Jin led to the abandonment of the love triangle . Reuters announced in November that the mobisodes would premiere that month . This proved to be true , with " The Watch " appearing suddenly to Verizon customers as the first of the Lost : Missing Pieces . A new mobisode would generally become available each Monday and would be released a week later as a free webisode on ABC 's website . The Writers Guild of America strike occurred as the mobisodes were released , due to television writers wanting a deal similar to that achieved for Missing Pieces . Filming was completed in late November . The mobisodes were later released as special features on the DVD and Blu @-@ ray sets of Lost : The Complete Fourth Season – The Expanded Experience in the second half of 2008 . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Although it had not always been the plan , the Missing Pieces were produced by ABC Studios . Executive producer Jack Bender directed each mobisode , with writing duties divided between executive producers Lindelof and Cuse , supervising producer Elizabeth Sarnoff , co @-@ producer Brian K. Vaughan , executive story editor Christina M. Kim , and co @-@ executive producers Drew Goddard , Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz . Other crew members included executive producer Bryan Burk of post @-@ production and co @-@ executive producer Jean Higgins of physical production . " The Envelope " — a deleted scene from the third season premiere ; the only mobisode not to be originally filmed and written for Lost : Missing Pieces — contained additional credits : Jeff Pinkner is an executive producer and executive producer J. J. Abrams is a co @-@ writer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Cast and characters = = = 
 The Missing Pieces retained many of the cast members from the television series . Perrineau plays Michael , who had not been seen since the second season . Matthew Fox plays Jack Shephard , the leader of the castaways and Elizabeth Mitchell portrays his love interest , Juliet Burke . Garcia reprises his role as crash survivor Hurley . Kim and Kim play married couple Jin and Sun . Michael Emerson acts as Ben Linus , the leader of the island residents known as the " Others " . Guest stars John Terry , Daniel Roebuck , William Mapother and Julie Adams reprise their roles of Christian Shephard , Leslie Arzt , Ethan Rom and Amelia , respectively . Emilie de Ravin , who plays Claire Littleton , appears solely in archived footage from the television show . Vincent , a dog who survived the plane crash , is played by the dog Pono . Guest star Sean Whalen makes his first appearance as the crash survivor Neil " Frogurt " . While the second season was airing , the writer @-@ producers confirmed in the April 3 , 2006 edition of the Official Lost Podcast that Frogurt would appear in the late second season , however , he was merely mentioned once . Frogurt also did not appear in the third season and he became a running gag in the podcast , with Lindelof and Cuse repeatedly claiming that Frogurt would appear in the show . However , Frogurt did appear in the fifth season briefly , but was shot through with flaming arrows shortly after being introduced . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 " <unk> no . " is short for " production code number " , which signifies the order that the mobisodes were produced in and appear on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , which is different from the order that they aired in . " Original air date " refers to the original V CAST airdate . Days are in relation to the day of the crash , which is day 1 and September 22 , 2004 . All mobisodes are newly written and shot , with the exception of " The Envelope " , which is a deleted scene from " A Tale of Two Cities " that was shot on August 9 and 11 , 2006 , a year before the other mobisodes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The finale — " So It Begins " — was submitted to the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences for Emmy consideration in the " Special Class : Short @-@ Format Live @-@ Action Entertainment Programs " category . Executive producers Damon Lindelof , Carlton Cuse and Barry <unk> were successful in receiving a nomination on July 17 , 2007 ; however , they lost to SciFi 's Battlestar Galactica : Razor Flashbacks on September 13 at the Creative Arts Emmy Award ceremony of the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards . Douglas <unk> of the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch described " The Watch " " as unsatisfying as it is satisfying " because the reviewer was unsure of which lines were important or if there were any clues to future episodes hidden amongst the background . After two mobisodes aired , UGO 's Jon Lachonis wrote that " the [ first two ] mobisodes ... have most fans <unk> about the irrelevancy and down right Lost @-@ <unk> of the tidbits that are meant to traverse gaps in the story " , " it 's way too early to dismiss the mobisodes as a complete waste of time , as Lost has a long history of righting its own wrongs and the best may certainly be yet to come " and " [ Frogurt is ] the most annoying person on Lost 's mystery island " . Four mobisodes later , UGO called them " impressive " and said that " they ' look ' like full out productions " . Larry <unk> of Advertising Age enjoyed the first six Lost : Missing Pieces , describing them as " all entertaining and professionally rendered " and calling the project " a great friggin ' idea " . Josh Wigler of Wizard wrote that the Lost : Missing Pieces are " hit or miss in terms of quality and importance . Some episodes , however , shed some excellent light on Lost mythology . ... In terms of flat out fun , it doesn 't get much better than ' Jin has a Temper @-@ Tantrum on the Golf Course ' ... featuring a frustrated Jin screaming to the high heavens after botching an easy putt against Michael . Unnecessary , yes . Hysterical , absolutely . " 
 MSNBC 's Ree Hines reviewed the first seven Missing Pieces . He wrote that " ' The Watch ' is basically pointless " , " the humor [ of ' The Adventures of Hurley and Frogurt ' ] doesn 't work " and " Operation : Sleeper " was deemed " the most useless of the webisodes " . Hines said that " King of the Castle " " almost satisfies ... due to ... Ben 's deadpan dastardly presence " and " Room 23 " is the most promising of the first half of the series . Hines concluded that " the creators fill gaps that don 't need filling . The installments fail to form a cohesive stand @-@ alone arc , leaving viewers with little more than a series of fragmented scenes , presumably no better than those left on the cutting @-@ room floor . " 
 Chris Carabott of IGN reviewed most of Lost : Missing Pieces and has given each a rating out of ten . After four mobisodes aired , he remarked that " these vignettes feel like your average deleted scene — removed for a good reason " ; however , no mobisode received a score less than 6 @.@ 5 . " The Watch " scored a 7 @.@ 5 and was called " touching " because Jack and his father have rarely been seen getting along in Lost . " The Adventures of Hurley and Frogurt " was given a 6 @.@ 5 and described as " a funny little moment " and " tragic " , in regard to Libby 's death . " King of the Castle " received an 8 @.@ 5 . Carabott said that it was well @-@ written , " a great performance from [ Fox and Emerson ] " and worthy of appearing on television . Carabott celebrated Michael 's return in " The Deal " , but the reviewer noted that " The Deal " " doesn 't reveal anything new or exciting at all " . " Operation : Sleeper " was rated as a 7 @.@ 5 , as was " Buried Secrets " . " Room 23 " got an 8 and was described as " definitely the type of new content that we are looking for . It 's something that won 't be missed by regular viewers but gives a little more insight into the nature of events on the island " . " Arzt and Crafts " also got an 8 and was said to have " a cleverly devised title " and was " packed with a healthy amount of humor " . " Tropical Depression " received an 8 @.@ 5 , with Carabott calling it " rather pointless ... but cute nonetheless " . " Jack , Meet Ethan . Ethan ? Jack " scored an 8 and Mapother 's acting skills were commended . " Jin Has a Temper @-@ Tantrum on the Golf Course " was deemed " hilarious " and " one of [ Lost 's ] funniest ... moments " and worthy of a 7 @.@ 5 . " The Envelope " was given a 6 @.@ 5 , and " So It Begins " was given a 9 — the highest score of any mobisode — and was described as " a shocking new look at the Christian Shephard who appeared to Jack " . 
 Oscar Dahl of BuddyTV reviewed each mobisode . " The Watch " was called " a fun couple minutes of character work " , but " relatively worthless " . " The Adventures of Hurley and Frogurt " was thought to be better than " The Watch " . " King of the Castle " was reviewed better than the previous two mobisodes and the reviewer noted that " it 's a testament to ... Fox and ... Emerson 's acting abilities that [ it ] is so intense " . " The Deal " was said to be even better than " King of the Castle " . While Dahl " always like [ s ] what Juliet brings to the table " , he thought that " Operation : Sleeper " " serves little purpose " . " Room 23 " was called the " best mobisode ever " . In regard to " Arzt and Crafts " , Dahl wrote that " Lindelof wrote this mobisode ... and as a result ... it has the best dialogue of any mobisode so far " . He commented that " Tropical Depression " is " not totally superfluous , though the new information isn 't very enlightening " . Dahl " liked " " Jack , Meet Ethan . Ethan ? Jack " , but decided " that it 's not [ Lindelof ] ' s best work " . Dahl wrote that " Jin Has a Temper @-@ Tantrum on the Golf Course " is " a nice little scene " , but the reviewer pointed out an inaccuracy in the scene 's golf gameplay . When reviewing " The Envelope " , Dahl wrote that " The people over at Lost have cheated a little bit ... [ but ] it 's still a pretty cool deleted scene " . After seeing " So It Begins " , Dahl was " not entirely sure what to think " because the reviewer liked " showing the moments before the pilot began " and " doing a mobisode from Vincent 's perspective , but adding a supposed @-@ to @-@ be @-@ dead Christian to the mix is confusing " . 
 Ryan McGee of Zap2it also reviewed every mobisode . " The Watch " was described as " anticlimactic " . " The Adventures of Hurley and Frogurt " was described as " a little ... lacking " , but McGee wrote that " ' King of the Castle ' proves that brevity is the soul of awesome , with a tense , information @-@ rich two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes that <unk> my Spidey @-@ esque mythology sense the entire time " . " The Deal " was received less favourably than the previous installment McGee wrote that " Room 23 " was " short but sweet " . " Arzt and Crafts " was called " a weak @-@ ish entry " and it was noted that " not everything Lost does turns into Dharma @-@ laced gold , sadly " . " Buried Secrets " was described as mediocre . In the review for " Tropical Depression " , McGee commented that " It 's just not good . At all . " and compared its quality to the episode " Stranger in a Strange Land " and the character Paulo , both of which were negatively received by fans and critics . " Jack , Meet Ethan . Ethan ? Jack " had " return [ ed Lost : Missing Pieces ] to compelling form " , however the title was called " clunky " . After watching " So It Begins " , McGee wrote that it is " a mobisode so vital , so important that I can 't believe that ABC didn 't bother to air this [ online ] before the start of Season 4 " . 
 = The Dog and Pony Show = 
 " The Dog and Pony Show " is the eighth episode of the third season of the American sitcom The Drew Carey Show , and the 54th overall . The series focuses on the work and home life of a fictionalized version of actor and comedian Drew Carey . The episode first aired on November 12 , 1997 on ABC in the United States . The episode 's plot sees Mr. Wick ( Craig Ferguson ) pass off caring for his boss Mrs. Lauder 's ( Nan Martin ) Hungarian Puli to his employee Drew ( Drew Carey ) . When Drew has the prize @-@ winning dog shaved and neutered , he and his friends decide to perform a striptease at the local bar , The Warsaw Tavern , to earn quick cash to buy a replacement . 
 The episode was co @-@ written by producers Robert Borden and Deborah Oppenheimer , while Steve Zuckerman directed . It was inspired by the British comedy film The Full Monty and Carey invited four of the film 's cast members to appear in the episode . " The Dog and Pony Show " was shot on October 15 , 1997 at the Warner Bros. Television studios in Burbank , California . The set was closed to the usual taping audience while the cast performed their striptease routine . " The Dog and Pony Show " was seen by an estimated 12 @.@ 4 million viewing households , finishing in 15th place in the ratings for the week it aired . Critical response was mostly positive , with reporters praising the script and the striptease routine . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Mr. Wick ( Craig Ferguson ) is asked to look after Mrs. Lauder 's ( Nan Martin ) prize @-@ winning Hungarian Puli , he decides to pass the task on to his employee Drew ( Drew Carey ) . Kate O 'Brien ( Christa Miller ) offers to take the dog , Lucky , to Drew 's house ; but she has to leave suddenly to pick up her boyfriend Oswald ( Diedrich Bader ) . Drew does not see Kate 's note and assumes Lucky is a stray . He takes it to the vet to get it shaved and neutered . When Kate sees the dog , she fears that she , Drew and Mr. Wick will be fired . She finds an advertisement for a pure bred Hungarian Puli , but it costs $ 4 @,@ 500 . Since no one has that kind of money , Oswald suggests they sell their bodies for money . Inspired by The Full Monty , the guys decide to perform a striptease at The Warsaw Tavern to make the money they need . Lewis Kiniski ( Ryan Stiles ) backs out of the performance at the last minute , but Larry Almada ( Ian Gomez ) steps in as his replacement . 
 With the bar full , the guys begin their routine , but are soon stopped by the police , who explain that due to zoning regulations , stripping is illegal at The Warsaw . Drew and the guys go before the city council , but their request is denied . Drew questions how the council can deny something without seeing it and the guys , including Lewis , decide to demonstrate their striptease routine before the council members . Their request is then approved . After performing the striptease at the bar , Drew counts out the money and finds that they have $ 4 @,@ 800 . Mr. Wick asks what they should do with the extra money and Drew replies that they should give it to the people that earned it . He then walks off stage and into the audience and starts handing out the extra cash , apologising for them having seen his naked buttocks . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Dog and Pony Show " was co @-@ written by producers Robert Borden and Deborah Oppenheimer , and directed by Steve Zuckerman . The episode was inspired by the British comedy film The Full Monty . Following its release in the United States , Drew Carey saw the film three times and loved it so much he invited the cast to appear in the episode , while they were promoting the film . However , Andrew Essex from Entertainment Weekly reported that cast members Mark Addy , Paul Barber , Steve <unk> and Hugo Speer were not allowed to perform on the show after being stopped by the American immigration department because they did not have work permits . The cast members were instead billed as " guests of honor " due to Actors Equity rules preventing them from being paid for their cameo . 
 The episode was filmed at the Warner Bros. Television studios in Burbank , California on October 15 , 1997 . The set was closed to the usual taping audience when Carey , Bader , Ferguson , Gomez and Stiles performed their striptease to The Edgar Winter Group 's " Free Ride " . The Full Monty cast members came to the set to offer advice and watch the taping . The remainder of the episode was filmed before an audience later that same night . Gomez quipped that having two guys paint his body in make @-@ up was " more embarrassing " than filming the routine , while Stiles joked that the episode was the first time he had been " totally naked " since he was cast in the show . Carey admitted that he was grateful that stripping during prime @-@ time had to be PG and apologized that viewers had to see his naked buttocks . He also clarified that the cast wore pouches to protect their modesty . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Dog and Pony Show " finished 15th in the ratings for the week of November 10 – 16 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 12 @.@ 4 million viewing households . It was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on ABC that week , following episodes of Home Improvement , Monday Night Football and 20 / 20 . 
 The episode received mostly positive attention from television critics . A reporter for the Los Angeles Daily News gave the episode a positive review calling it " meatier " than usual . The reporter thought the take on The Full Monty was " sharply silly " and said " Carey 's striptease doesn 't come till the show 's end . The most we see is a full rear view – raw indeed but strategically blocked by microphones . But the bun fun , half @-@ baked as it is , is exuberant and preceded by smarter writing than usual . " The reporter called the characters " unlikely <unk> " and added that Carey had one of the best scripts he had in a while , which mixed " understated humor with <unk> @-@ conscious undress . " 
 Alan Pergament , writing for The Buffalo News , awarded the episode 3 and a half stars out of five and said the episode " offers a delicious take on the surprise theatrical movie hit from England . " Pergament thought there were too many penis jokes , especially for the show 's time slot , but called the dance scenes " hysterically funny . " The Spokesman @-@ Review 's John Martin stated that while he usually condemned the " cheap , tawdry use of nudity " to boost ratings , it was different with Carey and he thought the take on The Full Monty was " riotous " and " wild " . Martin finished by saying " Carey may be the only comic in prime time who could pull this off , so to speak . You gotta love the big guy . " 
 Lon Grahnke from the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the episode three stars . The Chicago Tribune 's Steve Johnson said the show was " working at its usual level " and called the homage to The Full Monty " uninspired " . A reporter for The Age chose " The Dog and Pony Show " as one of the shows Melbourne would be talking about the week it aired in Australia . While The Sun @-@ Herald 's Rachel Browne awarded the episode four out of five stars and called it an " hilarious homage to The Full Monty " . Browne was thankful that the gang 's modesty was protected . James Joyce , writing for The Newcastle Herald , commented that the episode was " a crack @-@ up . " Joyce later branded the plot " contrived " , but thought the end of the episode was " risque " and " suitably cheeky . " 
 = 2015 Vuelta a España = 
 The 2015 Vuelta a España was a three @-@ week Grand Tour cycling race . The race was the 70th edition of the Vuelta a España and took place principally in Spain , although two stages took place partly or wholly in Andorra , and was the 22nd race in the 2015 UCI World Tour . The 3 @,@ 358 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre ( 2 @,@ 086 @.@ 6 mi ) race included 21 stages , beginning in Marbella on 22 August 2015 and finishing in Madrid on 13 September . It was won by Fabio Aru ( Astana Pro Team ) , with Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) second and Rafał Majka ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) third . 
 The early leaders of the race were Esteban Chaves ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) and Tom Dumoulin ( Giant – Alpecin ) , who exchanged the leader 's red jersey several times during the first ten days of racing , with both riders winning summit finishes in the first week . Aru took over the race lead following the mountainous Stage 11 , which took place entirely within Andorra . He kept his lead for five stages as the race entered the mountains of northern Spain , but lost it to Rodríguez on Stage 16 . Dumoulin took the lead back on Stage 17 – the race 's only individual time trial – with Aru three seconds behind in second place . Aru attacked throughout the final stages and , on the penultimate day , finally dropped Dumoulin , who fell to sixth place overall . Aru therefore took the first Grand Tour victory of his career . 
 The points classification was decided during the final stage and was won by Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) , while Rodriguez won the combination classification . The mountains classification was won by Omar Fraile ( Caja Rural – Seguros RGA ) . Dumoulin won the combativity award , while Movistar won the team prize . 
 = = Teams = = 
 The seventeen UCI WorldTeams were automatically invited and obliged to attend the race . The organiser of the Vuelta , <unk> , was also able to invite five UCI Professional Continental teams – the second tier of professional cycling teams – as wildcards . These were announced on 20 March 2015 . Caja Rural – Seguros RGA , the only Spanish @-@ registered Professional Continental team , was one of those invited , along with two French teams , Cofidis and Team Europcar . MTN – Qhubeka were invited for the second consecutive year after also securing their first ever entry into the Tour de France . The final team to be invited was Colombia . One prominent team to miss out on an entry was UnitedHealthcare . 
 The team presentation took place in <unk> on the evening before the first stage . The number of riders allowed per squad was nine , therefore the start list contained a total of 198 riders . The riders represented 37 different countries , with the largest numbers coming from France ( 30 ) , Spain ( 27 ) and Italy ( 20 ) . The average age of riders in the Vuelta was 29 @.@ 13 years , ranging from the 20 @-@ year @-@ old Matej Mohorič ( Cannondale – Garmin ) to the 38 @-@ year @-@ old Haimar Zubeldia ( Trek Factory Racing ) . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 The top four riders from the 2015 Tour de France all chose to start the Vuelta . These were Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) , Nairo Quintana and Alejandro Valverde ( both Movistar Team ) and Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) , all of whom had previously won Grand Tours . The most notable absentee from among the general classification contenders was Alberto Contador ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , the winner of the 2014 Vuelta . Oleg Tinkov , the owner of the Tinkoff @-@ Saxo team , had challenged Contador , Froome , Nibali and Quintana to attempt to ride all three Grand Tours in 2015 ; none of the riders took up the challenge . Froome , Nibali and Quintana all declined to ride the Giro and , as Contador was attempting to win both the Giro d 'Italia and the Tour , he did not aim to ride the Vuelta . Valverde and Nibali were the only two previous winners of the race to start the 2015 edition . 
 Froome , who had been second in the 2011 and 2014 <unk> , had had a strong season , with victories in the Vuelta a Andalucía , the Critérium du Dauphiné and the Tour de France . He was attempting to become the first rider since Bernard Hinault in 1978 to win both the Tour and the Vuelta in the same season , though it was expected that he would be tired following his victory in the Tour . The individual time trial was expected to favour Froome , who is strong in the discipline . Before the race , however , Froome was uncertain about his form and his ability to win the race . Quintana 's only stage race victory of the season had come in the Tirreno – Adriatico , but he had performed strongly in the Alps in the Tour 's final stages and the mountainous route of the Vuelta was expected to suit him . 
 Vincenzo Nibali , who had won the Vuelta in 2010 , had struggled in the opening stages of the Tour , but had recovered to take a stage victory in the final week . The Astana team also included Fabio Aru and Mikel Landa , second and third respectively at the Giro d 'Italia ; while this made a strong team it was unclear which rider would be favoured by the team and given the assistance of his teammates . There was a similar situation at Movistar , as Valverde , who had won the Vuelta in 2009 and had finished on the podium on four other occasions , was also in strong form and was well suited to the course . Also among the general classification contenders were Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) , Rafał Majka ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) and Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) . 
 Other notable riders to take part in the race included several sprinters . One of these was Peter Sagan ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , four times the winner of the points classification in the Tour de France and winner of three stages in the 2011 Vuelta , who was preparing for the World Championships road race the following month . Sagan was considered particularly strong on the easier uphill finishes in the first week . John Degenkolb ( Giant – Alpecin ) had won four stages and the points classification in 2014 as well as five stages in 2012 . Nacer Bouhanni ( Cofidis ) , who had crashed out of the Tour , was expected to compete with Degenkolb in the flat sprints . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The first announcement of the route for the 2015 Vuelta a España came in October 2014 , when Javier Guillén , the race director , announced that the first stage would take place in Puerto Banús near Marbella on 22 August . It had been decided that the stage would be either an individual time trial or a team time trial . More news came the following month , when Guillén revealed that he had been involved in conversations with Chris Froome and had promised him that the race would include a fairly flat individual time trial of around 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) . He also said that the race would feature " explosive finals and summit finishes " . The official route announcement came on 10 January 2015 in Torremolinos , along the coast from the start of the first stage in Puerto Banús . 
 The first five stages took place in and around Andalusia in southern Spain ; the 2014 Vuelta had also started there . The first stage was a team time trial along the coast from Puerto Banús to Marbella . The next four stages were fairly flat , although Stage 2 finished on a moderately difficult climb . The sixth stage started in Córdoba and finished in Sierra de Cazorla in Jaén on another moderately difficult climb . The seventh stage then returned to Andalusia for the first major difficulty of the race : the first @-@ category summit finish at La <unk> . The route then continued along the eastern coast of Spain , with a medium @-@ mountain seventh stage and another first @-@ category summit finish at <unk> on Stage 9 . There was one more medium @-@ mountain stage on Stage 10 , taking the riders into the Province of Castellón . This was followed by a transfer that took the riders into Andorra for a three @-@ day spell , beginning with the first rest day . The eleventh stage took place entirely in Andorra ; though it was only 138 kilometres ( 86 mi ) in length , it included six categorised climbs , including a summit finish , and was described by Eusebio <unk> ( the manager of the Movistar team ) as " the toughest Vuelta stage that he has seen in more than 30 years " . Stage 12 took the riders back into Spain for a fairly flat stage , before three consecutive stages with summit finishes . These took place in the mountains of Cantabria and Asturias and were followed by the race 's second rest day . The final week of the race included no summit finishes : the first stage was a 38 @.@ 7 @-@ kilometre ( 24 @.@ 0 mi ) individual time trial in Burgos and was then followed by three mixed stages that took the riders nearer to the final stage of the race , a sprint stage in Madrid . For the first time , the race organisers also held a women 's race on the same day as the final stage , using the same circuit . This race – called La Madrid Challenge by La Vuelta – was won by Shelley Olds . 
 The 2015 Vuelta included nine summit finishes , none of which had previously been used in the race . Unusually , the principal difficulties of the race came in the first two weeks , including all nine summit finishes . It was therefore expected that the climbers would need to attack early in the race , in order to build up a significant lead ahead of the lengthy time trial on Stage 17 . The race organisers also hoped to encourage sprinters to take part by including seven fairly flat stages . 
 Each road stage ( that is , all the stages except the team time trial and the individual time trial ) included an intermediate sprint . This was a point where the leading riders in the stage were awarded points in the points classification and time bonuses in the general classification . Many of the stages also included climbs that were categorised by the race organisers according to their difficulty ; the leading riders over each of these climbs were awarded points in the mountains classification , with the most difficult climbs earning the most points . 
 In the days before the beginning of the race , there was controversy over the first stage . On arriving at the start , the teams discovered that the route used a variety of road surfaces , crossed sandy sections and included several ramps . As a result , the race organisers decided to neutralise the stage : the teams therefore competed only for the stage victory and for the team classification , not for the general classification . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The team time trial was won by BMC Racing Team and Peter Velits took the red jersey as the first rider across the line . Since the stage had been neutralised for the general classification , all 198 riders began the second stage on the same time . The stage finished on a moderate climb , where Esteban Chaves ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) attacked early and took both the stage victory and the lead of the race . A major crash in the final 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) brought down several riders and most riders in the peloton ( the main group ) were held up , including Fabio Aru and Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) . Aru quickly rejoined the peloton ; Nibali was forced to chase for a long time . After the stage , a video emerged of Nibali holding on to his team car as it accelerated him back to the peloton . Nibali was therefore fined and excluded from the race . 
 The next stage was a moderately difficult stage that ended in a bunch sprint . Peter Sagan won his first Grand Tour stage in over two years ahead of Nacer Bouhanni ( Cofidis ) and John Degenkolb ( Giant @-@ Alpecin ) . The fourth stage again included an uphill finish . This stage was also decided in a sprint finish , this time won by Alejandro Valverde . Sagan , who came second , took over the lead of the points classification . A third consecutive bunch sprint came on the fifth stage , which ended on a slight incline . The relatively straightforward stage was won by Caleb Ewan ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) , who was riding his first Grand Tour , ahead of Degenkolb and Sagan . There were splits in the peloton at the finish ; Chaves lost six seconds to Tom Dumoulin ( Giant – Alpecin ) , who therefore took over the red jersey of the race leader by one second . This lead did not last long . The sixth stage finished on another moderate climb . Chaves again attacked early in the climb and took his second stage victory , with Dan Martin ( Cannondale – Garmin ) second and Dumoulin third . Chaves therefore took back the red jersey . 
 The seventh stage was the most significant uphill finish of the race so far , finishing on the climb of the Alto de <unk> . It was won by Bert @-@ Jan Lindeman ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) from the breakaway . Most of the general classification favourites finished together , though Fabio Aru gained seven seconds in the final kilometre and Chris Froome lost nearly half a minute . The following stage was a moderately difficult stage : it was too difficult for the pure sprinters to reach the finish line with the main group of riders , but not difficult enough to create gaps between those riding for the overall victory . The most notable event was a large crash 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) from the finish . Four riders were immediately forced to withdraw from the race with injuries , including Dan Martin , who had been in the top ten . The stage was won in a reduced bunch sprint by Jasper Stuyven ( Trek Factory Racing ) , who had been among the riders injured in the earlier crash . He was forced to withdraw from the race after the stage with a broken scaphoid . Stage 9 ended with a difficult climb . There was a series of attacks on the early part of the mountain , with many riders dropped from the lead group . Tom Dumoulin eventually took a solo win in the stage , two seconds ahead of Chris Froome , and took back the red jersey as Chaves lost significant time . Froome had originally been dropped , but rode at a steady tempo and came close to the stage victory . Stage 10 , the final stage before the first rest day , ended in another bunch sprint , which was won by Kristian Sbaragli ( MTN – Qhubeka ) . 
 The eleventh stage , the first after the rest day , was the difficult stage in Andorra , with six difficult climbs and almost no flat roads . The stage was won from a breakaway by Mikel Landa ( Astana ) . Fabio Aru , Landa 's teammate , took second place and moved into the race lead . Chris Froome fell from his bike at the beginning of the stage and lost several minutes to Aru ; the following morning it was revealed that he had broken his foot in the fall and he withdrew from the race . Nairo Quintana also lost several minutes on the stage . The following stage , which took the riders from Andorra back into Spain , was won in a sprint by Danny van Poppel ( Trek Factory Racing ) after the day 's breakaway was caught in the final kilometre . Van Poppel won the stage despite puncturing his tyre with 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) remaining . The thirteenth stage – the last one before a series of three consecutive summit finishes – was won from a breakaway by Nelson Oliveira ( Lampre – Merida ) , with no impact on the general classification . 
 The first of the three summit finishes – Stage 14 – was won by Alessandro De Marchi ( BMC Racing Team ) , who had been in the day 's breakaway . Quintana gained several seconds back , while Aru , Rodríguez , Chaves and Majka all gained time on Dumoulin . Rodríguez attacked strongly on the final climb to win Stage 15 and gained time on all his rivals , putting himself just one second behind Aru . Dumoulin lost further time to Aru , Majka and Chaves . The final stage with a summit finish was Stage 16 : it was a difficult stage including seven climbs and was won by Fränk Schleck ( Trek Factory Racing ) . On the final climb , Rodríguez gained two seconds on Aru in the final metres to put himself into the race lead for the final rest day , while Dumoulin lost more time and was nearly two minutes back . 
 After the rest day came the race 's individual time trial . It was won by Dumoulin , who was more than a minute ahead of all the other riders in the race . His time was good enough to put him into the overall race lead . Aru rode strongly , and was only three seconds behind Dumoulin in the general classification after the stage . Rodríguez lost over three minutes to Dumoulin . Majka also lost significant time to Aru and Dumoulin and fell to fourth place . 
 Following the time trial , there were three mountainous stages , although none of them had a summit finish . All three were won by riders from breakaways . Nicolas Roche ( Sky ) won Stage 18 , beating Haimar Zubeldia ( Trek Factory Racing ) in a two @-@ man sprint . After his team had put pressure on the peloton through the whole stage , Aru attacked Dumoulin six times on the final climb , and Valverde put in three more attacks . Dumoulin , however , did not lose any time and retained his three @-@ second lead . Stage 19 ended with a short , cobbled climb into Ávila . It was won by Alexis Gougeard ( AG2R La Mondiale ) , who had escaped from the breakaway group on the previous climb . The day 's racing also produced another crash : this time Aru fell to the ground . Although he had to make several trips to the medical car , he did not seem seriously injured . At the end of the stage , Dumoulin used his team to put him in a strong position for the cobbled climb and he increased his lead over Aru to six seconds . Stage 20 was the final day of mountainous terrain , including four difficult climbs . It was won by Rubén Plaza ( Lampre @-@ Merida ) after a 117 @-@ kilometre ( 73 mi ) solo breakaway that lasted over three hours . Aru 's Astana team rode hard in the second half of the stage and , with a strong team effort , they were eventually able to drop Dumoulin on the penultimate climb of the day ; he dropped further back on the final climb and lost nearly four minutes , dropping to sixth place overall . Quintana and Majka gained nearly a minute on the other general classification rivals . This meant that Aru took the race lead , with Rodríguez second and Majka third . 
 The final stage of the race was a flat stage that finished in Madrid . It was won in a sprint by Degenkolb . During the stage , Valverde took advantage of a puncture for Rodríguez and won the intermediate sprint to give him the points jersey . Although Aru lost a little time in a split in the peloton at the finish line , the rest of the standings were unchanged . Aru therefore won the race , his first Grand Tour victory . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 The 2015 Vuelta a España included four principal classifications . The first of these was the general classification , which was calculated by adding up each rider 's times on each stage and applying the relevant time bonuses . These were 10 seconds for the stage winner , 6 seconds for the rider in second , and 4 seconds for the rider in third , and 3 , 2 and 1 seconds for the first three riders at each intermediate sprint ; no bonuses were awarded on the time trial stages . The rider with the lowest cumulative time was the winner of the general classification and was considered the overall winner of the Vuelta . The rider leading the classification wore a red jersey . 
 The second classification was the points classification . Riders were awarded points for finishing in the top fifteen places on each stage and in the top three at each intermediate sprint . The first rider at each stage finish was awarded 25 points , the second 20 points , the third 16 points , the fourth 14 points , the fifth 12 points , the sixth 10 points , down to 1 point for the rider in fifteenth . At the intermediate sprints , the first three riders won 4 , 2 and 1 points respectively . The rider with the most points won the classification and wore a green jersey . 
 The third classification was the mountains classification . Most stages of the race included one or more categorised climbs . Stages were categorised as third- , second- , first- and special @-@ category , with the more difficult climbs rated higher . The most difficult climb of the race , the Alto Ermita de Alba on Stage 16 , was given its own category as the Cima Alberto Fernández . Points were awarded for the first riders across the summit of each climb ; the rider with the most accumulated points won the classification and wore a white jersey with blue polka dots . 
 The final individual classification was the combination classification . This was calculated by adding up each rider 's position on the other three individual classifications . The rider with the lowest cumulative score was the winner of the classification and wore a white jersey . 
 The final classification was a team classification . This was calculated by adding together the times of each team 's best three riders on each stage . The team with the lowest cumulative time was the winner of the classification . There was also a combativity prize awarded on each stage ; three riders were chosen on each stage by a race jury to recognise the rider " who displayed the most courageous effort " . There was then a public vote to decide which rider should be awarded the prize ; the rider wore a red dossard ( race number ) the following day . An identical procedure took place on the final stage to decide the most combative rider of the whole Vuelta . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 = Atheis = 
 Atheis ( English : Atheist ) is a 1949 Indonesian novel written by Achdiat Karta Mihardja and published by Balai Pustaka . The novel , using three narrative voices , details the rise and fall of Hasan , a young Muslim who is raised to be religious but winds up doubting his faith after dealings with his Marxist – Leninist childhood friend and an anarcho @-@ nihilist writer . 
 Mihardja , a journalist @-@ cum @-@ literary editor who associated with the eccentric poet Chairil Anwar and the Socialist Party of Indonesia , wrote Atheis from May 1948 to February 1949 . The Indonesian used in the novel was influenced by Sundanese and harkens back to earlier works by Minang writers , as opposed to Mihardja 's contemporaries who attempted to distance themselves from the earlier style . Dealing mainly with faith , the novel also touches on the interactions between modernity and traditionalism . Although the writer insisted that the work was meant to be realistic , symbolic representations from subjective meanings to the novel being an allegory have been advanced . 
 After the novel was published , it caused considerable discussion . Religious thinkers , Marxist @-@ Leninists , and anarchists decried the novel for not explaining their ideologies in more detail , but literary figures and many in the general public praised it ; this positive reception may have been influenced by the nascent government 's need to promote literature for nation @-@ building . Atheis was translated into Malay before 1970 and into English in 1972 ; it was also adapted into a film with the same title in 1974 . The novel , which received an award from the Indonesian government in 1969 , is one of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot of Atheis is non @-@ linear . A. Teeuw , a Dutch scholar of Indonesian literature , models it as below , with A representing the time frame covered in Hasan 's manuscript ( from the his youth until splitting with Kartini ) , B representing the time frame in which the narrator meets with Hasan and receives his manuscript , and C representing the events around Hasan 's death . 
 [ C { B ( A ) B } C ] 
 The following plot summary is presented chronologically . 
 Hasan , born to a religious <unk> family in Panyeredan , is a student who lives with his family and adopted sister , Fatimah . After finishing his schooling , Hasan attempts to propose marriage to his classmate , Rukmini . However , Rukmini , who is from a higher social class than him , is set to marry a rich man from Batavia ( modern day Jakarta ) . Instead , his parents ask him to marry Fatimah . Hasan refuses , then devotes himself to studying Islam with his father . In the early 1940s he moves to Bandung to work as a civil servant . 
 In Bandung , Hasan works for the Japanese occupation government and lives an ascetic lifestyle , often fasting for days on end and dunking himself into a river to refresh his body between evening and morning prayers . While there , he meets his childhood friend Rusli , who introduces Hasan to his friend Kartini . Seeing that Rusli and Kartini are atheistic Marxist @-@ Leninists , Hasan considers it his duty to return them to Islam . However , he finds himself unable to address Rusli 's arguments against religion and begins doubting his faith . Soon Hasan becomes increasingly divorced from his religious upbringing , at one time skipping the mandatory maghrib prayer to watch a movie with Kartini . Through Rusli , Hasan is introduced to people from different ideologies , including the anarcho @-@ nihilist playboy Anwar ; he also begins courting Kartini . 
 One day , he returns to Panyeredan to visit his family with Anwar . While there , Anwar sees some night watchmen quivering in fear near a cemetery . When told that they had seen a ghost , Anwar enters the cemetery with Hasan to disprove its existence . However , Hasan thinks he sees a ghost and runs away frightened . When ridiculed for this by Anwar , Hasan 's faith is broken . This leads him to have a large fight with his family about their Islamic faith , which results in Hasan 's family disowning him . Upon his return to Bandung , Hasan marries Kartini . 
 Three years later , Hasan 's relationship with Kartini is souring ; both are suspicious that the other is unfaithful . Eventually , Hasan sees Kartini and Anwar leaving a hotel near the train station and incorrectly assumes that she had been cheating on him . He immediately divorces her and moves out , but soon contracts tuberculosis . After several weeks , Hasan returns to Panyeredan after hearing that his father is ill to work out their issues . However , his father rejects him as a temptation from the devil . Dejected , Hasan returns to Bandung . 
 As his health continues to degrade , Hasan approaches a local journalist with a manuscript that details his life ; the journalist agrees to publish it should something happen to Hasan . Not long afterwards , Hasan goes out into the night after curfew and is shot in the chest by Japanese patrols , dying after torture at the station with the Islamic creed " Allahu Akbar " on his lips . Later , Rusli and a tearful Kartini claim his body . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Hasan 
 Hasan is the protagonist of the novel . Raised a devout Muslim , he becomes confused over his beliefs due to influences from his childhood friend and other acquaintances in Bandung . He is further confused by his feelings towards Kartini , who physically resembles his first love Rukmini . Eventually , after being disowned by his family and seemingly abandoned by his friends , Hasan is shot and subsequently tortured to death by Japanese police . 
 According to the literary critics Maman S. Mahayana , <unk> Sofyan , and Achmad Dian , Hasan 's psychological struggles reflect Sigmund Freud 's theories on psychoanalysis . Teeuw notes that Hasan comes across as being disappointed that his traditional religious upbringing is not enough to overcome the temptations of the modern world . Poet and critic of Indonesian literature Muhammad Balfas writes that Hasan 's conflict arises from being torn intellectually between the teachings of his ultra @-@ religious father and the Marxist Rusli , while at the same time being emotionally victimised by the ever self @-@ confident Anwar . Balfas notes that three versions of Hasan are made apparent to the reader : Hasan 's view of himself , the narrator 's view of Hasan , and the narrator 's reconstruction of Hasan . 
 Rusli 
 Rusli is Hasan 's childhood friend who approaches him in Bandung . A Marxist @-@ Leninist , he is highly educated and eloquent , which he often uses to win debates on the benefits of different ideologies . Through Rusli , Hasan is introduced to several other characters with Western educations and ideologies , including Hasan 's future wife Kartini . During Hasan 's time in Bandung , Rusli provides emotional support to him and Kartini . Rusli accompanies Kartini to the police station to identify Hasan 's body . 
 According to literary scholar Boen S. Oemarjati , Rusli was inspired by one of Mihardja 's friends in Bandung . Hendrik Maier , professor of southeast Asian literature at the University of California , Riverside , characterizes Rusli as the most balanced of the main protagonists . 
 Kartini 
 Kartini is a young Marxist @-@ Leninist who Rusli introduces to Hasan . As Kartini resembles Hasan 's first love , Hasan falls deeply in love with her . However , after they marry Hasan becomes increasingly jealous and questions her relationship with Anwar , who often flirts with Kartini . When Anwar picks her up at the train station after she visits her aunt , he attempts to force himself on her . After fighting him off , Kartini leaves the hotel , followed by Anwar . After Hasan divorces her based on his perception of the events , Kartini lives alone . She cries over Hasan 's body when asked to identify him for the police . 
 Anwar 
 Anwar is a young anarcho @-@ nihilist who considers himself his own god . He is known for being a crude womanizer who has no qualms with using others to get what he wants . Through his actions , Anwar is responsible for both events which devastate Hasan 's life : Anwar 's ridicule leads Hasan to strife with his family , and Anwar 's womanizing and incessant flirting , including unwanted sexual advances against Kartini , lead to Hasan 's divorce . Maier describes him as a " destructive , egotistic and vain man who in daily life does not live up to the ideals with which he tries to impress [ Hasan ] " . 
 Anwar is thought to have been based on the poet Chairil Anwar , an individualistic anarchist known for being abrasive , having kleptomania , and womanizing . The poet 's friend <unk> Djamin notes that the characterization captured the real @-@ life Anwar 's nonchalance , <unk> , and arrogance . 
 Narrator 
 The narrator , who only appears in parts of the novel which he narrates , is referred to throughout the novel only as " saya " ( a respectful term for " I " or " me " ) . Little is known about his personal life other than that he is a journalist . According to Indonesian writer and literary critic Subagio Sastrowardoyo , the narrator appears to be representative of Mihardja and is used to teach moral lessons to the reader through his suggestions to Hasan . 
 = = Writing and influences = = 
 Mihardja , who was born and raised in Garut , West Java , was trained as a journalist before moving to Batavia in 1941 to work for the state publisher of the Dutch East Indies , Balai Pustaka . While in Batavia , in 1945 he began associating with Chairil Anwar 's literary group Republika . After the Proclamation of Indonesian Independence and the start of the Indonesian National Revolution , he fled to West Java and participated in events led by the Socialist Party of Indonesia led by Sutan Sjahrir . He was not an atheist , although his association with the party led some to draw that conclusion . Mihardja drew upon this background while writing Atheis . 
 Atheis was Mihardja 's first novel ; what few literary works he had written beforehand were mostly short stories and dramas , both those intended for the radio and the stage . He never formally studied writing , instead learning how to write fiction from his experiences reading existing works , including those of André Gide , Leo Tolstoy , Vsevolod Ivanov , and Fyodor Dostoyevsky . His writing style was heavily influenced by that of Gide , particularly as found in The <unk> ( 1902 ) . Malay , the language which forms the basis of modern Indonesian , was not Mihardja 's native language ; his earlier works had all been in Sundanese , and Mihardja had only begun regularly using Indonesian after the Japanese occupation ( 1942 – 1945 ) , when he became a translator . 
 The inspiration for Atheis came , according to Oemarjati , sometime during the early 1940s . In Mihardja 's observations , Marxism – Leninism and anarcho @-@ nihilism were among the most common ideologies in Indonesia ; this led him to depict Rusli and Anwar as holding those ideologies . Meanwhile , emerging writers such as <unk> , Asrul Sani , and Chairil Anwar were increasingly critical of the older generation of Indonesian authors , whom they decried as narrow @-@ minded and provincial . Mihardja , who was older than many contemporary writers and wrote in a similar style to the older authors , disliked this comparison ; according to Maier , this may have led him to represent Chairil Anwar as a much @-@ flawed character . Mihardja formalised his concept throughout the early 1940s and completed the writing during a period of unemployment from May 1948 until February 1949 . 
 = = Styles = = 
 Atheis uses three narrative voices , the first Indonesian novel to do so . The novel starts with a third @-@ person description of Rusli and Kartini 's visit to the Japanese police headquarters after hearing of Hasan 's death . Afterwards , the narrator , referred to only as " saya " , describes in the first person how he met Hasan and how the main character came to tell him his life 's story . This is followed by what is described by the original narrator as a manuscript by Hasan , which tells Hasan 's life story from his own point of view using the less respectful term " aku " . After a brief recollection of the narrator 's last meeting with Hasan in the first person , using " saya " , the last portion of the book describes Hasan 's death in the third person omniscient . According to Teeuw , this serves to avoid caricaturing the characters by giving an objective presentation of them before transitioning to their point of view . However , Mihardja wrote that it was simply to facilitate the completion of the plot . 
 Teeuw writes that the literary style is didactic , which he considers the novel 's main shortcoming . However , he notes that Mihardja was part of a literary movement led by Sutan Takdir Alisjahbana that viewed literature as being instructive ; he also writes that such a style was common in Indonesian literature at the time . 
 The diction in the novel shows a heavy Sundanese influence , including many loan @-@ words . Teeuw describes the diction as forced in places , with sentence structure deviating from those used by the Minang writers who dominated that period 's Indonesian literature . According to Teeuw , this is because Mihardja had been raised speaking both Sundanese and Dutch ; as such , his Indonesian was not as well developed as Minang writers or those younger than him . Maier notes that the novel features " odd but appropriate metaphors and similes " and stylistically resembles earlier works such as Abdul Muis ' Salah Asuhan ( Wrong Upbringing ; 1928 ) , Sutan Takdir Alisjahbana 's Layar Terkembang ( With Sails Unfurled ; 1936 ) , and Armijn Pane 's Belenggu ( Shackles ; 1940 ) . Balfas also notes stylistic similarities with older works , such as the death of the protagonist at the climax , and Sastrowardoyo opines that Belenggu had a more modern styling despite being published nine years earlier . 
 = = Themes and symbolism = = 
 Mihardja later wrote that he intended the novel to deal with the question of the existence of God . Mahayana et al. agree , noting that the theme of faith – a theme unknown in modern Indonesian literature at the time – is found throughout the novel . Maier notes that the psychological concepts of guilt , fear , and remorse drive the novel . Teeuw describes the work as taking up the classic theme of modernity versus tradition in a new , more worldly manner . Balfas writes that this approach to the theme was soon followed by other writers . 
 Despite Mihardja 's insistence that Atheis is meant to be realistic , several symbolic interpretations have been put forward . According to Mihardja , one of the most common interpretations readers conveyed to him was that Hasan 's death symbolised atheism defeating religion , with Hasan 's death as the death of theism . According to Maier , Atheis serves as an allegory for the development of the Indonesian nation . Hasan , representing traditionalism , is killed by the Japanese , who changed the status quo when they invaded in 1942 . Meanwhile , the anarchistic Anwar finds himself without a place in the modern world . Only the responsible modern character , Rusli , is able to bring the Indonesian nation , as represented by Kartini , to terms with the new world . 
 = = Print history = = 
 Atheis was published in 1949 by Balai Pustaka , which had become the state publisher of independent Indonesia . A second printing followed three years later , with a cover by Basuki Resobowo . A third printing , which had several revisions to improve the flow of the story , was published in 1958 . As of 2009 , Atheis has been reprinted thirty @-@ three times . By 1970 , Atheis had been printed in Malaysian three times . In 1972 , the novel was translated by R. J. Macguire into English as part of the UNESCO Collection of Representative Works project . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Teeuw , after the publication of Atheis Mihardja immediately became famous . Maier notes that the fame and warm reception to which Atheis was released was influenced not only by the novel 's strengths , but also by Mihardja 's personality and stature . These qualities were in @-@ line with the nascent government 's need to use literature , as the most developed of the new national culture , for nation @-@ building ; in 1969 , Atheis received a literary award from the government of Indonesia . 
 According to Mihardja , religious thinkers blasted the novel for depicting Hasan , whom they interpreted as representative of religion and religious people , as unable to overcome temptation ; they also disliked the novel 's lack of in @-@ depth discussion of religion , necessary for a better understanding of theism . Marxists and anarchists also felt that their ideologies were not well explained . They considered Rusli and Anwar not truly representative of the thoughts of Karl Marx and Friedrich Nietzsche . In response , Mihardja wrote that the characters were meant to be realistic , and that few people have as much knowledge about an ideology as demanded by the critics . 
 However , other readers – many from the literary community – praised the novel , including writers Pramoedya Ananta Toer and Haji Abdul Malik Karim Amrullah . Sastrowardoyo described it as a " well made novel " , arguing that Hasan 's death brought complete closure to the story . Teeuw describes Atheis as the first truly interesting novel to arise after the war for independence . 
 Author Ahmad Tohari describes Atheis as a " timeless monument of Indonesian literature " , emphasising its ability to represent the social factors dominant in Indonesian society at the time of writing . Mahayana credits the book 's success to " almost every element which remains salient " owing to its setting and story @-@ telling techniques . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By the 1970s Atheis had become part of the Indonesian junior and senior high school curriculum . In 1974 Sjumandjaja adapted the novel into a film with the same title . The film , shot on a Rp . 80 million ( US $ 193 @,@ 771 ) budget , mimicked the novel 's non @-@ linear plot . Intended as a challenge to Indonesia 's religious communities , upon its release faced with controversy . Ultimately , the Indonesian censorship bureau passed the film after several cuts . Though it was a commercial failure , Sjumandjaja 's Atheis was well received by critics . 
 Mihardja went on to write two more novels : <unk> Cinta <unk> ( The Dust of Love Spreads ; 1973 ) , published in Singapore , and Manifesto Khalifatullah ( Manifest of Khalifatullah ; 2005 ) , published in Jakarta . At the launch of Manifesto Khalifatullah , a religious @-@ themed novel , Mihardja stated that it was " the answer to Atheis " , after he came to believe that " God made man to be His representative on earth , not that of Satan " . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Tory Burch = 
 Tory Burch ( born June 17 , 1966 ; née Robinson ) is an American fashion designer , businesswoman , and philanthropist , who has won several fashion awards for her designs . She is the Chairman , CEO , and Designer of Tory Burch LLC . In 2015 , she was listed as the 73rd most powerful woman in the world by Forbes . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Burch was born in Valley Forge , Pennsylvania , the daughter of Reva ( née Schapira ) and Ira Earl " Bud " Robinson ( 1923 – 2007 ) . She was raised with her three brothers ( Robert , James and Leonard ) in a Valley Forge farmhouse , a 250 @-@ year @-@ old Georgian near the Valley Forge National Historical Park . 
 Her father was a wealthy investor who inherited a stock exchange seat and a paper cup company . He dated Grace Kelly and Joan Bennett before marrying Reva , an actress who had dated both Steve McQueen and Marlon Brando . Burch is Jewish on her mother 's side . 
 Burch attended the Agnes Irwin School in Rosemont , Pennsylvania where she was captain of the tennis team , and was a friend of jewelry designer Kara Ross . Her first job was at Benetton in the King of Prussia Mall . 
 She then attended the University of Pennsylvania , an Ivy League university in Philadelphia , where she was a member of the sorority Kappa Alpha Theta . She majored in art history , and graduated in 1988 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 After graduating from college , Tory moved to New York City where she worked for Zoran , a Yugoslavian designer , followed by Harper 's Bazaar magazine . She then moved into public relations and advertising positions at Vera Wang , Polo Ralph Lauren and Loewe when Narciso Rodriguez was there . 
 = = = Fashion label = = = 
 Burch began her fashion label – " <unk> by Tory Burch " , later known as Tory Burch – in February 2004 , launching it with a retail store in Manhattan 's <unk> district . Most of the inventory sold out on the first day . When Oprah Winfrey endorsed her line on The Oprah Winfrey Show in April 2005 , calling Burch " the next big thing in fashion " , Burch 's website received eight million hits the following day . 
 Since launch , the company has grown to include 160 Tory Burch stores worldwide . The fashion line , which encompasses ready @-@ to @-@ wear , shoes , handbags , accessories , watches , home decor , and a fragrance and beauty collection , is also carried at over 3 @,@ 000 department and specialty stores worldwide . In 2015 Burch also introduced a separate performance activewear line , Tory Sport , with a dedicated website and a pop @-@ up shop ; a stand @-@ alone store on Fifth Avenue followed in 2016 . 
 Burch 's style has been described as preppy @-@ <unk> and preppy @-@ bohemian luxe , and is associated with her T @-@ logo medallion . Known for being easy to wear and versatile , her styles are popular with women of all ages , including the viewers and fans of the television show Gossip Girl , where they were often featured . In 2007 , there were wait lists to buy Tory Burch fashions , which are known for color and print and often pay homage to styles of the 1960s and 1970s . Burch named her line of Reva ballerina flats after her mother . 
 = = = Selected television appearances = = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In 2005 , Burch won the Rising Star Award for Best New Retail Concept from the Fashion Group International . In 2007 , she won the Accessory Brand Launch of the year award at the Accessories Council Excellence Awards . In 2008 , Burch won the Council of Fashion Designers of America award for Accessories Designer of the Year . Working Mother included her on their list of the 50 Most Powerful Moms of 2015 . In 2015 , she received the Breast Cancer Research Foundation 's Sandra Taub Humanitarian Award . 
 Burch has consistently been included on Forbes ' list of The World ’ s 100 Most Powerful Women . As of 2015 , she is listed as the 73rd most powerful woman in the world by Forbes . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Burch serves on the boards of the Council of Fashion Designers of America , the Society of Memorial Sloan @-@ Kettering Cancer Center , the Breast Cancer Research Foundation , the Startup America Partnership and the Barnes Foundation . She is a member of the Industry Advisory Board of the Jay H. Baker Retailing Center at the Wharton School of Business , and a member of the Council on Foreign Relations . She chaired the 2007 spring gala for the American Ballet Theatre . 
 In 2009 , Burch founded the Tory Burch Foundation , which supports the economic empowerment of women in the U.S. through small business loans , mentoring and entrepreneurial education . The foundation is currently partnered with <unk> USA , a non @-@ profit domestic microfinance provider founded in 1991 . Burch ’ s stores sell products whose proceeds support the foundation ’ s work . 
 In 2014 , the foundation launched Elizabeth Street Capital , an initiative with Bank of America , with an initial investment of $ 10 million in capital to provide women entrepreneurs with access to low cost loans , mentoring support and networking opportunities . The initiative is named for the location of the first Tory Burch boutique . The foundation also offers an entrepreneurial education program in collaboration with Goldman Sachs 10 @,@ 000 Small Businesses and Babson College . In November 2015 , the foundation launched a fellows competition offering women entrepreneurs a chance to compete for business @-@ education grants , year @-@ long mentoring , and a $ 50 @,@ 000 grant plus a $ 50 @,@ 000 no @-@ interest investment in their business . 
 In April 2014 , the Obama Administration named Burch an inaugural member of the Presidential Ambassadors for Global Entrepreneurship , a group of successful American businesspeople committed to developing the next generation of entrepreneurs in the U.S. and around the world . Other members of PAGE include Reid Hoffman , co @-@ founder of LinkedIn , and entertainment producer Quincy Jones . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1993 she married William <unk> , son of real @-@ estate tycoon Harry B. <unk> , and was divorced within a year . In 1996 she married J. Christopher Burch , an investor in Internet Capital Group , a venture capital firm founded by Walter Buckley and Ken Fox . Although divorced from Burch in 2006 , she continues to use his last name , and for some time continued to live with her children in their New York City apartment ; she has three sons and three stepdaughters . She dated Lance Armstrong in 2007 . Afterward she was for some time linked to <unk> Cohen . In early 2016 Burch became engaged to Pierre @-@ Yves Roussel , the chairman and CEO of the LVMH Fashion Group . The couple had been dating since 2014 . 
 Forbes magazine has estimated that she is a billionaire , with a net worth of $ 1 @.@ 0 billion as of 2013 . 
 = Fat Man = 
 " Fat Man " was the codename for the type of atomic bomb that was detonated over the Japanese city of Nagasaki by the United States on 9 August 1945 . It was the second of the only two nuclear weapons ever used in warfare , the first being Little Boy , and its detonation marked the third @-@ ever man @-@ made nuclear explosion in history . It was built by scientists and engineers at Los Alamos Laboratory using plutonium from the Hanford Site and dropped from the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress Bockscar . For the Fat Man mission , Bockscar was piloted by Major Charles W. Sweeney . 
 The name Fat Man refers generically to the early design of the bomb , because it had a wide , round shape . It was also known as the Mark III . Fat Man was an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon with a solid plutonium core . The first of that type to be detonated was the Gadget , in the Trinity nuclear test , less than a month earlier on 16 July at the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range in New Mexico . 
 Two more Fat Man bombs were detonated during the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll in 1946 . Some 120 Fat Man units were produced between 1947 and 1949 , when it was superseded by the Mark 4 nuclear bomb . The Fat Man was retired in 1950 . 
 = = Early decisions = = 
 In 1942 , prior to the Army taking over wartime atomic research , Robert Oppenheimer held conferences in Chicago in June and Berkeley , California , in July , at which various engineers and physicists discussed nuclear bomb design issues . A gun @-@ type design was chosen , in which two sub @-@ critical masses would be brought together by firing a " bullet " into a " target " . Richard C. Tolman suggested an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon , but the idea attracted scant consideration . 
 The feasibility of a plutonium bomb was questioned in 1942 . James Conant heard on 14 November from Wallace Akers , the director of the British " Tube Alloys " project , that James Chadwick had " concluded that plutonium might not be a practical fissionable material for weapons because of impurities . " Conant consulted Ernest Lawrence and Arthur Compton , who acknowledged that their scientists at Berkeley and Chicago respectively knew about the problem , but could offer no ready solution . Conant informed the director of the Manhattan Project , Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , who in turn assembled a special committee consisting of Lawrence , Compton , Oppenheimer , and McMillan to examine the issue . The committee concluded that any problems could be overcome simply by requiring higher purity . 
 Oppenheimer , reviewing his options in early 1943 , gave priority to the gun @-@ type weapon , but as a hedge against the threat of pre @-@ detonation , he created the E @-@ 5 Group at the Los Alamos Laboratory under Seth Neddermeyer to investigate implosion . Implosion @-@ type bombs were determined to be significantly more efficient in terms of explosive yield per unit mass of fissile material in the bomb , because compressed fissile materials react more rapidly and therefore more completely . Nonetheless , it was decided that the plutonium gun would receive the bulk of the research effort , since it was the project with the least amount of uncertainty involved . It was assumed that the uranium gun @-@ type bomb could be easily adapted from it . 
 = = Naming = = 
 The gun @-@ type and implosion @-@ type designs were codenamed " Thin Man " and " Fat Man " respectively . These code names were created by Robert Serber , a former student of Oppenheimer 's who worked on the Manhattan Project . He chose them based on their design shapes ; the Thin Man would be a very long device , and the name came from the Dashiell Hammett detective novel The Thin Man and series of movies by the same name ; the Fat Man would be round and fat and was named after Sydney Greenstreet 's character in The Maltese Falcon . Little Boy would come last , as a variation of Thin Man . 
 = = Development = = 
 Neddermeyer discarded Serber and Tolman 's initial concept of implosion as assembling a series of pieces in favor of one in which a hollow sphere was imploded by an explosive shell . He was assisted in this work by Hugh Bradner , Charles Critchfield , and John Streib . L. T. E. Thompson was brought in as a consultant , and discussed the problem with Neddermeyer in June 1943 . Thompson was skeptical that an implosion could be made sufficiently symmetric . Oppenheimer arranged for Neddermeyer and Edwin McMillan to visit the National Defense Research Committee 's Explosives Research Laboratory near the laboratories of the Bureau of Mines in Bruceton , Pennsylvania ( a Pittsburgh suburb ) , where they spoke to George Kistiakowsky and his team . But Neddermeyer 's efforts in July and August at imploding tubes to produce cylinders tended to produce objects that resembled rocks . Neddermeyer was the only person who believed that implosion was practical , and only his enthusiasm kept the project alive . 
 Oppenheimer brought John von Neumann to Los Alamos in September 1943 to take a fresh look at implosion . After reviewing Neddermeyer 's studies , and discussing the matter with Edward Teller , von Neumann suggested the use of high explosives in shaped charges to implode a sphere , which he showed could not only result in a faster assembly of fissile material than was possible with the gun method , but which could greatly reduce the amount of material required , because of the resulting higher density . The idea that , under such pressures , the plutonium metal itself would be compressed came from Teller , whose knowledge of how dense metals behaved under heavy pressure was influenced by his pre @-@ war theoretical studies of the Earth 's core with George Gamow . The prospect of more @-@ efficient nuclear weapons impressed Oppenheimer , Teller , and Hans Bethe , but they decided that an expert on explosives would be required . Kistiakowsky 's name was immediately suggested , and Kistiakowsky was brought into the project as a consultant in October 1943 . 
 The implosion project remained a backup until April 1944 , when experiments by Emilio G. Segrè and his P @-@ 5 Group at Los Alamos on the newly reactor @-@ produced plutonium from the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge and the B Reactor at the Hanford site showed that it contained impurities in the form of the isotope plutonium @-@ 240 . This has a far higher spontaneous fission rate and radioactivity than plutonium @-@ 239 . The cyclotron @-@ produced isotopes , on which the original measurements had been made , held much lower traces of plutonium @-@ 240 . Its inclusion in reactor @-@ bred plutonium appeared unavoidable . This meant that the spontaneous fission rate of the reactor plutonium was so high that it would be highly likely that it would predetonate and blow itself apart during the initial formation of a critical mass . The distance required to accelerate the plutonium to speeds where predetonation would be less likely would need a gun barrel too long for any existing or planned bomber . The only way to use plutonium in a workable bomb was therefore implosion . 
 The impracticability of a gun @-@ type bomb using plutonium was agreed at a meeting in Los Alamos on 17 July 1944 . All gun @-@ type work in the Manhattan Project was directed at the Little Boy , enriched @-@ uranium gun design , and the Los Alamos Laboratory was reorganized , with almost all of the research oriented around the problems of implosion for the Fat Man bomb . The idea of using shaped charges as three @-@ dimensional explosive lenses came from James L. Tuck , and was developed by von Neumann . To overcome the difficulty of synchronizing multiple detonations , Luis Alvarez and Lawrence Johnston invented exploding @-@ bridgewire detonators to replace the less precise <unk> detonation system . Robert Christy is credited with doing the calculations that showed how a solid subcritical sphere of plutonium could be compressed to a critical state , greatly simplifying the task , since earlier efforts had attempted the more @-@ difficult compression of a hollow spherical shell . After Christy 's report , the solid @-@ plutonium core weapon was referred to as the " Christy Gadget " . 
 The task of the metallurgists was to determine how to cast plutonium into a sphere . The difficulties became apparent when attempts to measure the density of plutonium gave inconsistent results . At first contamination was believed to be the cause , but it was soon determined that there were multiple allotropes of plutonium . The brittle α phase that exists at room temperature changes to the plastic β phase at higher temperatures . Attention then shifted to the even more malleable δ phase that normally exists in the 300 – 450 ° C ( 570 – 840 ° F ) range . It was found that this was stable at room temperature when alloyed with aluminum , but aluminum emits neutrons when bombarded with alpha particles , which would exacerbate the pre @-@ ignition problem . The metallurgists then hit upon a plutonium – gallium alloy , which stabilized the δ phase and could be hot pressed into the desired spherical shape . As plutonium was found to corrode readily , the sphere was coated with nickel . 
 The size of the bomb was constrained by the available aircraft . The only Allied aircraft capable of carrying the Fat Man were the British Avro Lancaster and the American Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress . For logistic and nationalistic reasons , the B @-@ 29 was preferred , but this constrained the bomb to a maximum length of 132 inches ( 3 @,@ 400 mm ) , width of 60 inches ( 1 @,@ 500 mm ) and weight of 20 @,@ 000 pounds ( 9 @,@ 100 kg ) . Removing the bomb rails allowed a maximum width of 66 inches ( 1 @,@ 700 mm ) . Drop tests began in March 1944 , and resulted in modifications to the Silverplate aircraft due to the weight of the bomb . High @-@ speed photographs revealed that the tail fins folded under the pressure , resulting in an erratic descent . Various combinations of stabilizer boxes and fins were tested on the Fat Man shape to eliminate its persistent wobble until an arrangement dubbed a " California Parachute " , a cubical open @-@ rear tail box outer surface with eight radial fins inside of it , four angled at 45 ° and four orthogonally to the line of fall holding the outer square @-@ fin box to the bomb 's rear end , was approved . In drop tests in early weeks , the Fat Man missed its target by an average of 1 @,@ 857 feet ( 566 m ) , but this was halved by June as the bombardiers became more proficient with it . 
 The early Y @-@ 1222 model Fat Man was assembled with some 1 @,@ 500 bolts . This was superseded by the Y @-@ 1291 design in December 1944 . This redesign work was substantial , and only the Y @-@ 1222 tail design was retained . Later versions included the Y @-@ 1560 , which had 72 detonators ; the Y @-@ 1561 , which had 32 ; and the Y @-@ 1562 , which had 132 . There were also the Y @-@ 1563 and Y @-@ 1564 , which were practice bombs with no detonators at all . The final wartime Y @-@ 1561 design was assembled with just 90 bolts . 
 Because of its complicated firing mechanism and the need for previously untested synchronization of explosives and precision design , it was thought that a full test of the concept was needed before the scientists and military representatives could be confident it would perform correctly under combat conditions . On 16 July 1945 , a Y @-@ 1561 model Fat Man , known as the Gadget for security reasons , was detonated in a test explosion at a remote site in New Mexico , known as the " Trinity " test . It gave a yield of about 20 kilotonnes ( 84 TJ ) . Some minor changes were made to the design as a result of the Trinity test . Philip Morrison recalled that " There were some changes of importance ... The fundamental thing was , of course , very much the same . " 
 = = Bomb interior = = 
 The bomb was 128 inches ( 3 @,@ 300 mm ) long and 60 inches ( 1 @,@ 500 mm ) in diameter . It weighed 10 @,@ 300 pounds ( 4 @,@ 700 kg ) . 
 = = Assembly = = 
 To allow insertion of the 3 @.@ 62 @-@ inch ( 92 mm ) diameter plutonium pit , containing the 0 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ( 20 mm ) diameter " Urchin " modulated neutron initiator , as late as possible in the device 's assembly , the spherical 8 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 222 mm ) diameter depleted uranium tamper surrounded by a 0 @.@ 125 @-@ inch ( 3 @.@ 2 mm ) thick shell of boron impregnated plastic had a 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) diameter cylindrical hole running through it , like the hole in a cored apple . The missing tamper cylinder , containing the pit , could be slipped in through a hole in the surrounding 18 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 470 mm ) diameter aluminium pusher . The pit was warm to touch , emitting 2 @.@ 4 W / kg @-@ Pu , about 15 W for the 6 @.@ 19 kilograms ( 13 @.@ 6 lb ) core . 
 The plutonium was compressed to twice its normal density before the " Urchin " added free neutrons to initiate a fission chain reaction . 
 The result was the fission of about 1 kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) of the 6 @.@ 19 kilograms ( 13 @.@ 6 lb ) of plutonium in the pit , i.e. of about 17 % of the fissile material present . 1 gram ( 0 @.@ 035 oz ) of matter in the bomb is converted into the active energy of heat and radiation , releasing the energy equivalent to the detonation of 21 kilotons of TNT or 88 terajoules . 
 = = Bombing of Nagasaki = = 
 The first plutonium core , along with its polonium @-@ beryllium Urchin initiator , was transported in the custody of Project Alberta courier Raemer Schreiber in a magnesium @-@ field carrying @-@ case designed for the purpose by Philip Morrison . Magnesium was chosen because it does not act as a tamper . The core departed from Kirtland Army Air Field on a C @-@ 54 transport aircraft of the 509th Composite Group 's 320th Troop Carrier Squadron on 26 July , and arrived at North Field on Tinian on 28 July . Three Fat Man high @-@ explosive pre @-@ assemblies , designated F31 , F32 , and F33 , were picked up at Kirtland on 28 July by three B @-@ 29s ; two , Luke the Spook and Laggin ' Dragon , from the 509th Composite Group 's 393d Bombardment Squadron plus one from the 216th AAF Base Unit , and transported to North Field , arriving on 2 August . Upon arrival , F31 was partly disassembled in order to check all its components . F33 was expended near Tinian during a final rehearsal on 8 August , and F31 was the bomb dropped on Nagasaki . F32 presumably would have been used for a third attack or its rehearsal . 
 In August 1945 , the Fat Man was assembled on Tinian by Project Alberta personnel . When the physics package was fully assembled and wired , it was placed inside its ellipsoidal aerodynamic bombshell and wheeled out , where it was signed by nearly 60 people , including Rear Admiral William R. Purnell , Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell and Captain William S. Parsons . It was then wheeled to the bomb bay of the B @-@ 29 Superfortress named Bockscar after its normally assigned command pilot , Captain Frederick C. Bock , who flew The Great Artiste with his crew on the mission . Bockscar was flown by Major Charles W. Sweeney and his crew , with Commander Frederick L. Ashworth from Project Alberta as the weaponeer in charge of the bomb . 
 Bockscar lifted off at 03 : 47 on the morning of 9 August 1945 , with Kokura as the primary target and Nagasaki the secondary target . The weapon was already armed , but with the green electrical safety plugs still engaged . Ashworth changed them to red after ten minutes so that Sweeney could climb to 17 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 200 m ) in order to get above storm clouds . During pre @-@ flight inspection of Bockscar , the flight engineer notified Sweeney that an inoperative fuel transfer pump made it impossible to use 640 US gallons ( 2 @,@ 400 l ) of fuel carried in a reserve tank . This fuel would still have to be carried all the way to Japan and back , consuming still more fuel . Replacing the pump would take hours ; moving the Fat Man to another aircraft might take just as long and was dangerous as well , as the bomb was live . 509th Composite Group Commander Colonel Paul Tibbets and Sweeney therefore elected to have Bockscar continue the mission . 
 The original target for the bomb was the city of Kokura , but it was found to be obscured by clouds and drifting smoke from fires started by a major firebombing raid by 224 B @-@ 29s on nearby Yawata the previous day . This covered 70 % of the area over Kokura , obscuring the aiming point . Three bomb runs were made over the next 50 minutes , burning fuel and repeatedly exposing the aircraft to the heavy defenses of Yawata , but the bombardier was unable to drop visually . By the time of the third bomb run , Japanese anti @-@ aircraft fire was getting close , and Second Lieutenant Jacob Beser , who was monitoring Japanese communications , reported activity on the Japanese fighter direction radio bands . 
 Sweeney then proceeded to the alternative target , Nagasaki . It too was obscured by cloud , and Ashworth ordered Sweeney to make a radar approach . At the last minute , the bombardier , Captain Kermit K. Beahan , found a hole in the clouds . The Fat Man was dropped and , following a 43 @-@ second duration free fall , it exploded at 11 : 02 local time , at an altitude of about 1 @,@ 650 feet ( 500 m ) . Because of poor visibility due to cloud cover , the bomb missed its intended detonation point by almost two miles , and damage was somewhat less extensive than that in Hiroshima . 
 An estimated 35 @,@ 000 – 40 @,@ 000 people were killed outright by the bombing at Nagasaki . A total of 60 @,@ 000 – 80 @,@ 000 fatalities resulted , including from long @-@ term health effects , the strongest of which was leukemia , with an attributable risk of 46 % for bomb victims . Others died later from related blast and burn injuries , and hundreds more from radiation illnesses from exposure to the bomb 's initial radiation . Most of the direct deaths and injuries sustained from the bombing were munitions or industrial workers . Mitsubishi 's industrial production in the city were also severed by the attack ; the dockyard would have produced at 80 percent of its full capacity within three to four months , the steel works would have required a year to get back to substantial production , the electric works would have resumed some production within two months and been back at capacity within six months , and the restoration of the arms plant to 60 to 70 percent of former capacity would have required 15 months . The Mitsubishi @-@ Urakami Ordnance Works , the factory that manufactured the type 91 torpedoes released in the attack on Pearl Harbor , was destroyed in the blast . 
 = = Post @-@ war development = = 
 After the war , two Y @-@ 1561 Fat Man bombs were used in the Operation " Crossroads " nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific . The first , known as Gilda after Rita Hayworth 's character in the 1946 movie of the same name , was dropped by the B @-@ 29 Dave 's Dream . The bomb missed its aim point by 710 yards ( 650 m ) . The second bomb , nicknamed Helen of Bikini , was placed , without its tail fin assembly , in a steel caisson made from a submarine 's conning tower , and detonated 90 feet ( 27 m ) beneath the landing craft LSM @-@ 60 . The two weapons yielded about 23 kilotonnes ( 96 TJ ) each . 
 The Los Alamos Laboratory and the Army Air Forces had already commenced work on improving the design . The North American B @-@ 45 Tornado , Convair XB @-@ 46 , Martin XB @-@ 48 , and Boeing B @-@ 47 Stratojet bombers , then on the drawing boards , had bomb bays sized to carry the Grand Slam , which was much longer but not as wide as the Fat Man . The only bombers that could carry the Fat Man were the B @-@ 29 and the Convair B @-@ 36 . In November 1945 , the Army Air Forces asked Los Alamos for 200 Fat Man bombs . At the time there were only two sets of plutonium cores and high @-@ explosive assemblies . The Army Air Forces wanted improvements to the design to make it easier to manufacture , assemble , handle , transport , and stockpile . The wartime Project W @-@ 47 was continued , and drop tests resumed in January 1946 . 
 The Mark III Mod 0 Fat Man was ordered to be put into production in mid @-@ 1946 . High explosives were manufactured by the Salt Wells Pilot Plant , which had been established by the Manhattan Project as part of Project Camel . A new plant was established at the Iowa Army Ordnance Plant . Mechanical components were made or procured by the Rock Island Arsenal . Electrical and mechanical components for about 50 bombs were stockpiled at Kirtland Army Air Field by August 1946 , but only nine plutonium cores were available . Production of the Mod 0 ended in December 1948 , by which time there were still only 53 cores available . It was replaced by improved versions , known as Mods 1 and 2 , which contained a number of minor changes , the most important of which was that they did not charge the X @-@ Unit firing system 's capacitors until released from the aircraft . The Mod 0s were withdrawn from service between March and July 1949 , and by October they had all been rebuilt as Mods 1 and 2 . Some 120 Mark III Fat Man units were added to the stockpile between 1947 and 1949 , when it was superseded by the Mark 4 nuclear bomb . The Mark III Fat Man was retired in 1950 . 
 Due to the limitations of the Mark III Fat Man , a nuclear strike would have been a formidable undertaking in the 1940s . The lead @-@ acid batteries that powered the fuzing system remained charged for only 36 hours , after which they needed to be recharged . To do this meant disassembling the bomb , and recharging took 72 hours . The batteries had to be removed in any case after nine days or they corroded . The plutonium core could not be left in for much longer , because its heat damaged the high explosives . Replacing the core also required the bomb to be completely disassembled and reassembled . This required about 40 to 50 men and took between 56 and 72 hours , depending on the skill of the bomb assembly team , and in June 1948 the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project had only three teams . The only aircraft capable of carrying the bomb were Silverplate B @-@ 29s , and the only group equipped with them was the 509th Bombardment Group at Walker Air Force Base in Roswell , New Mexico . They would first have to fly to Sandia Base to collect the bombs , and then to an overseas base from which a strike could be mounted . 
 As much of the Manhattan Project data leaked by the spies Klaus Fuchs , Theodore Hall , and David Greenglass to the Soviet Union concerned Fat Man , the Soviet Union 's first nuclear weapon , designated " Joe @-@ 1 " by the United States , was based closely on Fat Man 's design . " Joe 1 " was detonated on 29 August 1949 as part of Operation " First Lightning " . 
 = SM U @-@ 70 = 
 SM U @-@ 70 was a Type U 66 submarine or U @-@ boat for the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during the First World War . She had been laid down in February 1914 as U @-@ 11 the final boat of the U @-@ 7 class for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) but was sold to Germany , along with the others in her class , in November 1914 . 
 The submarine was ordered as U @-@ 11 from Germaniawerft of Kiel as the last of five boats of the U @-@ 7 class for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy became convinced that none of the submarines of the class could be delivered to the Adriatic via Gibraltar . As a consequence , the entire class , including U @-@ 11 , was sold to the German Imperial Navy in November 1914 . Under German control , the class became known as the U 66 type and the boats were renumbered ; U @-@ 11 became U @-@ 70 , and all were redesigned and reconstructed to German specifications . U @-@ 70 was launched in July 1915 and commissioned in September . As completed , she displaced 791 tonnes ( 779 long tons ) , surfaced , and 933 tonnes ( 918 long tons ) , submerged . The boat was 69 @.@ 50 metres ( 228 ft ) long and was armed with five torpedo tubes and a deck gun . 
 A part of the 4th Flotilla throughout the war , U @-@ 70 sank 53 merchant ships with a combined gross register tonnage ( GRT ) of 137 @,@ 775 . Included in that total was Southland — at 11 @,@ 899 GRT , one of the largest ships of the war sunk by a U @-@ boat — sunk in June 1917 . In addition she sank one British Flower @-@ class sloop and damaged four merchant ships ( 20 @,@ 369 GRT ) . On 20 November 1918 , nine days after the Armistice , U @-@ 70 was surrendered to the British . She was broken up at Bo 'ness in 1919 – 20 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy had competitively evaluated three foreign submarine designs , it selected the Germaniawerft 506d design , also known as the Type UD , for its new U @-@ 7 class of five submarines . The Navy ordered five boats on 1 February 1913 . 
 The U @-@ 7 class was seen by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy as an improved version of its U @-@ 3 class , which was also a Germaniawerft design . As designed for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , the boats were to displace 695 tonnes ( 684 long tons ) on the surface and 885 tonnes ( 871 long tons ) while submerged . The doubled @-@ hulled boats were to be 69 @.@ 50 metres ( 228 ft ) long overall with a beam of 6 @.@ 30 metres ( 20 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 3 @.@ 79 metres ( 12 @.@ 4 ft ) . The Austrian specifications called for two shafts with twin diesel engines ( 2 @,@ 300 metric horsepower ( 2 @,@ 269 bhp ; 1 @,@ 692 kW ) total ) for surface running at up to 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) , and twin electric motors ( 1 @,@ 240 metric horsepower ( 1 @,@ 223 shp ; 912 kW ) total ) for a maximum of 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) when submerged . The boats were designed with five 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes ; four located in the bow , one in the stern . The boats ' armament was to also include a single 6 @.@ 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) deck gun . 
 U @-@ 11 was laid down on 11 February 1914 , the final boat of the class begun . Her construction was slated to be complete within 29 to 33 months . 
 Neither U @-@ 11 nor any of her sister boats were complete when World War I began in August 1914 . With the boats under construction at Kiel , the Austrians became convinced that it would be impossible to take delivery of the boats , which would need to be towed into the Mediterranean past Gibraltar , a British territory . As a result , U @-@ 11 and her four sisters were sold to the Imperial German Navy on 28 November 1914 . 
 U @-@ 11 was renumbered by the Germans as U @-@ 70 when her class was redesignated as the Type U 66 . The Imperial German Navy had the submarines redesigned and reconstructed to German standards , which increased the surface displacement by 96 tonnes ( 94 long tons ) and the submerged by 48 tonnes ( 47 long tons ) . The torpedo load was increased by a third , from 9 to 12 , and the deck gun was upgraded from the 6 @.@ 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) gun originally specified to an 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) one . 
 = = Early career = = 
 U @-@ 70 was launched on 20 July 1915 . On 22 September , SM U @-@ 70 was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy under the command of Kapitänleutnant Otto Wünsche . U @-@ 70 was the second U @-@ boat command for the 30 @-@ year @-@ old officer ; he had commanded U @-@ 25 from August 1914 until a week before assignment to U @-@ 70 . In January 1916 , Wünsche and U @-@ 70 escorted the German blockade runner Marie through the North Sea . On 9 February , U @-@ 70 was assigned to the 4th Flotilla ( German : IV . <unk> ) in which she remained for the duration of the war . U @-@ 70 served as an escort again in late February , when she accompanied the German merchant raider Greif . 
 = = The second German offensive = = 
 Germany began its second submarine offensive against shipping in February 1916 , the month U @-@ 70 had joined the 4th Flotilla . As in the first submarine offensive , U @-@ boats were sent independently around Scotland to patrol the Irish Sea and the western entrance to the English Channel . U @-@ 70 sank her first ship on 16 March , when she dispatched the British sailing vessel Willie 60 nautical miles ( 110 km ; 69 mi ) northwest by west of Fastnet Rock . The same day she also damaged the British cargo ship <unk> , en route to Avonmouth with a load of wheat from Galveston , Texas . Throughout the rest of March and into early April , U @-@ 70 sank an additional five ships of 14 @,@ 557 gross register tons ( GRT ) ; the largest being the British cargo vessel Eagle Point , carrying a load of hay and oats from Saint John , New Brunswick , torpedoed and sunk on 28 March . Near the end of April 1916 , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the new commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the High Seas Fleet ( under which U @-@ 70 's 4th Flotilla operated ) , called off the merchant shipping offensive and ordered all boats at sea to return , and all boats in port to remain there . 
 = = Grand Fleet ambush = = 
 In mid @-@ May , Scheer completed plans to draw out part of the British Grand Fleet . The German High Seas Fleet would sortie for a raid on Sunderland , luring the British fleet across " ' nests ' of submarines and mine @-@ fields " . U @-@ 70 was one of four U @-@ boats that put out to sea beginning on 18 May to scout the central North Sea for signs of the British fleet . Completing five days of scouting , U @-@ 70 , along with U @-@ 63 , U @-@ 51 , U @-@ 32 , sister boat U @-@ 66 , U @-@ 24 , and U @-@ 52 , took up position off the Firth of Forth on 23 May . The other two other boats , U @-@ 43 and U @-@ 44 , were stationed off Pentland Firth , in position to attack the British fleet leaving Scapa Flow . All the boats were to remain on station until 1 June and await a coded message which would report the sailing of the British fleet . Unfortunately for the Germans , the British Admiralty had intelligence reports of the departure of the submarines which , coupled with an absence of attacks on shipping , aroused British suspicions . 
 A delayed departure of the German fleet for its sortie ( which had been redirected to the Skagerrak ) and the failure of five U @-@ boats to receive the coded message warning of the British advance caused Scheer 's anticipated ambush to be a " complete and disappointing failure " . Although U @-@ 70 had received the advance warning of the coded message , her crew did not ever see any part of the fleet . The failure of the submarine ambush to sink any British capital ships allowed the full Grand Fleet to engage the numerically inferior High Seas Fleet in the Battle of Jutland , which took place 31 May – 1 June . 
 U @-@ 70 's next success came in December when she sank the 5 @,@ 587 @-@ ton British steamer Pascal on 17 December . Over the next month she sank an additional 15 ships ( 20 @,@ 545 GRT ) . 
 = = Unrestricted submarine warfare = = 
 From the early stages of the war the British had blockaded Germany , preventing neutral shipping from reaching German ports . By the time of the so @-@ called " turnip winter " of 1916 – 17 , the blockade had severely limited imports of food and fuel into Germany . Among the results were an increase in infant mortality and as many as 700 @,@ 000 deaths attributed to starvation or hypothermia during the war . With the blockade having such dire consequences , Kaiser Wilhelm II personally approved a resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare to begin on 1 February 1917 to help force the British to make peace . The new rules of engagement specified that no ship was to be left afloat . 
 The first recorded action of U @-@ 70 under the new rules of engagement occurred near the end of February 1917 , when the U @-@ boat shelled the British @-@ flagged SS San Patricio . The 9 @,@ 712 GRT tanker , encountered by U @-@ 70 off the Orkney Islands , survived the attack . In March , U @-@ 70 sank twelve ships totaling 25 @,@ 708 tons and damaged a thirteenth of 4 @,@ 666 tons . 
 During the month of April 1917 , German U @-@ boats succeeded in sinking 860 @,@ 334 tons of Allied and neutral shipping , a total unsurpassed by any month in either of the two world wars . U @-@ 70 's contribution came in the form of ten ships of 23 @,@ 530 tons sent to the bottom , four of them on the same day , 24 April . 
 Although the monthly total of tonnage sunk by all U @-@ boats had peaked in April , the losses were over 600 @,@ 000 tons in each of May and June . U @-@ 70 did not contribute to the May tally but her commanding officer , Wünsche , was awarded the House Order of Hohenzollern . U @-@ 70 began another productive month in June by sinking the American Line ocean liner Southland on 4 June . At 11 @,@ 899 GRT , Southland was the largest ship sunk by U @-@ 70 , and one of the largest ships sunk during the war by a U @-@ boat . Southland was carrying a general cargo from Liverpool to Philadelphia when U @-@ 70 sank her at position 56 ° 10 ′ N 12 ° 14 ′ W , some 140 nautical miles ( 260 km ; 160 mi ) from Tory Island . Throughout the rest of June , U @-@ 70 sank another seven ships totaling 26 @,@ 131 tons . 
 After June 1917 , U @-@ 70 only sank another three ships throughout the rest of the war , one of which was the British Flower @-@ class sloop Rhododendron on 5 May 1918 . Rhododendron had been constructed in 1917 as a purpose built Q @-@ ship , a warship disguised as a merchant ship to lure German submarines within range of their concealed gun batteries . The sloop was patrolling off Mull Head in the Orkney Islands when struck by a single torpedo from U @-@ 70 . The captain , Lieutenant Commander Charles Arthur Peal , became disoriented in the aftermath of the explosion , and instead of ordering away a " panic party " to draw the submarine within range , ordered the complete evacuation of the ship , which was carried out in great haste and confusion . U @-@ 70 approached the burning ship and observed the chaotic evacuation , seizing a petty officer from a liferaft who revealed the ship 's true identity . U @-@ 70 shelled the wreck and escaped without coming under fire . Rhododendron capsized and sank the following morning , with the loss of 15 men , four killed in the explosion and 11 drowned during the evacuation . Peal and the rest of the crew were heavily criticized for their conduct under fire by an Admiralty board . 
 In total U @-@ 70 sank 54 ships with a combined tonnage of 139 @,@ 065 and damaged four with a tonnage of 20 @,@ 369 in her twelve war patrols . She was surrendered to the British on 20 November 1918 , nine days after the Armistice , and broken up at Bo 'ness in 1919 – 20 . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = Pink slime = 
 " Pink slime " ( a <unk> for lean finely textured beef or LFTB , finely textured beef , and boneless lean beef trimmings or <unk> ) is a meat @-@ based product used as a food additive to ground beef and beef @-@ based processed meats , as a filler or to reduce the overall fat content of ground beef . In the production process , heat and centrifuges remove fat from the meat in beef trimmings . The resulting product is exposed to ammonia gas or citric acid to kill bacteria . In 2001 , the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) approved the product for limited human consumption . 
 In March 2012 , an ABC News series about " pink slime " included claims that approximately 70 percent of ground beef sold in U.S. supermarkets contained the additive at that time . Some companies and organizations stopped offering ground beef with the product . " Pink slime " was claimed by some originally to have been used as pet food and cooking oil and later approved for public consumption , but this was disputed in April 2012 , by both the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) administrator responsible for approving the product and Beef Products , Inc . ( BPI ) , the largest U.S. producer of the additive . In September 2012 BPI filed a lawsuit against American Broadcasting Company for false claims about the product . 
 The product is regulated in different manners in various regions . In the United States , the product is allowed to be used in ground beef , and it can be used in other meat products such as beef @-@ based processed meats . The product is banned in Canada due to the presence of ammonia in it , and it is banned for human consumption in the European Union . Some consumer advocacy groups have promoted the elimination of the product or for mandatory disclosure of additives in beef , while others have expressed concerns about plant closures that occurred after the product received significant news media coverage . 
 = = Production and content = = 
 Finely textured meat is produced by heating boneless beef trimmings to 107 – 109 ° F ( 42 – 43 ° C ) , removing the melted fat by centrifugal force using a centrifuge , and flash freezing the remaining product to 15 ° F ( − 9 ° C ) in 90 seconds in a roller press freezer , although the South Dakota Department of Agriculture has reported a lower processing temperature of about 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) . The roller press freezer is a type of freezer that was invented in 1971 by BPI CEO Eldon Roth that can " freeze packages of meat in two minutes " and began to be used at Beef Products Inc. in 1981 . The lean finely textured beef is added to ground beef as a filler or to reduce the overall fat content of ground beef . In March 2012 about 70 percent of ground beef sold in U.S. supermarkets contained the product . Source areas for the product from cattle may include the most contaminated portions , such as near the hide . 
 The recovered beef material is extruded through long tubes that are thinner than a pencil , during which time at the Beef Products , Inc . ( BPI ) processing plant , the meat is exposed to gaseous ammonia . At Cargill Meat Solutions , citric acid is used to kill bacteria such as E. coli and Salmonella . Gaseous ammonia in contact with the water in the meat produces ammonium hydroxide . The ammonia sharply increases the pH and damages microscopic organisms , the freezing causes ice crystals to form and puncture the organisms ' weakened cell walls , and the mechanical stress destroys the organisms altogether . The product is finely ground , compressed into pellets or blocks , flash frozen and then shipped for use as an additive . 
 Most of the finely textured beef is produced and sold by BPI , Cargill and Tyson Foods . As of March 2012 there was no labeling of the product , and only a USDA Organic label would have indicated that beef contained no " pink slime " . Per BPI , the finished product is 94 to 97 percent lean beef ( with a fat content of 3 – 6 percent ) has a nutritional value comparable to 90 percent lean ground beef , is very high in protein , low in fat , and contains iron , zinc and B vitamins . U.S. beef that contains up to 15 percent of the product can be labeled as " 100 % ground beef " . Up to 2005 , filler could make up to 25 percent of ground meat . In an Associated Press review , food editor and cookbook author J.M. Hirsh compared the taste of LFTB @-@ containing hamburgers against traditional , or " real " , hamburgers . He described the LFTB @-@ containing burgers as smelling the same , but being less juicy and highly mealy with bits and studs of cartilage @-@ like matter . 
 Rick <unk> , a spokesperson for BPI , stated in 2012 that BPI 's product does not contain cow intestines or connective tissue such as tendons . A United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) microbiologist stated that the product does contain connective tissue " instead of muscle " and thus it is " not meat " and is " not nutritionally equivalent " to ground beef . Fox News reported that besides low @-@ grade beef trimmings other meat by @-@ products such as connective tissue , cartilage , and sinew which contain fat were present . 
 = = Early use = = 
 In 1990 , the USDA 's Food Safety and Inspection Service ( FSIS ) approved the use of the technology for manufacturing finely textured meat . At the time of its approval , the FSIS called the remaining product " meat " , although one FSIS microbiologist dissented , arguing it contained both muscle and connective tissue . 
 In 1994 , in response to public health concerns over pathogenic E. coli in beef , the founder of BPI , Eldon Roth , began work on the " pH Enhancement System " , which <unk> meat using injected anhydrous ammonia in gaseous form , rapid freezing to 28 ° F ( − 2 ° C ) , and mechanical stress . 
 In 2001 , the FSIS approved the gaseous disinfection system as an intermediate step before the roller press freezer , and approved the disinfected product for human consumption , as an additive . The FSIS agreed with BPI 's suggestion that ammonia was a " processing agent " which did not need to be listed on labels as an ingredient . FSIS microbiologists Carl Custer and Gerald Zirnstein stated that they argued against the product 's approval for human consumption , saying that it was not " meat " but actually " salvage " , and that the USDA should seek independent verification of its safety , but they were overruled . In 2003 , BPI commissioned a study of the effectiveness and safety of the disinfection process ; the Iowa State University researchers found no safety concern in the product or in ground beef containing it . 
 The term " pink slime " , a reference to the product 's " distinctive look " , was coined in 2002 by Zirnstein in an internal FSIS e @-@ mail . Expressing concern that ammonia should be mentioned on the labels of packaged ground beef to which the treated trimmings are added , Zirnstein stated " I do not consider the stuff to be ground beef , and I consider allowing it in ground beef to be a form of fraudulent labeling " . He later stated that his main concern was that connective tissue is not " meat " , and that ground beef to which the product had been added should not be called ground beef , since it is not nutritionally equivalent to regular ground beef . 
 In 2007 , the USDA determined the disinfection process was so effective that it would be exempt from " routine testing of meat used in hamburger sold to the general public " . 
 A December 2009 investigative piece published by The New York Times questioned the safety of the meat treated by this process , pointing to occasions in which process adjustments were not effective . This article included the first public use of the term " pink slime " as a pejorative . In January 2010 , The New York Times published an editorial reiterating the concerns posed in the news article while noting that no meat produced by BPI had been linked to any illnesses or outbreaks . 
 An episode of Jamie Oliver 's Food Revolution aired on April 12 , 2011 depicted Jamie Oliver decrying the use of " pink slime " in the food supply and in school lunches . In the episode , Oliver douses beef trimmings in liquid ammonia while explaining what the product is and why he is disgusted with it . Oliver stated , " Everyone who is told about ' pink slime ' doesn 't like it in their food — school kids , soldiers , senior citizens all hate it " . The American Meat Institute and Beef Products Inc. retorted with a YouTube video featuring Dr. Gary Acuff of Texas A & M University questioning some of Oliver 's statements and promoting the additive . 
 = = ABC News report = = 
 An 11 @-@ segment series of reports in March 2012 from ABC News brought widespread public attention to and raised consumer concerns about the product . The product was described as " essentially scrap meat pieces compressed together and treated with an antibacterial agent " . Lean finely textured beef ( LFTB ) was referred to as " an unappetizing example of industrialized food production " . The product has been characterized as " unappetizing , but perhaps not more so than other things that are routinely part of hamburger " by Sarah Klein , an attorney for the food safety program at the Center for Science in the Public Interest . Nutritionist Andy <unk> has referred to the product as " one of many symptoms of a broken food system " . Food policy writer Tom <unk> noted that ammonium hydroxide is only one of several chemicals routinely added to industrially produced meat in the United States . 
 It was reported at that time that 70 percent of ground beef sold in U.S. supermarkets contained the additive , and that the USDA considered it as meat . The USDA issued a statement that LFTB was safe and had been included in consumer products for some time , and its Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food Safety Elisabeth A. Hagen stated that " The process used to produce LFTB is safe and has been used for a very long time . And adding LFTB to ground beef does not make that ground beef any less safe to consume " . 
 = = = Industry response = = = 
 Manufacturer Beef Products Inc . ( BPI ) and meat industry organizations addressed public concerns by stating that the additive , though processed , is " lean beef " that simply was not able to be reclaimed through traditional slaughterhouse practices until newer technologies became available approximately 20 years ago . With regard to concerns over the use of ammonium hydroxide , BPI noted that its use as an anti @-@ microbial agent is approved by the Food and Drug Administration . The use of ammonium hydroxide is included on the FDA 's list of GRAS ( generally recognized as safe ) procedures , and is used in similar applications for numerous other food products , including puddings and baked goods . 
 = = = Market response = = = 
 Several U.S. food manufacturers publicly stated that they did not use the product in their wares , including ConAgra Foods Inc . , Sara Lee Corporation and Kraft Foods Inc . Many meat retailers stated that they either did not use the product , or would cease using it . 
 Many fast food chains stopped use of the product after the controversy arose , or stated that they had not used the product before . The Concord Monitor reported increased business in some small neighborhood markets in April 2012 , due to consumer concerns about the additive . 
 On March 25 , 2012 , BPI announced it would suspend operations at three of its four plants , being in " crisis planning " . The three plants produced a total of about 900 @,@ 000 pounds of the product per day . BPI said it lost contracts with 72 customers , many over the course of one weekend , and production decreased from 5 million pounds of LFTB per week to below one million pounds a week at the nadir ( lowest point of production ) . Effective May 25 , 2012 BPI closed three of its four plants , including one in Garden City , Kansas , lost more than $ 400 million in sales , and laid off 700 workers . Production increased to less than 2 million pounds in 2013 . Cargill also significantly cut production of finely textured beef and in April 2012 " warned [ that ] the public 's resistance to the filler could lead to higher hamburger prices this barbecue season " . About 80 percent of sales of the product evaporated " overnight " in 2012 , per the president of Cargill Beef . Cargill stopped production in Vernon , California and laid off about 50 workers as well as slowing production at other plants including a beef @-@ processing plant in Plainview , Texas , where about 2 @,@ 000 people were laid off . 
 Many grocery stores and supermarkets , including the nation 's three largest chains , announced in March 2012 that they would no longer sell products containing the additive . Some grocery companies , restaurants and school districts discontinued the sale and provision of beef containing the additive after the media reports . 
 In April 2012 , the USDA received requests from beef processors to allow voluntary labeling of products with the additive , and stated it plans to approve labeling after checks for label accuracy . Both BFI and Cargill made plans to label products that contain the additive to alleviate these concerns and restore consumer confidence . Following the USDA announcement to allow choices in purchasing decisions for ground beef , many school districts stated that they would opt out of serving ground beef with LFTB . By June 2012 , 47 out of 50 U.S. states declined to purchase any of the product for the 2012 – 2013 school year while South Dakota Department of Education , Nebraska , and Iowa chose to continue buying it . 
 On April 2 , 2012 AFA Foods , a ground @-@ beef processor manufacturer of finely textured beef owned by Yucaipa Companies filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy citing " ongoing media attention " that has " dramatically reduced the demand for all ground beef products " . On April 3 , 2012 , U.S. cattle futures on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange were at a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ month low , which was partially attributed to the " pink slime " controversy . Livestock traders stated that : " It has put a dent in demand . It is bullish for live cattle over the long @-@ term , but short @-@ term it is certainly negative " . 
 = = = Government response = = = 
 Following the suspension of operations at three out of four BPI plants , members of the media and leaders were invited by Iowa Governor Terry Branstad to tour the BPI facility that remained open in South Sioux City , Nebraska . The founders of BPI gave campaign contributions to Branstad in 2010 , and to other candidates ' campaigns . Branstad stated to ABC News that the contributions were not a factor in his decision regarding having the event . Texas Governor Rick Perry , Nebraska Lieutenant Governor Rick Sheehy , Kansas Governor Sam Brownback , and South Dakota Lieutenant Governor Matt Michels , toured the South Sioux City , Nebraska , plant in an attempt to allay " inaccurate information " that they stated as having caused " an unnecessary panic among consumers " . The publicity tour emerged with the promotional slogan , " Dude , it 's beef ! " News reporters were not allowed to ask employees at BPI any questions during the tour . BPI asserts that social media and ABC News " grossly misrepresented " their product . BPI eventually sued ABC News for defamation . On March 28 , 2012 , Branstad stated , " The problem is , we take this off the market , then we end up with a fatter product that 's going to cost more and it 's going to increase the obesity problem in this country " . Safeway and other retailers that have removed the product from their shelves or product lines have stated they will not raise the price of their beef . Branstad also stated that he would recommend that Iowa state public schools continue to use ground beef which contains the product , and stated plans to " send a letter to the state 's public schools , encouraging them to continue to buy LFTB " . 
 On March 22 , 2012 , 41 Democrats in Congress , led by Representative <unk> Pingree of Maine , wrote a letter to United States Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack , head of the USDA , that " creating a two @-@ tiered school lunch program where kids in less affluent communities get served this low @-@ grade slurry is wrong " and urged its elimination from all public @-@ school lunches . Senator Jon Tester of Montana issued a news release in March 2012 urging Agriculture Secretary Vilsack to remove " pink slime " from school lunches and replace it with " high @-@ quality Montana beef " . Tester stated he planned to include provisions in the upcoming farm bill that would allow schools more flexibility in using USDA commodity funds , to increase options in purchasing locally grown and produced foods . 
 = = = School lunches = = = 
 The reaction against the product has also been partially credited to Bettina Siegel 's Change.org petition that has landed over a quarter million signatures to ban it in school lunches . After some parents and consumer advocates insisted the product be removed from public schools , the USDA indicated , beginning in fall 2012 , that it would give school districts the choice between ground beef with or without LFTB . CBS News reported that Chicago Public schools may have served ' Pink Slime ' in school lunches . 
 While some school districts have their own suppliers , many school districts purchase beef directly from the USDA and do not know what is in the beef . For the year 2012 , the USDA planned on purchasing 7 million pounds of lean beef trimmings for the U.S. national school lunch program . USDA spokesman Mike Jarvis stated that of the 117 million pounds of beef ordered nationally for the school lunch program last year , six percent was LFTB . An analysis of California Department of Education data indicated that " anywhere from none to nearly 3 million pounds of beef from the USDA that was served in California schools last year could have contained lean finely textured beef " . According to the USDA , the cost differential between ground beef with and without the additive has been estimated at approximately 3 % . 
 = = = BPI lawsuit = = = 
 On September 13 , 2012 , BPI announced that it filed a $ 1 @.@ 2 billion lawsuit against ABC News , three reporters ( Diane Sawyer , Jim Avila and David <unk> ) and others , claiming ABC News made nearly " 200 false , misleading and defamatory statements , repeated continuously during a month @-@ long disinformation campaign " , engaged in " product and food disparagement , and tortious interference with business relationships " . BPI called the ABC News series a " concerted disinformation campaign " against LFTB . 
 ABC News denied BPI 's claims , and called the lawsuit without merit . ABC News sought to have the case removed from South Dakota state court to federal court . In June 2013 , a federal judge sent the lawsuit back to state court . On March 27 , 2014 , South Dakota state court Judge <unk> <unk> dismissed ABC 's motion to dismiss , and allowed the defamation suit to move forward . 
 = = Current use = = 
 In March 2012 , 70 percent of ground beef in the United States contained lean finely textured beef , and a year later in March 2013 the amount was estimated by meat industry officials to be at approximately five percent . This significant reduction is due in part to the extensive media coverage that began in March 2012 about the additive . During the 2014 grilling season , Cargill started using a label stating " Contains Finely Textured Beef " . In 2014 , finely textured beef production increased modestly , as beef prices rose by 27 % and " retailers seek cheaper trimmings to include in hamburger meat and processors find new products to put it in " . BPI , which does not label its product , recovered 40 customers since March 2012 . 
 = = Regulation = = 
 In the United States , the additive is not for direct consumer sale . Lean finely textured beef can constitute up to 15 percent of ground beef without additional labeling , and it can be added to other meat products such as beef @-@ based processed meats . Prior to the invention of the disinfection process , beef scraps could not be processed to reduce or remove the fat , bone fragments or other non @-@ beef components and could be sold for other uses only , such as pet food or as an ingredient for cooking oil . 
 Because of ammonium hydroxide use in its processing , the lean finely textured beef by BPI is not permitted in Canada . Health Canada stated that : " Ammonia is not permitted in Canada to be used in ground beef or meats during their production " and may not be imported , as the Canadian Food and Drugs Act requires that imported meat products meet the same standards and requirements as domestic meat . Canada does allow Cargill 's citric acid @-@ produced Finely Textured Meat ( FTM ) to be " used in the preparation of ground meat " and " identified as ground meat " under certain conditions . 
 Lean finely textured beef and Finely Textured Meat is banned for human consumption in the European Union ( EU ) . Meat processed using the Baader process is allowed in the EU . The Baader process involves the use of a machine manufactured by the Baader Company of Germany that mechanically separates meat residue from bones of animals using low pressure water . This meat is referred to as " <unk> meat " , and the Baader process involves the formation of the final product into a red meat paste . It is a similar process to mechanically separated meat , which forces " fragments of meat from animal bones using high pressure water " . 
 = = Public perception = = 
 The nature of the product and the manner in which it is processed led to concerns that it might be a risk to human health , despite the fact that there have been no reported cases of foodborne illnesses due to consumption of the product . Among consumers , media reporting significantly reduced its acceptance as an additive to ground beef . 
 A Harris Interactive survey commissioned by Red Robin and released on April 4 , 2012 , found that 88 percent of U.S. adults were aware of the " pink slime " issue , and that of those who were aware , 76 percent indicated that they were " at least somewhat concerned " , with 30 percent " extremely concerned " . 53 percent of respondents who stated that they were aware of pink slime took some action , such as researching ground beef they purchase or consume , or decreasing or eliminating ground beef consumption . 
 = = Legislation = = 
 Some consumer advocacy groups pressed for pink slime 's elimination or for mandatory disclosure of additives in beef , but a spokesperson from Beef Products Inc. at the time said there was no need for any additional labeling , asking " What should we label it ? It 's 100 percent beef , what do you want us to label it ? I 'm not prepared to say it 's anything other than beef , because it 's 100 percent beef " . 
 Other consumer advocacy groups , notably the National Consumers League , expressed dismay at the popular reaction against the product , and especially the plant closures " because of business the company has lost to very serious misinformation , widely disseminated by the media , about its product , lean finely textured beef ( LFTB ) " . Similarly , the Consumer Federation of America said the plant closures were " unfortunate " and expressed concern that the product might be replaced in ground beef with " something that has not been processed to assure the same level of safety " . U.S. consumers have expressed concerns that ground beef which contains the product is not labeled as such , and that consumers are currently unable to make informed purchasing decisions due to this lack of product labeling . Senator Bob Menendez of New Jersey called upon the USDA to institute mandatory labeling guidelines for ground beef sold in supermarkets , so consumers can make informed purchasing decisions . 
 = Ritchie Humphreys = 
 Ritchie John Humphreys ( born 30 November 1977 ) is an English professional footballer who plays for League One side Chesterfield . He is chairman of the Professional Footballers ' Association ( PFA ) and holds a UEFA A Licence coaching qualification . 
 Humphreys started his career with Premier League side Sheffield Wednesday in 1996 . Whilst with the club , he was loaned out to Scunthorpe United and Cardiff City . He also won five caps for England at under @-@ 20 and under @-@ 21 levels . He left the club in 2001 and joined Cambridge United for a short period , after which he joined Hartlepool United . He joined Port Vale on loan in 2006 . He left Hartlepool in July 2013 , and moved on to Chesterfield . Whilst at Chesterfield in 2014 he appeared at Wembley in the final of the Football League Trophy and helped the club to the League Two title in 2013 – 14 . 
 In 12 seasons with Hartlepool he made a club record 544 appearances , and picked up numerous club awards , including two Player of the Year awards from fans , one Player of the Year award from his teammates , as well as the award for Player of the Decade ( 2000s ) . He was also recognised at regional and national levels , being named on the PFA Team of the Year twice , and recognised as the North East League Player of the Year in 2006 . He helped the club win promotion out of the fourth tier in 2002 – 03 , and again in 2006 – 07 . However he suffered play @-@ off heartbreak with the club on three separate occasions . 
 = = Childhood and early career = = 
 Humphreys was introduced to football from an early age , his grandfather , Ernest Humphreys , played for Millwall , Motherwell and St Mirren . His dad , John Humphreys , also had trials with Sheffield United . 
 Humphreys grew up as a Sheffield United fan and joined their academy , which he described as a " dream come true " . However , they released him when we he was 13 . 
 Humphreys then played for the Sheffield Boys and was one of their few players who did not play for a professional club . However , that soon changed when Humphreys was scouted by a Sheffield Wednesday scout and he joined their centre of excellence . He completed a boy @-@ hood dream by scoring at Bramall Lane in a 3 – 2 win for Hartlepool in December 2012 . In November 2009 , Humphreys was listed 40th in the Daily Mail 's Top 50 Teenage Sensations in Premier League history . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Sheffield Wednesday = = = 
 In 1995 , after leaving Newfield Secondary School , Humphreys became part of Sheffield Wednesday ’ s youth squad . For the youth squad Humphreys played as a left winger and was offered a professional contract . Due to the injuries of strikers David Hirst and Mark Bright , Wednesday manager David Pleat gave Humphreys the opportunity to go on Wednesday 's pre @-@ season tour of the Netherlands . 
 Humphreys played the first game and scored twice . He then played in the second game against FC Utrecht and scored again . Johan Cruyff was the guest of honour for that game and he praised Humphreys and said he was the next Marco van Basten . It was during this pre season tour that he was taken under the wing and guidance of Wednesday legend Chris Waddle . After scoring 4 goals in his first 5 Premier League games lifting Wednesday to the top of the league , David Pleat decided to release his mentor Waddle . Humphreys did not score another league goal all season ( only notching a hat @-@ trick in a League Cup game against Grimsby Town in a 7 – 1 win ) . Humphreys pre @-@ season form earned him a full league debut in Wednesday 's opening match against Aston Villa . In this match Humphreys scored a goal that was recorded at 95 @.@ 9 mph , one of the hardest @-@ hit goals in the history of football . Humphreys also scored in the following match against Leeds United . Two games later , Humphreys scored a much talked about goal when he went on a 50 @-@ yard run and scored a spectacular chipped goal against Leicester City . Humphreys was seen as the driving force behind Sheffield Wednesday 's shock early lead at the top of The Premiership . 
 His form linked him to a £ 4 million transfer to Leeds United . However Humphreys remained at Sheffield Wednesday and played 34 games for them in the 1996 – 97 season . His performances earned him a place in the England team for the 1997 FIFA U @-@ 20 World Cup in Malaysia . Humphreys wore the much coveted number 9 shirt for that tournament . 
 For the next two seasons , after Sheffield Wednesday signed an influx of foreign players such as Paolo Di Canio and Benito Carbone , Humphreys failed to hold down a regular place and he only played a total of 31 games in those two seasons . Humphreys was sent on loan to Scunthorpe United on 13 August 1999 , where he played six matches and again scored twice . He was then sent on loan to Cardiff City where he played 11 matches , scoring twice . After a brief return to the Wednesday side for the 2000 – 01 season , Humphreys decided to leave Wednesday to play more first team football was allowed to join Cambridge United on trial . Humphreys impressed on trial scoring 3 goals in 7 games and it looked likely that Cambridge manager Roy McFarland was going to offer him a contract . However , Humphreys ' trial was cut abruptly after he broke his foot . After the sacking of Roy McFarland , new Cambridge manager John Beck was reluctant to offer Humphreys a new contract until he had seen him play . 
 = = = Hartlepool United = = = 
 Hartlepool United manager Chris Turner then offered Humphreys the chance to train with the club . Shortly after Humphreys signed a new contract with the club , much to the dismay of Cambridge fans who wanted him to stay and described him as " a big loss " . Humphreys started the 2001 – 02 season partnering Kevin Henderson up front for the first 9 league games . However , after a bad run Humphreys was dropped and replaced by new signing Gordon Watson . However , Humphreys would force his way back into the team and replace Henderson to partner Watson instead , these two players were already familiar with each other from their days at Sheffield Wednesday . Despite not scoring many goals Hartlepool manager Chris Turner was pleased with his performances . Humphreys was then moved into central midfield due to the injury of Tommy <unk> and after impressing played there for the remainder of the season . Humphreys ' first season at the club would end in disappointment as he missed the decisive penalty in the play @-@ off semi final defeat to Cheltenham Town , which cost Hartlepool a place in Division Two . The penalty struck the woodwork twice and stayed out . Humphreys ' miss would send him to tears and he was photographed by Frank Reid , a photograph that would prove to be one of the most memorable images of Reid and Humphreys ' career . After his miss Humphreys was devastated but he was cheered up by Chris Turner and the players who rang him and told him to keep his head up . Humphreys also received lots of letters of support from the Hartlepool fans . 
 When Humphreys returned to pre @-@ season training for the following season , he was playfully teased over his penalty miss . Humphreys took the motto " that anything that doesn ’ t kill you , makes you stronger " and was determined to come back stronger . Humphreys started the 2002 – 03 season with a goal against Carlisle on the opening day of the season . Throughout the course of the season , Humphreys would be played prominently as a left winger . Humphreys finished the season as an ever present in the Hartlepool squad , adding 11 goals to his name in the process and helped Hartlepool gain promotion to Division 2 . His performances won him the Player of the Season award from the supporters . During this season it was revealed that Humphreys had been writing a diary , which he published and named it " From Tears to Cheers " , in reference to his tears at Cheltenham . 
 The following two seasons once again saw Humphreys as an ever @-@ present in the Hartlepool side under new manager Neale Cooper . In the 2003 – 04 season , Hartlepool once again made the play @-@ offs , only to go out after conceding two last minute goals to Bristol City , a memory which Humphreys described as more painful than Cheltenham . Due to the injuries of Michael Barron , Humphreys began regularly captaining the side . 
 In the 2004 – 05 season , Humphreys helped Hartlepool once again make the play @-@ offs . During the play @-@ off semi @-@ final against Tranmere , Humphreys had the task of taking a penalty for Hartlepool in sudden death . This was the first time Humphreys had taken a penalty since his crucial miss at Cheltenham . This time he scored and sent Hartlepool through to the play @-@ off final against his old club Sheffield Wednesday at the Millennium Stadium . This helped to erase the memories of Cheltenham . However , Hartlepool lost the play @-@ off final to Sheffield Wednesday . Humphreys believes that of all the play @-@ off defeats he has suffered that the controversial loss to Wednesday was the hardest to take . Before the end of the season Humphreys extended his contract by a further two years . 
 The following season , 2005 – 06 , saw Humphreys become the first player to make 200 consecutive league appearances for Hartlepool . For this season Humphreys ' moved to left back due to Hugh Robertson being injured . Unfortunately Hartlepool and Humphreys suffered relegation . Despite this Humphreys was named the Supporters and Players ' Player of the Season as well as the North East Football Awards Football League Player of the Season . 
 For the 2006 – 07 season , Danny Wilson was appointed the new manager , Wilson had previously managed Humphreys at Sheffield Wednesday . On 22 August 2006 , Humphreys was dropped for Hartlepool 's match against Hereford United . After making 230 consecutive appearances , this was the first time Humphreys had not played since October 2001 . Shortly after that match , Humphreys joined Port Vale on a month 's loan . This was the third time that Danny Wilson had loaned Humphreys out during his career , the only times Humphreys had ever been loaned out . Port Vale tried to extend Humphreys ' loan deal by at least another month , but Hartlepool refused and Humphreys returned . Humphreys later stated that he had no intentions of leaving Hartlepool . 
 After a bad start to the season , Hartlepool were struggling near the lower reaches of the table . However , this changed against Accrington Stanley when Humphreys scored a spectacular last minute winner . This sent Hartlepool on 23 match unbeaten streak . During that streak , Humphreys scored another spectacular goal against Walsall to give Hartlepool the lead in a victory that sent them into second place . Hartlepool would remain in the top two for the remainder of the season and secured promotion , narrowly missing out on the title . Humphreys performances earned him a place in the League Two PFA Team of the Year . Humphreys was also awarded the Monkey Business Achievement Award for this contribution to the season , and had a street in Hartlepool named after him . However these awards proved small in comparison to when Humphreys was honoured by the Queen for making a " significant contribution to local and national life " earlier on in the season . 
 At the end of the 2007 – 08 season , Humphreys was voted Player of the Year , Player of the 2000s and Hartlepool United 's Player of the Century . He continued to be a key player in 2008 – 09 , making a total of 54 appearances . He was a key figure once again in the 2009 – 10 season , missing just nine games as a central midfielder . On 26 February 2011 , Humphreys replaced Joe Gamble after 82 minutes to play his <unk> game for " Pools " . This broke the record previously held by Watty Moore for over half a century . Over the course of the 2010 – 11 season he played 29 games . On 2 August 2011 , Humphreys was given a testimonial game against Premier League Sunderland to mark his ten years at Hartlepool United . Sunderland won 3 – 1 , though the 5 @,@ 757 fans present at the Victoria Park were reported to be very vocal in their appreciation of the veteran player . On 7 January 2012 , Humphreys replaced Luke James 90 minutes into a 2 – 0 win over Rochdale to make his 500th appearance for " Pools " . He signed an " undisclosed extension to his contract " in May 2012 . He made 33 appearances in the 2012 – 13 campaign , as Hartlepool were relegated into League Two . 
 Hartlepool released Humphreys from the club in May 2013 , after it was decided that the option in his contract to extend would not be taken up . 
 = = = Chesterfield = = = 
 Humphreys signed a one @-@ year contract with League Two club Chesterfield on 15 July 2013 . He became a key player for Paul Cook 's " Spireites " during the 2013 – 14 season , and on 30 March 2014 he made his first appearance at Wembley Stadium in Chesterfield 's 3 – 1 defeat to Peterborough United in the final of the Football League Trophy . In total he made 49 appearances throughout the 2013 – 14 campaign as Chesterfield won promotion as divisional champions . 
 He made 25 appearances in the 2014 – 15 campaign , helping the " Spireites " to the play @-@ offs , where they were beaten by Preston North End at the semi @-@ final stage . He made only three appearances in the 2015 – 16 campaign . 
 = = PFA work = = 
 Humphreys succeeded Clarke Carlisle as chairman of the Professional Footballers ' Association ( PFA ) in 2013 . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 As of match played 22 May 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Hartlepool United Fans ' Player of the Year : 2003 , 2006 
 Hartlepool United Players ' Player of the Year : 2006 
 Hartlepool United Player of the Decade ( for the 2000s ) 
 North East League Player of the Year : 2006 
 PFA Team of the Year : 2002 – 03 , 2006 – 07 
 With Hartlepool United 
 Football League Third Division play @-@ off semi @-@ finalists : 2001 – 02 
 Football League Third Division runners @-@ up : 2002 – 03 
 North East Team of the Year : 2002 – 03 
 League One play @-@ off semi @-@ finalists : 2003 – 04 
 League One play @-@ off finalists : 2004 – 05 
 League Two runners @-@ up : 2006 – 07 
 With Chesterfield 
 Football League Trophy runners @-@ up : 2014 
 League Two champions : 2013 – 14 
 = Labrador Retriever = 
 The Labrador Retriever , also Labrador , is a type of retriever @-@ gun dog . The Labrador is one of the most popular breeds of dog in the United Kingdom and the United States . 
 A favorite disability assistance breed in many countries , Labradors are frequently trained to aid the blind , those who have autism , to act as a therapy dog and perform screening and detection work for law enforcement and other official agencies . They are prized as sporting and hunting dogs . 
 A few kennels breeding their ancestors , the St. John 's water dog , were in England . At the same time , a combination of the sheep protection policy in Newfoundland and rabies quarantine in the United Kingdom , led to the gradual demise of the St. John 's water dog in Canada . 
 In the 1830s , the 10th Earl of Home and his nephews the 5th Duke of Buccleuch and Lord John Scott , had imported progenitors of the breed from Newfoundland to Europe for use as gundogs . Another early advocate of these Newfoundland dogs , or Labrador Retrievers as they later became known , was the 2nd Earl of Malmesbury who bred them for their expertise in <unk> . 
 During the 1880s , the 3rd Earl of Malmesbury , the 6th Duke of Buccleuch and the 12th Earl of Home collaborated to develop and establish the modern Labrador breed . The dogs Buccleuch Avon and Buccleuch Ned , given by Malmesbury to Buccleuch , were mated with bitches carrying blood from those originally imported by the 5th Duke and the 10th Earl of Home . The offspring are considered to be the ancestors of modern Labradors . 
 = = Early descriptions = = 
 Several early descriptions of the St. John 's water dog exist . In 1822 , explorer W.E. Cormack crossed the island of Newfoundland by foot . In his journal he wrote " The dogs are admirably trained as retrievers in fowling , and are otherwise useful ..... The smooth or short haired dog is preferred because in frosty weather the long haired kind become encumbered with ice on coming out of the water . " 
 An early report by a Colonel Hawker described the dog as " by far the best for any kind of shooting . He is generally black and no bigger than a Pointer , very fine in legs , with short , smooth hair and does not carry his tail so much curled as the other ; is extremely quick , running , swimming and fighting .... and their sense of smell is hardly to be credited .... " 
 The first St. John 's dog was said to be brought to England in or around 1820 , but the breed 's reputation had already spread to England ; there is a story that the 2nd Earl of Malmesbury saw a St. John 's dog on a fishing boat and immediately made arrangements with traders to have some of these dogs imported to England . These ancestors of the first labradors so impressed the Earl with their skill and ability for retrieving anything within the water and on shore that he devoted his entire kennel to developing and stabilizing the breed . 
 In his book Excursions In and About Newfoundland During the Years 1839 and 1840 , the geologist Joseph <unk> Jukes describes the St. John 's water dog . " A thin , short @-@ haired , black dog came off @-@ shore to us to @-@ day . The animal was of a breed very different from what we understand by the term Newfoundland dog in England . He had a thin , tapering snout , a long thin tail , and rather thin , but powerful legs , with a lank body , – the hair short and smooth . " wrote Jukes . " These are the most abundant dogs in the country ... They are no means handsome , but are generally more intelligent and useful than the others ... I observed he once or twice put his foot in the water and paddled it about . This foot was white , and Harvey said he did it to " toil " or entice the fish . The whole proceeding struck me as remarkable , more especially as they said he had never been taught anything of the kind . " 
 = = Name = = 
 The foundational breed of what is now the Labrador Retriever was known as the St. John 's water dog , St. John 's dog , or Lesser Newfoundland . When the dogs were later brought to England , they were named after the geographic area known as " the Labrador " ( they were known as Labrador Retrievers because they " retrieved " in the Labrador Sea ) or simply Labrador to distinguish them from the larger Newfoundland breed , even though the breed was from the more southern Avalon Peninsula . 
 The progenitors of the Labrador retriever were actually from Newfoundland and Labrador exceptionally , the breed known as the Newfoundland was created near the same time in Labrador . The two breeds ' names and origins were mixed once moved into England and the Americas . The dog from Labrador became the large , long furred dog we see and know today , and the dog from Newfoundland became the Labrador . 
 = = Historical landmarks = = 
 The first written reference to the breed was in 1814 ( " Instructions to Young Sportsmen " by Colonel Peter Hawker ) , the first painting in 1823 ( " Cora . A Labrador Bitch " by Edwin Landseer ) , and the first photograph in 1856 ( the Earl of Home 's dog " Nell " , described both as a Labrador and a St. Johns dog ) . By 1870 the name Labrador Retriever became common in England . The first yellow Labrador on record was born in 1899 ( Ben of Hyde , kennels of Major C.J. Radclyffe ) , and the breed was recognised by The Kennel Club in 1903 . The first American Kennel Club ( AKC ) registration was in 1917 . The chocolate Labrador emerged in the 1930s , although liver spotted pups were documented being born at the Buccleuch kennels in 1892 . The first dog to appear on the cover of Life Magazine was a black Labrador Retriever called ‘ Blind of Arden ’ in the December , 12th , 1938 issue . The St. John 's dog survived until the early 1980s , the last two individuals being photographed in old age around 1981 . 
 = = History of subtypes = = 
 Yellow and chocolate pups would occasionally appear ( although often culled ) , until finally gaining acceptance in the 20th century . The first recognized Yellow Labrador was Ben of Hyde , born in 1899 , and Chocolate Labradors became more established in the 1930s . , There is also a significant difference between show Labs , which tend to be short legged and very heavy , and field Labs which have a more functional and athletic build . Generally these two subtypes have different general features such as facial or body types . 
 = = = Yellow ( and similar shades ) = = = 
 In the early years of the breed through to the mid @-@ 20th century , Labradors of a shade we would now call " yellow " were in fact a dark , almost butterscotch , colour ( visible in early yellow Labrador photographs ) . The shade was known as " Golden " until required to be changed by the UK Kennel Club , on the grounds that " Gold " was not actually a color . Over the 20th century a preference for far lighter shades of yellow through to cream prevailed , until today most yellow Labradors are of this shade . Also fawn has been a common colour in the yellow lab variety . 
 Interest in the darker shades of gold and fox red were re @-@ established by English breeders in the 1980s , and three dogs were instrumental in this change : <unk> King Frost ( black , born c . 1976 ) who consistently sired " very dark yellow " offspring and is credited as having " the biggest influence in the re @-@ development of the fox red shade " , and his great @-@ grandson , the likewise famous <unk> Tabasco ( b . 1986 ) , described as " the father of the modern fox red Labrador " , and the only modern fox red Show Champion in the UK . Other dogs , such as Red Alert and Scrimshaw Placido Flamingo , are also credited with passing on the genes into more than one renowned bloodline . 
 Yellow Labradors 
 = = = Chocolate Labradors = = = 
 Jack Vanderwyk traces the origins of all Chocolate Labradors listed on the <unk> database ( some 34 @,@ 000 Labrador dogs of all shades ) to eight original bloodlines . However , the shade was not seen as a distinct colour until the 20th century ; before then according to Vanderwyk , such dogs can be traced but were not registered . A degree of crossbreeding with <unk> or Chesapeake Bay retrievers was also documented in the early 20th century , prior to recognition . Chocolate Labradors were also well established in the early 20th century at the kennels of the Earl of Feversham , and Lady Ward of <unk> . 
 The bloodlines as traced by Vanderwyk each lead back to three black Labradors in the 1880s — Buccleuch Avon ( m ) , and his sire and dam , Malmesbury Tramp ( m ) , and Malmesbury June ( f ) . <unk> <unk> is also named as an important intermediary , and according to the studbook of Buccleuch Kennels , the chocolates in this kennel came through FTW Peter of <unk> ( 1908 ) . 
 Chocolate Labradors 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 Labradors are medium @-@ large , with males typically weighing 65 to 80 lb ( 29 to 36 kg ) and females 55 to 70 lb ( 25 to 32 kg ) . Labradors weighing close to or over 100 lb ( 45 kg ) are considered obese or having a major fault under American Kennel Club standards , although some Labradors weigh significantly more . The majority of the characteristics of this breed , with the exception of colour , are the result of breeding to produce a working retriever . 
 As with some other breeds , the Conformation ( typically " Show " , " English " or " bench " ) and the Field ( typically " Working " or " American " ) lines differ , although both lines are bred in both countries . In general , however , Conformation Labradors tend to be bred as medium @-@ sized dogs , shorter and stockier with fuller faces and a slightly calmer nature than their Field counterparts , which are often bred as taller , lighter @-@ framed dogs , with slightly less broad faces and a slightly longer nose . However , Field Labradors should still be proportional and fit within American Kennel Club standards . With Field Labradors , excessively long noses , thin heads , long legs , and lanky frames are not considered standard . These two types are informal and not codified or standardised ; no distinction is made by the AKC or other kennel clubs , but the two types come from different breeding lines . Australian stock also exists ; though not seen in the West , they are common in Asia . These dogs are also very good with children . 
 The breed tends to shed hair twice annually or regularly throughout the year in temperate climates . Some Labradors shed considerably ; however , individual Labradors vary . Labrador hair is usually short and straight , and the tail is quite broad and strong . The webbed toes of the Labrador Retriever make them excellent swimmers . The webbing between their toes can also serve as a " snowshoe " in colder climates and keep snow from balling up between their toes — a condition that can be painful to other breeds with hair between the toes . Their interwoven coat is also relatively waterproof , providing more assistance for swimming . 
 = = = = Official breed standards = = = = 
 There is a great deal of variety among Labradors . The following characteristics are typical of the conformation show bred ( bench @-@ bred ) lines of this breed in the United States and are based on the American Kennel Club standard . Significant differences between UK and US standards are noted . 
 Size : Labradors are a medium @-@ large breed . They should be as long from the withers to the base of the tail as they are from the floor to the withers . Males should stand 22 to 24 inches ( 56 to 61 cm ) tall at the withers and weight 65 to 80 lb ( 29 to 36 kg ) . Females should stand 22 to 24 inches ( 56 to 61 cm ) and weigh 55 to 70 lb ( 25 to 32 kg ) . By comparison under UK Kennel Club standards , height should be 22 to 22 inches ( 56 to 56 cm ) for males , and 22 to 22 inches ( 56 to 56 cm ) for females . 
 Coat : The Labrador Retriever 's coat should be short and dense , but not wiry . The coat is water @-@ resistant , so the dog does not get cold when taking to water in the winter . That means that the dog naturally has a slightly dry , oily coat . Acceptable colours are black , yellow , and chocolate . 
 Head : The head should be broad with slightly pronounced eyebrows . The eyes should be kind and expressive . Appropriate eye colours are brown and hazel . The lining around the eyes should be black . The ears should hang close to the head and set slightly above the eyes . 
 Jaws : The jaws should be strong and powerful . The muzzle should be of medium length and should not be too tapered . The jaws should hang slightly and curve gracefully back . 
 Body : The body should have a powerful and muscular build . 
 The tail and coat are designated " distinctive [ or distinguishing ] features " of the Labrador by both the Kennel Club and AKC . The AKC adds that " true Labrador Retriever temperament is as much a hallmark of the breed as the ' otter ' tail . " 
 = = = = Colour = = = = 
 Labrador Retrievers are registered in three colours : black ( a solid black colour ) , yellow ( considered from cream to fox @-@ red ) , and chocolate ( medium to dark brown ) . Some dogs are sold as silver pure @-@ bred Labradors , but purity of those bloodlines is currently disputed by breed experts including breed clubs and breed councils . Some major kennel clubs around the world allow silver Labradors to be registered , but not as silver . The Kennel Club ( England ) requires that they be registered as " Non @-@ recognised . ” Occasionally , Labradors will exhibit small amounts of white fur on their chest , paws , or tail , and rarely a purebred Lab will exhibit <unk> stripes or tan points similar to a Rottweiler . These markings are a disqualification for show dogs but do not have any bearing on the dog 's temperament or ability to be a good working or pet dog . 
 Puppies of all colours can potentially occur in the same litter . Colour is determined primarily by three genes . The first gene ( the B locus ) determines the density of the coat 's eumelanin pigment granules , if that pigment is allowed : dense granules result in a black coat , sparse ones give a chocolate coat . The second ( E ) locus determines whether the eumelanin is produced at all . A dog with the recessive e allele will produce only <unk> pigment and will be yellow regardless of its genotype at the B locus . The genes known about previously have had their number increased by the introduction of the K locus , where the dominant " black " allele KB is now known to reside . Black or chocolate Labradors therefore must have the KB allele . Yellow Labradors are determined at the E locus , so the K locus is irrelevant in determining their colour . Variations in numerous other genes control the subtler details of the coat 's colouration , which in yellow Labradors varies from white to light gold to a fox red . Chocolate and black Labradors ' noses will match the coat colour . 
 According to a 2011 study , 13 out of 245 Labradors studied were heterozygous for the <unk> mutation responsible for the melanistic mask , and one was homozygous . Within the breed , this trait is not visible . 
 = = = = = Nose and skin pigmentation = = = = = 
 Labrador colouration is controlled by multiple genes . It is possible for recessive genes to re @-@ emerge in later generations . Also , there can sometimes be unexpected pigmentation effects to different parts of the body . <unk> effects appear in regard to yellow Labradors , and sometimes chocolate , and hence the majority of this section covers pigmentation within the yellow Labrador . The most common places where pigmentation is visible are the nose , lips , gums , feet , tail , and the rims of the eyes , which may be black , brown , light yellow @-@ brown ( " liver " , caused by having two genes for chocolate ) , or several other colours . A Labrador can carry genes for a different colour , for example a black Labrador can carry recessive chocolate and yellow genes , and a yellow Labrador can carry recessive genes for the other two colours . DNA testing can reveal some aspects of these . Less common <unk> ( other than pink ) are a fault , not a disqualification , and hence such dogs are still permitted to be shown . 
 The intensity of black pigment on yellow Labradors is controlled by a separate gene independent of the fur colouring . Yellow Labradors usually have black noses , which may gradually turn pink with age ( called " snow nose " or " winter nose " ) . This is due to a reduction in the enzyme tyrosinase which indirectly controls the production of melanin , a dark colouring . <unk> is temperature dependent — hence light colouration can be seasonal , due to cold weather — and is less produced with increasing age two years old onwards . As a result , the nose colour of most yellow Labradors becomes a somewhat pink shade as they grow older . 
 A colouration known as " Dudley " is also possible . Dudleys are variously defined as yellow Labradors which have unpigmented ( pink ) noses ( <unk> ) , yellow with liver / chocolate pigmentation ( AKC ) , or " flesh coloured " in addition to having the same colour around the rims of the eye , rather than having black or dark brown pigmentation . A yellow Labrador with brown or chocolate pigmentation , for example , a brown or chocolate nose , is not necessarily a Dudley , though according to the AKC 's current standard it would be if it has chocolate rims around the eyes ( or more accurately of the genotype <unk> ) . Breed standards for Labradors considers a true Dudley to be a disqualifying feature in a conformation show Lab , such as one with a thoroughly pink nose or one lacking in any pigment along with flesh coloured rims around the eyes . True Dudleys are extremely rare . Breeding in order to correct pigmentation often lacks dependability . Because colour is determined by many genes , some of which are recessive , crossbreeding a pigmentation non @-@ standard yellow Labrador to a black Labrador may not correct the matter or prevent future generations carrying the same recessive genes . For similar reasons , crossbreeding chocolate to yellow Labradors is also often avoided . 
 = = = = Show and field lines = = = = 
 As a result of specialised breeding there are significant differences between field and trial @-@ bred and show @-@ bred lines of Labradors . In the United States the former are sometimes mistakenly referred to as " American " and the latter as " English " although both field and show types are bred in both countries . In the United Kingdom they are called " Field " and " Show " . Dogs bred for hunting and field @-@ trial work are selected first for working ability , where dogs bred to compete in conformation shows are selected for their conformation to the standards and characteristics sought by judges in the show ring . 
 While individual dogs may vary , in general show @-@ bred Labradors are heavier built , slightly shorter @-@ bodied , and have a thicker coat and tail . Field Labradors are generally longer legged , lighter , and more lithe in build , making them agile . In the head , show Labradors tend to have broader heads , better defined stops , and more powerful necks , while field Labradors have lighter and slightly narrower heads with longer muzzles . Field @-@ bred Labradors are commonly higher energy and more high @-@ strung compared to the Labrador bred for conformation showing while conformation breeds are calmer in energy , and as a consequence may be more suited to working relationships than being a " family pet " . Some breeders , especially those specialising in the field type , feel that breed shows do not adequately recognise their type of dog , leading to occasional debate regarding officially splitting the breed into subtypes . 
 In the United States , the American Kennel Club ( AKC ) and the Labrador 's breed club have set the breed standard to accommodate the field @-@ bred Labrador somewhat . For instance , the AKC withers @-@ height standards allow conformation dogs to be slightly taller than the equivalent British standard . However , dual champions , or dogs that excel in both the field and the show ring , are becoming more unusual . 
 = = Temperament = = 
 The AKC describes the Labrador 's temperament as a kind , pleasant , outgoing and tractable nature . Labradors ' sense of smell allows them to home in on almost any scent and follow the path of its origin . They generally stay on the scent until they find it . Navies , military forces and police forces use them as detection dogs to track down smugglers , thieves , terrorists and black marketers . Labradors instinctively enjoy holding objects and even hands or arms in their mouths , which they can do with great gentleness ( a Labrador can carry an egg in its mouth without breaking it ) . They are known to have a very soft feel to the mouth , as a result of being bred to retrieve game such as waterfowl . They are prone to chewing objects ( though they can be trained to abandon this behavior ) . The Labrador Retriever 's coat repels water to some extent , thus facilitating the extensive use of the dog in waterfowl hunting . 
 Labradors have a reputation as a very even @-@ tempered breed and an excellent family dog . This includes a good reputation with children of all ages and other animals . Some lines , particularly those that have continued to be bred specifically for their skills at working in the field ( rather than for their appearance ) , are particularly fast and athletic . Their fun @-@ loving boisterousness and lack of fear may require training and firm handling at times to ensure it does not get out of hand — an uncontrolled adult can be quite problematic . Females may be slightly more independent than males . Labradors mature at around three years of age ; before this time they can have a significant degree of puppy @-@ like energy , often mislabelled as being hyperactive . Because of their enthusiasm , leash @-@ training early on is suggested to prevent pulling when full @-@ grown . Labradors often enjoy retrieving a ball endlessly ( often obsessively ) and other forms of activity ( such as agility , frisbee , or flyball ) . 
 Although they will sometimes bark at noise , especially noise from an unseen source ( " alarm barking " ) , Labradors are usually not noisy or territorial . They are often very easygoing and trusting with strangers and therefore are not usually suitable as guard dogs . 
 Labradors have a well @-@ known reputation for appetite , and some individuals may be highly indiscriminate , eating digestible and non @-@ food objects alike . They are persistent and persuasive in requesting food . For this reason , the Labrador owner must carefully control their dog 's food intake to avoid obesity and its associated health problems ( see below ) . 
 The steady temperament of Labradors and their ability to learn make them an ideal breed for search and rescue , detection , and therapy work . They are a very intelligent breed . They are ranked # 7 in Stanley Coren 's The Intelligence of Dogs . The AKC describes the breed as an ideal family and sporting dog . Their primary working role in the field continues to be that of a hunting retriever . 
 = = = Exploration = = = 
 Labradors do not typically jump high fences or dig , but because of their personalities , some Labradors climb and / or jump for their own amusement . As a breed they are highly intelligent and capable of intense single @-@ mindedness and focus if motivated or their interest is caught . Therefore , with the right conditions and stimuli , a bored Labrador could " turn into an escape artist par excellence " . 
 Labradors as a breed are curious and exploratory and love company , following both people and interesting scents for food , attention , and novelty value . In this way , they can often " vanish " or otherwise become separated from their owners with little fanfare . Many dogs are also stolen . Because of their curious nature and ability to " vanish , " along with the risk of being stolen , a number of dog clubs and rescue organizations ( including the UK 's Kennel Club ) consider it good practice that Labradors be microchipped , with the owner 's name and address also on their collar and tags . 
 = = = Use as working dogs = = = 
 Labradors are an intelligent breed with a good work ethic and generally good temperaments . Common working roles for Labradors include : hunting , tracking and detection ( they have a great sense of smell which helps when working in these areas ) , disabled @-@ assistance , carting , and therapy work . Approximately 60 – 70 % of all guide dogs in Canada are Labradors ; other common breeds are Golden Retrievers and German Shepherds . Labrador Retrievers have proven to have a high success rate at becoming guide dogs . A study was recently done on how well four different breeds ( Labrador Retriever , Golden Retriever , Labrador Retriever / Golden Retriever Mix , and German Shepherds ) trained to become guide dogs . In this experiment , German Shepherds had the highest chance of not completing it . Labrador Retrievers and Labrador Retriever / Golden Retriever Mix had the highest success rate . However , German Shepherds and Golden Retrievers had a higher success rate after going through longer training than the training required for Labrador Retrievers . 
 Labradors are powerful and indefatigable swimmers noted for their ability to tolerate the coldest of water for extended periods of time . Their ability to work quietly alongside hunters while watching for birds to fall from the sky , marking where they land , and then using their outstanding nose to find and retrieve dead or wounded birds has made them the king of waterfowl retrievers . They are also used for pointing and flushing and make excellent upland game hunting partners . 
 The high intelligence , initiative and self @-@ direction of Labradors in working roles is exemplified by dogs such as Endal , who during a 2001 emergency placed an unconscious human being in the recovery position , retrieved his mobile phone from beneath the car , fetched a blanket and covered him , barked at nearby dwellings for assistance , and then ran to a nearby hotel to obtain help . A number of Labradors have also been taught to assist their owner in removing money and credit cards from ATMs with prior training . 
 The breed is used in water rescue / lifesaving . It continues in that role today , along with the <unk> , Newfoundland and Golden Retriever dogs ; they are used at the Italian School of Canine Lifeguard . 
 = = Health = = 
 Labrador pups generally are not brought to the home before they are 8 weeks old . Their life expectancy is generally 10 to 12 years , and it is a healthy breed with relatively few major problems . Notable issues related to health and well @-@ being include : 
 = = = Inherited disorders = = = 
 Labradors are somewhat prone to hip and elbow dysplasia , especially the larger dogs , though not as much as some other breeds . Hip scores are recommended before breeding and often joint supplements are recommended . 
 Labradors also suffer from the risk of knee problems . A luxating patella is a common occurrence in the knee where the knee dislocates and goes back into place . 
 Eye problems are also possible in some Labradors , particularly progressive retinal atrophy , cataracts , corneal dystrophy and retinal dysplasia . Dogs which are intended to be bred should be examined by a veterinary ophthalmologist for an eye score . 
 Hereditary myopathy , a rare inherited disorder that causes a deficiency in type II muscle fibre . Symptoms include a short stilted gait or " bunny hopping , " and in rare cases <unk> of the neck accompanied by a <unk> posture . 
 There is a small incidence of other conditions , such as autoimmune diseases and deafness in Labradors , either congenitally or later in life . 
 Labradors often suffer from exercise induced collapse , a syndrome that causes hyperthermia , weakness , collapse , and disorientation after short bouts of exercise . 
 Out of all dog breeds it is the Labrador Retriever that is most likely to obese . This obesity has been attributed to a specific gene mutation . See the Obesity sub section below . 
 = = = Obesity = = = 
 Labradors like to eat , and without proper exercise can become obese . <unk> is a contribution to this . Obesity is a serious condition and can be considered the number one nutritional problem with dogs . A study shows that at least 25 % of dogs in the United States are overweight . Therefore , Labradors must be properly exercised and stimulated . A healthy Labrador can do swimming wind sprints for two hours , and should keep a very slight hourglass waist and be fit and light , rather than fat or heavy @-@ set . Obesity can exacerbate conditions such as hip dysplasia and joint problems , and can lead to secondary diseases , including diabetes . <unk> is very uncommon in older , especially overweight , Labradors . A 14 @-@ year study covering 48 dogs by food manufacturer Purina showed that Labradors fed to maintain a lean body shape outlived those fed freely by around two years , emphasising the importance of not over @-@ feeding . Labradors should be walked twice a day for at least half an hour . 
 It has been shown that out of all dog breeds , it is the Labrador Retriever that is most likely to obese . In a 2016 published study it was shown that out of 310 Labradors , most were missing all or parts of the POMC gene . This gene plays a part in appetite regulation as well as indication of the amount of one 's stored fat . The study concluded that the absence of that gene had a significant impact on Labrador weight and appetite . The POMC gene mutation is present in only one other breed - the Flat @-@ coated Retriever . 
