 Dust particles tend to stick to each other in the dense disk environment , leading to the formation of larger particles up to several centimeters in size . The signatures of the dust processing and coagulation are observed in the infrared spectra of the young disks . Further aggregation can lead to the formation of planetesimals measuring 1 km across or larger , which are the building blocks of planets . <unk> formation is another unsolved problem of disk physics , as simple sticking becomes ineffective as dust particles grow larger . 
 One hypothesis is formation by the gravitational instability . Particles several centimeters in size or larger slowly settle near the middle plane of the disk , forming a very thin — less than 100 km — and dense layer . This layer is gravitationally unstable and may fragment into numerous clumps , which in turn collapse into planetesimals . However , the differing velocities of the gas disk and the solids near the mid @-@ plane can generate turbulence which prevents the layer from becoming thin enough to fragment due to gravitational instability . This may limit the formation of planetesimals via gravitational instabilities to specific locations in the disk where the concentration of solids is enhanced . 
 Another possible mechanism for the formation of planetesimals is the streaming instability in which the drag felt by particles orbiting through gas creates a feedback effect causing the growth of local concentrations . These local concentration push back on the gas creating a region where the headwind felt by the particles is smaller . The concentration is thus able to orbit faster and undergoes less radial drift . Isolated particles join these concentrations as they are overtaken or as they drift inward causing it to grow in mass . Eventually these concentrations form massive filaments which fragment and undergo gravitational collapse forming planetesimals the size of the larger asteroids . 
 Planetary formation can also be triggered by gravitational instability within the disk itself , which leads to its fragmentation into clumps . Some of them , if they are dense enough , will collapse , which can lead to rapid formation of gas giant planets and even brown dwarfs on the timescale of 1 @,@ 000 years . If these clumps migrate inward as the collapse proceeds tidal forces from the star can result in a significant mass loss leaving behind a smaller body . However it is only possible in massive disks — more massive than 0 @.@ 3 M ☉ . In comparison , typical disk masses are 0 @.@ 01 – 0 @.@ 03 M ☉ . Because the massive disks are rare , this mechanism of the planet formation is thought to be infrequent . On the other hand , this mechanism may play a major role in the formation of brown dwarfs . 
 The ultimate dissipation of protoplanetary disks is triggered by a number of different mechanisms . The inner part of the disk is either accreted by the star or ejected by the bipolar jets , whereas the outer part can evaporate under the star 's powerful UV radiation during the T Tauri stage or by nearby stars . The gas in the central part can either be accreted or ejected by the growing planets , while the small dust particles are ejected by the radiation pressure of the central star . What is finally left is either a planetary system , a remnant disk of dust without planets , or nothing , if planetesimals failed to form . 
 Because planetesimals are so numerous , and spread throughout the protoplanetary disk , some survive the formation of a planetary system . Asteroids are understood to be left @-@ over planetesimals , gradually grinding each other down into smaller and smaller bits , while comets are typically planetesimals from the farther reaches of a planetary system . Meteorites are samples of planetesimals that reach a planetary surface , and provide a great deal of information about the formation of the Solar System . Primitive @-@ type meteorites are chunks of shattered low @-@ mass planetesimals , where no thermal differentiation took place , while processed @-@ type meteorites are chunks from shattered massive planetesimals . 
 = = Formation of planets = = 
 = = = Rocky planets = = = 
 According to the solar nebular disk model , rocky planets form in the inner part of the protoplanetary disk , within the frost line , where the temperature is high enough to prevent condensation of water ice and other substances into grains . This results in coagulation of purely rocky grains and later in the formation of rocky planetesimals . Such conditions are thought to exist in the inner 3 – 4 AU part of the disk of a Sun @-@ like star . 
 After small planetesimals — about 1 km in diameter — have formed by one way or another , runaway accretion begins . It is called runaway because the mass growth rate is proportional to R4 ~ M4 / 3 , where R and M are the radius and mass of the growing body , respectively . It is obvious that the specific ( divided by mass ) growth accelerates as the mass increases . This leads to the preferential growth of larger bodies at the expense of smaller ones . The runaway accretion lasts between 10 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 years and ends when the largest bodies exceed approximately 1 @,@ 000 km in diameter . Slowing of the accretion is caused by gravitational perturbations by large bodies on the remaining planetesimals . In addition , the influence of larger bodies stops further growth of smaller bodies . 
 The next stage is called oligarchic accretion . It is characterized by the dominance of several hundred of the largest bodies — oligarchs , which continue to slowly accrete planetesimals . No body other than the oligarchs can grow . At this stage the rate of accretion is proportional to R2 , which is derived from the geometrical cross @-@ section of an oligarch . The specific accretion rate is proportional to M − 1 / 3 ; and it declines with the mass of the body . This allows smaller oligarchs to catch up to larger ones . The oligarchs are kept at the distance of about 10 · <unk> ( <unk> = a ( 1 @-@ e ) ( M / <unk> ) 1 / 3 is the Hill radius , where a is the semimajor axis , e is the orbital eccentricity , and Ms is the mass of the central star ) from each other by the influence of the remaining planetesimals . Their orbital eccentricities and inclinations remain small . The oligarchs continue to accrete until planetesimals are exhausted in the disk around them . Sometimes nearby oligarchs merge . The final mass of an oligarch depends on the distance from the star and surface density of planetesimals and is called the isolation mass . For the rocky planets it is up to 0 @.@ 1 M ⊕ , or one Mars mass . The final result of the oligarchic stage is the formation of about 100 Moon- to Mars @-@ sized planetary embryos uniformly spaced at about 10 · Hr. They are thought to reside inside gaps in the disk and to be separated by rings of remaining planetesimals . This stage is thought to last a few hundred thousand years . 
 The last stage of rocky planet formation is the merger stage . It begins when only a small number of planetesimals remains and embryos become massive enough to perturb each other , which causes their orbits to become chaotic . During this stage embryos expel remaining planetesimals , and collide with each other . The result of this process , which lasts for 10 to 100 million years , is the formation of a limited number of Earth sized bodies . Simulations show that the number of surviving planets is on average from 2 to 5 . In the Solar System they may be represented by Earth and Venus . Formation of both planets required merging of approximately 10 – 20 embryos , while an equal number of them were thrown out of the Solar System . Some of the embryos , which originated in the asteroid belt , are thought to have brought water to Earth . Mars and Mercury may be regarded as remaining embryos that survived that rivalry . Rocky planets , which have managed to coalesce , settle eventually into more or less stable orbits , explaining why planetary systems are generally packed to the limit ; or , in other words , why they always appear to be at the brink of instability . 
 = = = Giant planets = = = 
 The formation of giant planets is an outstanding problem in the planetary sciences . In the framework of the solar nebular model two theories for their formation exist . The first one is the disk instability model , where giant planets form in the massive protoplanetary disks as a result of its gravitational fragmentation ( see above ) . The second possibility is the core accretion model , which is also known as the nucleated instability model . The latter scenario is thought to be the most promising one , because it can explain the formation of the giant planets in relatively low @-@ mass disks ( less than 0 @.@ 1 M ☉ ) . In this model giant planet formation is divided into two stages : a ) accretion of a core of approximately 10 M ⊕ and b ) accretion of gas from the protoplanetary disk . Either method may also lead to the creation of brown dwarfs . Searches as of 2011 have found that core accretion is likely the dominant formation mechanism . 
 Giant planet core formation is thought to proceed roughly along the lines of the terrestrial planet formation . It starts with planetesimals that undergo runaway growth , followed by the slower oligarchic stage . Hypotheses do not predict a merger stage , due to the low probability of collisions between planetary embryos in the outer part of planetary systems . An additional difference is the composition of the planetesimals , which in the case of giant planets form beyond the so @-@ called snow line and consist mainly of ice — the ice to rock ratio is about 4 to 1 . This enhances the mass of planetesimals fourfold . However , the minimum mass nebula capable of terrestrial planet formation can only form 1 – 2 M ⊕ cores at the distance of Jupiter ( 5 AU ) within 10 million years . The latter number represents the average lifetime of gaseous disks around Sun @-@ like stars . The proposed solutions include enhanced mass of the disk — a tenfold increase would suffice ; protoplanet migration , which allows the embryo to accrete more planetesimals ; and finally accretion enhancement due to gas drag in the gaseous envelopes of the embryos . Some combination of the above @-@ mentioned ideas may explain the formation of the cores of gas giant planets such as Jupiter and perhaps even Saturn . The formation of planets like Uranus and Neptune is more problematic , since no theory has been capable of providing for the in situ formation of their cores at the distance of 20 – 30 AU from the central star . One hypothesis is that they initially accreted in the Jupiter @-@ Saturn region , then were scattered and migrated to their present location . Another possible solution is the growth of the cores of the giant planets via pebble accretion . In pebble accretion objects between a cm and a meter in diameter falling toward a massive body are slowed enough by gas drag for them to spiral toward it and be accreted . Growth via pebble accretion may be as much as 1000 time faster than by the accretion of <unk> . 
 Once the cores are of sufficient mass ( 5 – 10 M ⊕ ) , they begin to gather gas from the surrounding disk . Initially it is a slow process , increasing the core masses up to 30 M ⊕ in a few million years . After that , the accretion rates increase dramatically and the remaining 90 % of the mass is accumulated in approximately 10 @,@ 000 years . The accretion of gas stops when the supply from the disk is exhausted . This happens gradually , due to the formation of a density gap in the protoplanetary disk and to disk dispersal . In this model ice giants — Uranus and Neptune — are failed cores that began gas accretion too late , when almost all gas had already disappeared . The post @-@ runaway @-@ gas @-@ accretion stage is characterized by migration of the newly formed giant planets and continued slow gas accretion . Migration is caused by the interaction of the planet sitting in the gap with the remaining disk . It stops when the protoplanetary disk disappears or when the end of the disk is attained . The latter case corresponds to the so @-@ called hot Jupiters , which are likely to have stopped their migration when they reached the inner hole in the protoplanetary disk . 
 Giant planets can significantly influence terrestrial planet formation . The presence of giants tends to increase eccentricities and inclinations ( see Kozai mechanism ) of planetesimals and embryos in the terrestrial planet region ( inside 4 AU in the Solar System ) . If giant planets form too early , they can slow or prevent inner planet accretion . If they form near the end of the oligarchic stage , as is thought to have happened in the Solar System , they will influence the merges of planetary embryos , making them more violent . As a result , the number of terrestrial planets will decrease and they will be more massive . In addition , the size of the system will shrink , because terrestrial planets will form closer to the central star . The influence of giant planets in the Solar System , particularly that of Jupiter , is thought to have been limited because they are relatively remote from the terrestrial planets . 
 The region of a planetary system adjacent to the giant planets will be influenced in a different way . In such a region , eccentricities of embryos may become so large that the embryos pass close to a giant planet , which may cause them to be ejected from the system . If all embryos are removed , then no planets will form in this region . An additional consequence is that a huge number of small planetesimals will remain , because giant planets are incapable of clearing them all out without the help of embryos . The total mass of remaining planetesimals will be small , because cumulative action of the embryos before their ejection and giant planets is still strong enough to remove 99 % of the small bodies . Such a region will eventually evolve into an asteroid belt , which is a full analog of the asteroid belt in the Solar System , located from 2 to 4 AU from the Sun . 
 = = Meaning of accretion = = 
 Use of the term accretion disk for the protoplanetary disk leads to confusion over the planetary accretion process . The protoplanetary disk is sometimes referred to as an accretion disk , because while the young T Tauri @-@ like protostar is still contracting , gaseous material may still be falling onto it , accreting on its surface from the disk 's inner edge . In an accretion disk , there is a net flux of mass from larger radii toward smaller radii . 
 However , that meaning should not be confused with the process of accretion forming the planets . In this context , accretion refers to the process of cooled , solidified grains of dust and ice orbiting the protostar in the protoplanetary disk , colliding and sticking together and gradually growing , up to and including the high @-@ energy collisions between sizable planetesimals . 
 In addition , the giant planets probably had accretion disks of their own , in the first meaning of the word . The clouds of captured hydrogen and helium gas contracted , spun up , flattened , and deposited gas onto the surface of each giant protoplanet , while solid bodies within that disk accreted into the giant planet 's regular moons . 
 = HMS Gorgon ( 1914 ) = 
 HMS Gorgon and her sister ship Glatton were two monitors originally built as coastal defence ships for the Royal Norwegian Navy , as HNoMS Nidaros and Bjørgvin respectively , by Armstrong Whitworth at Elswick . She was purchased from Norway at the beginning of the First World War , but was not completed until 1918 although she had been launched over three years earlier . She engaged targets in Occupied Flanders for the last several months of the war and fired the last shots of the war against such targets on 15 October 1918 . She was used as a target ship after several attempts to sell her had fallen through before being sold for scrap in 1928 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Nidaros was ordered by Norway in 1913 to supplement the older <unk> class and <unk> class classes of coastal defense ships . She would have been known in Norway as P / S Nidaros ; P / S stands for <unk> ( " armoured ship " ) , while Nidaros was the old name for the Norwegian city of Trondheim . However , when the First World War broke out , the Royal Navy requisitioned most warships under construction in Britain for foreign powers and refunded the two @-@ thirds of the Bjørgvin 's £ 370 @,@ 000 purchase price already paid by the Norwegians . 
 = = Construction and description = = 
 Nidaros was laid down by Armstrong Whitworth at Elswick on 11 June 1913 and launched on 9 June 1914 . She was renamed as Gorgon , after an earlier breastwork monitor of 1871 . Her completion was greatly delayed by the modifications made by the British , which included modifying the boilers to use both oil and coal and conversion of 12 double @-@ bottom tanks to carry oil . This work began on 9 January 1915 , but was suspended the following May , when it was estimated that only another 10 – 12 months of work remained , to allow for faster progress to be made on the large light cruisers Furious and Courageous that were building in Armstrong 's Naval Yard downriver . In September 1917 , work was resumed on a new design that added a large anti @-@ torpedo bulge along about 75 % of the hull 's length , suppression of the torpedo tubes and the 100 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) guns planned by the Norwegians , and a large tripod mast was fitted behind the single funnel to carry the directors for both the 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) and 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 230 mm ) guns . Both of these guns had to be relined to use standard British ammunition and the mount for the 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch gun was modified to give a maximum elevation of 40 ° which gave the gun a maximum range of 39 @,@ 000 yards ( 36 @,@ 000 m ) . Addition of the bulges cost 2 knots ( 3 @.@ 7 km / h ; 2 @.@ 3 mph ) in speed , but prevented the extra weight resulting from all of these changes from deepening her draft . She was finally completed on 4 June 1918 . 
 Gorgon displaced 5 @,@ 700 long tons ( 5 @,@ 800 t ) at deep load as built , with a length of 310 feet ( 94 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 73 feet 7 inches ( 22 @.@ 4 m ) at maximum , although her main hull only had a beam of 55 feet ( 16 @.@ 8 m ) and a draught of 16 feet 4 inches ( 5 @.@ 0 m ) . She was powered by two vertical triple expansion steam engines , which developed a total of 4 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 000 kW ) from four Yarrow watertube boilers and gave a maximum speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 She was armed with two 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns arranged in two single @-@ gun turrets , one turret each fore and aft . Her secondary armament consisted of four six @-@ inch guns , also in single gun turrets , two of which <unk> over the 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch turrets and the others were positioned on each side of the superstructure . One 3 in ( 76 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft gun was mounted on each center @-@ line six @-@ inch turret . She also carried four 3 @-@ pounder and four 2 @-@ pounder guns on high @-@ angle mounts . 
 = = Service = = 
 Gorgon arrived at Dover on 6 June 1918 where she spent the next five weeks working up . Her first engagement was on 26 July when she fired eight rounds at a range of 33 @,@ 000 yards ( 30 @,@ 000 m ) at a German howitzer battery to calibrate her guns and fire control system , which provoked a response from the German 380 @-@ millimetre ( 15 in ) gun of Batterie Pommern south of Ostende . Three days later , she accompanied Marshal Soult on a bombardment of Batterie " Tirpitz " . She spent the next month and a half either out on patrol in the English Channel or preparing for the bombardment scheduled for the end of September in support of a major offensive along the coast . 
 At daybreak on 28 September 1918 , Gorgon , in company with General Wolfe , anchored about 7 mi ( 6 @.@ 1 nmi ; 11 km ) off De Panne , Belgium and opened fire about 7 : 15 on a bridge at <unk> , Belgium at a range of 36 @,@ 000 yd ( 33 @,@ 000 m ) . Conditions were not good as both wind and tide were against her . Gorgon 's stern anchor cable parted and she swung around on her bow anchor so that only her rear turret could bear on the target . No aircraft were made available to spot for her so there was little chance of a hit and she only fired eleven rounds . She , and the other monitors , were attacked several times during the day by German aircraft with little effect and several coast defense batteries attempted to engage them through the smokescreen put up by the motor launches supporting the operation . She fired thirteen shells the next day in another attempt to destroy the bridge and claimed one hit although this was not confirmed by subsequent observations . 
 On 14 October , she repeated the experience , except that her target was now the Middelkerke batteries . She fired 41 rounds during the morning at a range of 26 @,@ 000 yards ( 24 @,@ 000 m ) , but she accompanied Vice @-@ Admiral Keyes in the destroyer Termagant in a reconnaissance mission to see if the Germans were still holding the coast in strength . The fire of the Tirpitz and <unk> Batteries soon <unk> them of any notions to the contrary and Gorgon was forced to turn away at maximum speed ( 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) ) , which was faster than she 'd made on trials , when they straddled her and hit her with splinters from the near @-@ misses . The following day she returned to her original target and fired 30 rounds in 20 minutes . These were the last shots of the war fired against German batteries on the Belgian coast . 
 She was sent to Portsmouth after the end of the war where she was made available to investigate the cause of her sister ship Glatton 's magazine explosion . She was moved to Devonport as a temporary tender to the stone frigate Vivid in April 1919 . She was paid off on 31 August and joined the Reserve Fleet in September . She was offered back to the Norwegians , but they rejected her as unsuitable to their requirements , especially since she was now too broad for their dock at Horten . Several attempts were made to sell her , but she was disarmed in 1922 and used as a target ship to evaluate the effects of bombs bursting underwater near a ship and the effects of six @-@ inch gunfire . She was finally sold for scrap on 26 August 1928 and broken up at the former naval dockyard at Pembroke . 
 = Battle of Sedan ( 1940 ) = 
 The Battle of Sedan or Second Battle of Sedan ( 12 – 15 May 1940 ) was a Second World War battle fought during the French Campaign . The battle was part of the German Wehrmacht 's operational plan codenamed Fall Gelb ( Case Yellow ) for an offensive through the hilly and heavily forested Ardennes , to encircle the Allied armies in Belgium and north @-@ eastern France . German Army Group A crossed the Meuse river with the intention of capturing Sedan and pushing northwards towards the Channel coast , in order to entrap the Allied forces that were advancing east into Belgium , as part of the Allied Dyle Plan strategy . 
 Sedan was situated on the east bank of the Meuse River . Its capture would give the Germans a base from which to capture the Meuse bridges and cross the river . Should this occur , the German divisions could then advance across the open and undefended French countryside , beyond Sedan , and to the English Channel . On 12 May , Sedan was captured without resistance . In the following days , the Germans defeated the French defences surrounding Sedan on the west bank of the Meuse . This was largely achieved by the Luftwaffe . As a result of German bombing and low morale , the French defenders were unable to mount a coherent defence . The Germans captured the Meuse bridges at Sedan allowing them to pour forces including armour across the river . On 14 May , the Allied air forces , the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and Armée de l 'Air ( French Air Force ) tried to destroy the bridges , and prevent German reinforcements reaching the west bank . The Luftwaffe prevented them from doing so . In large air battles , the Allies suffered high losses which depleted Allied bomber strength in the campaign . 
 The crossing of the Meuse enabled the Germans to break into the strategic depths , or undefended rear , of the Allied front and to advance to the English Channel without significant opposition . The French attempted to launch counter @-@ attacks against the German @-@ held bridgeheads , from 15 – 17 May , but the offensives fell victim to delay and confusion . Five days after consolidating their bridgeheads at Sedan , on 20 May , the German Army reached the Channel . The victory at Sedan achieved the operational goal of Fall Gelb and encircled the strongest Allied armies , including the British Expeditionary Force . The resulting battles destroyed the remaining French army as an effective fighting force , and expelled the British Army from the continent , leading to the defeat of France in June 1940 . The battle at Sedan was instrumental in the fall of France . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = German plan = = = 
 On 10 May 1940 , the Wehrmacht invaded Luxembourg , Netherlands and Belgium . In the Netherlands the Germans made steady progress . By 12 May , parts of the German Army Group B was closing on Rotterdam and Amsterdam , while in central Belgium the Germans were close to reaching the Dyle river east of Brussels . In response to the invasions , the Allied First Army Group , under the command of Gaston Billotte , containing the French Seventh Army , French Ninth Army , French First Army and the British Expeditionary Force , advanced to the Dyle river in order to form a solid front line as part of the Dyle Plan , a defensive strategy to halt the German advances in Belgium . However , the offensive by Army Group B was a diversion . The main thrust of Fall Gelb was to be conducted by Army Group A through the Ardennes in Luxembourg and southern Belgium . Once these lightly defended areas were negotiated , Army Group A 's XIX . Panzerkorps ( 19th Tank Corps ) , under the command of Heinz Guderian , was to strike into France at Sedan , located on the Meuse river . Its capture would enable a German advance into the undefended depths of France and to the English Channel , into the rear of the Allied mobile forces advancing into Belgium . The result would be a strategic @-@ level encirclement . 
 For the offensive , the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht ( German High Command ) gave Army Group A the most powerful concentration of German armour and motorised forces . Although Army Group B was allocated 808 tanks , over 1 ⁄ 4 of the total German tanks , they were largely light tanks such as the Panzer I and Panzer II , as opposed to the Panzer III and Panzer IV . The heavier tanks were handed over to Army Group A as it required the best machines to conduct the critical operation at Sedan . Army Group A contained 1 @,@ 753 tanks of the heavier types . 
 = = = ' <unk> ' Ardennes = = = 
 Following the First World War , the French General Staff had ruled out the idea of a future German thrust through the Ardennes – Sedan sector . The French were certain such terrain could not be crossed by tanks . Marshal Philippe Pétain described them as " impenetrable " . Maurice Gamelin described the geographical feature as " Europe 's best tank obstacle " . The " barrier " of the Meuse and Ardennes appeared to be a sound strategic defence feature that a future enemy could not get through or go around . The French concluded that at best , a German assault through the Ardennes towards Sedan would not reach the Meuse until two weeks after the start of any German offensive , taking between five and nine days to penetrate the Ardennes alone . 
 The French assessments were less credible in the light of military exercises carried out in 1938 . That year , General André @-@ Gaston Prételat took command of manoeuvres which created a scenario whereby the German Army launched an assault with seven divisions , including four motorised infantry divisions and two tank brigades ( the type of the remaining three are not given ) . The " French " side 's defences collapsed . " The result was a defeat of so comprehensive a nature that the wisdom of publishing it was questioned lest morale be damaged . " As late as March 1940 , a French report to Gamelin named the defences at Sedan , the last " fortified " position on the Meuse , and the last before the open country of France , as " entirely inadequate . " Prételat had correctly identified the landscape as relatively easy terrain for armour to cross . At most , he concluded , the Germans would take 60 hours to reach the Meuse and take one day to cross it . This estimate to was to prove only three hours too late . The Germans achieved the Meuse crossing after just 57 hours . 
 The French Army authorised fresh attempts to increase the strength of the fortifications in the autumn of 1939 , but severe winter weather prevented the pouring of concrete and the delivery of the necessary materials . On 11 April 1940 , General Charles Huntziger asked for another four divisions to work on the defences but was refused . 
 = = = French defences at Sedan = = = 
 The French defences at Sedan were weak and neglected . The French had long believed that the German Army would not attack through the Sedan sector as part of their concentrated effort , and only Brigadier General Pierre Lafontaine 's French 55th Infantry Division , a category B division , was allocated to this sector . The Maginot Line ended 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) east of Sedan at La Ferté , where Fort No. 505 constituted its most westerly position . Sedan was a part of the extended Maginot Line that ran north behind the Meuse river . Between Sedan and La Ferté lay the <unk> gap , which was a stretch of unprotected terrain not covered by French defences or natural obstacles . This was the reason a significant number of French generals insisted on strengthening this sector , while ignoring Sedan . 
 As the French constructed further fortifications , Luftwaffe reconnaissance aircraft picked up the activity and reported it . The steep slopes on the banks of the Meuse , added to what appeared in photographic reconnaissance to be a formidable barrier of bunkers and defence lines , caused Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt , the commander in chief of Army Group A , to question the wisdom of Guderian in choosing Sedan as the point of maximum effort . To identify how strong these fortifications were , a team of photographic specialists were called in to evaluate the pictures . Their analysis concluded that what appeared to be strong fortified positions were just the construction sites of half @-@ built bunkers that were , to all intents and purposes , empty shells . The contribution of the specialists tilted the Sedan attack plan into Guderian 's favour . 
 General Huntziger was happy to rely on " concrete " to ensure the safety of Sedan as he rejected the idea that the Germans would attack through the Ardennes . The Second Army built 52 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of concrete fortifications along its front , but very little in the Sedan sector . Only 42 bunkers protected the Sedan bridgeheads on the outbreak of war in September 1939 and an additional 61 were built by 10 May . However , by 10 May , most of the bunkers were incomplete , lacking gun port shutters for the artillery casemates . Some of the bunkers lacked rear doors , making them vulnerable to infiltration by infantry . To the north of Sedan , on the northern bend of the Meuse , the town of Glaire overlooked the crossing points on the river , which was to be where the German armour would deliver its heaviest blow . There was a gap of 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) between Bunker 305 at Glaire and Bunker 211 next to the Pont Neuf bridge . This allowed an attacker coming from the north to use the good road routes through the <unk> – Saint @-@ Menges – Glaire axis to enter Sedan from the north . 
 The defences at Sedan also lacked any mines . The French Second Army was guarding a front of 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) , and was given only 16 @,@ 000 mines . Of that number , 7 @,@ 000 were given to the cavalry divisions that were intended to delay a German advance through southern Belgium as well as to blockhouse points along the Franco – Belgian border . That left 2 @,@ 000 for the defence of the river Meuse . Of those , the 55th Infantry Division got 422 . Not all of these were laid , and some barriers were moved during the bunker construction in the Sedan sector . 
 = = = German approach = = = 
 As the German Army advanced through southern Belgium on 12 May , General Ewald von Kleist and Guderian clashed over where the main point of effort should fall . Kleist was Guderian 's immediate superior , commanding Panzergruppe von Kleist , consisting of XLI Panzer Corps and XIX Panzer Corps ( under Guderian ) . Kleist pressed for the main point to come at <unk> , further west than Sedan . Kleist argued that the blow would avoid a double river crossing at the Meuse ( at Sedan ) and Ardennes canal ( to the west of Sedan ) . Moreover , the blow would strike at the dividing line between the French Ninth Army and the French Second Army . Guderian saw things differently , and pointed out that a thrust along the lines of Kleist 's plan would put the flank of the advance within range of the fortress artillery at Charleville @-@ Mézières , some 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) north west of Sedan . The shift of operations further north would also disperse concentration ( or <unk> ) and disrupt the intense planning of the German tactical units , who had been in training for the Sedan attack and an advance north @-@ west , for months . He also felt that a regrouping period in front of Sedan would delay the assault for 24 hours and allow the French to bring up reinforcements . Kleist agreed that such a delay was unacceptable , so he agreed to Guderian 's plan . 
 Nevertheless , while Kleist accepted the folly of the <unk> detour , he insisted the offensive concentration point should be made west of the Ardennes Canal . Kleist reaffirmed this in a letter to Guderian on 18 April , but when operations began Guderian ignored this completely . Guderian had wanted a large , 20 @-@ kilometre ( 12 mi ) bridgehead at Sedan and the rapid occupation of Stonne and the high ground surrounding Sedan . 
 Guderian 's plan for 13 May was straightforward . The 2nd Panzer Division in the north was to form the right flank of the assaulting force when it reached the Meuse near Donchery . The 1st Panzer Division , reinforced by the Infantry Regiment Großdeutschland , a battalion of assault engineers , and divisional artillery of the 2nd and 10th Panzer Divisions , was to make the main attack by crossing the Meuse just north of Sedan and seizing the Heights of la Marfee overlooking the city . The 10th Panzer Division was to cross the Meuse south of Sedan and protect the southern flank of the corps . Throughout the day , large masses of troops and equipment assembled north of the Meuse in preparation for the river crossing . 
 = = Forces involved = = 
 = = = German forces = = = 
 The German forces consisted of the 1st , 2nd and 10th Panzer Divisions . The 1st Panzer Division under the command of General @-@ Major ( Major General ) Friedrich Kirchner , had on strength 52 Panzer IIs , 98 Panzer III , 58 Panzer IV , 40 Panzer 35 ( t ) and eight SdKfz 265 <unk> . The 2nd Panzer Division , under the command of Generalleutnant ( Lieutenant General ) Rudolf <unk> , had to hand 45 Panzer I , 115 Panzer II , 59 Panzer III and 32 Panzer IVs . It also had 16 SdKfz 265 . The 10th Panzer Division , under the command of Generalleutnant Ferdinand Schaal , had 44 Panzer I , 113 Panzer II , 58 Panzer III , 32 Panzer IV and 18 SdKfz 265 . In total Guderian could muster 60 @,@ 000 men , 22 @,@ 000 vehicles , 771 tanks and 141 artillery pieces . He could also call upon 1 @,@ 470 aircraft . 
 Part of Guderian 's problem was the lack of mobile artillery . He had no intention of halting the breakout in order to wait for additional artillery units to be moved into place to assault Sedan . Instead , Guderian requested maximum support from the Luftwaffe . For the first few days the German air arm would be used mostly in support of Army Group B. Most of the air support over Sedan was to be provided by Luftflotte 3 ( Air Fleet 3 ) . Initially , only limited numbers of air units were to be used , but the Luftwaffe 's workload was greatly increased nearer the time of the battle . The Luftwaffe was to commit I. Fliegerkorps ( 1st Air Corps under Ulrich Grauert ) , II . Fliegerkorps ( under Bruno Loerzer ) , V. Fliegerkorps ( under Robert Ritter von Greim ) , and VIII . Fliegerkorps ( under Wolfram Freiherr von Richthofen ) . These units came from Luftflotte 2 and Jagdfliegerführer 3 ( Fighter Leader 3 ) . The most significant unit was VIII . Fliegerkorps , nicknamed the <unk> @-@ Fliegerkorps ( Close Support Air Corps ) , which contained Sturzkampfgeschwader 77 ( Dive bomber Wing 77 ) , a powerful concentration of dive @-@ bomber units equipped with the Junkers Ju 87 Stuka precision ground attack aircraft . This powerful air concentration numbered some 1 @,@ 470 aircraft ; 600 Heinkel He 111 and Junkers Ju 88 medium bombers and Dornier Do 17 light bombers , 250 Ju 87s , 500 Messerschmitt Bf 109s and 120 Messerschmitt Bf 110s . 
 = = = French forces = = = 
 In the sector of Longwy , Sedan and Namur , where the Ardennes and the River Meuse meet , the French Ninth Army and French Second Army were made up chiefly of poor quality divisions . Reinforcements were minimal , and those units were equipped with obsolete weapons . The resources at the disposal of the two Series B divisions , the 55th and later 71s Infantry Divisions , who were to bear the brunt of the attack , were weak . They had almost no Regular officers and they had not been broken @-@ in to war conditions by being in contact with the enemy . 
 The 55th Infantry Division guarding Sedan had little time for combat training , as its time had been spent in construction work . The division consisted mainly of reservists , most of who were over the age of 30 . Little attempt was made to improve the poor combat quality of the division . One officer , First Lieutenant <unk> of the 1st Battalion 147th Fortress Infantry Regiment was arrested and confined for 15 days for ordering firing practice with a 25mm anti @-@ tank gun in a nearby quarry . The division 's commanding officer , General Lafontaine , put more faith into fortifications than training , as he believed it would compensate for the weakness of the division . The men of the division lacked the confidence and will to fight when the battle took place . 
 The organisation of the French 55th Infantry Division was chaotic . Most units had been involved in construction work and were constantly moved to different tactical positions . Of the nine companies in position by 10 May , only a few had been holding their respective positions for even a few days and were not familiar with them . One of the premier infantry regiments , the 213th Infantry Regiment , was removed from the line altogether and was replaced with the <unk> Regiment . In some cases , Infantry regiments were made up of several different companies from several different battalions from different regiments . For example , the 295th Infantry Regiment 's 6th Company , 2nd Battalion , was made up of four different companies which were drawn from three different battalions belonging to three different regiments . 
 Such actions damaged the cohesion of the units that were initially strong . The 147th Fortress Regiment was the backbone of the 55th Infantry Division and was to occupy the bunker positions on the Meuse . At the start of mobilisation , the unit had high morale and very good cohesion . Because of the constant changes in organisation , however , the unit 's battalions were " torn apart again and again " . 
 To relieve the 55th Infantry Division , the French 71st Infantry Division was ordered out of reserve and into the frontline . The presence of the 71st Infantry shortened the front from 20 to 14 kilometres ( 12 @.@ 4 to 8 @.@ 7 mi ) along the Meuse . This would increase the density of fighting strength in the immediate area , but such a move was only partially complete by 10 May , as it was scheduled to be completed on 13 – 14 May , three days after the German attack . Although the two divisions had 174 artillery pieces , more than the German forces opposing them , they had to share that force between them . Both divisions were short of anti @-@ tank and anti @-@ aircraft guns , a critical short @-@ coming . 
 = = Crossing the Meuse = = 
 = = = Capture of Sedan = = = 
 The main problem confronting Guderian and his Sedan method was inadequate artillery support . Several batteries were stuck in traffic in the Ardennes and he could not rely on the artillery batteries of his Panzer Divisions only . Everything depended on the support of the Luftwaffe . General der Flieger Hugo Sperrle , commander of Luftflotte 3 , had planned a conventional method of a brief bombardment before the ground forces moved in . After preparatory raids , the medium and dive @-@ bombers were to smash the French defences in a concentrated blow lasting 20 minutes . The raid was planned for 16 : 00 before the infantry crossed the Meuse . In collaboration , Bruno Loerzer 's II . Fliegerkorps had developed the concept of the rolling raid with Guderian . The idea of a single massed strike was abandoned , and the German air units were to attack in small formations but constantly , through the day . It was deemed the effect would be threefold ; the French artillery would be eliminated , the effect of continuous raids would damage enemy morale , and smaller formations would be more systematic and accurate against targets such as bunkers . 
 Unknown to Guderian , von Kleist , his immediate superior , had contacted Loerzer and banned Guderian 's proposed long systematic approach in favour of one big assault . Guderian complained . Kleist ignored him . Yet , the following morning , Loerzer rejected Kleist 's method and went ahead with the agreed rolling bombing as discussed with Guderian . Loerzer would later say that the official order from Hugo Sperrle had arrived too late to make changes . 
 By nightfall on 12 May , Guderian 's XIX . Panzerkorps rolled into Sedan . Guderian reported there was no sign of the enemy . With the city itself secured , Guderian would now have to strike south , across the defended rear behind Sedan , which in turn was protected by a large bunker complex located on Marfee ridge , a piece of high ground covering the Sedan @-@ Meuse river to the south . But there were three fundamental choices . He could obey tactical necessity and protect the bridgeheads against a French counter @-@ attack from the south ; he could strike west towards Paris with his Corps ; or he could carry out the dash to the Channel . Remembering the Chief of Operations , 1st Panzer Division , Walther Wenck 's saying , " Hit with your fists , don 't feel with your fingers ! " , Guderian decided on the last option . 
 = = = Lack of German artillery = = = 
 In the early hours of 13 May , the 10th Panzer Division slipped into position upstream to the north @-@ east of Sedan , ready to strike at its designated crossing point near the town of Wadelincourt . Downstream , the 2nd Panzer Division moved into position to cross at Donchery . The 1st Panzer Division prepared to strike at the Gaulier bridgehead , in the centre of Sedan 's tactical front . It was on the northern bend of the Sedan Meuse loop that the Luftwaffe was to make its maximum effort , between Gaulier and Wadelincourt . To supplement his air support , Guderian stripped most of his Panzer Divisions of their artillery , which he then positioned directly opposite Gaulier . However , the artillery regiments lacked ammunition . Sustained and damaging bombardment through shelling was impossible . The Luftwaffe was going to have to do most of the work . Guderian reported that his Corps had only 141 artillery pieces against the French 174 . To the north and south of Sedan , the French X Corps and French XXXXI Corps ( at the artillery fortress at Charleville @-@ Mézières ) could also add their artillery and shell Guderian 's Panzer units as they crossed the bridgeheads . The slow advance of artillery units to the front added to the German numerical inferiority , which was now 1 : 3 against . Only in the afternoon did the German artillery make an appearance , but with little effect . The 2nd Panzer Division was forced to attack without artillery support . For these reasons , Guderian had decided the outcome depended on the quality of air support , acting as flying artillery . 
 = = = Luftwaffe assault = = = 
 Luftflotte 3 ( commanded by Hugo Sperrle ) , supported by Luftflotte 2 ( commanded by Albert Kesselring ) , executed the heaviest air bombardment the world had yet witnessed and the most intense by the Luftwaffe during the war . The Luftwaffe committed two Sturzkampfgeschwader ( dive bomber wings ) to the assault , flying 300 sorties against French positions , with Sturzkampfgeschwader 77 alone flying 201 individual missions . A total of 3 @,@ 940 sorties were flown by nine Kampfgeschwader ( Bomber Wing ) units often in Gruppe strength . 
 The planned aerial assault would last for eight hours , from 08 : 00 @-@ 16 : 00 . Loerzer and Richthofen committed two Stuka units to the attack . Loerzer 's Ju 87s flew some 180 missions against Sedan 's bunkers whilst Richthofen 's managed 90 . The nine Kampfgruppen ( bomber wings ) of Bruno Loerzer 's II . Fliegerkorps flew 900 missions against the 360 of Wolfram Freiherr von Richthofen 's VIII . Fliegerkorps . VIII . Fliegerkorps 's total mission count on the Meuse front was 910 compared to II . Fliegerkorps 1 @,@ 770 missions . 
 The Luftwaffe 's target was the Marfee heights which lay behind Sedan to the south east . They contained the fortified artillery positions and dominated the approaches to the strategic and operational depths beyond Sedan and the Meuse . The Luftwaffe was two hours late in appearing but the effort made was considerable . The attacks were made in Gruppe ( group ) strength and against the line of maximum resistance along the enemy gun line . To restrict enemy movements and communications , German fighters swept the area to cut land @-@ lines and strafe fortifications , with some shooting of radio antennae off command posts . The attacks isolated the forward defence lines . Sturzkampfgeschwader 77 struck first in the morning of 13 May . In just five hours , 500 Ju 87 sorties had been flown . 
 The Luftwaffe cowed the defenders , breaking them psychologically . The gunners , the backbone of the defences , had abandoned their positions by the time the German ground assault had begun . The cost to the Luftwaffe was just six aircraft , three of which were Ju 87s . 
 The French 55th Infantry Division was not prepared for such an attack . French soldiers had commented on the massive psychological effect of the bombardment , in particular the siren of the Ju 87 . However , after the war , it was discovered that none of the bunkers had been destroyed by direct hits . Moreover , just 56 French casualties were suffered . It was the indirect effect that did the damage . The telecommunication cables were destroyed ( most had been laid out in the open ) through bombing , paralysing the division 's communications , and the psychological damage crippled its defensive capacity . 
 The ensuing psychological damage contributed to " the panic of Bulson " . At about 19 : 00 on 13 May , a report by a French artillery observer was passed on incorrectly . There was a rumour that German tanks were approaching the town of Bulson . The false reports spread and the French 55th Infantry Division deserted their positions . German sources say that the first German tank crossed the Meuse River 12 hours later . By the time the error was realised , most of the artillerymen and infantrymen had abandoned their heavy equipment . 
 = = = 1st Panzer at Gaulier = = = 
 The central ground assault was to be conducted by the 1st Panzer Division and supported by the Infantry Regiment Großdeutschland and the <unk> @-@ Battalion 43 ( 43rd Assault Engineer Battalion ) as the 1st Panzer only had a single rifle regiment . The Großdeutschland would be attached to the 1st Panzer Division for the remainder of the campaign and it was the first unit to breach the defences on Hill 247 , the high ground dominating Gaulier . The regiment , much to their surprise , discovered the Luftwaffe had failed to destroy the enemy bunkers . Enemy small arms fire ensured that crossing the river at Pont Neuf bridge could not be done in rubber assault boats as intended . The Regiment retreated . Reconnaissance found an enemy Bunker , No. 211 , was still active . Its location guarded the bridgehead , making it dangerous for German infantry attempting a crossing . A platoon of infantry guns ( 75 mm short barrel artillery ) failed to knock it out . An 8 @.@ 8 cm FlaK dual purpose gun ( 88 mm ) was brought in to do the job . It succeeded , but the following crossing failed as machine gun fire came from another flanking position that had not been spotted . Once this was dealt with by the 2nd Battalion , the remainder of the regiment crossed the river . Throughout the rest of the day , the regiment moved up and into the French defences , the 2nd Battalion 's 6th , 7th and 8th Companies gradually knocking out each bunker . Despite the other two battalions being held up further south , by 20 : 00 the central Hill 247 had been taken . The Großdeutschland Regiment had now penetrated 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) into the French defences . 
 On Hill 301 , further west , the First Rifle Regiment under Col. Hermann Balck had helped take the position by nightfall . With help from two platoons of the 3rd Company of the 34th Assault Engineer Battalion , it had succeeded in knocking out the bunker positions . The regiment inched westward and was able to see the 2nd Panzer Division on the extreme west flank of the 1st Panzer , attacking the bunker position near Donchery . Several Panzers were knocked out . The First Rifle Regiment , 1st Panzer , had crossed the boundary into the 2nd Panzer 's territory . They eased the 2nd Panzer 's passage by knocking out several bunkers on their eastern flank and succeeded in cutting the Donchery @-@ Sedan road . The infantry also succeeded in knocking out most of the casemates in the area using flamethrower teams to destroy the bunkers whose infantry failed to surrender quickly . The last bunker to surrender did so at 22 : 40 hours on 13 May . By that time , elements of the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions had negotiated the Meuse river . 
 = = = 2nd Panzer at Donchery = = = 
 The 2nd Panzer had been given the most difficult job . Its advance through the Ardennes trapped and delayed it in nearly 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) of traffic . Consequently , it arrived late at Donchery , after the 1st and 10th Panzer Divisions had initiated their assaults across the Meuse . Due to a combination of its being late and the attacks of its sister units , the enemy defences were alerted in advance of the 2nd Panzer 's offensive . Crossing at the extreme western end of the Sedan sector on the Donchery axis , it was forced to advance across open terrain for the last 3 km before reaching the bridgehead . This subjected the division to fire from Donchery and the Bellevue Castle 's 75mm artillery casemates , located slightly to the east of the town . Several boats were tied to the Panzers and dragged across , but the tanks were knocked out . The bulk of the 174 artillery pieces available to the French at Sedan were concentrated on the 2nd Panzer Division 's front . Most were located in the bunkers on the south side of the river Meuse @-@ Donchery sector . Some of the French 102nd Infantry division 's batteries also joined in from the north west , at Charleville . The only way to respond was with howitzers . However , 2nd Panzer Division had handed its heavy howitzers over to the 1st Panzer Division , and now had only 24 guns and they did not arrive on the battlefield until 17 : 00 . When they arrived , they had only had a couple of shells per gun owing to the logistical tailback in the Ardennes . 
 All attempts to land on the southern side of the Meuse failed . Fortunately , the 1st Panzer Division succeeded in crossing the Meuse in the centre ( see above ) . Once completed , it headed into the right ( eastern ) flank of the French at Donchery . Some of its units cleared the Meuse bend . Assault Engineers and 1st Panzer Division neutralised the guns at Bellevue Castle , and cleared the bunker positions along the Meuse River from the rear . The artillery falling on the 2nd Panzer Division 's eastern flank was stopped . With the threat of artillery fire on its right flank removed , the units on the 2nd Panzer 's left flank crossed the river and infiltrated the French positions opposite Donchery at 20 : 00 . Heavy French fire continued from the bunkers in front of Donchery on the south side of the Meuse . It was not until 22 : 20 , in darkness , that regular ferrying missions enabled the reinforcement of the German bridgehead . 
 = = = 10th Panzer at Wadelincourt = = = 
 The 10th Panzer Division , like the 2nd Panzer Division , had detached its heavy artillery batteries to support neighbouring units . It was left with just 24 light 105 mm howitzers . Moreover , the batteries were short of ammunition . The Luftwaffe had not helped the 10th Panzer Division as most of the air attacks were in support of the 1st Panzer Division in the central sector . This meant all of the French artillery and machine gun positions in the area of Wadelincourt were undisturbed . Added to this , the newly inserted 71st Infantry Division and French X Corps in the <unk> area prevented the 10th Panzer Division making any quick progress . The Division also had to advance down to the river on open flat terrain of some 600 – 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 600 ft ) . 
 Near the town of <unk> , the Engineers and assault infantry had gathered to prepare the boats for the crossing of the Meuse at Wadelincourt when an artillery barrage from the French positions destroyed 81 out of 96 rubber boats . The plan of attack had included an assault by both the 69th and 89th Infantry Regiments , but the loss of so many boats meant that only the 86th Infantry Regiment was able to conduct the crossing . The 69th Infantry Regiment was kept in reserve to follow the 86th as reinforcements . 
 The 10th Panzer Division 's assaults failed all along the Meuse front . The only success came from a small 11 @-@ man team ( five engineers and six infantrymen ) of the 2nd Company , <unk> @-@ <unk> 49 ( 49th Panzer Engineer Battalion ) placed under the 1st Battalion , 86th Infantry Regiment . Unsupported and acting on their own initiative , this small force led by Feldwebel Walter <unk> opened a decisive breach by knocking out seven bunker positions . Follow @-@ up units from the 1st Battalion 86th Rifle Regiment had crossed over by 21 : 00 and stormed the remaining bunkers on Hill 246 , where the main French defence positions were located . By the end of the day , the bridgehead had been consolidated and the objective taken . 
 = = = Allied air strikes = = = 
 In the central sector , at Gaulier , the Germans began moving 3 @.@ 7 cm Pak 36 light infantry field artillery across the Meuse to provide support to infantry across the river . By 01 : 00 on 14 May , a pontoon bridge had been erected over which <unk> 222 , SdKfz 232 and SdKfz 264 armoured cars began to dismount in the bridgeheads . French reports spoke of German tanks crossing the bridges . Such reports were in error , as the first Panzers only crossed at 07 : 20 on 14 May . Prior to this masses of lorries , armoured cars and other traffic had passed through but not tanks . 
 The capture of Sedan and the expansion of the bridgeheads alarmed the French who called for a total effort against the bridgeheads at Sedan , to isolate the three Panzer Divisions . General Gaston @-@ Henri Billotte , commander of the First French Army Group , whose right flank pivoted on Sedan , urged that the bridges across the Meuse be destroyed by air attack , convinced that " over them will pass either victory or defeat ! " . General Marcel Têtu , commander of the Allied Tactical Air Forces ordered : " Concentrate everything on Sedan . Priority between Sedan and Houx is at 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to 1 " . 
 No. 103 Squadron and No. 150 Squadron RAF of the RAF Advanced Air Striking Force ( AASF ) flew 10 sorties against the targets in the early morning . In the process they suffered only one loss in a forced landing . Between 15 : 00 – 16 : 00 , 71 RAF bombers took off escorted by Allied fighters . The impressive escort was offset by the presence of German fighter units that outnumbered the Allied escort fighters by 3 : 1 . No. 71 Wing RAF lost 10 Fairey Battles and five Bristol Blenheims . No. 75 Wing RAF lost 14 – 18 Battles and No. 76 Wing RAF lost 11 Battles . Out of 71 bombers dispatched , 40 – 44 bombers were lost , meaning a loss rate of 56 – 62 percent . The AASF lost a further five Hawker Hurricanes . The AASF flew 81 sorties and lost 52 percent of its strength . No 2 Group RAF also contributed with 28 sorties . The bombing results were poor , with three bridges damaged and one possibly destroyed . 
 French Air Forces under the command of Commandant des Forces ( Commander of Forces ) Marcel Têtu <unk> de Cooperation du Front Nord @-@ Est ( Ardennes Cooperation Front North East , or <unk> ) rarely supported the British efforts despite substantial reinforcements . They flew only an average of one sortie per day , including strategic defensive missions . One reason for this was heavy French bomber losses on the previous two days . During the Battle of Maastricht in the Netherlands , the Groupement de <unk> ( Bomber Groups , or GB ) had its squadrons reduced . GB I / 12 and II / 12 had only 13 LeO <unk> between them . Groupement de <unk> d <unk> 18 ( GBA 18 ) had only 12 of 25 Breguet <unk> left . GB I / 34 and II / 34 could muster eight aircraft out of 22 Amiot <unk> , I / 38 seven out of 12 , and II / 38 six out of 11 . All of these groups were sent to Sedan on 14 May . Escort was given from Groupement de Chasse ( Fighter Groups , or GC ) . GC III / 7 with 12 Morane 406s , 12 Bloch 152s of I / 8 and nine Dewoitine D.520s of I / 3 took part . GBA 18 was escorted by 15 Bloch 152s of GC I / 8 . The missions cost the French five bombers , two from ground fire . After this date , the French bomber forces were eliminated from the fight over Sedan . The major efforts were now made by the AASF . 
 The Allied bombers received mostly poor protection . Only 93 fighter sorties , ( 60 by the French ) were flown . The French lost 21 fighters in the operation . The German air defence was soon reinforced by Jagdgeschwader 26 and Jagdgeschwader 27 ( Fighter Wings 26 and 27 ) . One of the premier German fighter units responsible for the heavy loss rate was Jagdgeschwader 53 ( Fighter Wing 53 ) , who later engaged French bombers who tried to succeed where the AASF failed . The attacks failed as they were uncoordinated . Along with fighter aircraft , the Germans had assembled powerful flak concentrations in Sedan . The FlaK battalions of the 1st , 2nd and 10th Panzer Divisions numbered 303 anti @-@ aircraft guns . This force was built around the 102nd FlaK Regiment with its 88 mm , 37 mm , and rapid fire 20 mm weapons . So heavy was the defensive fire that the Allied bombers could not concentrate over the target . Allied bomber pilots called it " hell along the Meuse " . On 14 May , the Allies flew 250 sorties , the French losing 30 ( another source states 21 ) and the RAF losing 20 fighter aircraft . Another 65 were heavily damaged . Out of 109 RAF bombers dispatched , 47 were shot down . This meant 167 aircraft had been lost against one target . Bruno Loerzer called 14 May " the day of the fighter " . 
 The German Generals , in particular Guderian , were relieved that the Luftwaffe had prevented the Allied bombers from knocking out their supply bridges . By nightfall , at least 600 tanks , including those of the 2nd Panzer Division which had to use the 1st Panzer Division 's bridge at Gaulier ( owing to theirs not having yet been constructed ) , were across the Meuse . The German victory in the air battle had been decisive . 
 = = French counter @-@ offensive = = 
 Charles Huntziger , commanding the Second Army was unconcerned by the capture of Sedan , or of the collapse of French defences in the face of air attack . He expected considerable French reserves , particularly X Corps , to stabilise the front . The forces at the French commander 's disposal were formidable . Guderian 's decision to strike north west left the 10th Panzer Division protecting the bridgehead alone . Against this force was the XXI Corps ( 3d Armoured Division , 3d Motorised Infantry Division , 5th Light Cavalry Division , 1st Cavalry Brigade ) under Flavigny . A second group , consisting of the 2d Light Cavalry Division and 3d Tank Division reinforced Flavigny . X Corps , with the 12th and 64th Reconnaissance Battalions , elements of the 71st Infantry Division , 205th Infantry Regiment , the 4th Tank Battalion were also to join the attack . The French had nearly 300 tanks , with 138 main battle tanks consisting of Hotchkiss and Char B1 @-@ Bis . 
 The French tanks had heavier armour and armament than the Panzers . The Panzer IV had 30 mm of armour , while the Hotchkiss had 45 mm , and the Char B1 had 60 mm of protection . Moreover , its main armament , one 47 mm and one 75 mm gun , outmatched all the German tanks . In an open field engagement , Guderian 's armour stood little chance . Two @-@ thirds of his units were equipped with Panzer I and IIs . Just 30 of the Panzer IVs were on his order of battle . However , one crucial disadvantage of the French tanks , considered as a very broad whole , was their low endurance . They needed refuelling after just two hours . They were also slow in speed , complicating high tempo operations . 
 = = = Missed chance = = = 
 During 14 May , General Lafontaine had moved the 55th Infantry Division 's command post from its position on the Marfee heights to Bulson , 10 – 11 kilometres ( 6 – 7 mi ) south of Sedan . The French had prepared , to an extent , for a German breakthrough at Sedan , and accordingly placed X Corps available for a counter @-@ attack . It was to occupy the Bulson position on the Chéhéry – Bulson – <unk> axis and strike at the Meuse bridgeheads . The terrain included heavily wooded areas , and the units left behind convinced General Charles Huntziger , commander of the French Second Army , that they would be able to hold Bulson , and the Germans would not be able to exploit their tactical victory at Sedan on 14 May . 
 The Germans suffered a seven @-@ hour delay in getting their armour across the bridge from 01 : 20 @-@ 07 : 30 , which could have been disastrous for the Panzer divisions . The French had already initiated plans for counter @-@ attacks with armour on the German @-@ held bridgehead during the night but delays in bringing up forces , procrastination ( inclined towards momentary adaptation towards defensive <unk> and posturing ) , and hesitation on the part of local overall French command at large , made worse by the resulting confusion from the panic and retreat of the infantry who had also abandoned their positions and artillery as part of the " panic of Bulson " , made an attack possible only in the morning of 14 May . The commander of X Corps ' artillery , Colonel Poncelet , had tried to keep his units where they were , but had reluctantly ordered a retreat . This decision resulted in the Corps artillery battalions abandoning many heavy artillery pieces and caused the collapse of the 55th Infantry Division ( " panic of Bulson " ) and a partial collapse of the 71st Infantry Division . Poncelet killed himself a few days later . 
 On 13 – 14 May , the Germans were vulnerable . A strong attack at this point by the French armoured units could have prevented Guderian from breaking out of the Meuse bridgeheads and changed the outcome of the campaign . However , the French commanders , already deeply schooled and versed in the rather staunchly defensively @-@ focused broad , generalized doctrine of methodological warfare , were located far to the rear , which meant they lacked a real time and up @-@ to @-@ date picture of the battle . When intelligence did filter through , it was out @-@ of @-@ date . This was to prove fatal , especially coupled with the case of the matter that the French generalship at large was envisioning plus expecting a considerably more prolonged process of initial German assault phase and overall attack effort as a whole . 
 = = = Race to Bulson = = = 
 The race to Bulson ridge began at 16 : 00 on 13 May . At 07 : 30 on 14 May , French armour advanced to Bulson ridge with a view to seizing the high ground vacated by the infantry of the 55th Infantry Division on 13 May . But the main , primary objective was to destroy the German bridgeheads . While that may have been possible on 13 May , the odds had shifted against the French . 
 The X Corps attack involved a strike on the left flank by the 213th Infantry Regiment and 7th Tank Battalion , and on the right flank by the 205th Infantry Regiment and 4th Tank Battalion . The right flanking force arrived late , so the 213th Infantry and the 7th Tank Battalion advanced alone on the north axis . It was thought that the 213th could reach an area in between Chéhéry and Bulson in one hour fifty minutes and the 7th Tank Battalion in two hours . Yet it was not until 17 hours after the original order to advance to Bulson that the lead French tanks reached the Bulson ridge . They found the Germans had beaten them there by a few minutes . 
 Lafontaine had hesitated over the 24 hours since the afternoon of 13 May . He spent hours reconnoitring the terrain , sometimes trying to contain and reason with fleeing , routing scores of French infantrymen and artillerymen of the 55th and 71st Infantry Divisions , and travelling around the area to various regimental headquarters , looking for his Corps commander , General <unk> ( whom was deliberately reconnoitring the terrain , for some time , at that relative point in time ) , for an order to attack , and , in the meantime , <unk> assessing and conferring with some local command personnel . Owing to this Lafontaine also delayed issuing orders to the tactical attack units until 05 : 00 on 14 May , by which time the Germans had consolidated their bridgehead and the Panzer divisions ' combined arms infantry teams were already advancing inland to Bulson . Lafontaine had had a mission plan since 20 : 00 on 13 May to defeat the Germans and retake the Meuse bridgeheads , but he waited for an order to proceed . Lafontaine 's need for an order was contrary to the unit actions of the Germans , who operated the tactically more efficient Auftragstaktik ( Mission Command ) system . Ultimately , Lafontaine had squandered valuable hours essential for a prompt , perhaps opportune and timely , perhaps potentially decisive counter @-@ attack effort . 
 The French had an opportunity to throw the Germans back into the Meuse but they missed their chance owing to poor staff @-@ work . The 1st Panzer Division had struggled to advance as quickly as it would have liked , and was jammed on the roads leading out of Gaulier and Sedan . Moreover , the German soldiers were exhausted after a five @-@ day advance . A quick counter thrust by just two infantry regiments and two tank battalions would have " plunged the Germans into crisis " . Even a failed attack , and the holding of Bulson , would have allowed it to be used by formations of the Second French Army and the tank units , including the French 3rd Armoured Division , of General Jean Adolphe Louis Robert Flavigny 's powerful French XXI Corps which were moving up from the Maginot line area in the south . 
 That said , however , additionally , the French lacked neither relatively mobile tanks nor relatively offensively @-@ intended tanks , in the local area of battle just as well so , for the most part , as in the whole broad Western European theatre of war and campaign of military operations of the time . French military doctrine dictated that the tanks , mostly FCM 36s , predominantly and primarily designed and intended as basically defensive @-@ oriented infantry @-@ support units , were to advance with the infantry . The speed of the FCM 36 was not designed to go any faster for this reason , so its top speed was only 24 km / h ( 15 mph ) . It took from 07 : 30 to 08 : 45 on 14 May for the French armour to traverse the last 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) to the ridge . Lead elements of the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions had reached the ridge just minutes before , having travelled 9 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) in less time . But the initial clash was not in the Germans ' favour . Instead of making sure the medium Panzer III and Panzer IV tanks had priority in crossing the Meuse , the Germans had sent few across , and the van of the advance contained mostly lightly armed and lightly armoured although faster Panzer Is and Panzer IIs . 
 = = = Battle of Bulson = = = 
 The initial encounters took place as the Battle of Hannut was being fought in Belgium . The results were much the same . On the southern face of Bulson , General Friedrich Kirchner , commander of the 1st Panzer Division , suffered several tactical reverses and saw the 37mm shells from his 3 @.@ 7 cm PaK 36 anti @-@ tank guns and Panzer IIIs bounce off the more heavily armoured French tanks . A number of the German tanks were knocked out in rapid succession . The Germans had to hold the French at the ridge . Kirchner was forced to send in his tanks in <unk> and drabs , tactics which Guderian hated , but which he himself decided there was no other recourse . It was once again the German tanks ' radio equipment that enabled them to move around quickly and communicate with one another , to change the point of defence or attack quickly . The speed of the German tanks also enabled them to offset their inferiority in combat power to the French tanks . <unk> the Panzer III and IVs could speed into the rear of French formations , closing quickly and knocking out the French armour from the rear . The Germans noted the particular weakness between the chassis and turret of the French tanks , which were vulnerable to their fire . 
 The French artillery concealed in wooded areas proved more potent than the tanks . The German 1st Panzer Company was wiped out by French artillery , and pulled back with just one battle worthy tank . The Company retreated under the cover of part of the ridge , and moved its single tank back and forth , simulating the presence of many German tanks . Diverted from their success at Gaulier , near Sedan , the 2nd Panzer Company was rushed to the spot and managed to delay the French armoured advance . The Großdeutschland Infantry Regiment 's late arrival tilted the scales . They managed to eliminate the anti @-@ tank lines and entrenched French infantry . 
 On the left side of the Bulson ridge , the Germans encountered 13 French tanks with support from infantry near Chéhéry . The Germans ' advance intended to strike at Connage to the south of the town of Chéhéry , to outflank the French . Kirchner reacted quickly , ordering two anti @-@ tank platoons to be set up at Connage . The 37 mm guns struggled to halt the French armour which then outflanked the position at Connage by moving to the west while the infantry advanced from the south east on the German right flank . Fortunately the 43rd Assault Engineer Battalion and the 8th Company , 2nd Battalion , 2nd Panzer Regiment arrived and pushed the French back to the town of <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Bar , some 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) south west of Bulson , and due south of Connage . 
 At 10 : 45 , Lafontaine ordered a retreat and Guderian finally got heavy artillery from the Großdeutschland Infantry Regiment . The 88 mm dual role artillery guns and the heavier Panzer III and IVs reached the area of the battle . By this time , the French 7th Tank Battalion had been wiped out and the 213th Infantry Regiment had been devastated . Only 10 French tanks , out of 40 , remained . In the two pitched battles the 7th Tank Battalion fought that day they lost 10 from 13 . Delays on the right flank meant the 205th Infantry Regiment and 4th Tank Battalion did not reach their starting line until 10 : 45 , by which time the battle on the left wing had been lost and further attacks on the right would have made little sense . The 1st Panzer Division 's victory parade was held in <unk> at 12 : 00 , but it was cut short when the Luftwaffe bombed the square by mistake inflicting a few casualties . 
 = = = Battle of Stonne = = = 
 The German High Command did not want to exploit the victory at Sedan and Bulson until the German infantry divisions had caught up with the three Panzer divisions . To Guderian , this was madness and would throw away the victory at Sedan and allow the enemy time to recover and reorganise his still formidable armoured units . Guderian decided to push for the Channel , even if it meant ignoring the High Command and Hitler himself . Guderian ordered the 10th Panzer Division and Großdeutschland Infantry Regiment to hold the Sedan bridgehead , while the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions struck north west , towards the Channel . Now that they were pushing largely at an ' open door ' , the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions advanced into the undefended French rear with speed . 
 The Sedan bridgeheads were still not safe . French forces were massing to the south . Guderian decided it was better to mount an aggressive defence given the lack of any suitable anti @-@ tank weapons for a defensive battle . The better option would be to attack rather than defend . The advance of the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions had assisted his progress . They ran into and defeated elements of X Corps near <unk> . The French Corps was heading towards Sedan , but withdrew southward after the engagement . Any potential threat on the German western flank had been removed . 
 Part of Guderian 's original plan had called for a feint south towards and behind the Maginot Line , to mask the intention to thrust to the channel . General Franz Halder had dropped this from Fall Gelb , but Guderian resurrected it and ordered the 10th Panzer Division and Großdeutschland Infantry Regiment to attack across the Stonne plateau . In this innocuous town , a vicious two @-@ day battle took place in which the Germans came face to face with the premier French tank , the Char B1 @-@ Bis , for the only time . One of these tanks , commanded by Pierre Billotte , proved invulnerable to German anti @-@ tank fire and took 140 hits , and knocked out 13 German tanks ( two PzKpfw IV and eleven PzKpfw III ) and a number of anti @-@ tank guns . It transpired that the French had concentrated their own armour there to mount another attack on the Sedan bridgeheads . The battle of Stonne took place between 15 and 17 May , and the town changed hands 17 times . Ultimately the failure of the French to hold it meant the final failure to eliminate the Sedan bridgeheads . 
 The French offensive at Stonne was of vital importance . The town remained a base situated on high ground overlooking Sedan . The French could use it as a base from which to launch long @-@ term attacks on Sedan . On 15 May , the battle began . The French committed the 3d Company , 49th Tank Battalion ; 1st Company , 45th Tank Battalion ; and the 2d Company , 4th Tank Battalion ; the 1st Battalion , 67th Infantry Regiment ; and the 1st Company , 51st Infantry Regiment . The French infantry were slow in their advance , which meant the armour outran them . Alone , the tanks tried to attack and failed . At this time , Stonne was held only by the 1st Battalion Großdeutschland supported by only nine of the Regiments 12 anti @-@ tank artillery guns . As the French pressed forward , the weak German defence struggled to hold its ground . However , when one German platoon managed to knock out three French Char <unk> the French tank crews panicked , and drove away to the south . It was a psychological victory for the Germans which encouraged their continued defence of the position . In the next attacks , they held their positions and fought . The town would fall to each side over the next 48 hours , as offensive followed counter @-@ attack . The 10th Panzer sent its 1st Battalion , 69th Infantry Regiment to support the hard @-@ pressed Großdeutschland . The Germans retook the town at 17 : 00 on 17 May , for the fourth time in nine hours . 
 The Germans reinforced their defences on the night of 16 May with the VI Corps , consisting of the 16th Division under Heinrich <unk> , and 24th Infantry Division . It was a timely deployment . By this time the Großdeutschland had lost 570 men and were in need of rest and the <unk> 14 ( 14th Panzer Anti @-@ tank Company ) had lost six of its 12 guns . It had also lost 12 dead and 65 wounded . Stonne was destroyed . Around 33 French tanks and 24 German Panzers were knocked out . With the IV Corps now supporting the German defence and counter @-@ attacks , the town was captured for the 17th and final time at 17 : 45 on 17 May . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The French defeat at Sedan left the Allied Army Groups in Belgium with sparse flank protection . The German attack , especially the breakout from the bridgeheads at Sedan , was so fast that there were hardly any major combats . Many French soldiers were in such shock that they were taken prisoner before they could offer resistance , which also explains the low casualty rates for both sides . The two assault engineer battalions under <unk> achieved the most important success . By eliminating the bunkers in the Bellevue sector , they made the breakthroughs of the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions possible . This was achieved without a single casualty . 
 There is consensus among military historians the Battle at Sedan sealed the fate of Belgium and France . On 14 May , the Allied forces had been <unk> and through the failures in deployment had effectively lost the campaign . The advance to the Channel would trap 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 soldiers and expel the Allies from Western Europe . 
 Unfortunately for the Germans , the bulk of the British Army escaped from the port of Dunkirk . The German Army eventually won the ensuing Battle of Dunkirk , forcing the Allied Armies to leave behind large amounts of equipment , but failed , through controversial circumstances , to eliminate the British manpower trapped in the pocket . The encirclement destroyed the best units of the French Army , including a prisoner of war total of 40 @,@ 000 , but significant forces did escape ( 139 @,@ 732 British and 139 @,@ 037 French ) . Some French forces would return to France and participate in the battles of June 1940 , surrendering along with the rest of the French armed forces on 25 June 1940 . 
 = Robert Jefferson Breckinridge = 
 Robert Jefferson Breckinridge ( March 8 , 1800 – December 27 , 1871 ) was a politician and Presbyterian minister . He was a member of the Breckinridge family of Kentucky , the son of Senator John Breckinridge . 
 A restless youth , Breckinridge was suspended from Princeton University for fighting , and following his graduation from Union College in 1819 , was prone to engage in a lifestyle of partying and revelry . But , he was admitted to the bar in 1824 and elected to the Kentucky General Assembly in 1825 . A serious illness and the death of a child in 1829 prompted him to turn to religion , and he became an ordained minister in 1832 . 
 That year Breckinridge accepted the call to pastor the Second [ a ] Presbyterian Church of Baltimore , Maryland . While at the church , he became involved in a number of theological debates . During the Old School @-@ New School Controversy within the Presbyterian Church in the 1830s , Breckinridge became a hard @-@ line member of the Old School faction , and played an influential role in the ejection of several churches in 1837 . He was rewarded for his stances by being elected moderator of the Presbyterian Church 's General Assembly in 1841 . 
 After a brief stint as president of Jefferson College in Pennsylvania , Breckinridge returned to Kentucky , where he pastored the First Presbyterian church of Lexington , Kentucky , and was appointed superintendent of public education by Governor William Owsley . The changes he effected in this office brought a tenfold increase in public school attendance and led to him being called the father of the public school system in Kentucky . He left his post as superintendent after six years to become a professor at Danville Theological Seminary in Danville , Kentucky . 
 As the sectional conflict leading up to the Civil War escalated , Breckinridge was put in the unusual position of being a slaveholder who opposed slavery . His support of Abraham Lincoln for president in the election of 1860 put him at odds with his nephew , John C. Breckinridge . The tragic scenario of brother against brother literally played out in Breckinridge 's family , with two of his sons joining each side during the war . Following the war , Breckinridge retired to his home in Danville , where he died on December 27 , 1871 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robert Breckinridge was born March 8 , 1800 at Cabell 's Dale near Lexington , Kentucky . He was the third son born to Senator John and Mary Hopkins ( Cabell ) Breckinridge . Senator Breckinridge died in 1806 , leaving his wife to tend the family 's large plantations . Robert soon earned a reputation of misbehaving . In one instance , he and his brother John had a physical altercation because Robert put salt in a blind cousin 's coffee ; in another , his mother gave him a " tremendous whipping " for beating an old slave . 
 Breckinridge studied education at a classical school operated by Dr. Louis Marshall , the brother of Chief Justice John Marshall , then followed his brothers , Cabell and John , to Princeton in 1817 . His behavior problems continued there ; in one year , he spent more than $ 1200 . He was suspended for fighting , and although he was later reinstated , the incident soured him on Princeton , and he was granted an honorable release . ( The school later awarded him an honorary Master of Arts degree in 1832 . ) Breckinridge enrolled at Yale University , but after three months , discovered that a one @-@ year residency was required for graduation . Unwilling to complete this requirement , he moved to Union College in Schenectady , New York , where he earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1819 . 
 Following his graduation , Breckinridge returned to Kentucky with no clear direction in his life . He began to amuse himself by attending various parties and other social engagements . During a visit to the state capital , he so offended one man that he was challenged to a duel . Though he obtained two pistols , he never accepted the man 's challenge , and was branded a coward . The dispute was later settled in the Masonic Lodge of which both Breckinridge and the other man were members . 
 On March 11 , 1823 , Breckinridge married his cousin , Ann Sophonisba Preston at the bride 's home in Abingdon , Virginia ; the couple had eleven children . Ann 's political heritage rivaled that of her husband . A grandniece of Patrick Henry , she was also a sister to Senator William Campbell Preston and a sister @-@ in @-@ law to South Carolina governor Wade Hampton III , and Virginia governors John B. Floyd and James McDowell . 
 = = Service in the Kentucky General Assembly = = 
 Following the advice of his older brother , Breckinridge obtained his law license on January 3 , 1824 , but the practice of law did not suit him . He instead decided to follow the family tradition and seek public office , campaigning for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives . Even in his early political career , he began to articulate his stance on the issues that would become his legacy . 
 First , he shunned the states ' rights viewpoint , stressing instead the need for a strong interdependence between the states . Second , he called for an end to slavery . Third , he emphasized the importance of education . Though they agreed on this last point , Breckinridge 's father had ardently opposed emancipation of slaves and favored states ' rights . Historian James C. Klotter opines that Louis Marshall and Robert 's mother Mary may have influenced his positions . 
 The most politically charged issue in Kentucky during Breckinridge 's campaign , however , was the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy . The Panic of 1819 had left many Kentuckians in dire financial straits . Legislators sought to relieve some of the financial burden by passing a law of replevin which favored debtors . The Kentucky Court of Appeals , ( the highest court in the Commonwealth at the time , ) declared the law unconstitutional . The next year , an incensed General Assembly passed legislation that dissolved the court and replaced it with a new court . Neither court acknowledged the other as valid , and a confused public lost respect for public authority in general . The issue was generally split along party lines , with Democrats generally favoring the New Court and Whigs favoring the Old Court . 
 Breckinridge dodged the issue during the campaign , which he won in 1825 , but once he took office , he had to come down on one side or the other . He voted in favor of the Old Court , reflecting his upper @-@ class status and affinity for the establishment . In so doing , he identified himself with the party of Kentucky 's favorite son , Henry Clay . The Whigs would control Kentucky politics for the next twenty @-@ five years . In 1826 , the majority of the General Assembly sided with the Old Court and abolished the New Court . 
 Eventually , tensions faded , but a bigger decision awaited Robert Breckinridge in 1828 . He was chosen to sit on a committee that would draft Kentucky 's response to the Nullification Crisis . Because much of South Carolina 's reasoning for their actions was based on the logic of the Kentucky Resolutions , which had been supported by Senator John Breckinridge , Robert Breckinridge now had to determine whether he should support the words of his late father or refute them . In the end , his Unionist sympathies overrode his sense of loyalty to his father ; he sided with the committee 's majority in condemning South Carolina 's actions . 
 = = Religious conversion and ministry = = 
 Throughout his time in the General Assembly , Breckinridge had battled with typhoid fever . In an 1828 letter to his wife , who was visiting relatives in Virginia , he recounted that he had been bedridden and near death for two months . Finally , in February 1829 , the illness subsided . Only then could he be told about the death of his daughter , Louisiana , which had occurred a month earlier . The illness , combined with the news of the death of his daughter , caused Breckinridge to turn to religion . 
 In spring 1829 , he made a public profession of his faith . In 1831 , he hosted a revival meeting on his farm during which he decided to pursue ministerial training under the West Lexington Presbytery . He was ordained as a Presbyterian minister on April 5 , 1832 . 
 Breckinridge served as a Ruling Elder at the Presbyterian General Assembly of 1832 , then relocated to Princeton , New Jersey , to study under Samuel Miller at Princeton Theological Seminary . In November 1832 , he succeeded his brother John as pastor of Second [ a ] Presbyterian Church of Baltimore , Maryland . His tenure saw numerous converts , but he was put at odds with his brother and Samuel Miller over practices employed in his church . His counselors were also concerned that he was wavering on his belief in the doctrine of limited atonement . Eventually , he was persuaded back into the doctrines of the orthodox Calvinism and became one of the leaders of the Old School Presbyterian movement . 
 Now solidly in the Presbyterian fold , Breckinridge began to follow in the footsteps of his brother John , criticizing Roman Catholicism in a number of his speeches and publications . There were many Catholics in Baltimore . He sponsored and edited two " thoroughly Protestant " journals – the Baltimore Literary and Religious magazine and the Spirit of the XIX Century . A year @-@ long tour of Europe with his wife that began in April 1836 deepened his disdain for the denomination ; he opined that most of the continent 's ills could be traced back to Catholic " superstitions . " A particularly harsh missive against a Catholic who worked in the county almshouse drew an indictment for libel in 1840 . The trial ended in a hung jury that voted 10 – 2 in favor of acquittal . Though displeased that he could not obtain a unanimous acquittal , Breckinridge continued undaunted . In 1841 , he published several of his anti @-@ Catholic articles as <unk> in the XIX Century in the United States . 
 Breckinridge was equally controversial in internal church politics . He rebuked the Synod of the Western Reserve for de @-@ emphasizing and effectively abandoning the office of Ruling Elder . He also condemned the governance of Presbyterian missionaries by anyone other than the Presbyterian church . In 1834 , he was the chief author of the Act and Testimony , a document summarizing the contentions between the Old and New Schools . The New School resented Breckinridge and those who signed the Act and Testimony , and even some in the Old School camp had hoped for a more moderate course . The differences between the Old and New Schools widened over the teachings of Albert Barnes , and the New School members were ejected from the Presbyterian Church in 1837 . Because of his leadership in the Old School @-@ New School controversy , Breckinridge was elected moderator of the Old School branch 's General Assembly in 1841 . 
 = = President of Jefferson College = = 
 In 1844 , Breckinridge 's wife Ann died . Lingering sadness and memories of his and Ann 's life in Baltimore may have led him to leave the city and the pastorate he had held for twelve years . He was offered pastorate of the Second Presbyterian Church of Lexington , Kentucky , but instead , accepted the presidency of Jefferson College in Pennsylvania in 1845 against the advice of his brothers John and William . A rift between Breckinridge and his brother Cabell 's widow and other relatives may help account for this surprising decision . He did not feel he could yet return to his home state . 
 Breckinridge was inaugurated as president of Jefferson College on September 27 , 1845 . During his tenure , he also pastored a church in the city of Canonsburg , Pennsylvania . College administration apparently did not suit him , however . A student uprising against the president and the faculty occurred in 1846 , hastening the end of his short stay at the school . A desire to see his children , most of whom were living with relatives scattered throughout Kentucky and Virginia , also factored into his decision to resign his post in 1847 . On his resignation , he was awarded an honorary <unk> from the school . 
 = = Father of Kentucky 's public school system = = 
 Breckinridge returned to Kentucky , accepting the pastorate of First Presbyterian Church of Lexington . His return to Kentucky was also motivated by a growing fondness for his cousin , Virginia Hart Shelby , who had cared for two of his children during his stay in Pennsylvania . Virginia was the widow of Alfred Shelby , the son of Isaac Shelby , who was twice governor of Kentucky . Their written exchanges included love poems from Robert and concerned questions from Virginia about the wisdom of engaging in a relationship . Despite being advised by her sisters to avoid the marriage and her own wavering on the issue , the two were married in April 1847 . They had three children , only one of whom survived to adulthood . Disagreements among the children of both partners ' previous marriages exacerbated an already tense union , which almost ended in divorce in September 1856 . Robert managed to reconcile with his wife , and they remained together until Virginia 's death in 1859 . 
 Breckinridge 's personal turmoil did not hinder his political accomplishments . He was appointed superintendent of public education by Governor William Owsley . He was the sixth person to hold the office since its creation in the 1830s . The task was daunting . Only one of every ten school @-@ age children in Kentucky ever attended school , and at least thirty Kentucky counties had received no state educational funds since 1840 . 
 Breckinridge began reforms immediately and zealously . He secured the General Assembly 's passage of a two @-@ cent property tax for education . The tax was subject to voter approval , and Breckinridge worked hard to publicize the issue . His efforts paid off , as the tax passed by almost a two @-@ to @-@ one margin . Continuing to publicize needs and push legislators to action , Breckinridge enjoyed the support of five of the six governors under whom he served . Only John L. Helm , who opposed a state @-@ funded school system , challenged him , but Helm 's veto of a Breckinridge educational bill was overridden in the General Assembly . Breckinridge 's reforms manifested tangible results . From 1847 to 1850 , educational spending increased from $ 6 @,@ 000 to $ 144 @,@ 000 . By 1850 , only one out of every ten school age children did not attend school . 
 In 1850 , Kentuckians ratified their third constitution . One of many changes effected by this document was that the office of superintendent became elective . Though the election belonged to the Democrats , Breckinridge , a Whig , was elected over five challengers for the office . His tenure would be a short one , however . Unlike his early reforms , his calls for parental selection of textbooks and use of the Bible as the primary reading material were not heeded . He also opposed the abolition of tuition charges and unsuccessfully lobbied for a pay increase for his position . ( The salary was only $ 750 . ) With little prospect of further reform under his leadership , Breckinridge resigned in 1853 . 
 Following his resignation , Breckinridge shifted his party affiliation from Whig to Know @-@ Nothing to Republican . In 1853 , he helped found Danville Theological Seminary in Danville , Kentucky , becoming a Professor of <unk> , Didactic and Polemic Theology . 
 = = Civil War and later life = = 
 Although he owned a number of slaves , and his marriage to Virginia Shelby had left him with a good many more , Breckinridge had been a supporter of gradual emancipation and colonization of blacks since his early political career . As the sectional crisis worsened , this led him into several high @-@ profile debates , notably with fellow Kentuckian Robert Wickliffe , the uncle of Robert C. Wickliffe . His support of Abraham Lincoln for president in the election of 1860 pitted him against his own nephew , Vice President John C. Breckinridge . 
 At the outbreak of the Civil War , Breckinridge quickly became an ardent supporter of the Union , not for its position against slavery , but for the sake of preserving the Union . He used his position as editor of the Danville Quarterly Review to advocate his position . He called for harsh measures against secession , and in time , accepted President Lincoln 's immediate emancipation of slaves . He was chosen as the temporary chair of the 1864 Republican National Convention that re @-@ nominated Lincoln for president , and his pro @-@ Union speech was hailed by freshman Representative James G. Blaine as one of the most inspiring given at the event . 
 Breckinridge 's family split on the issue , with two of his sons – Joseph and Charles – fighting for the Union cause , and two – Willie and Robert Jr . – fighting for the Confederacy . While three of his sons @-@ in @-@ law also fought for the Union , daughter Sophonisba 's husband , Theophilus Steele , rode with John Hunt Morgan , and it is likely that Robert Breckinridge 's intervention kept him from being executed by Edwin M. Stanton . Following the war , Willie Breckinridge 's wife Issa refused to let her father @-@ in @-@ law see two of his grandchildren for a period of two years . 
 On November 5 , 1868 , Breckinridge married his third wife , Margaret Faulkner White . A year later , he resigned his professorship at Danville Seminary . He died on December 27 , 1871 after an extensive illness , and was buried in Lexington Cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1892 , Breckinridge Hall ( named for Breckinridge ) was built as a dormitory for students of the Danville Theological Seminary . It is now a residence hall for upper @-@ class students at Centre College in Danville - Breckinridge 's nephew John C. Breckinridge 's alma mater . Breckinridge Hall was renovated in 1999 , and is on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 Breckinridge Hall , a three @-@ story building on Morehead State University 's campus , is named for Robert J. Breckinridge . 
 = = Selected works of Robert Breckinridge = = 
 The Knowledge of God , Objectively Considered : Being the First Part of Theology Considered as a Science of Positive Truth , Both Inductive and <unk> 
 The Knowledge of God , <unk> Considered : Being the Second Part of Theology Considered as a Science of Positive Truth , Both Inductive and <unk> 
 Our country – its peril and its deliverance . 
 Breckinridge 's protest against the use of instrumental music in worship 
 Presbyterian Government not a Hierarchy , but a Commonwealth 
 Presbyterian Ordination not a Charm , but an Act of Government 
 Some Thoughts on the Development of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. 
 The Christian Pastor , One of Christ 's Ascension Gifts 
 Letter of Robert J. Breckinridge to the Second Presbyterian Church of Baltimore 
 Robert J. Breckinridge 's speech at the laying of the cornerstone of the Clay Monument 
 The Calling of the Church of Christ : A Discourse to <unk> the Posture and Duty of the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America 
 = Rideau Cottage = 
 Rideau Cottage is a historic , residential building located on the grounds of Rideau Hall in Ottawa , Ontario . The two @-@ level , 22 @-@ room Georgian Revival home is owned by the Canadian Crown and has traditionally been inhabited by persons associated with the Governor General of Canada , including the viceroy 's private secretary . It is occupied by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and his family as of 2016 . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction on the building , which was based on a design by architect F.P. <unk> , began in 1866 and concluded in 1867 . Though intended in the early days to serve as the residence of the governor general 's secretary , the cottage was later designated for use by the government as an official guest house for visiting dignitaries . 
 On his arrival in Canada in 1883 , incoming governor general the Marquess of Lansdowne resided at Rideau Cottage while waiting for Rideau Hall to be vacated by the outgoing Governor General , the Marquess of Lorne . Other residents included Lionel and Lilias Massey during Vincent Massey 's time as governor general ; Georges Vanier , as Aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Governor General the Viscount Byng of Vimy , and Barbara <unk> , private secretary to the governor general from 2000 to 2006 , and her husband , Graham Fraser . <unk> 's successor , Stephen Wallace , resided in Rideau Cottage until the weekend of 24 – 25 October 2015 , when he vacated the premises to allow then prime minister @-@ designate Justin Trudeau and his family to live in the house while the traditional official residence of the Prime Minister of Canada , 24 Sussex Drive , was undergoing assessment for repairs and restoration . 
 Rideau Cottage was recognized as a Recognized Federal Heritage Building on 3 October 1986 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Rideau Cottage is a two @-@ level , 22 @-@ room Georgian Revival building . Originally , the structure had 14 rooms on a single floor . An 1872 remodel , using a different brick , added both the second level and a verandah on three sides of the ground floor . During that remodel , the exterior brick of the first floor was covered in stucco painted to appear like brick . ( When the verandah was removed some time later , the stucco remained . ) Between 1999 and 2000 , the building underwent major renovations to the basement , roof and interior finishes , and the mechanical and electrical systems were upgraded . Outside , the stucco was removed and each brick and joint was individually dyed to give a uniform appearance . It was again renovated in 2013 . 
 Rideau Cottage is characterized and distinguished by its symmetry , simple lines , classically inspired central entrance with pedimented porch , sash windows flanked by decorative shutters , and paired chimneys . 
 = Tōshirō Hitsugaya = 
 Tōshirō Hitsugaya ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Hitsugaya Tōshirō ) is a fictional character in the manga and anime series Bleach , created by Tite Kubo . In the series , Hitsugaya is a captain of the Gotei 13 , a group of Soul Reapers who govern the flow of souls and protect Soul Society , an afterlife realm . Hitsugaya makes appearances in all Bleach 's films , being the protagonist in The Diamond Dust Rebellion , as well as and in other media related to the franchise , including video games and original video animations . 
 Hitsugaya 's character has been well received among both readers and reviewers , becoming the series breakout character . Amongst the Bleach reader base , he has been highly popular , placing high in several popularity polls . Several pieces of merchandise have been released in Hitsugaya 's likeness , including action figures , plush toys and key chains . Anime and manga publications have provided acclaim and criticism of Hitsugaya 's character . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In the Bleach manga and anime series = = = 
 Hitsugaya lived with his grandmother and with Momo Hinamori , whom he considers a very close friend . Hitsugaya excelled in the Soul Reaper academy , becoming the youngest captain in the history of Soul Society with command over Squad 10 . Introduced to the Gotei 13 , Hitsugaya suspected Squad 3 captain Gin <unk> of foul play as the circumstances surrounding the coming execution of Rukia Kuchiki become more complicated . When Hinamori is manipulated into thinking that Hitsugaya killed Sōsuke Aizen , Hitsugaya attacks Gin on the notion that he tricked her . The fight is interrupted when Hitsugaya dodges an attack that almost kills Hinamori , only to be intercepted by his lieutenant Rangiku Matsumoto . Seeing how destructive Rukia 's execution is becoming , Hitsugaya tries to stop it by appealing to the Chamber 46 , only to discover all members were murdered by Aizen , who faked his death . When Hitsugaya discovers Hinamori injured , Hitsugaya tries to kill Aizen but is defeated . 
 In a later arc , Hitsugaya leads a group of Soul Reapers assigned to defend Karakura Town against the Arrancar that Aizen has enlisted to his cause . He defeats <unk> <unk> , and <unk> Antenor , and upon learning that Orihime Inoue has followed the Arrancars back to their home world , Hitsugaya returns to Soul Society to help in the preparation for the war against Aizen . At Karakura Town , he engages the Espada Tier <unk> before she is mortally wounded by Aizen . From there , Hitsugaya engages Aizen , and is tricked into stabs Momo in the chest with Aizen taking advantage of the youth 's rage of being tricked to cut his left limbs off . After Aizen 's defeat and healed , Hitsugaya resolves to train so that he can more freely use his bankai to protect Hinamori . 
 When <unk> Ginjo steals Ichigo Kurosaki 's Fullbring powers , Hitsugaya and several other high @-@ ranking Soul Reapers appear in the human world . To help Ichigo regain his Soul Reaper powers and combat <unk> , captain @-@ commander <unk> <unk> Yamamoto orders the Soul Reapers to give Ichigo some of their spirit energy . Hitsugaya then engages the Fullbringer Yukio Hans <unk> in a cat @-@ and @-@ mouse game , ending with Hitsugaya encasing Yukio in ice , threatening to end his life if he does not release his Fullbring . During the Wandenreich invasion of Soul Society , Hitsugaya loses his bankai to the organization 's member Cang Du . But with the help of Kisuke Urahara , Hitsugaya retrieves his bankai from Cang Du and defeat him . However , the battle took its toll on Hitsugaya as he ends up a zombie under the <unk> Giselle <unk> . Hitsugaya appears along with a <unk> Rangiku as they , <unk> , and Rose fight Mayuri <unk> 's group of revived Arrancars and Squad 11 's Ikkaku and <unk> . Eventually , Mayuri manages to take control of the zombified Soul Reapers with Hitsugaya and Rangiku restored to normal and healed , although their lifespans were shortened . Hitsugaya later joins Byakuya and other soul reapers against the <unk> , Gerard . During this battle , the ice petals of Hitsugaya 's bankai dissolve . But instead of his bankai deactivating , revealing that the time limit was a sign that it was fully developed prior to the fight , <unk> Hyōrinmaru 's power reaches its full potential while Hitsugaya is transformed into a young adult to better utilize his improved weapon . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 He appears in all of the four featured films in the series . He fights the Dark Ones with other Soul Reaper comrades in Bleach : Memories of Nobody . He is the main character in Bleach : The DiamondDust Rebellion , where he is accused of stealing the King 's Seal , an ancient artifact , and stumbles across a dark secret concerning a long @-@ dead Soul Reaper named Sōjirō Kusaka , who was his close friend and rival when he was younger . A one @-@ shot manga chapter focusing on <unk> 's past was released to promote the film , revealing how Hitsugaya learned of his powers . Apparently , Kusaka uses the King 's Seal to come back to life for revenge , but in the end is killed by Hitsugaya in a final rematch . He also appears in Bleach : Fade to Black , in which he loses his memories of Ichigo and Rukia , along with the other Soul Reapers . In Hell Verse , after losing his memories about Rukia 's disappearance and Ichigo , Hitsugaya along with other captains try to stop Ichigo from entering the Soul Society . 
 Hitsugaya is featured in the 30 minute original video animation , Sealed Sword Frenzy , in which he is part of the group of captains sent to the real world to seal away the escaped and notoriously dangerous shinigami criminal , Baishin . During their first encounter , he successfully fends off the criminal , though Baishin escapes . Hitsugaya is a common playable character in Bleach @-@ related video game , including the Blade Battlers series and the Nintendo home consoles series . Special versions of the character such his bankai form is featured in some games such Soul <unk> , and Hitsugaya in a school costume are unlockable in other games such as Bleach : Shattered Blade . He is also a playable character in the Nintendo DS game , Jump Ultimate Stars . He also appears in two Bleach Beat Collection albums aside . The first one was a compilation album with Hinamori and Matsumoto . The second one was also a compilation album , this time with Ichigo . A Hitsugaya and Hyōrinmaru 's album was also released as part of Bleach Breathless Collection . He was initially portrayed by Takashi Nagayama in the Bleach rock musicals . Later , in Shinsei Rock Musical Bleach Reprise , Nagayama was replaced by Yūya Kido , who also was substituted ; Takuya <unk> took the role . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Hitsugaya has been highly popular in the Weekly Shōnen Jump 's Bleach popularity polls ranking most of the times within the top ten . In early 2008 , Hitsugaya was voted the most popular character in the series , replacing Ichigo , who had previously held the position . Hyōrinmaru was voted the most popular zanpakutō in the zanpakutō popularity poll of the series . In the 2007 Japanese Newtype magazine character polls , he was voted the 9th most popular male character in any anime . In the 28th Annual Animage Readers ' Poll , Anime Grand Prix , Hitsugaya was voted as the eighth most popular male anime character . He has also been featured in similar Animage monthly polls . Hitsugaya ranked eighth in 2008 and third in 2009 in a survey titled " The Character I Want to Be My Groom " from the Japanese music distributor Recochoku . In order to promote the second film of Bleach , the trailer had the line " Execute Hitsugaya ! " . Kubo admitted that it was his own idea to make everybody be surprised , but he and Masakazu Morita , the voice actor of Ichigo , received a lot of letters from worried fans , causing Kubo to apologize in response . Various merchandise based on Hitsugaya 's appearance has been created , including action figures , plush toys and key chains . 
 Various publications from manga , anime and other media have commented on Hitsugaya 's character adding praise and criticism . He has been noted to be one of the most common " fan favorite " characters from the series . Carl Kimlinger from Anime News Network praised Steve Staley for giving an interesting variation of his voice rather than " integrity @-@ destroying abominations " . Also , he commented that Hitsugaya 's unresolved personal issue is , along with the ones from others characters , a good part from the climax of the Soul Society story arc . He additionally praised the animation of Hitsugaya 's bankai in the anime . Later , however , Kimlinger criticized it as " it makes him look like an arthritic blue crow " . IGN 's Ramsey Isler lamented the fact that his first fight against an Arrancar was not very entertaining and his character did not " get a chance to shine . " Hitsugaya 's early appearances were criticized by Isaac Hale from Pop Culture Shock who found Kubo was ignoring other characters and giving a lot of attention to him and Matsumoto 's gags . However , in a later arc , Chris Beveridge of Mania Entertainment noted he " has a pretty good arc " and " shine [ s ] brightly " facing Aizen . His appearance in DiamondDust Rebellion were praised by Active Anime 's Holly Ellingwood who found his motivations and back story " involving and intriguing " . Similarly , Chris Beveridge from Mania Entertainment praised " how he stands as a man " on this film . 
 = Sunny Lee = 
 Sunny Lee is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours , played by Hany Lee . She made her first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 8 April 2009 . Sunny was created by executive producer Susan Bower in response to criticism that Neighbours was " too white " . Lee came to the attention of Neighbours producers after she entered a competition run by Dolly Magazine to win a three @-@ month contract with the show . Despite not winning , she was cast as Sunny soon afterwards . In August 2009 , it was announced that Lee and Sunny would be departing Neighbours and Sunny made her final appearance on 19 November 2009 . 
 Sunny was an exchange student from South Korea who is taken in by Karl ( Alan Fletcher ) and Susan Kennedy ( Jackie Woodburne ) . Sunny was described as having " typical teenage insecurities " , which made her appear abrasive , unfriendly and " snobby " . Her storylines focused on her starting a relationship with Zeke Kinski ( Matthew Werkmeister ) , having her first kiss stolen by Donna Freedman ( Margot Robbie ) and being the subject of a crush by Robin Hester ( Benjamin Jay ) . During her time on Neighbours , Sunny was poorly received by television critics . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 In July 2008 , Neighbours was branded " too white " by black and Asian viewers in Britain . A report found that many ethnic viewers felt they were under @-@ represented in some of Britain 's most popular television shows . In Australia there was talk of a ' White Australia policy ' when it came to casting actors for top @-@ rated soaps . In response to the criticism , executive producer Susan Bower made the decision to add more ethnically diverse extras , small walk on roles and speaking parts . She also decided to introduce 15 @-@ year @-@ old Korean actor Hany Lee into the cast as exchange student , Sunny Lee . Bower said " I know we 're going to get flak about this gorgeous little Korean girl who 's going to be coming in next year , because you 're damned if you do and damned if you don 't " . 
 Hany Lee was chosen to play the role of Sunny after she was spotted at Dolly Magazine 's " Neighbours ' Next Big Stars " contest . Lee made it to the final ten , but ultimately lost out on the six @-@ week contract to Mauricio Merino , Jr . ( Simon Freedman ) and Chelsea Jones ( Tegan Freedman ) . A few months later , Lee was cast as regular character Sunny after producers saw her audition tape for the competition . 
 In August 2009 , it was announced that Lee was to leave the show . Producers confirmed that Lee would film her last scenes the following month and they would air in Australia that November . Following the news , Lee said that she would miss the friendships that she had formed with the actors and crew . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Sunny clashed with her culture 's patriarchal society after being influenced by life in western countries and was considered to be something of a rebel by her peers . On her arrival into the show , Sunny was described as being aloof by television channel , Five 's Holy Soap website . They also described her as being bright , confident , having an outspoken nature and being " full of contradictions " . Holy Soap also described Sunny as having " typical teenage insecurities " , which included being self @-@ conscious about her braces and her lack of experience with boys . This results in Sunny having an abrasive attitude . British television magazine , What 's on TV described Sunny as being initially " disappointed by the lack of excitement in Erinsborough " , they also added " Sunny appears snobby and unfriendly . But Sunny 's front is a cover for a whole host of insecurities " . 
 On her character , Lee said " She 's come from an Asian lifestyle and culture so she 's out there , she 's got the fashion going on , the hair and make up going on and the attitude " . Lee also said that she shares some similarities with Sunny , with them both having strict parents . On her departure , Lee said that Sunny took a " sacrifice " in leaving as she did not want her parents turning up and ruining everyone 's lives , especially after Susan had recently suffered health issues . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Sunny found it difficult to express herself to the other female teens on her first day in Ramsay Street and instead she chose to talk to ' Lost Boy ' from the radio station , Pirate Net about her past and her hurtful relationship with her sister . 
 Sunny and her housemate , Zeke Kinski , clashed on a number of occasions , which led What 's On TV to ask " is their playful animosity fuelled by romantic chemistry ? " Viewers saw Sunny finding herself unable to deal with her feelings for Zeke and their friends trying to encourage the two to begin a relationship . Zeke managed to get Sunny to open up to him about her insecurities and she started to trust him . They later began a relationship . Holy Soap described their relationship saying " After much to @-@ ing and fro @-@ ing , she eventually got together with Zeke " . Network Ten describe Sunny and Zeke 's relationship as being a " blessing in Zeke 's life , and a great help to him " . Sunny is also credited with helping Zeke to heal from his past and putting him on the straight and narrow again . Bower called Zeke and Sunny the show 's " Romeo and Juliet couple " . Of their relationship she said " They come from different cultures and she 's got a year as an exchange student , so we play out the Romeo and Juliet thing . How far do they go for their love ? Do they love each other ? They keep clashing because of their cultural differences " . 
 Robin Hester played by Benjamin Jay , was a teenager who formed a crush on Sunny and tried to ruin her relationship with Zeke . Digital Spy said Robin " goes to drastic lengths to keep Zeke and Sunny apart " and Holy Soap and Jay labelled him as " creepy " . Robin was seen trying to manipulate Sunny and he locked Zeke in a store cupboard , so he could spend time with her . Lee named the storyline with Robin as her favourite from her time in the show . She said " That was probably the best storyline ever because it gave me a chance to show who Sunny Lee was " . 
 = = = Same @-@ sex kiss = = = 
 One of Sunny 's most high @-@ profile storylines was a kiss between herself and female character , Donna Freedman ( Margot Robbie ) . The kiss occurs after Donna discovers that Sunny has been writing the romantic love letters given to her by her boyfriend . Sunny is then shocked when Donna leans over and kisses her on the lips and steals her first kiss . Lee said " For days , all Sunny 's been able to think about is what it would be like to kiss Zeke . Now Donna 's gone and stolen the moment – and Sunny 's not happy , to say the least ... " 
 Previously a kiss between Lana Crawford ( Bridget Neval ) and Sky Mangel ( Stephanie McIntosh ) in 2004 received complaints from conservative groups . The show 's producers called the kiss between Sunny and Donna " impulsive " and Robbie agreed , saying " It 's really not a big deal at all . It 's not an actual gay storyline , it 's just kind of an impulsive peck " . The storyline came weeks after rival soap Home and Away endured a backlash to its own same @-@ sex romance . 
 The storyline received attention from the Australian Family Association , with spokesman John Morrissey saying that he was concerned about TV " normalising " same @-@ sex relationships . Psychologist Dr Janet Hall praised the storyline , saying it allows families to discuss the topic . Susan Bower defended the kiss , which was shot before the Home and Away controversy , saying " Ours is a lovely tale about friendship . It 's very innocent . " She added " If we were going to do a lesbian story – and " Neighbours " is not against lesbian stories – we would do it properly . This is a teenage romance story . There 's nothing sexual " . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Susan and Karl Kennedy decide to take in exchange student , Sunny , following their step daughter 's departure . On her first night with the Kennedys , Sunny calls into the Pirate Net radio station and speaks to ' Lost Boy ' about her past and her relationship with her sister . Sunny believes that she has humiliated herself by talking too much about her life . She then decides to find out who ' Lost Boy ' is , so she can confront him . She is unaware that he is really her housemate , Zeke Kinski . 
 During auditions for the school play , a romantic tension builds between Sunny and Zeke and they are asked to play the lead roles . Sunny quits the play when she realises that she has to kiss Zeke . Sunny then finds out that Zeke is ' Lost Boy ' , but she forgives him . When she sees Donna Freedman practising the kissing scene with Zeke , Sunny becomes upset . Sunny and Zeke almost share a kiss one night when they are alone . However , they are interrupted by Libby Kennedy ( Kym Valentine ) . Due to rewrites of the play , Sunny 's new character has to kiss Zeke too and Sunny grows uncomfortable again . During drama camp , Sunny and Zeke are locked in a cupboard during a game of truth or dare . They almost kiss again , but are interrupted when the door is opened . Karl realises that Sunny and Zeke like each other and he tries to keep them apart . However , they eventually start a relationship . 
 Sunny offers to help out Ringo Brown ( Sam Clark ) with his love letters to Donna . When Donna works out that Ringo did not write the letters , Sunny has to tell her that she wrote them for him . In a spur @-@ of @-@ the @-@ moment act , Donna kisses Sunny , grateful for her honesty . Sunny is upset that her first kiss was stolen by Donna . Sunny and Zeke 's first kiss occurs during the play . Sunny struggles with public displays of affection with Zeke and she lies that she told her parents about their relationship . When Sunny finds that her grades have slipped , she decides to end the relationship and admits to Zeke that she did not tell her parents about him . 
 At a music festival , Sunny is embarrassed when Ringo and Declan Napier ( James Sorensen ) interrupt a kiss between her and Zeke . She runs off into the bush , falls down a cliff and injures her ankle . Zeke also falls down the cliff , they are eventually rescued by Declan and Lucas Fitzgerald ( Scott Major ) . Karl and Susan call Sunny 's parents and learn that they know nothing about the festival or Zeke . Sunny 's parents demand that she is placed on the next flight home . However , Zeke moves out , so Sunny 's parents will not worry about them having a relationship . Zeke later moves back home and Karl asks Sunny to call her father and translate for him . Sunny lies to her father about the nature of the conversation and tells him that her father said everything is fine . 
 After hearing Sunny on the radio , Robin Hester turns up in Ramsay Street to try to get close to her . Sunny believes he is just being friendly . Robin climbs through Sunny 's bedroom window and takes a photo of her . He locks Zeke in Pirate Net 's storeroom , so he can spend some time with Sunny alone . Sunny and Robin go to Pirate Net to see if Zeke is there and Robin pretends to find the storeroom key and unlocks the door . Zeke tells Sunny that Robin locked him in the storeroom , but she refuses to believe him . Zeke violently attacks Robin in front of Sunny , scaring her . Zeke apologises and Sunny eventually realises that Zeke had been right about Robin . Sunny meets Robin at Charlie 's and tells him that she and Zeke have broken up . Robin confesses to locking Zeke in the storeroom and tries to kiss Sunny , but Zeke appears and tells Robin to stay away them . 
 Libby accuses Zeke of writing Kyle Canning 's ( Christopher Milligan ) essay for him , but Sunny reveals that she wrote it . Kyle was blackmailing her after he overheard Sunny telling Donna that her parents did not know about Zeke moving home . Karl and Susan make Sunny call her parents and tell them about Zeke . Sunny tells them that her parents want her to come home . Zeke tells Sunny that he will go to South Korea with her . However , when Sunny realises how much Susan and Karl need him , she tells him to stay . On her last day , Zeke organises a picnic and a performance at Charlie 's from The Black <unk> . A few days after her departure , Sunny texts Zeke and tells him not to contact her again . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sunny was negatively received during her time on Neighbours . Upon her arrival , the a Western Mail reporter quipped that viewers were going to tire of Sunny " quite quickly " and that she was " downright irritating . " Ruth Deller of entertainment website Lowculture called the character " annoying " and thought that she had " no other layers to her personality " . She added " As for expecting us to believe that perma @-@ <unk> emo kid Zeke would fall for her ? Don 't be daft – he 's the character most likely to push her from a tower . Let 's hope her stay in Ramsay Street is short @-@ lived . " In November , Deller called the storyline between Sunny , Zeke and Robin " ludicrous " and she was placed at number one of the " soap characters we love to hate " list . Deller cited her " continued presence in general " as another reason for her being there . 
 During a feature on the best and worst soap characters of the decade , Sunny was placed at number eight on the worst soap characters list . Deller stated " Neighbours doesn 't have a great reputation for ethnic diversity , and when they finally decide to introduce a non @-@ white main character for the first time in years , they have to make her the most wooden , annoying , drippy character since Ned . Let 's hope Sunny 's failure isn 't an excuse for avoiding ethnic minority casting in the future … " 
 Jaci Stephen from the British newspaper , Daily Mail was also negative towards the character , calling her " dreadful " and " awful " . Stephen also expressed her desire for the character 's departure from the show and asked " When are they going to dispense with this hopeless character ? " During the storyline involving Robin and Sunny , Stephen commented " Is she about to disappear into the sunset with someone else ? No such luck . Looks like we 're still going to have to pay a dingo to carry her off . " Following Sunny 's departure , Stephen said " The relief at Erinsborough becoming a Sunny @-@ free zone is enormous " . 
 = The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill = 
 The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill is the debut solo album by American recording artist Lauryn Hill , released on August 25 , 1998 , by Ruffhouse Records and Columbia Records . After touring with her former group Fugees , Hill became involved in a romantic relationship with Jamaican entrepreneur Rohan Marley , and shortly after , became pregnant with his child . This pregnancy , as well as other circumstances in her life , inspired Hill to make a solo album . Recording sessions for the album took place from late 1997 to June 1998 mainly at Tuff Gong Studios in Kingston , as Hill collaborated with a group of musicians known as New Ark in writing and producing the songs . Primarily a neo soul album , The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill incorporates musical styles from R & B , hip hop , soul , and reggae . Its lyrics touch upon Hill 's pregnancy and the turmoil within the Fugees , along with themes of love and God . The album 's title was inspired by the film and autobiographical novel The Education of Sonny Carson , and Carter G. Woodson 's The Mis @-@ Education of the Negro . 
 The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 422 @,@ 624 copies in its first week , which broke a record for first @-@ week sales by a female artist . The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill produced three hit singles : " Doo Wop ( That Thing ) " , " Ex @-@ Factor " , and " Everything Is Everything " . Its lead single " Doo Wop ( That Thing ) " peaked at number one in the US , with the latter two singles peaking within the top 40 . The album 's success propelled Hill to international superstardom , and contributed to bringing hip hop and neo soul to the forefront of popular music . At the 41st Annual Grammy Awards , The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill earned 10 nominations , winning five awards , making Hill the first woman to receive that many nominations and awards in one night . By 2013 , it had sold over 8 million copies in the US and over 19 million copies worldwide . 
 Critics generally praised The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill for Hill 's presentation of a woman 's view on life and love , along with her artistic range . New Ark , however , felt Hill and her record label did not properly credit the group on the album ; a lawsuit filed by the group was settled out of court in 2001 . Since the record 's release , it has been ranked in numerous best @-@ album lists , with a number of critics regarding it as one of the greatest albums of the 1990s , as well as one of the greatest albums of all time . In 2015 , it was included by the Library of Congress in the National Recording Registry . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1996 , Lauryn Hill met Rohan Marley while touring as a member of the Fugees . The two gradually formed a close relationship , and while on tour , Hill became pregnant with his child . The pregnancy and other circumstances in her life inspired her to record a solo album . After contributing to fellow Fugees member Wyclef Jean 's 1997 solo record The Carnival , Hill took time off from touring and recording due to her pregnancy and cases of writer 's block . This pregnancy , however , renewed Hill 's creativity , as she recalled in an interview several years later : " When some women are pregnant , their hair and their nails grow , but for me it was my mind and ability to create . I had the desire to write in a capacity that I hadn 't done in a while . I don 't know if it 's a hormonal or emotional thing ... I was very in touch with my feelings at the time . " Of the early writing process , Hill said , " Every time I got hurt , every time I was disappointed , every time I learned , I just wrote a song . " 
 While inspired , Hill wrote over thirty songs in her attic studio in South Orange , New Jersey . Many of these songs drew upon the turbulence in the Fugees , as well as past love experiences . In the summer of 1997 , as Hill was due to give birth to her first child , she was requested to write a song for gospel musician CeCe Winans . Several months later , she went to Detroit to work with soul singer Aretha Franklin , writing and producing her single " A Rose is Still a Rose " . Franklin would later have Hill direct the song 's music video . Shortly after this , Hill did writing work for Whitney Houston . Having written songs for artists in gospel , hip hop , and R & B , she drew on these influences and experiences to record The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Hill began recording The Miseducation in late 1997 at Chung King Studios in New York City , and completed it in June 1998 at Tuff Gong Studios in Kingston , Jamaica . In an interview , Hill described the first day of recording , stating : " The first day in the studio I ordered every instrument I ever fell in love with : harps , strings , timpani drums , organs , clarinets . It was my idea to record it so the human element stayed in . I didn 't want it to be too technically perfect . " Initially , Jean did not support Hill recording a solo album , but eventually offered to help as a producer , which she did not accept . Aside from doing work at Chung King Studios , Hill also recorded at Perfect Pair Studios in New Jersey , as well as Sony Studios , with some songs having different elements recorded at different studios . The bulk of the album , however , was recorded at Tuff Gong Studios in Kingston , Jamaica , the studio built by reggae musician Bob Marley . Regarding this shift in environment , Hill stated : " When I started recording in New York and New Jersey , lots of people were talking to me about going different routes . I could feel people up in my face , and I was picking up on bad vibes . I wanted a place where there was good vibes , where I was among family , and it was Tuff Gong . " Many members of the Marley family were present in the studio during the recording sessions , among them Julian Marley , who added guitar elements to " Forgive Them Father . " 
 In an interview , recording engineer Gordon " <unk> Gordon " Williams recalled the recording of " Lost Ones " , stating : " It was our first morning in Jamaica and I saw all of these kids gathered around Lauryn , screaming and dancing . Lauryn was in the living room next to the studio with about fifteen Marley grandchildren around her , the children of Ziggy , and Stephen , and Julian , and she starts singing this rap verse , and all the kids start repeating the last word of each line , chiming in very spontaneously because they were so into the song . " Columbia Records considered bringing in an outside producer for the album and had early talks with RZA of the Wu @-@ Tang Clan . However , Hill was adamant about writing , arranging , and producing the album herself : " It would have been more difficult to articulate to other people . Hey , it 's my album . Who can tell my story better than me ? " She recalled Ruffhouse Records executive Chris Swartz ensuring her artistic freedom while recording the album : " I had total control of the album . Chris Swartz at Ruffhouse , my label , said , ' Listen , you 've never done anything stupid thus far , so let me let you do your thing . ' " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 A neo soul album , The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill incorporates musical styles such as R & B , soul , hip hop , and reggae . Some songs are based in hip hop soul . " When It Hurts So Bad " is musically old roots reggae mixed with soul . While mostly in English , " Forgive Them Father " and " Lost Ones " both feature singing in patois , which is the common dialect in Jamaica . Although heavily R & B , the song " Superstar " contains an interpolation of the rock song " Light My Fire " by The Doors . Hill said that she " didn 't want to come out with a [ Fugees ] type of sound " , but create " something that was uniquely and very clearly a Lauryn Hill album . " She also said that she did not intend for the album 's sound to be commercially appealing : " There 's too much pressure to have hits these days . Artists are watching Billboard instead of exploring themselves . Look at someone like Aretha , she didn 't hit with her first album , but she was able to grow up and find herself . I wanted to make honest music . I don 't like things to be too perfect , or too polished . People may criticize me for that , but I grew up listening to Al Green and Sam Cooke . When they hit a high note , you actually felt it . " 
 Much of Hill 's lyrics dealt with motherhood , the Fugees , reminiscence , love , heartbreak , and God . Commenting on the album 's gospel content , Hill stated " Gospel music is music inspired by the gospels . In a huge respect , a lot of this music turned out to be just that . During this album , I turned to the Bible and wrote songs that I drew comfort from . " Several of the album 's songs , such as " Lost Ones , " " Superstar , " " Ex @-@ Factor " and " Forgive Them Father " were widely speculated as direct attacks at <unk> members Wyclef and Pras . " Ex @-@ Factor " was originally intended for a different artist , however , Hill decided to keep it after it was completed , due to its personal content . Although a large portion of the album 's love songs would turn out to be bitter from Hill 's previous relationship , " Nothing Even Matters , " a duet performed by Hill and R & B singer D 'Angelo , showcased a brighter , more intimate perspective on the subject . The song was inspired by Hill 's relationship with Rohan Marley . Speaking about " Nothing Even Matters " ' lyrics , Hill remarked : " I wanted to make a love song , á la Roberta Flack & Donny Hathaway , and give people a humanistic approach to love again without all the physicality and overt sexuality . " 
 " To Zion , " among the more introspective tracks on the album , spoke about how Hill 's family comes before her career and her decision to have her first child , even though many at the time encouraged her to abort the pregnancy , so as to not conflict with her burgeoning career . In an interview she discussed the song 's origin and significance , commenting " Names wouldn 't come when I was ready to have him . The only name that came to me was Zion . I was like , ' is Zion too much of a weight to carry ? ' But this little boy , man . I would say he personally delivered me from my emotional and spiritual drought . He just replenished my newness . When he was born , I felt like I was born again . " She further stated : " I wanted it to be a revolutionary song about a spiritual movement , and also about my spiritual change , going from one place to another because of my son . " 
 Throughout The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill , several interludes of a teacher speaking to what is implied to be a classroom of children are played . The " teacher " was played by American poet and politician Ras Baraka speaking to a group of children in the living room of Hill 's New Jersey home . Hill requested that Baraka speak to the children about the concept of love , to which he improvised in the lecture . Slant Magazine 's Paul Schrodt remarked on the title 's reference to Carter G. Woodson 's The Mis @-@ Education of the Negro : " [ Hill ] adopts Woodson 's thesis and makes it part of her own artistic process . Like the songs themselves , the intro / outro classroom scenes suggest a larger community working to redefine itself . " Along with Woodson 's book , the album 's title was inspired by the film and autobiographical novel The Education of Sonny Carson . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 After The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill was released on August 25 , 1998 , it entered at number one on the Billboard 200 , selling 422 @,@ 624 copies in its first week . The album 's chart debut broke the record for first @-@ week sales by a female artist . It topped the Billboard 200 for a second consecutive week , during which it sold 265 @,@ 000 copies . In the United States , the album sold one million copies in less than a month and 2 @.@ 4 million copies by December . It spent 81 weeks on the Billboard 200 , and topped the Billboard Year @-@ End Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . 
 The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill was promoted with three singles — " Doo Wop ( That Thing ) " , " Ex @-@ Factor " , and " Everything Is Everything " — all of which became hits and produced popular music videos . The album 's sales increased after Hill 's appearance at the 41st Annual Grammy Awards , as it sold 234 @,@ 000 more copies in the week of March 3 , 1999 , and 200 @,@ 000 copies the following week . By August , it had sold 10 million copies worldwide , including nearly 700 @,@ 000 in Canada . On December 17 , 2001 , it was certified 8x platinum by the RIAA . In April 2002 , Columbia said that the album had sold 12 million copies worldwide , and in 2009 , its global sales were reported to be 19 million copies . By 2013 , it had sold more than eight million copies in the US . 
 The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill received highly positive reviews from contemporary critics and , according to the Los Angeles Times , was the most acclaimed album of 1998 . Reviewers frequently praised Hill 's presentation of a female 's view on life and love . Eric Weisbard from Spin called her a " genre @-@ bender " whose confident singing and rapping was balanced by vulnerable themes and sentiment . In The New York Times , Ann Powers found it " miraculous " and " exceptional " for Hill to use " her faith , based more in experience and feeling than in doctrine , " to " connect the sacred to the secular in music that touches the essence of soul . " AllMusic 's John Bush was impressed by how she produced most of the album , " not as a crossover record , but as a collection of overtly personal and political statements " , while demonstrating " performing talents , vocal range , and songwriting smarts " . David Browne , writing in Entertainment Weekly , called it " an album of often @-@ astonishing power , strength , and feeling " , crediting Hill with " easily flowing from singing to rapping , evoking the past while forging a future of her own " . Dream Hampton of The Village Voice said she seamlessly " travels her realm within any given song " , while Chicago Tribune critic Greg Kot deemed the record a " vocal tour de force " with arrangements that " bristle with great ideas " . 
 In a less enthusiastic review , Q magazine 's Dom Phillips felt the music 's only flaw was " a lack of memorable melody " on some songs that did not utilize interesting samples , while John Mulvey from NME <unk> about what he felt were redundant skits and Hill 's " propensity " for histrionics and declarations of " how brilliant God is " on an other " essential " album . Pitchfork Media 's Neil Lieberman found some of the ballads tedious and the melodies " cheesy " . Citing " Lost Ones " and " Superstar " as highlights , Village Voice reviewer Robert Christgau deemed it the " PC record of the year " , featuring exceptionally understated production and skillful rapping but also inconsistent lyrics , average singing , and superfluous skits . He appreciated the " knowledge [ and ] moral authority " of Hill 's perspective and values , although he lamented her appraisal of God on record . In the Los Angeles Times , Soren Baker believed Hill was more effective as a critical rapper than a singer on the more emotional songs , where her voice was " too thin to carry such heavy subject matter " . 
 = = Tour = = 
 Initially , there was no immediate tour planned due to the album not needing the promotion , and Hill was pregnant again with a child due in September 1998 . Her first live performances of the songs were at Saturday Night Live and the Billboard Music Awards . In January 1999 , Hill recruited a band and began rehearsals for what would become The Miseducation Tour . As soon as the tour was announced , tickets immediately sold out . 
 The tour began at Budokan in Tokyo on January 21 , 1999 . Hill performed there again the following night , and played at two other Tokyo venues in the following week . One week later , she flew to London for her performance at the Brixton Academy on February 8 , 1999 . With 20 US dates total , the American part of the tour , which featured Outkast as the opening act , started on February 18 in Detroit , and ended on April 1 , 1999 , at Hill 's hometown , Newark , New Jersey . She began the tour 's 14 @-@ date European leg on May 13 , when she performed at the Oslo Spektrum in Norway , closing on June 2 at the Manchester Arena in England . She then returned to Japan , where the tour was completed . 
 Hill did not want an extensive tour because of obligations to her family and the difficulties she experienced touring with the Fugees in 1996 , which she found desensitizing and isolating . According to Hill biographer Chris Nickson in 1999 , " there was the possibility of more dates being added ... but it was unlikely that Lauryn would be willing to make the tour more grueling and draining . She 'd come to know that there was much more to life than a career . " 
 = = Lawsuit = = 
 Though The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill was largely a collaborative work between Hill and a group of musicians known as New Ark ( Vada Nobles , <unk> Pugh , <unk> and Johari Newton ) , there was " label pressure to do the Prince thing , " wherein all tracks would be credited as " written and produced by " the artist with little outside help . While recording the album , when Hill was asked about providing contracts or documentation to the musicians , she replied : " We all love each other . This ain 't about documents . This is blessed . " 
 In 1998 , New Ark filed a 50 @-@ page lawsuit against Hill , her management and her record label , stating that Hill " used their songs and production skills , but failed to properly credit them for the work . " The musicians claimed to be the primary songwriters on two tracks , and major contributors on several others , though Gordon Williams , the album 's mixer and engineer , described the project as a " powerfully personal effort by Hill ... It was definitely her vision . " In response to the lawsuit , Hill claimed that New Ark took advantage of her success . New Ark requested partial writing credits , and monetary reimbursement . The suit was eventually settled out of court in February 2001 for a reported $ 5 million . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 At the end of 1998 , The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill was voted the second best record of the year in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics published in The Village Voice . Hill was nominated ten times for the 1999 Grammy Awards , making her the first woman to ever be nominated that many times in one year . She won five Grammys , including awards in the Best New Artist , Best R & B Song , Best Female R & B Vocal Performance , and Best R & B Album categories . The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill also won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year , making it the first hip hop record to ever receive that award . Hill set a new record in the industry , as she also became the first woman to win five Grammys in one night . It also earned her nominations at the NAACP Image Awards for Outstanding Female Artist , Outstanding Album , and Outstanding Song ( " Doo Wop ( That Thing ) " ) . At the Billboard Music Awards , the record won in the R & B Album of the Year category , while " Doo Wop " won Best R & B / Urban New Artist Clip , and at the 1999 American Music Awards , Hill won the award for Best New Soul / R & B artist . She also won a Soul Train award and received a nomination for Best International Female Solo Artist at the Brit Awards . 
 The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill has since appeared on a number of lists ranking the greatest albums ever ; according to Acclaimed Music , it is the 154th most ranked record on critics ' all @-@ time lists . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 With The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill 's success , Hill became a national media icon , as magazines ranging from Time to Esquire to Teen People vied to place her on their front covers . In a February 8 , 1999 , Time cover @-@ story , Hill was credited for helping fully assimilate hip hop into mainstream music , making her the first hip hop artist to ever appear on the magazine 's front cover . In 2012 , Rolling Stone ranked the record at number 314 in the magazine 's " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " list , its entry reading , " Hill took Seventies soul and made it boom and signify to the hip @-@ hop generation on her solo debut . " Jon Caramanica , writing in The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , called it " as earnest , unpretentious , and pleasantly sloppy an album as any woman of the hip @-@ hop generation has ever made " , and said that , by appealing to a wide spectrum of listeners with hip hop filtered through a " womanist lens " , the album propelled Hill to superstardom " of epic proportions " and " the focal point at hip @-@ hop 's crossover into the mainstream . " Music journalist Peter Shapiro cited it as " the ultimate cross @-@ over album of the hip @-@ hop era . " 
 Along with Erykah Badu 's 1997 debut Baduizm , The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill was also an important release in the neo soul music scene . According to Ebony magazine , it brought the neo soul genre to the forefront of popular music , and became the genre 's most critically acclaimed and popular album . According to the Encyclopedia of African American Music ( 2010 ) , " some tracks are based more in hip hop soul than neo soul , but the record is filled with live musicians and layered harmonies , and therefore it is a trendsetting record that connects modern hip hop , R & B , and classic soul music together , creating groundwork for what followed it in the neo soul genre . " On its fifteenth anniversary , American rapper Nas reviewed the album for XXL giving it the publication 's highest rating . He viewed it as a model for artists of all genres to follow and " a timeless record , pure music ... It represents the time period — a serious moment in Black music , when young artists were taking charge and breaking through doors . " In 2015 , The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the Library of Congress and selected for inclusion in the National Recording Registry . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Instrumentalists = = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 = = = Vocalists = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Mendy Rudolph = 
 Marvin " Mendy " Rudolph ( March 8 , 1926 – July 4 , 1979 ) was an American professional basketball referee in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) for 22 years , from 1953 to 1975 . Regarded as one of the greatest officials in NBA history , Rudolph officiated 2 @,@ 112 NBA games ( a record held at retirement ) and was the first league referee to work 2 @,@ 000 games . He was also selected to referee eight NBA All @-@ Star Games and made 22 consecutive NBA Finals appearances . 
 Following his career as a referee , he was a color commentator for CBS Sports 's coverage of the NBA on CBS for two seasons from 1975 to 1977 and he appeared in a television advertisement for Miller Lite . He was a member of the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame Class of 2007 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Early life and family = = = 
 Born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , Rudolph was raised in Wilkes @-@ Barre , Pennsylvania . His father , Harry Rudolph , was a prominent basketball referee and baseball umpire . Mendy Rudolph played basketball as a child and eventually chose the same profession as his father . Upon graduating from James M. Coughlin High School , he began officiating basketball games at the Wilkes @-@ Barre Jewish Community Center and later worked scholastic games . At age 20 , he was recruited to referee games alongside his father , who served as Eastern Professional Basketball League ( Eastern League ) President from 1956 to 1970 . During his career in the Eastern League , he officiated his first Eastern League President 's Cup championship series in 1948 and was selected as a referee in at least one game in every President 's Cup playoff and championship series between 1949 and 1953 . At the same time , he also served in the United States Air Force during the Korean War . 
 Rudolph was married twice during his life . His first marriage was to his childhood sweetheart and together they raised three children . But the relationship became troubled and eventually ended . In 1961 , Mendy Rudolph met Susan , a receptionist at the WGN office in New York City , while both worked for the station . At the time , Rudolph worked at WGN as an additional job outside of officiating , which was common among referees from his era . Mendy and Susan Rudolph were married in 1973 . Two years later , their first child , Jennifer Rudolph , was born . 
 = = = Gambling problem = = = 
 Throughout his life , Rudolph suffered from a gambling problem and was labeled a " compulsive gambler " . He would often spend his leisure time placing bets at race tracks and Las Vegas , Nevada and Puerto Rico casinos . At that time , NBA referees were allowed to gamble , but this practice has since been prohibited . As he incurred gambling losses , Rudolph was once offered by a Las Vegas gambler to erase his outstanding debt by participating in point shaving . However , he refused to accept the offer and said to his wife , " It goes against all my principles . I love the game too much , respect it too much . I couldn 't do it to you . I couldn 't do it to the memory of my father , and I couldn 't do it to myself . If I have to go into bankruptcy , something I 'd hate to do , I 'd do it , " according to in a 1992 New York Times interview with Susan Rudolph . Rudolph had cashed in his $ 60 @,@ 000 pension fund to pay debts and he still owed an additional $ 100 @,@ 000 . While he refused to seek professional help , Rudolph cut back on his gambling habit later in his life . 
 = = NBA officiating career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Rudolph was recommended by Eddie Gottlieb , coach and owner of the NBA 's Philadelphia Warriors at the time , to then @-@ NBA commissioner Maurice Podoloff , after observing Rudolph officiate an exhibition game . Rudolph was hired by the NBA in February 1953 , midway through the 1952 – 53 NBA season and he became the youngest official in the league . In his early years with the NBA , Rudolph quickly became an established official as he worked playoff games within his first two years in the league . 
 = = = Memorable NBA Finals games = = = 
 Rudolph officiated the 1955 NBA Finals between the Syracuse Nationals and Fort Wayne Pistons , which was notable for its actions by fans , fights between players , and attacks on referees . Game 3 of the series , played in Indianapolis , Indiana , was interrupted by a fan who threw a chair on the floor and ran on the court to protest calls made by Rudolph and referee Arnie Heft . Six years later , he made history by officiating the entire 1961 NBA Finals between the Boston Celtics and St. Louis Hawks with his colleague Earl Strom . 
 Rudolph and Strom officiated another notable game in the 1964 NBA Finals . In Game 5 of the championship series , Wilt Chamberlain , playing for the San Francisco Warriors , knocked out Clyde Lovellette of the Boston Celtics with a punch . Celtics head coach Red Auerbach stormed onto the court and demanded that Chamberlain be thrown out of the game . The latter told Auerbach if he did not " shut up " , he would be knocked down to the floor with Lovellette . Auerbach countered the threat , " Why don 't you pick on somebody your own size . " Rudolph intervened the discussion and told Auerbach , " Red , do you have any other seven @-@ footers who 'd like to volunteer ? " 
 = = = Head of officials = = = 
 As his career progressed in the league , Rudolph took on responsibilities beyond officiating . In 1966 , he was named referee @-@ in @-@ chief and worked alongside Dolph Schayes , who was hired as the league 's supervisor of officials that year to replace Sid Borgia . In this position , he oversaw areas that pertained to referee mechanics , techniques , and rule interpretations . It was in this role that he authored the NBA Official ’ s Manual and Case Book . 
 While he served as head of officials , the NBA lost four veteran officials — Norm Drucker , Joe Gushue , Earl Strom , and John <unk> to the rival American Basketball Association ( ABA ) in 1969 over salary and benefits . At the time of transaction , Rudolph told Strom , " ( Deputy Commissioner ) Carl [ Scheer ] , ( NBA Commissioner ) Walter [ Kennedy ] , and I were prepared to offer you guys the greatest contract in the history of pro basketball . " 
 By the early 1970s , Rudolph successfully encouraged the league to adopt a plain gray referee uniform over the traditional " zebra " shirt to de @-@ emphasize the presence of officials in games . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 By 1975 , Rudolph 's health condition began to deteriorate and he was forced to retire after suffering a blood clot in his lung during a 1975 NBA playoff game between the Buffalo Braves and Washington Bullets , played April 25 , 1975 . In his final game , he had to be carried off the court . On November 9 , 1975 , Rudolph officially ended his career as a referee in the NBA , in which he officiated more games ( 2 @,@ 113 ) than any official in league history at the time . Earl Strom later broke Rudolph ’ s record and officiated over 2 @,@ 400 games in his 30 @-@ year career . 
 = = Post @-@ officiating career = = 
 = = = Broadcasting = = = 
 Following his officiating career , Rudolph transitioned to a career in broadcasting . During the 1975 @-@ 76 and 1976 @-@ 77 NBA seasons , he worked as a television analyst for CBS Sports covering The NBA on CBS . During his first season , he was paired with Brent Musburger and Rick Barry for the 1976 NBA Finals . This championship series was most memorable for a triple @-@ overtime Game 5 , which has been labeled the " greatest game " in NBA history . In this game , Celtic John Havlicek made an apparent game @-@ winning field goal at the conclusion of the second overtime . The game clock had expired , but Rudolph , along with Musburger and Barry , noted that the shot was made with two seconds remaining . Referee Richie Powers , however , decided that one second remained in the second overtime period . 
 = = = Television commercial = = = 
 In 1976 , Rudolph was featured in a Miller Brewing Company television advertisement along with then @-@ Celtics head coach Tom Heinsohn to promote Miller Lite 's " Tastes Great , Less Filling " advertising campaign . Rudolph and Heinsohn debated whether Miller Lite was less filling or tastes great in a bar room scene . After Heinsohn refused to agree that Lite was , first and foremost , less filling , Rudolph threw his thumb in the air and screamed , " You 're out of the bar . " This advertisement popularized Miller 's campaign slogan and the campaign was named eighth best of the 20th century by Advertising Age in 1999 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Rudolph died on July 4 , 1979 from a heart attack in New York City . Mendy and Susan Rudolph were standing outside a movie theatre entrance when Mendy collapsed . After unsuccessful attempts at mouth @-@ to @-@ mouth resuscitation , he was taken to a hospital where he died an hour after arrival . At the time of his death , then @-@ NBA Commissioner Larry O 'Brien said of Rudolph , " Mendy 's contributions to the integrity of pro basketball are legendary . " Officials wore a patch with Rudolph 's uniform number , 5 , on their sleeves the following season after his death , the 1979 @-@ 80 NBA season , to honor him . No other official in the NBA has worn this number to the present day . 
 Known for his charisma , personality , and iconic stature on the court , Rudolph symbolized NBA officiating during the early years of the NBA to fans of professional basketball and became the most recognizable official during the NBA 's first four decades . Bob Ryan of The Boston Globe said of Rudolph , " If any man other than Red Auerbach ever earned the title of NBA institution , it was certainly Mendy Rudolph . " Upon retirement , he set a precedent for the standards that future referees are judged . Early in his officiating career , Joe Crawford ( later hired by the NBA in 1977 ) attended games that Rudolph worked in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania and studied his style and approach . Earl Strom credited Rudolph for being an influence on the development of his career in the NBA . In his autobiography , Calling the Shots , Strom described Rudolph as " one of the most prominent referees because of his style , courage , and judgment . He had excellent judgment . He made the call regardless of the pressure , whom it involved , or where it was . " Strom later told The New York Times that " Mendy Rudolph was simply the greatest referee of all time . " 
 Strom was also an advocate to get Rudolph enshrined into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame . On April 2 , 2007 , Rudolph was announced as one of the seven members of the Basketball Hall of Fame 's Class of 2007 to be enshrined in September 2007 , twenty @-@ eight years after his death . It was reported that the length of time for Rudolph to become elected was the result of his gambling lifestyle . He became the thirteenth referee to be inducted into the Hall of Fame . 
 = Commutative property = 
 In mathematics , a binary operation is commutative if changing the order of the operands does not change the result . It is a fundamental property of many binary operations , and many mathematical proofs depend on it . Most familiar as the name of the property that says " 3 + 4 
 = 4 + 3 " or " 2 × 5 = 
 5 × 2 " , the property can also be used in more advanced settings . The name is needed because there are operations , such as division and subtraction , that do not have it ( for example , " 3 − 5 ≠ 5 − 3 " ) , such operations are not commutative , or noncommutative operations . The idea that simple operations , such as multiplication and addition of numbers , are commutative was for many years implicitly assumed and the property was not named until the 19th century when mathematics started to become formalized . 
 = = Common uses = = 
 The commutative property ( or commutative law ) is a property generally associated with binary operations and functions . If the commutative property holds for a pair of elements under a certain binary operation then the two elements are said to commute under that operation . 
 = = Mathematical definitions = = 
 The term " commutative " is used in several related senses . 
 = = Examples = = 
 = = = Commutative operations in everyday life = = = 
 Putting on socks resembles a commutative operation since which sock is put on first is unimportant . Either way , the result ( having both socks on ) , is the same . In contrast , putting on underwear and trousers is not commutative . 
 The commutativity of addition is observed when paying for an item with cash . Regardless of the order the bills are handed over in , they always give the same total . 
 = = = Commutative operations in mathematics = = = 
 Two well @-@ known examples of commutative binary operations : 
 The addition of real numbers is commutative , since 
 <formula> 
 For example 4 + 5 
 = 5 + 4 , since both expressions equal 9 . 
 The multiplication of real numbers is commutative , since 
 <formula> 
 For example , 3 × 5 = 
 5 × 3 , since both expressions equal 15 . 
 Some binary truth functions are also commutative , since the truth tables for the functions are the same when one changes the order of the operands . 
 For example , the logical biconditional function p ↔ q is equivalent to q ↔ p . This function is also written as p IFF q , or as p ≡ q , or as <unk> . 
 The last form is an example of the most concise notation in the article on truth functions , which lists the sixteen possible binary truth functions of which eight are commutative : <unk> 
 = <unk> ; <unk> ( OR ) = 
 <unk> ; <unk> ( NAND ) 
 = <unk> ; <unk> ( IFF ) = 
 <unk> ; <unk> 
 = <unk> ; <unk> ( AND ) = 
 <unk> ; <unk> ( NOR ) 
 = <unk> ; <unk> = 
 <unk> . 
 Further examples of commutative binary operations include addition and multiplication of complex numbers , addition and scalar multiplication of vectors , and intersection and union of sets . 
 = = = Noncommutative operations in everyday life = = = 
 <unk> , the act of joining character strings together , is a noncommutative operation . For example , 
 <formula> 
 Washing and drying clothes resembles a noncommutative operation ; washing and then drying produces a markedly different result to drying and then washing . 
 Rotating a book 90 ° around a vertical axis then 90 ° around a horizontal axis produces a different orientation than when the rotations are performed in the opposite order . 
 The twists of the Rubik 's Cube are noncommutative . This can be studied using group theory . 
 Also thought processes are noncommutative : A person asked a question ( A ) and then a question ( B ) may give different answers to each question than a person asked first ( B ) and then ( A ) , because asking a question may change the person 's state of mind . 
 = = = Noncommutative operations in mathematics = = = 
 Some non @-@ commutative binary operations : 
 = = History and etymology = = 
 Records of the implicit use of the commutative property go back to ancient times . The Egyptians used the commutative property of multiplication to simplify computing products . Euclid is known to have assumed the commutative property of multiplication in his book Elements . Formal uses of the commutative property arose in the late 18th and early 19th centuries , when mathematicians began to work on a theory of functions . Today the commutative property is a well known and basic property used in most branches of mathematics . 
 The first recorded use of the term commutative was in a memoir by François Servois in 1814 , which used the word <unk> when describing functions that have what is now called the commutative property . The word is a combination of the French word commuter meaning " to substitute or switch " and the suffix <unk> meaning " tending to " so the word literally means " tending to substitute or switch . " The term then appeared in English in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society in 1844 . 
 = = Propositional logic = = 
 = = = Rule of replacement = = = 
 In truth @-@ functional propositional logic , commutation , or commutativity refer to two valid rules of replacement . The rules allow one to transpose propositional variables within logical expressions in logical proofs . The rules are : 
 <formula> 
 and 
 <formula> 
 where " <formula> " is a <unk> symbol representing " can be replaced in a proof with . " 
 = = = Truth functional connectives = = = 
 Commutativity is a property of some logical connectives of truth functional propositional logic . The following logical <unk> demonstrate that commutativity is a property of particular connectives . The following are truth @-@ functional tautologies . 
 Commutativity of conjunction 
 <formula> 
 Commutativity of disjunction 
 <formula> 
 Commutativity of implication ( also called the law of permutation ) 
 <formula> 
 Commutativity of equivalence ( also called the complete commutative law of equivalence ) 
 <formula> 
 = = Set theory = = 
 In group and set theory , many algebraic structures are called commutative when certain operands satisfy the commutative property . In higher branches of mathematics , such as analysis and linear algebra the commutativity of well @-@ known operations ( such as addition and multiplication on real and complex numbers ) is often used ( or implicitly assumed ) in proofs . 
 = = Mathematical structures and commutativity = = 
 A commutative semigroup is a set endowed with a total , associative and commutative operation . 
 If the operation additionally has an identity element , we have a commutative monoid 
 An abelian group , or commutative group is a group whose group operation is commutative . 
 A commutative ring is a ring whose multiplication is commutative . ( Addition in a ring is always commutative . ) 
 In a field both addition and multiplication are commutative . 
 = = Related properties = = 
 = = = Associativity = = = 
 The associative property is closely related to the commutative property . The associative property of an expression containing two or more occurrences of the same operator states that the order operations are performed in does not affect the final result , as long as the order of terms doesn 't change . In contrast , the commutative property states that the order of the terms does not affect the final result . 
 Most commutative operations encountered in practice are also associative . However , commutativity does not imply associativity . A counterexample is the function 
 <formula> 
 which is clearly commutative ( interchanging x and y does not affect the result ) , but it is not associative ( since , for example , <formula> but <formula> ) . More such examples may be found in Commutative non @-@ associative magmas . 
 = = = Symmetry = = = 
 Some forms of symmetry can be directly linked to commutativity . When a commutative operator is written as a binary function then the resulting function is symmetric across the line y 
 = x . As an example , if we let a function f represent addition ( a commutative operation ) so that f ( x , y ) = 
 x + y then f is a symmetric function , which can be seen in the image on the right . 
 For relations , a symmetric relation is analogous to a commutative operation , in that if a relation R is symmetric , then <formula> . 
 = = Non @-@ commuting operators in quantum mechanics = = 
 In quantum mechanics as formulated by Schrödinger , physical variables are represented by linear operators such as x ( meaning multiply by x ) , and <formula> . These two operators do not commute as may be seen by considering the effect of their compositions <formula> and <formula> ( also called products of operators ) on a one @-@ dimensional wave function <formula> : 
 <formula> 
 According to the uncertainty principle of Heisenberg , if the two operators representing a pair of variables do not commute , then that pair of variables are mutually complementary , which means they cannot be simultaneously measured or known precisely . For example , the position and the linear momentum in the x @-@ direction of a particle are represented respectively by the operators <formula> and <formula> ( where <formula> is the reduced Planck constant ) . This is the same example except for the constant <formula> , so again the operators do not commute and the physical meaning is that the position and linear momentum in a given direction are complementary . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Axler , Sheldon ( 1997 ) . Linear Algebra Done Right , 2e . Springer . ISBN 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Abstract algebra theory . Covers commutativity in that context . Uses property throughout book . 
 <unk> , Irving M. ; Cohen , Carl ( 2005 ) . Introduction to Logic . Prentice Hall . 
 Gallian , Joseph ( 2006 ) . Contemporary Abstract Algebra , 6e . Boston , Mass . : Houghton Mifflin . ISBN 0 @-@ 618 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Linear algebra theory . Explains commutativity in chapter 1 , uses it throughout . 
 Goodman , Frederick ( 2003 ) . Algebra : Abstract and Concrete , Stressing Symmetry , 2e . Prentice Hall . ISBN 0 @-@ 13 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Abstract algebra theory . Uses commutativity property throughout book . 
 Hurley , Patrick ( 1991 ) . A Concise Introduction to Logic 4th edition . Wadsworth Publishing . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 http : / / <unk> / web / <unk> / http : / / <unk> / resources / <unk> Lumpkin , B. ( 1997 ) . The Mathematical Legacy Of Ancient Egypt - A Response To Robert <unk> . Unpublished manuscript . 
 Article describing the mathematical ability of ancient civilizations . 
 Robins , R. Gay , and Charles C. D. Shute . 1987 . The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus : An Ancient Egyptian Text . London : British Museum Publications Limited . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Translation and interpretation of the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus . 
 = = = Online resources = = = 
 <unk> , Michiel , ed . ( 2001 ) , " Commutativity " , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , Springer , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 010 @-@ 4 
 <unk> , Aaron , Commutative at <unk> , Accessed 8 August 2007 . 
 Definition of commutativity and examples of commutative operations 
 Weisstein , Eric W. , " Commute " , <unk> . , Accessed 8 August 2007 . 
 Explanation of the term commute 
 <unk> . Examples of non @-@ commutative operations at <unk> , Accessed 8 August 2007 
 Examples proving some noncommutative operations 
 O 'Conner , J J and Robertson , E F. MacTutor history of real numbers , Accessed 8 August 2007 
 Article giving the history of the real numbers 
 <unk> , Julio and Miller , Jeff . Earliest Known Uses Of Mathematical Terms , Accessed 22 November 2008 
 Page covering the earliest uses of mathematical terms 
 O 'Conner , J J and Robertson , E F. MacTutor biography of François Servois , Accessed 8 August 2007 
 Biography of Francois Servois , who first used the term 
 = Bon Voyage ( Kumi Koda album ) = 
 Bon Voyage is the eleventh studio album by Japanese recording artist Kumi Koda . It was released on February 26 , 2014 by Rhythm Zone . Bon Voyage is Koda 's first album since her 2012 Japonesque , and her longest album in production since her 2008 studio album Kingdom . The album 's production was handled by several music producers , such as Joseph Lawrence , Toby Gad , T @-@ Sk , Mats Lie <unk> , Figge Bosstrom , Tommy Henriksen , <unk> <unk> , and Clarabell . It also features guest appearances from Sean Paul and OVDS . Five different formats were released to promote the album : a standalone CD , a CD and DVD bundle , a CD and Blu @-@ ray bundle , a fan package featuring a live DVD , and a digital release in Japan . 
 Upon the album 's release , it was met with favourable reviews from music critics . Critics highlight individual songs for their production and composition , and commended the singles . Bon Voyage became Koda 's seventh studio album to reach the top spot on Japan 's Oricon Albums Chart , but her first album to not ship over 100 @,@ 000 units in that region . Because of this , it became her first studio album to fail to achieve a certification by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) . Three singles and one EP were released from the album . Koda promoted the album through her 2014 Bon Voyage concert tour . 
 = = Development and composition = = 
 Bon Voyage is Koda 's first album since her 2012 Japonesque . It is also her longest album in production since her 2008 studio album Kingdom , both of which spanned a total of two years . For the album , Koda 's record label Rhythm Zone and its parent company Avex Trax hired several producers , such as Joseph Lawrence , Toby Gad , T @-@ Sk , Mats Lie <unk> , Figge Bosstrom , Tommy Henriksen , <unk> <unk> , and Clarabell . Producers such as Henriksen and Bosstrom have collaborated with Koda in the past with her albums Kingdom and Universe ( 2010 ) . Bon Voyage is Koda 's second album to be handled primarily with Western producers and composers ; Koda 's first album handled by Western producers was Japonesque . Western producers and composers carried on working with Koda on her next studio album Walk of My Life ( 2015 ) . 
 Bon Voyage is a J @-@ pop album with numerous elements of country rock , pop , R & B , electronic dance music , and reggae . It is Koda 's first album to emphasize full English language songs ; in total , Bon Voyage features nine English , five bilingual ( Japanese / English ) , and two Japanese tracks . Each song from the album is co @-@ written by Koda , including the English , Japanese and interlude tracks . The album includes two interlude tracks ; " Introduction : Bon Voyage " and " Interlude : Bon Voyage " , both boasting electronic music and sirens noises . EDM elements are used in tracks " Show Me Your Holla " , " Crank tha Bass " ( featuring OVDS ) , " LOL " , " Go to the Top " , " Dreaming On " , and " U Know " . " Loaded " , which features Jamaican rapper and musician Sean Paul , incorporates elements of reggae and dancehall music , as does the following tracks " Winner Girls " and " On Your Side " . Tetsuo Hiraga from Hot Shot Discs reviewed the singles " Go to the Top " and " Koishikute " , and identified musical elements of electronic dance , dubstep , and 8 @-@ bit music in the former , and a pop ballad melody in the latter . Koda 's summer EP Summer Trip featured " Lalalalala " and " Touch Down " , and Hiraga noted elements of country rock in the former , and R & B in the latter track . 
 = = Release and packaging = = 
 Bon Voyage was released on February 26 , 2014 by Rhythm Zone and Avex Taiwan in five different formats . The stand @-@ alone CD featured the sixteen tracks in a cardboard slipcase , with first press editions including a glossy sticker of Koda . The CD and DVD bundle featured the sixteen tracks and a bonus DVD , including the music videos for : " Show Me Your Holla " , " LOL " , " Dreaming Now ! " , " Touch Down " , " Lalalalala " , and " Koishikute " . The DVD also included the making videos for " Show Me Your Holla " and " LOL " . The CD and Blu @-@ ray bundle includes the same tracks and videos from the CD and DVD bundle , but features a hologram sticker , one <unk> , and a slipcase . A special edition was released on Koda 's website , entitled the " Fan Club Edition " . This format features the original CD , and a DVD featuring live performances from Koda 's Fanclub Live Tour in 2013 . The format was housed in an A5 @-@ sized digipak . The final format is the digital release , which was released only in Japan . This is Koda 's only studio album not to be released worldwide . 
 Visually based on cruise ship members , the five Bon Voyage cover sleeves feature different images all photographed by Kazuyoshi Shimomura . The CD cardboard sleeve has Koda squatting and holding onto a cruise ship steering wheel ; the jewel case has Koda holding a life buoy . The CD and DVD cardboard sleeve has a close @-@ up shot of Koda wearing a captain 's uniform ; the jewel case has Koda posing on top of a life buoy . The Blu @-@ ray cardboard sleeve and jewel case has Koda posing with a pair of binoculars , while the Fan Club edition has a close @-@ up of Koda sitting down holding a cruise ship steering wheel . The digital release uses the CD and DVD close @-@ up shot . The booklet and photo shoot were designed by members of United Lounge Tokyo , and each booklet from the five format features different images of Koda . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Bon Voyage received favourable reviews from music critics . A reviewer from CD Journal was positive towards the album , commending the song 's production and " danceable " material . The reviewer complimented how Koda " transformed " her previous look from Japonesque into a more " Westernized " adaptation . The reviewer highlighted " Go to the Top " and the " pop ballad gem " " Koishikute " as the album 's best tracks . A reviewer from Amazon.co.jp was positive towards the album 's musical variety , labelling it " Koda flow " . The reviewer also complimented how the " entertainment factor " was " jam @-@ packed " into the album . <unk> Music ’ s Kirsty H. gave the album a positive review , saying that it " shows Koda Kumi 's experiences perfectly " . Kirsty praised Koda 's " personal songs " and the album 's musical variation . On the album ’ s overall sound , she wrote the following : " The album overall is very good and catchy and clearly shows how mature and experienced Koda Kumi is . All of the songs are catchy and this makes the album all the more fun to listen to ” . <unk> and Zero from GK : AD , a sub @-@ site from <unk> , awarded the album a B- , calling the dance tracks gems and praising a majority of the album 's ballads . Zero highlighted " Imagine " as the album 's best track . However , they both were critical toward the composition of the second half of the album . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Bon Voyage debuted at number one on both the Japanese Daily and Weekly Oricon Albums Chart , with over 46 @,@ 000 units sold in its first week . It became Koda 's sixth studio album to reach the top spot , but became her lowest first week sales since her debut album Affection ( 2002 ) . It fell to 21 in its second week , shifting over 5 @,@ 000 units . The album stayed in the top 100 for four weeks , and the overall top 300 for twelve weeks . As of January 2016 , Bon Voyage has sold an estimated 59 @,@ 499 units , making it her first album to not sell over the 100 @,@ 000 limit . Because of this , it failed to achieve a certification by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) . It was her lowest selling studio album at the time , until her next album Walk Of My Life sold less by May 2015 ( with 50 @,@ 000 units ) . Bon Voyage reached number five on Japan 's Billboard Top Albums Sales . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Go to the Top " was released as the album 's lead single on October 24 , 2012 . The song was used as the opening theme song for the Âge – developed anime series Muv @-@ Luv Alternative : Total Eclipse . Upon its release , it garnered positive reviews from music critics . Many critics commended the song 's composition , lyrical content , and Koda 's vocal delivery . Minor criticism was towards the song 's musical elements of 8 @-@ bit music . " Go to the Top " was successful in Japan , peaking at number one on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart , Koda 's eighth number one single . It also reached number 10 on Billboard 's Japan Hot 100 chart , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . The accompanying music video for the single was shot in Tokyo by Tomoe Nakano ; it features an animated Koda flying a large robot in a racing circuit with another racer . 
 " Koishikute " was released as the album 's second single on December 26 , 2012 . Upon its release , it garnered positive reviews from music critics . Many critics commended the song 's composition , lyrical content , and Koda 's vocal delivery ; critics had highlighted it as an album stand out , and labelled it a " gem " . The single suffered in physical sales in Japan , reaching number seven on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart and selling over 23 @,@ 000 units . It remains Koda 's lowest selling single since " Hot Stuff " in 2005 . However , the song was certified gold by RIAJ for digital sales of 100 @,@ 000 units . The accompanying music video for the single was shot in Tokyo by Ryuji Seki ; it features Koda singing the song in a subway and in a small room . 
 Summer Trip was released as the album 's third single and first extended play single on July 31 , 2013 . The EP consists of four interlude tracks , two album tracks : " Lalalalala " and " Touch Down " , and an unreleased track " Is This Trap ? " . Upon its release , Summer Trip received garnered positive reviews from music critics . Many critics commended the tracks individually for its composition and its song writing . Summer Trip debuted at number six on the Japanese Singles Chart , and sold over 20 @,@ 000 units . " Lalalalala " charted on Japan 's Hot 100 at number 23 . This is Koda 's lowest selling EP to date , surpassing Gossip Candy ( 2010 ) which sold over 84 @,@ 000 units . Music videos for " Lalalalala " and " Touch Down " were shot in Venice Beach , California . 
 " Dreaming Now ! " was released as the album 's fourth and final single on November 13 , 2013 , which was the same day as Koda 's 30th birthday . The song was written by Koda in honor of Japan 's part in the 2013 Volleyball World Grand Champion Cup for men and women , both of which were held in Japan . Upon its release , it garnered positive reviews from music critics . Many critics commended the tracks composition and labelled it an anthem for the games . Despite out selling both " Koishikute " and Summer Trip with over 26 @,@ 000 units sold , it charted lower on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart at number nine . It charted at number 33 on Japan 's Hot 100 chart . An accompanying music video for " Dreaming Now ! " was shot in Tokyo . 
 = = = Concert tour and other releases = = = 
 To promote Bon Voyage , Koda went on her 2014 Bon Voyage concert tour . The concert tour went throughout Japan , and carried on the cruise theme from the album . All of the album tracks , apart from " On Your Side " and " Introduction : Bon Voyage " , were included on the set list for the tour ; " Is This Trap ? " from Summer Trip also appeared on the set list . The concert tour was released in two formats ; a double @-@ DVD bundle , and a Blu @-@ ray release . The bonus disc on the DVD bundle featured a new track " Money in my Bag " from Walk of My Life , alongside the backdrop visual of " Crank tha Bass " and the documentary of the tour . This material was included on the one disc for Blu @-@ ray . Despite the release , it did not chart on the Oricon DVD and Blu @-@ ray charts . To promote the material from Bon Voyage , remixes of " Crank tha Bass " , " Loaded " , " Is This Trap ? " , " Dreaming Now ! " , " Touch Down " , " Winner Girls " , and " Lalalalala " were later featured on Koda ’ s eight remix album Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's 6 ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Bon Voyage . 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = = Alternate Versions = = 
 Crank Tha Bass feat . OVDS 
 Crank Tha Bass feat . OVDS : Found on the album ( 2014 ) 
 Crank Tha Bass feat . OVDS [ <unk> vs <unk> Remix ] : Found on Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's 6 ( 2014 ) 
 Crank Tha Bass feat . OVDS [ OVDS Remix ] : Found on Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's 6 ( 2014 ) 
 LOADED feat . Sean Paul 
 LOADED feat . Sean Paul : Found on the album ( 2014 ) 
 LOADED feat . Sean Paul [ <unk> <unk> Remix ] : Found on Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's 6 ( 2014 ) 
 Winner Girls 
 Winner Girls : Found on the album ( 2014 ) 
 Winner Girls [ Dank @-@ One Glitch @-@ Hop Remix ] : Found on Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's 6 ( 2014 ) 
 = New York State Route 18F = 
 New York State Route 18F ( NY 18F ) is a 9 @.@ 80 @-@ mile ( 15 @.@ 77 km ) long state highway in northwestern Niagara County , New York , in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at an interchange with NY 104 and the Niagara Scenic State Parkway just east of the village of Lewiston . The northern terminus is at an intersection with NY 18 near Four Mile Creek State Park in Porter . NY 18F parallels NY 18 for most of its alignment , taking a more westerly course than its parent . NY 18F is the only remaining suffixed route of NY 18 . 
 The portion of modern NY 18F south of Youngstown was originally designated as part of NY 34 in 1924 ; however , NY 34 was absorbed into NY 18 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . The change was part of a larger extension of NY 18 east to Rochester . NY 18 was realigned in 1949 to follow its modern alignment between Lewiston and Lake Ontario , at which time its former routing alongside the Niagara River became NY 18F . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Officially , NY 18F begins at the eastern edge of the village of Lewiston at an interchange between NY 104 and the Niagara Scenic Parkway . Signage for NY 18F , however , exists as far south as the interchange between NY 104 and NY 18 south of the village . According to signage , NY 18F is concurrent to NY 104 from NY 18 north to the interchange between NY 104 and the Moses Parkway , where NY 18F and NY 104 split at the western extent of the interchange . The Seaway Trail , routed along NY 104 from Niagara Falls north to Lewiston , follows NY 18F west into Lewiston along the path of Ridge Road , here named Center Street . At 4th Street , NY 18F turns northward , following 4th Street for four blocks to Oneida Street . NY 18F cuts west on Oneida for two blocks before continuing northward out of the village on 2nd Street . 
 North of the Lewiston village limits , NY 18F is the closest roadway to the Niagara River , a trait reflected in its name of Lower River Road . As it progresses northward along the eastern bank of the river , NY 18F parallels both the Niagara Scenic State Parkway and NY 18 . At Stella Niagara , NY 18F meets Pletcher Road , the first road north of Lewiston that provides a connection to all three roadways . NY 18F continues on , passing through the western extent of Joseph Davis State Park south of the village of Youngstown in the town of Lewiston . In Youngstown , NY 18F becomes Main Street and intersects the western terminus of NY 93 in the village center . At the northern fringe of the community , NY 18F intersects the southern entrance to the Fort Niagara State Park . NY 18F bypasses the park , turning east onto Jackson Street , then north onto Lake Road as it follows the perimeter of the park . 
 Near the Lake Ontario shoreline , NY 18F connects to the Fort Niagara spur of the Niagara Scenic State Parkway via a partial diamond interchange . Only westbound access is permitted at the location ; access to the eastbound spur , and thus the parkway mainline , is provided via NY 93 in Youngstown or by NY 18 farther east . Past the exit , NY 18F turns east and begins to parallel the lakeshore . The route also parallels the mainline Moses Parkway for a short distance before curving south to cross over the parkway and terminate at NY 18 in the vicinity of Four Mile Creek State Park in Porter . 
 Ownership and maintenance of NY 18F is split between three different entities . The section of NY 18F from Center Street in Lewiston to the northern village line of Youngstown is maintained by Niagara County . From Main Street in Youngstown to the northern village line , NY 18F is concurrent to the unsigned County Route 138 ( CR 138 ) ; the remainder of the county @-@ maintained segment is co @-@ designated as CR 907 . All of NY 18F north of Youngstown is maintained by the town of Porter while the rest — Center Street between NY 104 and 4th Street — is maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation . 
 = = History = = 
 All of what is now NY 18F south of Youngstown was originally designated as part of NY 34 in 1924 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 34 became part of NY 18 , which was extended north to Youngstown and east to Rochester as part of the renumbering . NY 18 was originally state @-@ maintained from the village of Lewiston to Youngstown ; however , the state of New York relinquished ownership and maintenance of NY 18 between Center Street in Lewiston and the village of Youngstown on July 24 , 1947 . The section within the village of Lewiston was transferred to village control , while the remainder of the route was given to Niagara County . In December 1947 , Lewiston petitioned the county to also assume maintenance of the portion of NY 18 within the village ; the request was eventually granted . 
 On January 1 , 1949 , NY 18 was realigned to follow a more inland routing between the village of Lewiston and what is now Four Mile Creek State Park . The former riverside and lakeside routing of NY 18 between the two locations was redesignated as NY 18F . At the time , NY 18F was one of five spur routes of NY 18 , which at the time extended southward to the Pennsylvania state line . NY 18A , NY 18B , and NY 18D were assigned to spurs of NY 18 south of Lewiston , while NY 18E was assigned to a spur of NY 18 in the village of Lewiston that connected the village to the second Queenston – Lewiston Bridge . When NY 18 was truncated to Lewiston c . 1962 , NY 18A , NY 18B , and NY 18D were either renumbered or absorbed by pre @-@ existing routes . NY 18E also ceased to exist around this time as the Queenston – Lewiston Bridge was removed and replaced with the modern Lewiston – Queenston Bridge just upstream . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Niagara County . 
 = International Development Association = 
 The International Development Association ( IDA ) is an international financial institution which offers concessional loans and grants to the world 's poorest developing countries . The IDA is a member of the World Bank Group and is headquartered in Washington , D.C. , United States . It was established in 1960 to complement the existing International Bank for Reconstruction and Development by lending to developing countries which suffer from the lowest gross national income , from troubled creditworthiness , or from the lowest per capita income . Together , the International Development Association and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development are collectively generally known as the World Bank , as they follow the same executive leadership and operate with the same staff . 
 The association shares the World Bank 's mission of reducing poverty and aims to provide affordable development financing to countries whose credit risk is so prohibitive that they cannot afford to borrow commercially or from the Bank 's other programs . The IDA 's stated aim is to assist the poorest nations in growing more quickly , equitably , and sustainably to reduce poverty . The IDA is the single largest provider of funds to economic and human development projects in the world 's poorest nations . From 2000 to 2010 , it financed projects which recruited and trained 3 million teachers , immunized 310 million children , funded $ 792 million in loans to 120 @,@ 000 small and medium enterprises , built or restored 118 @,@ 000 kilometers of paved roads , built or restored 1 @,@ 600 bridges , and expanded access to improved water to 113 million people and improved sanitation facilities to 5 @.@ 8 million people . The IDA has issued a total $ 238 billion USD in loans and grants since its launch in 1960 . Thirty @-@ six of the association 's borrowing countries have graduated from their eligibility for its concessional lending . However , eight of these countries have relapsed and have not re @-@ graduated . 
 = = History = = 
 During the 1940s and 1950s , developing countries with the poorest incomes began realizing that they could no longer afford to borrow capital and needed more @-@ favorable lending terms than offered by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) . At the onset of his inaugural term in 1949 , then @-@ President of the United States Harry S. Truman assembled an advisory group to suggest ways to accomplish his Point Four Program , of which a significant component was an effort to strengthen developing countries , especially those nearest to the Eastern Bloc , to dissuade them from aligning with other communist states . The advisory group recommended an international mechanism that would function somewhere in between providing strictly @-@ loaned and strictly @-@ granted funds . The UN and United States government published reports expressing support for the creation of a multilateral , concessional lending program for the poorest developing countries . However , the United States was largely unresponsive and ultimately distracted by its involvement in the Korean War and unconvinced that development needed greater financial stimulation . 
 Developing countries grew increasingly frustrated with not being able to afford IBRD lending and perceived the Marshall Plan as a comparatively generous gift to European nations . In the late 1940s and early 1950s , developing countries began calling for the United Nations ( UN ) to create a development agency that would offer technical support and concessional financing , with a particular desire that the agency adhere to other UN bodies ' convention of each country having one vote as opposed to a weighted vote . However , the United States ultimately opposed proposals of that nature . As the United States grew more concerned over the growth of the Cold War , it made a concession in 1954 at the behest of its Department of State by backing the conception of the International Finance Corporation ( IFC ) . Despite the launch of the IFC in 1956 , developing countries persisted in demanding the creation of a new concessional financing mechanism and the idea gained traction within the IBRD . Then @-@ President of the IBRD Eugene R. Black , Sr. began circulating the notion of an International Development Association , as opposed to an idea of a concessional named the Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development ( SUNFED ) governed by the United Nations . Paul Hoffman , the Marshall Plan 's former Administrator , proposed the idea of a soft @-@ loan facility within the World Bank , where the US would have a preponderant voice in the allocation of such <unk> Senator Mike Monroney of Oklahoma supported this idea . As Chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on International Finance , Monroney proposed a resolution recommending a study of the potential establishment of an International Development Association to be affiliated with the IBRD . Monroney 's proposal was more preferred received within the United States than the SUNFED . The resolution passed the senate in 1958 , and then @-@ U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert B. Anderson encouraged other countries to conduct similar studies . In 1959 , the World Bank 's Board of Governors approved a U.S.-born resolution calling for the drafting of the articles of agreement . SUNFED later became the Special Fund and merged with the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance to form the United Nations Development Programme . 
 By the end of January 1960 , fifteen countries signed the articles of agreement which established the International Development Association . The association launched in September of that same year with an initial budget of $ 913 million ( $ 7 @.@ 1 billion in 2012 dollars ) . Over the next eight months following its launch , the IDA grew to 51 member states and loaned $ 101 million ( $ 784 @.@ 2 million in 2012 dollars ) to four developing countries . 
 = = Governance and operations = = 
 The IDA is governed by the World Bank 's Board of Governors which meets annually and consists of one governor per member country ( most often the country 's finance minister or treasury secretary ) . The Board of Governors delegates most of its authority over daily matters such as lending and operations to the Board of Directors . The Board of Directors consists of 25 executive directors and is chaired by the President of the World Bank Group . The executive directors collectively represent all 187 member states of the World Bank , although decisions regarding IDA matters concern only the IDA 's 172 member states . The president oversees the IDA 's overall direction and daily operations . As of July 2012 , Jim Yong Kim serves as the President of the World Bank Group . The association and IBRD operate with a staff of approximately 10 @,@ 000 employees . 
 The IDA is evaluated by the Bank 's Independent Evaluation Group . In 2009 , the group identified weaknesses in the set of controls used to protect against fraud and corruption in projects supported by IDA lending . In 2011 , the group recommended the Bank provide recognition and incentives to staff and management for implementing activities which implement the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness principles of harmonization and alignment , promote greater use of sector @-@ wide approaches to coordination , and explain the reasons why when a country 's financial management system is not used so that the client country may address those shortcomings . It also recommended that the Bank collaborate with development partners to strengthen country @-@ level leadership of development assistance coordination by offering greater financial and technical support . Development economists , such as William Easterly , have conducted research which ranked the IDA as featuring the most transparency and best practices among donors of development aid . 
 Researchers from the Center for Global Development expect that the IDA 's collection of eligible borrowing countries will decrease by half by the year 2025 ( marking the 65th anniversary of the association 's establishment ) due to graduations and that remaining borrowers will consist primarily of African countries and will face substantial population declines . These changes will imply a need for the association to carefully examine its financial models and business operations to determine an appropriate strategy going forward . The center recommended that the World Bank leadership begin discussing the long @-@ term future of the IDA . 
 = = Membership = = 
 The IDA has 173 member countries which pay contributions every three years as replenishments of its capital . The IDA lends to 81 borrowing countries , nearly half of which are in Africa . Membership in the IDA is available only to countries who are members of the World Bank , particularly the IBRD . Throughout its lifetime , 36 borrowing countries have graduated from the association , although a number of these countries have relapsed as borrowers after not sustaining their graduate status . 
 To be eligible for support from the IDA , countries are assessed by their poverty and their lack of creditworthiness for commercial and IBRD borrowing . The association assesses countries based on their per capita income , lack of access to private capital markets , and policy performance in implementing pro @-@ growth and anti @-@ poverty economic or social reforms . As of 2012 , to borrow from the IDA 's concessional lending programs , a country 's gross national income ( GNI ) per capita must not exceed $ 1 @,@ 175 ( in 2010 dollars ) . 
 = = = Countries graduated from IDA lending = = = 
 The following countries have graduated from their eligibility for IDA lending . 
 = = = Countries relapsed to IDA lending = = = 
 The following countries have relapsed to their eligibility for IDA lending and have not yet re @-@ graduated or have instead become partially eligible ( also referred to as a blend country ) . 
 Cameroon ( 1994 ) 
 Congo ( 1994 ) 
 Cote d 'Ivoire ( 1992 ) 
 Honduras ( 1991 ) 
 Nicaragua ( 1991 ) 
 Nigeria ( 1989 ) 
 Papua New Guinea ( 2003 , partially eligible ) 
 Zimbabwe ( 1992 ) 
 = = Replenishment rounds = = 
 The IDA is a unique part of the World Bank as it requires continuous replenishment of its resources . Member countries replenish its funds through contributions in addition to supplementary funds provided by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Finance Corporation ( IFC ) . Whereas the IBRD acquires most of its funds by raising capital on international financial markets , the IDA heavily depends on contributions from its member states . The IDA received 2 billion in special drawing rights ( $ 3 billion USD ) from the IBRD and IFC . Approximately half of the IDA 's resources come from the 45 donating member countries . In its early years , the IDA received most of its replenishments from the United Kingdom and United States but , because they were not always reliable sources of funding , other developed nations began to step in and fill the economic gaps not met by these two countries . Every three years , member nations that provide funds to the IDA gather together to replenish the IDA 's resources . These funds come primarily from well @-@ developed countries including the United States , Japan , France , Germany , and the United Kingdom with 58 % from the US , 22 % from France , and 8 % from the UK . As of 2014 , there have been 17 IDA replenishment rounds . Fifty one member countries participated in the IDA 's 16th replenishment of $ 49 @.@ 3 billion USD . The IDA 's loans and grants are usually not paid in full to the borrower at the outset , but rather disbursed incrementally as needed by the project . Most of the donor countries such as the United States commit letters of credit to the IDA which bear no interest and are not able to be transferred or revoked , and which are exchanged for cash as needed for project disbursal . Other countries pay their contributions in full on the date of commitment to the IDA so that it may cover its operating expenses . Donors receive no return of funds and repayments from borrowers are again loaned to future projects such that donors won 't need to commit those funds again in the future . 
 Although the IDA 's funds are now regularly replenished , this does not happen without some financial and political challenges for the donating countries . When donor countries convene to negotiate the replenishments , there is often intense discussion about redefining the association 's goals and objectives or even about reforming the IDA . Due to delays in the United States Congress impeding the approval of IDA funding , the association 's members implemented a set of policy triggers outlining the commitment threshold necessary for replenishment to take effect . The threshold imposed a requirement that an aggregate share of 85 % in voting stock is necessary for executing a replenishment . The threshold was implemented with the aim to compel the United States to participate in replenishment rounds . Though countries intended for the triggers to hold the United States to its commitments , the threshold ultimately provided the United States a de facto veto power over replenishment and capital increase negotiations due to its ability to bring replenishment negotiations to an impasse by threatening to withhold support . The U.S. has used this influence to further its long @-@ term foreign policy objectives and short @-@ term political and economic goals by imposing conditionality on replenishment negotiations . 
 = = Lending = = 
 The IDA lends to countries with the aim to finance projects that will develop infrastructure and improve education , healthcare , access to clean water and sanitation facilities , and environmental responsibility . It is considered to be the soft lending window of the World Bank , while the IBRD is considered to be the hard lending window . The association offers grants and loans with maturities ranging from 25 to 40 years , grace periods of 5 to 10 years , and interest rates of 2 @.@ 8 % or 1 @.@ 25 % depending on whether the borrower is a blend country and to which degree it is eligible . Regular IDA @-@ eligible borrowers may take advantage of no @-@ interest loans . Financial resources are allocated to eligible countries based on their success at implementing pro @-@ growth and a poverty @-@ reducing domestic policies . The IDA uses the World Bank 's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment ( <unk> ) development indicator to determine each country 's place in a resource allocation index . It then prioritizes its lending to those countries which are indicated to be most promising in terms of favorable policies and aid effectiveness . The IDA adopted the Crisis Response Window in 2007 to enable the rapid provision of emergency financing in response to crises . The association adopted the Immediate Response Mechanism in 2011 to provide IDA borrowers with immediate access to withdraw <unk> portions of their loans , should a crisis arise that meets the mechanism 's criteria . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 Because African countries face some of the most severe poverty and underdevelopment , and because 39 of those countries are the IDA 's poorest member states , the association allocates approximately half of the IDA 's resources toward financing projects in those countries . As a result of its efforts to improve the region , the IDA has helped bring electricity to an additional 66 million Africans since 1997 , helped build or restore 240 @,@ 000 kilometers of paved roads , and helped enroll an additional 15 million African children in school since 2002 . The IDA was approved in May 2012 to provide $ 50 million USD worth of credit to the Women Entrepreneur Development Project as part of an effort to help women in Ethiopia participate in business as skilled employees or leaders . Although the positive outcomes of the IDA 's efforts in Africa had been historically slow , the large allocation of funding to African countries led to positive outcomes particularly within agriculture and infrastructure development efforts . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 The IDA 's efforts in Asia have been particularly successful . Numerous Asian countries have graduated from the IDA lending program , including the Philippines , China , South Korea , and Thailand . Of the association 's borrowing countries , approximately 20 are in Asia . The association 's efforts in South Asia have focused primarily on projects for education , healthcare , transportation , agriculture , and energy . Due to rapid growth in Asian countries ' populations , some pockets of poverty have emerged . To mitigate this effect , the IDA adopted an economic plan of action which established organizations to improve education and healthcare , with a focus on reducing poverty across Asian nations in ways that are compatible with local culture . 
 = Lerkendal Stadion = 
 The Lerkendal Stadion ( Norwegian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ) is an all @-@ seater football stadium located at Lerkendal in Trondheim , Norway . The home ground of the Tippeligaen side Rosenborg BK , it has a capacity for 21 @,@ 166 spectators , making it the second @-@ largest football stadium in the country . 
 Lerkendal opened as a multi @-@ purpose stadium on 10 August 1947 , as the main football and athletics stadium in Trondheim . Originally the venue was mostly used by the football teams SK Freidig and FK Kvik , and Rosenborg did not became a tenant until 1957 . A new grandstand with roof was completed in 1962 , and floodlights were installed in 1968 . The oldest of the current stands were built in 1996 , along with new lighting . Three more grandstands were built between 2000 and 2002 , which also saw the removal of the athletics facilities and the sale of the stadium from Trondheim Municipality to Rosenborg . Further expansions plans have been launched , to increase capacity by filling in the corners and possibly by building a retractable roof . 
 The record attendance of 28 @,@ 569 dates from the decisive league match against Lillestrøm in 1985 . Ten international matches were held at Lerkendal between 1951 and 1990 . One domestic cup final has been held at Lerkendal ; the Women 's Cup Final in 1986 . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction of Lerkendal started as a public works during the 1930s , as a measure to create jobs . It opened on 10 August 1947 , and consisted of a main grass field , two gravel fields , two handball courts and two tennis courts . The main field had a spectator capacity for 37 @,@ 000 on temporary stands , making it the second @-@ largest stadium in the country . The long sides consisted of temporary wooden stands , with seating on the south stand and standing places on terraces on the north stand . The end sides of the stadium consisted of grass embankments at a 30 percent angle , allowing for standing space for spectators without having to build stands . Changing rooms were located in a nearby German @-@ built barracks dating from the Second World War . 
 The first major rebuilding of the venue took place ahead of the 1962 season , when the wooden stands were torn and replaced with concrete stands on both long sides . On the south side , a wave @-@ shaped roof was built ; originally designed to be self @-@ supporting , the contractor , Reinertsen , did not trust their own calculations and made a last @-@ minute decision to install support columns . The new stands were taken into use on 3 May 1962 . <unk> was installed in 1968 to allow UEFA club tournament matches to be held at the venue . An all @-@ weather running track was subsequently also laid . On 1 December 1988 , Lerkendal Station opened , allowing train passengers a short walk to the stadium . In 1994 , the first pitch with Desso GrassMaster was laid . 
 By the time Rosenborg had qualified for the 1995 – 96 UEFA Champions League , UEFA had for security reasons introduced restrictions which reduced Lerkendal 's capacity to 12 @,@ 200 spectators . In addition , a total ban on standing places would be introduced from 1997 . In 1995 , a debate arose between Rosenborg and Trondheim Municipality regarding the construction of a new grandstand , to be located on the north side of the stadium . Rosenborg 's Nils <unk> stated that if it was not built ahead of the 1997 – 98 season , Rosenborg would only be allowed to sell 2 @,@ 800 tickets to their home Champions League matches , and that they instead would be forced to play their games at Ullevaal Stadion in Oslo . The new grandstand cost 32 million , and opened in 1996 season . The upgrades also included a new floodlight and public announcement system . 
 Rosenborg started laying plans for further construction , at first looking at construction of a new grandstand on the east end . In May 1998 , Lerkendal Eiendom AS , owned 44 % by Rosenborg , was established to build three new grandstands , including removing the running track to make it a football @-@ only stadium . An alternative was to move and build an all @-@ new stadium at Ranheim . Following the announcement of the Ranheim plans , Mayor Anne Kathrine <unk> stated that she did not want to sell Lerkendal , as she wanted public ownership of cultural infrastructure . In April 1999 , Trondheim Municipality 's chief of administration , Knut <unk> , recommended that the municipality sell Lerkendal to Rosenborg , who would then along with private investors be free to construct the necessary facilities . At the time , the municipality estimated the value of Lerkendal to between NOK 50 and 100 million . The football district stated they were in favor of conversion of Lerkendal , and that they feared that if Rosenborg moved Lerkendal would incur high costs on the municipality , giving Granåsen as an example of a little used skiing facility which used half the municipal funding for sports venues . 
 On 5 October 1999 , the club and the municipality signed a letter of intent which indicated that the two would cooperate constructing a new venue along with private investors . The final contract was made with Reinertsen on 20 April 2000 , and other involved investors included Fokus Bank , <unk> NOR , I. K. Lykke , <unk> , Siemens and <unk> Næringsbygg . The club received a 47 % share of the stadium company , while the municipality received 14 % in exchange for the company taking over the ownership of the land and existing structure . As compensation for losing Lerkendal as an athletics venue , the municipality spent NOK 32 million upgrading <unk> stadion as the city 's new main athletics stadium . NOK 20 million was financed by Rosenborg , while the remainder was spent using public funds . 
 Construction of the end stands started in January 2001 , and they were completed in November . The demolition of the 1962 stand started on 24 October 2001 , and the new stand was completed on 30 September 2002 . The cost of constructing the new Lerkendal , including all four stands from 1996 to 2002 , was NOK 335 million , of which NOK 253 million was for the 2001 and 2002 work . To give optimal conditions for the turf , the corners were not built out and the south stand was built with a transparent roof . However , the harsh climate forced the turf to be replaced two years later . In a 2012 survey carried out by the Norwegian Players ' Association among away @-@ team captains , Lerkendal was found to be the league 's second @-@ best stadium , with a score of 4 @,@ 40 on a scale from one to five . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Lerkendal Stadion consists of four , three @-@ tier grandstand without corners . The stadium has a capacity for 21 @,@ 166 spectators , of which 1 @,@ 338 are in club seating and luxury boxes on the center tier of all four stands . The <unk> Stand on the north side of the pitch , built in 1996 , is the largest and the only to have red seats . It holds a capacity of 7 @,@ 457 spectators . Originally named the Adidas Stand , it was renamed before the 2013 @-@ season . Opposite lies the <unk> Stand , which was completed in 2002 . In addition to change rooms and an honor stand , it has a capacity for 6 @,@ 194 spectators . The Rema Stand to the west , opened in 2001 , houses the supporter shop , a pizza restaurant and commercial offices . The upper tier has since its opening been used as a family tier . While the lower tier was used by Kjernen , Rosenborg 's singing supporters . Since Kjernen in 2009 moved to the upper tier of the opposite <unk> Stand , the whole Rema Stand has been used as a family stand . The <unk> Stand opened at the same time , and both have a seating capacity for 3 @,@ 810 people . The latter hosts office space for Rosenborg Arena and the football district , as well as change rooms for the training pitch . The upper tier is used by Kjernen , Rosenborg 's supporter club . The lower tier was earlier used by the away fans . But after Kjernen 's move to the upper tier , the away fans was moved to the western end of the <unk> stand . The pitch has Desso GrassMaster , a natural grass pitch with artificial fibers sown in for increase strength . This includes an automatic watering system and a built @-@ in heating 25 centimeters ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) below the surface . 
 The stadium is part of Lerkendal idrettspark , which also consists of three training pitches , two in full size and of which one has artificial turf . The main training pitch is the natural grass <unk> , while the artificial turf venue is Lerkendal <unk> . The two pitches both have flood lighting , heating and are often used for matches by Rosenborg 's recruit and reserve teams . The team has a health club located within the south stand . The club 's offices are located in <unk> , a German @-@ built barracks dating from World War II . 
 The stadium is located at Lerkendal , 3 kilometers ( 2 mi ) south of the city center . It is located on the southern main road into town , with good bus service . In addition , it is located next to Lerkendal Station , the southern terminus of the Trøndelag Commuter Rail . Parking near the stadium is very limited , and ad @-@ hoc park and ride are established on matchdays at <unk> and City Syd . 
 = = Events = = 
 The venue was opened with a friendly football match between the Trondheim city team and the Vestfold county team , which Trondheim won 4 – 3 . The opening , attended by 8 @,@ 000 spectators , also saw several track and field events . The original main football tenants were SK Freidig and FK Kvik . The latter played in the Main League in 1951 – 52 and 1955 – 56 , and otherwise remained in the Second Division throughout most of the 1950s and 60s . A record 18 @,@ 000 spectators watched Freidig lose the 1948 Norwegian Football Cup semifinal against Viking . On 18 October 1950 , Lerkendal hosted a friendly between Kvik and Spartak Moscow . 
 Lerkendal hosted its first international on 26 June 1951 , when Norway beat Iceland 3 – 1 . On 28 August 1953 it hosted a B international game against Finland . Later national games consist of 5 – 0 against Malta on 3 July 1962 , 2 – 0 against Finland on 20 August 1964 , 4 – 2 against Luxembourg on 27 May 1965 , with the record international audience of 22 @,@ 319 , 2 – 1 against Iceland on 21 July 1969 , 0 – 1 against Denmark on 23 September 1973 , 2 – 0 against West Germany on 26 September 1979 , 1 – 0 against Wales on 6 June 1984 , 1 – 0 against Bulgaria on 26 May 1987 @.@ and 1 – 2 against Denmark on 6 June 1990 , The Football Association of Norway no longer plays international matches elsewhere than Ullevaal Stadion because of the conditions in its sponsorship agreements . On 26 May 1977 , the Norway national under @-@ 21 football team lost 2 – 3 against Sweden at Lerkendal . 
 Rosenborg took Lerkendal into use from the 1957 – 58 season , when they were promoted to the Regional League . The season ended in relegation and Rosenborg played the following season at their old home ground , <unk> . With the promotion ahead of the 1959 – 60 season , Rosenborg returned to Lerkendal and have remained there since . In 1959 , Lerkendal was the venue of a neutral quarter final in the cup between <unk> from Levanger and Viking , which attracted 25 @,@ 043 spectators , mostly from Innherred , setting a new stadium record . From the 1960 – 61 season , Rosenborg established itself in the Main League . 
 The opening game of the new stands on 3 May 1962 was a Rosenborg friendly against Dunfermline Athletic . Freidig moved to <unk> <unk> when it was completed ahead of the 1965 season . A new stadium spectator record was set in the cup semifinal against Brann in 1967 , which was watched by 25 @,@ 551 people . Rosenborg qualified for the 1968 – 69 European Cup and met SK Rapid Wien in the first round . The game was spectated by 22 @,@ 492 and remains the record for UEFA tournaments . Per @-@ season average attendance for Rosenborg 's league matches lay between five and ten thousand people during the 1970s and early 1980s , with an all @-@ time low of 2 @,@ 549 in 1978 , when Rosenborg played in the Second Division . The venue hosted the Norwegian Athletics Championships four times , in 1963 , 1967 , 1973 and 1983 . Lerkendal hosted the Women 's Cup Final in 1986 , where Sprint @-@ <unk> beat <unk> @-@ Ørn . <unk> IL played in the top division in 1984 and 1995 , both times playing their home games at Lerkendal . Kvik remained at Lerkendal until the upgrades started in 2000 , after which they moved to <unk> stadion . Bodø / Glimt played their home game in the 1999 – 2000 UEFA Cup against Werder Bremen at Lerkendal , attracting 1 @,@ 425 spectators . 
 The official all @-@ time record at Lerkendal is the final game of the 1985 season , when Rosenborg won the league in the last game against Lillestrøm in a league final which attracted 28 @,@ 569 . Starting with Rosenborg 's success in the late 1980s , attendance rose and lay between eleven and thirteen thousand until 2001 . After the opening of the new stadium in 2002 , attendance again rose , peaking at an average 19 @,@ 903 in 2007 , although it has fallen somewhat since . The high of most seasons is the 16 May game held every year : the 1994 edition against Tromsø saw 27 @,@ 661 spectators , and in 1985 as many as 30 @,@ 000 may have seen the game , as the gates were opened . Since the opening of the current stadium , the attendance record is 22 @,@ 330 , set in the 2006 edition against Odd Grenland . Between 1995 and 2007 , Rosenborg played 11 seasons and 37 home matches in UEFA Champions League . The venue has been used for numerous concerts , including A @-@ ha , Iron Maiden and Kiss . 
 = = Future = = 
 Ahead of the failed Nordic bid to host the Euro 2008 , Lerkendal was , along with Ullevaal Stadion , proposed as Norwegian venues . To reach the required spectator capacity of 30 @,@ 000 seats , the plans called for the roof of the Adidas stand to be removed to allow for a temporary third tier . Additional seating would be created by adding a single row at the bottom of the four stands , and building capacity in the corners . The proposal would have given a spectator capacity of 30 @,@ 849 , although it would have been reduced after the championship by removing the extra tier . Similar plans were launched for the Norwegian – Swedish bid for Euro 2016 , where the cost of the stadium upgrades was estimated at NOK 800 million . In 2007 , the club management stated that they wanted to sell out all matches before they made further expansions to the stadium , independent of the plans to host the Euro . Construction of stands in the corners could give 4 @,@ 000 additional seats , although these would be the most costly to build and at the same time give the worst view of the pitch . Construction could be done by first building two of the corners . Since then , Rosenborg has experienced a significant drop in attendance . The failed Trondheim bid for the 2018 Winter Olympics , launched in 2007 , called for Lerkendal to be the Olympic Stadium and host the opening and closing ceremonies . 
 Rosenborg had originally planned to build additional commercial facilities and a tower hotel during the 2002 construction , but this was canceled . At the 2011 annual meeting , the plans were again launched by <unk> , who stated that construction might start as early as 2011 . In March 2005 , Rosenborg announced plans to build a retractable roof over the pitch and lay artificial turf . The roof was estimated to cost NOK 100 million , and the club estimated that it could generate NOK 30 million per year in increased revenue from concerts and events . By 2007 , the roof plans were delayed , with management stating that it would be necessary to complete the construction of all stands before a roof was built , and that they believed the stadium would soon be expanded . 
 On 19 September 2014 , Lerkendal was awarded the right to host the 2016 UEFA Super Cup , marking the first time a Norwegian stadium would host a European final . 
 = The Cats of Ulthar = 
 " The Cats of Ulthar " is a short story written by American fantasy author H. P. Lovecraft in June 1920 . In the tale , an unnamed narrator relates the story of how a law forbidding the killing of cats came to be in a town called Ulthar . As the narrative goes , the city is home to an old couple who enjoy capturing and killing the townspeople 's cats . When a caravan of wanderers passes through the city , the kitten of an orphan ( Menes ) traveling with the band disappears . Upon hearing of the couple 's violent acts towards cats , Menes invokes a prayer before leaving town that causes the local felines to swarm the cat @-@ killers ' house and devour them . Upon witnessing the result , the local politicians pass a law forbidding the killing of cats . 
 Influenced by Lord Dunsany , the tale was a personal favorite of Lovecraft 's and has remained popular since his death . Considered one of the best short stories of Lovecraft 's early period , aspects of The Cats of Ulthar would be referenced again in the author 's works The Other Gods and The Dream @-@ Quest of Unknown Kadath . It was first published in the literary journal Tryout in November 1920 and now resides in the public domain . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 An unnamed narrator , while gazing upon his pet cat , begins to reminisce about a law in the town of Ulthar that forbids the killing of cats and relates the story of how this law came to be . The tale begins with the introduction of an old cotter and his wife who delight in trapping and violently killing any cats who venture onto their property . The people of the town are too afraid of the couple to speak against these acts , so they instead focus their efforts on keeping their felines from approaching the cotter 's house . One night a caravan of travelers from a distant land arrives and passes through the village . They bring with them an orphan named Menes who , having lost his family to a plague , has only a small , black kitten to keep him company . After being unable to find his kitten on the third day of his stay , Menes hears the stories of the old cotter and his wife , and decides to take action . 
 Menes spends time meditating prior to unleashing a prayer that affects the shapes and movements of the clouds in the sky . The caravan leaves Ulthar that night , shortly before the townspeople notice that all of their cats have gone missing . The townspeople suspect both the old couple and the wanderers , but the innkeeper 's son Atal witnesses the felines circling the property of the cotter . The next morning , the cats have returned to their owners well @-@ fed , but the cotter and his wife have vanished . When the townspeople explore their abandoned house , they discovered nothing more than two skeletons that have been picked clean . The local burgesses , after reviewing the evidence and stories of the townspeople , decide to pass a law that forbids the killing of cats in Ulthar . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lovecraft outlined the plot to his friend <unk> Kleiner in May 1920 and wrote The Cats of Ulthar on June 15 , 1920 , five months after completing his previous tale , The Terrible Old Man . Conceived during the author 's early period , Lovecraft was influenced by the writing of Anglo @-@ Irish writer Lord Dunsany and attempted to mimic his style . Among the literary aspects that Lovecraft borrows are the " vengeance motif " and the " ponderous tone " of Dunsany . Dunsany 's influence is evident on the surface of the text as well : wanderers , similar to the ones portrayed in The Cats of Ulthar , appear in Dunsany 's earlier tale Idle Days on the Yann . Lovecraft ’ s character of Menes shares his name with Menes , the semi @-@ mythical founder of the ancient city of Memphis , Egypt . The ancient Egyptians were admirers of cats who made it a crime to kill or export felines . 
 Prior to The Cats of Ulthar , Lovecraft had penned several tales in the style of Lord Dunsany , including The White Ship , The Street , The Doom that Came to Sarnath , The Terrible Old Man , and The Tree . His next Dunsanian tale , <unk> , was considered by Lovecraft scholar S. T. Joshi to be " one of his best and most significant " . The Cats of Ulthar was first published in the literary journal Tryout in November 1920 , and later appeared in Weird Tales in February 1926 and 1933 , as well as being privately reprinted in a forty two @-@ copy run in December 1935 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Cats of Ulthar was a personal favorite of Lovecraft 's , who was an ardent cat lover . A number of contemporary critics , as well as Lovecraft himself , consider the story to be the best of all his Dunsanian tales . Other critics have noted that the story is one of Lovecraft 's most famous tales that fits both the Dunsanian and the " weird fantasy " style . Literary critic Darrell Schweitzer , however , comments that The Cats of Ulthar resembles Dunsany in " mood and execution " only and that " [ it ] has no obvious parallels in any Dunsany story " . Schweitzer refers to the prose as " restrained " , and notes that , unlike Lovecraft , Dunsany preferred dogs and would have been unlikely to have written such an enthusiastic tribute . Lovecraft scholar S. T. Joshi disagrees , claiming that " [ t ] his tale owes more to Dunsany than many of his other ' Dunsanian ' fantasies " . 
 The character of Atal , the innkeeper 's son who witnesses the cats of Ulthar circling the antagonists ' cottage , would later appear in Lovecraft 's The Other Gods . In this short story , written in August 1921 and first published in November 1933 , Atal , now an adult , becomes an apprentice to Barzai the Wise and travels with him to seek out the tale 's eponymous deities . Barzai even mentions the law against killing cats in Ulthar , further cementing the connection . Atal also appears as a priest in the long The Dream @-@ Quest of Unknown Kadath — written in 1927 but not published until 1943 — when protagonist Randolph Carter visits the city 300 years after the events in The Cats of Ulthar , when the town is still heavily populated by felines . Carter is later able to summon the cats of Ulthar to his aid . Cats would be used in what scholar Katharine M. Rogers calls " a more original way " in Lovecraft 's 1923 work The Rats in the Walls . Here , as in others of Lovecraft later tales , cats embody the attraction to horror while , unlike the human protagonists , " never pursuing horror to the point of becoming horrible themselves " . The text of The Cats of Ulthar , like many of Lovecraft 's works , has fallen into the public domain and can be accessed in several compilations of the author 's work as well as on the Internet . 
 = Alright , Still = 
 Alright , Still is the debut studio album by English singer and songwriter Lily Allen , released on 13 July 2006 by Regal Recordings . After being rejected by several labels , Allen signed to London Records , who eventually lost interest in Allen , leading her to meet production duo Future Cut and sign to Regal Recordings . Recording for the album began in 2004 with sessions between Allen and Future Cut , and Allen 's work garnered publicity on the Internet as she posted demos to her Myspace account before they were officially released . Allen later traveled to the United States to work with Greg Kurstin and Mark Ronson , to complete the final half of the album in 2006 . 
 Alright , Still is predominately a pop album , with songs that are heavily influenced by Jamaican ska music , reggae and hip hop . The lyrics are conversational and farcical , while discussing past relationships and a dark sense of humour . Due to the instances of strong language in a great majority of the songs , the album was released with a Parental Advisory warning , although the song " Friday Night " remains censored on all versions of the album . 
 Upon release , Alright , Still received acclaim from the British music press , with international critics calling the record and Allen " original " . It was commercially successful in the United Kingdom , where it debuted at number two on the UK Albums Chart and was later certified triple platinum . Alright , Still has sold over 2 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . The album earned a nomination for Best Alternative Music Album at the 50th Grammy Awards . It was promoted by the release of four singles , including the chart @-@ topper " Smile " and the top @-@ 10 hit " LDN " . 
 = = Background = = 
 When her family went to Ibiza on holiday , Allen told her mother that she was staying with friends but remained in Sant Antoni de Portmany instead . She earned money by working at a Plastic Fantastic record store and dealing ecstasy . Allen met her first manager , George Lamb , in Ibiza . She was rejected by several labels , which she attributed to her drinking and being the daughter of actor Keith Allen . She eventually used her father 's connections to get signed to London Records in 2002 . When the executive who had signed her left , the label lost interest and she left without releasing the folk songs that had been written for her , many of which were written by her father . She then studied horticulture to become a florist , but changed her mind and returned to music . Allen began writing songs , while her manager introduced her to production duo Future Cut in 2004 . They worked in a small studio in the basement of an office building . 
 = = Development = = 
 Allen 's manager introduced her to production duo Future Cut in 2004 . They worked in a small studio in the basement of a Manchester office building . In 2005 , Allen was signed to Regal Records ; the label gave her £ 25 @,@ 000 to produce an album , though they were unable to provide much support for it due to their preoccupation with other releases such as Coldplay 's X & Y and virtual band Gorillaz ' Demon Days . 
 Allen created an account on Myspace and began posting demos in November 2005 . The demos attracted thousands of listeners , and 500 limited edition 7 " vinyl singles of one of the demos , a song titled " LDN " , were rush @-@ released and sold for as much as £ 40 . Allen also produced two mixtapes titled My First Mixtape and My Second Mixtape to promote her work , including tracks by the band Creedence Clearwater Revival , and rapper Dizzee Rascal , and Ludacris . As she accumulated tens of thousands of MySpace friends , The Observer Music Monthly ( OMM ) , a magazine published in The Observer , took interest . Few people outside of her label 's A & R department had heard of Allen , so the label were slow in responding to publications who wanted to report about her . 
 In March 2006 , OMM published an article about Allen 's success through MySpace , and she received her first major mainstream coverage appearing in the magazine 's cover story two months later . The popularity of her songs convinced her label to allow her more creative control over the album and to use some of the songs that she had written instead of attempting to work with mainstream producers . Allen found herself distracted by the publicity , so to focus on finishing the album , she traveled to the United States to work with producers Greg Kurstin and Mark Ronson . There , she was able to complete the second half of the album in approximately two weeks . 
 The album 's title is used in a line from the second track , " Knock ' Em Out " : " You look alright still , yeah what 's your name ? " Allen borrowed the phrase from a slang term that her brother Alfie Owen @-@ Allen and his friends used as a synonym for cool . She stated that she liked Albert Einstein 's aphorism " Nothing changes until something moves " and the idea that " everything is [ alright ] as long as it 's still " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 In her songs , Allen develops various personas . She stated that she tried to " write about stuff that happens to people from all different backgrounds " . The lyrics are conversational , with a dark sense of humour . In many of the songs , one of Allen 's personae disparages someone around her . In " Smile " , " Not Big " , and " Shame for You " , she insults an ex @-@ boyfriend . In " Knock ' Em Out " , she mocks suitors at a bar , and Lily reprimands her brother Alfie on the song of the same name . 
 Joe Strummer , a close friend of Allen 's father Keith , played mixtapes of Brazilian music and Jamaican reggae and ska when she was young . Allen stated that she had " always been into very black music " such as ska , reggae , and hip hop music . Since she did not know how to rap , she chose to use reggae as a point of reference when making Alright , Still . The album 's music blends ska and reggae with pop melodies . Allen 's melodies are influenced by the jazz improvisation techniques of American singers Blossom Dearie and Ella Fitzgerald . The album 's beats are influenced by various genres such as jazz and grime . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In 2007 , Allen played the newly launched Park Stage at the Glastonbury Festival , replacing M.I.A. who had cancelled . During the festival she reunited two members of The Specials , an act that guitarist <unk> Golding claimed played a " massive part " in the group 's 2009 reunion . 
 On the day " Smile " was released , Allen appeared on BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge with DJ Jo Whiley , performing an acoustic version of " Smile " and a cover of The Kooks ' song " Naïve " . At the Secret Garden Party , in September 2006 , Allen made a rendition of the song and afterwards stated : " The festival was well good , particularly as Lester , my ex , who I wrote ' Smile ' about , and subsequently sold his story to the papers , had a tent called ' the shit tent ' positioned directly opposite the main stage . So he and his new girlfriend had no option but to watch me perform to a couple of thousand people singing ' Smile ' back to me . Oh , it 's the little things eh ! " " Smile " was performed live as part of the setlist of Allen 's 2007 concert tour . During the 2007 South by Southwest music festival , Allen said , " I 'm so sick of this song , but I 'll play it for you , Austin " before singing it . On 3 February 2007 , the singer was invited as a musical guest on Saturday Night Live , where she performed " Smile " and " LDN " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Alright , Still received acclaim from the British music press . The album holds a score 79 out of 100 based on 27 critical reviews which indicates " generally favorable reviews " , according to the music review aggregator Metacritic . The Observer 's Rosie Swash stated that Allen 's " uniquely acidic brand of pop " music justified the publicity it generated and that " the icing on the cake is that brutally barbed tongue " . Ron Webb wrote for Drowned in Sound that the album " is almost a brilliant record , easily a good one and one that promises to divide opinion like <unk> " . In a review for The Guardian , Sophie Heawood stated that " the album is rough round the edges , that amateurism serves to bring the listener in " , noting that it gave the album a more personal touch . The NME 's Priya Elan remarked that " with a personality this size , this isn 't the last time you 'll be hearing from [ Allen ] " . 
 The album generally received positive reviews from international music press . Rob Sheffield wrote for Rolling Stone that Allen 's sense of irony was " just more proof that [ she 's ] an original " . Heather Phares of AllMusic stated that " enough of Alright , Still works — as pure pop and on the meta level Allen aims for — to make the album a fun , summery fling , and maybe more " . Praising Allen for her " genuine personality with wit and attitude to spare " , Pitchfork 's Mark Pytlik remarked that the album " isn 't anything else but a fantastic success " . In his review for Blender , Jon Dolan complimented Allen 's " little @-@ sisterly " personality , describing it as a combination " of panache and self @-@ doubt , courage and chaos " . 
 On the other hand , Stylus Magazine dismissed the album as " nothing more than pop for people who hate pop music " and " phony music for people who can 't let go of their inhibitions " , while Slant Magazine deemed it " rubbish " and called Allen " sickeningly contemptuous " . The mastering of Alright , Still , done by Tim Burrell and Tim Debney , has been criticised . In January 2007 , The Guardian ran a piece about loudness wars , the practice of increasing the loudness of tracks which often results in distortion and the loss of dynamic range . It included Alright , Still in a list of CDs in which sound quality was compromised for loudness . Rolling Stone published a similar story in December 2007 , and it also identified Alright , Still as an album " so unrelentingly loud that the sound is actually distorted " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The Guardian ranked it the seventh best album of the year and commented , " For her lyrical nous and her quick delivery alone , get that toast on . " Pitchfork called it " one of 2006 's most enduringly rewarding pop albums " and listed it as the 29th best album of 2006 . " Rolling Stone " ranked the album 13th on its list of the best albums of 2007 . Uncut called it " a terrific , bolshy , eclectic stew of London street pop " , listing Alright , Still at number 38 on its " Definitive Albums of 2006 " . The Observer ranked the album tenth on its list of the best albums of 2006 . At the 2008 Grammy Awards , the album was nominated for Best Alternative Music Album but lost to The White Stripes ' Icky Thump . Ronson 's production on " Littlest Things " helped him win a Grammy Award for Producer of the Year , Non @-@ Classical . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Alright , Still debuted at number two on the UK Albums Chart , selling 62 @,@ 701 copies in its first week . During the week ending 3 February 2007 , all top 10 places on the UK Albums Chart were occupied by British artists for the first time since the chart was established in 1956 ; Alright , Still was number nine that week . The British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certified it triple platinum on 14 March 2008 . As of May 2014 , the album had sold 1 @,@ 117 @,@ 604 copies in the United Kingdom . 
 In Ireland , the album debuted at number six on the Irish Albums Chart and was certified platinum by the Irish Recorded Music Association ( IRMA ) . The album was less successful in continental Europe ; it charted inside the top 20 in Norway , the top 30 in Belgium and the Netherlands , and the top 50 in France and Sweden . In April 2007 , Alright , Still received a Platinum Europe Award by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , denoting sales in excess of one million copies across Europe . 
 Alright , Still debuted at number 20 on the Billboard 200 in the United States , with first @-@ week sales of 34 @,@ 000 copies . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) awarded the album a gold certification on 6 December 2007 , and by November 2013 , it had sold 627 @,@ 000 copies in the US . Alright , Still peaked at number seven on the Australian ARIA Albums Chart , and in 2009 , it received a platinum accreditation by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , shipping over 70 @,@ 000 copies . In New Zealand , the album reached number 26 and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipments in excess of 7 @,@ 500 copies . As of February 2009 , the album had sold more than 2 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 " Smile " contains replayed elements of " Free Soul " by Jackie Mittoo and Clement Dodd . 
 " Knock ' Em Out " contains replayed elements of the work " Big Chief " by Earl King . 
 " LDN " contains replayed elements of " Reggae Merengue " . 
 " Littlest Things " contains elements from " Theme from Emmanuelle ( Instrumental ) " and " Emmanuelle in the Mirror " written by Pierre Bachelet and Hervé Roy . 
 " Friend of Mine " contains elements from " For the Love of You " written and composed by O 'Kelly Isley , Jr . , Ernest Isley , Rudolph Isley , Ronald Isley , Marvin Isley and Chris Jasper . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Alright , Still . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Cannabis in Oregon = 
 Cannabis in Oregon relates to a number of legislative , legal , and cultural events surrounding use of cannabis ( marijuana , hashish , THC , <unk> , etc . ) . Oregon was the first U.S. state to decriminalize the possession of small amounts of cannabis , and among the first to authorize its use for medical purposes . An attempt to <unk> possession of small amounts of cannabis was turned down by Oregon voters in 1997 . 
 From 1999 through 2005 , the ratio of Oregonians using cannabis outpaced the general United States population by 32 – 45 % . In surveys conducted in 1974 and 1975 — one and two years after decriminalization — it was found that 2 % of respondents said they did not use marijuana or cannabis because they were unavailable , 4 % for legal or law enforcement reasons , 53 % reported lack of interest , and 23 % cited health dangers . The remaining 19 % were using or had used it at one time . 
 Measure 91 was approved in 2014 , legalizing non @-@ medical cultivation and uses of marijuana . It followed perennial , unsuccessful efforts to legalize marijuana by ballot initiative , including in 1986 and in 2012 which made it to the ballot , but voters rejected . 
 In 2015 the Oregon state governor signed an emergency bill declaring marijuana sales legal to recreational users from dispensaries starting October 1st , 2015 . 
 = = Cannabis culture in Oregon = = 
 = = = Usage = = = 
 According to the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) , cannabis is readily available in Oregon . According to a 2006 report by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration , in 2003 – 2004 Oregon ranked in the top fifth of states for cannabis usage in three age categories : 12 to 17 , 18 to 25 , and 26 and older . In 2005 , while most states that had passed medical marijuana bills over the past decade saw marijuana use among teenagers decline faster than the national average ( a 43 % decrease ) , Oregon , Nevada , and Maine saw smaller decreases than the average . 
 The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration estimates and publishes the number of people to have used cannabis in the previous 30 days , as compiled by the Oregon chapter of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws ( NORML ) : 
 = = = Cultivation = = = 
 Oregon imports cannabis from Washington , California , Mexico and Canada , while also producing a large quantity locally . Large indoor and outdoor growing operations have been discovered on private , state , and forest lands , with plants numbering in the thousands . Allegedly large outdoor growing operations run by Mexican cartels drug trafficking were assumed to be operating in remote locations . Highly potent cannabis grown in Oregon is consumed locally , and distributed to other parts of the U.S. 
 In 1988 , due to the success of the DEA 's Campaign Against Marijuana Planting in California , Oregon rivaled California nationally in cannabis production . In the 1990s , Oregon was a national leader in indoor cannabis cultivation , along with California , Washington , Kentucky and South Florida . For the decade ending in 1991 , the DEA considered Oregon the " nation 's cradle of indoor marijuana growing . " In 2006 , Oregon was the fourth largest indoor cannabis producing state , and the tenth largest cannabis producing state overall . 
 = = = Events and attitudes = = = 
 According to Nick <unk> of the Willamette Week , medical marijuana has " helped legitimize pot culture in Oregon . " In 2005 , Multnomah County Circuit Judge Doug Beckman said " I think there 's a broader social acceptance for users of marijuana . And gradually there 's increasing public pressure , I think , to decriminalize marijuana . " 
 In 2007 , nearly 20 @,@ 000 people attended the third annual <unk> Festival at Sellwood Riverfront Park in Portland , Oregon . While organizers insisted smoking would not be tolerated , the smell of marijuana lingered in the air and some festival goers chose to consume various forms of cannabis foods . No festival attendees were arrested . Seattle Hempfest is an annual event in Seattle , Washington also attended by Oregonians , known as the world 's largest annual gathering advocating decriminalization of marijuana for uses including but not limited to medicinal , industrial , and recreational . The 2008 Seattle Hempfest , which took place August 16 – 17 , set a new record with around 150 @,@ 000 people in attendance . 
 The first International Cannabis Business Conference ( ICBC ) took place in Portland , on September 13 and 14 , 2014 , at the Oregon Convention Center . The conference brought together entrepreneurs , professionals and advocates from across the globe , with the goal to further mainstream the global cannabis industry . The ICBC is a collaboration between veteran activists Anthony Johnson , Alex Rogers and Debby Goldsberry . Johnson has served as chief petitioner of statewide cannabis reforms and is currently Director of the Oregon Cannabis Industry Association ; Rogers is CEO of Northwest Alternative Health and lead producer of the Oregon Medical Marijuana Business Conference ; Goldsberry is a co @-@ founder of the Berkeley Patients Group and serves as an ambassador for Magnolia Wellness . The ICBC further cements Portland has a prominent locale for cannabis activism . 
 = = Legality = = 
 Measure 91 was approved in 2014 , legalizing non @-@ medical cultivation and uses of marijuana in Oregon starting July 1 , 2015 . 
 Cannabis was completely legal in Oregon until 1935 , when the state passed the Uniform State Narcotic Drug Act . The legislative record contains no mention of those substances causing any problems , but they were simply included as part of the package . The Oregon <unk> Bill of 1973 abolished criminal penalties for possession of small amounts of marijuana . As a result , possession of up to an ounce of marijuana in Oregon was a violation ( not a crime ) , punishable only by a fine of $ 500 to $ 1000 . There is one exception , however , which is : if possession of such an amount occurs in a public place within 1000 feet of a school attended by minors , the person committing the offense is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor instead . Possession of more than one ounce , no matter the proximity to a school , was a Class B felony until July 3 , 2013 , at which point it became a Class B misdemeanor . The actual use of marijuana in private , and being under the influence of marijuana , are not punishable offenses under Oregon law . However , public use , and also driving under the influence of intoxicants are punishable offenses . 
 Intentionally growing even one marijuana plant ( Unlawful manufacture of marijuana ) , was a Class A felony in Oregon ( ORS 475 @.@ 856 , 475 @.@ 858 ) until July 1 , 2015 . Selling or giving away marijuana was an offense ( Unlawful delivery of marijuana ) that varied in severity and penalty depending on the amount of marijuana involved in the transaction , whether or not consideration was involved , the relative ages of the people involved , and the proximity of the transaction to nearby schools attended by minors ( ORS 475 @.@ 860 , 475 @.@ 862 ) . Giving away five grams ( approx . <unk> ) of marijuana or less by an adult to another adult for no payment at a location at least 1000 feet from the closest school was only a violation , punishable by a fine of $ 500 to $ 1000 . However , if greater amounts of marijuana were involved , if any payment at all were involved , if delivery was by an adult to a minor , and / or if delivery occurred within 1000 feet of a school ( even if both parties are adults ) , the severity of the offense ranged from Class C misdemeanor to Class A felony with increasing penalties . 
 The preceding convictions and penalties applied to any person , minor or adult , Oregon resident or otherwise , when the offense occurred within the state of Oregon . However , Oregon marijuana law is further complicated due to the existence of Oregon 's medical marijuana program . The Oregon Medical Marijuana Program allows individuals with a medical history of one or more qualifying illnesses and a doctor 's recommendation to apply for registration with the program . Accepted applicants are issued a Medical Marijuana Card , which entitles them to different treatment under the law . Essentially , medical marijuana patients are allowed to possess , without fear of citation , arrest , or penalty , up to 1 @.@ 5 pounds of marijuana at a time . Possession of a greater amount , however , does become punishable by law . In addition to legal possession , cardholders may also legally grow , without fear of citation , arrest , or penalty , up to 18 immature cannabis plants and 6 mature ones at a single time . Cardholders are also allowed to designate a primary caregiver and a grower of their choice , if so inclined . These people enjoy the same freedoms , in regard to possession , as the cardholder as long as they remain officially registered . The above limits of legal possession apply to the total combined property of the cardholder , caregiver , and grower . If a grower is growing plants for more than one cardholder , he or she may possess up to 18 immature plants per cardholder . A grower may not grow plants for more than four cardholders at a time . Also , in addition to legal possession and manufacture as outlined above , cardholders , caregivers , and growers may legally deliver marijuana to each other , and to other cardholders , so long as the delivery is made without consideration . The privileges which normally protect cardholders , caregivers , and growers from citation , arrest , and penalty do not excuse possession , manufacture , or delivery in cases where they are simultaneously guilty of certain offenses listed in ORS 475 @.@ 316 , such as driving under the influence of marijuana or using marijuana in public . 
 In June 2010 , the Oregon Board of Pharmacy reclassified marijuana from a Schedule I drug to a Schedule II drug . According to a press release from the board , " The Board of Pharmacy ’ s action to reschedule marijuana on the state list does not supersede federal law or create a direct conflict with federal law . It simply does not address federal law , " and , " Marijuana or products containing any amount of marijuana will not be available by prescription in Oregon unless they have been approved by the FDA . " News reports noted that this reclassification makes Oregon the " first state in the nation to make marijuana anything less serious than a Schedule I drug . " ( See also Removal of cannabis from Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act ) 
 A ballot measure of the November 2010 election would have established a state licensing system for marijuana producers and dispensaries , allowed the sale of marijuana from the dispensaries to medical marijuana patients , provide low income assistance for those patients , and set up a research program to evaluate the effects of the new law . It was defeated with 43 @.@ 85 % support and 56 @.@ 15 % opposition . 
 The Oregon Cannabis Tax Act is another recent citizens ' initiative . It qualified for the November 2012 state ballot , with the petition having 88 @,@ 887 valid signatures . If approved , it would have legalized marijuana for recreational adult use , regulate and tax the cultivation and sale of marijuana , and legalize the production , use , and sale of hemp . It appeared as Measure 80 on the ballot , but was defeated by a margin of approximately 53 % <unk> % . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 1973 , Oregon became the first state to decriminalize cannabis . Possession of 28 @.@ 35 grams ( 1 ounce ) or less is a violation ( not a crime ) punishable by a $ 500 to $ 1 @,@ 000 fine ; stricter punishments exist for sale or cultivation . Possession of 1 ounce to 110 grams is a class B felony punishable by 10 years in prison , and possession of more than 110 grams is a felony with punishment depending on the defendant 's prior record . In 1986 , Oregon 's Ballot Measure 5 sought to legalize cannabis . The Oregon Marijuana Initiative spent about $ 50 @,@ 000 promoting the proposition , and collected the 87 @,@ 000 signatures necessary to place it on the ballot . In 1986 , by some estimates , cannabis was Oregon 's largest cash crop , estimated in 1985 at between $ 1 billion and $ 1 @.@ 15 billion . The ballot measure was rejected by Oregon voters with 279 @,@ 479 " Yes " and 781 @,@ 922 " No " votes , or 26 @.@ 33 % support . 
 In 1995 , Oregon House Bill 3466 , which would have <unk> marijuana in Oregon , died . According to bill sponsor Jerry Grisham ( R – Beavercreek ) , HB 3466 was meant to counter a circulating initiative petition called The Oregon Cannabis Tax Act of 1997 , which would have allowed state liquor stores to sell marijuana and permitted hemp production for paper , fabric , oil , and protein . Taxes on these products would go to schools to replace funding allegedly lost by Measure 5 . The petition was sponsored by a political action committee named Pay for Schools by Regulating Cannabis . 
 HB 3466 would have increased penalties for possession of under an ounce of marijuana from an infraction ( traffic ticket @-@ like offense ) to a Class A misdemeanor , the worst non @-@ felony offense , with a fine of $ 100 to $ 1 @,@ 000 per gram , up to a maximum of $ 5 @,@ 000 . The bill also would have created a new crime — being under the influence of marijuana — punishable by a fine of up to $ 5 @,@ 000 . The bill would have passed according to the positions of state senators , but was blocked on a technical basis which prevented it from coming to the floor the same day it was read — which allows public input — unless overridden by a vote . 
 In 1997 , the Oregon Legislature passed House Bill 3643 , making the possession of less than an ounce of marijuana a Class C misdemeanor , which added a possible jail sentence of up to 30 days . According to Eric Schlosser of Rolling Stone , John Kitzhaber , then Oregon 's governor , signed the bill because he did not want to appear soft on crime . Activists opposing HB 3643 collected twice as many signatures as were required to force a referendum on the bill . John Sperling , Peter Lewis , and George Soros were the principal financial backers of the referendum signature drive . Measure 57 , which would have upheld HB 3643 , was turned down by a margin of 2 – 1 . 
 The Oregonians For Cannabis Reform 2010 hoped to make cannabis products legal and available in a retail environment by enacting the Oregon Cannabis Tax Act of 2010 ( <unk> ) , but the effort failed to collect the minimum 83 @,@ 000 signatures by the July 2 deadline to qualify for the 2010 ballot . Backers of the initiative say 90 % of the proceeds from the state 's sale of marijuana would have gone to Oregon 's general fund ( as much as $ 300 million ) , lowering the state tax burden , while 10 % of the revenue would have been used to fund drug abuse education and treatment programs . Advocates claim the marijuana market would be removed from the underground economy , where young people and drug abusers often take control , and place it in liquor stores regulated by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission so the minimum age of 21 can be enforced . According to Madeline Martinez , Executive Director of NORML 's Oregon chapter , U.S. Congressman Barney Frank ( D – Massachusetts ) has endorsed the idea , though support from Oregon state officials has been limited . 
 An initiative petition to allow recreational use of marijuana passed in November 2014 . In September 2014 , some of the municipalities revealed intention to apply sales tax on recreational use , ahead of it being legalized . Measure 91 only allows the state to tax marijuana , so local governments are hoping they ’ ll be able to get their taxes grandfathered in if they pass them now . 
 = = = Medical cannabis = = = 
 The Oregon Medical Marijuana Act was established by Ballot Measure 67 , a citizens ' initiative , in November 1998 , the same election as the referendum Measure 57 . It modified state law to allow the cultivation , possession , and use of marijuana by prescription by patients with certain medical conditions . The ballot measure passed by a margin of 54 @.@ 6 % to 45 @.@ 4 % . The Act does not affect federal law , which still prohibits the cultivation and possession of marijuana . Bernie Hobson , spokesman for the DEA 's Seattle regional office , said " From a federal standpoint , there is no such thing as medical marijuana . " Four other western states ( Alaska , Arizona , Nevada and Washington ) and the District of Columbia passed similar measures legalizing the use of marijuana for medical purposes in the same election . 
 The act created " The Oregon Medical Marijuana Program , " which administers the Medical Marijuana Act approved by the public in November 1998 . The Oregon Medical Marijuana Program administers the program within the Oregon Department of Human Services . As of April 1 , 2009 , there were 20 @,@ 974 patients registered , with 10 @,@ 626 caregivers holding cards for these patients . Virtually all patients benefiting from the program ( 18 @,@ 000 + ) suffer from severe pain and more than 3 @,@ 200 from nausea . The other conditions are given as epilepsy , HIV / AIDS , cancer , cachexia , chronic glaucoma and tremors caused by Alzheimer 's disease . Multiple states have requested information on Oregon 's program to use as a model for their own medical marijuana initiatives and registration systems . 
 In 2004 , an Oregon ballot measure that would have increased the amount of cannabis a patient can legally possess to six pounds was defeated by Oregon voters . In 2005 , the Oregon Medical Marijuana Program brought in more than $ 900 @,@ 000 to the state 's budget for the Department of Human Services . 
 An initiative seeking to legalize medical marijuana dispensaries appeared on the November 2010 ballot as Ballot Measure 74 where it was defeated with 56 % of voters opposing the initiative . However , the state legislature legalized medical dispensaries a few years later during its 2013 legislative session . 
 = = = Conflict with federal drug law = = = 
 = = = = Physician liability = = = = 
 Physicians cannot have their licenses revoked for recommending or supporting marijuana according to a September 7 , 2000 decision by the U.S. District Court . The case , Dr. Marcus Conant , et al . , v. McCaffrey et al . , arose from two events : the November 1996 passage of California Proposition 215 which authorized medical marijuana , and a December 30 , 1996 response to the law by the director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy which said : 
 The statement accompanied authorization for the U.S. Inspector General for Health and Human Services to exclude individuals from participation in Medicare and Medicaid programs , such as physicians who recommend marijuana to patients for medical purposes . Clarification two months later affirmed that mere discussion of any drugs with a patient was not grounds for sanction , but affirmed that physicians " may not intentionally provide their patients with oral or written statements in order to enable them to obtain controlled substances in violation of federal law . " The court 's decision acknowledged that the government has a legitimate concern that physicians might recommend marijuana in bad faith . However , physicians in good faith using honest medical judgment should not fear DEA sanctions . Furthermore , 
 The government appealed the decision to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals , which agreed with the lower court on October 29 , 2002 , and expanded the grounds for the injunction to include free speech . The government appealed again to the Supreme Court which declined to hear it October 14 , 2003 , reaffirming the California Circuit Court 's injunction . 
 = = = = Law enforcement = = = = 
 In November 2007 , a California appeals court ruled that " it is not the job of the local police to enforce the federal drug laws . " The U.S. Supreme Court denied an appeal by the city of Garden Grove in December 2008 , upholding the decision . The case began in June 2005 with a medical marijuana patient from Garden Grove being pulled over by city police and cited for possession of marijuana , despite his immediate display of proper medical marijuana documentation . The charge against him was later dismissed , but the city refused to return his confiscated eight grams of marijuana , even after being instructed by Orange County Superior Court . The Supreme Court ruling affects 13 U.S. states with medical marijuana laws . 
 Police departments throughout Oregon decline to press charges , or charges have been dropped for possessing and growing marijuana , even for convicted drug dealers . Salem police estimated they received 30 or 40 calls for marijuana activity in 2007 which were not pursued because the grow operations were legal , even one next to a high school . One grower , a previously convicted felon , was found with evidence of making hash oil , which is not protected , though a grand jury did not indict him . 
 = = = Thermal imaging searches = = = 
 After a federal agent from the Department of the Interior used a thermal imaging device to determine that Danny Lee Kyllo was using grow lamps to grow marijuana in his Florence , Oregon home , the Supreme Court of the United States determined that the use of a thermal imaging device from a public vantage point to monitor the radiation of heat from a person 's home was a " search " within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment , and thus required a warrant . Because the police in this case did not have a warrant , the Court reversed Kyllo 's conviction for growing marijuana . 
 = Rewrite ( visual novel ) = 
 Rewrite ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a Japanese visual novel developed by Key , a brand of VisualArt 's . It was released on June 24 , 2011 for Windows PCs and is rated for all ages . Rewrite is Key 's ninth game , along with other titles such as Kanon , Air , and Clannad . Key released a fan disc expanding on the game 's story titled Rewrite Harvest festa ! on July 27 , 2012 for Windows . Rewrite was ported to the PlayStation Portable , PlayStation Vita and PlayStation 3 . The story follows the life of Kotarou Tennouji , a high school student with superhuman abilities who investigates supernatural mysteries with five girls from his school in the fictional city of Kazamatsuri . This ultimately leads him into the middle of a conflict between familiar summoners and superhumans with the fate of the world at stake . 
 The gameplay in Rewrite follows an interactive branching plot line with multiple scenarios , and focuses on the player character gaining the favor of the six female main characters . There are additional minigames and quests added into the gameplay , which are necessary to complete the game . The game ranked as the best @-@ selling PC game sold in Japan for the time of its release , and charted in the national top 50 twice more afterwards . There have been four manga adaptations based on Rewrite published by ASCII Media Works and Ichijinsha . Comic anthologies , light novels and an art book were also published , as were several music albums . A 13 @-@ episode anime television series adaptation , produced by 8 @-@ Bit and directed by <unk> , premiered in July 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Rewrite is a romance visual novel in which the player assumes the role of Kotarou Tennouji . Much of its gameplay is spent on reading the story 's narrative and dialogue . The text in the game is accompanied by character sprites , which represent who Kotarou is talking to , over background art . Throughout the game , the player encounters CG artwork at certain points in the story , which take the place of the background art and character sprites . When the game is completed at least once , a gallery of the viewed CGs and played background music becomes available on the game 's title screen . Rewrite follows a branching plot line with multiple endings , and depending on the decisions that the player makes during the game , the plot will progress in a specific direction . 
 There are eight main plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience , three which are initially available and five more which can later become available . Throughout gameplay , the player is given multiple options to choose from , and text progression pauses at these points until a choice is made . Some decisions can lead the game to end prematurely , which offer an alternative ending to the plot . To view all plot lines in their entirety , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and choose different choices to further the plot to an alternate direction . When first playing the game , the scenarios for the heroines Kotori , Chihaya and Lucia are available . To access Sizuru 's scenario , Kotori 's must be completed first . Similarly , to access Akane 's scenario , Chihaya 's must be done first . After the plot lines for these five heroines have been completed , an additional scenario called Moon is made available . Upon the completion of the Moon route , another scenario called Terra is made available , which serves as the true conclusion to the story ; both Moon and Terra revolve around the main heroine , Kagari . 
 Throughout gameplay , the player encounters minigames accessed through an in @-@ game GPS system called Mappie , which is rendered as a point and click map . In most cases , the player can choose to automatically skip accessing Mappie , but sometimes the player is required to play through the minigame to move on to the next event . When accessing Mappie , the player meets various people who become Kotarou 's friends , and certain people and items encountered will lead the player to do a quest . The names of the friends and the completed quests are recorded in the Memory function , which serves as an encyclopedia of events . If the player completes all 31 quests , a bonus scenario called Oppai ( <unk> , Breasts ) is made available . Oppai is a branch off Akane 's scenario and serves as a comedic plot line not important to the overall story . 
 The gear and dial in the bottom left of the game screen is related to the Kotarou 's Rewrite ability . The dial moves forward whenever this ability is used , and the outcome of certain scenes is determined by how much the dial has moved . Throughout most of the game , the text is presented in a dialog box on the lower portion of the game screen , but this is changed for the Terra scenario , where the text is overlaid across the entire screen . 
 In Rewrite Harvest festa ! , there are six separate scenarios , one for each heroine . The player is initially given the choice to play the scenarios for Kotori , Chihaya and Lucia from a character selection screen . Once these three scenarios are completed , the routes for Sizuru and Akane become available , and after those two are completed , Kagari 's scenario is made available . After the completion of Kagari 's scenario , a dungeon exploration role @-@ playing minigame called Rewrite Quest becomes available . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The main part of Rewrite 's story takes place in the fictional city of Kazamatsuri in Japan , where <unk> and afforestation have caused the city to become overgrown with trees and vegetation . The protagonist Kotarou and his friends in the occult research society attend a high school in Kazamatsuri , and the characters also spend time in the society 's <unk> . Outside of the school , frequented locations include the forest around Kazamatsuri and Kotarou 's house . Throughout the story , Kotarou encounters an alternate dimension of Kazamatsuri where everything is silent and the sky is gray . There are many entrances to this dimension throughout the city . In this secret world developed by Gaia , a sustainable environment exists to support life . When on the Moon , a hill where daisies grow is prominently shown amid a ruined Kazamatsuri where the night is eternal . This hill appears again later on Earth in the forest of Kazamatsuri . 
 Kazamatsuri is the setting for a secret war being waged by two main groups : Gaia and Guardian . Gaia , an organization under the auspices of the environmental conservation group Martel , is populated by nihilistic and misanthropic people able to contract with familiars , which manifest as constructs fueled by the summoner 's life force . Martel itself used to be a church and contains within it a holy maiden group of girls with developmental disabilities . Guardian is dedicated to the destruction of familiars and is composed almost entirely of humans who possess special powers . Gaia and Guardian came to Kazamatsuri in the pursuit of the Earth 's familiar named Kagari , who manifests as a young , high school age @-@ looking girl . Kagari , the main heroine of Rewrite , has the power to initiate a period of re @-@ evolution , which restarts the process of evolving another means of intelligent life . However , this is done with the use of the Earth 's energy , and by the time the events of Rewrite occur , there is no more energy left to do another re @-@ evolution . Gaia wants to capture Kagari to ensure the destruction of humanity , but Guardian wishes to seek out Kagari to kill her , ensuring that human life continues . 
 = = = Principal characters = = = 
 The player assumes the role of Kotarou Tennouji , the protagonist of Rewrite . He is a second @-@ year high school student who has a bright personality and is sociable to others . Kotarou is a superhuman with two powers called Rewrite and Aurora . Rewrite enables him to permanently restructure and modify any part of his body , including his blood , so as to make himself stronger or faster . Every time Kotarou uses his Rewrite ability , he uses up some of his life @-@ force and becomes closer to being a full familiar . Aurora manipulates his energy to form weapons like a sword or claw . Kotarou is invited into his school 's occult research society by the club president Akane Senri , who is one year older than him and is referred to as the " School Witch " by other students because of her mysterious nature . Akane , a heroine in the game , is unenthusiastic towards Kotarou 's pursuit of the supernatural , which she initially claims she does not believe in , but is later shown to be a high ranking summoner in Gaia . Akane also invites into the club Chihaya Ohtori , a second @-@ year transfer student in Kotarou 's class who is very strong , but clumsy . Chihaya , who is also a heroine , has led a sheltered life and now lives with her butler Sakuya Ohtori , who poses as her brother at school . Like Akane , Chihaya is in Gaia and is a summoner . 
 Kotarou invites three other girls into the occult research society who are also heroines in the game . One is Kotori Kanbe , Kotarou 's childhood friend in his class who has few friends and starts attending school regularly after joining the club . She has a playful personality and has an extremely strong pet dog named Chibi @-@ Moth . Kotori , who is a summoner , is not affiliated with Gaia or Guardian , and instead follows in the path of an ancient sect of summoners called Druids who revered nature and protected Kagari with familiars . Kotarou meets first @-@ year student Sizuru <unk> , a shy girl on the public morals committee who has excellent hearing , eyesight and can read lips . She has heterochromia , though wears an eyepatch over her golden @-@ colored right eye as she is very self @-@ conscious about it ; her left eye is blue . Sizuru is a member of Guardian who has the ability to produce various chemicals inside her body which can be used to heal herself and others , paralyze and cause amnesia . Sizuru joins the club with her close friend Lucia Konohana , the class representative of Kotarou 's class . Lucia is easily agitated by the antics of boys and often punches Kotarou when he annoys her . She is obsessed with cleanliness and always wears gloves . Like Sizuru , Lucia is a member of Guardian and has the ability to produces poisonous miasma and pus as a result of an experiment by Guardian , which she takes medication for to suppress . She can also create vibrations within the objects she touches . Both Lucia and Sizuru have superhuman speed , agility , and reflexes in addition to their other abilities . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Rewrite 's story revolves around the protagonist Kotarou Tennouji , a male high school student living in Kazamatsuri , and the story begins on October 3 , 2010 on the Moon . Kotarou , who is interested in the unidentified mysterious animals in the forest in and around Kazamatsuri , spends times with five girls in the occult research society at his school : Kotori Kanbe , Chihaya Ohtori , Sizuru <unk> , Lucia Konohana , and Akane Senri , who is also the club president . The club members spend fun , peaceful times together uncovering the supernatural mysteries of Kazamatsuri . During this time , Kotarou falls in love with each of them in separate plot lines determined by the choices the player makes . These plot lines represent various timelines in which the conflict between Gaia and Guardian occurs , although it is hinted that humanity is inevitably destroyed in every timeline . 
 After the five heroine 's routes are completed , the story shifts to a setting amid a ruined Kazamatsuri where Kotarou encounters Kagari in a world after re @-@ evolution , still on the Moon . Kotarou at this point is a unified entity of all the <unk> from all timelines where humanity was destroyed and he has memories of these events . The Moon 's Kagari is trying to research a way so the Earth and humanity are not destroyed , and Kotarou attempts to buy her time while fighting a hoard of familiars summoned by Sakura Kashima of Gaia whose resolve is to annihilate humanity by killing Kagari . Kotarou and the entire cast rejoin together to protect Kagari , who manages to finish her plan to allow the Earth and humanity to coexist by sending the Moon 's life force back to Earth . In the past , the Earth had sent this energy to the Moon so life could continue . There is just enough energy and resources left for a final re @-@ evolution . 
