 = = Appearance around the world = = 
 In the United States , the breed gained wider recognition following a 1928 American Kennel Gazette article , " Meet the Labrador Retriever " . Before this time , the AKC had only registered 23 Labradors in the country , in part because US and UK hunting styles had different requirements . Labradors acquired popularity as hunting dogs during the 1920s and especially after World War II , as they gained recognition as combining some of the best traits of the two favourite United States breeds as both game finders and water dogs . 
 Outside North America and Western Europe , the Labrador arrived later . For example , the Russian Retriever Club traces the arrival of Labradors to the late 1960s , as household pets of diplomats and others in the foreign ministry . The establishment of the breed in the Commonwealth of Independent States ( former USSR ) was initially hindered by the relatively small numbers of Labradors and great distances involved , leading to difficulty establishing breedings and bloodlines ; at the start of the 1980s , home @-@ born dogs were still regularly supplemented by further imports from overseas . Difficulties such as these initially led to Labradors being tacitly cross @-@ bred to other types of retriever . In the 1990s , improved access to overseas shows and bloodlines is said to have helped this situation become regularised . 
 = = = Demography = = = 
 The Labrador is an exceptionally popular dog . For example , as of 2006 : 
 Widely considered the most popular breed in the world . 
 Most popular dog by ownership in Australia , Canada , Israel . New Zealand UK , and USA ( since 1991 ) , 
 In both the UK and USA , there are well over twice as many Labradors registered as the next most popular breed . If the comparison is limited to dog breeds of a similar size , then there are around 3 - 5 times as many Labradors registered in both countries as the next most popular breeds , the German Shepherd Dog and Golden Retriever . 
 Most popular breed of assistance dog in the United States , Australia and many other countries , as well as being widely used by police and other official bodies for their detection and working abilities . Approximately 60 – 70 % of all guide dogs in the United States are Labradors ( see below ) . 
 Seven out of 13 of the Australian National Kennel Council " Outstanding <unk> " Hall of Fame appointees are Labradors ( list covers 2000 – 2005 ) . 
 There is no global registry of Labradors , nor detailed information on numbers of Labradors living in each country . The countries with the five largest numbers of Labrador registrations as of 2005 are : 1 : United Kingdom 2 : France and United States ( approximately equal ) , 4 : Sweden , 5 : Finland . Sweden and Finland have far lower populations than the other three countries , suggesting that as of 2005 these two countries have the highest proportion of Labradors per million people : As there is no global registry for Labradors , it is difficult to ascertain whether there is simply a smaller percentage of people formally registering their animals in countries like the United States , or whether the number of animals per capita is actually smaller . 
 OFA statistics suggest that yellow and black Labradors are registered in very similar numbers ( yellow slightly more than black ) ; chocolate in lesser numbers . 
 Note : The number of registrations is not necessarily the same as the number of living dogs at any given time . 
 = = = US Military Working Dogs ( War Dogs ) : Labrador Retrievers in the Vietnam War = = = 
 The Vietnam War is the only war in American history in which US war dogs , which were officially classified by the military as " military working dogs , " were not allowed to officially return home after the war . Classified as expendable equipment , of the approximate 4 @,@ 000 US K @-@ 9s deployed to the Vietnam War , it is estimated that only about 200 US war dogs survived Vietnam to be put into service at other outposts stationed overseas . Aside from these 200 or so , the remaining canines who were not killed in action were either euthanized or left behind . 
 The predominate canine selected by the US Military during the Vietnam War was the German Shepherd Dog , which was utilized in the roles of Scout Dogs , Sentry Dogs , Mine Detection Dogs , and the US Navy used Water Dogs to detect enemy under water divers in South Vietnam . The Labrador Retriever was the military 's choice for their Combat Tracker Teams ( <unk> ) . Combat Tracker Teams consisted of one Labrador and four men : the handler , an observer , a security man , and the team leader . Labradors were selected by the military for tracking because of their distinct smelling qualities , and were utilized to locate wounded US servicemen , enemy patrols , and downed allied airmen in Vietnam . The US Army Labrador Retrievers received their combat training at the British Army 's Jungle Warfare School in Malaysia . 
 Of the over 4 @,@ 000 US war dogs serving in the Vietnam War , 232 were killed in action , and 295 US servicemen deployed as " dog handlers " were killed in action . Dog handler Robert W. <unk> was awarded the Medal of Honor . Six Labrador Retrievers were killed in action while assigned to the 62nd and 63rd US Army Combat Tracking Teams . During the course of the war the US Army lost 204 dogs , while the US Marine Corps and US Air Force lost 13 and 15 dogs , respectively . 
 In November 2000 , President Bill Clinton signed into law an amendment that allowed retired US military working dogs ( war dogs ) to be adopted by personnel outside of the military , leaving the Vietnam War as the only war in US history in which American war dogs never returned home . 
 = = Famous labradors = = 
 As both the most popular breed by registered ownership and also the most popular breed for assistance dogs in several countries , there have been many notable and famous labradors since the breed was recognized . 
 A selection of a few of the most famous labradors within various categories includes : 
 Assistance dogs 
 Endal , a service dog in Britain . Among other distinctions , " the most decorated dog in the world " ( including " Dog of the Millennium " and the PDSA ’ s Gold Medal for Animal Gallantry and Devotion to Duty ) , the first dog to ride on the London Eye and the first dog known to work a ' chip and pin ' ATM card . By Endal 's death in March 2009 , he and his owner / handler Allen Parton had been filmed almost 350 times by crews from several countries , and a film of a year in Endal 's life was in production . 
 Police , military , rescue and detection dogs 
 Zanjeer ( " Chain " , or " Shackles " ) , a detection dog who detected arms and ammunition used in 1993 Mumbai ( Bombay ) serial explosions . During his service , he helped recover 57 country @-@ made bombs , 175 patrol bombs , 11 military grade armaments , 242 grenades and 600 detonators . His biggest contribution to the police force and the city was the detection of 3 @,@ 329 kg of RDX . He also helped detect 18 Type 56 rifles and five 9mm pistols . 
 Lucky and Flo , twin Black Labrador counterfeit detection dogs who became famous in 2007 for " sniffing out nearly 2 million counterfeit DVDs " on a six @-@ month secondment to Malaysia in 2007 . Following the multimillion @-@ dollar , 6 @-@ arrest Malaysian detection , they became the first dogs to be awarded Malaysia 's " outstanding service award " and software pirates were stated to have put a £ 30 @,@ 000 contract out for their lives . 
 <unk> , an Australian special forces explosives detection dog that spent almost 14 months missing in action ( MIA ) in Afghanistan before being recovered safe and well in 2009 . 
 Jake ( rescue dog ) a well @-@ known American black <unk> who served as a search and rescue dog following the September 11 attacks and Hurricane Katrina . 
 Pets 
 Former President of the United States Bill Clinton 's Labradors Buddy and Seamus . 
 Russian President Vladimir Putin 's Labrador ' Koni ' . 
 Fiction and media 
 Brian Griffin from the animated TV sitcom Family Guy is a white Labrador Retriever . 
 Bouncer in Neighbours , and <unk> in The Incredible Journey , are also famous Labradors on TV . 
 Marley is an American Labrador featured in Marley & Me , a best @-@ selling book by John Grogan , and a subsequent film based on Grogan 's life and times with Marley . 
 On the BBC children 's television series Big Barn Farm , Digger is a yellow Labrador puppy . 
 Rowdy on Scrubs is a taxidermy golden Labrador Retriever involved in various gags on the show . 
 Vincent on Lost is a white Labrador Retriever . 
 Pharaoh , Isis , and <unk> are yellow Labrador Retrievers in the television series Downton Abbey . 
 Brandeis , a yellow Labrador Retriever , is a minor character on Sesame Street who finds employment as a Mobility assistance dog . 
 Mascots and advertising 
 Since 1972 , a yellow Labrador pup known as the <unk> Puppy has been an advertising symbol for <unk> ( <unk> ) toilet tissue . 
 Michigan State University has an ongoing tradition of Zeke the Wonder Dog . The original " Zeke " as well as the current " Zeke IV " was a yellow Lab , as " Zeke III " , and " Zeke II " were black Labs . 
 = Hurricane Dean ( 1989 ) = 
 Hurricane Dean was the fourth named storm and second hurricane of the 1989 Atlantic hurricane season . Dean formed on July 31 and reached tropical storm status the following day east of the Leeward Islands . Dean brushed the northern Leeward Islands as a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale , bringing light rain but producing no damage , before turning northward and striking Bermuda as a Category 2 hurricane . Dean continued northward before making landfall in southeastern Newfoundland . 
 Since Dean was initially difficult to forecast , it posed a possible threat to the Lesser Antilles , as a result , several evacuations occurred , and many hurricane watches and warning were issued . However , as Dean turned northward , all watches and warnings in the Lesser Antilles were discontinued . As Dean approached Bermuda , a hurricane watch was issued , and was later upgraded to a hurricane warning . After Dean tracked away from the island , the hurricane warning was discontinued . In addition , a hurricane warning was briefly in effect for Sable Island , Nova Scotia . The storm left $ 8 @.@ 9 million ( 1989 USD , $ 17 million 2016 USD ) and sixteen injuries across Bermuda , but no fatalities were reported . In Atlantic Canada , Dean dropped light rain across Nova Scotia and Sable Island . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on July 27 as detected by <unk> imagery . By July 31 the tropical wave began being classified , using the Dvorak Technique , by satellite analysts at the National Hurricane Center , in part due to persistent deep convection . Shortly thereafter the system organized enough that the National Hurricane Center began classifying it as Tropical Depression Five , roughly halfway between Cape Verde and the Lesser Antilles . The depression moved westward at 17 mph ( 28 km / h ) , intensifying as it did so , and eventually intensified enough to be upgraded to a tropical storm , which was named Dean by the National Hurricane Center . 
 Continuing generally westward , Dean continued to gradually intensify and became a hurricane on August 2 after an Air Force reconnaissance flight had recorded hurricane @-@ force winds . The following day a decreasing ridge of high pressure to the north and a trough of low pressure forming off the East Coast of the United States caused Dean to slow in its forward motion and turn northwest . The trough of low pressure forming off the East Coast of the United States was deepening , causing Dean to curve northward while remaining nearly stationary . After remaining nearly stationary , Dean began to accelerate to a forward speed of 17 mph ( 28 km / h ) as it headed toward Bermuda . Thereafter , Dean intensified into a Category 2 hurricane , whilst the eastern half of the eyewall brushed Bermuda . Dean continued to intensify slightly after passing the island of Bermuda and became a Category 2 hurricane on August 7 . While Dean was a Category 2 hurricane , it attained its peak intensity with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 968 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 59 inHg ) . 
 After peak intensity , the forward speed of Dean continued to increase as it approached Atlantic Canada while weakening back to a Category 1 hurricane . While approaching southern Newfoundland , Dean had weakened enough to be downgraded to a tropical storm on August 8 . Shortly thereafter , Dean then made landfall on the south coast of Newfoundland with winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . Later that day , Dean emerged into the far north Atlantic and rapidly transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on the following day . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Hurricane Dean was very difficult to forecast in its early stages as the storm approached the eastern Caribbean . Even though most forecast models predicted that Dean would skirt the Leeward Islands , the track prediction models were not consistent and , as a result , uncertainty existed in justifying the posting of watches and warnings for the Leeward Islands and Puerto Rico . One track predicted Dean to threaten South Florida within three to four days . 
 Regardless , the National Hurricane Center issued hurricane warnings for Guadeloupe on August 2 and the rest of the Leeward Islands extending to the Virgin Islands . The uncertainty of the hurricanes forecast track forced residents and tourists in the Lesser Antilles to evacuate . In the British Virgin Islands , 80 American and Canadian tourists evacuated to hotels . In Puerto Rico , residents were advised to secure or stow away loose objects and stock up on emergency supplies . 1 @.@ 1 million residents in the city of San Juan went to supermarkets to get much needed supplies in anticipation that the storm might hit Puerto Rico . In Humacao , the National Guard evacuated 1 @,@ 966 people living along a coastal highway . The islands of Martinique and Dominica were placed under a hurricane watch . The warning for Guadeloupe was discontinued at 2200 UTC when the hurricane posed no threat to the island . Simultaneously , the hurricane watches in effect for Martinique and Dominica were also discontinued . As Dean continued westward , the National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane watch for the Turks and Caicos Islands . The watch was soon canceled as Dean made its northward turn towards Bermuda . 
 In Bermuda , the National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane watch on August 5 . The hurricane watch was later changed to a hurricane warning the following day . Dean ’ s approach to the island canceled numerous inbound and outbound flights . In Atlantic Canada , the National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane warning for Nova Scotia and Sable Island , while the Canadian forecasters issued a high wind advisory . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The outer bands of Hurricane Dean produced heavy rainfall and winds up to 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) across Antigua and Barbuda . There was no reported damage in the Leeward Islands or the Virgin Islands since the hurricane turned northward . In the Atlantic , a sailboat bound for Bermuda was caught off guard by the hurricane . The boat , which carried no radio equipment , was spotted by a hurricane hunter plane . The occupants of the boat suffered no injuries . In Bermuda , the hurricanes eastern eyewall produced 81 mph ( 130 km / h ) sustained winds with gusts up to 113 mph ( 182 km / h ) . Bermuda highest rainfall total from Dean was 2 @.@ 45 in ( 50 @.@ 8 mm ) while parts of the island received 3 @-@ 5 in ( 76 @.@ 2 – 127 mm ) of rain . 
 Strong winds from Hurricane Dean caused considerable power line damage , leaving 65 @,@ 000 residents without electricity . The winds also caused minor roof damage . In Hamilton Harbor , 20 pleasure boats were damaged or sent adrift due to the rough seas . Flooding from the hurricane damaged fifteen houses . Sixteen people were injured by the hurricane , five of the injuries were considered serious . There were , however , no reports of fatalities from Dean ’ s impact on Bermuda . Damage in Bermuda amounted up to $ 8 @.@ 9 million ( 1989 USD , $ 17 million 2016 USD ) . 
 Although Dean remained away from the United States coastline , it produced storm tides of 1 @.@ 7 ft ( 0 @.@ 51 m ) to North Carolina . In Atlantic Canada , hurricane @-@ force winds were reported in Nova Scotia and Sable Island . Newfoundland reported winds of only 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . Moderate rainfall was reported on Newfoundland , with most areas of the island experiencing at least 1 in ( 25 @.@ 4 mm ) of precipitation . Rainfall on Newfoundland peaked at 2 @.@ 7 in ( 68 @.@ 58 mm ) on the south coast of the island , near the location of Dean 's landfall . A majority of rainfall was reported on the west side of Dean , but minimal precipitation had been recorded to the east of the storm . High winds were reported on the eastern side of the storm , however , with lighter winds along the western quadrants of Dean . Offshore , waves up to 26 ft ( 7 @.@ 92 m ) were reported and Sable Island reported rainfall of 0 @.@ 59 in ( 15 mm ) . Although there were no reports of damage in Atlantic Canada from Hurricane Dean , three sailors had to be rescued by the Canadian Coast Guard when their boat got dismasted during the storm . 
 = Paudge Behan = 
 Paudge Rodger Behan ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / <unk> <unk> @-@ ər @-@ <unk> @-@ ən ; born January 1965 ) is an Irish actor and writer . The son of IRA Chief of Staff Cathal Goulding and Beatrice ffrench @-@ Salkeld , the widow of playwright Brendan Behan , Paudge Behan worked briefly as a journalist for a Dublin newspaper before turning to acting . After a series of minor film and television roles in the 1990s , he was handpicked by English novelist Barbara Taylor Bradford to appear as the male lead in a 1999 dramatisation of her book A Secret Affair ( 1996 ) . 
 Behan has also appeared in the feature films A Man of No Importance ( 1994 ) , Conspiracy of Silence ( 2003 ) and Veronica Guerin ( 2003 ) , and has taken leading roles in two short films , A Lonely Sky ( 2006 ) and Wake Up ( 2007 ) . He has also auditioned unsuccessfully for Neighbours and popular UK black comedy , Doctors . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Born in January 1965 , Paudge Behan is the son of Cathal Goulding ( 1923 – 1998 ) , Chief of Staff of the Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) and the Official IRA , and Beatrice Behan ( née ffrench @-@ Salkeld ) ( 1925 – 1993 ) . As a teenager , Goulding was involved with the IRA youth wing Fianna Éireann . After Brendan Behan 's early death at the age of 41 on 20 March 1964 , Goulding had Paudge Behan with Brendan 's widow Beatrice . Paudge and his half @-@ sister <unk> grew up at 5 Anglesea Road , a red @-@ brick , semi @-@ detached late Victorian house in Ballsbridge , Dublin , which Brendan Behan bought for his wife Beatrice in 1959 for IR £ 1 @,@ 400 . The house came into Paudge Behan 's ownership , and he sold it reluctantly for € 1 @.@ 65 million in February 2006 . 
 = = Education and career = = 
 Before turning to acting , Behan had a brief career in journalism in Ireland : " I interviewed everyone from priests to prostitutes before my Dublin paper folded . " Behan was also involved in theatre work – he was a costume assistant during the original production of Tom Murphy 's adaptation of Liam O 'Flaherty 's 1925 novel The Informer on 13 October 1981 at the Olympia Theatre in Dublin . He participated in various other plays in Dublin , but finding them " all very over the top , very amateurish , full of people turning up drunk or not turning up at all " , he decided to leave Ireland and pursue art studies in Berlin . 
 However , Behan found he could not concentrate on his art in Germany as he was working too hard in the evenings in nightclubs and bars to earn money . Also , as he was doing " too much drinking as well , so unless I wanted to start a new art style where it would 've been very ' <unk> ' [ sic ] to look at , basically I decided I had to do something else " . He resolved to go to London to study acting . After applying to three drama schools he was accepted by the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) . For about three years from 1990 or 1991 , he lived with his friends from RADA , David Harewood and Danny <unk> , at 39 Ravenshaw Street in West Hampstead . Harewood recalls that his housemates were " fantastic characters " – " It was a wonderful , experimental time . We 'd spend long nights discussing art , life and politics ; smoking weed , drinking lots of whisky , listening to music and throwing furniture on the fire . " 
 On 15 May 1991 at Dublin 's Abbey Theatre , Behan played the lead character Connolly in the original production of Tom Murphy 's play The Patriot Game , which charted the events of the Easter Rising of 1916 . He also acted as a thug in the comedy film London Kills Me ( 1991 ) ; and made an appearance in the TV film Anglo @-@ Saxon Attitudes ( 1992 ) , based on the 1956 satirical novel by Angus Wilson . Other TV roles included characters in episodes of Highlander : The Series ( 1995 ) and The New Adventures of Robin Hood ( 1997 ) . He was subsequently handpicked by English novelist Barbara Taylor Bradford to be the male protagonist of the made @-@ for @-@ television film A Secret Affair ( 1999 ) , based on her 1996 book . In the film , which gained him a large and enthusiastic female following , he starred as Bill Fitzgerald , a war correspondent who falls in love with and pursues Vanessa Stewart ( Janine Turner ) in Venice although she is engaged , and who is subsequently kidnapped in a war zone . 
 Other films in which Behan appeared include A Man of No Importance ( 1994 ) , Conspiracy of Silence ( 2003 ) and Veronica Guerin ( 2003 ) . In the latter film , he played Brian Meehan , who was convicted of murdering Irish crime journalist Veronica Guerin in 1996 . In 2006 , he appeared in Nick Ryan 's short film A Lonely Sky as Jack Reilly , a test pilot who risks his life to break the sound barrier in 1947 , but who is forced to question his reasons and abilities by a strange yet familiar man . The ten @-@ minute film won Best Film ( Production and Post @-@ Production ) at the Digital Media Awards in Dublin in February 2007 . Behan appeared in the short film Wake Up ( 2007 ) , in which he played the lead character Nathan . The film is the first 20 minutes of a proposed feature film . Most recently , Behan has appeared in the fifth season of the Irish crime drama series Love / Hate ( 2010 ) . He played the role of Terence May , an Irish drugs supplier based in Spain . 
 Concerning acting , Behan has been quoted as saying " this is a good business when it 's working , but when it 's not , it 's awful " . 
 = = 2008 police investigation = = 
 On 12 July 2008 , Behan was questioned by the Carabinieri ( Italian military police ) in connection with the murder of a 72 @-@ year @-@ old woman , Silvana <unk> Francescatti , at her home on Monte Amiata , Arcidosso , in Grosseto , Tuscany , Italy . The woman was found on 11 July with 13 stab wounds , including a fatal throat wound , but was believed to have died the previous day . Behan , who had been resident in Arcidosso for part of the year since 2006 , was arrested after seeking treatment twice at a hospital near Arcidosso for a cut on his thigh . In an interview with The Irish Times , he claimed he had first gone to the hospital on 10 July after cutting himself in the thigh while unpacking furniture and other objects delivered from the USA . However , hospital staff had mistakenly decided he had been acting suspiciously due to his poor spoken Italian , and the fact that he had expressed annoyance at how the hospital was managed and its bad signage . 
 Upon returning to the hospital on 12 July for a tetanus injection , Behan was arrested by five policemen and taken to their Arcidosso barracks for questioning . He did not know what was happening at first as the police had no interpreter in the barracks . He was only provided with a lawyer and interpreter 15 hours later when a magistrate from Grosseto came . Behan exercised his right not to answer questions . He was released , but was formally informed that he was under suspicion . As of 15 July 2008 he was the only suspect in the case . The police subsequently seized his car and a knife from his home , and secured a room in the house in which traces of blood were allegedly found . In addition , shoe prints found were said to have matched his footwear . Custody of his car and home ( except for the cellar ) were returned to him on 14 July by the judge overseeing the investigation . 
 Speaking on Italian television , Behan denied knowing the victim and maintained his innocence , saying " I 've got nothing to hide . " He accused the police of subjecting him to " psychological torture " during his detention and threatened to sue them . 
 In November 2008 , Behan was cleared of the crime and allowed full use of his home after a chef named Aldo <unk> was identified as the murderer from DNA retrieved from under Mrs. <unk> 's fingernails . Behan said , " I don 't hold any animosity . It 's done now , there is no point in bearing any grudges . I am just glad somebody has finally been caught for this brutal killing . " 
 = = Selected work = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Some information in this table was obtained from Paudge Behan : Filmography , Internet Movie Database ( IMDb ) , retrieved 11 November 2007 . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Some information in this table was obtained from Paudge Behan : Filmography , Internet Movie Database ( IMDb ) , retrieved 11 November 2007 . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In addition to his half @-@ sister <unk> , Paudge Behan has one older half @-@ brother , Cathal Og ( the son of Cathal Goulding and Patty Germaine who married in 1950 ) , and a younger half @-@ brother <unk> and half @-@ sister <unk> . 
 = John Plagis = 
 Ioannis Agorastos " John " Plagis , DSO , DFC & Bar ( 1919 – 1974 ) was a Southern Rhodesian flying ace in the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) during the Second World War , noted especially for his part in the defence of Malta during 1942 . The son of Greek immigrants , he was accepted by recruiters only after Greece joined the Allies in late 1940 . Following spells with No. 65 Squadron and No. 266 ( Rhodesia ) Squadron , he joined No. 249 ( Gold Coast ) Squadron in Malta in March 1942 . Flying Spitfire Mk Vs , Plagis was part of the multinational group of Allied pilots that successfully defended the strategically important island against numerically superior Axis forces over the next few months . Flying with No. 185 Squadron from early June , he was withdrawn to England in early July 1942 . 
 After a spell as an instructor in the UK , Plagis returned to action in September 1943 as commander of No. 64 Squadron , flying Spitfire Mk VCs over northern France . He took command of No. 126 ( Persian Gulf ) Squadron in June 1944 , and led many attacks on German positions during the invasion of France and the campaign that followed ; he was shot down over Arnhem during Operation Market Garden , but only lightly wounded . After converting to Mustang IIIs , he commanded a wing based at RAF Bentwaters that supported bombing missions . He finished the war with the rank of squadron leader and remained with the RAF afterwards , operating Gloster Meteors at the head of No. 266 ( Rhodesia ) Squadron . 
 Plagis was the top @-@ scoring Southern Rhodesian ace of the war , and the highest @-@ scoring ace of Greek origin , with 16 confirmed aerial victories , including 11 over Malta . Awarded the Distinguished Service Order and other medals , he was also one of Rhodesia 's most decorated veterans . The Southern Rhodesian capital , Salisbury , honoured his wartime contributions by naming a street in its northern Alexandra Park neighbourhood after him . On his return home after retiring from the RAF with the rank of wing commander in 1948 , he set up home at 1 John Plagis Avenue , opened a bottle store bearing his name , and was a director of several companies , including Central African Airways in the 1960s . He contested the Salisbury City constituency in the 1962 general election , running for the Rhodesian Front , but failed to win . He died in 1974 , reportedly by suicide . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Plagis was born on 10 March 1919 in Gadzema , a mining village near Hartley , about 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) south @-@ west of the Southern Rhodesian capital Salisbury . His parents , Agorastos and Helen Plagis , were Greek immigrants from the island of Lemnos ; he had five siblings . Christened with the Greek name Ioannis Agorastos , Plagis used the English form of Ioannis , John , from childhood , and attended Prince Edward School in Salisbury . 
 Having been interested in aviation since he was a boy , Plagis volunteered for the Southern Rhodesian Air Force ( SRAF ) soon after the outbreak of war in September 1939 . He was turned down because he was the son of foreign nationals and therefore not a citizen , despite having lived in Rhodesia all his life . After Italy invaded Greece in late October 1940 , bringing the Greeks into the war on the Allied side , Plagis applied again — this time to join the Royal Air Force , which had absorbed the SRAF in April 1940 — and was accepted . Training first in Southern Rhodesia , then England , Plagis passed out with the rank of flight sergeant in June 1941 with above @-@ average ratings in all of his flying assessments . 
 Though he was officially in the RAF as a Greek ( he became a Rhodesian citizen only after the war ) , Plagis considered himself a Rhodesian flyer and wore shoulder flashes on his uniform denoting him as such . He named each aircraft he piloted during the war after his sister Kay , and painted that name on the side of each cockpit . After briefly flying Spitfires with No. 65 Squadron RAF , Plagis joined No. 266 ( Rhodesia ) Squadron , an almost all @-@ Rhodesian Spitfire unit , on 19 July 1941 . He served in the UK for about half a year , during which he was commissioned as a pilot officer , before being posted to the Mediterranean theatre in January 1942 . 
 = = Air war in Europe and the Mediterranean = = 
 = = = First tour of operations = = = 
 Plagis 's first major operation was Operation Spotter , the first of many British endeavours to reinforce the besieged island of Malta in the face of German and Italian assaults during the Battle of the Mediterranean . Malta was considered to be of vital strategic importance , and its defence was looking increasingly precarious in March 1942 . Spotter was a plan to strengthen its British garrison with 16 new Spitfire Mk Vs , which would be carried part of the way from Gibraltar on the aircraft carrier HMS Eagle , then flown to Malta ; the pilots would then become part of the severely depleted No. 249 ( Gold Coast ) Squadron . The team of pilots comprised eight British airmen , four Australians , two New Zealanders and two Southern Rhodesians — Plagis and his close friend Pilot Officer Doug Leggo . 
 The operation , carried out on 7 March 1942 , was largely successful and 15 of the 16 Spitfires reached Malta . Plagis and Leggo arrived to find a third Rhodesian , Flight Officer George " Buck " Buchanan , already attached to the squadron . A further delivery of 16 Spitfires , Operation Picket I , was attempted on 21 March , but this was less successful ; only nine of the planes arrived . Thirteen Spitfire reinforcement operations were ultimately launched between March and October 1942 , playing a key role in the siege . The Luftwaffe and the Italian Regia Aeronautica meanwhile attempted to bomb Malta into submission , turning the airfields into " a wilderness of craters , the docks ... a shambles , Valletta a mass of broken limestone ... " 
 The Luftwaffe launched a major attack against key Maltese airfields at dawn on 20 March . Leggo , who had not slept for over 24 hours , returned to the airfield in the early hours having spent the night with a girlfriend . As the German planes approached he was ordered to prepare to fly . Plagis attempted to stop his friend from going , but Leggo insisted on flying , and took off at 08 : 05 as part of a group of four Spitfires and 12 Hurricanes aiming to intercept a squadron of Messerschmitt Bf 109s . He was soon seen to be flying poorly . A German pilot noticed this and attacked Leggo from close range , seriously damaging his aircraft and forcing him to bale out . Another Bf 109 then swooped and either fired at Leggo or collapsed his parachute with its slipstream , causing him to fall to his death . When Plagis learned what had happened , he was inconsolable , holding himself responsible . In his journal , he vowed to " shoot down ten for Doug — I will too , if it takes me a lifetime " . 
 Plagis shot down his first enemy aircraft on 25 March 1942 , and on 1 April achieved four more aerial victories in a single afternoon , thereby becoming the Siege of Malta 's first Spitfire ace . His downing of four enemies in a few hours won him much praise from superiors and reporters , and contributed to his growing reputation as an aggressive but skilful combat pilot . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) on 1 May 1942 , the citation noting that he had " destroyed 4 and probably destroyed a further 3 hostile aircraft " . " With complete indifference to odds against him , he presses home his attacks with skill and courage , " it continued — " He has set an outstanding example . " 
 On 11 May , Plagis attempted to down an Italian Reggiane Re.2001 by flying straight at it to ram it ; taking erratic evasive manoeuvres , the Italian aircraft stalled and almost crashed into the sea . Thinking he had downed the enemy , Plagis claimed afterwards to have achieved an aerial victory without firing a shot , but the Italian flight reported no losses . Plagis 's Spitfire was lightly hit during this engagement , and the Rhodesian had some luck returning safely ; he landed with only three gallons ( 14 litres ) of fuel left . On 16 May , Plagis and an English ace , Pilot Officer Peter Nash , destroyed a Bf 109 for a shared kill that became No. 249 Squadron 's 100th victory over Malta . Amid the continuing siege , the need for a major supply convoy to Malta was becoming urgent ; the Governor Lord Gort warned Britain in early June that if no supplies came by August , he would have to surrender to prevent a famine . 
 Plagis was promoted in the field to flight lieutenant on 4 June 1942 and transferred to No. 185 Squadron to command " B " Flight . He shot down two Re.2001s two days later to bring his tally of victories to ten ( thereby fulfilling his pledge following Leggo 's death ) , and destroyed a Bf 109 on 7 June . A month later , he received a Bar to his DFC , having been adjudged to have shown " exceptional skill and gallantry in combat ... Undeterred by superior numbers of attacking aircraft , he presses home his attacks with great determination . " Plagis left Malta when his tour expired on 7 July 1942 , flying first to Gibraltar , then the UK . The British finally delivered vital supplies to Malta on 15 August with Operation Pedestal ( known in Malta as the " Santa Marija Convoy " ) . 
 On arriving in England , Plagis was found to be suffering from malnutrition , scabies and physical and mental fatigue . He briefly convalesced in a nursing home , then spent a year as an instructor in England . He was promoted to probationary flying officer on 1 October 1942 . 
 = = = Second tour of operations = = = 
 Plagis returned to action in September 1943 , when he was appointed commanding officer of No. 64 Squadron , then flying Spitfire Mk VCs over northern France from RAF Coltishall in Norfolk . Plagis downed a Bf 109 over France on 24 September 1943 , then a Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 on 23 November , and formally received the rank of flight lieutenant on 8 December 1943 . 
 At the start of June 1944 , Plagis assumed command of No. 126 ( Persian Gulf ) Squadron , flying Spitfire Mk IXs that had recently been moved from Malta to assist in the invasion of Normandy . Six of the squadron 's planes had been purchased by the Persian Gulf Spitfire Fund , and duly named after the donating sheikdoms ; Plagis 's aircraft , which he chose because of the large letter " K " on its tail ( echoing his sister 's name ) , had " Muscat " painted in English and Arabic script on its side . He added to this a full rendering of " Kay " and other personal decorations . 
 After leading No. 126 Squadron on raids into Normandy during the Allied invasion , Plagis took part in many of the attacks on German positions in northern France and the Low Countries that followed over the next few months . He was shot down over Arnhem in the Netherlands during Operation Market Garden in September 1944 , but suffered only minor injuries and quickly returned to action . He received the Distinguished Service Order on 3 November for his " <unk> [ ion ] in very many sorties during which much damage has been inflicted on ... [ German ] shipping , radio stations , oil storage tanks , power plants and other installations " . The citation particularly stressed an engagement in which a small group of Allied fighters led by Plagis had taken on a far superior force of enemy aircraft and shot down five of them , Plagis himself downing two . Plagis was described as " a brave and resourceful leader whose example has proved a rare source of inspiration " . 
 Plagis converted to Mustang IIIs along with the rest of his squadron at RAF Bentwaters in Suffolk during December 1944 and January 1945 , and spent the rest of the war flying bomber escort missions at the head of Bentwaters Wing , which included No. 126 Squadron . He was promoted to squadron leader on 28 March 1945 . Germany surrendered on 7 May , ending the war in Europe . 
 Plagis finished the war with a tally of 16 enemy aircraft confirmed destroyed ( including two shared victories counted as half a kill each ) , two shared probably destroyed , six damaged and one shared damaged . This made him Southern Rhodesia 's highest @-@ scoring ace of the war , as well as the top @-@ scoring ace of Greek origin . He was one of the most @-@ decorated Southern Rhodesian servicemen of the war . 
 = = Post @-@ war service and later life = = 
 Plagis stayed with the RAF following the end of hostilities , and from September 1946 to December 1947 commanded No. 266 ( Rhodesia ) Squadron in England and Germany , flying Gloster Meteor <unk> He was awarded the Airman 's Cross by the government of the Netherlands in October 1946 . After retiring from the military with the rank of wing commander , Plagis returned home to Southern Rhodesia in 1948 . A street in the north Salisbury suburb of Alexandra Park had been named after him in recognition of his wartime exploits ; he moved into the house at the end of the road , 1 John Plagis Avenue . He married in 1954 and had three sons and a daughter . 
 Plagis set up and ran a bottle store bearing his name in Salisbury , and was involved in several businesses during the next three decades , serving as a director on company boards , including Central African Airways from 1963 to 1968 . He joined the Rhodesian Front on its formation in 1962 , and was its candidate in Salisbury City in that year 's general election , losing to the United Federal Party 's John Roger Nicholson by 631 votes to 501 . According to a report published by the Zimbabwe African National Union in 1969 , Plagis was by then working in the office of the Rhodesian Prime Minister Ian Smith ( himself a Second World War Spitfire pilot ) , with responsibility for the premier 's written correspondence . 
 In later life , Plagis became a friend of British ace Douglas Bader , a prominent supporter of Rhodesia 's Unilateral Declaration of Independence in 1965 . Bader , Smith and Plagis often socialised . Plagis also knew L Ron Hubbard , the American founder of Scientology , who briefly relocated to Salisbury in 1966 . Hubbard initiated numerous business schemes in Rhodesia , including the purchase of the Bumi Hills Hotel at Kariba . Plagis was one of two local businessmen who partnered with Hubbard in the Bumi Hills deal . He also sold Hubbard an interest in his holdings before the American was deported . 
 Plagis died in 1974 , aged 54 or 55 ; according to Lauren St John , an author from Gadzema , he had committed suicide , having never truly readjusted to civilian life . 
 = Arthur Cumming ( Royal Navy officer ) = 
 Admiral Sir Arthur Cumming KCB ( 6 May 1817 – 17 February 1893 ) was an officer of the Royal Navy . He was born in Nancy , France to Sir Henry Cumming , a general in the British Army and received naval education at the Royal Naval College in Portsmouth . Cumming served as a midshipman in the Mediterranean and North America before being promoted to lieutenant in 1840 for his actions in the Syrian War . He remained with the Mediterranean Fleet until appointed to HMS Frolic , a sloop stationed in South America . Whilst detached from Frolic and in command of a small pinnace on 6 September 1843 Cumming and seven men boarded a Portuguese slave ship , subdued her 27 @-@ man crew and brought her back to Rio de Janeiro . He had expected to be promoted for his efforts , but was overlooked and resented the decision for the rest of his life . Cumming spent some time in the Navy 's Experimental Squadron before being promoted commander on 9 November 1846 . 
 Cumming 's first command was HMS Rattler , stationed off West Africa , during which he captured another slave ship . He saw active service against the Russians during the Crimean War , captaining the frigate HMS Gorgon and being promoted to post @-@ captain on 19 April 1854 . Subsequently Cumming was transferred to HMS Conflict and , in company with HMS Amphion , was able to capture the Baltic Sea port of Libau without firing a shot . Towards the end of the war he took command of the ironclad floating battery HMS Glatton but arrived in the Black Sea after the peace had been agreed . He returned to the UK in time for Glatton to take part in Queen Victoria 's 1856 Fleet Review . Cumming was appointed captain of the frigate HMS Emerald on 14 May 1859 and remained with the ship until the end of her Royal Navy career on 7 November 1863 . Emerald served in the Channel Fleet , the Baltic Sea and Admiralty propeller trials . She also made several trips to the Americas including " one of the quickest passages on record " to Bermuda in 1860 . After her decommissioning Cumming was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath , served aboard HMS Victory and Duke of Wellington and in the Packet Service . 
 Cumming achieved flag rank on 27 February 1870 when he was promoted to rear @-@ admiral . He served for a while as a port admiral before becoming the Naval Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the East Indies in 1872 , remaining there until 1875 . Cumming continued to receive promotions , becoming vice @-@ admiral in 1876 and admiral in 1880 , but retired from the Navy in 1880 . In retirement he lived at Foston Hall , near Derby . Cumming was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath as part of Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee celebrations on 21 June 1887 and died in London on 17 February 1893 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Arthur Cumming was born at Nancy in France on 6 May 1817 , his father was General Sir Henry Cumming . Arthur was entered into the Royal Naval College at Portsmouth in January 1831 , passing the course and being discharged on 8 August 1832 . His first ship was the sloop HMS Rover on which he served in the Mediterranean ( presumably as a midshipman ) , also serving on the Lisbon and North American Stations . In 1837 Cumming passed his examinations to become eligible for the position of lieutenant and was promoted to the rank of mate on 4 April . By early 1840 Cumming was stationed at HMS Excellent , a navy stone frigate in Portsmouth that housed the gunnery school . 
 = = Syrian War = = 
 On 14 March 1840 Cumming was appointed mate on the frigate HMS Cyclops ( commanded by Horatio Thomas Austin ) , part of Commodore Charles John Napier 's squadron sent to intervene for Britain in the Syrian War , and reached the ship in April . The war had begun when <unk> Ali , Pasha of Egypt , attempted to claim independence from the Ottoman Empire . Ali invaded Syria and took control of the Ottoman Fleet forcing young Sultan Abdülmecid I to request help from the European powers . Great Britain , Austria , Prussia and Russia agreed to assist and issued an ultimatum to Ali demanding his withdrawal from Ottoman possessions ( Arabia , Crete and Syria ) in return for being made hereditary Viceroy of Egypt . Cyclops was detached from patrolling to carry the ultimatum into Alexandria on 9 August 1840 . 
 The ultimatum was refused and the European allies intervened , the naval side of the war becoming the responsibility of Britain and Austria . Cyclops played an active role ; arriving at Beirut on 7 September 1840 to fire shells in support of the landing of Ottoman troops , attempting to capture the fort at <unk> on 11 September , landing marines and further troops at <unk> on 12 September and capturing Batroun on 15 September . On 25 September Cyclops arrived at Sidon , the main Egyptian southern division supplies depot , alongside HMS Thunderer , Gorgon , Wasp , Stromboli , Hydra , SMS <unk> ( Austrian ) and <unk> ( Ottoman ) . The ships proceeded to bombard the citadel and surrounding fort on 26 September before a force of 500 Ottoman troops were landed . The 2 @,@ 700 strong defending force continued to resist so the bombardment was resumed and reinforcements of 750 British Marines and 100 Austrian troops landed , alongside some British sailors . The fort was overrun and the entire garrison captured , Cumming being mentioned in despatches for his bravery during the action . The Admiralty rewarded him with promotion to the rank of lieutenant , dated just two days after the action . Cyclops remained in the theatre until leaving for Malta in October and saw action at <unk> , the Syrian War continued into November . 
 Cumming transferred to HMS Princess Charlotte , a first @-@ rate ship of the line commanded by Arthur Fanshawe and flagship of Robert Stopford , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Mediterranean Fleet , on 28 November 1840 . By January 1841 Cumming had transferred again , being appointed lieutenant in HMS Britannia . Britannia , commanded by Michael Seymour , was another first @-@ rate and the new flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet , John Ommanney having succeeded Stopford as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . Cumming 's next posting was again within the Mediterranean Fleet , serving under Houston Stewart from 19 June 1841 to 23 May 1842 on the 74 @-@ gun third @-@ rate HMS Benbow . 
 = = South America = = 
 On 5 November 1842 Cumming was appointed to the newly built 16 @-@ gun sloop HMS Frolic , under the command of William Alexander Willis . Frolic was posted to South America and on 6 September 1843 Cumming was cruising off Santos , São Paulo , in command of the ship 's pinnace , when he encountered the large brigantine Portuguese slaver Vincedora in company with two other slaving vessels . The British slave trade had been outlawed by the Slave Trade Act 1807 and the Royal Navy viewed all slavers as pirates , liable to be arrested and their ships confiscated . Cumming positioned the pinnace to cut off the Vincedora 's retreat but the brigantine made to ram the boat . At the last moment , perhaps wary of intentionally killing a Royal Navy officer and his men , the Vincedora changed course . Shortly afterwards Cumming was able to shoot the brigantine 's captain . 
 With their captain killed the crew were thrown into confusion and Cumming was able to board the vessel , followed by a marine and six sailors – all that could fit on the deck at the time . Cumming and his men were able to drive the 27 @-@ strong and fully armed crew below and lock them beneath the hatches . He got the rest of the pinnace 's crew aboard and ordered the Portuguese crew shackled to the anchor cable . The other two slavers could have changed the course of events if they chose to get involved but instead made their escape . The Vincedora displaced just 55 tons but was found to be carrying 338 slaves , having left Africa with 450 . 
 The ships set sail for Rio de Janeiro , arriving there on 10 September when the slaves were transferred to the hulk Crescent under the supervision of Sir Thomas Paisley . Paisley said that he had " never witnessed anything so shocking " , particularly as most of the slaves were suffering from emaciation and sores and others were infected by smallpox and had to be quarantined aboard the Vincedora . The slaves included parentless children , babies and a harem of women for the brigantine 's crew . Although the slaves continued to die over the next month , most recovered to be set free . The event was recorded in the memoirs of Sir Astley Cooper Key . 
 Cumming hoped that he would be promoted to commander as a result of the action given the unusual circumstances and danger involved . However the event was reported to London merely as the commonplace capture of a slaver and hence merited no reward , a fact that Cumming resented for the rest of his life . Instead all he received was a period of quarantine , followed by an attack of smallpox and a long convalescence in England . Cumming remained nominally with Frolic until 21 October 1843 . 
 = = Experimental Squadron = = 
 Cumming was posted to the brig HMS Espiegle on 2 October 1844 , serving under Captain Thomas Pickering Thompson in the East Indies until 27 March 1845 . The next day he was appointed to HMS Caledonia , a first @-@ rate commanded by Alexander Milne that served as the flagship of his father Admiral Sir David Milne who was the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Plymouth . On 29 April Cumming transferred to the first @-@ rate HMS Queen , under the command of Baldwin Wake Walker and the flagship of John West in Devonport . Cumming was transferred again on 13 July 1845 to the second @-@ rate HMS Albion , captained by Nicholas Lockyer and remained aboard until 30 November 1846 . 
 Albion , alongside Cumming 's previous ships Caledonia and Queen and other vessels , was part of the 1845 Experimental Squadron . Cumming sailed on the first trial of 1845 that lasted from 15 July to the 20 September and was supervised by Rear Admiral Hyde Parker . The trial was part of a series that attempted to compare new methods of ship building with traditional ones . Cumming at last received promotion to Commander on 9 November 1846 . His first command was HMS Rattler , a 12 @-@ gun sloop that had been the first warship powered by a steam engine and screw propeller , that he captained from 12 February 1849 to 15 April 1851 on the west coast of Africa . Whilst in command of Rattler Cumming captured the Brazilian slave brigantine <unk> on 30 October 1849 . In 1853 Cumming married Adelaide Stuart with whom he had at least one child . 
 = = Crimean War = = 
 Cumming saw active service against the Russians during the Crimean War . On 25 February 1854 he received command of the frigate HMS Gorgon , being promoted to post @-@ captain on 19 April . Cumming was transferred to command HMS Conflict on 9 May 1854 and served aboard her in the Baltic Sea until 6 February 1855 . In company with HMS Amphion , under the command of Captain Astley Cooper Key , the Conflict sailed into Libau on 17 May 1854 . The harbour contained eight Russian merchant vessels and was defended by a force of 4 – 500 soldiers with 2 – 3 cannon . 
 Cumming went ashore under a flag of truce to meet with the town 's governor and demand the handing over of the merchant ships within three hours . The governor refused to comply but the Russian troops left the town shortly afterwards and the governor stated that , whilst he could not order them out of the harbour , Cumming and Key would be permitted to enter the harbour to take them . They proceeded to do so , finding themselves in control of the entire town of 10 @,@ 000 inhabitants with just 110 men , and took out the eight merchant vessels without firing a shot . The ships were sent with prize crews to the Prussian port of Memel . Cumming and Conflict also saw service at the port of Riga in this period and from 15 April to 22 May were responsible for boarding 19 vessels . 
 Cumming returned to England in 1855 and on 22 May was appointed to HMS Glatton , an ironclad floating battery with orders to sail her to the Black Sea . He carried out these orders but arrived after the end of the war and returned Glatton to the United Kingdom by Spring 1856 . He remained captain of the battery until 3 May 1856 and commanded her during the 23 April 1856 Fleet Review , where Glatton was one of four floating batteries that were the first ironclad ships to appear at any fleet review . 
 = = HMS Emerald = = 
 Cumming was appointed captain of the 51 @-@ gun frigate HMS Emerald on her commissioning at Sheerness on 14 May 1859 and remained with the ship until the end of her Royal Navy career on 7 November 1863 . The vessel was initially part of the Channel Fleet and as part of her duties visited Plymouth , Spithead , Torbay , Cork and Devonport . Cumming was reunited with his old commander , Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Alexander Milne , when Emerald became his temporary flagship on 19 January 1860 in order to carry him to the West Indies where he was to replace Vice Admiral Sir Houston Stewart , another former shipmate , as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief on the North America and West Indies Station . Emerald left Devonport on 18 February and arrived at Bermuda 19 days and 6 hours later , completing " one of the quickest passages on record " at the time . The feat is all the more impressive for the fact that Cumming relied almost entirely on sail power , engaging the steam engines only when he was within 500 nautical miles ( 930 km ) of her destination . Whilst in Bermuda Emerald ran aground and tore her coppering , the first of several times she was damaged in her career . 
 Cumming and Emerald returned to Plymouth on 4 July 1860 and was heading to Keyham steam @-@ yard on 10 July when she ran aground on a beach at Hamoaze whilst trying to avoid a merchant brig under tow , this and the Bermuda grounding were found to have damaged 60 feet ( 18 m ) of her coppering . Cumming was next ordered to Alderney , in the Channel Islands to transport a replacement Royal Artillery garrison . On the return journey on 28 August the ship ran aground once more , whilst in the charge of a Trinity House pilot , necessitating more repairs . In September Cumming sailed to Antwerp to provide a British presence and salute to Queen Victoria who was passing through the port . Cumming made another trip to South America in April 1861 when he carried Rear @-@ Admiral Richard Laird Warren in Emerald to his new appointment as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Brazil Station , returning with Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Henry Keppel . 
 On his return Cumming was again ordered to America , transporting guns , shot and stores to the West India Squadron , but was hit by storms off Newfoundland and forced to turn back to Plymouth . Once again Emerald was damaged , losing three boats , damaging rigging and equipment and being said to leak " like a sieve " . This necessitated another period of repair in Keyham , before Cumming set out for Brazil once more , this time encountering storms in the Bay of Biscay and again being damaged and repaired in dock . Emerald saw service in the Baltic and participated in propeller trials for the Admiralty but was decommissioned in 1863 and sold in 1869 . 
 Cumming was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath on 13 May 1867 . In November of that year he became part of the Royal Navy 's Packet Service and served in that role as an additional captain in HMS Victory , under the command of Captains Frederick Beauchamp Paget Seymour and George Le <unk> <unk> . During this time Victory served as the flagship of the Port Admiral of Portsmouth and Cumming transferred to HMS Duke of Wellington when she became the flagship on 2 March 1869 . Cumming remained on the Duke of Wellington , on harbour service duties , until 26 February 1870 . 
 = = Admiral = = 
 Cumming 's service aboard the Duke of Wellington ended with his promotion to rear @-@ admiral on 27 February 1870 . He served for a while as a port admiral before being appointed , on 14 February 1872 , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the East Indies Station . He remained in the East Indies until March 1875 and was promoted to vice @-@ admiral on 22 March 1876 . Cumming 's promotion to admiral came on 9 January 1880 and he retired from the service on 6 April 1882 . After retirement he lived mainly at Foston Hall , near Derby . Cumming was a keen patron of his former shipmates including Surgeon William Loney , who had served aboard Emerald , which Cumming had captained , and Glasgow , part of his East Indies squadron . In 1877 Cumming wrote to Vice @-@ Admiral Beauchamp Seymour , 1st Baron Alcester , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Channel Squadron , and Lord <unk> , Lord Commissioner of the Admiralty , to recommend Loney for promotion . Cumming was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath as part of Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee celebrations on 21 June 1887 . 
 Cumming became an early victim of identity theft on 27 March 1888 when a man impersonating him stole goods worth 100 @,@ 000 francs ( equivalent to approximately £ 402 @,@ 000 in current terms ) from a Nice jewellery shop . The thief had identified himself to the shop 's owner , Mr Boxta , as " Admiral Sir Arthur Cumming " and presented a card in that name with Cumming 's coat of arms printed on it . Having made a small purchase the thief requested that Boxta bring a large quantity of diamond rings , bracelets and a necklace to his rooms so that he could choose a present for his wife . Boxta was reassured by the high status neighbourhood and a pile of Bank of England notes that the thief showed him and allowed the thief to take the jewellery to an adjacent room from which he was able to escape . The thief was never caught . 
 Sir Arthur Cumming died in London on 17 February 1893 . He was survived by his wife and is buried in Brookwood Cemetery , Surrey . 
 = SMS Stuttgart = 
 SMS Stuttgart was a Königsberg @-@ class light cruiser of the Kaiserliche Marine , named after the city of Stuttgart . She had three sister ships : Königsberg , Nürnberg , and Stettin . Stuttgart was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig in 1905 , launched in September 1906 , and commissioned in February 1908 . Like her sisters , Stettin was armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and a pair of 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , and was capable of a top speed in excess of 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . 
 Stuttgart was used as a gunnery training ship from her commissioning to the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , when she was mobilized into the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . There , she saw action at the Battle of Jutland , where she engaged the British cruiser HMS Dublin . Stuttgart was not damaged during the battle . She was converted into a seaplane tender in 1918 , and after the end of the war , was surrendered to Britain as a war prize in 1920 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Stuttgart was ordered under the contract name " O " and was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig in 1905 . She was launched on 22 September 1906 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 1 February 1908 . The ship was 115 @.@ 3 meters ( 378 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 2 m ( 43 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 29 m ( 17 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 814 t ( 3 @,@ 754 long tons ; 4 @,@ 204 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by eleven coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type boilers . These provided a top speed of 24 @.@ 1 knots ( 44 @.@ 6 km / h ; 27 @.@ 7 mph ) and a range of approximately 5 @,@ 750 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 650 km ; 6 @,@ 620 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Stuttgart had a crew of 14 officers and 308 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were side by side aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 41 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . The ship was also equipped with eight 5 @.@ 2 cm SK L / 55 guns with 4 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . She was also equipped with a pair of 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning into the High Seas Fleet , Stuttgart was used as a gunnery training ship for the Fleet 's gunners . At the outbreak of World War I , she was mobilized and served with the Fleet , along with the other gunnery ships like the armored cruiser Blücher . After the outbreak of war , she and several other cruisers were tasked with patrol duties in the Heligoland Bight . The cruisers were divided with the torpedo boat flotillas , and assigned to rotate through nightly patrols into the North Sea . As part of this operation , Stuttgart conducted a patrol on the night of 15 August with Cöln and the I and II Torpedo @-@ boat Flotillas , without incident . 
 On 15 – 16 December , Stuttgart participated in the bombardment of Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby . She was assigned to the cruiser screen of the High Seas Fleet , which was providing distant cover to Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers while they were conducting the bombardment . Following reports of British destroyers from the German screen , Admiral von Ingenohl ordered the High Seas Fleet to turn to port and head for Germany . At 06 : 59 , Stuttgart , the armored cruiser Roon , and the light cruiser Hamburg encountered Commander Jones ' destroyers . Jones shadowed the Germans until 07 : 40 , at which point Stuttgart and Hamburg were detached to sink their pursuers . At 08 : 02 , however , Roon signaled the two light cruisers and ordered them to abandon the pursuit and retreat along with the rest of the High Seas Fleet . 
 On 7 May 1915 , the IV Scouting Group , which by then consisted of Stuttgart , Stettin , München , and Danzig , and twenty @-@ one torpedo boats was sent into the Baltic Sea to support a major operation against Russian positions at Libau . The operation was commanded by Rear Admiral Hopman , the commander of the reconnaissance forces in the Baltic . The IV Scouting Group was tasked with screening to the north to prevent any Russian naval forces from moving out of the Gulf of Finland undetected , while several armored cruisers and other warships bombarded the port . The Russians did attempt to intervene with a force of four cruisers : Admiral Makarov , Bayan , Oleg , and Bogatyr . The Russian ships briefly engaged München , but both sides were unsure of the others ' strength , and so both disengaged . Shortly after the bombardment , Libau was captured by the advancing German army , and Stuttgart and the rest of the IV Scouting Group were recalled to the High Seas Fleet . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 Stuttgart was assigned to the IV Scouting Group during the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . The IV Scouting Group , under the command of Commodore Ludwig von Reuter , departed Wilhelmshaven at 03 : 30 on 31 May , along with the rest of the fleet . Tasked with screening for the fleet , Stuttgart and the torpedo boat V71 were positioned at the rear of the fleet , astern of the II Battle Squadron . Stuttgart and the IV Scouting Group were not heavily engaged during the early phases of the battle , but around 21 : 30 , they encountered the British 3rd Light Cruiser Squadron ( 3rd LCS ) . Reuter 's ships were leading the High Seas Fleet south , away from the deployed Grand Fleet . Due to the long range and poor visibility , only München and Stettin were able to engage the British cruisers . Stuttgart was the fourth ship in the line , and her gunners could only make out one British ship in the haze . Since that ship was already being engaged by the other German cruisers , Stuttgart held her fire . Reuter turned his ships hard to starboard , in order to draw the British closer to the capital ships of the German fleet , but the 3rd LCS refused to take the bait and disengaged . 
 During the ferocious night fighting that occurred as the High Seas Fleet forced its way through the British rear , the IV Scouting Group encountered the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron at close range in the darkness . As the two squadrons closed on each other , the Germans illuminated HMS Southampton and HMS Dublin and concentrated their fire on the two ships . Stuttgart and Elbing fired on Dublin . During this period , Dublin was hit by eight shells , probably all from Stuttgart , though these hits did not do serious damage . The two British ships were badly damaged and set on fire and forced to retreat , while the Germans also fell back in an attempt to bring the British closer to the battlecruisers Moltke and Seydlitz . In the melee , the cruiser Frauenlob was hit and sunk by a torpedo launched by Southampton ; this forced Stuttgart to haul out of line to starboard . She then lost contact with the rest of the IV Scouting Group , so she fell in with the I Battle Squadron . She was present during a later encounter with British light forces around midnight . She remained concealed in the darkness and observed the I Battle Squadron dreadnoughts hammering several British destroyers . The British meanwhile launched torpedoes at the German line , which forced it to turn away . Stuttgart had to thread her way in between the battleships Nassau and Posen in the darkness . 
 By 02 : 30 , Stuttgart was steaming at the head of the German line , ahead of Westfalen , the leading battleship . She led the I Battle Squadron back to port , and later assisted the III Battle Squadron and the fleet flagship , Friedrich der Grosse . In the course of the battle , Stuttgart had fired 64 rounds , the least of all of the German cruisers in the battle . She emerged from the battle unscathed , unlike many of the other German cruisers . 
 = = = Conversion and fate = = = 
 Earlier in the war , the German Navy had experimented with converting steamers into seaplane tenders . They were too slow to operate with the fleet , however , and so a faster alternative was needed . By 1918 , the Navy had decided to convert Stuttgart , which was fast enough to steam with the fleet ; conversion work started in February 1918 . The work was done at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven , and was completed in May . As a seaplane tender , her forward and rear 10 @.@ 5 cm guns , and the two rearmost broadside guns were removed , leaving only four broadside guns remaining . Two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns were installed forward ; she retained her submerged torpedo tubes . Two large hangars were installed aft of the funnels , with space for two seaplanes ; a third seaplane was carried on top of the hangars . Since Stuttgart could carry only three aircraft , a number which was deemed insufficient to support the entire High Seas Fleet , plans were drawn up to convert Roon into a seaplane carrier as well . Neither ship was ever used operationally . Stuttgart survived the war , and was stricken from the naval register on 5 November 1919 . She was surrendered to the United Kingdom on 20 July 1920 , as the war prize " S " and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = Hurricane Gert ( 1999 ) = 
 Hurricane Gert was the fourth of five major hurricanes in the moderately active 1999 Atlantic hurricane season . A Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane , Gert formed on September 11 off the coast of Africa before heading west @-@ northwest . It reached a peak wind speed of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) by September 15 over the open central Atlantic east @-@ northeast of the Leeward Islands . It gradually curved to the northwest and later to the north , due to a weakness in the subtropical ridge created by Hurricane Floyd . Hurricane Gert passed east of Bermuda on September 21 and began a steady weakening trend at that time . It turned to the northeast , and on September 23 , Gert transitioned into an extratropical cyclone to the southeast of Atlantic Canada before being absorbed by a larger storm . 
 For several days , Gert threatened to strike Bermuda , prompting the evacuation of tourists . Although Gert 's center did not make landfall , it passed a short distance east of the island , producing hurricane force winds that left 11 @,@ 000 people without power . High waves swept two people out to sea at Acadia National Park in Maine . Later , strong waves struck Newfoundland and left heavy marine damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on September 10 , with evidence of a low @-@ level circulation and convective banding . It moved west @-@ northwestward , located south of a subtropical ridge . Based on satellite imagery , it is estimated the system organized into Tropical Depression Nine by 1200 UTC on September 11 to the south of the Cape Verde islands . Upon its formation , the center was poorly defined , with restricted easterly outflow due to easterly wind shear . After about 24 hours of remaining somewhat disorganized , the convection became more concentrated on September 12 as banding features and outflow improved . Consequently , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Gert , the seventh named storm of the season . 
 After becoming a tropical storm , Gert quickly intensified due to the presence of an anticyclone aloft , as well as warm water temperatures exceeding 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) . Following the development of a warm spot near the center , Gert intensified into a hurricane on September 13 . It strengthened further , developing an eye that briefly dissipated before reforming . Early on September 15 , Gert attained major hurricane strength , or a Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . Still moving west @-@ northwestward , Gert continued its steady intensification trend , developing well @-@ defined outflow throughout the circulation that was described as " outstanding " . After reaching Category 4 status on September 15 , Gert strengthened further to peak winds of 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) early on September 16 , as estimated on satellite imagery through the Dvorak technique . Satellite intensity estimates reached as high as 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) , or a Category 5 hurricane . At the time , the hurricane was located about 720 mi ( 1160 km ) east @-@ northeast of Guadeloupe in the Lesser Antilles . Around the time of peak intensity , Gert maintained a round central dense overcast . Hurricane Hunters investigated the hurricane on September 16 and indicated a slight weakening trend due to an eyewall replacement cycle . Gradually Gert turned toward the northwest due to a weakness in the subtropical ridge , created by Hurricane Floyd to the west . As it did so , the hurricane re @-@ intensified briefly before resuming a weakening trend , due to increased wind shear and an upper @-@ level trough to its west restricting outflow . 
 After weakening to winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) , Gert again re @-@ strengthened to Category 4 status on September 19 , as the eye became well @-@ organized within its surrounding convection following an eyewall replacement cycle . By September 20 , while the hurricane was approaching Bermuda , the appearance became more ragged due to the intrusion of unfavorable dry air . Early on September 21 Gert weakened to Category 2 intensity , around the same time it turned northward . Later that day it passed about 135 mi ( 217 km ) east of Bermuda , producing hurricane force winds on the island . Steady weakening continued as Gert accelerated northeastward under the influence of an approaching trough . The convection decreased around the center due to cooler water temperatures , and on September 23 Gert weakened to tropical storm status as it approached Newfoundland . After nearly all of the convection had dissipated , the system no longer met the characteristics of a tropical cyclone . As a result , it was declared extratropical at 1200 UTC on September 23 about 55 mi ( 90 km ) southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . About six hours later , the remnants of Gert were absorbed by a larger extratropical storm . Gert was the fourth of five Category 4 hurricanes to form during the 1999 season , the highest number of such storms on record . Later , the 2005 season tied the record . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Bermuda = = = 
 As Gert was several days away from Bermuda , the NHC advised residents there to monitor the progress of the storm , Due to uncertainties in the future forecast , as well as the size and strength of Gert , a tropical storm warning and hurricane watch was issued for the island on September 19 , about two days prior to its closest approach . As Gert moved closer to the island , the watch and warning were replaced by a hurricane warning on September 20 , which was maintained until the following day after Gert moved further away . Before Gert passed by the island , officials closed two schools and converted them to emergency shelters . Police workers advised 700 families to leave their houses . Cruise lines diverted ships away , while hundreds of tourists took flights to leave the island . 
 While passing east of Bermuda , Gert produced 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) at Bermuda International Airport . Elsewhere on the island , wind gusts peaked at 87 mph ( 140 km / h ) along the coast , while 1 @-@ minute sustained winds reached 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) along the harbor . Rainfall on the island was light , totaling only 0 @.@ 53 in ( 13 mm ) . Rough surf battered the island , resulting in extensive beach erosion . The well @-@ known Natural Arches were damaged , and part of a house collapsed into the sea . Severe damage was reported along the southern shore of the island . Approximately 11 @,@ 000 residents suffered temporary power outages . Several roads were flooded , and the intense winds downed trees . However , the storm 's worst effects remained offshore . 
 = = = United States and Canada = = = 
 On September 20 , Hurricane Gert was attributed to generating a rogue wave that swept two people out to sea at Acadia National Park along the coast of Maine . The crew of a lobster boat later found their bodies . Although the storm never approached the United States , seas in the area generally ran 3 to 5 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 to 1 @.@ 52 m ) above normal . 
 Late in its duration , Gert passed just southeast of Newfoundland before becoming extratropical , producing wave heights of 77 @.@ 4 ft ( 23 @.@ 6 m ) offshore and 30 ft ( 9 m ) onshore . In St. Bride 's along the Avalon Peninsula , a large wave severely damaged a wharf , destroying five boats and damaging 45 others . Along the wharf , a wave swept three people into the ocean , hospitalizing one of them . The wharf required $ 2 million ( 1999 CAD , $ 1 @.@ 9 million 1999 USD ) in repairs , forcing its closure . Further west , high waves damaged a fish plant in Lord 's Cove . Gale force winds extended across southeastern Newfoundland , and in the Grand Banks a station reported winds of 74 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Onshore , the winds downed trees and caused power outages , primarily in the St. John 's area . In addition , the adverse conditions from Gert prompted the cancellation of flights to and from St. John 's International Airport . 
 = Angie Ballard = 
 Angela " Angie " Ballard ( born 6 June 1982 ) is an Australian Paralympic athlete who competes in T53 wheelchair sprint events . She became a paraplegic at age 7 due to a car accident . 
 She began competing in wheelchair racing in 1994 , and first represented Australia in 1998 . Over four Paralympic Games from 2000 to 2012 , she has won three silver and two bronze medals . Her current coach is Louise Sauvage and her training partner is Madison de Rozario . 
 Ballard held athletics scholarships at the Australian Institute of Sport from 1999 to 2001 , and The University of Sydney ( while studying first commerce and then psychology ) , and also represents the New South Wales Institute of Sport . She has been appointed by a number of organisations as a disability or sports ambassador , and currently sits on the board of Wheelchair Sports NSW . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Ballard was born on 6 June 1982 in Canberra . At the age of seven , she became a ( T10 ) paraplegic after a car accident , when her mother lost control of the car through fatigue . Following the accident , her initial hospitalisation and rehabilitation was in Canberra for three months , among elderly amputees . Her rehabilitation was then moved to the Royal North Shore Hospital , where she met Christie Dawes ( née Skelton ) , who she would later race with in the Australian 4x100 m relay team at the 2008 Beijing Paralympics . Because her brother had spina bifida , and was already " in the [ regular ] system " , her parents insisted that Angie continue at a regular school , rather than one specifically for disabled students . She attended Lyneham Primary School and Lyneham High School in Canberra . Her physical education teacher was one of the people who first encouraged her to participate in wheelchair sports . After her rehabilitation she tried swimming and wheelchair basketball . Her first experiences of racing at the age of 12 resulted in blisters and a sore neck , but wheelchair athletics soon became her passion . At age 14 , after treatment for scoliosis , Ballard was unable to participate in sport for a year . 
 She was offered a scholarship with the ACT Academy of Sport and she then took up an athletics scholarship at the Australian Institute of Sport in Canberra from 1999 to 2001 . In 2002 , she moved to Sydney to attend university on a sports scholarship , initially studying commerce . As of 2011 , she was living in Liberty Grove , New South Wales and attending the University of Sydney studying for a Bachelor of Psychology , with the intention of practising as a psychologist . She graduated and received an Alumni Award in 2014 . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Ballard is a wheelchair racing athlete , competing mainly in category T53 sprint events . Compared to T54 athletes , she has less use of her abdominal muscles , which means she cannot raise herself as much in her wheelchair to get the best angle to propel herself forward . 
 Ballard first entered competitive wheelchair races in 1994 , at the age of twelve . Her first racing wheelchair was bought second hand . By 1997 , she started taking the sport more seriously and began setting records in Australian athletics for her classification . A year later she was representing her country on the international stage . By 2000 , she held national records in the T53 100 m and 200 m events . 
 From 2002 she held a sports scholarship at the University of Sydney , where she was coached by Andrew Dawes ( Christie 's husband ) . At the time , Dawes also coached Louise Sauvage , and on occasion the two would train together . After Sauvage retired from competitive wheelchair athletics following the 2004 Games , she became Ballard 's coach . As of 2012 her training partner is Madison de Rozario . 
 = = = Paralympics = = = 
 Ballard competed in Sydney in the 2000 Summer Paralympics but did not win any medals , placing fourth in both the 100 m and 200 m events ; she was also a torch bearer , and featured in the entertainment section of the opening ceremony , where she circled the track 12 @.@ 3 metres ( 40 ft ) in the air , suspended by a blimp and giant inflated angels . In preparation for the 2004 Athens Paralympics , Ballard trained six days a week in 11 sessions . Her training included going to Centennial Park and training on the hills there . It also included track work twice a week and doing weight training at least three times a week . This training schedule caused a few injuries , so she reduced the training frequency for later Games . 
 Just before the Games , she competed in a warm up event in Switzerland , and set Australian records in the 100 m , 400 m and 800 m events . At the 2004 games , she won a bronze medal in the T53 100 m , behind Tanni Grey @-@ Thompson and Francesca <unk> . Her goal for the 2008 Beijing Paralympics was to set a personal best , but she also had eyes on a medal . She took the year off her psychology degree to train six times a week . At the 2008 games , along with her team mates Christie Dawes , Madison de Rozario , and Jemima Moore , she achieved her best Paralympic result , winning a silver medal behind China 's world record in the T53 / 54 4x100 m relay . In the individual events , she finished fifth in the women 's T53 100 m event ( a race won in world record time by Huang <unk> ) , seventh in the women 's T53 200 m event ( also won in a world record time by Huang ) , seventh in the women 's T53 400 m event , and led out the women 's 800 m final , eventually finishing sixth . After a couple of sub @-@ par competition results in 2011 , Ballard made big changes to her diet , gloves , technique , chair position , and training regime . She entered the 2012 London Paralympics ranked world number one in both the T53 100 m and 200 m . At the games , Ballard participated in the T53 class events for 100 m , 200 m , 400 m and 800 m events . She won two silver medals in the 200 m and 400 m T53 events , and a bronze medal in the 100 m T53 event . 
 = = = World championships = = = 
 In August 1998 , Ballard competed at the International Paralympic Committee World Championships in Birmingham , England , where she was part of the gold medal winning Australian women 's 4 <unk> m and 4x400 m relay teams . Both relay wins set long @-@ standing world records . In the 2002 World Championships , she won gold in the 100 m . At the 2013 IPC Athletics World Championships in Lyon , France , she won silver medals in the Women 's 100 m , Women 's 200 m and Women 's 800 m T53 and a bronze medal in the 400 m T53 . 
 At the 2015 IPC Athletics World Championships in Doha , Ballard won gold medals in the Women 's 200m T53 in a championship record time of 29 @.@ 33 and the Women 's 400m T53 . After winning the 400 m , Ballard said : " This is the one I wanted . I was so nervous coming in , you try and tell yourself that the worst thing that can happen is a loss and starting again tomorrow , but the reality is that this matters so much . I was so scared before the race , perhaps it gave me the adrenalin to get it done . I ’ ve just worked so hard for this for so long . " She also won a bronze medal in the Women 's 800 mm T54 behind gold medallist Madison de Rozario . 
 = = = World Cup = = = 
 In the inaugural Paralympic World Cup in Manchester in 2005 , Ballard placed third in the Women 's T53 100 m . 
 = = = Australian titles = = = 
 Ballard won the 100 m women 's wheelchair open title in 1998 , 2001 , 2002 , 2004 , 2005 and 2008 , and finished second in 2000 , 2003 , 2010 , and 2011 . In the 200 m event , she won gold in 1998 , 1999 , 2001 , 2002 , 2004 , 2008 and 2010 , silver in 2000 and 2005 and bronze in 2006 . In the 400 m , she won gold in 1999 , 2000 , 2001 , 2005 , 2008 and 2010 , silver in 2004 and bronze in 2002 and 2006 . In the 800 m , she won gold in 1999 and 2001 , silver in 2000 and 2005 , and bronze in 2002 and 2004 . In the 1500 m , she won gold in 2005 and 2010 . 
 In 1999 , she competed at Australia 's Junior Wheelchair Nationals . She won five gold medals at those games and was named the event 's Female Athlete of the Games . 
 Ballard won a gold and silver at the 2011 Sydney Track Classic . At the 2012 competition , Ballard set personal bests and Oceania records for the 100 m ( in a time of 17 @.@ 27 s ) , 200 m ( 30 @.@ 12 s ) and 400 m ( 56 @.@ 89 s ) events . 
 = = = Long distance events = = = 
 Ballard also sometimes competes in longer distance events , in which the disability classifications are usually combined , so she competes against athletes in the higher T54 classification . She represented Australia in the 800 m ( T54 ) at the 2006 Commonwealth Games , placing 6th in the final . At the 2014 Glasgow Commonwealth Games , she won a gold medal in the 1500 m T54 . She has also raced in and helped organise the 10 km Oz Day wheelchair race , placing 2nd in 1999 , 3rd in 2005 , and 3rd in 2012 . In 1998 , together with Louise Sauvage , Christie Skelton , and Holly <unk> , she completed an 845 @-@ kilometre ( 525 mi ) relay from Byron Bay to Bondi Beach , which raised $ 200 @,@ 000 for disabled athletes . 
 = = = World records = = = 
 29 May 2015 at the IPC Athletics Grand Prix in <unk> , Switzerland – Women ’ s 400m T53 world record with a time of 54 @.@ 73 seconds . 
 4 June 2015 at IPC sanctioned Daniela <unk> Memorial Para @-@ athletics Meet , Arbon , Switzerland – Women ’ s 400m T53 world record with a time of 54 @.@ 70 
 4 June 2015 at IPC sanctioned Daniela <unk> Memorial Para @-@ athletics Meet , Arbon , Switzerland – Women ’ s 800m T53 world record with a time of 1 : 47 @.@ 48 . 
 5 June 2016 at Indy Invitational Meet in Indianapolis , USA - Women 's 400m T53 world record with a time of 54 @.@ 69 . 
 = = Advocacy and patronage = = 
 Ballard has been appointed as an ambassador or advocate by a number of organisations with an interest in people with disabilities , sport , health , or exercise . In 2000 she was selected for Team MAA ( Motor Accidents Authority ) , to discuss road trauma with other young people . In 2005 she was appointed as an ambassador for Technical Aid to the Disabled . She helped recruit volunteers , attended fundraisers , posed for photos and showed them her medal . Later that year she also visited patients at the <unk> Children 's Hospital alongside a number of celebrities to help them celebrate Christmas . In 2007 Ballard was chosen as an ambassador for Walk to Work Day . She is on the board of the Wheelchair Sports Association of New South Wales . 
 Alongside a number of other university @-@ affiliated athletes , Ballard attended a press conference to oppose the introduction of Voluntary Student Unionism . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 1999 – ACT Academy of Sport Athlete of the year in the Disabled Category 
 2013 and 2014 – Athletics Australia Female Para @-@ Athlete of the Year 
 October 2014 – Awarded the Nigel C Barker Graduate Medal for Sporting Achievement by a recent graduate of the University of Sydney . 
 = Christmas Wishes ( The Office ) = 
 " Christmas Wishes " is the tenth episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 162nd episode overall . The episode originally aired on NBC in the United States on December 8 , 2011 . It was written by executive producer Mindy Kaling and was directed by Ed Helms in his directorial debut . The episode guest starred Lindsey Broad , Ameenah Kaplan , and Eleanor Seigler . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) attempts to make everyone 's Christmas wishes come true , including those of a drunken Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) . Meanwhile , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) are entangled in an escalating prank war wherein one attempts to frame the other . 
 " Christmas Wishes " received mostly positive reviews from critics . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Christmas Wishes " drew 5 @.@ 79 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 8 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , staying even with the previous two episode , " Gettysburg " and " Mrs. California . " It ranked first in its timeslot , and was the highest ranked NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andy ( Ed Helms ) attempts to make everyone 's Christmas wishes come true . At a conference meeting , he vows to keep his promise to make wishes and asks the office members to also be nice to his new girlfriend Jessica . An emotionally confused Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) tries to be nice to Jessica , but ends up drinking too much at the party . In a drunken stupor , she tells Andy that her Christmas wish is for Jessica to die . Offended , he tells her to get over their breakup before storming off . Kelly does her part as a friend of Erin 's by being mean to Jessica . Andy becomes concerned about Erin 's behavior , not least because Robert California ( James Spader ) has revealed that his marriage is ending , spends a good deal of the party hanging out with Erin and pressures her into drinking shots . When Andy has to drive a drunken Meredith home , he sees Erin getting into Robert 's car and he follows them with a look of panic on his face . However , he covertly witnesses Robert being a gentleman and sending Erin off to her apartment with a hug and words of encouragement . Andy subsequently drives away with a smile on his face . 
 Meanwhile , Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) and Jim 's ( John Krasinski ) pranking has caused Cathy to ask Andy to move her to a different desk . In turn , Andy orders Dwight and Jim to quit their childish behavior . He tells them that the next one to pull a prank will lose their Christmas bonus , and the target of the prank will get the prankster 's share . Wanting to double their bonuses , both Dwight and Jim attempt to frame the other . Jim loudly releases his credit card information hoping Dwight will steal it and buy something ridiculous . However , Dwight orders a $ 200 bouquet of flowers for Pam . Dwight then puts a porcupine in his desk and blames Jim . However , a verbal slip @-@ up causes him to inadvertently reveal his intentions . Jim , in retaliation , defaces a picture of his daughter CeCe , and blames Dwight . After Andy says such vandalism is grounds for termination , Jim admits he staged the crime . Acknowledging that his plan has backfired , Andy tells Jim that he won 't touch their bonuses , and just wants their behavior to not interfere with their job performances . Jim assures him he will tell Dwight , but purposefully neglects to do so . Dwight thus continues to pull pranks on himself , to Jim 's amusement . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by executive producer Mindy Kaling , who also portrays Kelly Kapoor on the series , her 24th writing credit for the series . This marks her first writing credit as an executive producer . Before this , it was speculated that she might not return to the series as a writer , before she confirmed that she would be writing the Christmas episode . She has also written the previous two Christmas episodes : " Secret Santa " and " Classy Christmas " . The episode was directed by cast member Ed Helms , making his directorial debut . The episode also marks the fourth appearance of Lindsey Broad who plays Cathy , Pam 's replacement during her maternity leave . She appeared in a recurring role for the season and she initially appeared in " Pam 's Replacement " . Due to Jenna Fischer 's actual pregnancy , Pam did not appear in the episode . The Season Eight DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include shoots of several of the staff member 's Christmas wishes being revealed , Dwight and Jim 's pranks start turning on Cathy , and Meredith hitting on a newly single Robert . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Midway through the party , Dwight enters the conference room and sets up his own speaker system to play Christmas Eve / Sarajevo 12 / 24 , a heavy metal medley of traditional Christmas songs performed by Savatage and the Trans @-@ Siberian Orchestra . The song acts as a backdrop to a brief montage of various scenes of members of the office exchanging gifts while shots of Dwight , Nate , Creed , and Gabe air @-@ <unk> along are interspersed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Christmas Wishes " originally aired on NBC in the United States on December 8 , 2011 . The episode was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 79 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 8 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 8 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode matched the ratings with the previous episode , " Mrs. California . " Despite this , the episode ranked first in its timeslot , beating CBS drama Person of Interest which received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 7 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , Fox drama series Bones which received a 2 @.@ 4 rating / 6 % share , and ABC reality series America 's Funniest Home Videos which received a 1 @.@ 9 rating / 5 % share . Despite place third , all three of these shows received more total viewers than " Christmas Wishes " . For the week of November 5 – December 11 , 2011 , " Christmas Wishes " placed twenty @-@ third in the ratings among all prime @-@ time broadcasts in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Christmas Wishes " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Hollywood writer Hannah Lawrence enjoyed the episode , writing , " as an episode , [ ' Christmas Wishes ' ] had that certain … ' spirit ' that I enjoy from Office episodes . " She also complimented the Erin @-@ Andy relationship arc . IGN writer Cindy White , although noting that the episode " had some big obstacles to overcome " with the absences of both Michael Scott and Pam Halpert , " concluded that the episode had a " high rewatch factor . " She wrote , " If my Christmas wish was to watch an episode of The Office that made me laugh a lot , consider that wish granted . " She ultimately gave the episode 8 @.@ 0 / 10 . M. Giant of Television without Pity gave the episode a " B + " . Margaret Lyons from New York wrote a mostly positively review , saying " ' Christmas Wishes ' filled me with holiday cheer , proving that there 's still some juice left in this show , " before noting that " There are still some issues left , too , though . " What Culture ! reviewer Joseph Kratzer praised Mindy Kaling and Ed Helms ' writing and directing work , and said , " If this is what happens when cast members [ … ] take the reins then the writing and directing duties should be kept in house much more often . " 
 The A.V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt wrote a slightly more critical review , noting the episode 's lack of structure . He wrote that " [ ' Christmas Wishes ' ] is not a terrible episode of television , but it ’ s formless to the point where it avoids having to make any sort of statement . " He did , however , positively comment on the Andy and Erin subplot and suggested that the episode was " positioned as a transition point , " featuring an Andy @-@ Erin @-@ Jessica love triangle and a darker Robert California . He ultimately gave the episode a " B – " . Many reviews considered " Christmas Wishes " to be the best episode of the first part of the season . 
 = The Man from London = 
 The Man from London ( Hungarian : A <unk> <unk> ) is a 2007 film by Hungarian director Béla Tarr . It is an adaptation by Tarr and his collaborator @-@ friend László <unk> of the 1934 French language novel L 'Homme de Londres by prolific Belgian writer Georges Simenon . The film was co @-@ directed by editor Ágnes <unk> , and features an international ensemble cast including Czech actor Miroslav Krobot , Tilda Swinton , and Hungarian actors János Derzsi and István Lénárt . The plot follows Maloin , a nondescript railway worker who recovers a briefcase containing a significant amount of money from the scene of a murder to which he is the only witness . Wracked by guilt and fear of being discovered , Maloin sinks into despondence and frustration , which leads to acrimony in his household . Meanwhile , an English police detective investigates the disappearance of the money and the unscrupulous characters connected to the crime . 
 The French , German and Hungarian co @-@ production of the film was fraught with difficulty and obstacles . The first of these was the suicide in February 2005 , days before shooting was due to begin , of the film 's French producer , Humbert Balsan . As the original financing of the film collapsed , the remaining producers managed to secure stop @-@ gap funding which allowed them to shoot nine days of footage on the expensive Corsican sets , until they were shut down through legal action by the local subcontractor . After many expressions of support from European film organisations , production companies and government bodies , a new co @-@ production contract was signed in July 2005 with a revised budget and shooting schedule . It then emerged that all rights to the film had been ceded to a French bank under the original production agreement , and only after further changes in the film 's backers was a deal struck with the bank to allow shooting to resume in March 2006 , over a year later than had been originally envisaged . 
 The Man from London was the first of Tarr 's films to premiere in competition at the Cannes Film Festival , but despite being highly anticipated , it won no prize . The French distributor blamed this on poor dubbing and a late showing , though the press were put off by the film 's extended shots and leaden pace . After being re @-@ dubbed , it was shown on the international film festival circuit . 
 Critical reception to The Man from London was generally positive , though less adamant than that of the director 's previous two works ; while reviewers spoke in glowing terms of the formidable cinematography and meticulous composition , they felt the film lacked compelling characters . Variety reviewer Derek Elley commented that the film was unlikely to reconcile the division between viewers of Tarr 's films who find the director to be " either a visionary genius or a crashing bore " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film concerns a middle @-@ aged railway <unk> , Maloin ( Miroslav Krobot ) , who lives in a decrepit apartment in a port town with his highly @-@ strung wife Camélia ( Tilda Swinton ) and his daughter Henriette ( Erika <unk> ) . One night while in his viewing tower at the port 's rail terminus , Maloin witnesses a fight on the dockside . One of the shady combatants is knocked into the water along with the briefcase he carries ; when the other flees the dark quayside , Maloin makes a clandestine descent from the tower and retrieves the briefcase , which he finds full of sodden English banknotes . Maloin conceals the money and tells no @-@ one of what he has seen . The next morning , he visits a tavern where he plays chess with the barkeep ( Gyula <unk> ) . On his way home , he stops by the butcher 's where his daughter works , and finds to his indignation that they have her washing the floor . Later , from the window of his apartment , he notices Brown ( János Derzsi ) watching him from below . At dinner , Maloin is increasingly irascible , addressing Henriette brusquely and arguing with Camélia . Meanwhile , Brown searches the water at the dock 's edge without success before noticing the watchtower overlooking the quayside , and Maloin within . 
 Later at the tavern , a police inspector from London named Morrison ( István Lénárt ) discusses with Brown the matter of the stolen money . Morrison claims to be working on behalf of a theater owner named Mitchell , a theatre owner from whose office safe the £ 55 @,@ 000 was stolen . Morrison proposes that Brown , being intimately familiar with Mitchell 's office , is the only man he knows who was capable of making away with the money without raising alarm . Morrison indicates that Mitchell cares only that the money is returned swiftly , and is even prepared to offer a two nights ' theater takings in exchange . When Morrison mentions having visited Brown 's wife and asks what he should tell Mitchell , Brown leaves the room under a pretense and slips out a side door . Nearby playing chess with the barkeep , Maloin has overheard the conversation . 
 Maloin calls to the butcher 's and drags Henriette from the store against her will and over the protestations of the butcher 's wife ( Kati <unk> ) . He brings her to the tavern for a drink , where he overhears the barkeep telling another patron the story of Brown 's meeting with the inspector , revealing that Morrison had called the local police when Brown absconded . Though Henriette refuses her drink , Maloin buys her an expensive mink stole . They return home to the consternation of Camélia , who cannot comprehend why Maloin has ruined Henriette 's chances of a job and spent what little savings the family had on the extravagant stole . During Maloin 's shift the next night he is visited by Morrison , who questions him as to the previous night 's events as the body of the drowned man is retrieved from the quayside below . 
 The next day at the tavern , Morrison meets Brown 's wife ( Agi <unk> ) , and tells her that Brown is under suspicion for the theft and for the murder at the quayside . He asks for her help in finding him and repeats to her Mitchell 's offer to Brown , but she remains silent . At home , Henriette tells Maloin she found a man in their hut at the seaside , and in fear locked the door and ran home . An agitated Maloin tells her not to tell anyone , and leaves for the hut . He unlocks the door , and receiving no response to his calling Brown 's name , steps inside , closing the door behind . Minutes later he re @-@ emerges , breathing heavily . After pausing to compose himself , he locks the door and leaves . In the next scene , Maloin presents the briefcase to Morrison in the tavern , and asks him to arrest him , confessing to having killed Brown an hour ago . Morrison leaves with Maloin for the hut , dismissing the frenzied inquiries of Brown 's wife about her husband and handing the briefcase to the barkeep on the way out . Brown 's wife follows the men to the hut , and emerges weeping with Morrison moments later . Back at the tavern , Morrison prepares two envelopes with a small portion of the recovered money in each . One he leaves with the grieving widow to whom he apologizes and wishes well , while the other he gives to Maloin , telling him that his case was one of self @-@ defense . As he is preparing to leave , Morrison advises Maloin to go home and forget the whole affair . The camera focuses on the expressionless face of Brown 's wife momentarily before fading to white . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 According to critic Martha P. <unk> , the film is an exploration of the place of anonymous breakdowns of social order in personal life . For the most part , questions of justice operate in the background of The Man From London , which foregrounds the perceptions and point of view of an accidental witness to the murder , who , like the viewer , has no connection with anyone involved . The film principally concerns the texture of the world of the protagonist Maloin as he experiences it ﬁrst hand : fog , light , shadow , skin , walls , <unk> , windows , sounds . These are much closer to Maloin than any broken laws involving strangers as in the killing at the dock . As distinct from the trope of crime functioning as a break from the boredom of the mundane for the Hitchcockian ordinary man " excitingly " caught up in it , the interjection of crime in the lives of the characters of The Man from London is a phantom occurrence for those burrowed into the center of the mundane details of their lives . In other words , Tarr 's ﬁlm suggests the possibility that it is only on an abstract plane that murder committed by and on strangers causes a stir and demands an investigation . In this context , it is fitting that the investigation must be undertaken by a stranger , the man from London , since abstraction entails distancing from an enveloping context . Only the appearance of the man from London , Brown , impels Maloin to struggle with his de facto alienation , as an ordinary man , from moral principle , an alienation linked , counterintuitively , to the absence of desire in his daily grind . 
 = = Background = = 
 Director Béla Tarr and novelist @-@ screenwriter László <unk> had been collaborators since making the acclaimed epic <unk> in 1985 . With The Man from London , they sought to adapt the 1934 French language novel L 'Homme de Londres by the Belgian writer Georges Simenon . The novel had been twice adapted for film previously ; as The London Man by Henri <unk> in 1943 , and as Temptation Harbour by Lance Comfort in 1947 with William Hartnell , Robert Newton , and Simone Simon in the lead roles . The Man from London was something of a departure from the social realism of the collaborators ' preceding films , as the characters exemplify no social classes and the film focuses on their internal and <unk> dynamics rather than their environment . Tarr explained that he had been drawn to adapt the novel because " it deals with the eternal and the everyday at one and the same time . It deals with the cosmic and the realistic , the divine and the human , and to my mind , contains the totality of nature and man , just as it contains their pettiness . " It was the first of the director 's films not to feature the Hungarian language or an Eastern European setting . The ensemble cast of the film included Czech Miroslav Krobot , Briton Tilda Swinton , and the Hungarians János Derzsi and István Lénárt . Tarr shared directorial credit with Ágnes <unk> – the film 's editor and his long @-@ time collaborator . 
 = = Production history = = 
 The development of the film was problematic , with threats to shut down the production , lack of financing , and ultimately a return to work . The project first faltered in February 2005 , when the film 's producer Humbert Balsan committed suicide . Tarr reported receiving word of his producer 's death two days before shooting was scheduled to begin in Bastia , Corsica . Balsan 's death led to significant financial difficulties for the production . The film had been established as a co @-@ production with French , German and Hungarian financing . Tarr 's Budapest @-@ based production company T. T. <unk> were to provide the Hungarian funding for the project , while Balsan had secured the French and German financing for the film by warranting a loan from the French bank Coficiné . Upon learning of his death , the bank withdrew its support for the production , which was then postponed . 
 After securing additional financing from Eurimages and ARTE , Tarr used these and the Hungarian funds to undertake nine days of shooting on sets he had built at a cost of € 2 million . The French funding was cross @-@ financed for the shoot by T. T. <unk> . As funds were frozen however , the Corsican subcontractor Tanit Films ( controlled by the film 's then @-@ executive producer Jean @-@ Patrick <unk> ) , terminated their contract with Balsan and through legal action compelled the production to dismantle the sets and leave the shooting location . At that point , Ognon Pictures shut the production down and disassociated themselves from the film , and Tarr withdrew to Hungary to regroup . 
 Expressions of sympathy and solidarity from the European film community manifested in renewed assurances of continued support from the production 's German partners , ARTE , and the French National Film Centre ( whose support was conditional on the film having 51 % of its dialogue in French ) . New French financing was secured from production company Mezzanine Film , and in Hungary , the Hungarian Motion Picture Foundation ( <unk> ) and the Minister of Culture pledged to back the production if a guarantee could be made that the film would be finished safely . A compromise filming schedule was negotiated whereby a quarter of the shoot would take place in Eastern Europe rather than Corsica and fewer shooting days would be allotted . This allowed the original € 5 million budget to be reduced by € 700 @,@ 000 to the amount available . With the funding promises secured and a revised shooting schedule , the film 's producers forged a new co @-@ production contract in July 2005 . 
 While the production 's lawyers worked to clarify its legal standing in the Summer of 2005 , it emerged that Humbert Balsan 's deeply indebted production company Ognon Pictures had pledged all rights to the production to Coficiné in exchange for loans . With production in legal stasis and faced with a lengthy court battle to recover the rights , the producers agreed to a settlement with Ognon 's bankruptcy officer . In the meantime , the French partners Mezzanine Film declared their <unk> with the scale of the production , and after mutual agreement with the producers , left the project on September 5 , 2005 . After meeting with the producers and their new French partner , Paul <unk> of 13 Production , Coficiné consented to completing the film . On February 6 , 2006 , Tarr and producer Gábor <unk> issued a press release which documented at length the developments with the troubled production to that date , and expressed their hope and intent to persevere in completing the film . Tarr duly restarted shooting in March 2006 , after a year of inactivity . The filmmakers dedicated The Man from London to their late colleague Humbert Balsan . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Man from London premiered in competition at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival , Tarr 's first film to do so . Although its showing was highly anticipated , the slow pace and prolonged shots of the film " had the press fleeing like panicked slaughterhouse cattle " as The New York Times put it , and it won no prize . This failure was attributed by the film 's French distributor Shellac to its late showing and the poor quality of the dubbing . A proposal for the film to open the Hungarian Film Week out of competition had previously been rejected by the festival 's board . Following its Cannes appearance , the film was screened at the film festivals of Toronto , Melbourne , Edinburgh , Split , Vancouver and New York . It proved controversial in New York , where elements of the audience reacted favourably when the film appeared to end prematurely due to a technical fault ; others greeted the actual conclusion with fervent applause and calls of bravo . 
 Global sales rights to the film were bought by Fortissimo Films , and it was re @-@ dubbed in French and English . The new version had its North American premiere at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City in September 2008 . In the United Kingdom , distributor Artificial Eye released the film theatrically in December 2008 , 18 months following its Cannes premiere . They later released a DVD box set of Tarr 's films which collected The Man from London with Damnation ( 1988 ) and <unk> Harmonies ( 2000 ) . In the United States the film was given a limited release in May 2009 by IFC Films , who later made it available through video @-@ on @-@ demand . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reaction to The Man from London generally praised its formalist aesthetic and painstakingly composed scenes , while criticizing its slow pace and lack of a compelling plot . Most argued the film fell short of Tarr 's previous efforts . Variety 's Derek Elley rated the film on a par with his Damnation ( 1988 ) but as inferior to <unk> ( 1994 ) and <unk> Harmonies ( 2000 ) , remarking it was improbable that The Man From London would put an end to the polarization of Tarr 's audiences into those who hail him as a director of " visionary genius " and those for whom he is a " crashing bore " . Martin Tsai of The New York Sun allowed that Tarr " makes it easy for viewers to get lost in his beautifully bleak world and lose track of time " but complained that in comparison with its predecessors , the film 's central theme of guilt seemed insubstantial and the film itself felt " slight and incomplete " . 
 The New York Times reviewer Nathan Lee described The Man from London as " bloated , formalist art " , and an " outrageously stylized , conceptually demanding film " that <unk> and alienates its audience . In The Hollywood Reporter , Kirk Honeycutt complimented the intricacy of the cinematography and the monochrome photography , but judged the film to be " tedious " , " repetitive " and " nearly unwatchable " . In a review of Cannes ' offerings for Time Out , Dave Calhoun too drew attention to the meticulous cinematography and signature shot length 's of Tarr 's " austere and mesmeric " film , and declared Swinton 's dubbing into Hungarian one of the festival 's strangest instances of cultural displacement . Reporting from Cannes , The Guardian 's Peter Bradshaw described the film as " bizarre and lugubrious , but mesmeric " , and praised the muted performance of Agi <unk> in the role of Brown 's wife as " strangely compelling " . Reviewing the film following its theatrical release , he found the dubbed dialogue affected and odd , the score doom @-@ laden , the occasional humour mordant , and the cinematography mesmerising , remarking that net effect was " unsettling , sometimes absurd , sometimes stunning " . Ed Gonzales of The Village Voice concluded that the film " stands as an example of style for the sake of pure and intense but dispassionate style " . 
 = 6 : 02 AM EST = 
 " 6 : 02 AM EST " is the 20th episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 63rd episode overall . The narrative follows the activation of the doomsday device by the parallel universe , and the subsequent devastating consequences experienced by our world . 
 David Wilcox , Josh Singer , and Graham Roland co @-@ wrote the episode , while Jeannot Szwarc directed it . Guest star Kevin Corrigan returned as the mysterious Sam Weiss . Actor John Noble and executive producer Jeff Pinkner have referred to " 6 : 02 AM EST " as the start of an " epic trilogy " , as it and the following two episodes would be " linked in one continuous story arc " . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews ; many critics noted its purpose was meant to set the stage for the season finale . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the parallel universe , Walternate has been able to use the blood sample from Fauxlivia 's child to create a serum made up of half of Peter Bishop 's DNA . He uses this serum to activate his doomsday machine at 6 : 02 AM . In the prime universe , this results in a series of unusual events , including the formation of a vortex that wipes out a long swath of land in rural New York state , including a herd of sheep and two of their shepherds . The Fringe division learns that their version of the machine activated at 6 : 02 AM on its own , and Walter suspects the two machines are tied by quantum entanglement , with their version of the machine destroying their world to stabilize the parallel one . Unknown to the prime universe , Walternate 's experiment has not affected the stability of their world . 
 In the prime universe , Nina Sharp helps to set up Massive Dynamic 's resources to track these occurrences , preparing to deploy limited supplies of the amber substance to contain them if needed . Nina advises Olivia to find Sam Weiss , a man that William Bell had trusted and instructed Nina to also listen to . However , Sam has disappeared and cannot be found . Walter and Peter , along with Massive Dynamic staff , debate how to disable the machine , but Peter realizes that he himself is the only option . Walter comes to recognize that the Observer 's efforts from earlier ( " The Firefly " ) were to prepare him to lose Peter . After preparing himself , Peter goes to touch the machine , but is sent flying by an electrical spark , wounding him and knocking him unconscious . At the hospital chapel , Walter tries to find repentance from God for his actions , while Olivia arrives after hearing the news . She steps outside to observe the sunset when Sam Weiss runs up to her and demands to be taken to the machine to stop what is already happening . 
 In the parallel universe , Walternate 's machine has been detected by the Fringe division and Fauxlivia and her team go to investigate . When Walternate tells them to stand down , Fauxilivia asks him about her recent mission to the prime universe and the part that she recovered . Walternate admits to her that the machine has been activated , having sacrificed his own son Peter to allow Fauxlivia 's son to live . Fauxlivia becomes distressed at Walternate 's actions , and later returns to Liberty Island to obtain the devices to allow her to cross to the prime universe , but is caught before she can use them . Walternate locks her away , seeing her as a traitor to his cause . 
 = = Production = = 
 " 6 : 02 AM EST " was written by co @-@ executive producers David Wilcox and Josh Singer , and executive story editor Graham Roland ; filmmaker Jeannot Szwarc directed it . 
 Though the season 3 finale was scheduled to be just an hour long , executive producer Jeff Pinkner confirmed that the last three episodes would be " linked in one continuous story arc " . This was a reflection of Pinkner and fellow executive producer J.H. Wyman 's intent to have the last three episodes of every season seem like " you 're turning the last page of a chapter in a novel . And usually in a good novel , the last pages [ of a chapter ] compels you forward with a new understanding of what the subject matter is and you get deeper and you can ’ t wait to turn that page . " Some media outlets have referred to the episodes as a " three @-@ part third @-@ season finale " . 
 During a conference call with journalists , actor John Noble called " 6 : 02 AM EST " and the next two episodes of the third season an " epic trilogy " . He elaborated " All year we 've been heading toward the fact that there seems to be an inevitable conflict between the two universes . And we 've gotten to know the people on both sides now , so we now bring it to a conclusion starting with ' 6 : 02 . ' By the next episode we start to deal with the issue because our earth starts to deteriorate . Events start to happen here which indicate that our world is degrading . And so everyone has to move into another gear and say , ' Okay , this problem is not going to go away . It 's now affecting our side . We do have a machine which we believe can assist in the resolution of this problem . ' And so the episode basically deals with the lead @-@ up in the first part of that trilogy , leading up to the use of that machine . " In the same interview , Noble called the episode 's title very critical to the series , stating " That time frame plays through the three episodes . Very important to remember as we get to the finale , that time frame . " 
 In March 2011 , TVline 's Michael Ausiello exclusively confirmed that previous guest actor Kevin Corrigan would be returning for the twentieth and twenty @-@ first episodes of the season . Corrigan last appeared in the season 's twelfth episode " Concentrate and Ask Again " ; his role in " 6 : 02 AM EST " and the following week 's episode " The Last Sam Weiss " marked his sixth and seventh appearances on Fringe , respectively . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " 6 : 02 AM EST " , with the intention of having " students learn about weather forecasting . " 
 Ironically , the sunny post @-@ daybreak conditions depicted as occurring at the time used as the episode 's title ( 6 : 02 AM Eastern Standard Time ) cannot ever occur anywhere in New York state under the Daylight Saving Time rules used in the contemporary United States . Even on the very first days of the period in the autumn when DST ends and New York returns to Standard Time , the sun has not yet risen over any part of the state . The same is true on the last day of Standard Time in the spring ( even in Montauk , Long Island , which is the <unk> point of New York , the sunrise on the final day of EST in 2011 was at 6 : 06 AM ) . A better title for the episode would have thus have been " 6 : 02 AM EDT " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 On its initial broadcast in the United States , the episode was watched by an estimated 3 @.@ 51 million viewers , with a 1 @.@ 2 / 4 ratings share for those aged 18 – 49 . It was seen by 14 percent fewer viewers than the previous week , though several other series airing that night were also down in viewers . The 1 @.@ 2 ratings share resulted in a series low for Fringe . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded the episode with an A- , explaining that though he did not want to give a full review until the season finale aired , he was " enjoying how Fringe 's third season is wrapping up " , such as " the cross @-@ cutting between Earth @-@ 1 and Earth @-@ 2 , and the sense of imminent doom . " Murray continued that he " especially liked ... that in the midst of all this end @-@ times rush , it pauses periodically to check in with the various characters in short one @-@ on @-@ one scenes , strengthening our sense of what these relationships mean . ( It 's something that Fringe has gotten good at in the past year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half , and something I wouldn 't have predicted for the show back in season one . ) " Writing for the Los Angeles Times , critic Andrew Hanson noted Fringe is preparing for the finale , calling " 6 : 02 AM EST " a " movement episode [ that ] give [ s ] an opportunity to get everyone into place for the big climax " in a vein similar to the television series Lost . Hanson enjoyed the two " sleights of hand " , explaining he was surprised by Fauxlivia 's universe @-@ crossing device failing and what happened to Peter after touching the machine . 
 IGN 's Ramsey Isler rated the episode 7 @.@ 5 / 10 , writing " This week 's episode wasn 't an edge @-@ of @-@ your seat masterpiece , but it scores high marks for character development and putting the pieces in place for a great season finale . " Like Hanson , Isler loved the outcome of Peter and the machine , calling it a " nice plot twist " ; he also praised Blair Brown as " one of the many under @-@ appreciated elements of the series . " Writing for Mania.com , critic Kurt Anthony Krug acknowledged the episode " had a tough act to follow " after the previous week 's episode , but stated " it 's still pretty good " . Sarah Stegall from SFScope was happy to see Peter " taking a more active role " with the machine plotline , but disliked the episode 's religious elements , believing that Walter 's scene in the church " felt forced " . Stegall concluded her review noting " This episode felt like the first part of a chess game , as the pieces are arranged on the board . The big move is coming up , the endgame that will decide who wins and who loses " . 
 = Subspecies ( film series ) = 
 Subspecies is an American , direct @-@ to @-@ video , horror film series produced by Full Moon Studios . The series ran from 1991 to 1998 , and followed the exploits of vampire Radu Vladislas , portrayed by Anders Hove , and his efforts to turn Michelle Morgan into his fledgling . A spin @-@ off film was released in 1997 , which featured characters that would go on to appear in the final installment of the film series . Ted Nicolaou directed each of the five films , which included the spin @-@ off ; he also wrote the scripts for the sequels and spin @-@ off . 
 The series was shot on @-@ location in Romania , utilizing stop @-@ motion and rod puppet techniques to achieve the look the director wanted for the series ' subspecies creatures . The series has had mixed reviews with critics citing vampire clichés as a downfall of the films , but generally commending the director 's choice in filming in Romania , as well as the special effects used in the film . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Subspecies ( 1991 ) follows three college students , Mara , Michelle , and Lillian , as they begin a study on Romanian culture and superstition in the small town <unk> . They are befriended by Stefan , a student studying nocturnal animals . It is revealed that the nearby Castle Vladislas has been caught in a power struggle between vampire brothers Stefan and Radu . Centuries prior , King Vladislas was seduced and cursed by a sorceress who eventually gave birth to Radu . After banishing Radu 's mother , the king met a mortal woman . She gave birth to Stefan , who prefers to live in the open , and loathes his vampire heritage . To gain control over the Bloodstone , a relic that is said to drip the blood of the saints , Radu kills his father . In an effort to hurt his brother , Radu turns Mara and Lillian into vampires . Stefan , having fallen in love with Michelle , helps her try and free Mara and Lillian from Radu 's control . Stefan drives a stake through Radu 's heart and severs his head with a sword , killing Radu . Unfortunately for Stefan , Radu bites Michelle before his brother can kill him , which forces Stefan to turn Michelle with his own blood in order to keep her from becoming like Radu . As Stefan and Michelle sleep , Radu 's minions set about resurrecting their master . 
 = = = Bloodstone : Subspecies II = = = 
 Bloodstone : Subspecies II ( 1993 ) picks up directly after the events of the first film , with Radu 's minions , the Subspecies , reattaching Radu 's head and removing the stake from his heart . Radu finds Stefan and Michelle sleeping , and immediately kills Stefan . The rising sun forces Radu to seek refuge ; Michelle wakes at sunset and finds Stefan dead in his coffin , with the Bloodstone still in his hands . Michelle flees to Bucharest with the Bloodstone , hoping to contact her sister , Becky , for help . Radu , with the help of his mother , " Mummy " , sets out to find Michelle and the Bloodstone . Becky arrives in Romania and with the help of Lieutenant Marin , Professor Popescu , and US Embassy Agent Mel Thompson , attempts to find her sister . Radu eventually captures Michelle , who has been fighting her craving for blood since Radu took the Bloodstone . Mel and Lieutenant Marin do not believe Popescu and Becky , so the two of them go to a nearby crypt where they believe Michelle might be . Popescu is murdered by Mummy , while Becky is also captured and given to Michelle to feed from , as a way for Michelle to shed her mortal ties . Instead of killing her sister , Michelle stabs Radu in the face with an enchanted dagger , and sets fire to Radu 's mother , who flees the room in flames . Becky and Michelle attempt to escape the catacomb , but Michelle is halted by the coming sunrise . Becky promises to return that evening , but as Michelle descends back into the tomb she is grabbed by Radu 's mother and carried off . 
 = = = Bloodlust : Subspecies III = = = 
 Picking up where Subspecies II leaves off , Bloodlust : Subspecies III ( 1994 ) finds Michelle deep in the catacombs with Radu 's mother , who brings her son back from the dead with Michelle 's blood and the enchanted dagger that killed him ; Radu , his mother , and Michelle return to Castle Vladislas . Michelle promises to obey Radu if he teaches her everything that he knows . Radu takes Michelle out hunting so she can enhance her powers , while Mel contacts a former operative of the CIA for help . While trying to rescue Michelle , Radu 's mother quickly kills Mel 's CIA friend , and knocks Mel unconscious . In an effort to get Michelle to stay with him forever , Radu kills his mother when she attacks Michelle . Becky arrives to save Michelle , but before everyone leaves , Michelle takes a gun from Becky , which contains silver bullets , and shoots Radu . The rising sun slows Michelle , so she is placed inside a body bag that was brought along ; the delay allows Radu time to catch up to the group . Wanting the Bloodstone , which was taken by Michelle , Radu attempts to barter the group 's lives in exchange for it . Becky throws it over the roof 's edge , and when Radu attempts to follow it he is engulfed in the rays of the Sun . Radu 's body bursts into flames and falls from the castle wall . Becky and the group make it to their car and drive off . Radu 's burning corpse is left smoldering and impaled on tree branches , with his burning blood dropping to the ground ; the flames go out and the blood morphs into new subspecies . 
 = = = Vampire Journals = = = 
 Vampire Journals ( 1997 ) is a spin @-@ off of the Subspecies film series , featuring the vampire Ash . Vampire Journals follows Zachary , a vampire with a conscience , who hunts the vampire bloodline that sired him . After witnessing the love of his life get turned into a vampire , Zachary destroys both her , and his master , and former protégé of Ash , Serena . Zachary , armed with the enchanted sword of a great vampire slayer called Laertes , seeks out the rest of Serena 's bloodline to eradicate them . Zachary travels to Bucharest to find Ash . Zachary uses Ash 's penchant for music and women to bait him out into the open for attack . Ash sets his sights on pianist Sofia , but is thwarted by Zachary during his first attempt to take Sofia . It is revealed through a conversation between Ash and a seer that Zachary 's coming was expected and that the two are destined to fight ; however , Ash is to be the victor . Ash does not give up on acquiring Sofia , and hires her for his nightclub . Over the next few nights he drains her of blood , so that he may turn her into a new apprentice . He also makes a deal with Zachary : he will give Zachary a consort , protection from the Sun , and allow Zachary to see Sophia if he leaves the city the following night . While Ash is preparing to sire Sofia , he gives his daytime consult Iris the key to Zachary 's room , so that she may dispose of his sleeping body in the sunlight . Seeing that his obsession with Sofia will ruin both their lives , Iris releases Zachary instead . Zachary arrives too late ; Sophia has already accepted Ash 's blood . Fighting off a weakened Ash , Zachary and Sofia escape from the nightclub . Ash follows them , but the rising sun becomes a problem . Zachary manages to get back the sword and kill Ash , whose body falls into the Sun 's rays . Zachary and Sofia then find refuge in a nearby closet . 
 = = = Subspecies 4 : <unk> = = = 
 Subspecies 4 : <unk> ( 1998 ) begins with a badly burnt Radu able to find refuge in his crypt . A car accident takes the lives of everyone but Michelle , who is discovered by a stranger named Ana . Upon seeing Michelle 's reaction to the sunlight , Ana takes her body to her former professor , Dr. Nicolescu , who quickly determines that Michelle is a vampire . When Michelle wakes , Dr. Nicolescu promises to cure her of her vampirism . Dr. Nicolescu is a vampire himself , but uses science to allow him to be immune to vampire weaknesses , with the exception of needing blood , and hopes to use Michelle to get the blood stone and therefore a cure for his condition . With his strength restored , Radu travels to Bucharest to claim the financial wealth one of his previous " fledglings " , Ash , who has acquired in the Vladislas . Radu enlists Ash 's help to track down Michelle , while Ash 's own fledgling , Serena , attempts to play Radu and Ash against each other . Radu discovers Michelle 's location , and Dr. Nicolescu agrees to give her to Radu in exchange for three drops of blood from the Bloodstone . Radu agrees , but it was only a trick to allow Dr. Nicolescu the opportunity to capture and stake Radu . Michelle arrives releases Radu , and the two flee to safety . Serena arrives immediately after and gives Ana a key to the Vladislas crypt , where Radu is , with instructions to kill Radu . Ana and Dr. Nicolescu arrive at the tomb , but Radu awakens and kills Nicolescu . Radu turns his attention to Ana , but Michelle slices his throat , allowing Ana enough time to decapitate Radu . They burn his body and take the Bloodstone . Ash and Serena are waiting at the opening of the crypt , but a caretaker , hearing Ana 's screams , opens the crypt and spills sunlight inside . Michelle is hidden in a coffin and transported out of the cemetery , while Radu 's head sits on a pike burning in the sun . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 List indicator ( s ) 
 Italics indicate a transition to a minor role , such as an extended flashback , after the initial appearance . 
 A dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1991 , Subspecies became the first American film to be filmed in Bucharest , Romania . Director Ted Nicolaou was initially apprehensive about shooting on location in Romania , but during a four @-@ day location scout he came to love the location thanks to the free rein he had over the ancient ruins and woodland area . Other Transylvanian areas would be used for all Subspecies films , with specific location shootings at Hunedoara , Braşov , and Sinaia . Although , the remnants of communism left in the country , along with cultural differences and the general problems that accompany film productions lent to a difficult experience for the crew while shooting the first Subspecies film . 
 The subspecies creatures , which were created from Radu 's blood , originally began as local Romanian men in rubber suits . The men were filmed on over @-@ scaled sets to simulate the miniature size of the creatures . The performances of the Romanian men , along with the design of the rubber suits , caused director Ted Nicolaou to rethink his approach . Nicolaou brought in animator David W. Allen to assist him in creating " more magical " looking subspecies creatures . Allen went through all of the film footage that contained the Romanian extras in their rubber suits with the film 's editor in order to find usable footage before and after the men enter the scene . Allen would use the isolated footage to develop a new background for the animated creatures he would later create . Allen created two puppet types , displayed in front of a bluescreen : a stop motion puppet and a rod puppet . Each of the puppet types were composed of foam rubber , and held similar skeletal systems . Some differences between the two types include tension filled joints for the stop @-@ motion puppet , while the rod puppet was looser . The flexibility of the rod @-@ puppet allowed for faster movements , which were needed occasionally for real time filming . 
 For Bloodstone and Bloodlust , Wayne Toth and Norman Cabrera came on board to create the special make @-@ up effects for the films ; they also pulled double duty composing and performing the music , alongside Romanian musicians , for a portion of Bloodstone . The limited budget that Toth and Cabrera had to work forced them to use any location they could find in order to apply the make @-@ up to the actors , as they did not have a separate workstation . Make @-@ up trailers would be created in local resident 's homes , cave openings , inside of cars , or just sitting on the side of the road . To create Radu 's face , Toth and Cabrera applied four separate prosthetic pieces to Anders Hove 's forehead , left and right cheek , and his chin . A cosmetic make @-@ up is applied over his entire face to help conceal those four prosthetics . This was the same process used in the original Subspecies film , although Toth and Cabrera admit to tweaking the coloring of Radu 's skin . One major change to the make @-@ up process was to Radu 's hands . In the original film , Hove had to wear individual appliances on each of his fingers , but to cut back on the time needed to apply the make @-@ up , Toth and Cabrera created a pair of prosthetic gloves that Hove could slip on his hands . For " Mummy " , Radu 's sorceress mother , a headpiece was cast from Pamela Gordon , which included her shoulders as well . After the make @-@ up was applied to give the cast a " dry " and " mummified " appearance , it was slipped over Gordon 's head leaving only her face showing . From there , Toth and Cabrera applied a separate face prosthetic . The facial appliance gave Gordon near zero visibility , having only a single eye slit for her left eye . The crew had to escort her around sets so that she would not injure herself . Gordon was given a pair of dentures to wear , as well as some prosthetic gloves similar to what Hove wore . The rest of Gordon 's body was draped in clothing to conceal it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Culture Cartel critic Mike Bracken believed the story was " largely clichéd " , coupled with " bad acting " on the part of Watson and the female cast , but commended the realism Nicolaou created by shooting on location in Romania — using Romanian residents for smaller roles in the film — as well as the fact that the film does not " take itself too seriously " , making it " more fun " than Francis Ford Coppola 's Dracula . Cold Fusion Video 's Nathan Shumate echoed Bracken 's opinion on the " authenticity " created from the Romanian landscaping and actors that gave " the feel of verisimilitude " , but criticized the stop @-@ motion subspecies as being " irrelevant to the main action " , and the story as a " general lack of urgency " . Richard Scheib , a critic for science fiction , horror , and fantasy review website Moria , felt the original film " showed promise " when it attempted to go " back to the folklore roots of vampirism " ; he also liked the authentic feeling from shooting in Romania , but felt the limited budget restricted the film from being convincing , with David Allen 's stop @-@ motion subspecies creatures being a disappointment . When he had a chance to review Bloodstone , Scheib felt the sequel delivered " vampire clichés " , but again " showed promise " with its imaginative make @-@ up effects — specifically the staking of Stefan , the reattachment of Radu 's head by the subspecies creatures , the look of Mummy — as well as the visual effects of Radu 's shadow stalking Michelle through town , which gave Scheib a sense of Nosferatu . Another criticism from Scheib was with the replacement of Laura Tate with Denice Duff ; Scheib characterizes Duff as " internalized and afraid " , as opposed to the addition of Melanie Shatner 's character , Rebecca Morgan , whom he classifies as " alert and intelligent " . 
 DVD schlock wrote that the film series " manage to give an edge of bad @-@ <unk> to its vampires " , and that " each entertains in its own right and furthers the Subspecies tale one more step beyond the last one ... until finally being beaten over the head by a shovel with the stinky Vampire Journals " . In a review by LaserDisc , it was felt that one consistency through the series was Radu , whose villainy is " effectively embodied " by Anders Hove . LaserDisc also believed that the sequels sustained the entertainment value through their intelligent use of eroticism , gore and on @-@ location setting . 
 = = Other media = = 
 In 1991 , Full Moon teamed with Eternity Comics to produce comic books series for a handful of Full Moon 's titles . Among these comics was a Subspecies series that served as a prequel to the first film . The title ran as a four issue mini @-@ series . 
 = German submarine U @-@ 36 ( 1936 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 36 was a Type VIIA U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine which served during World War II . She was constructed in the earliest days of the U @-@ boat arm at Kiel in 1936 , and served in the pre @-@ war Navy in the Baltic Sea and North Sea under Kapitänleutnant ( Kptlt . ) Klaus <unk> . Korvettenkapitän ( <unk> ) Wilhelm Fröhlich took command in October 1938 and continued in the role until the boat was lost . 
 During the war , U @-@ 36 undertook two patrols , but was sunk by a torpedo fired by HMS Salmon . She was lost with all hands . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 U @-@ 36 was ordered by the Kriegsmarine on 25 March 1935 as part of the German Plan Z and in violation of the Treaty of Versailles . Her keel was laid down in the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen as yard number 559 on 2 March 1936 . After about eight months of construction , she was launched on 4 November 1936 and commissioned on 16 December under the command of Kptlt . Klaus <unk> . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Like all Type VIIA submarines , U @-@ 36 displaced 626 tonnes ( 616 long tons ) while surfaced and 745 t ( 733 long tons ) when submerged . She was 64 @.@ 51 m ( 211 ft 8 in ) in overall length and had a 45 @.@ 50 m ( 149 ft 3 in ) pressure hull . U @-@ 36 's propulsion consisted of two MAN 6 @-@ cylinder 4 @-@ stroke <unk> 40 / 46 diesel engines that totaled 2 @,@ 100 – 2 @,@ 310 PS ( 1 @,@ 540 – 1 @,@ 700 kW ; 2 @,@ 070 – 2 @,@ 280 bhp ) . Her maximum rpm was between 470 and 485 . The submarine was also equipped with two Brown , Boveri & Cie GG UB 720 / 8 electric motors that totaled 750 PS ( 550 kW ; 740 shp ) . Their maximum rpm was 322 . These engines gave U @-@ 36 a total speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) while surfaced and 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) when submerged . This resulted in a range of 6 @,@ 200 nmi ( 11 @,@ 500 km ; 7 @,@ 100 mi ) while traveling at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) on the surface and 73 – 94 nmi ( 135 – 174 km ; 84 – 108 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) when submerged . The U @-@ boat 's test depth was 220 m ( 720 ft ) but she could go as deep as 230 – 250 m ( 750 – 820 ft ) without having her hull crushed . 
 U @-@ 36 's armament consisted of five 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four located in the bow and one in the stern ) . She could have up to 11 torpedoes on board or 22 TMA or 33 TMB mines . U @-@ 36 was also equipped with a 8 @.@ 8 cm SK C / 35 naval gun and had 220 rounds for it stowed on board . Her anti @-@ aircraft defenses consisted of one 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = First patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 36 was at sea when the war broke out , having set out from Wilhelmshaven on 31 August 1939 . She arrived in Kiel on 6 September and the following day departed for her first war patrol . She then patrolled the North Sea for three weeks , hoping to catch ships traveling between Britain and Scandinavia carrying war supplies . During this patrol , the boat sank two steamers , Truro and Silesia — one British and the other from neutral Sweden — carrying British produce . 
 Seahorse , a British submarine , later fired on U @-@ 36 and subsequently claimed to have sunk her , although in fact the torpedo missed . On 27 September Fröhlich and his crew captured another Swedish vessel , Algeria , which he proceeded to escort back to Germany as the patrol came to an end . She returned to her berth in Kiel at the end of September , where she remained until December . During her first patrol , U @-@ 36 was also credited with having laid the mine that sank the Norwegian freighter , <unk> . 
 = = = Second patrol = = = 
 On 17 November 1939 , Naval High Command ( SKL ) issued orders for U @-@ 36 and U @-@ 38 to scout the location for Basis Nord , a secret German naval base for raids on Allied shipping located off the Kola Peninsula and provided by the Soviet Union . The mission required coded messages to be flashed to Soviet naval vessels patrolling the area preceding a Soviet escort to the prospective base location . 
 However , U @-@ 36 never left the Norwegian Sea . On 4 December 1939 , two days out of Wilhelmshaven , she was spotted on the surface near the Norwegian port of Stavanger by the British submarine Salmon . Salmon then fired one torpedo at her unwitting counterpart . It sank U @-@ 36 , all 40 of the sailors aboard were lost . During the same patrol , the Salmon also torpedoed the light cruisers Leipzig and Nürnberg . 
 Following the loss of U @-@ 36 , U @-@ 38 continued towards the Kola Peninsula , successfully reaching the location and accomplished the scouting mission for Basis Nord . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = Hey Daddy ( Daddy 's Home ) = 
 " Hey Daddy ( Daddy 's Home ) " is a song by American R & B singer , Usher . The song is the first single in the United States from Usher 's sixth studio album Raymond v. Raymond , following the buzz single " Papers " . The song was written by longtime Usher collaborator Rico Love , Usher , Plies and The Runners and it was also produced by the Love and The Runners . The remix version of the song , featuring Plies was released to radio stations on December 8 , 2009 , and subsequently available for digital download on December 15 , 2009 . 
 The song received positive reviews with critics praising Usher 's return to the style of music in 2004 's Confessions , as also with " Papers " . The song has peaked at number twenty @-@ four on the Billboard Hot 100 , and at number two on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , giving Usher his third consecutive U.S. R & B top five hit . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 The song was leaked onto the internet in later October 2009 with several preliminary tracks from Raymond v. Raymond . " Hey Daddy ( Daddy 's Home ) " , one of the tracks that follows @-@ up Usher 's divorce , and the change in content from Here I Stand , back to Confessions @-@ style , was one of six tracks co @-@ written by Rico Love for the album . In an exclusive with Rap @-@ Up , Love said of Usher 's return to that style , " I feel like he ’ s got his mind right and it ’ s focused . He went through a lot . He had lost his father when he was creating the Here I Stand record , a lot of controversy with his marriage , he had kids , he parted ways with his mother ’ s management , and there were just a lot of things going on and he kind of lost focus . It ’ s not like Here I Stand wasn ’ t a good album . I just feel like he lost touch with his demographic . " According to MTV News , the song provides the reasons behind Usher 's crumbling marriage as narrated in " Papers " . The remix version featuring Plies made its way onto the internet in late November , a few days before the song 's radio and digital release . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Mariel Concepcion of Billboard said that the song is " a clear indication that the R & B crooner is bringing sexy back , " " atop a silky piano pattern and hand claps . " She also said , " Plies makes a nice addition to the already <unk> track , as the self @-@ proclaimed goon drops a raunchy verse in his raspy Southern drawl . " The review went on to say , " ' Hey Daddy ' may not be a chart @-@ topper @-@ yet @-@ but it sure will make the naysayers pay attention again . " Mark Edward Nero of About.com said that the song was " is not only the album 's first official single , " but " also a declaration . " He goes on to say , " In the song , Usher 's basically sending a message to his female fans that the Usher they knew and loved is back in their lives and that they don 't need to stray any more : " You know your daddy 's home , and it 's time to play , so you ain 't got to give my lovin ' away . " Nero calls ' Hey Daddy ' " one of more than half a dozen sex songs on the album . " Sara D. Anderson of AOL Music said that the song has a " catchy R & B tune " and " the song showcases Usher 's role as the ladies ' man as he croons : " You know your daddy 's home ( daddy 's home ) / And it 's time to play ( so it 's time to play ) / So you ain 't got to give my loving away . " James Reed of The Boston Globe said that the track was one of the album 's songs to showcase " Usher 's signature <unk> moves " however called them " hollow as a chocolate Easter bunny " , as he pointed out the whole album had a lack of emotion Andrew Rennie of Now Magazine said that on the song and on " Lil Freak " that Usher shows " he ’ s unafraid to get lewd " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 After its release to digital download , the song debuted at number ninety @-@ four on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song fell off the chart its second week , but re @-@ entered the chart four weeks later at number 100 . It then dropped out the chart again , before re @-@ entering yet again , this time at eighty . It has since peaked at twenty @-@ four . The song peaked at number two on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and was Usher 's third consecutive top five R & B hit , and his fourteenth top three R & B title . With the charting , Usher passed Ludacris for the most top three hits . The song also peaked at number sixty @-@ eight on the Austrian Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Chris Robinson , and was shot in West Hollywood at " The London " . It premiered on MTV on January 28 , 2010 . French fashion model <unk> Lenoir portrays Usher 's love interest . Like the album version of the song , the music video does not feature Plies or his verse . In the video , Usher struggles to get home to his wife , however due to several obligations and his partying , he cannot make it . Previous shots are given of Usher and Lenoir in a brown backdrop , and assumed previous situations of their love life and Usher coming home . Scenes are seen with Usher in a boardroom setting , and then teaching dance to a group of women in a studio , then in a club . Several instances in the video are unknown as in the scene in which Usher takes a phone call , unknown to the viewer for " business or pleasure , " as explained by James Montgomery of MTV News . In describing the video , he went on to say , " ... you can kind of see why it 'd be about both . Such is the life he 's chosen , and now he must deal with the repercussions . " In following scenes the threat of infidelity is seen even clearer as Usher gets close to the " over @-@ friendly dancers " and " sipping — and spitting — champagne in a place that looks very much like a strip club . " 
 Montgomery went on to say that the video is full of " temptation , love and lust , " and " about distance and the effect it has on all those things . " He goes on to say that in the video " All Ush wants to do is make it back to her , to do all those things that husbands and wives tend to do . The only problem is he can 't . " At the end of the video , Lenoir has enough , and walks out . Montgomery notes that it is not clear whether Usher even makes it home , or if the song was even referring to the wife character , and not " someone special stashed in a nearby suite . " In resolving the video 's review , Montgomery said , " Distance may make the heart grow fonder , but there are limits to everything . Usher may want to be no place but home , but there 's a big , wide world out there with pitfalls aplenty . He 's a superstar , a businessman , a father and an ( <unk> ) husband , but at the end of the day , Ush is also human , and " Hey Daddy " is proof of that . " In a review of the video , Rap @-@ Up said that " Even though it ’ s been a minute since his last video , the ladies man still knows how to bust a move . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Usher performed the song on Lopez Tonight and the Late Show with David Letterman . In promoting Raymond v. Raymond , he performed the song along with a medley of the songs from the album on Good Morning America . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Hey Daddy ( Daddy 's Home ) [ featuring Plies ] " – 4 : 16 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Usher Raymond , Rico Love , Andrew Harr , Jermaine Jackson , Plies 
 Production - Rico Love , Andrew Harr , Jermaine Jackson 
 Background vocals - Rico Love , <unk> Hamilton 
 Vocal production - Rico Love 
 Vocal recording - Ian Cross 
 Mixing - Manny Marroquin , assisted by Erik Madrid 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Chorioactis = 
 Chorioactis is a genus of fungus that contains the single species Chorioactis geaster . The mushroom is commonly known as the devil 's cigar or the Texas star in the United States , while in Japan it is called <unk> ( <unk> ? ) . This extremely rare mushroom is notable for its unusual appearance and disjunct distribution : it is found only in select locales in Texas and Japan . The fruit body , which grows on the stumps or dead roots of cedar elms ( in Texas ) or dead oaks ( in Japan ) , somewhat resembles a dark brown or black cigar before it splits open radially into a starlike arrangement of four to seven leathery rays . The interior surface of the fruit body bears the spore @-@ bearing tissue known as the hymenium , and is colored white to brown , depending on its age . The fruit body opening can be accompanied by a distinct hissing sound and the release of a smoky cloud of spores . 
 Fruit bodies were first collected in Austin , Texas , and the species was named Urnula geaster in 1893 ; later it was found in Kyushu in 1937 , but the mushroom was not reported again in Japan until 1973 . Although the new genus Chorioactis was proposed to accommodate the unique species a few years after its original discovery , it was not until 1968 that it was accepted as a valid genus . Its classification has also been a source of confusion . Historically , Chorioactis was placed in the fungus family Sarcosomataceae , despite inconsistencies in the microscopic structure of the ascus , the saclike structure in which spores are formed . Phylogenetic analyses of the past decade have clarified the fungus 's classification : Chorioactis , along with three other genera , make up the family Chorioactidaceae , a grouping of related fungi formally acknowledged in 2008 . In 2009 , Japanese researchers reported discovering a form of the fungus missing the sexual stage of its life cycle ; this asexual state was named Kumanasamuha geaster . 
 = = History = = 
 The fungus was first collected in Austin , Texas , in 1893 by botanist Lucien Marcus Underwood , who sent the specimens to mycologist Charles Horton Peck for identification . Peck described the species as Urnula geaster in that year 's Annual Report of the New York State botanist , although he expressed doubt about its generic placement in Urnula . In 1902 , student mycologist Elsie Kupfer questioned the proposed classification of various species in the genera Urnula and Geopyxis , as suggested in an 1896 publication on the Discomycetes by German mycologist Heinrich Rehm . She considered Rehm 's transfer of the species to the genus Geopyxis illogical : 
 " Even externally the fungus does not closely answer Rehm 's own description of the genus Geopyxis under which he places it ; the texture of the apothecium is described as fleshy , the stem , as short and sometimes thin ; while in this plant , the leathery character of the cup and the length and thickness of the stem are its noticeable features . " 
 Working with Underwood 's guidance , Kupfer compared the microscopic structure of the hymenium ( the fertile , spore @-@ bearing tissue ) of the Texan species with a number of similar ones — Geopyxis carbonaria , Urnula craterium , and Urnula terrestris ( now known as Podophacidium <unk> ) . She concluded that the Texan species was so dissimilar as to warrant its own genus , which she named Chorioactis . Although this taxonomical change was opposed in later studies of the fungus by Frederick De Forest Heald and Frederick Adolf Wolf ( 1910 ) and Fred Jay Seaver ( 1928 , 1942 ) , Chorioactis was established as a valid genus in 1968 by Finn @-@ Egil <unk> in his comprehensive monograph about the Discomycetes . 
 = = Classification and naming = = 
 Historically , Chorioactis was considered to be in the family Sarcosomataceae . A 1983 monograph on the family included Chorioactis in the tribe <unk> ( along with the genera <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Plectania , and Urnula ) , a grouping of fungi characterized by having spores lacking small <unk> projections ( <unk> ) capable of absorbing blue dye . A 1994 study of the structural features of the asci and the ascospores concluded that Chorioactis was more closely aligned with the Sarcoscyphaceae , although it conceded that the layering of the cells comprising the walls of the ascus differed considerably from the other members of the family . It was not until 1999 that the results of phylogenetic analysis firmly challenged the traditional classification , showing C. geaster to be part of a distinct lineage , or clade , that includes species in the genera <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , taxa that were distributed among both families . This analysis was later corroborated when it was shown that the grouping of these four genera ( by then called the " Chorioactis clade " ) represented a sister clade to the Sarcosomataceae , and a new family , the Chorioactidaceae , was erected to contain them . Although C. geaster shares some characteristics with the other Chorioactidaceae genera , including dark @-@ colored superficial " hairs " on the outer surface of the fruit bodies , it is distinguished from them by its tan to orange ( rather than black ) <unk> . 
 The specific epithet geaster alludes to members of genus Geastrum , which also open to form star @-@ shaped fruit bodies commonly called ' earthstars ' . In the United States , Chorioactis geaster is commonly known as the Texas star , or the devil 's cigar . Regarding the origin of the latter name American mycologist Fred Jay Seaver commented : " Whether the name Devil 's Cigar refers to the form of the young specimens which resemble a bloated cigar in form , as well as in color , or to the fact that the fungus appears to ' smoke ' at maturity , we cannot say ... At any rate , the name is very appropriate . " In 1997 , Texan state Senator Chris Harris filed a bill to make C. geaster the official state fungus of Texas . The bill passed the Senate but did not succeed in the House . In Japan the mushroom is called <unk> ( <unk> ) , because the immature , unopened fruit body bears a superficial resemblance to the seed pods of kiri , the empress tree ( Paulownia tomentosa ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Young specimens of C. geaster have a hollow , club @-@ shaped dark @-@ brown fruit body , connected to a stem . The stem , which is usually buried in the ground , is shorter than the hollow fruit body or equals it in length , although the stem length is somewhat variable depending on the depth of the underground root to which it is attached . The flesh of the stem and the wall of the fruit body is white , while the inner surface is yellowish @-@ white , turning light brown with age . The fruit body varies in width from 1 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 4 in ) in the thickest portion , and has a length of 4 to 12 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) ; the stem is 0 @.@ 75 to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) wide by 1 to 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) long . Both stem and fruit body are covered by a dense layer of soft brown velvety " hairs " , or tomentum . In maturity , the fruit body splits open into 4 – 7 rays that curve downward , similar to mushrooms of the genus Geastrum . The spores are borne on the inner surface of the rays , which , depending on the maturity of the specimen , may range in color from whitish to saffron to salmon to butterscotch to chestnut . The leathery rays are up to 0 @.@ 35 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 in ) thick . 
 The fruit body remains closed until shortly before spore discharge ; dehiscence ( fruit body opening ) is caused by the pressure exerted by swollen paraphyses — sterile ( i.e. , non @-@ reproductive ) cells that are interspersed between the ascospores . <unk> is accompanied by the release of clouds of spores , resembling smoke . The spore puffing upon rupture is thought to be caused by the sudden change in relative humidity between the interior chamber of the fruit body and the outside environment . <unk> is accompanied by a hissing sound , an auditory phenomenon known to occur in about fifteen other fungal species . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 Spores are oblong to spindle @-@ shaped , and are flattened on one side ; they have dimensions of 54 – 68 µm by 10 – 13 µm . The spores each contain 3 – 5 oil drops . Although the spores have been described as smooth in older literature , when viewed with transmission electron microscopy , they are seen to have minute spots or punctures . The spores develop simultaneously ( synchronously ) within the ascus , a developmental feature shared with the Sarcoscyphaceae genera <unk> and <unk> . Like other members of the Pezizales order , the asci of C. geaster have an operculum — a " lid " — that opens when the spores are discharged . However , the operculum of C. geaster develops a two @-@ layered ring zone upon dehiscence , making it structurally distinct from members of both the Sarcosomataceae and the Sarcoscyphaceae families . 
 Similar to other Discomycetes , the fruit body consists of three distinct layers of tissue : the hymenium , the hypothecium , and the excipulum . The spore @-@ bearing hymenium , the outermost layer of cells , contains asci interspersed with sterile cells called paraphyses . In C. geaster , the club @-@ shaped asci are 700 – 800 µm long and 14 – 17 @.@ 25 µm thick ; they are abruptly constricted at the base to a narrow pedicel . The paraphyses are initially filamentous or thread @-@ like ( filiform ) but swell with age to resemble a string of beads ( moniliform ) . The swelling of the paraphyses is believed to cause the expansion of the hymenium and subsequent splitting of the fruit body into rays ; this development places the asci into an optimal position for spore release and dispersal . Supporting the cells of the hymenium is a thin layer of tightly interwoven hyphae called the hypothecium , and underneath this is a thick layer of loosely interwoven hyphae known as the excipulum . This tissue layer , analogous to parenchyma found in plants , gives the tissue a fibrous texture . The excipulum layer averages 34 µm in diameter , while the hypothecium is 10 – 14 µm . When viewed with electron microscopy , the dark brown " hairs " on the surface of the fruit body can be seen to be adorned with conical warts or spines . 
 = = = Anamorph form = = = 
 The so @-@ called anamorphic or imperfect fungi are those that seem to lack a sexual stage in their life cycle , and typically reproduce by the process of mitosis in structures called conidia . In some cases , the sexual stage — or teleomorph stage — is later identified , and a teleomorph @-@ anamorph relationship is established between the species . The International Code of Botanical Nomenclature permits the recognition of two ( or more ) names for one and the same organisms , one based on the teleomorph , the other ( s ) restricted to the anamorph . In 2004 , researchers reported a connection between C. geaster and the appearance of blackish @-@ brown tufted structures on rotting wood . By comparing the internal transcribed spacer region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA from the two organisms , they established a phylogenetic connection between Chorioactis and the fungus they called Conoplea aff. elegantula . However , they were unable to induce the new organism to grow on artificial media , and did not definitively establish a teleomorph @-@ anamorph connection between the fungi . In 2009 , Japanese researchers found a similar fungus growing on rotting logs that were normally associated with the growth of C. geaster ; they were able to grow the organism in axenic cultures from single @-@ spore isolates of C. geaster . They named the anamorph Kumanasamuha geaster due to its morphological similarity with species in the genus Kumanasamuha . 
 = = Distribution , ecology , and habitat = = 
 Chorioactis geaster has a disjunct distribution , and has only been collected from Texas and Japan . The first reported collection in Japan was in Kyushu in 1937 , and then it was not collected again in that location until thirty @-@ six years later . In 2006 , it was observed in a humid forest near Kawakami , Nara Prefecture . The fungus 's natural habitat in Japan is disappearing because of the practice of deforestation and replanting with Japanese cedar ( Cryptomeria japonica ) . This rare mushroom has been put on the list of threatened species in Japan . In Texas , the fungus has been reported in Collin , Hays , Travis , Dallas , Denton , Guadalupe , Tarrant and Hunt counties . Travis , Hays , and Guadalupe counties are in central Texas , while the remainder are clustered together in the northeastern part of the state . Although the species is considered rare due to its globally restricted distribution , it may be locally abundant . 
 Although it is not known definitively , Chorioactis is believed to be saprobic , deriving nutrients from decomposing organic matter . In Texas , fruit bodies are found growing singly or in groups from roots , stumps , and dead roots of cedar elm trees ( Ulmus crassifolia ) or <unk> <unk> ; in Japan , the usual host is dead oak trees . Fruit bodies can be clustered together close to the base of the stump , or from the roots away from the stump ; the stem of the fruit body tends to originate from a point 5 to 10 cm ( 2 to 4 in ) below the ground . In Texas , fruit bodies usually appear between October and April , as this period is associated with somewhat cooler weather , and the temperature and moisture conditions during this time seem to be more favorable for growth . 
 Scientists do not know why the fungus mysteriously lives only in Texas and Japan , locations of approximately the same latitude , but separated by 11 @,@ 000 km ( 6 @,@ 800 mi ) . Fred Jay Seaver commented " this is only another illustration of the unusual and unpredictable distribution of many species of the fungi . It would be difficult indeed to account for it , and we merely accept the facts as they are . " In 2004 , a research study compared the DNA sequences of both populations and used a combination of molecular phylogenetics and molecular clock calculations to estimate the extent of genetic divergence . It concluded that the two populations have been separated for at least nineteen million years , ruling out the possibility of human introduction of the species from one location to the other . Although there are no consistent differences in morphology between the two populations , there are several differences in their life histories . The preferred host of Texan populations is typically roots and stumps of Ulmus crassifolia , while the Japanese populations tend to grow on the fallen trunks of <unk> <unk> and Quercus <unk> . Texan species grow in areas subjected to periodic flooding , unlike their Japanese counterparts . Finally , only Japanese specimens can be grown in culture — the spores of Texan material have not been successfully germinated on artificial media . 
 = Lingbao School = 
 The Lingbao School ( Simplified Chinese : <unk> ; Traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Líng <unk> <unk> ) , also known as the School of the Sacred Jewel or the School of <unk> Treasure , was an important Daoist school that emerged in China in between the Jin Dynasty and the Liu Song Dynasty in the early fifth century CE . It lasted for about two hundred years until it was absorbed into the Shangqing and Zhengyi currents during the Tang Dynasty . The Lingbao School is a synthesis of religious ideas based on Shangqing texts , the rituals of the Celestial Masters , and Buddhist practices . 
 The Lingbao School borrowed many concepts from Buddhism , including the concept of reincarnation , and also some cosmological elements . Although reincarnation was an important concept in the Lingbao School , the earlier Daoist belief in attaining immortality remained . The school 's pantheon is similar to Shangqing and Celestial Master Daoism , with one of its most important gods being the deified form of Laozi . Other gods also existed , some of whom were in charge of preparing spirits for reincarnation . Lingbao ritual was initially in individual practice , but later went through a transformation that put more emphasis on collective rites . The most important scripture in the Lingbao School is known as the Five Talismans ( Wufujing ) , which was compiled by Ge Chaofu and based on Ge Hong 's earlier alchemical works . 
 Although Lingbao no longer exists as a distinct movement , it has left influences on all subsequent branches of Taoism . The " <unk> masters " popular in contemporary northern China are defined as Zhengyi <unk> following the Lingbao scriptural tradition . 
 = = History = = 
 The Lingbao School began in around 400 CE when the Lingbao scriptures were revealed to Ge Chaofu , the grandnephew of Ge Hong . Ge Chaofu claimed that the scriptures came to him in a line of transmission going back to Ge Hong 's great @-@ uncle , Ge Xuan ( 164 @-@ 244 ) . Ge Chaofu transmitted the scriptures to two of his disciples , and the scriptures quickly gained immense popularity . In 471 , Lu <unk> ( 406 @-@ 477 ) compiled a catalogue of all the Lingbao texts , and also was responsible for reorganizing and standardizing Lingbao ritual . This organization of texts and ritual provided a solid foundation on which the Lingbao School prospered in the subsequent centuries . During the Tang Dynasty , the influence of the Lingbao School declined and another school of Daoism , the Shangqing School , became prominent . Borrowing many Lingbao practices , it was well accepted by the aristocracy and established an influence in court . 
 = = Beliefs = = 
 Some early Lingbao scriptures borrowed so many Buddhist terminological , stylistic and conceptual elements that Zürcher describes them as " <unk> @-@ Taoist hybrids " . 
 = = = Rebirth = = = 
 Many Lingbao beliefs are borrowed from Buddhism . The names of the many different deities and heavens were often given titles based on phonetic transcriptions of Sanskrit . Many Sanskrit terms were borrowed phonetically , but given completely different meanings . One significant concept borrowed from Buddhism was that of reincarnation . 
 Both Buddhism and the Lingbao School share the idea of the Five Paths of Rebirth ( <unk> ) . People were reborn into earth prisons , as a hungry ghost , as an animal , as a man , or as a celestial being . After death , the body would be <unk> refined in the Palace of Supreme Darkness located in the north , and the Southern Palace in the south . The transmutation of the body consisted of two steps ; the yin components of the person were refined in the Palace of Supreme Darkness , followed by the yang components in the Southern Palace . The Lingbao concept of rebirth is a Chinese adaptation of Buddhism , mixing traditional Chinese concepts with newly arrived Buddhist ideas . 
 = = = Cosmology = = = 
 Lingbao cosmology also borrows heavily from Buddhism . Unlike previous Daoist cosmological systems which were divided into four to nine regions , Lingbao cosmology supposed that there were ten regions , an idea borrowed from Buddhism . In addition to the cosmological regions , there were 32 heavens divided into four sectors , each with eight heavens that were placed horizontally on the periphery of the celestial disc . Each of the four sectors was ruled by an emperor and populated by denizens of an earlier cosmic age ( kalpa ) . Like Buddhism , the heavens were divided into the " three worlds " of desire , form , and formlessness . Lingbao cosmology deviated from Buddhist beliefs by proposing that the heavens rotated around a huge mountain known as the Jade Capital , which was the residence of the Celestial Worthy , the Daoist version of the Buddha , and the primordial deity . 
 Certain traditional Daoist ideas were retained in Lingbao cosmology , such as the idea that the world originated from a type of primordial qi known as <unk> , and then was divided into heaven and earth . Furthermore , the <unk> is subdivided into three types of qi that correspond to three deities : the lords of the Celestial Treasure , of the Sacred Treasure and of the Divine Treasure . These three deities later introduced the teachings of the <unk> ( Perfect Grotto ) , the <unk> ( Mysterious Grotto ) , and of the <unk> ( Divine Grotto ) . These three teachings form the basis for the later classification of texts in the Daozang . 
 Apocalyptic notions that appeared in Shangqing Daoism were first developed fully by the Lingbao School . Lingbao cosmology supposed that time was divided into cosmic cycles , which correlated with the Five Phases . At the end of a cosmic era , the god of the colour associated with that era would descend onto earth and reveal a teaching that would save a fixed number of people from death . There were two types of cosmic eras , short ones that were characterized by an excess of yin energy , and long ones that were characterized by an excess of yang energy . At the end of a short cosmic era , the moon was prophesized to produce a flood that would erode the mountains , renew the qi of the universe , and change the rankings of the members of the celestial bureaucracy . At the end of a long cosmic era , evil creatures were unleashed , heaven and earth were turned upside down , and metals and stones melted together . The people who followed the correct teaching revealed by the god of the colour would be gathered up by the Queen Mother of the West and transported to a " land of bliss " that would not be affected by the apocalypse . 
 = = = Pantheon = = = 
 In addition to borrowing deities from the Celestial Masters and the Shangqing School , the Lingbao School also developed its own gods . The supreme god of Lingbao Daoists is known as the <unk> <unk> or the Celestial Worthy of the Original Beginning , who played a similar role to the deified Laozi in the Celestial Masters . According to the scriptures , this god went through a series of kalpa cycles that were given names similar to dynastic names , until emerging at the beginning of the <unk> period . The next most important god was Laojun , the deified form of Laozi , who was the Celestial Worthy 's chief disciple . Below these two main gods in the celestial hierarchy were those deities associated with the Southern Palace , where spirits went after death to prepare for rebirth . The head of this group of gods was known as the Perfected of the Southern <unk> . Beneath him was the Director of the Equerry , who was in charge of the life records of the spirits , and Lord Han , who controlled <unk> , the city of the dead . Below these principal gods in the Lingbao hierarchy were other deities such as the Five Old Men , the Dragon Kings , and the Demon Kings . 
 Deities were present not only in the heavens , but also in the human body itself . They were responsible for maintaining the body 's five viscera , guarding the registers of life , and regulating the souls . There were five internal deities that were particularly important in Lingbao Daoism . The Great Unity lived in the head , along with <unk> and White Prime , who could descend into the liver and lungs . The Director of Destinies lived in the heart and sexual organs , and finally , the Peach Child lived in the lower <unk> . Normally these deities resided in the heavens , but they could be activated by scriptural recitations to descend into the body . 
 = = Practices = = 
 = = = Immortality techniques = = = 
 Despite a belief in reincarnation , the Lingbao School maintained the traditional Daoist idea that certain techniques could allow an adherent to achieve immortality . One technique was to ingest the essence of the sun and the moon . Practitioners would expose themselves to the celestial bodies at certain times of the month . Closing their eyes , they would visualize that the essences would solidify and enter their bodies . Once in the body , the sun 's essence was matched to the heart and visualized as red , while the moon 's was matched with the kidneys and seen as black . Besides interior meditation practices , immortality could be achieved through the ingestion of potions or talismans . 
 = = = Rituals = = = 
 Early Lingbao ritual was mostly done on an individual basis , either in a meditation chamber , or the courtyard of a house . Early practitioners were not professional priests , but rather ' students of the Dao ' . Later on , as the Lingbao movement developed religious institutions and an established clergy , ritual practice became more of a communal rite . 
 Lingbao ritual shares a great deal with ritual in other Daoist traditions . Like other traditions , Lingbao rituals had a theatrical quality that involved accompanying music , dances , and chants . Lingbao Daoism also shared the multidimensional aspect of Daoist ritual , meaning that it was carried on at several different levels simultaneously . For example , while a ritual was being performed , the priest would repeat the ritual within himself through interior meditation . 
 There are three categories of ritual in Lingbao Daoism . The first is known as the heavenly Golden Register of Rituals , and is carried out to prevent natural disasters . During the Tang Dynasty , this ritual was carried out in honour of the imperial family , but later it could be performed by anyone . The earthly Yellow Register ritual was performed to ensure the dead was at rest . The final type of ritual , which has not survived , was the human Jade Register , which was performed to ensure the salvation of mankind . Of the rituals that have survived , the Golden Register has assumed the role of the Jade register , ensuring salvation and preventing bad weather . 
 = = Canon = = 
 Lingbao scriptures arose as a direct result of the success of earlier Shangqing texts . Lingbao scriptures are all based on a text known as the Text of the Five Talismans ( Wufujing ) , which was compiled by Ge Chaofu between 397 and 402 and borrowed from the work of Ge Hong , his great uncle . Being the most ancient Lingbao text , the Five Talismans provided the framework of the remainder of the Lingbao canon , which was based on the five directions . Because all Lingbao texts descended from the Five Talismans , it was believed that they had been revealed to Ge Xuan , presumably the original owner of the Five Talismans . Ge Xuan is purported to have transmitted the Lingbao texts first to his disciple Zheng <unk> , who then transmitted it to Ge 's grandnephew Ge Hong ( 284 @-@ 364 ) , who is well known for his alchemical innovations . The claim that the Lingbao texts derive from Ge Xuan , however , was likely a way of legitimizing them through the exaggeration of their antiquity . In reality , they were likely assembled by Ge Chaofu himself . Within a few years of the texts ' dissemination , they had become extremely popular . 
 The canon itself is a mix of previous Daoist traditions , combining features from the Shangqing School and the Celestial Masters , along with other ancient texts and even some Buddhist ideas . The two most important texts of the canon besides the Wufujing are the Red Book of Five Writings ( Chi shu <unk> ) and the Scripture of Upper Chapters on Limitless Salvation ( <unk> Duren <unk> ) . According to Lu <unk> , who edited the Lingbao Canon , there were a total of 34 texts in the canon , of which three have been lost . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 While the Lingbao school did not survive as a distinct entity , its ritual apparatus did , and it forms the basis for present @-@ day Daoist ritual practice . In addition , many of the innovations introduced by the Lingbao School have survived to the present , including its division of the Daozang into three sections corresponding to different teachings , with the <unk> corresponding to the Shangqing School , the <unk> to the Lingbao School , and the <unk> to the <unk> teaching . The integration of Buddhism within Lingbao practices and beliefs ensured that Buddhist elements would remain an important aspect of later Daoism , and also aided in integrating Buddhism into all levels of society in China . 
 = Virgin Hotels Chicago = 
 The Virgin Hotels Chicago ( formerly Old Dearborn Bank Building or 203 North Wabash Avenue ) is a historic building in the Loop community area of Chicago , Illinois , that has been converted from use as an office building to use as a hotel run via a mobile app based business model . The 250 @-@ room hotel is the first of Richard Branson 's Virgin Hotels brand boutique hotels geared toward the female business traveller . 
 = = Old Dearborn Bank Building = = 
 Situated at the intersection of East Lake Street and North Wabash Avenue , the Old Dearborn Bank Building was constructed between 1926 and 1928 with ornate medieval and mythological terra @-@ cotta decoration that was typical of movie palaces that were its contemporaries . The neoclassical architecture designed building is one of only two Rapp and Rapp buildings designed as an office building . Soon after the Old Dearborn Bank opened in 1928 , it was acquired and its parent company was liquidated in the United States ' Great Depression . The building , which is 27 stories high , was designated a Chicago Landmark on June 4 , 2003 . The 300 @-@ foot ( 91 @.@ 4 m ) light brown brick building with a steel structure includes 25 floors above ground and two below . 
 The owners of the building defaulted on a $ 9 million loan from John Hancock Life Insurance resulting in the acquisition of the loan ( and thus the property ) for an undisclosed amount by Urban Street Properties LLC in April 2010 . The building had been acquired by the previous owners for $ 9 @.@ 5 million in 2001 . 
 = = Virgin Hotels Chicago = = 
 On October 24 , 2011 , Virgin Hotels , part of Virgin Group , purchased the building with the aim of opening it as their first hotel in 2013 with approximately 250 rooms . The transaction was an all @-@ cash deal that was valued at about $ 14 million . The company hired The John Buck Company to renovate the building . The lead architect for the renovation was Booth Hansen . The co @-@ designers for the interior renovation were Rockwell Group Europe and Virgin Hotels ' in @-@ house design team . The purchase was part of Virgin Hotels ' 2010 business plan to acquire distressed properties in North America cheaply during the property downturn . 
 The building opened for business as a hotel on January 15 , 2015 . It is the first of what was planned to be twenty Virgin Hotels locations that operate under this business model . The renovation took longer than planned due to the building 's city landmark status , which required continuing coordination with the Commission on Chicago Landmarks . Original features that were retained include a 1920s oak cigar bar , brass elevator lobby doors and a tiled ceiling . The final layout of 250 rooms includes 40 single @-@ room suites and 2 penthouse suites . 40 rooms are pet friendly . 
 Under the <unk> of the Commission on Chicago Landmarks , the renovation included brick , window and steel frame replacement . The focal point of the renovated building is the publicly accessible Commons Club on the second floor , with a contemporary @-@ style bar , a full kitchen , a lounge area , curated books and local memorabilia . At the time of opening , four additional dining options were expected within three months . The area was carved out of a former second @-@ floor banking hall . 
 The hotel has no check @-@ in desk ; it uses a smartphone check @-@ in system in which you scan a QR code and retrieve your room key from a vending machine . The visitors use a mobile app , named Lucy , that the company describes as a " personal comfort assistant " . According to Mary <unk> of The Los Angeles Times , the app can order more pillows , handle room service orders , and serve as a remote control for both the television and the hotel 's music library . The website also suggests that the app can control room temperature , interface with the chat board , provide local knowledge , and coordinate your messages with hotel staff . 
 When asked about the operation , Virgin 's Richard Branson said " There won ’ t be hidden charges , and you won ’ t get charged $ 10 for a chocolate bar you know you can buy at a store for $ 2 . " Branson has stated that the brand is geared toward the female business traveler . The rooms feature a patent @-@ pending ergonomic bed and several female friendly features in the dressing room , shower and closets . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Bloomberg Business 's Jennifer Parker noted that the hotel was on the cutting edge of technology upon its opening , but questioned whether the hotel had any gender leanings . She found fault with the gym , toiletries , and delayed spa opening , but enjoyed the social ambiance , the normal retail prices of <unk> items ( rather than more standard hotel <unk> ) and the top notch free Wi @-@ Fi . She found many of the appealing elements of the designed to be dubiously marketed , but appealing nonetheless . 
 Chicago Tribune 's Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning architecture critic , Blair Kamin , praised the incorporation of various wildlife into the decor and <unk> elements of the rehab resulting from the alliance of real estate developers and historic preservationists , but made it clear that Virgin Hotels Chicago is not the Four Seasons Hotel Chicago or Ritz @-@ Carlton ( Four Seasons ) . He describes this as a successful recycling of a second @-@ tier historic building . 
 = = Old Dearborn Bank Building 2007 Gallery = = 
 = Say Yes ( Michelle Williams song ) = 
 " Say Yes " is a song recorded by American recording artist Michelle Williams , taken from her fourth studio album Journey to Freedom ( 2014 ) . It features Williams ' former Destiny 's Child <unk> Beyoncé and Kelly Rowland . The song was written by Williams , Carmen Reece , Al Sherrod Lambert and Harmony Samuels who also produced it . E1 Music released " Say Yes " as the album 's third single on June 2 , 2014 . " Say Yes " marks the third time the trio collaborated as solo artists following the disbandment of their group in 2006 . 
 Musically , " Say Yes " is an uptempo gospel and pop song , which takes influence from dance music . It samples a popular Nigerian gospel tune originally titled " When Jesus Says Yes " . Upon release , " Say Yes " received generally favorable reviews from contemporary music critics who called the song infectious and praised its catchiness . Commercially the song performed well on the gospel charts in the US , peaking at number one for seven non @-@ consecutive weeks on the Billboard Hot Gospel Songs . It also appeared on charts in the UK , France and Belgium across Europe . Billboard ranked " Say Yes " seventh on the 2014 year @-@ end Hot Gospel Songs chart . 
 An accompanying music video for " Say Yes " was directed by Matthew A. Cherry . It was released on June 18 , 2014 when Williams appeared on Good Morning America . The clip depicts the three singers at a street party , dancing and singing with a crowd ; along with solo appearances of each singer in a forest , wearing white clothes during their respective verses . It received generally positive reviews from critics who accredited it as a reunion of Destiny 's Child and praised its feel @-@ good nature . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Say Yes " was written by Williams , Carmen Reece , Al Sherrod Lambert and Harmony Samuels who also served as its producer . The song marked the third collaboration of the trio consisting of Williams , Beyoncé and Kelly Rowland , after their group Destiny 's Child disbanded in 2006 . Williams sent an advanced demo of the album Journey to Freedom to her former bandmates Beyoncé and Rowland which contained the song as a solo track titled " When Jesus Says Yes " . Later , Williams received a call from Rowland who said , " We love ' When Jesus Says Yes ' ... there has to be a Destiny 's Child mix of the song . " Both Rowland and Beyoncé recorded their respective verses in a studio afterwards . Williams stated she wanted to keep the project in secrecy " until it was time " to reveal it . During an interview with Rap @-@ Up , Beyoncé spoke about her decision to be a featured artist on the song , stating , " This song is so inspiring and ... not enough music out there like this and I 'm proud to be a part of it . " Williams talked about " Say Yes " with Fuse , saying , 
 " It 's an inspirational song , so I wasn 't sure how people would take to it . But it kind of reminds me of praying [ in ] that it continues to have the impact , and does have the impact , of when Kanye West did ' Jesus Walks . ' I think I got one here . " 
 " Say Yes " was leaked onto the Internet on May 21 , 2014 . Williams revealed on her Twitter account the same day that the leaked track was an unmixed and unmastered version of " Say Yes " . In an interview with The Hollywood Reporter , she said that she " hated " the fact that an unfinished version was released although noted that she was not angry and felt " overwhelmed " by the positive support . Prior to the song 's debut , several publications reported that Beyoncé 's sister , Solange Knowles , also appeared as a featured artist in " Say Yes " ; however , the claims were later proved to be wrong . A final official version of the song premiered on June 2 , 2014 and was released to radio and made available for digital download the same day . On the German web show <unk> , Williams performed a German version of the song with host and journalist Malcolm <unk> . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Say Yes " is an uptempo gospel song with elements of pop music . The song was also noted for exploring elements of Contemporary Christian as well as electronic dance music . Jeff Benjamin of Fuse felt that the song contained a " zippy " , reggae @-@ dance beat . Its instrumentation includes percussion instruments , synths and horn stabs along with African beats . According to sheet music published on the website Musicnotes.com by Kobalt Music Publishing America , Inc . , " Say Yes " is written in the key of D ♭ major using common time . It contains a moderately fast tempo with a metronome of 120 beats per minute and the singers ' vocal elements range from the low note of A ♭ 3 to the high note of F5 . The song samples a popular Nigerian gospel tune originally titled " When Jesus Says Yes " . Chris Payne and Colin Stutz of Billboard magazine described it as a modern dance and contemporary electronic dance reworking of that song . Stutz also found elements of an " upbeat swing " of West African gospel . Regarding the composition of the song , Williams stated , " It is a song that came from Africa more than a hundred years ago . I don 't think anyone knows who wrote it or who started singing that chorus . When the song leaked last week , so many people from Africa and Nigeria were trying to let me know where it came from . " 
 Williams sings the lead vocals while Beyoncé and Rowland sing their respective solo verses and serve as background vocalists throughout the song . Eric Corpus from The Christian Post interpreted the song 's lyrics as a praise of God 's sovereignty and " magnetism " of Jesus ' love . " Say Yes " opens with a message of faith as Williams sings the first lines , " I 'm not worried about a thing / ' Cause I know you are guiding me / Where you lead me / Lord I will go / I have not fear / ' Cause I know who 's in control . " The chorus is constructed as a call and response with the trio repeatedly praising Jesus through the lines " When Jesus say yes , nobody can say no ! " while being backed by a choir which repeats the verses . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Say Yes " received generally favorable reviews . Colin Stutz of Billboard described " Say Yes " as a " peppy " number . John Walker of MTV News described the song 's refrain as " infectious " . Mike Wass from Idolator praised the song 's catchiness , describing it as an " infectious gospel club @-@ banger " and an invitation to the dance floor for listeners . Further , he called it " possibly the first twerk @-@ inducing song of praise " . He concluded his review , writing , " those harmonies remain unrivaled and the chorus is a monster . Trust me , [ its chorus ] will be stuck in your head after the first listen . " In another review he felt that the song managed to bridge the gap between gospel and popular music . Describing the song as " kinetic " , Marc Hogan of Spin magazine called it " not only star @-@ studded , but damn near impossible to get out of your head , too " . Rolling Stone writer Jon Blistein described the horn stabs as " heavenly " and praised the trio 's " always potent harmonies " . 
 Yahoo ! Music writer Billy Johnson , Jr. found a " vibrant dance energy " in the song 's music and further hailed its message as " uplifting " . Similarly , Complex writer Zach Frydenlund echoed his statements , describing the song as " uplifting " . In a review for Fuse , Jeff Benjamin described " Say Yes " as a " gospel @-@ island hybrid " . He felt that it was interesting to hear Williams as the lead vocalist instead of Beyoncé , who had previously served as the lead vocalist of Destiny 's Child . <unk> finished his review , concluding , " It all sort of makes us want to twerk and throw our hands to heavens at the same time . " Brownie Marie of Christian Today praised Williams ' vocal performance during the song 's hook , along with the " well @-@ controlled riffs " . She also wrote that Beyoncé is " vocally subdued on the track , and truly lets Williams ' voice receive the attention " . <unk> Manders from Refinery29 felt that the song was Williams ' " turn to shine " . In a more mixed review , Vulture columnist Lindsey Weber wrote that the song is not " a total mess " and that listeners might sing the praises in the song along with it . At the 2014 Soul Train Music Awards , " Say Yes " is currently nominated in the category for Best Gospel / Inspirational Song . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Say Yes " entered the top ten of the Billboard Hot Gospel Songs chart at number five in its second week of charting on the issue dated June 21 , 2014 while also charting at numbers one and four on the Gospel Digital Songs and Gospel Streaming Songs charts respectively , the latter also being its debut position . On the issue dated July 5 , the song jumped from the position of nine to the top of the Hot Gospel Songs chart , while also reaching the number one spot on the Gospel Streaming Songs and Gospel Digital Songs . With that feat , it became Williams ' first number @-@ one single on the Hot Gospel Songs , spending 2 consecutive weeks at the top of the chart and 4 weeks at number @-@ one on the Gospel Digital Songs chart . In its twenty @-@ fourth week of charting on Hot Gospel Songs , " Say Yes " returned to number one , on the issue dated November 22 , 2014 , remaining there for five consecutive weeks , giving it a total of seven non @-@ consecutive weeks at number one . 
 On the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , which acts as a 25 @-@ song extension of the main Billboard Hot 100 , " Say Yes " peaked at number nine . It also peaked at number 14 on the Billboard component Heatseekers Songs chart . Luis Gomez in an article for the Chicago Tribune opined that the song 's religious message was the reason for its mild reception and performance on the mainstream charts . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Say Yes " debuted and peaked on the UK Singles Chart and the component UK R & B Chart at numbers 106 and 15 respectively on June 14 , 2014 . The song performed better on the country 's UK Indie Chart where it peaked at the eighth position in its first week . In France , Williams achieved her first solo single on the French Singles Chart when the track debuted at number 161 in the first week of charting on June 14 , 2014 . The following week , it fell off the chart , but re @-@ entered at its peak position of 90 on June 28 . It fell down to the position of 155 the next week and completely dropped out afterwards . Elsewhere , it charted for five weeks on the Flanders version of the Belgian Urban Singles Chart where it peaked at number 28 on June 14 , 2014 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 The music video for " Say Yes " was filmed on May 20 , 2014 and directed by Matthew A. Cherry . The clip was filmed in a house in Maplewood , New Jersey , where a crowd gathered the watch the trio on set . Following that , filming was cordoned by local police . Several pictures of Beyoncé arriving on set were shared on social networks by fans . Williams debuted the clip for " Say Yes " on her appearance at Good Morning America on June 18 , 2014 . Regarding the filming of the video , she stated , " Sometimes the director or production assistants had to say like , ' OK , girls , bring it back home . Bring it back together because when we were together , we go back to how we were when we were younger , just always laughing and talking about things . It 's been a great moment . " The video was released on Williams ' Vevo account the same day . A behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage was also released featuring the trio on set and talking about the song and their reunion . In the clip , Williams said she felt excited that she had her " sisters " with her spreading a positive message for the world . 
 The video opens with Williams singing the opening verses and dancing on a street . Beyoncé , wearing an apostolic @-@ like gown to fit the theme of the track , appears at 90 seconds into the song to deliver her verse in a forest in front of a tree hung with paper lanterns . Rowland appears soon after in the same forest wearing a white crop top , smiling . The singers appear together in the video 's last section when Williams , Beyoncé and Rowland sing and dance together at a street @-@ party scene along with dancers who are shown waving their flags and playing drums . The choreography present in the video was noted to be traditional African . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video received generally favorable reviews . Daniel Kreps from Rolling Stone said that it managed to highlight the " ' feel @-@ good ' vibes " without using " heavy @-@ handed " religious iconography . He further praised the reunion of Destiny 's Child . Tom Breihan of Stereogum said that each singer looked " seriously happy " , further praising Beyoncé 's style as reminiscent of the Destiny 's Child @-@ era . Writing for People , <unk> Yamal opined that the traditional choreography and drums were inspired by Africa . Yamal further praised the singers ' synchronized " formidable moves , reminding everyone they 've still got it " . Chiderah Monde from the New York Daily News felt that the dance sequence during the end of the video was similar to older videos by Destiny 's Child . Alex Rees from <unk> stated that a reunion of the group was " always good fun " . He also noted that the clip featured Williams dancing in the center spot between Beyoncé and Rowland for the first time . Mike Wass from Idolator described the video as " heavenly " and concluded that it was " heart @-@ warming " to see Williams have her moment . Wass went on to describe the clip as a " visual extravaganza " and praised Beyoncé 's look . 
 Mike Ayers of Fuse , described the visual as " uplifting " , adding that it included numerous " sun @-@ soaked " shots of the singers . John Walker of MTV News described the " glorious " , fun clip as " the Destiny 's Child reunion of your dreams " . Similarly , Zach Frydenlund from Complex wrote that he had a " great time " watching and remembering his " favorite Destiny 's Child moments " . Samantha Grossman of Time magazine praised the fact that the group reunited for a music video , linking it to the times when they were part of Destiny 's Child . Billboard 's Chris Payne described the clip as " jubilant " and felt that when the singers are seen <unk> on the set together , " [ it ] is absolutely heartwarming " . Writing for Essence , Dominique <unk> felt that the trio was " all smiles as they sing about who 's really in charge " . Chris Coplan from Consequence of Sound praised the clip 's positive energy as " [ b ] right and shimmery " comparing it with " forget the world and just dance " clips from the early ' 90s . Brett Malec from E ! Online described it as " [ i ] <unk> " . Hayden Manders from Refinery29 praised Williams ' look and stated that " the three women look like they 're having a blast " . Mikael Wood from Los Angeles Times found the choreography performed by the trio to be " light " and <unk> the clip as " pretty festive " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Williams performed an acoustic version of " Say Yes " at Yahoo ! Music , which was released in 2014 . Williams also performed the single during her set at the 2014 Essence Music Festival . Williams later performed the song together with Kelly Rowland and Beyoncé at the 2015 Stellar Awards . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Harvey brothers = 
 The Harvey brothers are six siblings from Victoria , Australia , known primarily for their success in the sport of cricket between the mid @-@ 1930s and the early 1960s . The sons of Horace and Elsie Harvey , in chronological order , they are Merv ( 1918 – 1995 ) , Clarence ( aka " Mick " ; b . 1921 ) , Harold ( b . 1923 ) , Ray ( b . 1926 ) , Neil ( b . 1928 ) and Brian ( 1932 – 1969 ) . All six were long @-@ serving members of the Fitzroy Cricket Club ( now Fitzroy @-@ Doncaster ) , which played in Melbourne 's district cricket competition . 
 Neil Harvey represented Australia in 79 Test matches between 1948 and 1963 . He was Australia 's most prolific batsman during the post @-@ war era , served as vice @-@ captain of Australia in the last five years of his career and regarded by Wisden as the leading fielder in the world during his career . At the time of his retirement , he held the record for the most Test appearances by an Australian and was the country 's second @-@ highest run scorer and century @-@ maker , behind Don Bradman . He was selected in the Australian Cricket Board 's Team of the Century and inducted into the Australian Cricket Hall of Fame . He was an inaugural inductee into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame . The family 's eldest son , Merv , played one Test for Australia in 1946 – 47 after losing his best years to World War II and his grandson Robert Harvey was one of the elite Australian rules footballers of the last twenty years , twice winning the Australian Football League 's Brownlow Medal for the best and fairest player of the season and being voted the Most Valuable Player in the competition by his peers in 1997 . 
 Along with their better @-@ known brothers , Mick and Ray played first @-@ class cricket for Victoria , although the former moved to Queensland after one season for his native state due to a lack of opportunities . Neither approached the level of success of Neil or Merv and often found themselves dropped , although Ray was a consistent player for Victoria for two seasons in the 1950s and came close to national selection . Mick 's daughter , Pauline Harvey @-@ Short , represented Australia in softball and her daughter , Kirby Short , plays for the Queensland women 's cricket team . After his playing career ended , Mick became a Test cricket umpire , officiating in two matches . The two other brothers , Brian and Harold , played for Fitzroy in district cricket . Apart from Harold , all of the brothers represented Victoria at baseball . 
 While the brothers played together for Fitzroy on a regular basis , they only played first @-@ class cricket together occasionally , mainly due to a lack of form and differences in age . Merv debuted for Victoria before the war , and Neil joined him in 1946 @-@ 47 . Ray followed in subsequent season , and the trio played in two matches together for their state . However , there were no occasions after this when more than two played together in the same match and such occurrences became more sporadic after this as Merv was dropped , while Neil was often away playing for Australia . Mick made his debut in 1948 @-@ 49 , but left Victoria at the end of the season after being unable to hold his position in the team , while Ray often struggled to gain regular selection except when Neil and the other Test players were representing Australia . Ray had a strong end to the 1952 @-@ 53 season and was selected for all the matches in the following two seasons alongside Neil , but was then dropped . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born at Kapunda , South Australia , Horace " Horry " Harvey moved to Broken Hill , New South Wales where he worked for BHP , driving horse @-@ drawn trailers . In 1914 , he married Elsie May Bitmead and their first two children , daughter Rita and son Mervyn , were born in the mining town . The family relocated to Newcastle , a mining town and harbour in New South Wales , and had two more sons , Clarence ( always known as " Mick " , as he was born on Saint Patrick 's Day ) and Harold . In 1926 , the Harveys shifted to the inner @-@ Melbourne suburb of Fitzroy , a staunchly working @-@ class , industrial area . During their relocation , Ray was born in Sydney . Horace secured a job at the confectionery company Life Savers ( Australasia ) Ltd , located next door to their house at 198 Argyle Street . The 19th century two @-@ storey house was owned by the firm and was used as lodgings for the workers ’ families . It no longer exists , having been demolished to make way for a textile factory . The two youngest sons Neil and Brian were born in Fitzroy . 
 The Cornish @-@ descended Horry raised his family as strict Methodists , disallowing gambling , alcohol , tobacco and profanity in his household . An ardent cricketer during his years in New South Wales , he was good enough to hit 196 runs during a match in Newcastle , and encouraged his children to play sport . He played for the Rita Social Club after moving to Fitzroy , while his wife kept score . His daughter was also a scorer for the club . As recreational facilities and grass ovals were sparse in densely populated Fitzroy , the boys took to playing cricket in a cobblestone laneway between their terraced house . Here they played cricket with a tennis ball , home made cricket bat and a kerosene tin for a wicket . 
 They were usually joined by other local children , two of whom became elite sportsmen : Allan Ruthven ( an Australian rules footballer ) and Harold Shillinglaw ( both an Australian rules footballer and first @-@ class cricketer ) — the group also played Australian rules football , kicking around rolled up cardboard and newspaper . Much of the batting skill displayed by the Harvey brothers has been attributed to these games played on the unpredictable bounce of the bumpy laneway . The surface also had a V @-@ shaped slope inwards towards the centre of the lane , causing balls to deviate sideways after bouncing . 
 As the laneway meant that the playing area was long and narrow , the young boys also had to learn to play the ball straight in accordance with orthodox cricket technique . The Harveys played another form of cricket in their concreted backyard ( using a marble instead of a ball ) that sharpened their reflexes , and a miniature bat . All were right @-@ handed batsmen with the exception of Neil . All the siblings attended the nearby George Street State School and , one by one , the brothers joined the Fitzroy Cricket Club as they reached their early teens . The club had a program whereby they gave a medal to local schools to award to their best cricketer in their ranks , who would then be given access to all of the club 's facilities . The Harvey brothers were all recipients of the medal . At Fitzroy , they came under the influence of former Victorian all @-@ rounder Arthur Liddicut and the club 's veteran captain Joe Plant . The Harveys had no formal coaching , and their father , a regular presence at the club , chose to stay in the background as their respective careers developed . Horace did not advise his sons on how to bat , allowing them to formulate their own style and technique , something Neil later regarded as beneficial . According to the Harvey brothers , it was their mother who was vocal and extroverted , in contrast to their reserved father . The boys who failed to score runs were given kitchen duty , and according to them , their parents never showed favouritism . 
 During the winter , they played for the Fitzroy Baseball Club , often competing in matches played as curtain raisers to the elite Australian rules football competition , the Victorian Football League . Saturday night entertainment for the family typically consisted of dinner after the day 's cricket for Fitzroy , and Plant , Liddicut and other club personnel were often invited . Under the influence of Plant and Liddicut , the boys were taught to adopt an aggressive approach , using fast feet movement to attack spin bowling in particular . In 1942 – 43 , Neil broke into Fitzroy 's First XI , joining his older brothers Merv , Mick , and Ray . During that season , the family held down the first four batting positions for Fitzroy ; Merv and Mick opened the batting and Ray and Neil came in after them . The four brothers entered the Victorian team in the 1940s ; Merv in 1940 – 41 , Neil in 1946 – 47 , and Ray and Mick in successive seasons thereafter . 
 = = Neil Harvey = = 
 Harvey represented the Australian cricket team between early 1948 and early 1963 . He was the vice captain of the team from 1957 until his retirement . An attacking left @-@ handed batsman , sharp fielder and occasional off @-@ spin bowler , Harvey was the senior batsman in the Australian team for much of the 1950s and was regarded by Wisden as the finest fielder of his era . Harvey followed his elder brother Merv in making his Test debut in January 1948 , aged 19 and three months . In his second match , he became the youngest Australian to score a Test century , a record that as of July 2010 , still stands . He was then part of The Invincibles of Don Bradman who toured England without defeat and were acclaimed as one of the finest teams in history ; Harvey was the youngest player in the team and scored a century on his Ashes debut in the Fourth Test at Headingley . The opening period of his Australian career was particularly fruitful , scoring six centuries in his first thirteen Test innings , at the end of which he averaged over 100 . As Bradman 's team broke up in the 1950s due to retirements , Harvey became Australia 's senior batsman , and was named as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year in 1954 . In 1957 he was passed over for the captaincy and was named as the deputy of Ian Craig who had played just six matches as Australia sought to rebuild the team with a youth policy . The following season , Craig had fallen ill , but Harvey moved interstate and Richie Benaud was promoted to the captaincy ahead of him as Benaud was higher in the New South Wales hierarchy . Harvey continued as vice @-@ captain until the end of his career , and led the team in only one Test . In the Second Test at Lord 's in 1961 when Benaud was injured , Harvey led the team in the " Battle of the Ridge " , a match played on a surface with a visible ridge that caused erratic bounce , grinding out a hard fought victory . When Harvey retired , only Bradman , generally deemed as the finest batsman in history , had scored more runs or centuries for Australia . Harvey was best known for his extravagant footwork and flamboyant strokeplay . In retirement , he became a national selector for twelve years but in recent times is best known for his strident criticism of modern cricket . He was inducted into the Australian Cricket Hall of Fame in 2000 , and also selected in the Australian Cricket Board 's Test Team of the Century . In 2009 , Harvey was one of the 55 inaugural inductees into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame . In 102 First XI matches for Fitzroy , he made <unk> runs at an average of 37 @.@ 10 , the highest average in the family . 
 = = Merv Harvey = = 
 Described by his younger brother Neil as the " best cricketer of us all " , Merv was an attacking opening batsman , strong on the drive and fond of hooking fast bowling . He graduated to Fitzroy 's first XI in 1933 @-@ 34 and made his first @-@ class debut for Victoria against Queensland at the Gabba in 1940 @-@ 41 . In the next match , he made an impression on cricket observers by scoring 70 in an hour at the SCG against New South Wales , whose bowling line @-@ up included Bill O 'Reilly . Service in the Royal Australian Air Force as an airframe fitter during World War II severely interrupted his cricket career . 
 After the war , he resumed with Victoria , but faced a lot of competition for a place as an opening batsman in the Australian team . He played his only Test in the 1946 @-@ 47 Ashes series at the Adelaide Oval , filling in for the injured Sid Barnes . Scoring 12 and 31 , he partnered Arthur Morris in a second innings opening stand of 116 . After a further two first @-@ class seasons , Harvey retired after being dropped from Victoria 's first @-@ choice team . He ended with a record of 1 @,@ 147 first @-@ class runs at 38 @.@ 23 in 22 matches . This included three centuries , and he captained Victoria five times , winning one match — the rest were drawn . His career highlight was an innings of 136 in December 1946 against New South Wales , when he hooked a bouncer from Ray Lindwall into the MCG public bar and featured in a partnership of 271 with Keith Miller . His highest score was 163 against South Australia at Adelaide . Harvey continued playing for Fitzroy until 1954 @-@ 55 , and he finished with 6 @,@ 654 runs at an average of 29 @.@ 31 in 207 First XI matches for the club . 
 = = = Anthony and Robert Harvey = = = 
 Merv 's grandson Robert Harvey made the Victorian Under @-@ 19 cricket team , but decided to focus on Australian rules football , becoming one of the most successful players of his generation . He made his AFL debut for St Kilda Football Club in 1988 and played 21 seasons before retiring at the end of 2008 as the most capped current player . 
 A midfielder , he was a member of the All @-@ Australian team eight times and won the Brownlow Medal twice , in 1997 and 1998 , for the best and fairest player in the Australian Football League . In addition , he was voted the AFL 's MVP in 1997 by his peers and also won the Trevor Barker Award for St Kilda 's best and fairest four times . He played in one grand final , in 1997 , when the Saints lost to the Adelaide Crows . His brother , Anthony , played for St Kilda and captained Norwood to the 1997 SANFL premiership . 
 = = Mick Harvey = = 
 A printer by trade , Clarence Edgar " Mick " Harvey played in the Fitzroy first XI in 1938 – 39 , then served as an infantryman in the Second Australian Imperial Force during World War II . A veteran of Kokoda , he resumed with Fitzroy at the war ’ s end and made enough runs to be selected for Victoria ’ s first three Sheffield Shield matches of the 1948 – 49 season . However , he failed to pass 33 in six innings as an opening batsman and was dropped from the team . Moving to Brisbane the following season , Harvey joined the Toombul grade club and made his first @-@ class debut for Queensland . Noted for his sound defence , he was a patient and dogged batsman , in contrast to the exciting styles of brothers Merv , Ray and Neil . 
 In 1950 @-@ 51 , he hit 490 runs at an average of 37 @.@ 69 , including 100 not out against New South Wales at the SCG . However , he struggled the following season and was dropped , and did not play a single first @-@ class match in 1952 @-@ 53 . His only other first @-@ class centuries came in 1953 – 54 : 102 against South Australia and 111 against Western Australia . He struggled in the following two summers and could not hold a consistent position in the team , and retired . Altogether , he made 1 @,@ 716 first @-@ class runs ( mostly as an opener ) in 37 matches at an average of 27 @.@ 23 . A regular choice for the Queensland baseball team , Harvey later turned to cricket umpiring . His initial first @-@ class match as an umpire was in 1974 @-@ 75 and he stood in two Tests from 1979 to 1980 after many players and officials left for the breakaway World Series Cricket . He stood in six One Day Internationals including one of the finals of the inaugural World Series Cup . In all , he officiated in 31 first @-@ class and 13 List A matches . 
 In 90 First XI matches for Fitzroy , Mick Harvey scored 2 @,@ 601 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 24 . His daughter , Pauline Harvey @-@ Short , represented Australia at softball , and later became a sports administrator ; her daughter , Kirby Short , plays cricket for the Queensland women 's team . 
 = = Ray Harvey = = 
 Raymond Harvey played 40 matches for Victoria . He was an attacking and talented batsman , but failed to reach international standards and only managed to hold down a regular position in the Victorian team in two seasons in the 1950s . This failure to match the standards set by his Test @-@ capped brothers was often attributed to a lack of single @-@ mindedness and hunger . 
 Harvey made his first @-@ class debut in 1947 @-@ 48 , but performed poorly , and did not play a match in the following summer , and for the two subsequent seasons , he played in only three games . In 1951 @-@ 52 he made five appearances , gaining selection only when Victoria ’ s Test players were busy representing Australia . The following season , he broke through for his maiden first @-@ class century , having never previously passed 50 . 
 Having broken through at the end of the preceding summer , Harvey played his first full season for Victoria in 1953 @-@ 54 . He scored two centuries and five half @-@ centuries against full @-@ strength teams from other states . He was hailed as the best player outside the Australian Test team , and at the start of the following season , Harvey was included in an Australian XI for a match against the touring England team for a Test trial match . However , rain curtailed the match and turned the playing surface into a sticky wicket hostile to batting . Harvey made only seven in his solitary innings . He played in all of Victoria 's matches for the season , but his form slumped and he was overlooked for state selection until 1958 @-@ 59 , when he regained his position and made 97 and 86 in consecutive innings . However , the following season , he made only sporadic appearances and was dropped after some low scores . He shone mainly for Fitzroy ; his club first @-@ grade records for the most career runs and centuries , and the most runs in a season , still stand . He ended his first @-@ grade career in 1960 – 61 with 19 centuries and 9 @,@ 146 runs at an average of 36 @.@ 15 from 247 matches . 
 = = Harold and Brian Harvey = = 
 Due to commitments during the war , the fourth of the brothers , Harold Lindsay Harvey was unable to pursue a cricket career . He played mainly Second XI cricket at Fitzroy , but did play in the First XI during the war . A fitter and turner , Harold Harvey enlisted on 19 April 1945 and was discharged on 20 January 1947 with the rank of sergeant . He served with the Second Australian Imperial Force in Bougainville in New Guinea and played 15 First XI matches for Fitzroy from 1942 @-@ 43 to 1949 @-@ 50 , as a wicketkeeper @-@ batsman , scoring 237 runs at an average of 14 @.@ 81 . 
 Brian Clifford Harvey , a Victorian representative at baseball , was a useful cricketer at club level , spending almost a decade in the Fitzroy First XI until 1961 @-@ 62 . An electrician , he was electrocuted in 1969 at the age of 37 while working for the State Electricity Commission . In 111 First XI matches for Fitzroy , he made 2 @,@ 503 runs at 21 @.@ 57 . 
 Between them , the Harvey brothers totalled 25 @,@ 185 runs in 772 appearances for the Fitzroy Cricket Club . Over time , their numbers in the ranks began to diminish . In 1949 – 50 , Mick moved to Queensland while Harold was dropped from his position in the Fitzroy First XI . Merv retired after 1954 @-@ 55 and Neil moved to New South Wales after 1956 – 57 . Ray retired from the First XI at the end of 1960 – 61 and Brian the year after . In 1962 @-@ 63 , the club played their first season for 30 years without a Harvey in the team . At first @-@ class level , the family 's contribution is 26 @,@ 532 in 405 appearances , with 7 @,@ 964 coming for Victoria . 
 = = First @-@ class team @-@ mates = = 
 Although the four brothers all played for Victoria , there was not a great deal of overlap in their careers at first @-@ class level , due to a combination of age , interstate moves , international duty and omissions from the team . The most Harveys in one first @-@ class team occurred twice in 1947 @-@ 48 , when Merv , Ray and Neil all played for Victoria in successive Shield matches . 
 The first time that more than one of the brothers played for Victoria together came in 1946 – 47 , after Neil was selected to play for the state against Tasmania . At the time , a second @-@ string team was used to play Tasmania — who were not in the Sheffield Shield — in two first @-@ class matches , while the strongest team played in the regular interstate competition . Neil struck a century in the second match against Tasmania , and was called into the Victorian team to play against New South Wales in a Sheffield Shield match at the SCG , and he played alongside Merv for their state ’ s three remaining matches of the season . However , the brothers never batted together in these three matches . Merv opened the batting and was always out before Neil came in , usually at No. 6 upon the fall of the fourth wicket . Merv captained at first @-@ class level for the first time in the last match , a draw against South Australia that was severely shortened by rain . 
 Neil and Merv retained their positions for Victoria ’ s first two matches of the 1947 – 48 season , against India and South Australia respectively . Again , Merv was out before Neil came in , so they did not bat together . The brotherly selection pairing was broken up for Victoria ’ s next match , as Neil was rewarded with selection for an Australian XI for a Test trial match against the Indians , while Merv continued to represent the state . Neil returned to the Victorian team for the match against New South Wales at the SCG the following week , and Ray was selected to make his first @-@ class debut , so three Harveys were in the state team for the first time . Merv opened , while Neil and Ray batted at Nos. 4 and 7 respectively . Victoria batted first and the brothers again did not form any partnerships . Merv opened and made 45 before being dismissed at 2 / 99 , prompting Neil 's entrance to replace him at the crease . Neil then top @-@ scored with 61 before falling at 4 / 200 , and Ray then came in at 5 / 208 to make 43 . Victoria ended with 331 and the Harvey brothers had scored almost half the runs . New South Wales were forced to follow on , and Victoria were set 51 for victory . After the fall of Fred Freer at 1 / 24 , captain Lindsay Hassett elevated Ray to No. 3 , allowing two Harveys to bat together for the first time at first @-@ class level . Ray and Merv put on an unbeaten partnership of 27 to take Victoria to a nine @-@ wicket win . Merv and Ray ended unbeaten on 12 and 22 respectively . 
 The trio then proceeded to play together in the next match against Western Australia two weeks later and Merv captained the team as Hassett was away on Test duty . Victoria batted first and Neil came in to join Merv with the score at 2 / 102 , and the pair added 173 together before Neil fell for 94 . One run later , Merv was out for 141 ; later , Ray made only 1 . Victoria ended on 370 and Western Australia took a 59 @-@ run lead . In the second innings , Merv , Neil and Ray made 6 , 41 and 15 respectively , never batting together as the match was drawn after Merv declared the innings at 9 / 304 , setting Western Australia a target of 246 for victory . The hosts reached 5 / 205 and Victoria avoided defeat . 
 After this match , Neil was called into the Australian Test team , so only Ray and Merv played in Victoria 's next match against New South Wales . Merv — again captaining the side — made a duck and was out before Ray came in , in Victoria 's only innings of the match and was not selected for the remainder of the season . After this , Ray and Neil played together for Victoria on two occasions in the second half of the season when the latter did not have a match for Australia . In the first match , against New South Wales , the two batted in partnership for the first time for their state . Ray came in at 5 / 53 to join Neil and he fell for 9 to leave the score at 6 / 64 as Victoria collapsed to be all out for 130 . In the second innings , Ray joined Neil with the score at 5 / 266 and the latter fell at 6 / 292 , ending a 26 @-@ run partnership . The pair did not bat together in the second match against South Australia as Neil was out before Ray came in on both occasions . The 1947 @-@ 48 was the most productive for the Harveys as a combination for Victoria until Ray played a full season in 1953 @-@ 54 together with Neil . 
 In 1948 – 49 , Ray , who had made only 190 runs at an average of 21 @.@ 11 in his debut season , was not selected for a single match , while Merv 's only first @-@ class outings were two matches for a second @-@ choice team against Tasmania while the leading players were participating in Shield fixtures at the same time . Mick was selected as an opener for Victoria ’ s first three Shield matches , and played with Neil in these matches . However , he struggled and made only 91 runs at 15 @.@ 16 and was then dropped . In six innings , the two brothers batted together only twice , even though they batted in successive batting positions ; Mick 's poor form meant he was usually the first batsman out , bringing his younger brother to the crease . In the first match of the season , against Queensland , Mick was the first wicket to fall on each occasion . In the second match , the brothers shared partnerships . In the first innings , Neil came in at 1 / 8 and the Harveys put on 39 runs before Merv was out . The second innings proceeded similarly as Neil came in at 1 / 31 and 40 runs were added before the older Harvey fell . In the third match of the season , Mick was out for 4 and 12 before Neil came in and was subsequently dropped . 
 In 1949 – 50 , none of the Harveys played together at first @-@ class level ; Merv had retired , Mick had moved to Queensland looking for more opportunities , while Neil was in South Africa with the Australian team . Ray and Mick played in one match each for the season , but not against the other . In 1950 @-@ 51 , Ray was selected in two matches for Victoria , both when Neil and the other Test players were competing against England . Both of these were against Tasmania , so he did not meet Mick . However , there were no international fixtures coinciding with Victoria ’ s two matches with Queensland , and Neil met Mick in both of these matches . In 1951 @-@ 52 , Ray was able to gain selection more regularly for Victoria . All of these came when Neil and the other Test players were playing for Australia ; when they available for Victoria , Ray was not selected . Ray played in both of Victoria 's matches against Queensland , for whom Mick played in the first match . 
 In 1952 – 53 Ray only managed selection in the last three matches of the season , and played alongside Neil in the last two fixtures , against South Africa and Western Australia . The brothers had previously had little success in partnerships together for Victoria and in the match against South Africa , Neil came in to join Ray — who was playing as an opener — with the score at 2 / 21 . The pair put on 96 runs . The Victorians drew the match and the brothers did not bat together in the second innings . In the match against South Australia , Neil joined his brother at 1 / 118 and the Harveys again narrowly missed a century partnership , as Ray fell at 2 / 211 for 121 . Later , Neil was out for 95 , missing out on another milestone . Mick was not selected for his adopted state in any fixture for the entire season and did not meet his brothers . 
 In 1953 @-@ 54 , Ray had his most effective season and played in all seven of Victoria ’ s Shield matches , even though there were no Test matches for the summer , meaning that all the national team members were available for state selection for the whole season . He played the entire season alongside Neil , and the pair encountered Mick in both matches against Queensland . During the summer , Neil typically batted at No. 3 , and Ray usually succeeded him . Despite this , they batted together only four times in 13 innings , as Neil was usually out first . Their first partnership came in the first innings of the second match of the season , against New South Wales . It was brief ; Ray came in at 2 / 93 and scored two runs before falling at 3 / 97 . They then batted together on New Year 's Day in the first innings of the next match against South Australia . Ray came in to join Neil after the Victorians had slumped to be 2 / 5 , and after twice coming close to century partnerships for their state in the past , the brothers put on 150 before Neil was out for 88 to leave the score at 3 / 165 . Ray went on to make 110 . In the following match against Queensland , Ray came in with the score at 2 / 65 and put on 82 with his brother before he was out for 50 . Their only other partnership of the season amounted to 36 runs in the second innings of the return match against New South Wales ; Neil was out for 47 as Ray guided the Victorians to their target with five wickets in hand , scoring 106 not out himself . Ray and Neil were also selected for the testimonial match for retiring Australian captain Lindsay Hassett . Neil played for Hassett ’ s XI while Ray was on the opposition team captained by Arthur Morris . 
 At the start of the 1954 – 55 season , along with Neil , Ray was called into an Australian XI for a Test trial against Len Hutton ’ s touring English team , the closest that two Harveys came to playing in a Test for Australia together . Ray did not make an impact in the match , scoring only seven in his solitary innings , and was not selected for Australian duty . He came in at No. 4 after the dismissal of his brother . Ray was selected for all six of Victoria ’ s matches and played in all of these matches alongside Neil , as the domestic season was shortened and there were no scheduling clashes between the Tests and the domestic matches . Mick also played in all of Queensland 's matches , and three brothers met in their states ’ only meeting for the season . 
 Ray and Neil did not bat together in the first match , before adding 24 for the second wicket in the second innings of the following match against England . They did not bat together in the third match of the season , against New South Wales , as Ray , who was batting one position ahead of Neil , was out first in both innings . In the return match that followed , the brothers had brief partnerships of two and ten runs , Ray being dismissed soon after Neil joined him at the crease . These brief stands continued in the first innings of the match against Queensland , as Ray fell after a six @-@ run partnership . In the second innings , the pair narrowly missed out on a century partnership . Neil came in at 1 / 17 to join Ray , who was opening in the match , and they took the score to 1 / 117 before Neil was out for 66 . In the final match of the season against the MCC , Ray was the first wicket to fall in the innings and he did not bat with Neil . 
 In 1955 @-@ 56 , Ray was overlooked and spent four years out of first @-@ class cricket , and he never played alongside Neil again at first @-@ class level . Neil played in all of Victoria 's matches , and Mick played in Queensland ’ s first six matches before being dropped for the second and final match against Victoria . In 1956 @-@ 57 , Mick played in two matches for Queensland earlier in the season before being dropped and retiring ; neither were against Victoria , so none of the brothers played together in one match . Ray was recalled to the Victorian team in the latter half of the 1958 @-@ 59 season . By this time , Neil had moved to New South Wales for employment reasons , and played each other late in the season . The Harvey brothers never played together or against one another again at first @-@ class level . In 1959 @-@ 60 , Neil was in the Indian subcontinent representing Australia as Ray played his final first @-@ class season before retiring . 
 = 1858 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1858 Atlantic hurricane season was one of only three Atlantic hurricane seasons on record in which every tropical cyclone intensified into a hurricane ( the others were in 1852 and 1884 ) . The first hurricane was first observed over the northwestern Caribbean Sea on June 12 . The sixth and final storm was last noted on October 26 . These dates fall within the period with the most tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic . Three tropical cyclones during the season existed simultaneously . Two of the cyclones have only a single known point in its track due to a sparsity of data . Operationally , another tropical cyclone was believed to have existed over the eastern Atlantic between September 17 and September 18 , but HURDAT – the official Atlantic hurricane database – excludes this system . However , in the absence of modern satellite and other remote @-@ sensing technologies , only cyclones that affected populated land areas or encountered ships at sea are currently known , so the actual total could be higher . An undercount bias of zero to four tropical cyclones per year between 1886 and 1910 has been estimated . Of the six known 1858 Atlantic cyclones , five were first documented in 1995 by Jose Fernandez @-@ Partagas and Henry Diaz . 
 The first system was spotted over the western Caribbean Sea on June 12 . It had a single @-@ point track . Another tropical cyclone was first observed over the northern Atlantic Ocean on August 5 and also had a single @-@ point track . On September 14 , the next system was observed over the southeastern Gulf of Mexico . Several hours later , the storm struck Florida , causing severe damage to crops . Strong winds and rough seas were reported by ships and on land , particularly in Maine . The storm dissipated on September 17 . That same day , another tropical cyclone developed over the central Atlantic . The storm capsized the bark Phantom , though no one drowned . The next hurricane developed over the Bahamas on September 22 , but caused little damage , despite its proximity to land . On October 21 , the sixth and final system of the season was first observed over the Bahamas . The storm brought coastal flooding to Nassau and Bermuda later in its duration , before dissipating on October 26 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a low accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 45 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm intensity . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 On June 12 , the brig L. H. Sampson encountered a hurricane in the northwestern Caribbean Sea . The vessel suffered some damage . The storm was a Category 1 hurricane on the modern day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , based on winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) observed by the L. H. Sampson . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A Category 1 hurricane was first observed about 585 mi ( 940 km ) west @-@ northwest of Corvo Island in the Azores on August 5 , based on reports from two ships , the Shelter and the <unk> Another ship that encountered the storm , the Magistrate , was abandoned . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 The bark Cavallo encountered experienced severe weather in the eastern Gulf of Mexico between September 13 and September 15 . It is believed that a tropical storm developed on September 14 . Moving northeastward , the storm made landfall near modern @-@ day Palmetto , Florida at 15 : 00 UTC , with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . While crossing the state , the storm brought severe damage . Ships remained in port at river ports in the state and at St. Marys , Georgia . After emerging into the Atlantic Ocean near Oak Hill , Florida early on September 15 , the system reached hurricane status several hours later . Shortly thereafter , the storm intensified into a Category 2 hurricane , peaking with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . On September 16 , the hurricane passed offshore North Carolina and then weakened to a Category 1 hurricane while east of the Mid @-@ Atlantic states . 
 At 17 : 00 UTC on September 16 , the storm made landfall near East Hampton , New York with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . About an hour later , it struck again just west of Groton , Connecticut with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Early on September 17 , the system weakened to a tropical storm and dissipated over the Gulf of Saint Lawrence several hours later . Parts of this storm were first described by David M. Ludlum , who called it The New England Tropical Storm of 1858 . However , barometer readings taken at Sag Harbor , New York and Providence , Rhode Island , along with ship reports and wind speeds recorded at Bangor , Maine and Nantucket , Massachusetts , conclude that the system reached hurricane intensity . In Maine , strong gales occurred , with Bangor reported having " one of the heaviest in years . " Trees and chimneys toppled throughout the southeastern portions of the state . There was also minor damage to shipping in Belfast . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 On September 17 , a hurricane was observed in the mid @-@ Atlantic by the bark Phantom . Later that day , the Phantom sank , though all of the crew survived . They described the system as a ' perfect hurricane ' with a lull around midnight on September 17 before the wind changed direction and blew with even greater force than before . The hurricane continued travelling on a northwest track and between September 22 and the night of September 23 it was encountered by the Hudson , the City of Washington and the bark Lanark . The system weakened to a tropical storm early on September 24 and dissipated later that day about 610 mi ( 980 km ) east of Cape Race , Newfoundland . Until reanalysis , this storm was considered two separate systems , including in the 1995 study by Partagas and Diaz . However , they stated that further information could indicate a single storm . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 Based on reports from the bark Wh H. Chandler , a tropical storm developed in the Bahamas near Acklins on September 22 . Moving northward , the storm strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane by 12 : 00 UTC the next day . Later on September 23 , the Harkaway noted a " severe hurricane " at Bermuda , though the report was considered " doubtful " due to the storm 's distance from the island . The hurricane continued northward and was last noted about 200 mi ( 320 km ) east of Virginia on September 25 , after the Priscilla observed sustained winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 The final known tropical cyclone of the season was first observed by the brig Sea Lark on October 21 , while located just north of Inagua in the Bahamas . Throughout the Bahamas , storm surge impacted some islands . At Nassau , several ships were driven ashore , parts of the town were flooded and buildings along the shoreline suffered damage . The storm moved northeastward and strengthened into a hurricane at 12 : 00 UTC on October 22 . About 24 hours later , the hurricane deepened into a Category 2 hurricane . Later on October 23 , it passed just west of Bermuda . Gale force winds and rough seas were observed on the island , causing damage to several vessels . Peaking with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , the storm began to weaken , falling to Category 1 intensity on October 25 . It weakened to a tropical storm early the following day and dissipated hours later , while located about 195 mi ( 315 km ) east @-@ southeast of Sable Island . 
 = Goldenheart = 
 Goldenheart is the second studio album by American recording artist Dawn Richard , released on January 15 , 2013 , by Our Dawn Entertainment . After her group Diddy – Dirty Money disbanded in 2012 , Richard continued to develop her musical identity and worked with creative partner and manager Andrew " Druski " Scott , who co @-@ wrote Goldenheart with her . It is the first in a planned trilogy of albums by Richard about love , loss , and redemption . 
 Goldenheart is an eccentric R & B album that draws on dream pop , alternative , and dance genres . Its mostly midtempo songs have strong grooves and feature synthesizers , string settings , vintage keyboards , and an array of percussive sounds . A post @-@ breakup concept album , Richard 's songwriting poses relationships and personal subjects as epic tales through magical , medieval imagery and allusions to high fantasy and science fiction tropes . 
 The album was released independently by Richard and promoted with the lead single " ' 86 " . It debuted at number 137 on the Billboard 200 chart and sold 3 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Upon its release , Goldenheart received universal acclaim from music critics , who praised its grand musical scope and Richard 's theatrical personality . 
 = = Background = = 
 During stints in different musical groups , Dawn Richard wanted to develop her musical identity and pursue a solo recording career . In 2011 , Richard was promoting the album Last Train to Paris ( 2010 ) as a member of Sean Combs ' musical project Diddy – Dirty Money and released a free mixtape , The Prelude to A Tell Tale Heart , which registered one million downloads within a month . After the group disbanded in 2012 , she worked with producer , manager , and creative partner Andrew " Druski " Scott and released her EP Armor On , which sold 30 @,@ 000 copies . Richard also marketed herself through social media and self @-@ funded music videos on YouTube . Goldenheart is the first of a planned trilogy of albums by Richard about love , loss , and redemption ; it will be followed by <unk> and <unk> . She wrote songs for the albums over the course of six years . Some were written as ten @-@ minute songs and instrumentals , but Richard edited them down to avoid being " long @-@ winded " and " overwhelming " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Goldenheart has an eccentric , dreamy musical style that incorporates spare , reverberating beats , icy synthesizers , and dream pop textures . Allmusic 's Andy Kellman characterizes its music as " largely pop @-@ oriented contemporary R & B " , while Jesse Cataldo from Slant Magazine finds it to be " aligned with an intensifying style of alternative R & B ... in which albums are intricately structured and thematic . " Marcus Holmlund of Interview observes an " atmospheric aesthetic " that blends " alternative listens like Björk and Imogen Heap with 80s pop ( à la Phil Collins and Prince ) " . Richard , who grew up listening to Collins , Prince , Genesis , Cyndi Lauper , and Peter Gabriel , cites the song " ' 86 " as most exemplary of those influences on the album . Goldenheart also draws heavily on dance music . Its melodic urban contemporary sound incorporates elements of electro , house , and European dance @-@ pop . The ambient , 2 @-@ step " In Your Eyes " and " Riot " both have euphoric house climaxes . " Pretty Wicked Things " features an industrialized , dubstep production , with jerky basslines and pitch @-@ shifted vocals . 
 Andrew " Druski " Scott 's production on Goldenheart incorporates synth pads , string settings , vintage keyboards , and varied beats . Music writers compare Scott 's partnership with Richard on the album to producer Brian Eno 's work with David Bowie during the latter 's " Berlin " period ; Jonathan Bogart of The Atlantic writes that Scott serves a similar role by " creating dense soundscapes for [ Richard 's ] often electronically altered voice to glide over , wash through , soar in , and pierce with sudden emotion . " The maximalist production of the opening song " In the Hearts Tonight " begins with 45 seconds of both staccato and tremolo strings , solo flute , and a ringing harpsichord line that coalesce with various self @-@ harmonising voices . The album 's closing title track , a meditation on nostalgia built around Claude Debussy 's " Clair de Lune " , is solely performed with electronically altered voice and piano . Richard 's singing veers from restraint to expressions of yearning , with a quavering timbre . " Return of the Queen " posits Richard 's virtuosic vocal undulations against trip hop and operatic flourishes . 
 The songs are mostly midtempo , have strong grooves , and occasionally emphasize drums , with various percussive sounds that include bass drums , handclaps , and <unk> . Beginning with an eerie music box loop , " Northern Lights " builds gradually over a drum machine beat and layered , stereo @-@ panning handclaps . The handclaps and drum loop that are buried in the mix of " <unk> " yield an urgent half @-@ time tremor and obscure chamber strings . The drumming on Goldenheart has a tribal , African @-@ influenced sound , which Richard attributes to the music of her native New Orleans : " It 's that marching band , second @-@ line music , that Creole @-@ influence in the kick , and the snare that drives everything for me . " The album is bookended by stately marches in " Return of a Queen " and " [ 300 ] " . " In Your Eyes " was inspired by the Peter Gabriel song of the same name , which Richard felt had a calypso and South African vibe . Steven Hyden observes several " hallmarks of ' 70s prog and ' 80s soft rock " other than the influence of Gabriel 's " art @-@ school deconstructions of classic ' 60s soul " , including Goldenheart 's Roxy Music @-@ esque album cover . 
 Goldenheart is a post @-@ breakup concept album that explores themes of imagination and dreams . In discussing trials of relationships , it portrays personal subjects as epic tales of battle and salvation . Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times writes that its stories of romantic and professional heartbreak are " tightly intertwined through Richard 's imagery " . Her lyrics employ religious imagery , battle motifs , and allusions to high fantasy and science fiction tropes , including heroic last stands , world @-@ dominating empires , parted oceans , <unk> , vampiric lovers , and military deployment , all used as metaphors for internal landscape and personal conflict . " Northern Lights " and " Frequency " feature space travel and cybernetic imagery , respectively , with the latter song featuring bandwidth references such as " your signal 's found a home " and " stimulation makes it flow " . Jesse Cataldo from Slant Magazine observes " a kind of feverish mysticism " on the album , which he views is " concerned with magical imagery and the self @-@ restorative properties of the human heart . " " ' 86 " is titled after the slang term and is about ridding oneself of barriers . 
 Richard views the album as her take on medieval literature , but calls her lyrics less " literal " than contemporary pop music . Lyrically , she portrays herself as an embattled queen in acts of guarding , fighting , surrendering , and conquering . She murmurs in the intro to " <unk> " , " I fight a battle every day , against discouragement and fear ... I must forever be on guard . " The track 's misspelled title is taken from the television series Game of Thrones . On " Goliath " , she declares , " I faced the Beast with my bare hands " . " <unk> " is an eccentric spelling of " glow " , referring to what the narrator wants to do with her lover to see each other in the night . " Tug of War " concludes a conflicted quest for dominance at the expense of a lover 's power . On the power ballad " Break of Dawn " , Richard promises herself and a love interest that he will " never see the break of dawn " . Richard , who wanted the album to end on a " hopeful " note , said that the title track " speaks of the fairytale . That naïveté . That moment where you felt anything is possible . " According to Laurie Tuffrey of The Quietus , the song concludes Goldenheart 's lyrical arc with a " wistful retrospect " on a relationship that began with Richard 's declaring her " champion " on " In the Hearts Tonight " and shifted to " Tug of War " , where she became " her own champion " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Originally intended for release in October 2012 , Richard delayed Goldenheart 's release after signing a distribution deal with independent company <unk> Distribution , which would release physical copies to retailers , and provide a wider marketing reach . The album 's lead single , " ' 86 " , was released as a digital download on September 26 . Goldenheart was released in the United States on January 15 , 2013 . Richard released the album independently , as she felt record labels were " taking a bit longer than we want " . It sold 3 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and debuted at number 137 on the Billboard 200 , number 2 on the Top Heatseekers Albums , and number 68 on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . The album also reached the top of the iTunes Store 's R & B chart , which prompted music retailer f.y.e. to preemptively release its physical CD . 
 Goldenheart received widespread acclaim from critics , some of whom hailed Richard as one of the best new acts in pop and R & B. At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 81 , based on nine reviews . Alex Macpherson of The Guardian gave it five stars and called it " dazzling and imperious " because of how Richard 's " array of sonic weapons matches her epic , elemental vision . Jason <unk> from Spin praised her eclectic music and versatile singing , which he credited for " springing finely placed surprises on listeners lulled into reverie , navigating tricky spots just effortlessly enough to mask her mastery " . Writing for NPR , Ann Powers found it altogether contemplative , joyful , and mythological . Jonathan Bogart of The Atlantic wrote that , with her Tolkien @-@ inspired lyrics , Richard " remains true to the oldest and most important standards of R & B , which , more than any other musical genre , charts the uncountable intricacies of the human heart . " Grantland critic Steven Hyden felt that the album blurs R & B conventions like Frank Ocean 's Channel Orange ( 2012 ) and Janelle Monáe 's The ArchAndroid ( 2010 ) , while Laurie Tuffrey from The Quietus said Richard distinguishes herself from her R & B contemporaries with her exceptional creativity . 
 In a mixed review , Slant Magazine 's Jesse Cataldo gave Goldenheart three stars and wrote that , despite its interesting " musical palette and tenacious personality " , Richard " falls back on the same tired tropes that have made many conventional R & B acts feel so exhaustingly familiar . " Ryan B. Patrick of Exclaim ! found the album 's lyrics uninspired and wrote that it " functions as a hypnotic aural distraction , but little more . " Ben Ratliff of The New York Times characterized Goldenheart as " oddball R & B ... at times mawkish , plodding , self @-@ obsessed , gothy , campy , filmic " , and mused , " Is it good ? I don 't know about that . But it has the dissonant attraction of something ventured . And it 's confident enough to sound normal . " Giving it four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars , AllMusic 's Andy Kellman called Goldenheart " sumptuous and grand " with enough exceptional songs to compensate for its intensity and indulgence . Pitchfork Media critic Andrew Ryce called Richard 's aptitude for theatricality " unparalleled " and wrote that her slightly " hammy " but " earnest personality both endears and empowers her work . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs were produced by Andrew " Druski " Scott , except where noted . 
 ^ [ A ] " Goldenheart " samples " Clair de lune " , composed by Claude Debussy . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Metacritic . 
 Andrew " Druski " Scott – producer 
 Dawn Richard – vocals 
 Deonte – producer 
 The <unk> – producer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Oleg of Novgorod = 
 Oleg of Novgorod ( Old East Slavic : <unk> , Old Norse : Helgi ) was a Varangian prince ( or <unk> ) who ruled all or part of the Rus ' people during the early 10th century . 
 He is credited with moving the capital of Rus ' from Novgorod the Great to Kiev and , in doing so , he laid the foundation of the powerful state of Kievan Rus ' . He also launched at least one attack on Constantinople , capital of the Byzantine Empire . According to East Slavic chronicles , Oleg was supreme ruler of the Rus ' from 882 to 912 . 
 This traditional dating has been challenged by some historians , who point out that it is inconsistent with such other sources as the Schechter Letter , which mentions the activities of certain khagan <unk> of Rus ' as late the 940s , during the reign of Byzantine Emperor Romanus I. The nature of Oleg 's relationship with the Rurikid ruling family of the Rus ' , and specifically with his successor Igor of Kiev , is a matter of much controversy among historians . 
 = = Oleg of the Russian chronicles = = 
 According to the Primary Chronicle , Oleg was a relative ( likely brother @-@ in @-@ law ) of the first ruler , Rurik , and was entrusted by Rurik to take care of both his kingdom and his young son Igor . Oleg gradually took control of the Dnieper cities , captured Kiev ( previously held by the Varangian warlords , Askold and Dir ) and finally moved his capital from Novgorod there . The new capital was a convenient place to launch a raid against <unk> ( Constantinople ) in 907 . 
 According to the chronicle , the Byzantines attempted to poison Oleg , but the Rus ' leader demonstrated his oracular powers by refusing to drink the cup of poisoned wine . Having fixed his shield to the gate of the imperial capital , Oleg won a favourable trade treaty , which eventually was of great benefit to both nations . Although Byzantine sources did not record these hostilities , the text of the treaty survives in the Chronicle . 
 The Primary Chronicle 's brief account of Oleg 's life contrasts with other early sources , specifically the Novgorod First Chronicle , which states that Oleg was not related to Rurik , and was rather a Scandinavian client @-@ prince who served as Igor 's army commander . The Novgorod First Chronicle does not give the date of the commencement of Oleg 's reign , but dates his death to 922 rather than 912 . 
 Scholars have contrasted this dating scheme with the " epic " reigns of roughly thirty @-@ three years for both Oleg and Igor in the Primary Chronicle . The Primary Chronicle and other Kievan sources place Oleg 's grave in Kiev , while Novgorodian sources identify a funerary barrow in Ladoga as Oleg 's final resting place . 
 = = = Legend of the death of Oleg the Prophet = = = 
 In the Primary Chronicle , Oleg is known as the Prophet ( <unk> ) , an epithet alluding to the sacred meaning of his Norse name ( " priest " ) . According to the legend , romanticised by Alexander Pushkin in his ballad " The Song of the Wise Oleg , " it was prophesied by the pagan priests ( <unk> ) that Oleg would take death from his stallion . 
 To defy the prophecies , Oleg sent the horse away . Many years later he asked where his horse was , and was told it had died . He asked to see the remains and was taken to the place where the bones lay . When he touched the horse 's skull with his boot a snake slithered from the skull and bit him . Oleg died , thus fulfilling the prophecy . 
 Oleg 's death has been interpreted as a distorted variant of the threefold death theme in Indo @-@ European myth and legend , with prophecy , the snake and the horse representing the three functions : the prophecy is associated with sovereignty , the horse with warriors , and the serpent with reproduction . 
 In Scandinavian traditions , this legend lived on in the saga of <unk> @-@ Odd . 
 = = Oleg of the Schechter Letter = = 
 According to the Primary Chronicle , Oleg died in 912 and his successor , Igor of Kiev , ruled from then until his assassination in 945 . The Schechter Letter , a document written by a Jewish Khazar , a contemporary of Romanus I Lecapenus , describes the activities of a Rus ' warlord named <unk> ( Hebrew : <unk> ) , usually transcribed as " Helgu " . For years many scholars disregarded or discounted the Schechter Letter account , which referred to Helgu ( often interpreted as Oleg ) as late as the 940s . 
 Recently , however , scholars such as David Christian and Constantine Zuckerman have suggested that the Schechter Letter 's account is corroborated by various other Russian chronicles , and suggests a struggle within the early Rus ' polity between factions loyal to Oleg and to the Rurikid Igor , a struggle that Oleg ultimately lost . Zuckerman posited that the early chronology of the Rus ' had to be re @-@ determined in light of these sources . Among Zuckerman 's beliefs and those of others who have analyzed these sources are that the Khazars did not lose Kiev until the early 10th century ( rather than 882 , the traditional date ) , that Igor was not Rurik 's son but rather a more distant descendant , and that Oleg did not immediately follow Rurik , but rather that there is a lost generation between the legendary Varangian lord and his documented successors . 
 Of particular interest is the fact that the Schechter Letter account of Oleg 's death ( namely , that he fled to and raided FRS , tentatively identified with Persia , and was slain there ) bears remarkable parallels to the account of Arab historians such as Ibn <unk> , who described a similar Rus ' attack on the Muslim state of Arran in the year 944 / 5 . 
 = = Attempts to reconcile the accounts = = 
 In contrast to Zuckerman 's version , the Primary Chronicle and the later Kiev Chronicle place Oleg 's grave in Kiev , where it could be seen at the time of the compilation of these documents . Furthermore , scholars have pointed out that if Oleg succeeded Rurik in 879 ( as the East Slavic chronicles assert ) , he could hardly have been active almost 70 years later , unless he had a life @-@ span otherwise unheard of in medieval annals . To solve these difficulties , it has been proposed that the pagan monarch @-@ priests of Rus ' used the hereditary title of <unk> , standing for " holy " in the Norse language , and that Igor and others held this title . 
 It has also been suggested that Helgu @-@ Oleg who waged war in the 940s was distinct from both of Rurik 's successors . He could have been one of the " fair and great princes " recorded in the Russo @-@ Byzantine treaties of 911 and 944 or one of the " archons of Rus " mentioned in De administrando imperio . Regrettably , the Primary Chronicle does not specify the relations between minor Rurikid princes active during the period , although the names Rurik , Oleg and Igor were recorded among the late @-@ 10th @-@ century and 11th @-@ century Rurikids . 
 Georgy Vernadsky even identified the Oleg of the Schechter Letter with Igor 's otherwise anonymous eldest son , whose widow Predslava is mentioned in the Russo @-@ Byzantine treaty of 944 . Alternatively , V. Ya . <unk> speculated that Helgu @-@ Oleg of the 940s was one of the vernacular princes of Chernigov , whose ruling dynasty maintained especially close contacts with Khazaria , as the findings at the Black Grave , a large royal kurgan excavated near Chernigov , seem to testify . However , the academic mainstream has not endorsed either of these theories . 
 = Bradford Colliery = 
 Bradford Colliery was a coal mine in Bradford , Manchester , England . Although part of the Manchester Coalfield , the seams of the Bradford Coalfield correspond more closely to those of the Oldham Coalfield . The Bradford Coalfield is crossed by a number of fault lines , principally the Bradford Fault , which was reactivated by mining activity in the mid @-@ 1960s . 
 Coal had been mined at Bradford since at least the early 17th century , when the area around the pits was largely rural ; it became increasingly built @-@ up and industrialised as nearby Manchester expanded during the 19th century . Coal was transported from the colliery by canal and railway , but most was consumed locally by the adjacent Bradford Ironworks . In the mid @-@ 20th century a 469 @-@ yard ( 420 m ) underground tunnel was dug to supply coal directly to the Stuart Street Power Station . 
 Damage to buildings in the area around the colliery caused by subsidence led to it becoming uneconomic despite its sitting on large reserves of high @-@ quality coal , and it was closed in 1968 . The site was cleared and is now occupied by the City of Manchester Stadium . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Bradford Coalfield is isolated from the rest of the Manchester Coalfield ; its coal seams , laid down in the Carboniferous period , dip at an average of 1 in 3 towards the south and correspond more closely with those of the Oldham Coalfield . The Upper Coal Measures above the Worsley Four Foot mine horizon were worked at Bradford , where the Worsley Four Foot is known as the Parker mine . The Two Foot , Doctor , New , Yard , Bradford Four Foot , Three Quarters and Charlotte mines , above the Parker mine , are known as the Bradford Group ; the Charlotte mine is closest to the surface . The Openshaw mine , above the Charlotte , was worked for fireclay . Below the Bradford Group and the Parker mine are the Top , Middle and Deep mines , and 60 feet ( 18 m ) below them , the Roger mine . The Top , Middle and Deep mines correspond to the Major , Bland , and Ashton Great mines in the Oldham Coalfield . The Crombouke mine in the western coalfield corresponds to the Roger mine at Bradford Colliery . In total the workable seams contained 310 million long tons ( 347 million short tons ) of coal . 
 The Bradford Coalfield is crossed by a number of fault lines , principally the Bradford Fault . The extraction of coal caused that fault to reactivate in the 1960s , resulting in a scarp that seriously damaged Crompton Hall , a residential complex built in the early 20th century . The building was subsequently demolished . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The colliery was situated south of the Ashton Canal , built in 1797 , and north of Ashton New Road . A short arm of the canal , now filled in , was built to the colliery from between Lock No. 6 and Lock No. 7 , Beswick Lock . 
 Coal has been mined at Bradford since at least the early 17th century , when the endeavour could be very profitable albeit with significant financial risk . Thomas Charnock is recorded as having invested £ 300 in his Bradford Colliery during the reign of King James I ( 1603 – 1624 ) ( equivalent to more than £ 500 @,@ 000 as of 2009 , At about that time the seams at Bradford were producing about 10 @,@ 000 long tons ( 11 @,@ 200 short tons ) of coal a year , and probably an average of 20 @,@ 000 – 30 @,@ 000 long tons ( 22 @,@ 400 – 33 @,@ 600 short tons ) a year over the course of the 17th century . The early mines were shallow , exploiting seams close to the surface of what was a largely rural area until the growth of nearby Manchester . Colliery records date from 1740 , when Oswald Mosley of Ancoats Hall granted a 200 @-@ year lease of mining rights . The first shaft for a deep colliery was sunk in 1840 . By 1856 the colliery was in the ownership of Thomas Livesey , and had two 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) diameter shafts to the Parker mine at a depth of 540 yards ( 490 m ) , providing ventilation . 
 The colliery became known as the Bradford Colliery Company , and by 1896 employed 404 underground and 125 surface workers producing house coal and coal for manufacturing from the Parker mine . The high price of coal at the end of the 19th century persuaded the newly created Fine Cotton Spinners and Doublers Association to mitigate the effects on its members by purchasing the colliery in 1900 , thus ensuring a cheap supply of fuel for their steam @-@ powered mills . 
 = = Expansion = = 
 The new owners embarked on a programme of expansion and installed one of the earliest electrical plants at any colliery in 1900 . A sirocco @-@ type ventilation fan made by Hick , Hargreaves , which could be powered by either electricity or steam , was provided . <unk> the downcast shaft to access the Deep mine at 902 yards ( 825 m ) started in 1903 and coal was reached in 1906 . A massive timber headgear was built over the downcast shaft and a twin @-@ cylinder vertical winding engine , built by Robert <unk> of St Helens , installed in the engine house . Coal tubs holding 10 cwt of coal were wound , six at a time in double @-@ deck cages . The upcast shaft was used for winding men and had a smaller horizontal winding engine . An earlier shaft at the Forge pit was 155 yards ( 142 m ) deep and used for pumping water from the workings . A windlass was used for winding at this shaft . 
 By the end of the 19th century the colliery site had become crowded , and included a brickworks that used fireclay and shale spoil from the pit . It was surrounded by housing and factories in what was one of the most industrial parts of Manchester . The ready supply of coal encouraged the development of Manchester 's chemical industry around the colliery and in the northeast of the city generally . A factory producing carbolic acid from coal tar was established in 1857 , and sulphuric acid and naphthalene were produced from 1865 in nearby Blackley , later the site of ICI 's <unk> 's Division . 
 Coal was transported by canal and a railway connection to the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway 's Beswick branch built in the early 1900s , but most of it was used locally , transported by road using horse and carts and motor lorries , much of it destined for the adjacent Bradford Ironworks . The company bought a 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 saddle tank locomotive , Bradford , from the Avonside Engine Company of Bristol in 1928 to shunt wagons to the colliery siding . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1935 the colliery was acquired by Manchester Collieries . It had large reserves of high @-@ quality coal in the Roger mine below the seams already exploited , and although the mines dipped steeply , was a dry and relatively gas @-@ free pit . Manchester Collieries initially improved coal screening but had plans to develop the colliery and maximise output to 4000 long tons ( <unk> short tons ) per day , involving the complete replacement of the surface works . The Parker shaft was deepened to 955 yards ( 873 m ) between 1944 and 1948 , and winding installed to accommodate 12 @-@ long ton ( 13 @.@ 44 @-@ short ton ) capacity skips . The transport of coal underground was improved by the installation of three @-@ ton mine cars hauled by a battery @-@ powered locomotive and a system of conveyors . A 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) reinforced concrete winding tower was built to house a <unk> @-@ type friction wheel built by Metropolitan @-@ Vickers . 
 A new headgear and winding engine were built at the Deep pit shaft ; ventilation was by means of two axial @-@ type fans installed in an underground chamber . After 1947 a 460 @-@ yard ( 420 m ) tunnel 55 yards ( 50 m ) below ground level was driven to the Stuart Street Power Station , to provide coal direct from the colliery . A conveyor within the tunnel delivered 200 long tons ( 224 short tons ) of small coal an hour to the power station 's bunker . Most of the developments begun by Manchester Collieries were completed after nationalisation in 1947 by the National Coal Board ( NCB ) . After modernisation and reconstruction , coal was extracted by <unk> mining using coal @-@ cutting machinery and conveyors . This type of mining creates a void or <unk> into which the roof is allowed to collapse . At Bradford , which had no spoil heap , the <unk> was infilled with spoil or waste . As there was insufficient spoil to fill the void , some was brought from other pits . The NCB incorporated the takes , or coal reserves , of Moston and Ashton Moss Collieries into the redeveloped Bradford Colliery . Moston was closed , but the shafts of Ashton Moss were retained for winding men and equipment . 
 = = Closure = = 
 By the mid @-@ 1960s it was apparent that considerable subsidence was being caused by mining in the built @-@ up area of Manchester around Bradford Colliery . Many buildings were affected , particularly in Bradford village and Miles <unk> , where in 1962 eleven council houses were so severely damaged they had to be demolished . The government approved an order restricting mining operations and ordered an enquiry to determine whether mining should continue unhindered , and if not whether compensation for loss of production should be paid ; for the first time , the NCB required planning permission to mine under the city of Manchester . The NCB gave evidence to the enquiry in 1966 stating that for each ton of coal extracted from the colliery 5s 2d had to be paid out in compensation for surface damage – the highest for any pit in the region – contrasted with a national average of 6d per ton . The NCB 's plans for the colliery included extending the mines beneath Collyhurst , Cheetham , and Ancoats , but the risk of causing yet more subsidence proved to be unacceptable . Therefore , despite sitting on " vast reserves of premium coal " , Bradford Colliery was closed in 1968 as being uneconomic . In its final year of operation the 1500 workers employed produced 530 @,@ 298 long tons ( 593 @,@ 933 short tons ) of coal . The 17 @-@ acre ( 6 @.@ 9 ha ) site , renamed Eastlands , was cleared and its two deep shafts capped with reinforced concrete in a scheme costing £ 8 million before redevelopment . Part of the site is now occupied by the City of Manchester Stadium . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 Francis Taylor is the first recorded fatality at the colliery , killed by a roof fall at " Bradford coal <unk> " in 1622 . Although the mines were relatively gas @-@ free , there were nevertheless some gas @-@ related incidents . One collier , working by the light of a candle in 1874 , died from burns received in an explosion of firedamp . In 1907 a miner died in a <unk> incident , when gas exploded as a fuse was lit . In 1924 a number of tubs transporting miners being hauled to the surface derailed and dislodged a pit prop , causing a roof collapse , known locally as a <unk> ; three men were killed and nine injured . The heat from a fire in the main winding engine house in 1953 caused the winding cables to snap , sending two coal @-@ carrying cages crashing to the bottom of the main shaft and trapping 350 men underground . All managed to reach a smaller shaft 40 yards ( 37 m ) away and were subsequently brought safely to the surface . 
 = Birmingham campaign = 
 The Birmingham campaign , or 1963 Birmingham movement , was a movement organized in early 1963 by the Southern Christian Leadership Conference ( SCLC ) to bring attention to the integration efforts of African Americans in Birmingham , Alabama . Led by Martin Luther King , Jr . , James Bevel , Fred Shuttlesworth and others , the campaign of nonviolent direct action culminated in widely publicized confrontations between young black students and white civic authorities , and eventually led the municipal government to change the city 's discrimination laws . 
 In the early 1960s , Birmingham was one of the most racially divided cities in the United States , both as enforced by law and culturally . Black citizens faced legal and economic disparities , and violent retribution when they attempted to draw attention to their problems . Martin Luther King called it the most segregated city in the country . Protests in Birmingham began with a boycott led by Shuttlesworth meant to pressure business leaders to open employment to people of all races , and end segregation in public facilities , restaurants , schools , and stores . When local business and governmental leaders resisted the boycott , SCLC agreed to assist . Organizer Wyatt Tee Walker joined Birmingham activist Shuttlesworth and began what they called Project C , a series of sit @-@ ins and marches intended to provoke mass arrests . 
 When the campaign ran low on adult volunteers , James Bevel , SCLC 's Director Direct Action , thought of the idea of having students become the main demonstrators in the Birmingham campaign . He then trained and directed high school , college , and elementary school students in nonviolence , and asked them to participate in the demonstrations by taking a peaceful walk fifty at a time from the 16th Street Baptist Church to City Hall in order to talk to the mayor about segregation . This resulted in over a thousand arrests , and , as the jails and holding areas filled with arrested students , the Birmingham Police Department , led by Eugene " Bull " Connor , used high @-@ pressure water hoses and police attack dogs on the children and adult bystanders . Not all of the bystanders were peaceful , despite the avowed intentions of SCLC to hold a completely nonviolent walk , but the students held to the nonviolent premise . King and the SCLC drew both criticism and praise for allowing children to participate and put themselves in harm 's way . 
 The Birmingham campaign was a model of nonviolent direct action protest and , through the media , drew the world 's attention to racial segregation in the South . It burnished King 's reputation , ousted Connor from his job , forced desegregation in Birmingham , and directly paved the way for the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which prohibited racial discrimination in hiring practices and public services throughout the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = City of segregation = = = 
 Birmingham , Alabama was , in 1963 , " probably the most thoroughly segregated city in the United States . " Although the city 's population of almost 350 @,@ 000 was 60 % white and 40 % black , Birmingham had no black police officers , firefighters , sales clerks in department stores , bus drivers , bank tellers , or store cashiers . Black secretaries could not work for white professionals . Jobs available to blacks were limited to manual labor in Birmingham 's steel mills , work in household service and yard maintenance , or work in black neighborhoods . When layoffs were necessary , black employees were often the first to go . The unemployment rate for blacks was two and a half times higher than for whites . The average income for blacks in the city was less than half that of whites . Significantly lower pay scales for black workers at the local steel mills were common . Racial segregation of public and commercial facilities throughout Jefferson County was legally required , covered all aspects of life , and was rigidly enforced . Only 10 percent of the city 's black population was registered to vote in 1960 . 
 In addition , Birmingham 's economy was stagnating as the city was shifting from blue collar to white collar jobs . According to Time magazine in 1958 , the only thing white workers had to gain from desegregation was more competition from black workers . Fifty unsolved racially motivated bombings between 1945 and 1962 had earned the city the nickname " <unk> " . A neighborhood shared by white and black families experienced so many attacks that it was called " Dynamite Hill " . Black churches in which civil rights were discussed became specific targets for attack . 
 Birmingham 's black population began to organize to effect change . After Alabama banned the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) in 1956 , Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth formed the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights ( <unk> ) the same year to challenge the city 's segregation policies through lawsuits and protests . When the courts overturned the segregation of the city 's parks , the city responded by closing them . Shuttlesworth 's home was repeatedly bombed , as was Bethel Baptist Church , where he was pastor . After Shuttlesworth was arrested and jailed for violating the city 's segregation rules in 1962 , he sent a petition to Mayor Art Hanes ' office asking that public facilities be desegregated . Hanes responded with a letter informing Shuttlesworth that his petition had been thrown in the garbage . Looking for outside help , Shuttlesworth invited Martin Luther King and the SCLC to Birmingham , saying , " If you come to Birmingham , you will not only gain prestige , but really shake the country . If you win in Birmingham , as Birmingham goes , so goes the nation . " 
 = = = Campaign goals = = = 
 King and the SCLC had recently been involved in a campaign to desegregate the city of Albany , Georgia , but did not see the results they had anticipated . Described by historian Henry Hampton as a " morass " , the Albany movement lost momentum and stalled . King 's reputation had been hurt by the Albany campaign , and he was eager to improve it . Determined not to make the same mistakes in Birmingham , King and the SCLC changed several of their strategies . In Albany , they concentrated on the desegregation of the city as a whole . In Birmingham , their campaign tactics focused on more narrowly defined goals for the downtown shopping and government district . These goals included the desegregation of Birmingham 's downtown stores , fair hiring practices in shops and city employment , the reopening of public parks , and the creation of a bi @-@ racial committee to oversee the desegregation of Birmingham 's public schools . King summarized the philosophy of the Birmingham campaign when he said : " The purpose of ... direct action is to create a situation so crisis @-@ packed that it will inevitably open the door to negotiation " . 
 = = = Commissioner of Public Safety = = = 
 A significant factor in the success of the Birmingham campaign was the structure of the city government and the personality of its contentious Commissioner of Public Safety , Eugene " Bull " Connor . Described as an " arch @-@ segregationist " by Time magazine , Connor asserted that the city " ain 't gonna segregate no niggers and whites together in this town [ sic ] " . He also apparently believed that the Civil Rights Movement was a Communist plot , and after the churches were bombed , Connor blamed the violence on local blacks . Birmingham 's government was set up in such a way that it gave Connor powerful influence . In 1958 , police arrested ministers organizing a bus boycott . When the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) initiated a probe amid allegations of police misconduct for the arrests , Connor responded that he " [ hadn 't ] got any damn apology to the FBI or anybody else " , and predicted , " If the North keeps trying to cram this thing [ desegregation ] down our throats , there 's going to be bloodshed . " In 1961 , Connor delayed sending police to intervene when Freedom Riders were beaten by local mobs . The police harassed religious leaders and protest organizers by ticketing cars parked at mass meetings and entering the meetings in plainclothes to take notes . The Birmingham Fire Department interrupted such meetings to search for " phantom fire hazards " . Connor was so antagonistic towards the Civil Rights Movement that his actions galvanized support for black Americans . President John F. Kennedy later said of him , " The Civil Rights movement should thank God for Bull Connor . He 's helped it as much as Abraham Lincoln . " 
 Turmoil in the mayor 's office also weakened the Birmingham city government in its opposition to the campaign . Connor , who had run for several elected offices in the months leading up to the campaign , had lost all but the race for Public Safety Commissioner . Because they believed Connor 's extreme conservatism slowed progress for the city as a whole , a group of white political moderates worked to defeat him . The Citizens for Progress was backed by the Chamber of Commerce and other white professionals in the city , and their tactics were successful . In November 1962 , Connor lost the race for mayor to Albert Boutwell , a less combative segregationist . However , Connor and his colleagues on the City Commission refused to accept the new mayor 's authority . They claimed on a technicality that their terms would not expire until 1965 instead of in the spring of 1963 . So for a brief time , Birmingham had two city governments attempting to conduct business . 
 = = Focus on Birmingham = = 
 = = = Selective buying campaign = = = 
 Modeled on the Montgomery Bus Boycott , protest actions in Birmingham began in 1962 , when students from local colleges arranged for a year of staggered boycotts . They caused downtown business to decline by as much as 40 percent , which attracted attention from Chamber of Commerce president Sidney Smyer , who commented that the " racial incidents have given us a black eye that we 'll be a long time trying to forget " . In response to the boycott , the City Commission of Birmingham punished the black community by withdrawing $ 45 @,@ 000 ( $ 350 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) from a surplus @-@ food program used primarily by low @-@ income blacks . The result , however , was a black community more motivated to resist . 
 The SCLC decided that economic pressure on Birmingham businesses would be more effective than pressure on politicians , a lesson learned in Albany as few blacks were registered to vote in 1962 . In the spring of 1963 , before Easter , the Birmingham boycott intensified during the second @-@ busiest shopping season of the year . Pastors urged their congregations to avoid shopping in Birmingham stores in the downtown district . For six weeks supporters of the boycott patrolled the downtown area to make sure blacks were not patronizing stores that promoted or tolerated segregation . If black shoppers were found in these stores , organizers confronted them and shamed them into participating in the boycott . Shuttlesworth recalled a woman whose $ 15 hat ( $ 120 in 2016 ) was destroyed by boycott enforcers . Campaign participant Joe Dickson recalled , " We had to go under strict surveillance . We had to tell people , say look : if you go downtown and buy something , you 're going to have to answer to us . " After several business owners in Birmingham took down " white only " and " colored only " signs , Commissioner Connor told business owners that if they did not obey the segregation ordinances , they would lose their business licenses . 
 = = = Project C = = = 
 Martin Luther King 's presence in Birmingham was not welcomed by all in the black community . A local black attorney complained in Time that the new city administration did not have enough time to confer with the various groups invested in changing the city 's segregation policies . Black hotel owner A. G. Gaston agreed . A white Jesuit priest assisting in desegregation negotiations attested the " demonstrations [ were ] poorly timed and misdirected " . 
 Protest organizers knew they would meet with violence from the Birmingham Police Department and chose a confrontational approach to get the attention of the federal government . Wyatt Tee Walker , one of the SCLC founders and the executive director from 1960 to 1964 , planned the tactics of the direct action protests , specifically targeting Bull Connor 's tendency to react to demonstrations with violence : " My theory was that if we mounted a strong nonviolent movement , the opposition would surely do something to attract the media , and in turn induce national sympathy and attention to the everyday segregated circumstance of a person living in the Deep South . " He headed the planning of what he called Project C , which stood for " confrontation " . Organizers believed their phones were tapped , so to prevent their plans from being leaked and perhaps influencing the mayoral election , they used code words for demonstrations . 
 The plan called for direct nonviolent action to attract media attention to " the biggest and baddest city of the South " . In preparation for the protests , Walker timed the walking distance from the 16th Street Baptist Church , headquarters for the campaign , to the downtown area . He surveyed the segregated lunch counters of department stores , and listed federal buildings as secondary targets should police block the protesters ' entrance into primary targets such as stores , libraries , and all @-@ white churches . 
 = = = = Methods = = = = 
 The campaign used a variety of nonviolent methods of confrontation , including sit @-@ ins at libraries and lunch counters , kneel @-@ ins by black visitors at white churches , and a march to the county building to mark the beginning of a voter @-@ registration drive . Most businesses responded by refusing to serve demonstrators . Some white spectators at a sit @-@ in at a Woolworth 's lunch counter spat upon the participants . A few hundred protesters , including jazz musician Al <unk> , were arrested , although <unk> was immediately released by Connor . 
 The SCLC 's goals were to fill the jails with protesters to force the city government to negotiate as demonstrations continued . However , not enough people were arrested to affect the functioning of the city and the wisdom of the plans were being questioned in the black community . The editor of The Birmingham World , the city 's black newspaper , called the direct actions by the demonstrators " wasteful and worthless " , and urged black citizens to use the courts to change the city 's racist policies . Most white residents of Birmingham expressed shock at the demonstrations . White religious leaders denounced King and the other organizers , saying that " a cause should be pressed in the courts and the negotiations among local leaders , and not in the streets " . Some white Birmingham residents were supportive as the boycott continued . When one black woman entered <unk> 's department store to buy her children Easter shoes , a white saleswoman said to her , " Negro , ain 't you ashamed of yourself , your people out there on the street getting put in jail and you in here spending money and I 'm not going to sell you any , you 'll have to go some other place . " King promised a protest every day until " peaceful equality had been assured " and expressed doubt that the new mayor would ever voluntarily desegregate the city . 
 = = = = City reaction = = = = 
 On April 10 , 1963 , Bull Connor obtained an injunction barring the protests and subsequently raised bail bond for those arrested from $ 300 to $ 1 @,@ 200 ( $ 2 @,@ 000 to $ 9 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . Fred Shuttlesworth called the injunction a " flagrant denial of our constitutional rights " and organizers prepared to defy the order . The decision to ignore the injunction had been made during the planning stage of the campaign . King and the SCLC had obeyed court injunctions in their Albany protests and reasoned that obeying them contributed to the Albany campaign 's lack of success . In a press release they explained , " We are now confronted with recalcitrant forces in the Deep South that will use the courts to perpetuate the unjust and illegal systems of racial separation " . Incoming mayor Albert Boutwell called King and the SCLC organizers " strangers " whose only purpose in Birmingham was " to stir inter @-@ racial discord " . Connor promised , " You can rest assured that I will fill the jail full of any persons violating the law as long as I 'm at City Hall . " 
 The movement organizers found themselves out of money after the amount of required bail was raised . Because King was the major fundraiser , his associates urged him to travel the country to raise bail money for those arrested . He had , however , previously promised to lead the marchers to jail in solidarity , but hesitated as the planned date arrived . Some SCLC members grew frustrated with his indecisiveness . " I have never seen Martin so troubled " , one of King 's friends later said . After King prayed and reflected alone in his hotel room , he and the campaign leaders decided to defy the injunction and prepared for mass arrests of campaign supporters . To build morale and to recruit volunteers to go to jail , Ralph Abernathy spoke at a mass meeting of Birmingham 's black citizens at the 16th Street Baptist Church : " The eyes of the world are on Birmingham tonight . Bobby Kennedy is looking here at Birmingham , the United States Congress is looking at Birmingham . The Department of Justice is looking at Birmingham . Are you ready , are you ready to make the challenge ? I am ready to go to jail , are you ? " With Abernathy , King was among 50 Birmingham residents ranging in age from 15 to 81 years who were arrested on Good Friday , April 12 , 1963 . It was King 's 13th arrest . 
 = = = Martin Luther King jailed = = = 
 Martin Luther King Jr. was held in the Birmingham jail and was denied a consultation with an attorney from the NAACP without guards present . When historian Jonathan Bass wrote of the incident in 2001 , he noted that news of King 's incarceration was spread quickly by Wyatt Tee Walker , as planned . King 's supporters sent telegrams about his arrest to the White House . He could have been released on bail at any time , and jail administrators wished him to be released as soon as possible to avoid the media attention while King was in custody . However , campaign organizers offered no bail in order " to focus the attention of the media and national public opinion on the Birmingham situation " . 
 Twenty @-@ four hours after his arrest , King was allowed to see local attorneys from the SCLC . When Coretta Scott King did not hear from her husband , she called Walker and he suggested that she call President Kennedy directly . Mrs. King was recuperating at home after the birth of their fourth child when she received a call from President Kennedy the Monday after the arrest . The president told her she could expect a call from her husband soon . When Martin Luther King called his wife , their conversation was brief and guarded ; he correctly assumed that his phones were tapped . Several days later , Jacqueline Kennedy called Coretta Scott King to express her concern for King while he was incarcerated . 
 Using scraps of paper given to him by a janitor , notes written on the margins of a newspaper , and later a legal pad given to him by SCLC attorneys , King wrote his essay " Letter from Birmingham Jail " . It responded to eight politically moderate white clergymen who accused King of agitating local residents and not giving the incoming mayor a chance to make any changes . Bass suggested that " Letter from Birmingham Jail " was pre @-@ planned , as was every move King and his associates made in Birmingham . The essay was a culmination of many of King 's ideas , which he had touched on in earlier writings . King 's arrest attracted national attention , including that of corporate officers of retail chains with stores in downtown Birmingham . After King 's arrest , the chains ' profits began to erode . National business owners pressed the Kennedy administration to intervene . King was released on April 20 , 1963 . 
 = = Conflict escalation = = 
 = = = Recruiting students = = = 
 Despite the publicity surrounding King 's arrest , the campaign was faltering because few demonstrators were willing to risk arrest . In addition , although Connor had used police dogs to assist in the arrest of demonstrators , this did not attract the media attention that organizers had hoped for . To re @-@ energize the campaign , SCLC organizer James Bevel devised a controversial alternative plan he named D Day that was later called the " Children 's Crusade " by Newsweek magazine . D Day called for students from Birmingham elementary schools and high schools as well as nearby Miles College to take part in the demonstrations . 
 Bevel , a veteran of earlier nonviolent student protests with the Nashville Student Movement and SNCC , had been named SCLC 's Director of Direct Action and Nonviolent Education . After initiating the idea he organized and educated the students in nonviolence tactics and philosophy . King hesitated to approve the use of children , but Bevel believed that children were appropriate for the demonstrations because jail time for them would not hurt families economically as much as the loss of a working parent . He also saw that adults in the black community were divided about how much support to give the protests . Bevel and the organizers knew that high school students were a more cohesive group ; they had been together as classmates since kindergarten . He recruited girls who were school leaders and boys who were athletes . Bevel found girls more receptive to his ideas because they had less experience as victims of white violence . When the girls joined , however , the boys were close behind . 
 Bevel and the SCLC held workshops to help students overcome their fear of dogs and jails . They showed films of the Nashville sit @-@ ins organized in 1960 to end segregation at public lunch counters . Birmingham 's black radio station , <unk> , supported the new plan by telling students to arrive at the demonstration meeting place with a toothbrush to be used in jail . Flyers were distributed in black schools and neighborhoods that said , " Fight for freedom first then go to school " and " It 's up to you to free our teachers , our parents , yourself , and our country . " 
