 = = = Children 's Crusade = = = 
 On May 2 , more than a thousand students skipped school and gathered at the 16th Street Baptist Church . The principal of Parker High School attempted to lock the gates to keep students in , but they scrambled over the walls to get to the church . Demonstrators were given instructions to march to the downtown area , to meet with the Mayor , and integrate the chosen buildings . They were to leave in smaller groups and continue on their courses until arrested . Marching in disciplined ranks , some of them using walkie @-@ talkies , they were sent at timed intervals from various churches to the downtown business area . More than 600 students were arrested ; the youngest of these was reported to be eight years old . Children left the churches while singing hymns and " freedom songs " such as " We Shall Overcome " . They clapped and laughed while being arrested and awaiting transport to jail . The mood was compared to that of a school picnic . Although Bevel informed Connor that the march was to take place , Connor and the police were dumbfounded by the numbers and behavior of the children . They assembled paddy wagons and school buses to take the children to jail . When no squad cars were left to block the city streets , Connor , whose authority extended to the fire department , used fire trucks . The day 's arrests brought the total number of jailed protesters to 1 @,@ 200 in the 900 @-@ capacity Birmingham jail . 
 The use of children proved very controversial . Incoming mayor Albert Boutwell and Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy condemned the decision to use children in the protests . Kennedy was reported in The New York Times as saying , " an injured , maimed , or dead child is a price that none of us can afford to pay " , although adding , " I believe that everyone understands their just grievances must be resolved . " Malcolm X criticized the decision , saying , " Real men don 't put their children on the firing line . " 
 King , who had been silent and then out of town while Bevel was organizing the children , was impressed by the success of using them in the protests . That evening he declared at a mass meeting , " I have been inspired and moved by today . I have never seen anything like it . " Although Wyatt Tee Walker was initially against the use of children in the demonstrations , he responded to criticism by saying , " Negro children will get a better education in five days in jail than in five months in a segregated school . " The D Day campaign received front page coverage by The Washington Post and The New York Times . 
 = = = Fire hoses and police dogs = = = 
 When Connor realized that the Birmingham jail was full , on May 3 he changed police tactics to keep protesters out of the downtown business area . Another thousand students gathered at the church and left to walk across Kelly Ingram Park while chanting , " We 're going to walk , walk , walk . Freedom ... freedom ... freedom . " As the demonstrators left the church , police warned them to stop and turn back , " or you 'll get wet " . When they continued , Connor ordered the city 's fire hoses , set at a level that would peel bark off a tree or separate bricks from mortar , to be turned on the children . Boys ' shirts were ripped off , and young women were pushed over the tops of cars by the force of the water . When the students crouched or fell , the blasts of water rolled them down the asphalt streets and concrete sidewalks . Connor allowed white spectators to push forward , shouting , " Let those people come forward , sergeant . I want ' em to see the dogs work . " 
 A.G. Gaston , who was appalled at the idea of using children , was on the phone with white attorney David Vann trying to negotiate a resolution to the crisis . When Gaston looked out the window and saw the children being hit with high @-@ pressure water , he said , " Lawyer Vann , I can 't talk to you now or ever . My people are out there fighting for their lives and my freedom . I have to go help them " , and hung up the phone . Black parents and adults who were observing cheered the marching students , but when the hoses were turned on , bystanders began to throw rocks and bottles at the police . To disperse them , Connor ordered police to use German shepherd dogs to keep them in line . James Bevel wove in and out of the crowds warning them , " If any cops get hurt , we 're going to lose this fight . " At 3 p.m. , the protest was over . During a kind of truce , protesters went home . Police removed the barricades and re @-@ opened the streets to traffic . That evening King told worried parents in a crowd of a thousand , " Don 't worry about your children who are in jail . The eyes of the world are on Birmingham . We 're going on in spite of dogs and fire hoses . We 've gone too far to turn back . " 
 = = = = Images of the day = = = = 
 A battle @-@ hardened Huntley @-@ Brinkley reporter later said that no military action he had witnessed had ever frightened or disturbed him as much as what he saw in Birmingham . Two out @-@ of @-@ town photographers in Birmingham that day were Charles Moore , who had previously worked with the Montgomery Advertiser and was now working for Life magazine , and Bill Hudson , with the Associated Press . Moore was a Marine combat photographer who was " jarred " and " sickened " by the use of children and what the Birmingham police and fire departments did to them . Moore was hit in the ankle by a brick meant for the police . He took several photos that were printed in Life . The first photo Moore shot that day showed three teenagers being hit by a water jet from a high @-@ pressure firehose . It was titled " They Fight a Fire That Won 't Go Out " . A shorter version of the caption was later used as the title for Fred Shuttlesworth 's biography . The Life photo became an " era @-@ defining picture " and was compared to the photo of Marines raising the U.S. flag on Iwo Jima . Moore suspected that the film he shot " was likely to obliterate in the national psyche any notion of a ' good southerner ' . " Hudson remarked later that his only priorities that day were " making pictures and staying alive " and " not getting bit by a dog . " 
 Right in front of Hudson stepped Parker High School senior Walter Gadsden when a police officer grabbed the young man 's sweater and a police dog charged him . Gadsden had been attending the demonstration as an observer . He was related to the editor of Birmingham 's black newspaper , The Birmingham World , who strongly disapproved of King 's leadership in the campaign . Gadsden was arrested for " parading without a permit " , and after witnessing his arrest , Commissioner Connor remarked to the officer , " Why didn 't you bring a meaner dog ; this one is not the vicious one . " Hudson 's photo of Gadsden and the dog ran across three columns in the prominent position above the fold on the front page of The New York Times on May 4 , 1963 . 
 Television cameras broadcast to the nation the scenes of fire hoses knocking down schoolchildren and police dogs attacking unprotected demonstrators . Such coverage and photos were given credit for shifting international support to the protesters and making Bull Connor " the villain of the era " . President Kennedy told a group of people at the White House that The New York Times photo made him " sick " . Kennedy called the scenes " shameful " and said that they were " so much more eloquently reported by the news camera than by any number of explanatory words . " 
 The images also had a profound effect in Birmingham . Despite decades of disagreements , when the photos were released , " the black community was instantaneously consolidated behind King " , according to David Vann , who would later serve as mayor of Birmingham . Horrified at what the Birmingham police were doing to protect segregation , New York Senator Jacob K. Javits declared , " the country won 't tolerate it " , and pressed Congress to pass a civil rights bill . Similar reactions were reported by Kentucky Senator Sherman Cooper , and Oregon Senator Wayne Morse , who compared Birmingham to South Africa under apartheid . A New York Times editorial called the behavior of the Birmingham police " a national disgrace . " The Washington Post editorialized , " The spectacle in Birmingham ... must excite the sympathy of the rest of the country for the decent , just , and reasonable citizens of the community , who have so recently demonstrated at the polls their lack of support for the very policies that have produced the Birmingham riots . The authorities who tried , by these brutal means , to stop the freedom marchers do not speak or act in the name of the enlightened people of the city . " President Kennedy sent Assistant Attorney General Burke Marshall to Birmingham to help negotiate a truce . Marshall faced a stalemate when merchants and protest organizers refused to budge . 
 = = = Standoff = = = 
 Black onlookers in the area of Kelly Ingram Park abandoned nonviolence on May 5 . Spectators taunted police , and SCLC leaders begged them to be peaceful or go home . James Bevel borrowed a bullhorn from the police and shouted , " Everybody get off this corner . If you 're not going to demonstrate in a nonviolent way , then leave ! " Commissioner Connor was overheard saying , " If you 'd ask half of them what freedom means , they couldn 't tell you . " To prevent further marches , Connor ordered the doors to the churches blocked to prevent students from leaving . 
 By May 6 , the jails were so full that Connor transformed the stockade at the state fairgrounds into a makeshift jail to hold protesters . Blacks arrived at white churches to integrate services . They were accepted in Roman Catholic , Episcopal , and Presbyterian churches but turned away at others , where they knelt and prayed until they were arrested . Well @-@ known national figures arrived to show support . Singer Joan Baez arrived to perform for free at Miles College and stayed at the black @-@ owned and integrated Gaston Motel . Comedian Dick Gregory and Barbara Deming , a writer for The Nation , were both arrested . The young Dan Rather reported for CBS News . The car of Fannie Flagg , a local television personality and recent Miss Alabama finalist , was surrounded by teenagers who recognized her . Flagg worked at Channel 6 on the morning show , and after asking her producers why the show was not covering the demonstrations , she received orders never to mention them on air . She rolled down the window and shouted to the children , " I 'm with you all the way ! " 
 Birmingham 's fire department refused orders from Connor to turn the hoses on demonstrators again , and waded through the basement of the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church to clean up water from earlier fire @-@ hose flooding . White business leaders met with protest organizers to try arrange an economic solution but said they had no control over politics . Protest organizers disagreed , saying that business leaders were positioned to pressure political leaders . 
 = = = City paralysis = = = 
 The situation reached a crisis on May 7 , 1963 . Breakfast in the jail took four hours to distribute to all the prisoners . Seventy members of the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce pleaded with the protest organizers to stop the actions . The NAACP asked for sympathizers to picket in unity in 100 American cities . Nineteen rabbis from New York flew to Birmingham , equating silence about segregation to the atrocities of the Holocaust . Local rabbis disagreed and asked them to go home . The editor of The Birmingham News wired President Kennedy and pleaded with him to end the protests . 
 Fire hoses were used once again , injuring police and Fred Shuttlesworth , as well as other demonstrators . Commissioner Connor expressed regret at missing seeing Shuttlesworth get hit and said he " wished they 'd carried him away in a hearse " . Another 1 @,@ 000 people were arrested , bringing the total to 2 @,@ 500 . 
 News of the mass arrests of children had reached Western Europe and the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union devoted up to 25 percent of its news broadcast to the demonstrations , sending much of it to Africa , where Soviet and U.S. interests clashed . Soviet news commentary accused the Kennedy administration of neglect and " inactivity " . Alabama Governor George Wallace sent state troopers to assist Connor . Attorney General Robert Kennedy prepared to activate the Alabama National Guard and notified the Second Infantry Division from Fort Benning , Georgia that it might be deployed to Birmingham . 
 No business of any kind was being conducted downtown . Organizers planned to flood the downtown area businesses with black people . Smaller groups of decoys were set out to distract police attention from activities at the 16th Street Baptist Church . Protesters set off false fire alarms to occupy the fire department and its hoses . One group of children approached a police officer and announced , " We want to go to jail ! " When the officer pointed the way , the students ran across Kelly Ingram Park shouting , " We 're going to jail ! " Six hundred picketers reached downtown Birmingham . Large groups of protesters sat in stores and sang freedom songs . Streets , sidewalks , stores , and buildings were overwhelmed with more than 3 @,@ 000 protesters . The sheriff and chief of police admitted to Burke Marshall that they did not think they could handle the situation for more than a few hours . 
 = = = Resolution = = = 
 On May 8 at 4 a.m. , white business leaders agreed to most of the protesters ' demands . Political leaders held fast , however . The rift between the businessmen and the politicians became clear when business leaders admitted they could not guarantee the protesters ' release from jail . On May 10 , Fred Shuttlesworth and Martin Luther King told reporters that they had an agreement from the City of Birmingham to desegregate lunch counters , restrooms , drinking fountains and fitting rooms within 90 days , and to hire blacks in stores as salesmen and clerks . Those in jail would be released on bond or their own recognizance . Urged by Kennedy , the United Auto Workers , National Maritime Union , United Steelworkers Union , and the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations ( AFL @-@ CIO ) raised $ 237 @,@ 000 in bail money ( $ 1 @,@ 830 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) to free the demonstrators . Commissioner Connor and the outgoing mayor condemned the resolution . 
 On the night of May 11 , a bomb heavily damaged the Gaston Motel where King had been staying — and had left only hours before — and another damaged the house of A. D. King , Martin Luther King 's brother . When police went to inspect the motel , they were met with rocks and bottles from neighborhood blacks . The arrival of state troopers only further angered the crowd ; in the early hours of the morning , thousands of blacks rioted , numerous buildings and vehicles were burned , and several people , including a police officer , were stabbed . By May 13 , three thousand federal troops were deployed to Birmingham to restore order , even though Alabama Governor George Wallace told President Kennedy that state and local forces were sufficient . Martin Luther King returned to Birmingham to stress nonviolence . 
 Outgoing mayor Art Hanes left office after the Alabama State Supreme Court ruled that Albert Boutwell could take office on May 21 , 1963 . Upon picking up his last paycheck , Bull Connor remarked tearfully , " This is the worst day of my life . " In June 1963 , the Jim Crow signs regulating segregated public places in Birmingham were taken down . 
 = = After the campaign = = 
 Desegregation in Birmingham took place slowly after the demonstrations . King and the SCLC were criticized by some for ending the campaign with promises that were too vague and " settling for a lot less than even moderate demands " . In fact , Sydney Smyer , president of the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce , re @-@ interpreted the terms of the agreement . Shuttlesworth and King had announced that desegregation would take place 90 days from May 15 . Smyer then said that a single black clerk hired 90 days from when the new city government took office would be sufficient . By July , most of the city 's segregation ordinances had been overturned . Some of the lunch counters in department stores complied with the new rules . City parks and golf courses were opened again to black and white citizens . Mayor Boutwell appointed a biracial committee to discuss further changes . However , no hiring of black clerks , police officers , and firefighters had yet been completed and the Birmingham Bar Association rejected membership by black attorneys . 
 The campaign brought national and international attention to racist violence in Birmingham . Fear that unrest might spread provoked a meeting of Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy with James Baldwin and other Black leaders . 
 The reputation of Martin Luther King soared after the protests in Birmingham , and he was lauded by many as a hero . The SCLC was much in demand to effect change in many Southern cities . In the summer of 1963 , King led the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom where he delivered his most famous speech , " I Have a Dream " . King became Time 's Man of the Year for 1963 and won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964 . 
 The Birmingham campaign , as well as George Wallace 's refusal to admit black students to the University of Alabama , convinced President Kennedy to address the severe inequalities between black and white citizens in the South : " The events in Birmingham and elsewhere have so increased cries for equality that no city or state or legislative body can prudently choose to ignore them . " Despite the apparent lack of immediate local success after the Birmingham campaign , Fred Shuttlesworth and Wyatt Tee Walker pointed to its influence on national affairs as its true impact . President Kennedy 's administration drew up the Civil Rights Act bill . After being filibustered for 75 days by " diehard southerners " in Congress , it was passed into law in 1964 and signed by President Lyndon Johnson . The Civil Rights Act applied to the entire nation , prohibiting racial discrimination in employment and in access to public places . Roy Wilkins of the NAACP , however , disagreed that the Birmingham campaign was the primary force behind the Civil Rights Act . Wilkins gave credit to other movements , such as the Freedom Rides , the integration of the University of Mississippi , and campaigns to end public school segregation . 
 Birmingham 's public schools were integrated in September 1963 . Governor Wallace sent National Guard troops to keep black students out but President Kennedy reversed Wallace by ordering the troops to stand down . Violence continued to plague the city , however . Someone threw a tear gas canister into <unk> 's department store when it complied with the desegregation agreement ; twenty people in the store required hospital treatment . 
 Four months after the Birmingham campaign settlement , someone bombed the house of NAACP attorney Arthur Shores , injuring his wife in the attack . 
 On September 15 , 1963 , Birmingham again earned international attention when Ku Klux Klan members bombed the 16th Street Baptist Church on a Sunday morning and killed four young girls . 
 The Birmingham campaign inspired the Civil Rights Movement in other parts of the South . Two days after King and Shuttlesworth announced the settlement in Birmingham , Medgar Evers of the NAACP in Jackson , Mississippi demanded a biracial committee to address concerns there . On June 12 , 1963 , Evers was fatally shot outside his home . He had been organizing demonstrations similar to those in Birmingham to pressure Jackson 's city government . In 1965 Shuttlesworth assisted Bevel , King , and the SCLC to lead the Selma to Montgomery marches , intended to increase voter registration among blacks . 
 = = = Campaign impact = = = 
 Historian Glenn <unk> wrote that the campaign " led to an awakening to the evils of segregation and a need for reforms in the region . " The black middle class generally assumed leadership in Birmingham and the SCLC , and the black underclass still struggled . According to <unk> , the riots that occurred after the bombing of the Gaston Motel foreshadowed rioting in larger cities later in the 1960s . <unk> vice president Abraham Woods claimed that the rioting in Birmingham set a precedent for the " Burn , baby , burn " mindset , a cry used in later civic unrest in the Watts Riots , the 12th Street riots in Detroit , and other American cities in the 1960s . A study of the Watts riots concluded , " The ' rules of the game ' in race relations were permanently changed in Birmingham . " 
 Wyatt Tee Walker wrote that the Birmingham campaign was " legend " and had become the Civil Rights Movement 's most important chapter . It was " the chief watershed of the nonviolent movement in the United States . It marked the maturation of the SCLC as a national force in the civil rights arena of the land that had been dominated by the older and <unk> NAACP . " Walker called the Birmingham campaign and the Selma marches " Siamese twins " joining to " kill segregation ... and bury the body " . Jonathan Bass declared that " King had won a tremendous public relations victory in Birmingham " but also stated pointedly that " it was the citizens of the Magic City , both black and white , and not Martin Luther King and the SCLC , that brought about the real transformation of the city . " 
 = The Brothers Grimm ( film ) = 
 The Brothers Grimm is a 2005 adventure fantasy film directed by Terry Gilliam . The film stars Matt Damon , Heath Ledger , and Lena Headey in an exaggerated and fictitious portrait of the Brothers Grimm as traveling con @-@ artists in French @-@ occupied Germany , during the early 19th century . However , the brothers eventually encounter a genuine fairy tale curse which requires real courage instead of their usual bogus exorcisms . Supporting characters are played by Peter Stormare , Jonathan Pryce , and Monica Bellucci . 
 In February 2001 , Ehren Kruger sold his spec script to Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) . With Gilliam 's hiring as director , the script was rewritten by Gilliam and Tony Grisoni , but the Writers Guild of America refused to credit them for their work , thus Kruger received sole credit . MGM eventually dropped out as distributor , but decided to co @-@ finance The Brothers Grimm with Dimension Films and Summit Entertainment , while Dimension took over distribution duties . 
 The film was shot entirely in the Czech Republic . Gilliam often had on @-@ set tensions with brothers Bob and Harvey Weinstein , which caused the original theatrical release date to be delayed nearly ten months . The Brothers Grimm was finally released on 26 August 2005 with mixed reviews and a $ 105 @.@ 3 million box office performance . 
 This also marks Terry Gilliam 's first film to receive a PG @-@ 13 rating by the MPAA . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Wilhelm Grimm ( Matt Damon ) and Jakob Grimm ( Heath Ledger ) arrive in French @-@ occupied Germany during the early 1800s . They go to Karlstadt to rid the town of a witch 's ghost . After killing the " ghost " , it is revealed that the Brothers Grimm have actually set up a fake witch to trick the town . Afterwards , as they are celebrating , Italian torturer Mercurio Cavaldi ( Peter Stormare ) takes them to the French General Delatombe ( Jonathan Pryce ) . Delatombe forces them to solve a mystery : The girls of the small village of <unk> are disappearing , and the villagers are convinced that supernatural beings are responsible . The Grimms are charged with finding who is responsible , and they soon discover that it is the work of a real supernatural force : a beautiful , yet evil , 500 @-@ year @-@ old Thuringian Queen ( Monica Bellucci ) stealing young girls to restore her own beauty . Will and Jake have a complicated relationship ; Jake is the smaller , younger , more sensitive one that Will feels he needs to protect . Will is often very hard on Jake ( dating all the way back to their childhood , when Jake spent their money that was to be used for medicine for their dying sister on " magic beans " ) and orders him around . Will is somewhat of a womanizer and wants to make money , whereas Jake is more interested in fairy tales and adventures . Jake feels that Will doesn 't care about or believe in him ; but Will is just frustrated about the way Jake acts so spontaneously , making it hard for Will to protect him . 
 Long ago , King Childeric I came to the forest to build a city while the Queen experimented with black magic to gain eternal life . A plague swept through the land , and she hid in her tower , while her husband and everyone below her perished . Her spell granted her immortal life , but not the youth and beauty to go along with it . Her youthful appearance now only exists in her mirror , the source of her life , as an illusion and nothing more . She needs to drink the blood of twelve young girls to regain her beauty ; ten have already been reported missing . The Queen is working an enchantment to regain her beauty with the aid of her werewolf huntsman and his magic axe , crow familiars , and various creatures in the forest . The Grimms , with the help of Cavaldi and Angelika ( Lena Headey ) , a knowing huntress from the village , intend to destroy the Mirror Queen . After another girl goes missing , Cavaldi takes the Grimms and Angelika back to Delatombe . Because they have failed , Cavaldi is ordered to kill both the Grimms ; but , after convincing Delatombe that the magic in the forest is actually caused by German rebels , he sends them back . While Cavaldi stays behind with Angelika in the village , the brothers attempt to get into the tower . Jake succeeds and discovers the Queen and the power of her mirror . Meanwhile , another girl , named Sasha , is captured despite Angelika and Cavaldi 's efforts to save her . 
 Jake rides into the forest alone after a spat with Will , who follows him . After mistaking a dummy that is smashed into the tower for Jake , Will realizes that Jake needs him to believe in him and assists Jake in climbing up the tower . On the roof of the tower , Jake notices twelve crypts in which the twelve victims must lie . When Sasha 's body comes up from a well , the werewolf takes her to a tomb . After rescuing Sasha and taking the werewolf 's magic axe , the Grimms return to the village . Delatombe captures the brothers and believes them to be frauds . French soldiers begin burning down the forest , and Cavaldi represses his sympathy to the brothers , but they are eventually saved by Angelika . The werewolf is revealed to be Angelika 's father , who is under the Queen 's spell . It turns out that he is only able to keep on living due to an enchanted spike that is lodged into his chest and , without such , the spell is broken . Angelika is drowned by her father , becoming the 12th victim . The Brothers reach the tower while the Queen breathes an ice wind that puts out the forest fire . Delatombe notices that the Grimms have escaped and goes after them with Cavaldi . When Cavaldi refuses to kill the Grimms , Delatombe shoots him but is later impaled by Will . 
 Will and Jake enter the tower , where Will falls under the Queen 's spell when the Queen takes the enchanted spike from Angelika 's father and thrusts it into Will 's chest . Jake shatters the enchanted mirror in the tower , preventing the Queen from completing the spell that will restore her youth . With the last of his strength , Angelika 's father destroys the rest of the mirror by jumping out of the window with it ; and Will , attempting to save the Queen , tries to take back the mirror and falls with him , and both men are killed . Outside , Cavaldi survives , having donned the Grimm 's faux @-@ magic armor . He finds Will 's body and recites an Italian curse , and the tower falls apart . Jake escapes , and Cavaldi informs Jake that he can break the spell and awaken Angelika with a kiss , which in turn resurrects the other girls and Will . With the menace gone and their daughters returned to them , the villagers of <unk> celebrate and give their heart @-@ felt thanks to the brothers . Cavaldi stays in the village and joins the villagers for the feast . Angelika kisses both the Grimms and tells them that they are always welcome at the village . The Brothers Grimm decide to pursue a new profession , presumably recording fairy tales , although they are now wanted criminals of the state . One of the Queen 's crows is seen flying off with the last shard of her mirror , still holding the Queen 's watchful eye and presumably , her living soul . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Matt Damon and Heath Ledger as Wilhelm " Will " and Jakob " Jake " Grimm : Johnny Depp was Gilliam 's first choice for Will Grimm , but producer Bob Weinstein believed Depp was not commercially famous enough for the role . Damon joked that Weinstein " was kicking himself because half @-@ way through production , Pirates of the Caribbean came out and Depp was all of a sudden a big sensation . " Ledger met Gilliam in November 2002 when Nicola Pecorini recommended the actor to the director , comparing him to Depp . Gilliam intended to cast Ledger opposite Depp . Damon and Ledger were originally cast in opposite roles before they petitioned to have their characters switched . Damon had wanted to work with Gilliam for years and actively campaigned to land the role of Will Grimm . The actor " grew up loving [ Gilliam 's ] Time Bandits , the way that movie created this weird but totally convincing world " . Gilliam elected to have Damon wear a prosthetic nose , but Weinstein said " it would have distracted audiences from Damon 's star @-@ studded good looks " . Gilliam later reasoned that " it would have been the most expensive nose job ever " . 
 Peter Stormare as Mercurio Cavaldi , Delatombe 's Italian associate . Cavaldi originally has a grudge against the brothers , but eventually has a change of heart . Robin Williams was cast in the role before dropping out . 
 Lena Headey as Angelika : Her father is a woodsman transformed into a werewolf by the Mirror Queen 's spell . Gilliam 's first choice for the role was Samantha Morton . 
 Jonathan Pryce as General <unk> Delatombe , a cruel French military commander . Delatombe attempts to burn down the forest and kill the brothers . 
 Tomáš <unk> as Woodsman 
 Julian Bleach as <unk> 
 Monica Bellucci as the Mirror Queen , a beautiful , evil queen who experimented with black magic before being struck by the Bubonic plague , her spell giving her eternal life but not the eternal youth she had expected . Nicole Kidman turned down the role over scheduling conflicts . 
 Mackenzie Crook and Richard Ridings as <unk> and <unk> : Duo sidekicks for the Grimms ; they are eventually beheaded by French soldiers . 
 Roger Ashton @-@ Griffiths as the Mayor , who is duped into employing the Grimms to rid his village of its haunting . 
 Anna Rust as Sister Grimm 
 = = Production = = 
 Ehren Kruger 's screenplay was written as a spec script ; in February 2001 , Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) purchased the script , with Summit Entertainment to co @-@ finance the film . In October 2002 , Terry Gilliam entered negotiations to direct , and rewrote Kruger 's script alongside frequent collaborator Tony Grisoni . However , the Writers Guild of America refused to credit Gilliam and Grisoni for their rewrite work , and Kruger received sole credit . After Gilliam 's hiring , production was put on fast track for a target November 2004 theatrical release date . The budget , originally projected at $ 75 million , was to be Dimension Films ' most expensive film ever . The studio had trouble financing the film , and dropped out as main distributor . Weeks later , Bob Weinstein , under his Dimension Films production company , made a deal with MGM and Summit to co @-@ finance The Brothers Grimm , and become the lead distributor . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The original start date was April 2003 , but filming did not begin until 30 June . It was decided to shoot The Brothers Grimm entirely in the Czech Republic over budget constraints . Gilliam reasoned that " this is an $ 80 million movie , which would probably cost $ 120 — $ 140 million in America " . The majority of filming required sound stages and backlots from Barrandov Studios in Prague . Filming at Barrandov ended on 23 October . Location filming began afterwards , which included the <unk> Castle . Along with Alien vs. Predator and Van Helsing , The Brothers Grimm provided work for hundreds of local jobs and contributed over $ 300 million into the Czech Republic 's economy . Gilliam hired Guy Hendrix Dyas as production designer after he was impressed with Dyas ' work on X2 . Gilliam often disputed with executive producers Bob and Harvey Weinstein during production . The Weinstein Brothers fired cinematographer and regular Gilliam collaborator Nicola Pecorini after six weeks . Pecorini was then replaced by Newton Thomas Sigel . 
 " I 'm used to riding roughshod over studio executives , " Gilliam explained , " but the Weinsteins rode roughshod over me . " Gilliam got so upset , filming was shut down for nearly two weeks . Matt Damon reflected on the situation : " I 've never been in a situation like that . Terry was spitting rage at the system , at the Weinsteins . You can 't try and impose big compromises on a visionary director like him . If you try to force him to do what you want creatively , he 'll go nuclear . " The feud between Gilliam and the Weinsteins was eventually settled , although Bob Weinstein blamed the entire situation on yellow journalism . Filming was scheduled to end in October , but due to various problems during filming , principal photography did not end until the following 27 November . 
 Due to the tensions between the filmmaker and the producers during production , Gilliam said in retrospect about the film , " [ I ] t 's not the film they wanted and it 's not quite the film I wanted . It 's the film that is a result of [ ... ] two groups of people , who aren ’ t working well together . " With regards to the Weinsteins also producing Martin Scorsese 's film Gangs of New York ( 2002 ) , Gilliam stated : " Marty [ Scorsese ] said almost the exact same quote I said , without us knowing it : ' They took the joy out of filmmaking . ' " 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Post @-@ production was severely delayed when Gilliam disagreed with the Weinsteins over the final cut privilege . In the meantime , the conflict lasted so long that Gilliam had enough time to shoot another feature film , <unk> . To create the visual effects , Gilliam awarded the shots to Peerless Camera , the London @-@ based effects studio he founded in the late @-@ 1970s with visual effects supervisor Kent Houston . However , two months into filming , Houston said that Peerless " ran into a number of major issues with The Brothers Grimm and with the Weinstein Brothers " . He continued that " the main problem was the fact that the number of effects shots had dramatically increased , mainly because of issues that arose during shooting with the physical effects . " Meanwhile , the Queen 's chamber inside the tower was actually built by the Art Department as 2 sets . One set was resplendent and new while the other was old and decrepit . The sets were joined to each other by the central mirror , a piece of transparent glass giving the illusion that a single set was reflected and used to create the effect . 
 There were originally to be about 500 effect shots , but it increased to 800 . The post @-@ production conflict between Gilliam and the Weinsteins also gave enough time for Peerless to work on another film , The Legend of Zorro . Four different creatures were required for computer animation : a Wolfman , a mud creature , the Mirror Queen , and a living tree . John Paul Docherty , who headed the digital visual effects unit , studied the animation of the computer @-@ generated Morlocks in The Time Machine for the Wolfman . Docherty depicted the Morlocks " as a nice mix between human and animal behaviors " . The death of The Mirror Queen was the most complex effect of the film . In the sequence , the Queen turns into hundreds of shards of glass and shatters . With computerized rendering , this could not happen , as the 3D volume of the body suddenly turns into 2D pieces of glass . The problem was eventually solved due to sudden advances that occurred with Softimage XSI software . 
 = = Release = = 
 The original theatrical release date was due in November 2004 before being changed many times ; the dates had been moved to February 2005 , 29 July , 23 November , and finally 26 August . Executive producer Bob Weinstein blamed the pushed back release dates on budgetary concerns . To help promote The Brothers Grimm , a three @-@ minute film trailer was shown at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival , while twenty minutes of footage was shown at the 2005 event . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Brothers Grimm was released in the United States in 3 @,@ 087 theaters , earning $ 15 @,@ 092 @,@ 079 in its opening weekend . The film eventually grossed $ 37 @,@ 916 @,@ 267 in the United States and $ 67 @.@ 4 million internationally , coming to a worldwide total of $ 105 @,@ 316 @,@ 267 . The Brothers Grimm was shown at the 62nd Venice International Film Festival on 4 September 2005 , while in competition for the Golden Lion , but lost to Brokeback Mountain , also starring Ledger . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Brothers Grimm was released with mixed reviews from critics . Based on 179 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 38 % of the critics enjoyed the film , with an average score of 5 @.@ 2 / 10 . By comparison , Metacritic collected a score of 51 / 100 based on 36 reviews . The majority of critics believed Gilliam sacrificed the storyline in favor of the visual design . Roger Ebert called the film " an invention without pattern , chasing itself around the screen without finding a plot . The movie seems like a style in search of a purpose , with a story we might not care about . " 
 Stephen Hunter of The Washington Post wrote that " The Brothers Grimm looks terrific , yet it remains essentially inert . You keep waiting for something to happen , and after a while your mind wanders from the hollow frenzy up there with all its filigrees and fretwork . " Mick LaSalle from the San Francisco Chronicle felt " despite an appealing actor in each role , the entire cast comes across as repellent . Will and Jake Grimm are two guys in the woods , surrounded by computerized animals , putting audiences to sleep all over America . " Peter Travers , writing in Rolling Stone magazine , largely enjoyed The Brothers Grimm . He explained that " if you 're a Gilliam junkie , as I am , you go with it , even when the script loses its shaky hold on coherence . " Travers added , " even when Gilliam flies off the rails , his images stick with you . " Gene Seymour of Newsday called the film " a great compound of rip @-@ snorting Gothic fantasy and Python @-@ esque dark comedy " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Currently , Disney own home video rights , while Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer holds television rights . The DVD release of The Brothers Grimm in December 2005 includes audio commentary by Gilliam , two " making @-@ of " featurettes , and deleted scenes . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc format in October 2006 . Both the DVD and Blu @-@ ray were released by Lionsgate Home Entertainment , under license from Disney . 
 = = TV series = = 
 Miramax has hired Ehren Kruger to adapt the film into a television series . 
 = Russian ironclad Sevastopol = 
 The Russian ironclad Sevastopol ( Russian : Севастополь ) was ordered as a 58 @-@ gun wooden frigate by the Imperial Russian Navy in the early 1860s , but was converted while under construction into a 32 @-@ gun armored frigate . She served in the Baltic Fleet and was reclassified as a training ship in 1880 . Sevastopol was decommissioned five years later , but was not sold for scrap until 1897 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Sevastopol was 300 feet ( 91 @.@ 4 m ) long between perpendiculars , with a beam of 50 feet 4 inches ( 15 @.@ 3 m ) and a draft of 22 feet 2 inches ( 6 @.@ 8 m ) ( forward ) and 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) ( aft ) . She displaced 6 @,@ 135 long tons ( 6 @,@ 233 t ) and she was fitted with a blunt iron ram at her bow . Sevastopol was considered to be a good sea boat and her total crew numbered 607 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was fitted with a horizontal return @-@ connecting @-@ rod steam engine built by the <unk> Works of Saint Petersburg . It drove a single two @-@ bladed propeller using steam that was provided by an unknown number of rectangular boilers . During the ship 's sea trials , the engine produced a total of 3 @,@ 088 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 303 kW ) and gave the ship a maximum speed of 13 @.@ 95 knots ( 25 @.@ 84 km / h ; 16 @.@ 05 mph ) . The ship carried a maximum of 400 long tons ( 410 t ) of coal , but her endurance is unknown . She was schooner @-@ rigged with three masts . 
 As a heavy frigate , Sevastopol was intended to be armed with 54 of the most powerful guns available to the Russians , the 7 @.@ 72 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) 60 @-@ pounder smoothbore gun , and four long 36 @-@ pounder smoothbores . Her armament was revised when she was converted to an ironclad and she was completed with an armament of thirty @-@ two 60 @-@ pounder guns , four on the upper deck as chase guns and 28 on the lower deck . In 1868 , one chase gun and two guns on the lower deck were replaced by 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) rifled guns and 11 more of the 60 @-@ pounders were replaced by seven 8 @-@ inch guns two years later . In 1877 , her armament was changed again to 14 eight @-@ inch guns on the lower deck and two more on the upper deck . Also mounted on the upper deck were one 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) and ten 3 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 86 mm ) rifled guns . 
 The entire ship 's side was protected with wrought @-@ iron armor that extended 5 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 6 m ) below the waterline . It was 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick amidships , backed by 10 inches ( 254 mm ) of teak , that thinned to 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , backed by six inches of teak , in steps beginning 50 feet ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) from the ship 's ends . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Sevastopol , named for the Siege of Sevastopol during the Crimean War , was laid down on 7 September 1860 as a 58 @-@ gun heavy frigate at Kronstadt . She was reordered as ( converted into ) a 32 @-@ gun armored frigate on 26 July 1862 while still under construction . The ship was launched on 12 August 1864 and commissioned on 8 July 1865 . She served with the Baltic Fleet for her entire career and was reclassified as a training ship on 23 March 1880 . Sevastopol was decommissioned on 15 June 1885 and sold for breaking up in May 1897 . 
 = Tunnel Railway = 
 The Tunnel Railway ( also known as the Ramsgate Cliff Railway , the Ramsgate Tunnel Railway , the Ramsgate Underground Railway and the World Scenic Railway ) was a 2 ft ( 610 mm ) narrow gauge underground railway in Ramsgate , Kent , England . Following the restructuring of railway lines in Ramsgate in 1926 , the section of line between Broadstairs and Ramsgate Harbour including the tunnel was abandoned . This narrow gauge railway was opened in 1936 to connect tourist attractions and shops near Ramsgate harbour with the new railway main line at Dumpton Park . 
 Except for its two stations — one at each end of the tunnel — the line ran entirely underground . The line was built in less than three months , and on its completion in 1936 was one of the shortest independent railway lines in the country . It was open for only three years before being converted to a major air @-@ raid shelter during World War II . After the war 's end , it was not included in the 1948 nationalisation of British railways but remained in private hands . 
 Passenger numbers fell during the 1960s , and the line became economically unviable . Following a train crash in 1965 , the owners closed the line at the end of September that year . The tunnel still exists , but no trace remains of the stations . 
 = = Background = = 
 The coastal resort and port town of Ramsgate was historically served by a complex network of unconnected railway lines , the legacy of competition between two rival companies to provide links to London and to neighbouring Margate . The town 's first railway station , Ramsgate Town , was opened by the South Eastern Railway on 13 April 1846 , on what was then the outskirts of the town , about a mile from the seafront . Lines from the station ran north , before splitting west to Canterbury and on to London , and north to Margate . 
 The London , Chatham and Dover Railway opened a second line to Ramsgate on 5 October 1863 . This line ran from London via Herne Bay , Margate and Broadstairs before descending to sea level at Ramsgate through a 1 @,@ 124 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 028 m ) tunnel to Ramsgate Harbour station , on the seafront immediately adjacent to the harbour . 
 Although very conveniently sited for passengers , Ramsgate Harbour station presented severe operating difficulties . Its situation at the end of a steep gradient in the tunnel meant there was the constant risk that an out @-@ of @-@ control train would run through the station onto the beach , as happened on 3 August 1891 and 24 March 1915 . Cramped conditions allowed no room for station growth or improvement , and the small turntable meant larger engines could not be used , so heavier trains needed two engines to haul them up the tunnel 's gradient . Additionally , by the 1920s the population of Ramsgate had almost doubled since the station had opened , making the freight facilities inadequate , with no room for expansion . 
 = = = 1926 restructuring = = = 
 Following the railway grouping of 1923 , both the South Eastern Railway and the London , Chatham & Dover Railway became part of the newly formed Southern Railway , which decided to address the duplication of lines and stations at Ramsgate and Margate . It decided to link the two lines at Ramsgate to allow through running between them . This scheme had been proposed by the South Eastern and Chatham Railway before World War I , but work did not commence until 1925 . This meant the closure of the terminus stations at Ramsgate Town and Ramsgate Harbour , and the construction of a line skirting the northern edge of the town to link the two existing lines . New stations on the north @-@ eastern and north @-@ western fringes of the town , called Dumpton Park and Ramsgate respectively , replaced the existing stations in the town centre and at the harbour . Construction work on the new line involved over 700 men moving 200 @,@ 000 long tons ( 224 @,@ 000 short tons ; 203 @,@ 200 t ) of chalk , at a cost of approximately £ 500 @,@ 000 ( £ 26 million in 2016 ) . 
 The new link opened on 2 July 1926 , from which date both former Ramsgate stations were closed along with the line through the tunnel to Ramsgate Harbour . The tunnel was sealed and abandoned , and the former Ramsgate Harbour station was sold to Thanet Amusements , who converted it into a zoo and funfair called Merrie England . 
 Although adequate for the town 's residents the new stations were a long way from the seafront attractions , which were at the foot of a steep hill . The day @-@ trippers on whom Ramsgate 's tourist industry depended were therefore increasingly attracted to Margate , where the station was next to the beach . 
 By 1933 Merrie England , now under the ownership of Ramsgate Olympia , had become extremely popular , and Ramsgate Olympia began to lobby the Southern Railway to reopen the line through the tunnel , with a new junction station between Dumpton Park and Broadstairs . However , the Southern Railway rejected the proposal as too costly and impractical . Ramsgate Olympia and the Southern Railway were keen to make the attractions near the harbour accessible from the railway main line and to provide a service from the seafront to the greyhound stadium at Dumpton Park . The two companies eventually agreed on a scheme by which a new line would use the 780 yards ( 710 m ) of the tunnel nearest the beach , before branching off into a new 364 @-@ yard ( 333 m ) tunnel to emerge at a new station at Hereson Road , a 250 @-@ yard ( 230 m ) walk from Dumpton Park station . Ramsgate Olympia planned the construction of a large @-@ scale housing estate , charabanc parking facilities , and a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ seat stadium at Dumpton Park to increase passenger numbers and encourage people to use the new rail line . 
 = = = Route = = = 
 The stations each had three platforms ; a broad island platform in the centre for passengers waiting to board trains , and narrower outer platforms from which passengers exited the trains . Although the upper station was known as Hereson Road from the outset , the lower station was never officially named . It was known at various times as " Olympia " , " Beach " , " Sands " and " Lower Terminus " . The platforms and ticket offices were immediately outside the mouth of the tunnel at both stations . 
 The line ran between Hereson Road , across the road from Dumpton Park station , down a steep gradient of 1 in 15 in the new tunnel , before running at a 1 in 75 gradient down the original tunnel to the lower terminus . The line consisted of a single line , branching into two platform tracks at the two stations , with a crossing loop halfway along the tunnel . Over the 1 @,@ 444 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 320 m ) journey between Hereson Road and the lower terminus , the line descended 83 feet ( 25 m ) . 
 = = = Construction and infrastructure = = = 
 The new line 's infrastructure was designed by Henry <unk> , a leading figure in the design of narrow gauge railways . He had begun his career at the Metropolitan Railway ( now part of the London Underground ) , and had designed the route , buildings , locomotives and rolling stock for the Rhyl Miniature Railway and the nearby Romney , Hythe and <unk> Railway . As the new railway would not be carrying heavy loads and would be travelling only a short distance , it was built as a narrow gauge railway , with a track gauge of 2 ft . This allowed the new branch tunnel to be built to far smaller dimensions than the existing tunnel , at just 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high and 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) wide . 
 Although a cable haulage system had initially been considered , Ramsgate Olympia decided early in the line 's planning to electrify the line . A third rail system was rejected due to concerns for the safety of the large numbers of children expected to use the line , and the locomotives had trolley poles drawing power from a single 400 @-@ volt DC overhead line running the length of the tunnel . The wire ran along the wall of the old tunnel , on brackets in the roof of the new tunnel , and was supported by poles at the open @-@ air stations . The electricity was supplied by an electrical substation built by English Electric , inside the tunnel near the lower end . 
 Construction work began on 2 May 1936 . The company hoped to have the line open in time to serve the large crowds expected on the August Bank Holiday , leading to a very tight construction deadline of three months . To try to meet the deadline , construction work was carried out both day and night . As the journey would take place entirely underground it was decided to line the wider , original tunnel with illuminated displays showing scenes from around the world . This led to the line becoming semi @-@ officially known as the " World Scenic Railway " . 
 English Electric built two trains for the line , designed to resemble the electric trains already in use on the Southern Railway , but on a smaller scale . A 94 ft 6 in ( 28 @.@ 80 m ) four @-@ car train , painted red , was capable of carrying 108 passengers , and had a driver 's cab at each end to avoid the need to turn the train around . A 99 ft 6 in ( 30 @.@ 33 m ) train , painted yellow , was also able to carry 108 passengers , but had two extra driver 's cabs in the centre , allowing it to be split into two separate 49 ft 9 in ( 15 @.@ 16 m ) trains , each capable of carrying 54 passengers . It was envisaged that when the line was busy both trains would be used , but during quiet periods the line could be operated by the two halves of the yellow train . The red train was modified so that it could also be split , reducing its capacity to 102 as the two rows of seats at the centre were replaced by driver 's cabs . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 The line opened to passengers on 31 July 1936 , less than 12 weeks after construction began . It was formally opened by Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Edwin Charles Cox , Traffic Manager of the Southern Railway , who commented that as the traffic manager of what was then the largest electric rail service in the world , he was now opening what was probably the smallest . Initially , the tunnel was decorated with illuminated scenes depicting Switzerland , Canada , the Netherlands , Japan and Egypt . 
 The railway proved very popular , and over the Bank Holiday weekend carried 20 @,@ 000 passengers . As it relied on the tourist trade for business , it closed at the end of September . Throughout the 1937 , 1938 , and 1939 seasons the railway operated between Whitsun and the end of September each year , closing for the autumn and winter . 
 The railway never had a timetable , and operated according to demand . Whenever one station had a sufficient number of passengers the driver signalled to the other station that he was about to depart , and the trains from both stations would set off simultaneously , passing at the halfway crossing loop . The journey took approximately five minutes . Outside of times of peak demand the full @-@ length trains were generally not used , and the trains used split into their two @-@ car sections . There was no depot : trains were stabled in the lower section of the tunnel . 
 = = Wartime = = 
 In the late 1930s , war between Britain and Germany began to seem likely . Ramsgate 's location on both the English Channel and North Sea and its proximity to the Thames Estuary , its large port facilities , and its close proximity to RAF Manston made it a likely target for heavy aerial bombing and as a landing site for any German invasion of Britain . With this in mind the town 's borough engineer and surveyor , R. D. <unk> , devised a scheme in 1938 for a network of tunnels beneath the town , to serve as a vast deep @-@ level air @-@ raid shelter for the town 's inhabitants . 
 A 3 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 23 km ) semi @-@ circular network of tunnels was dug beneath northern Ramsgate , connecting to the existing railway tunnel . It was opened by the Duke of Kent on 1 June 1939 , three months before the outbreak of war , and visited during the war by Winston Churchill . The network was capable of sheltering 60 @,@ 000 people , although Ramsgate 's civilian population at the time was approximately 33 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Post @-@ war operations = = 
 The Tunnel Railway reopened for the 1946 season as usual . The illuminated tableaux had been removed during the war but were replaced , but this time they were illuminated by floodlights fitted to the sides of the trains rather than being self illuminated . The line was not included in the 1948 nationalisation of the railways and so remained in the hands of Ramsgate Olympia ( later Pleasurama ) . The tableaux were removed around 1955 due to increasing vandalism , and the station signage changed from World Scenic Railway to Tunnel Railway . 
 Part of the chalk cliff near the lower terminus collapsed in 1957 , forcing the railway 's closure while a strengthening concrete wall was built . The new wall reduced the lower terminus to a single length of track . The second track at Hereson Road was closed at the same time , and removed to build a short siding near the bottom of the tunnel for stabling the trains . The wooden station platforms were replaced by modern concrete structures . 
 At 2 : 15 pm on 1 July 1965 , one of the two @-@ car yellow trains lost control while approaching the lower terminus and ran off the end of the rails before smashing into a building . The driver , 74 @-@ year @-@ old Ernest Brown , was trapped in the cab and suffered pelvic injuries , while a number of passengers suffered minor injuries . Although the station was repaired and services were resumed , Pleasurama decided to close the line at the end of the 1965 holiday season . Services stopped on 26 September 1965 . 
 = = After the closure = = 
 After closure the tunnel was sealed , although it remains structurally intact inside . The site of the lower terminus was cleared and is now an empty site surrounded with construction hoarding . There is a small roundabout directly outside the south tunnel portal . Hereson Road station is now a used car dealership . Four of the cars were sold to the <unk> Steam Collection and remain in use , while the remaining three were given to the Hampshire Narrow Gauge Railway Society . Most of the rails and sleepers were sold to the Romney , Hythe and <unk> Railway . 
 Following three years of renovation , the lower section of the tunnel was reopened to the public in 2014 as part of the Ramsgate Tunnels tourist attraction . The tunnels were formally reopened by Prince Edward , Duke of Kent in a ceremony on 27 May 2014 . 
 = L.A. Woman = 
 L.A. Woman is the sixth studio album by the American rock band the Doors , released on April 19 , 1971 , on Elektra Records . It is the last to feature the group 's lead singer , Jim Morrison , who died three months after the album 's release . It saw the band continue to integrate elements of blues back into their music , a direction begun with their previous album , Morrison Hotel . It was also recorded without long @-@ time record producer Paul A. Rothchild , after he fell out over the band 's studio performance . Subsequently , the band co @-@ produced the album with sound engineer , Bruce Botnick . 
 " Love Her Madly " was released as a single in March 1971 , preceding the album 's release , and it reached the Top 20 in the Billboard Hot 100 . Upon release , the album peaked at number nine on the Billboard 200 and reached number 28 on the UK Albums Charts . An additional single in support of the album , " Riders on the Storm " , also achieved chart success on Billboard and in the UK . Critics Richie Unterberger and David Quantick have both remarked that L.A. Woman one of the Doors ' best albums , citing Morrison 's unwavering enthusiasm in his vocal performance , and the band 's stripped @-@ down return to their blues rock roots . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Doors had achieved commercial and critical success by 1969 , but for much of that year , they were blacklisted from radio playlists and their concert bookings dwindled , after singer Jim Morrison had been charged with profanity and indecent exposure stemming from a concert in Miami , Florida , on March 1 . Promoters feared another episode like this . Morrison , who craved recognition as a serious poet and had also begun dabbling in film , had mentioned leaving the group at the end of 1968 , only to be convinced by keyboardist Ray Manzarek to stay on another six months . On September 20 , 1970 , Morrison was convicted for the Miami incident . In a 1971 interview with Ben Fong @-@ Torres , Morrison said of Miami , " I think subconsciously I was trying to get across in that concert , I was trying to reduce it to absurdity . And it worked too well . " 
 In November 1970 , shortly after Morrison 's trial ended , the Doors entered Sunset Sound Recorders in Los Angeles to record early versions of " L.A. Woman " , " Riders on the Storm " , and " Love Her Madly " , three songs they had recently written . The new songs were a departure from the heavily orchestrated pieces on the earlier album The Soft Parade that burdened the group with long , drawn @-@ out recording sessions . The simplified and straightforward style , progressing from Morrison Hotel , was well @-@ received , noted by Jazz & Pop magazine as " A return to the tight fury of early Doors ' music " . The band conflicted with their record company , Elektra Records , who released the Doors ' first compilation album , 13 , to have a product for the Christmas market . It was released without the band 's input , and featured a large image of a younger Morrison , upsetting him enough to threaten signing with another label . As their contract required one more album , the group were unable to follow through with the threat , so they continued rehearsing the new material . 
 Record producer Paul A. Rothchild , who worked with the band on their first five albums , attended the early sessions but quit following friction with the band . This included his dissatisfaction with the song " Love Her Madly " , which he recalled " drove [ him ] out of the studio " . He felt that recording the composition was a step backwards artistically , calling it " cocktail music " . Rothchild has said that the remark was directed toward " Riders on the Storm " , although he maintains that he said it to " make [ the group ] angry enough to do something good " . Rothchild also left because the group were slow in developing new material , especially as the band contained three songwriters . His enthusiasm with the band deteriorated further after he was unable to persuade Morrison to consistently attend rehearsals . As Botnick revealed in the book Love Becomes a Funeral Pyre , another issue that led to Rothchild 's leaving was the emotional devastation he felt after the death of Janis Joplin , who he had worked with on her second solo effort , Pearl . Rothchild left before any master takes were complete , recommending that the Doors co @-@ produce L.A. Woman with sound engineer Bruce Botnick . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The group and Botnick organized a makeshift recording studio at their private rehearsal space , The Doors ' Workshop , in a two @-@ story building at <unk> Santa Monica Boulevard , Los Angeles They could then record in a more comfortable and relaxed setting while avoiding the expenses of a professional studio . A mixing console , previously owned by Elektra , was installed in upstairs in the Workshop , while studio monitors , microphones , and keyboards were set downstairs . To compensate for the lack of an isolated vocal booth , Morrison recorded in the bathroom , singing into the same microphone as used on the Doors ' final tour . 
 For recording , the Doors hired Elvis Presley 's bassist Jerry Scheff and rhythm guitarist Marc Benno to round out their sound , with Scheff , in particular , contributing on every track except " L <unk> " . Densmore characterized Scheff as " an in @-@ the @-@ pocket man " and praised how he " allowed me to communicate rhythmically with Morrison , and he slowed Ray down , when his right hand on the keyboards got too darn fast " . By all accounts , Morrison – a huge Presley fan – was excited by Scheff 's participation . In addition , Benno was asked to participate as a result of his recent notoriety from working with Leon Russell . The songs were completed in a few takes on a professional @-@ quality 8 @-@ channel recorder , and the album was finished in six days . Morrison was a blues enthusiast and proclaimed the final recording session as " blues day " , recording " Crawling King Snake " , " Cars Hiss By My Window " , and " L.A. Woman " . The album had a raw , live sound with overdubs mostly limited to additional keyboards . Botnick explained , " The overall concept for the recording session was to go back to our early roots and try to get everything live in the studio with as few overdubs as possible " . Mixing was completed at Poppy Studios between February and March 1971 , by which time Morrison had moved to Paris , France . 
 = = Music = = 
 The band began recording without much material and needed to compose songs on the spot , either by jamming or talking through ideas . Morrison enjoyed not having multiple takes , as on The Soft Parade , and showed up to the sessions on time and sober , unlike sessions for that album . The absence of Rothchild helped as he was a perfectionist who insisted on many takes . In 1994 , guitarist Robby Krieger stated , " Rothchild was gone , which is one reason why we had so much fun . The warden was gone . " Despite its troubled beginnings , L.A. Woman contains some of the Doors ' most critically @-@ acclaimed , as well as some of their most blues @-@ oriented . Lyrically , it deals with contemporary topics such as love , life in Los Angeles , and complex aspects of the human experience . Manzarek explained the band did not " approach the album with one vision , but after we started working on the songs , we realized that they 're talking about L.A. They 're about men , women , boys , girls , love , loss , lovers @-@ lost , and lovers @-@ found in Los Angeles " . The album , as a whole , demonstrated Morrison 's songwriting abilities , combined with his poetic phrasing and enthusiasm for Los Angeles , and a desire to leave the city with his partner , Pamela <unk> . Artistically , L.A. Woman saw the band mixing blues , psychedelia , and jazz , often within a single song . For the first time since the " The End " and " When the Music 's Over " , the group incorporated longer songs , including " L.A. Woman " and " Riders on the Storm " . 
 L.A. Woman opens with the Morrison @-@ penned track " The Changeling " , which the Doors wanted to be the album 's first single . Taken from one of Morrison 's notebooks written in 1968 , Holtzman overruled the group 's decision in favor of " Love Her Madly " and the non @-@ album B @-@ side " ( You Need Meat ) Don 't Go No Further " . Author James Riordan has noted the song 's mention of the " changeling " , or spirit child , may be another reference to Morrison 's difficult childhood . The funky James Brown @-@ esque composition also appears to anticipate the singer 's departure from Los Angeles with the line " I 'm leavin ' town on the midnight train " . 
 In addition to " The Changeling " , the Doors chose to incorporate three other compositions written before 1971 : " L ' America " , " Crawling King Snake " , and " The WASP ( Texas Radio and the Big Beat ) " . The former was originally recorded for the soundtrack of director Michelangelo Antonioni 's 1970 counterculture film Zabriskie Point , but ultimately rejected . It was previously titled " Latin America " , and the only work during the L.A. Woman sessions were a few drum overdubs . The Doors ' arrangement of the traditional " Crawling King Snake " dates back to their early tours , and was sometimes coupled with Morrison 's poem " Celebration of the Lizard " . " The WASP ( Texas Radio and the Big Beat ) " is a reworking of Morrison 's sample of poetry first appearing on the group 's souvenir books in 1968 . Combining double @-@ tracked spoken word , the song foreshadowed the poetic readings Morrison posthumously revealed on An American Prayer . To highlight the melancholy of " The WASP ( Texas Radio and the Big Beat ) " , Densmore devised an early use of synthesized drums . 
 Morrison 's also contributed " Been Down So Long " , a song inspired by folk singer Richard Fariña 's book Been Down So Long It Looks Like Up to Me and Furry Lewis 's tune , " I Will Turn Your Money Green " . A conventional blues song reminiscent of earlier Doors performances , the lyrics showed depression , liberation , and sexuality owing to Morrison 's potential imprisonment . He also contributed the blues number " Cars Hiss By My Window " . Unlike most of the other tracks , it was composed in the studio . Manzarek recalled that " Jim said it was about living in Venice [ Beach ] , in a hot room , with a hot girlfriend , and an open window , and a bad time . It could have been about Pamela <unk> " . L.A. Woman closes its first side with the title track , the lengthiest song on the album . Thought of as Morrison 's final goodbye to Los Angeles , it communicated his mixed feelings of passion and disdain for " the city of night " . The lyrics feature an anagram for Morrison : " Mister Mojo Risin ' " . 
 Of the remaining self @-@ written material on L.A. Woman , Krieger wrote " Love Her Madly " , which echoed his songs of romance and insecurity . He wrote the song at home while being bored at waiting for Morrison 's trial to finish . L.A. Woman also features " Hyacinth House " , with lyrics written by Morrison and music by Manzarek . The song shows <unk> being influenced by the Polish composer Frédéric Chopin 's Polonaise in A @-@ flat major , Op. 53 , during its organ solo . The final track was " Riders on the Storm " , a collective effort by the Doors and a sign of their increasing jazz interests , which they would have further explored with Morrison . Based on the arrangement " Ghost Riders in the Sky " and the line " delicate riders of the storm " , taken from Hart Crane 's poem " Praise for an Urn " , the track melded Morrison 's hitchhiker imagery from his own poetry projects . The faint , ghostly backdrop heard throughout the song was the last recording of Morrison with the Doors . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 After Morrison recorded poetry at Village Recorders on December 8 , 1970 , he felt encouraged to play some L.A. Woman material on tour . On December 11 , the Doors performed in front of two sold @-@ out audiences at the State Fair Music Hall in Dallas . The band opened the first concert with an extended " Love Her Madly " , but struggled on older material as they had not played live since the Isle of Wight <unk> that August . The set included " The Changeling " and " L.A. Woman " and closed with " When the Music 's Over " . The concerts were well received , proving the Doors were still a capable live act and leading to an extra performance in Louisiana . Audience recordings from the Doors ' performances of " Love Her Madly " , " The Changeling " , " L.A. Woman " , and the Morrison Hotel track " Ship of Fools " were included on the 2003 album Boot Yer Butt : The Doors Bootlegs . 
 On December 12 , the Doors played the Warehouse in New Orleans for what turned out to be their last live performance with Morrison . Midway through the set , a drunk Morrison began slurring the lyrics to " Light My Fire " , interrupted with speeches and jokes . He sat in front of the drum platform in between Krieger and Manzarek 's solos , but did not stand up to finish the song . After prompting by Densmore , he tried to sing , before bashing the mic stand into the stage until its wood splintered . The Doors agreed to stop touring and focus on completing L.A. Woman . 
 For years , fans speculated over the possible recordings of the New Orleans concert . In 2011 , George Friedman , a stage manager of the Warehouse , revealed he had a reel to reel recording of the gig secured in a safety deposit box . He explained he discovered the tapes " when Beaver Productions moved its offices out of the Warehouse , Uptown into a building at the Riverbend . The Doors tape , along with a stack of other Warehouse show tapes , were cast off and left behind as debris during the move " . Despite the confirmation of their existence , there has yet to be an official release of the recordings . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 L.A. Woman was released on April 19 , 1971 . It reached number nine on the Billboard 200 , remaining on the charts for 36 weeks , and reached number 28 in the UK , spending four weeks on the UK Albums Charts . The first cover pressing had a burgundy @-@ colored , curved @-@ corner cardboard cutout sleeve , framing a clear embossed cellophane insert , glued in from behind . Photography was credited to Wendell <unk> . According to Jac Holzman , chief executive officer of Elektra Records : " I wasn 't sure there would be another album ever , so I had Bill Harvey create a collector 's cover . The Doors ' faces were printed on clear film . The backing color of the inner sleeve could be changed and would affect the mood of the package . This is the first album in which Jim is bearded [ on the cover ] . His photo is on the right , no bigger , no smaller than the others , just another guy in the band . " 
 Three months after release , on July 3 , Morrison was found dead . There had been discussions between Morrison and the others for future recording after he returned from Paris . The album was accompanied by the " Love Her Madly " single , which was released in March and charted at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 for a stay of 11 weeks , but failed to chart in the UK . An additional single , " Riders on the Storm " , was released in June , and reached number 14 on the Billboard chart , while managing to peak at number 22 in the UK chart . 
 The album received mostly positive reviews . Rolling Stone 's Robert Meltzer was impressed by the sense of fun and the togetherness of the band , saying it was " the Doors ' greatest album " and the best album of the year . Robert Christgau appreciated Morrison 's sense of humor in some of the lyrics and believed " the band has never sounded better " , although he was disappointed with " Been Down So Long " and " L <unk> " . More recently , Richie Unterberger , writing for AllMusic , described L.A. Woman as " uneven " , but noted that the album contains compositions that " rate among their finest and most disturbing work " . Sal Cinquemani , reviewing the album for Slant Magazine , considers L.A. Woman to be " the sound of a band in perfect harmony " . He describes the Doors ' material as " disturbing and cynical over the years , and these songs were no exception " . Stephen Dalton of Classic Rock , reviewing the 40th Anniversary Edition of the album , remarks how " the original L.A. Woman still stands proud , an all @-@ time classic journey into bright shining darkness . " 
 PopMatters 's Nathan <unk> said Morrison 's lyrics were less pretentious than previous work because of L.A. Woman 's " more conventional blues " . David Quantick from BBC Music attributed the record 's success to " a stripped @-@ down yet full sound , a developed mysticism tied tightly to the band 's brand of rock , and confidence born of having been a functioning unit for several years " . In his 1994 book The Complete Guide to the Music of The Doors , Peter K. Hogan describes the album as an expansion on the style from Morrison Hotel , but in a more coherent form . He also believed L.A. Woman was a fitting swan song for Morrison , who was pleased to finally record a blues @-@ oriented album . 
 In 2003 , L.A. Woman was ranked at 362 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . When the list was revised in 2012 , to accommodate a number of albums released since 2003 , the album was repositioned at number 364 . Stereogum named it the Doors ' second best album , with the website 's Ryan Leas adding , " It traveled the same raw blues @-@ rock lane as its predecessor , but now the Doors sounded ragged , bleary . It 's one of those early- ' 70s records that comes off like a beleaguered hangover from the end of the ' 60s . " 
 = = = CD reissues = = = 
 Botnick later produced and mixed a new 5 @.@ 1 Surround version of the album , released on DVD @-@ Audio on December 19 , 2000 . It was produced from the original eight @-@ track analog 1 " master tapes . L.A. Woman was digitally remastered as a part of " The Years of the Doors " series . It was reissued in an expanded format on January 24 , 2012 , by Elektra and Rhino Records , with seven alternate versions of songs , and three previously unreleased tracks , " Orange County Suite " , " She Smells So Nice " and " Rock Me " . To accompany this release , a documentary titled Mr. Mojo Risin ' : The Story of L.A. Woman was distributed . The film includes interviews between Krieger and Densmore , as well as live and studio performances . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Love Her Madly " b / w " ( You Need Meat ) Don 't Go No Further " ( Elektra <unk> ) March 1971 ( US No. 11 ) 
 " Riders on the Storm " b / w " The Changeling " ( Elektra <unk> ) June 1971 ( US No. 14 , UK No. 22 ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Note : Source for this section are as follows : 
 The Doors 
 Jim Morrison – Lead vocals , percussion , piano on " Orange County Suite " , production 
 Ray Manzarek – Hammond organ on tracks 1 , 7 , 9 and 11 , tack piano on tracks 2 and 5 , Vox Continental on track 2 , rhythm guitar on track 3 , Gibson G @-@ 101 on track 6 , Wurlitzer electric piano on track 8 , Rhodes piano on tracks 5 , 10 and 12 , lead vocals on " ( You Need Meat ) Don 't Go No Further " , production 
 Robby Krieger – Guitar , production 
 John Densmore – Drums , production 
 Additional musicians 
 Jerry Scheff – Bass guitar 
 Marc Benno – Rhythm guitar on tracks 3 , 4 , 5 and 8 
 Technical 
 Bruce Botnick – Production engineering 
 Doug Sax – Mastering engineer 
 Carl <unk> – Sleeve art concept and design 
 Wendell <unk> – Sleeve photography and visual effects 
 Bill Siddons – Personal management 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 Album 
 Singles 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Biography = = 
 Hopkins , Jerry ; <unk> , Danny ( 1980 ) . No One Here Gets Out Alive . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 446 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 = Stanley Industrial Alliance Stage = 
 The Stanley Industrial Alliance Stage ( formerly the Stanley Theatre ) is a landmark theatre at 12th Avenue and Granville Street in Vancouver , British Columbia which serves as the main stage for the Arts Club Theatre Company . The Stanley first opened as a movie theatre in December 1930 , and showed movies for over sixty years before falling revenues led to its closure in 1991 . After years of threatened commercial redevelopment , the Stanley was renovated as a stage theatre in 1997 – 1998 and subsequently awarded status as a heritage building . 
 As a stage for the Arts Club , the Stanley has been used to put on classics , Broadway musicals and other large productions , including Swing ! , My Fair Lady , Miss Saigon , Disney 's Beauty and the Beast and Irving Berlin 's White Christmas . The theatre , which went through major fundraising to finance its renovations and mortgage , at one stage lost its sponsor du Maurier due to tobacco regulations , but in 2005 received new sponsorship from Industrial Alliance Pacific Life Insurance Company and the theatre 's name was changed to the Stanley Industrial Alliance Stage . 
 = = Movie theatre = = 
 The Stanley opened on December 15 , 1930 . Originally envisioned as a vaudeville venue , it was built by Frederick Guest , owner of a chain of theatres in Ontario , who reportedly fell in love with Vancouver and decided to build his dream theatre there . He hired Henry <unk> Simmonds as the architect , who designed it with a neoclassical interior and an Art Deco exterior , with seating for 1 @,@ 216 people . In order to make as high quality a theatre as possible , Simmonds used only the best materials he could find , including <unk> stone from Winnipeg and tiles from Italy , along with chandeliers , carpets and furnishings from local merchants . Like the Stanley Cup and Stanley Park , the theatre was named after Governor General of Canada Lord Stanley . 
 The first film shown at the Stanley was One Romantic Night , starring Lillian Gish . Admission was originally between 10 and 40 cents . The vertical Stanley sign was added in 1940 and the stylized Stanley script came in 1957 . The cinema , which had been part of the Granville Theatre Company , was bought by Famous Players in 1941 for $ 268 @,@ 000 . 
 The Stanley was originally built as a neighbourhood theatre , but gradually became more popular and attracted moviegoers from throughout the Vancouver region . From the 1950s onwards , progressively improved sound and projection systems along with refurbished seating added to the theatre 's appeal . On July 8 , 1954 the Stanley began showing films in stereophonic CinemaScope for the first time . By November 1958 , the theatre had a <unk> 70mm projector , which at the time was advertised as " the only Todd @-@ AO in Western Canada . " On October 18 , 1978 the auditorium was equipped with Dolby Stereo , and in November – December 1985 its sound system was upgraded and certified to THX quality assurance standards . 
 The Stanley often showed blockbusters . Some movies shown at the theatre through the years included Duel in the Sun , Knock on Any Door , Ben @-@ Hur , Mutiny on the Bounty , Doctor Zhivago , 2001 : A Space Odyssey , The Exorcist , The Towering Inferno , The Muppet Movie , Apocalypse Now , The Empire Strikes Back , The Elephant Man , Poltergeist , The Right Stuff , Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom , Top Gun , The Untouchables , Stakeout , Empire of the Sun , Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade , and Goodfellas . 
 Revenues declined during the late 20th century , and Famous Players closed the Stanley , which was by then the oldest operating movie theatre in Vancouver , on September 25 , 1991 after a final showing of the Stanley regular Fantasia ( the theatre had previously shown Fantasia at least four times , in 1977 , 1979 , 1980 – 1981 and 1990 ) . Its closure was part of a long trend : The number of Famous Players theatres had dropped from 419 in 1954 to 196 in 1969 , and would fall to eighty , some in partnership with other companies , by the time it was taken over by Cineplex Galaxy Entertainment in 2005 . Other Vancouver @-@ area Famous Players movie theatres closed , sold or torn down in this period included the Regent ( 1958 ) , the Strand ( 1973 ) , the original Capitol ( 1974 ) , the Orpheum ( 1974 ) , the Fine Arts ( 1989 ) , Denman Place ( 1989 ) , Park Royal ( 1993 ) , the Park ( 2005 ) , and the Capitol 6 ( 2005 ) . 
 = = Renovation = = 
 Famous Players put the Stanley up for sale in the spring of 1991 , with the condition that it not be used as a movie theatre . In the months leading up to the Stanley 's closure , Famous Players had a conditional sale agreement for the theatre with Vancouver developer Sandy Cox , who was planning to keep the Stanley 's facade and convert the interior into retail space . The Vancouver City Council received a proposal to change the building to retail use , which it approved , but the planned development was abandoned , and the building remained vacant for several years . During the early 1990s , a " Save Our Stanley " campaign was begun to preserve the building and prevent commercial redevelopment of the space . In 1994 , the Stanley Theatre Society was formed to try to buy the Stanley for the Arts Club Theatre Company , and in 1997 it purchased the theatre from Famous Players for $ 3 @,@ 173 @,@ 000 . Renovation costs , including sound and lighting equipment , came to $ 5 @.@ 8 million , which brought the costs of purchase and renovation to about $ 9 million , $ 1 @.@ 5 million more than the $ 7 @.@ 5 million originally budgeted . Money came from fundraising campaigns by the Arts Club and Vancouver <unk> , at least $ 3 @.@ 9 million from the provincial and federal government , a $ 100 @,@ 000 grant from the City of Vancouver , the purchase of a density transfer to the One Wall Centre by Peter Wall for $ 1 @.@ 2 million , as well as corporate sponsorship by du Maurier , who contributed $ 1 @.@ 2 million — although du Maurier would later withdraw as a sponsor because of federal restrictions on tobacco advertising . 
 Architects including Thom Weeks and Jennifer Stanley led renovations of the Stanley into a live theatre . Weeks was initially disappointed with the state of the pre @-@ renovated theatre , which looked " pretty tired " with its aged orange walls and sticky , soft drink @-@ stained carpets . However , by the time the renovations were completed , and the actors and musicians were getting ready to first perform in it , there was a general feeling of excitement about the theatre . Renovations included expansion of the lobby , reconfiguration of the balcony , an expansion of the stage to twice its original size , a new twenty @-@ five metre fly tower from which to raise and lower scenery , new dressing rooms , a trap room , an electrical room and a green room backstage , a reduction of the number of seats from 1 @,@ 216 to 650 , a crush bar in the old projection booth , a section cut out of the theatre 's dome to use for spotlights , and a full restoration of the theatre 's gold @-@ leafed plaster decorations . As a result of these renovations , in 1999 the theatre was awarded a City of Vancouver Heritage Award , as well as an <unk> International Illumination Design Award . 
 = = = Effects on the local area = = = 
 A 2003 study claimed the Stanley 's renovation brought positive economic effects to the theatre 's local area , bounded by 8th Street and 17th between Fir and Hemlock . According to the study , this area became more of a leisure / recreation destination , with many new culturally related businesses , retail stores and service @-@ related businesses opening . An increase in overall sales was noted and 76 % of surveyed residents responded that the theatre 's reopening had a positive effect on the community . Business respondents also reportedly had a positive view of the theatre 's effects . 
 = = Live stage = = 
 After renovation , owing to du Maurier 's sponsorship , the facility was named the Stanley Theatre du Maurier Stage , taken over by the Arts Club Theatre Company and later became their main stage . This venue has allowed the Arts Club to put on new kinds of shows , such as large musicals , classics and productions from around the world . The first production was Swing ! , which opened on October 28 , 1998 and had a successful run , followed by Hamlet . In addition to showing Arts Club productions , the theatre is rented out for other purposes , including business and educational presentations , and has been used for comedy acts and concerts , such as Lorne Elliott , Francis Cabrel , and <unk> . 
 By 2005 du Maurier had withdrawn as a sponsor and , along with its over @-@ budget renovation costs , the Stanley was left with a $ 2 million mortgage . That year Industrial Alliance Pacific Life Insurance Company made a $ 1 @.@ 5 million donation , and on April 5 the theatre was renamed the Stanley Industrial Alliance Stage for the next twenty years . 
 = = = Productions = = = 
 = In Praise of Limestone = 
 " In Praise of Limestone " is a poem written by W. H. Auden in Italy in May 1948 . Central to his canon and one of Auden 's finest poems , it has been the subject of diverse scholarly interpretations . Auden 's limestone landscape has been interpreted as an allegory of Mediterranean civilization and of the human body . The poem , sui generis , is not easily classified . As a topographical poem , it describes a landscape and infuses it with meaning . It has been called the " first … postmodern pastoral " . In a letter , Auden wrote of limestone and the poem 's theme that " that rock creates the only human landscape . " 
 First published in Horizon in July 1948 , the poem then appeared in his important 1951 collection Nones . A revised version was published beginning in 1958 , and is prominently placed in the last chronological section of Auden 's Collected Shorter Poems , 1922 – 1957 ( 1966 ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Auden summered on Ischia , an island in the Gulf of Naples , between 1948 and 1957 ; " In Praise of Limestone " was among the first poems he wrote there . The titular limestone is characteristic of the Mediterranean landscape and is considered an allegory of history in the poem ; the properties of this sedimentary rock invoke the sedentary and domestic picture of Mediterranean culture . The calcium in limestone makes it water @-@ soluble and easily eroded , yet limestone builds up over eons , a stratum at a time , out of organic matter , recalling the stratified history of Mediterranean civilisation . Interpreting the metaphor of ground in poetry , the critic Rainer Emig writes , " The ground [ is ] a perfect symbol of cultural , ethnic , and national identity , a <unk> confluence of the historical and the mythical , individual and collective . " 
 According to critic Alan W. France , the Mediterranean 's religious tradition and culture are contrasted in " Limestone " with the Protestant and rationalistic " Gothic North " . He views the poem as an attempt to " rediscover the sacramental quality of nature , a quality still animate in the ' under @-@ developed ' regions of the Mediterranean South — in particular Italy below Rome , the Mezzogiorno — but thoroughly extirpated in the Germanic North by Protestant asceticism and modern science . " Auden , then , is looking on this landscape from the outside , as a member of the Northern community , yet includes himself as one of the " inconstant ones " : 
 Other outsiders , however — the constant and more single @-@ minded ( the " best and worst " ) — do not share his appreciation for the landscape . Rather , they " never stayed here long but sought / <unk> soils where the beauty was not so external " . The " granite wastes " attracted the ascetic " saints @-@ to @-@ be " , the " clays and gravels " tempted the would @-@ be tyrants ( who " left , slamming the door " , an allusion to Goebbels ' taunt that if the Nazis failed , they would " slam the door " with a bang that would shake the universe ) , and an " older colder voice , the oceanic whisper " beckoned the " really reckless " romantic <unk> who renounce or deny life : 
 The immoderate soils together represent the danger of humans " trying to be little gods on earth " , while the limestone landscape promises that life 's pleasures need not be incompatible with public responsibility and salvation . After seeming to dismiss the landscape as historically insignificant in these middle sections of the poem , Auden justifies it in theological terms at the end . In a world where " sins can be forgiven " and " bodies rise from the dead " , the limestone landscape makes " a further point : / The blessed will not care what angle they are regarded from / Having nothing to hide . " The poem concludes by envisioning a realm like that of the Kingdom of God in physical , not idealistic terms : 
 Auden 's literary executor and biographer Edward Mendelson and others interpret the poem as an allegory of the human body , whose characteristics correspond to those of the limestone landscape . The poet recognises that this landscape , like the body , is not witness to great historical events , but exists at a scale most suitable to humans . " Limestone " questions the valuation of that which exists on a scale different from the body — politics , the fascination with consciousness , and other abstractions . The poem 's ending lines , which justify the landscape in theological terms , are also a theological statement of the body 's sacred significance . The poem is thus an argument against Platonic and idealistic theologies in which the body is inherently fallen and inferior to the spirit . This interpretation is consistent with Auden 's many prose statements about the theological importance of the body . 
 The Karst topography of Auden 's birthplace , Yorkshire , also contains limestone . Some readings of the poem have thus taken Auden to be describing his own homeland . Auden makes a connection between the two locales in a letter written from Italy in 1948 to Elizabeth Mayer : " I hadn 't realized how like Italy is to my ' <unk> , ' the Pennines " . The maternal theme in the poem — 
 — is a point of entry into the psychoanalytical interpretation of the poem , in which the limestone landscape is a suitable backdrop for narcissism . The poem 's " band of rivals " cavorting about the " steep stone <unk> " exists in an aesthetic and spiritual torpor — unable to " conceive a god whose temper @-@ tantrums are moral / And not to be pacified by a clever line / Or a good lay … " . Lacking inner conflict , these youth will never " separate " or produce a new kind of art . Compared to the trait 's earlier literary treatments , " Limestone " ' s narcissism " bodes not so much the promise of a powerful aesthetic , but an artistic culture which , while it seduces , is ultimately <unk> by the gratification of its own desire " . 
 = = Structure and narration = = 
 The narrator 's tone is informal and conversational , attempting to conjure the picture of a dialogue between the reader and the speaker ( who is evidently Auden himself , speaking directly in the first person as he does in a large proportion of his work ) . The informality is established syntactically by <unk> — only 13 of the poem 's 93 lines are clearly end @-@ stopped . There are few instances of rhyme , and about half the lines end on unaccented syllables . The lines alternate 13 syllables incorporating five or six accents with 11 syllables and four accents . Auden adapted this syllabic construction from Marianne Moore . The pattern is reinforced by the line indentation and confirmed by Auden 's own reading . This structure mitigates the tendency of normally accented English speech to fall into the rhythm of iambic pentameter . Swift changes in the sophistication of diction also occur in the poem , as in conversation , and lend it an immediate , informal quality . 
 The poet 's audience seems to change between halves of the poem . He first addresses , in the first @-@ person plural , an audience of like @-@ minded readers or perhaps humans in general . He is discursive and speaks from a historical perspective , using imperatives such as " mark these rounded slopes " , " hear the springs " , and " examine this region " . At line 44 , his listener becomes a single beloved person , and the tone becomes more private . Auden now refers to himself , specifically , and addresses an intimate as " dear " , with a greater sense of urgency : 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mendelson , Auden 's biographer , summarises the response to " In Praise of Limestone " in the years following its publication : " Readers found the poem memorable … but even the critics who praised it did not pretend to understand it . Those who , without quite knowing why , felt grateful to it were perhaps responding to its secret , <unk> defense of a part of themselves that almost everything else written in their century was teaching them to discredit or deny . " 
 The English poet Stephen Spender ( 1909 – 1995 ) called " In Praise of Limestone " one of the century 's greatest poems , describing it as " the perfect fusion between Auden 's personality and the power of acute moral observation of a more generalized psychological situation , which is his great gift " . Literary critic David <unk> found it loose and unfulfilling . The poem became " In Praise of Sandstone " at the hand of Australian poet John Tranter ( 1943 – ) , who created a poetic form called the " terminal " in which only the line @-@ ending words of the source poem are kept in the writing of a new work . 
 = Action of 10 April 1795 = 
 The Action of 10 April 1795 was a minor naval engagement during the French Revolutionary Wars in which a squadron of French Navy frigates was intercepted by a British battle squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral John Colpoys which formed part of the blockade of the French naval base of Brest in Brittany . The French squadron split up in the face of superior British numbers , the three vessels seeking to divide and outrun the British pursuit . One frigate , Gloire was followed by the British frigate HMS Astraea and was ultimately brought to battle in a closely fought engagement . Although the ships were roughly equal in size , the British ship was easily able to defeat the French in an engagement lasting just under an hour . 
 The other French ships were pursued by British ships of the line and the chase lasted much longer , into the morning of 11 April when HMS Hannibal caught the frigate Gentille . Hannibal was far larger than its opponent and the French captain surrendered immediately rather than fight a futile engagement . The third French frigate , Fraternité successfully escaped . After refitting in Portsmouth , Colpoys ' ships returned to their station off Brest , the blockade remaining in place for the remainder of the year . 
 = = Background = = 
 Great Britain and France had been at war for more than two years by April 1795 , and British dominance at sea was well established , with the Royal Navy maintaining substantial blockade fleets off all of the principal French naval ports . The biggest port on the French Atlantic coast was at Brest in Brittany , from which French raiders could attack British shipping in the English Channel and Western Atlantic . The most efficient commerce raiders were frigates , light and fast warships that could strike rapidly and with devastating effect if left unopposed . One of the major roles of the British blockade squadrons was the detection and elimination of French frigates as they emerged from their bases . 
 In April 1795 , the inshore squadron of the British blockade at Brest was commanded by Rear @-@ Admiral John Colpoys , who had at his command five ships of the line : HMS London , HMS Valiant , HMS Colossus , HMS Hannibal and HMS Robust and frigates HMS Astraea and HMS Thalia . Colpoys ' ships had formed an effective blockade : on 29 March they had taken the French corvette Jean Bart and the following day recaptured a lost British merchant ship . At 10 : 00 on 10 April , the British squadron was cruising off the approaches to Brest when three ships were spotted to the west . 
 Colpoys immediately ordered his squadron to give chase and at 12 : 00 the strange ships were identified as a squadron of French frigates . The French ships were the 36 @-@ gun Gloire , Gentille and Fraternité , led by Captain Beens of Gloire and on a three @-@ month raiding cruise from Brest in the Bay of Biscay that had so @-@ far been uneventful : the only prize taken had been a small Spanish merchant brig . Beens quickly discovered the danger his squadron was in , and gave orders for them to sail westwards away from the British squadron . However , the wind favoured Colpoys and his vastly superior squadron rapidly gained on the French frigates . The first British ship to come within range was the 74 @-@ gun HMS Colossus under Captain John Monkton , which managed to exchange distant gunfire with the rearmost French ship before the gap widened once more . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Seeing that his ships were in danger of being caught by the much larger British ships of the line , Captain Beens gave orders for the squadron to separate . Gentille and Fraternité splitting from Gloire to the west with the ships of the line HMS Hannibal and HMS Robust in close pursuit while Gloire swung northwest , eluding most of the British squadron except for the 32 @-@ gun frigate HMS Astraea under Captain Lord Henry Paulet , which managed to stay in contact throughout the afternoon . 
 At 18 : 00 , with the rest of the pursuit far behind , Paulet succeeded in bringing Gloire within range of the cannon on his ship 's quarterdeck . Opening fire with these guns brought a response from Beens ' <unk> guns , the frigates exchanging cannon shot for four and a half hours as Astraea slowly caught up with its elusive opponent . At 22 : 30 , Paulet was finally close enough to lay Astraea alongside Gloire and the two frigates exchanged fire at close range for the next 58 minutes , Paulet concentrating his gunnery on the hull of the French ship while Beens ' ordered his men to disable the British ship 's rigging and masts . Gloire was a substantially larger ship than Astraea , both in weight of shot and gross tonnage , and the battle was fiercely contested : Beens suffered a head injury and all three of Astraea 's topmasts taking serious damage , so much so that the main topmast collapsed in the aftermath of the action . However at 23 : 28 , with two British ships of the line visible in the distance , Beens surrendered his ship to Paulet . 
 Both ships had suffered damage , with the injuries to Astraea 's masts requiring urgent repairs while Gloire had also suffered damage to its rigging and sails . The French ship had also taken heavy casualties , with 40 men killed or wounded , including the captain . In contrast , Astraea had not lost a single man , although one of the eight wounded subsequently died . Paulet effected repairs to both ships and gave temporary command of Gloire to Lieutenant John Talbot , who was subsequently promoted . He then brought both ships to the Portsmouth , where Colpoys was reconstituting his scattered squadron . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 It was while sailing off the Isle of Wight that Colpoys learned from Captain Edward Thornbrough of Robust that Hannibal had succeeded in catching the French frigate Gentille early on the morning of 11 April . The French captain surrendering without a fight before the overwhelming British force that he faced , shocked that his frigate had been caught by a ship of the line in open waters . In response , Hannibal 's captain , John Markham , proudly claimed that " Hannibal sails like a witch " . Hannibal subsequently joined Robust in the chase of Fraternité , succeeding in firing several shot at the French ship before falling behind in a period of calm weather . After a chase of several days , Fraternité 's captain lightened his ship by throwing guns and stores overboard and ultimately escaped pursuit , later rejoining the Brest fleet and participating in a number of subsequent campaigns . Both Gloire and Gentille were purchased for the Royal Navy , the entirety of <unk> 's squadron sharing in the prize money by prior arrangement . Neither ship was in particularly good condition however and neither had long service in the British fleet . Colpoys returned to the inshore blockade of Brest with his squadron following a brief refit at Portsmouth , remaining off the port for the remainder of the year . 
 = Bayern @-@ class battleship = 
 The Bayern class was a class of four super @-@ dreadnought battleships built by the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) . The class comprised Bayern , Baden , Sachsen , and Württemberg . Construction started on the ships shortly before World War I ; Baden was laid down in 1913 , Bayern and Sachsen followed in 1914 , and Württemberg , the final ship , was laid down in 1915 . Only Baden and Bayern were completed , due to shipbuilding priorities changing as the war dragged on . It was determined that U @-@ boats were more valuable to the war effort , and so work on new battleships was slowed and ultimately stopped altogether . As a result , Bayern and Baden were the last German battleships completed by the Kaiserliche Marine . 
 Bayern and Baden were commissioned into the fleet in July 1916 and March 1917 , respectively . This was too late for either ship to take part in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May and 1 June 1916 . Bayern was assigned to the naval force that drove the Imperial Russian Navy from the Gulf of Riga during Operation Albion in October 1917 , though the ship was severely damaged from a mine and had to be withdrawn to Kiel for repairs . Baden replaced Friedrich der Grosse as the flagship of the High Seas Fleet , but saw no combat . 
 Both Bayern and Baden were interned in Scapa Flow following the Armistice in November 1918 . Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , the commander of the interned German fleet , ordered his ships be sunk on 21 June 1919 ; Bayern was successfully scuttled , though British guards managed to beach Baden to prevent her from sinking . The ship was eventually expended as a gunnery target in 1921 . Sachsen and Württemberg , both at various stages of completion when the war ended , were broken up for scrap metal . Bayern was raised in 1934 and broken up the following year . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Bayern @-@ class ships were a result of the fourth Naval Law , which was passed in 1912 . Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz used public outcry over the British involvement in the Agadir Crisis of 1911 to pressure the Reichstag into appropriating additional funds for the Navy . The Fourth Naval Law secured funding for three new dreadnoughts , two light cruisers , and an increase of an additional 15 @,@ 000 officers and men in the ranks of the Navy for 1912 . The capital ships laid down in 1912 were the Derfflinger @-@ class battlecruisers ; funding for Bayern and Baden was allocated the following year . Funding for Sachsen was allocated in the 1914 budget , while Württemberg was funded in the War Estimates . The last remaining Brandenburg @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought , Wörth , was to be replaced , as well as two elderly Kaiser Friedrich III @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnoughts , Kaiser Wilhelm II and Kaiser Friedrich III . Baden was ordered as Ersatz Wörth , Württemberg as Ersatz Kaiser Wilhelm II , and Sachsen as Ersatz Kaiser Friedrich III ; Bayern was regarded as an addition to the fleet , and was ordered under the provisional name " T " . 
 The design for the ships was drawn up between 1910 and 1912 . Consideration was given to equipping the new ships with triple turrets mounting the 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 in ) guns of the preceding König @-@ class battleships , but after examining the gun turrets of the Austro @-@ Hungarian dreadnoughts of the Tegetthoff class , it was determined that the triple gun turrets still had too many problems . Among these deficiencies were increased weight , reduced ammunition supply and rate of fire , and loss of fighting capability if one of the turrets was disabled . It was therefore decided to arm the new vessels with eight 38 cm guns instead of twelve 30 @.@ 5 cm guns . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Bayern and Baden were 179 @.@ 4 meters ( 588 ft 7 in ) long at the waterline , and an even 180 m ( 590 ft 7 in ) long overall . Sachsen and Württemberg were slightly longer : 181 @.@ 8 m ( 596 ft 5 in ) m at the waterline and 182 @.@ 4 m ( 598 ft 5 in ) overall . All four ships had a beam of 30 m ( 98 ft 5 in ) , and had a draft of between 9 @.@ 3 and 9 @.@ 4 m ( 30 ft 6 in and 30 ft 10 in ) . Bayern and Baden were designed to displace 28 @,@ 530 t ( 28 @,@ 080 long tons ) at a normal displacement ; at full combat load , the ships displaced up to 32 @,@ 200 t ( 31 @,@ 700 long tons ) . Württemberg and Sachsen were slightly heavier , at 28 @,@ 800 t normal and 32 @,@ 500 t fully laden . The ships were constructed with transverse and longitudinal steel frames , over which the outer hull plates were riveted . The hull was divided into 17 watertight compartments , and included a double bottom that ran for 88 percent of the length of the hull . 
 Bayern and Baden were regarded as exceptional sea boats by the German navy . Bayern and her sisters were stable and very maneuverable . The ships suffered slight speed loss in heavy seas ; with the rudders hard over , the ships lost up to 62 % speed and heeled over 7 degrees . With a metacentric height of 2 @.@ 53 m ( 8 ft 4 in ) , larger than that of their British equivalents , the vessels were stable gun platforms for the confined waters of the North Sea . 
 The ships of the Bayern class had a standard crew of 42 officers and 1 @,@ 129 enlisted men ; when serving as a squadron flagship , an additional 14 officers and 86 men were required . The vessels carried several smaller craft , including one picket boat , three barges , two launches , two yawls , and two dinghies . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Bayern and Baden were equipped with 11 coal @-@ fired Schulz @-@ Thornycroft boilers and three oil @-@ fired Schulz @-@ Thornycroft boilers in nine boiler rooms . Three sets of Parsons turbines drove three @-@ bladed screws that were 3 @.@ 87 metres ( 12 @.@ 7 ft ) in diameter . Bayern 's and Baden 's power plant was designed to run at 34 @,@ 521 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 742 kW ) at 265 revolutions per minute ; on trials the ships achieved 55 @,@ 201 shp ( 41 @,@ 163 kW ) and 55 @,@ 505 shp ( 41 @,@ 390 kW ) , respectively . Both ships were capable of a maximum speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . The first two ships were initially designed to carry 900 t ( 890 long tons ) of coal and 200 t ( 200 long tons ) of oil , though fuel bunkerage was subsequently increased to 3 @,@ 400 t ( 3 @,@ 300 long tons ) of coal and 620 t ( 610 long tons ) of oil . This enabled a range of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . At 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) , the range decreased to 4 @,@ 485 nmi ( 8 @,@ 306 km ; 5 @,@ 161 mi ) , at 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) the range fell to 3 @,@ 740 nmi ( 6 @,@ 930 km ; 4 @,@ 300 mi ) , and at 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) the ships could steam for only 2 @,@ 390 nmi ( 4 @,@ 430 km ; 2 @,@ 750 mi ) . The ships carried eight diesel generators ; these supplied each ship with a total of 2 @,@ 400 kilowatts of electrical power at 220 volts . 
 Sachsen and Württemberg were intended to be one knot faster than the earlier pair of ships . Württemberg received more powerful machinery that would have produced 47 @,@ 343 shp ( 35 @,@ 304 kW ) for a designed speed of 22 knots . On Sachsen , a MAN diesel engine producing 11 @,@ 836 bhp ( 8 @,@ 826 kW ) was installed on the center shaft , while steam turbines powered the outboard shafts . The combined power plant would have produced 53 @,@ 261 shp ( 39 @,@ 717 kW ) for a designed speed of 22 @.@ 5 knots . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Bayern @-@ class battleships were armed with a main battery of eight 38 cm ( 15 in ) SK L / 45 guns in four Drh LC / 1913 twin gun turrets . These turrets could train 150 degrees to either side of the centerline , and their guns could depress to − 8 degrees . As the Germans thought that conditions in the North Sea would dictate short @-@ range actions , the guns initially could elevate only to 16 degrees , which allowed a maximum range of 20 @,@ 400 m . The gun mountings were modified to allow elevation up to 20 degrees , increasing the range to 23 @,@ 200 m . 
 The main battery was supplied with a total of 720 shells or 90 rounds per gun . The guns had a rate of fire of around 2 @.@ 5 shells per minute . Post @-@ war tests conducted by the British Royal Navy showed that the guns on Baden could be ready to fire again 23 seconds after firing ; this was significantly faster than their British contemporaries , the Queen Elizabeth class , which took 36 seconds between salvos . The German weapons were , however , less accurate than earlier German weapons , and fired a lighter shell than the equivalent British guns . The German armor @-@ piercing shell weighed 750 kg ( 1 @,@ 653 lb ) and was driven by a 277 kg ( 610 @.@ 7 lb ) RPC / 12 propellant charge in a brass cartridge . The shells were fired at a muzzle velocity of 800 mps ( 2 @,@ 625 fps ) . Each gun was expected to fire 300 shells before replacement of the barrel was required . The guns that had been constructed for the battleships Sachsen and Württemberg were eventually used as long @-@ range , heavy siege guns on the Western Front , as coastal guns in occupied France and Belgium , and a few as railway guns ; these guns were referred to as Langer Max . 
 The ships were also armed with a secondary battery of sixteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns , each mounted in MPL C / 13 casemates in the side of the top deck . These guns were intended for defense against torpedo boats , and were supplied with a total of 2 @,@ 240 shells . The guns could engage targets out to 13 @,@ 500 m , and after improvements in 1915 , their range was extended to 16 @,@ 800 m . The guns had a sustained rate of fire of 5 to 7 rounds per minute . The shells were 45 @.@ 3 kg ( 99 @.@ 8 lb ) , and were loaded with a 13 @.@ 7 kg ( 31 @.@ 2 lb ) RPC / 12 propellant charge in a brass cartridge . The guns fired at a muzzle velocity of 835 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 740 ft / s ) . The guns were expected to fire around 1 @,@ 400 shells before they needed to be replaced . 
 Bayern and Baden were also equipped with a pair of 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) L / 45 flak guns , which were supplied with 800 rounds . The guns were emplaced in MPL C / 13 mountings , which allowed depression to − 10 degrees and elevation to 70 degrees . These guns fired 9 kg ( 19 @.@ 8 lb ) shells , and had an effective ceiling of 9 @,@ 150 m at 70 degrees . 
 As was customary on capital ships of the period , the Bayern @-@ class ships were armed with five 60 cm ( 24 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . One tube was mounted in the bow and two on each broadside . A total of 20 torpedoes were carried per ship . However , both Bayern and Baden struck mines in 1917 ; the damage incurred revealed structural weaknesses caused by the torpedo tubes ; both ships had their lateral tubes removed . The torpedoes were the H8 type , which were 8 meters ( 26 ft 3 in ) long and carried a 210 kg ( 463 lb ) Hexanite warhead . The torpedoes had a range of 6 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 550 yd ) when set at a speed of 36 knots ; at a reduced speed of 30 knots , the range increased significantly to 14 @,@ 000 m ( 15 @,@ 310 yd ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The Bayern @-@ class ships were protected with Krupp cemented steel armor , as was the standard for German warships of the period . They had an armor belt that was 350 mm ( 14 in ) thick in the central citadel of the ship , where the most important parts of the ship were located . This included the ammunition magazines and the machinery spaces . The belt was reduced in less critical areas , to 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) forward and 170 mm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) aft . The bow and stern were not protected by armor at all . A 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) -thick torpedo bulkhead ran the length of the hull , several meters behind the main belt . The main armored deck was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick in most places , though the thickness of the sections that covered the more important areas of the ship was increased to 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . 
 The forward conning tower was protected with heavy armor : the sides were 400 mm ( 16 in ) thick and the roof was 170 mm thick . The rear conning tower was less well armored ; its sides were only 170 mm thick and the roof was covered with 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) of armor plate . The main battery gun turrets were also heavily armored : the turret sides were 350 mm thick and the roofs were 200 mm thick . The 15 cm guns had 170 mm thick armor plating on the casemates ; the guns themselves had 80 mm thick shields to protect their crews from shell splinters . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The class was planned to include four ships . Bayern was built by Howaldtswerke in Kiel under construction number 590 ; she was laid down in 1913 , launched on 18 February 1915 , and completed on 15 July 1916 . Baden was built by the Schichau shipyard in Danzig , under construction number 913 . The ship was launched on 30 October 1915 and commissioned into the fleet on 14 March 1917 . Sachsen was laid down at the Germaniawerft dockyard in Kiel , under construction number 210 . She was launched on 21 November 1916 , but not completed . Sachsen was by then 9 months from completion . Württemberg was built by the AG Vulcan shipyard in Hamburg , under construction number 19 . She was launched on 20 June 1917 , but she too was not completed . At the time of cancellation , the ship was approximately 12 months from completion . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Fleet sortie of 18 – 19 August 1916 = = = 
 During the fleet sortie on 18 – 19 August 1916 , the I Scouting Group , which was the battlecruiser reconnaissance force of the High Seas Fleet and commanded by Admiral Franz von Hipper , was to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . As Moltke and Von der Tann were the only two remaining German battlecruisers still in fighting condition after the Battle of Jutland , three dreadnoughts were assigned to the unit for the operation : Bayern , and the two König @-@ class ships Markgraf and Grosser Kurfürst . Admiral Scheer and the rest of the High Seas Fleet , with 15 dreadnoughts of its own , would trail behind and provide cover . The British were aware of the German plans and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just 11 weeks after the decidedly close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 = = = Operation Albion = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to evict the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . To this end , the Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic islands of Ösel , particularly the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint Army @-@ Navy operation to capture Ösel and Moon islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , the battlecruiser Moltke , along with the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . The V Division included the four König @-@ class battleships , and was by this time augmented with Bayern . The VI Division consisted of the five Kaiser @-@ class battleships . Along with nine light cruisers , 3 torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , and were supported by over 100 aircraft and 6 zeppelins . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsesarevich , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , and several torpedo boats and gunboats . The garrison on Ösel numbered some 14 @,@ 000 men . 
 The operation began on 12 October , when Moltke , Bayern , and the Königs began firing on the Russian shore batteries at Tagga Bay . Simultaneously , the Kaisers engaged the batteries on the Sworbe peninsula ; the objective was to secure the channel between Moon and Dagö islands , which would block the only escape route of the Russian ships in the gulf . Both Grosser Kurfürst and Bayern struck mines while maneuvering into their bombardment positions ; damage to the former was minimal , and the ship remained in action . However , Bayern was severely damaged , and temporary repairs proved ineffective . The ship had to be withdrawn to Kiel for repairs ; the return trip took 19 days . 
 = = = Fleet sortie of 23 – 24 April 1918 = = = 
 In late 1917 , the High Seas Fleet began to conduct anti @-@ convoy raids with light craft in the North Sea between Britain and Norway . On 17 October , the German light cruisers Brummer and Bremse intercepted a convoy of twelve ships escorted by a pair of destroyers and destroyed it ; only three transports managed to escape . On 12 December , four German destroyers intercepted and annihilated another convoy of five ships and two escorting destroyers . This prompted Admiral David Beatty , the Commander in Chief of the Grand Fleet , to detach several battleships and battlecruisers to protect the convoys in the North Sea . This presented to Admiral Scheer the opportunity for which he had been waiting the entire war : the chance to isolate and eliminate a portion of the Grand Fleet . 
 At 05 : 00 on 23 April 1918 , the entire High Seas Fleet , including Bayern and Baden , left harbor with the intention of intercepting one of the heavily escorted convoys . Wireless radio traffic was kept to a minimum to prevent the British from learning of the operation . However , at 05 : 10 on 24 April , the battlecruiser Moltke suffered severe mechanical problems and had to be towed back to Wilhelmshaven . By 14 : 10 , the convoy had still not yet been located , and so Scheer turned the High Seas Fleet back towards German waters . In fact , there was no convoy sailing on 24 April ; German naval intelligence had miscalculated the sailing date by one day . 
 = = = Wilhelmshaven mutiny = = = 
 In October 1918 , Admiral Hipper , now the commander of the entire High Seas Fleet , planned for a final battle with the Grand Fleet . Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the Chief of the Naval Staff , approved the plan on 27 October ; the operation was set for the 30th . However , when the fleet was ordered to assemble in Wilhelmshaven on 29 October , war @-@ weary crews began to desert or openly disobey their orders . Crews aboard König , Kronprinz , and Markgraf demonstrated for peace . The crew aboard Thüringen was the first to openly mutiny ; Helgoland and Kaiserin joined as well . By the evening of the 29th , red flags of revolution flew from the masts of dozens of warships in the harbor . In spite of this , Hipper decided to hold a last meeting aboard Baden — his flagship — to discuss the operation with the senior officers of the fleet . The following morning , it was clear the mutiny was too far gone to permit a fleet action . In an attempt to suppress the revolt , he ordered one of the battle squadrons to depart for Kiel . By 5 November , red flags had been raised on every battleship in the harbor except König , though it too was commandeered by a sailors ' council on 6 November . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Following the armistice with Germany in November 1918 , the majority of the High Seas Fleet was to be interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Bayern was listed as one of the ships to be handed over , though Baden initially was not . The battlecruiser Mackensen , which the British believed to be completed , was requested instead . When it became apparent to the Allies that Mackensen was still under construction , Baden was ordered to replace it . On 21 November 1918 , the ships to be interned , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , sailed from their base in Germany for the last time . The fleet rendezvoused with the light cruiser HMS Cardiff , before meeting a massive flotilla of some 370 British , American , and French warships for the voyage to Scapa Flow . Baden arrived at Scapa Flow separately on 14 December 1918 . 
 When the ships were interned , they had their guns disabled through the removal of their breech blocks . The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . It became apparent to Reuter that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . To prevent this , he decided to scuttle his ships at the first opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers ; at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Bayern sank at 14 : 30 , but Baden was run aground by British guards ; she was the only capital ship that was not sunk . After being refloated and thoroughly examined , Baden was expended as a gunnery target , finally being sunk on 16 August 1921 to the southwest of Portsmouth . Bayern was eventually raised for scrapping on 1 September 1934 and broken up over the following year in Rosyth . 
 Both Sachsen and Württemberg were stricken from the German Navy under the terms of Article 186 of the Versailles Treaty . Sachsen was sold for scrapping in 1920 to ship breakers at the Kiel Arsenal . Württemberg was sold the following year in 1921 , and broken up in Hamburg . 
 = Colorado State Highway 74 = 
 State Highway 74 ( SH 74 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Colorado . Running 18 miles ( 29 km ) from Interstate 70 ( I @-@ 70 ) in El Rancho to SH 8 in Morrison , the highway roughly follows a hook @-@ shaped path running northwest – southeast . The section of the route north of the town of Evergreen is known as Evergreen Parkway and is a segment with a four- to six @-@ lane roadway , with the section east of Evergreen mostly two lanes . The other section is known as the Bear Creek Canyon Scenic Mountain Drive , or just Bear Creek Road , and primarily parallels Bear Creek , passing through the towns of Kittredge and Idledale . The route , which is on the outskirts of Denver , passes through several of the city 's mountain parks , including Bergen , Dedisse and Red Rocks parks . 
 An early road following the current path was established in the late 19th century for miners and loggers . As floods ravaged the road along Bear Creek through the early 20th century , measures were taken to prevent further damage . Other sites along Bear Creek , such as a Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) camp in Red Rocks Park and the Bear Creek Canyon Scenic Mountain Drive , as the section between Idledale and Morrison is called , have given the route a listing on the National Register of Historic Places . An early designation of the route number went further west than its current @-@ day designation ; that section was truncated by the late 1930s . Another eastern segment was added from Morrison east toward Denver in the 1940s , but that section too was removed . Newer improvements to the road include widening the Evergreen Parkway segment to four lanes and constructing an interchange with I @-@ 70 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SH 74 begins at an interchange with I @-@ 70 in El Rancho . Ramps from I @-@ 70 westbound branch off the freeway 's exit 252 from the north side and cross the highway southwestward . Access to SH 74 from I @-@ 70 eastbound is provided via U.S. Highway 40 ( US 40 ) a slight distance to the west . From I @-@ 70 , the roadway heads southwesterly through El Rancho , meeting an intersection with US 40 ( Swede Gulch Road ) . The route heads westward before turning southwestward into a coniferous forest setting as a four @-@ lane divided highway . The roadway turns westward where it meets County Road 23 ( CR 23 , Kerr Gulch Road ) . Evergreen Parkway passes <unk> Park to the north in the community of Hidden Valley , where the terrain is mountainous . After intersecting Bergen Parkway , which heads southwesterly toward Bergen Park , SH 74 turns to the south . The parkway meets Squaw Pass Road and crosses the Troublesome Creek before traveling along the west side of Buchanan Park . SH 74 follows the east side of Elk Meadow Open Space Park , where open grassland is dotted with occasional trees . The road narrows to two lanes and climbs steeply at milepost five . While passing Wah Keeney Park , the road turns southeastward and continues to the community of <unk> . SH 74 enters the town of Evergreen , passing by a lake of the same name along Bear Creek in Dedisse Park . Here , the route intersects CR 74 , which heads west along the Upper Bear Creek . 
 SH 74 , now known as Bear Creek Road , curves east- and northward as it winds out of town . Narrowing to two lanes , the route follows the path of Bear Creek , curving northeasterly toward Kittredge with Pence Park on the east side . In Kittredge , the route meets CR 120 ( Myers Gulch Road ) , which heads southeast toward Indian Hills . The route again meets Kerr Gulch Road , which bypasses the large curve which SH 74 took . From Kittredge , SH 74 winds eastward on the north side of Bear Creek . The roadway passes Idledale north of the Lair O the Bear Park , where it intersects Grapevine Road . East of the town , an abandoned section of SH 74 exists , which now serves as a path to private areas . The route heads into Bear Creek Canyon Park , where it curves along the creek in a more rocky terrain . SH 74 also passes through Red Rocks Park along the stream . Exiting the park , SH 74 enters Morrison , where Bear Creek Road meets SH 8 at an intersection . From here , SH 8 ( Morrison Road ) serves as the continuation of the road toward Denver . 
 The route is maintained by the Colorado Department of Transportation ( CDOT ) , who is responsible for maintaining and constructing transportation infrastructure in Colorado , including highways . As part of this role , CDOT periodically conducts surveys on their highways to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of the average daily traffic volume on a particular road . In 2009 , CDOT calculated that as few as 3 @,@ 200 vehicles used SH 74 daily near Idledale , and as many as 23 @,@ 000 vehicles used SH 74 near the interchange with I @-@ 70 as well in Evergreen . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1873 , John Evans , then a former governor of the Colorado Territory , constructed a toll road from Evergreen to Morrison via Bear Creek canyon . The early road offered access to various mining and logging resources along the creek . This road had over twenty bridges over Bear Creek , most of which were made of wood from the surrounding region . By the late 1870s , toll roads were no longer common , and the path 's maintenance responsibilities were passed to Jefferson County . 
 SH 74 passes through many of Denver 's mountain parks , including Bergen Park and Dedisse Park . Established in 1909 by Colorado governor Robert W. Speer , the system encompassed several areas west of the city , comprising the first city @-@ owned park system in the world . SH 27 , as the Bear Creek Canyon Scenic Mountain Drive was designated at the time , ran past the Denver Motor Club in Idledale in addition to newly purchased parks . During the 1910s , Denver was granted the ability to enforce laws pertaining to these parks ; a speed limit of 20 miles per hour ( 32 km / h ) was set along the roadway uphill and 15 miles per hour ( 24 km / h ) downhill . In one of the parks , Red Rocks Park near Morrison , a CCC camp was established in 1935 as part of a New Deal work relief program . The enlistees here built a large amphitheater in the park . Numbered camp SP @-@ 13 @-@ C , it is the only CCC camp left in the state . Both the camp and the section of SH 74 between Idledale and Morrison , known as the Bear Creek Canyon Scenic Mountain Drive , are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 Bear Creek was especially prone to flooding , as was seen in 1896 when Morrison was almost destroyed . On occasion , sightseers along the road were threatened by floods , such as one in 1925 where cars on the road were carried into the river . To control flooding along the creek and therefore preserve safety along the road , the Denver manager of parks sought to build a dam near Evergreen . The dam , finished three years after the flood , created Evergreen Lake . Following a September 1938 flood , crews from a federal work program built walls along the side of the creek , measuring from 7 to 34 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 to 10 @.@ 4 m ) high . The Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) , as this program was called , installed over 4 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 400 m ) of masonry from Morrison to Idledale at points where previous floods had damaged the roadway . 
 From 1923 through the early 1930s , the SH 74 designation was from Echo Lake at what is now an intersection between SH 103 and SH 5 east along Squaw Pass Road to Bergen Park . From here , it followed its current designation to Morrison . SH 74 was paved from Morrison to Evergreen using an oil surface resembling asphalt in late 1928 . This oil surface , which was approximately 1 inch ( 25 mm ) deep , prevented erosion along the roadway in the Bear Creek canyon during floods . By 1938 , the section west of Bergen Park was redesignated as SH 68 , and SH 74 was turned northward to US 40 . The east end was extended into Denver along Alameda Avenue by 1947 . This section terminated at what was then SH 87 in Denver . In 1956 , the Colorado State Highway Department opted to realign sections of SH 74 away from Bear Creek . A section of the road between Evergreen and Kittredge was resurfaced and widened the next year . By then , US 285 replaced the eastern segment , and the terminus of the route was cut back to its original and current terminus in Morrison . Construction on I @-@ 70 through the region was completed in 1972 and included an interchange at El Rancho at the northwest end of SH 74 . During the 1990s , CDOT sought to further upgrade SH 74 from I @-@ 70 to Evergreen to an expressway . Work on this project began in 1993 to improve the interchange between Evergreen Parkway and I @-@ 70 and widen the roadway to its current state , costing CDOT $ 8 million . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Jefferson County . 
 = Waffle @-@ iron filter = 
 A waffle @-@ iron filter is a type of waveguide filter used at microwave frequencies for signal filtering . It is a variation of the corrugated @-@ waveguide filter but with longitudinal slots cut through the corrugations resulting in an internal structure that has the appearance of a waffle @-@ iron . 
 Waffle @-@ iron filters are particularly suitable where both a wide passband , and a wide stopband free of spurious transmission modes , are required . They also have a high power @-@ handling capability . Applications include suppressing the harmonic output of transmitters and the design of wide @-@ band diplexers . They are also used in industrial microwave manufacturing processes to prevent the escape of microwave radiation from the microwave chamber . Filters with an analogous design are now appearing in photonics , but , due to the higher frequency , at a much smaller scale . This small size allows them to be incorporated into integrated circuits . 
 Design techniques for waffle @-@ iron filters include image @-@ parameter methods , network synthesis methods and numerical analysis methods . Network synthesis is a more advanced method than image @-@ parameter techniques but the latter can still be used where a simple repeated @-@ pattern design is desired . Numerical methods can be used to analyse either design . 
 = = Description = = 
 The waffle @-@ iron filter was invented by Seymour B. Cohn at Stanford Research Institute in 1957 . The basis for the filter is the corrugated @-@ waveguide filter . This consists of a series of ridges , or corrugations , across the width of the filter . There are corrugations inside the waveguide on both the top and bottom surfaces . The rising and descending ridges are aligned with each other but do not meet in the middle ; there is a gap in between . In the waffle @-@ iron filter there are , in addition , slots cut through the ridges down the length of the waveguide . This leaves a matrix of square islands , or teeth , on the top and bottom surfaces . 
 Waffle @-@ iron filters are , in essence , low @-@ pass filters but like all waveguide devices will not transmit anything below the waveguide cutoff frequency . Waffle @-@ iron filters are used where both a wide passband with low insertion loss , and a wide ( sometimes very wide ) stopband are needed . They are particularly good where suppression of spurious modes is required . 
 Waffle @-@ iron filters have been built with a 10 GHz wide stopband and 60 dB attenuation . Even wider stopbands are possible with a relaxed attenuation specification . 
 = = Operation = = 
 One of the performance issues addressed by the waffle @-@ iron filter is that in many waveguide filters the attenuation is dependent on the transmission modes of the incident signal and some filters can be quite bad at suppressing spurious modes which may be contained in this signal . For instance , with the corrugated waveguide filter , on which the waffle @-@ iron filter is based , attenuation of TEn0 modes in the stopband is strongly dependent on the mode number . This is not the case with the waffle @-@ iron filter which attenuates all TEn0 modes nearly equally up to a certain frequency . The limit is the frequency at which the distance between the metal teeth is greater than half the free @-@ space wavelength of the signal . The reason for the waffle @-@ iron design 's good performance in this respect is that the distance between the teeth is the same in both the longitudinal and transverse directions and nearly the same in all directions in between . This makes the waffle @-@ iron nearly isotropic to TEM waves in all these directions . Since any TEn0 mode wave can be decomposed into two TEM mode waves travelling in different diagonal directions , all TEn0 modes are affected nearly equally . 
 Incident signals containing TM modes above a certain frequency can generate modes which propagate along the longitudinal slots with the slots themselves acting as waveguides . The point at which this can start to happen is the frequency at which the height of the slot is greater than half the free @-@ space wavelength of the signal . If this frequency is above the required stopband of the filter the effect is of no consequence . Otherwise , steps outside the filter are needed to suppress these modes and can be incorporated into the end @-@ matching sections . 
 Other design criteria will usually result in a filter which does not match the waveguides to which it is to be connected at its input and output . There are many structures that can be used for matching but a useful one here is the stepped @-@ impedance transformer which has the added advantage of helping to suppress the unwanted slot modes . 
 = = Applications = = 
 A common application of waffle @-@ iron filters is to remove the harmonics of transmitters , such as high power radar , before applying to the antenna . Legislation in most jurisdictions requires strict limits on out @-@ of @-@ band transmissions since these can cause serious interference with other stations . This is an application that usually requires a very wide stopband , a characteristic of waffle @-@ iron filters . For instance , to remove all harmonics up to the fifth it is necessary for a low @-@ pass filter to have a stopband greater than three times the passband . 
 The wide @-@ band nature of waffle @-@ iron filters finds applications in satellite communications . A satellite earth station may have multiple diplexers connected to a multi @-@ band antenna feeder . Each diplexer delivers a wide @-@ band signal in a different band and it is essential that its signal does not contain out @-@ of @-@ band components , particularly harmonics . These can seriously interfere with , or even stop entirely , communication in another band . The diplexer must therefore have a stopband that is even wider than the passband . For this reason , as well as the other advantages of waffle @-@ irons , these diplexers are commonly made to a waffle @-@ iron design . 
 Waffle @-@ iron filters are used in industrial microwave processes . The many industrial applications of microwave energy include drying of food products and industrial films , heating , such as in polyurethane foam production , melting , rendering , sterilising , and <unk> . In high @-@ volume production the process is continuous necessitating openings to the microwave chamber where the product can be fed in and exit . Steps need to be taken to prevent unsafe levels of microwave radiation escaping from these apertures which are often large to accommodate the product . It is usual to line the product feed ducts with microwave absorbent material for this purpose . However , the absorbed microwaves have a heating effect and this can be severe enough to damage the absorbent material . Waffle @-@ iron filters are a useful alternative because the product can be passed between the filter 's teeth . An ideal filter will reflect all the unwanted radiation rather than absorbing it so will not suffer from overheating . This is an example of a filter being used in a choke application . In some processes both techniques are used simultaneously . The waffle @-@ iron is placed nearest the microwave chamber to first reduce the energy to a level which will not cause the absorbent lining to overheat . The absorbent lining then removes the small residue . 
 = = Design = = 
 The number of teeth , their size , and the gap between them are all design parameters that can be used to control the design of the filter . As an example , a filter with a 3 : 1 stopband might have five teeth across the width of the waveguide . The number of rows of teeth down the length of the waveguide primarily affects the stopband attenuation . The more rows of teeth , the better the attenuation , each row being equivalent to a lumped element circuit filter section . A filter with ten rows of teeth has a theoretical stopband rejection of around 80 dB and one with seven rows around 60 dB . 
 The earliest waffle @-@ iron filters were designed with the image parameter method of filter design . Cohn 's original data for the corrugated filter could also be applied to the waffle @-@ iron with only a small adjustment of one parameter . An alternative approach to using Cohn 's empirical data , but still an image parameter design , is due to <unk> who used a waveguide T @-@ junction equivalent circuit to represent corrugations and this method was later extended by others to waffle @-@ irons . 
 One of the main drawbacks of the image parameter design method in this , as in other , filters is that the impedance match at the terminations is not good . This usually requires that impedance matching sections are provided at the input and output . These usually take the form of multi @-@ section stepped impedance transformers . These add considerably to the overall length of the filter . A small improvement to matching can be had by starting and ending the filter on a half @-@ space instead of a full tooth or space . The lumped circuit equivalent of this is T @-@ half @-@ sections terminating the filter at either end . Starting and ending on a half @-@ tooth instead of a half space is the equivalent of Π @-@ half @-@ sections . 
 Direct synthesis avoids many of the problems of the image parameter method . Not only does it take better account of the terminal impedances but the designer has additional degrees of freedom allowing improved matching . The size and gaps of the teeth are tapered in this method of design . That is , the teeth can be different sizes according to their position in the filter , compared with an image design where all sections are identical . With this approach , the original specification for passband and stopband can be kept while simultaneously improving the impedance matching . The stepped impedance transformers can be dispensed with , or at least significantly reduced in size . 
 Synthesis methods allow better control of the precise filter response . A common response function used by filter designers is the Chebyshev filter which trades steepness of the transition band for passband ripple . However the Chebyshev response is not always the best choice for waffle @-@ iron filters . Low @-@ pass waveguide filters do not pass frequencies all the way down to zero because of the waveguide cutoff effect . A better choice is the <unk> @-@ Zolotarev filter . This filter is based on Zolotarev polynomials ( which include the Chebyshev polynomials as a special case ) discovered by Yegor Ivanovich Zolotarev . The Zolotarev response has a stopband at low frequency , the cutoff of which can be controlled by the designer so it is not detrimental in a waveguide filter . The advantage of the Zolotarev response is that it results in a filter with a better impedance match to the connecting waveguides compared to the Chebyshev filter or image @-@ parameter filters . 
 Another design approach , particularly suitable for CAD because it is a numerical method , is to decompose the filter into a number of finite elements . These elements are a large number of simple steps and ridges . A number of methods are available to analyse the individual elements . The mode matching technique expands the field equations of the element into a series of eigenfunctions and then for each mode matches the field at the interface between elements . The <unk> method expands the field equations into polynomial functions such as <unk> polynomials or Chebyshev polynomials . These methods can be mixed according to what is convenient for a particular type of element . Whichever analysis method is used , the final output needed is the scattering parameters matrix for each element . The overall filter response is then found from the combined scattering matrix of all the individual element matrices . This method is analytic rather than synthetic , that is , a trial design must first exist in order to be analysed unlike synthesis methods where the starting point is a prescribed transfer function from which a design is synthesised . 
 <unk> modes should not , in theory , be excited in the waffle @-@ iron filter because of its vertical symmetry about the centre @-@ line . However , in practice they can be caused by poorly mating waveguide flanges or misaligned teeth . These spurious modes can be suppressed by fitting thin wires across the width of the filter in the space between the teeth on the vertical centre @-@ line of the waveguide . This can be a better solution than over @-@ engineering the components to high precision and results in a more robust design . 
 = = Multiple unit filters = = 
 Very wide stopbands can be achieved by cascading several waffle @-@ iron filter units together . Each unit is designed for a stopband in different , but overlapping , ranges . The filter with the highest frequency stopband has the smallest , and greatest number , of teeth . The units are connected together with λ / 4 impedance transformer sections of waveguide in order of progressively higher frequency operation . Since the impedance transformers are operating at different frequencies the ones connected to the units with smallest teeth are shorter than those connected to units with larger teeth . Matthaei gives an example of a three unit waffle @-@ iron filter designed to stop all harmonics of the passband from the second to the tenth – a combined stopband of 2 @.@ 2 GHz to 13 @.@ 7 GHz with a rejection of 60 dB . 
 Using network synthesis design techniques the need for multiple units can be reduced or eliminated . If tapering of the teeth is allowed , a two @-@ unit design can often be reduced to a single unit with the same wide stopband . This approach can halve the length of the complete filter . 
 = = High power = = 
 At high power , arcing can occur at the corners of the filter teeth due to strong electric fields being present at sharp corners . This limits the power @-@ handling capability of the filter . The effect can be mitigated by rounding the edges of the teeth . Completely circular teeth are best of all for power handling . Circular teeth will handle about 1 @.@ 4 times the power capability of square teeth without arcing . For instance Matthaei describes a 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 64 GHz passband filter with rounded teeth and a wide stopband with a power @-@ handling capability of 1 @.@ 4 MW . A similar filter with circular teeth , on the other hand , can handle 2 MW . Using power dividers to connect filters in parallel and then combining their outputs can provide even greater power handling . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Filter structures that are analogous to the waffle @-@ iron filter are used in photonics but operate at a much higher frequency and are much smaller than those used in electronics . Like the waffle @-@ iron , these structures have good suppression of unwanted transmission modes . A filter operating in the 0 @.@ 1 to 4 @.@ 0 THz band has been built using parallel @-@ plate waveguide ( PPWG ) technology with 50 dB of rejection in the stopband . The filter was constructed of two plates of highly polished aluminium spaced 100 μm apart . The teeth consisted of gold @-@ sputtered aluminium cylinders on a silicon die . In this design it is not convenient to provide a gap through the centre of the teeth as is done in the microwave version . Instead , the air gap is provided between the top of the teeth and one of the PPWG plates . 
 These filters can be made using the standard semiconductor industry photolithography manufacturing techniques . Consequently , they are suitable for incorporating into on @-@ chip integrated circuits , as is PPWG technology in general . 
 = Ars Conjectandi = 
 Ars Conjectandi ( Latin for " The Art of <unk> " ) is a book on combinatorics and mathematical probability written by Jacob Bernoulli and published in 1713 , eight years after his death , by his nephew , Niklaus Bernoulli . The seminal work consolidated , apart from many combinatorial topics , many central ideas in probability theory , such as the very first version of the law of large numbers : indeed , it is widely regarded as the founding work of that subject . It also addressed problems that today are classified in the twelvefold way and added to the subjects ; consequently , it has been dubbed an important historical landmark in not only probability but all combinatorics by a plethora of mathematical historians . The importance of this early work had a large impact on both contemporary and later mathematicians ; for example , Abraham de Moivre . 
 Bernoulli wrote the text between 1684 and 1689 , including the work of mathematicians such as Christiaan Huygens , Gerolamo Cardano , Pierre de Fermat , and Blaise Pascal . He incorporated fundamental combinatorial topics such as his theory of permutations and combinations ( the aforementioned problems from the twelvefold way ) as well as those more distantly connected to the burgeoning subject : the derivation and properties of the eponymous Bernoulli numbers , for instance . Core topics from probability , such as expected value , were also a significant portion of this important work . 
 = = Background = = 
 In Europe , the subject of probability was first formally developed in the 16th century with the work of Gerolamo Cardano , whose interest in the branch of mathematics was largely due to his habit of gambling . He formalized what is now called the classical definition of probability : if an event has a possible outcomes and we select any b of those such that b ≤ a , the probability of any of the b occurring is <formula> . However , his actual influence on mathematical scene was not great ; he wrote only one light tome on the subject in 1525 titled Liber de ludo aleae ( Book on Games of Chance ) , which was published posthumously in 1663 . 
 The date which historians cite as the beginning of the development of modern probability theory is 1654 , when two of the most well @-@ known mathematicians of the time , Blaise Pascal and Pierre de Fermat , began a correspondence discussing the subject . The two initiated the communication because earlier that year , a gambler from Paris named Antoine <unk> had sent Pascal and other mathematicians several questions on the practical applications of some of these theories ; in particular he posed the problem of points , concerning a theoretical two @-@ player game in which a prize must be divided between the players due to external circumstances halting the game . The fruits of Pascal and Fermat 's correspondence interested other mathematicians , including Christiaan Huygens , whose De <unk> in aleae ludo ( Calculations in Games of Chance ) appeared in 1657 as the final chapter of Van <unk> 's <unk> <unk> . In 1665 Pascal posthumously published his results on the eponymous Pascal 's triangle , an important combinatorial concept . He referred to the triangle in his work Traité du triangle <unk> ( Traits of the Arithmetic Triangle ) as the " arithmetic triangle " . 
 In 1662 , the book La <unk> ou l ’ Art de <unk> was published anonymously in Paris . The authors presumably were Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole , two leading <unk> , who worked together with Blaise Pascal . The Latin title of this book is Ars <unk> , which was a successful book on logic of the time . The Ars <unk> consists of four books , with the fourth one dealing with decision @-@ making under uncertainty by considering the analogy to gambling and introducing explicitly the concept of a quantified probability . 
 In the field of statistics and applied probability , John Graunt published Natural and Political Observations Made upon the Bills of Mortality also in 1662 , initiating the discipline of demography . This work , among other things , gave a statistical estimate of the population of London , produced the first life table , gave probabilities of survival of different age groups , examined the different causes of death , noting that the annual rate of suicide and accident is constant , and commented on the level and stability of sex ratio . The usefulness and interpretation of Graunt 's tables were discussed in a series of correspondences by brothers Ludwig and Christiaan Huygens in 1667 , where they realized the difference between mean and median estimates and Christian even interpolated Graunt 's life table by a smooth curve , creating the first continuous probability distribution ; but their correspondences were not published . Later , Johan de Witt , the then prime minister of the Dutch Republic , published similar material in his 1671 work <unk> van <unk> @-@ <unk> ( A Treatise on Life <unk> ) , which used statistical concepts to determine life expectancy for practical political purposes ; a demonstration of the fact that this sapling branch of mathematics had significant pragmatic applications . De Witt 's work was not widely distributed beyond the Dutch Republic , perhaps due to his fall from power and execution by mob in 1672 . Apart from the practical contributions of these two work , they also exposed a fundamental idea that probability can be assigned to events that do not have inherent physical symmetry , such as the chances of dying at certain age , unlike say the rolling of a dice or flipping of a coin , simply by counting the frequency of occurrence . Thus probability could be more than mere combinatorics . 
 = = Development of Ars Conjectandi = = 
 In the wake of all these pioneers , Bernoulli produced much of the results contained in Ars Conjectandi between 1684 and 1689 , which he recorded in his diary Meditationes . When he began the work in 1684 at the age of 30 , while intrigued by combinatorial and probabilistic problems , Bernoulli had not yet read Pascal 's work on the " arithmetic triangle " nor de Witt 's work on the applications of probability theory : he had earlier requested a copy of the latter from his acquaintance Gottfried Leibniz , but Leibniz failed to provide it . The latter , however , did manage to provide Pascal 's and <unk> 's work , and thus it is largely upon these foundations that Ars Conjectandi is constructed . Apart from these works , Bernoulli certainly possessed or at least knew the contents from secondary sources of the La <unk> ou l ’ Art de <unk> as well as Graunt 's Bills of Mortality , as he makes explicit reference to these two works . 
 Bernoulli ’ s progress over time can be pursued by means of the Meditationes . Three working periods with respect to his " discovery " can be distinguished by aims and times . The first period , which lasts from 1684 to 1685 , is devoted to the study of the problems regarding the games of chance posed by Christiaan Huygens ; during the second period ( 1685 @-@ 1686 ) the investigations are extended to cover processes where the probabilities are not known a priori , but have to be determined a posteriori . Finally , in the last period ( 1687 @-@ 1689 ) , the problem of measuring the probabilities is solved . 
 Before the publication of his Ars Conjectandi , Bernoulli had produced a number of treaties related to probability : 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> et <unk> , Basel , 1685 . 
 In the Journal des <unk> 1685 ( <unk> ) , p . 314 there appear two problems concerning the probability each of two players may have of winning in a game of dice . Solutions were published in the Acta <unk> 1690 ( May ) , pp. 219 – 223 in the article Quaestiones <unk> de <unk> , cum <unk> <unk> de <unk> <unk> . In addition , Leibniz himself published a solution in the same journal on pages 387 @-@ 390 . 
 Theses <unk> de <unk> et <unk> <unk> , a public lecture delivered at Basel , 12 February 1686 . Theses XXXI to XL are related to the theory of probability . 
 De Arte <unk> Oratio <unk> , 1692 . 
 The Letter à un amy sur les parties du jeu de paume , that is , a letter to a friend on sets in the game of Tennis , published with the Ars Conjectandi in 1713 . 
 Between 1703 to 1705 , Leibniz corresponded with Jakob after learning about his discoveries in probability from his brother Johann . Leibniz managed to provide thoughtful criticisms on Bernoulli 's law of large number , but failed to provide Bernoulli with de Witt 's work on annuities that he so desired . From the outset , Bernoulli wished for his work to demonstrate that combinatorics and probability theory would have numerous real @-@ world applications in all facets of society — in the line of Graunt 's and de Witt 's work — and would serve as a rigorous method of logical reasoning under insufficient evidence , as used in courtrooms and in moral judgements . It was also hoped that the theory of probability could provide comprehensive and consistent method of reasoning , where ordinary reasoning might be overwhelmed by the complexity of the situation . Thus the title Ars Conjectandi was chosen : a link to the concept of ars <unk> from scholasticism , which provided the symbolic link to pragmatism he desired and also as an extension of the prior Ars <unk> . 
 In Bernoulli 's own words , the " art of conjecture " is defined in Chapter II of Part IV of his Ars Conjectandi as : 
 The art of measuring , as precisely as possible , probabilities of things , with the goal that we would be able always to choose or follow in our judgments and actions that course , which will have been determined to be better , more satisfactory , safer or more advantageous . 
 The development of the book was terminated by Bernoulli 's death in 1705 ; thus the book is essentially incomplete when compared with Bernoulli 's original vision . The quarrel with his younger brother Johann , who was the most competent person who could have fulfilled Jacob 's project , prevented Johann to get hold of the manuscript . Jacob 's own children were not mathematicians and were not up to the task of editing and publishing the manuscript . Finally Jacob 's nephew Niklaus , 7 years after Jacob 's death in 1705 , managed to publish the manuscript in 1713 . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Bernoulli 's work , originally published in Latin is divided into four parts . It covers most notably his theory of permutations and combinations ; the standard foundations of combinatorics today and subsets of the foundational problems today known as the twelvefold way . It also discusses the motivation and applications of a sequence of numbers more closely related to number theory than probability ; these Bernoulli numbers bear his name today , and are one of his more notable achievements . 
 The first part is an in @-@ depth expository on Huygens ' De <unk> in aleae ludo . Bernoulli provides in this section solutions to the five problems Huygens posed at the end of his work . He particularly develops Huygens ' concept of expected value — the weighted average of all possible outcomes of an event . Huygens had developed the following formula : 
 <formula> 
 In this formula , E is the expected value , pi are the probabilities of attaining each value , and ai are the attainable values . Bernoulli normalizes the expected value by assuming that pi are the probabilities of all the disjoint outcomes of the value , hence implying that p0 + p1 + ... + pn = 1 . Another key theory developed in this part is the probability of achieving at least a certain number of successes from a number of binary events , today named Bernoulli trials , given that the probability of success in each event was the same . Bernoulli shows through mathematical induction that given a the number of favorable outcomes in each event , b the number of total outcomes in each event , d the desired number of successful outcomes , and e the number of events , the probability of at least d successes is 
 <formula> 
 The first part concludes with what is now known as the Bernoulli distribution . 
 The second part expands on enumerative combinatorics , or the systematic numeration of objects . It was in this part that two of the most important of the twelvefold ways — the permutations and combinations that would form the basis of the subject — were fleshed out , though they had been introduced earlier for the purposes of probability theory . He gives the first non @-@ inductive proof of the binomial expansion for integer exponent using combinatorial arguments . On a note more distantly related to combinatorics , the second section also discusses the general formula for sums of integer powers ; the free coefficients of this formula are therefore called the Bernoulli numbers , which influenced Abraham de Moivre 's work later , and which have proven to have numerous applications in number theory . 
 In the third part , Bernoulli applies the probability techniques from the first section to the common chance games played with playing cards or dice . Interestingly , he does not feel the necessity to describe the rules and objectives of the card games he analyzes . He presents probability problems related to these games and , once a method had been established , posed generalizations . For example , a problem involving the expected number of " court cards " — jack , queen , and king — one would pick in a five @-@ card hand from a standard deck of 52 cards containing 12 court cards could be generalized to a deck with a cards that contained b court cards , and a c @-@ card hand . 
 The fourth section continues the trend of practical applications by discussing applications of probability to <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , or to personal , judicial , and financial decisions . In this section , Bernoulli differs from the school of thought known as <unk> , which defined probability in an empirical sense . As a counter , he produces a result resembling the law of large numbers , which he describes as predicting that the results of observation would approach theoretical probability as more trials were held — in contrast , frequents defined probability in terms of the former . Bernoulli was very proud of this result , referring to it as his " golden theorem " , and remarked that it was " a problem in which I ’ ve engaged myself for twenty years " . This early version of the law is known today as either Bernoulli 's theorem or the weak law of large numbers , as it is less rigorous and general than the modern version . 
 After these four primary expository sections , almost as an afterthought , Bernoulli appended to Ars Conjectandi a tract on calculus , which concerned infinite series . It was a reprint of five dissertations he had published between 1686 and 1704 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ars Conjectandi is considered a landmark work in combinatorics and the founding work of mathematical probability . Among others , an anthology of great mathematical writings published by Elsevier and edited by historian Ivor Grattan @-@ Guinness describes the studies set out in the work " [ occupying ] mathematicians throughout 18th and 19th centuries " — an influence lasting three centuries . Statistician Anthony Edwards praised not only the book 's groundbreaking content , writing that it demonstrated Bernoulli 's " thorough familiarity with the many facets [ of combinatorics ] , " but its form : " [ Ars Conjectandi ] is a very well @-@ written book , excellently constructed . " Perhaps most recently , notable popular mathematical historian and topologist William Dunham called the paper " the next milestone of probability theory [ after the work of Cardano ] " as well as " Jakob Bernoulli 's masterpiece " . It greatly aided what Dunham describes as " Bernoulli 's long @-@ established reputation " . 
 Bernoulli 's work influenced many contemporary and subsequent mathematicians . Even the afterthought @-@ like tract on calculus has been quoted frequently ; most notably by the Scottish mathematician Colin Maclaurin . Jacob 's program of applying his art of conjecture to the matters of practical life , which was terminated by his death in 1705 , was continued by his nephew Nicolaus Bernoulli , after having taken parts verbatim out of Ars Conjectandi , for his own dissertation entitled De Usu Artis Conjectandi in Jure which was published already in 1709 . Nicolas finally edited and assisted in the publication of Ars <unk> in 1713 . Later Nicolaus also edited Jacob Bernoulli 's complete works and supplemented it with results taken from Jacob 's diary . 
 Pierre <unk> de Montmort , in collaboration with Nicolaus Bernoulli , wrote a book on probability Essay d <unk> sur les <unk> de hazard which appeared in 1708 , which can be seen as an extension of the Part III of Ars Conjectandi which applies combinatorics and probability to analyze games of chance commonly played at that time . Abraham de Moivre also wrote extensively on the subject in De <unk> <unk> : Seu de <unk> <unk> in <unk> a <unk> <unk> <unk> of 1711 and its extension The Doctrine of Chances or , a Method of Calculating the Probability of Events in Play of 1718 . De Moivre 's most notable achievement in probability was the discovery of the first instance of central limit theorem , by which he was able to approximate the binomial distribution with the normal distribution . To achieve this De Moivre developed an asymptotic sequence for the factorial function — - which we now refer to as Stirling 's approximation — - and Bernoulli 's formula for the sum of powers of numbers . Both Montmort and de Moivre adopted the term probability from Jacob Bernoulli , which had not been used in all the previous publications on gambling , and both their works were enormously popular . 
 The refinement of Bernoulli 's Golden Theorem , regarding the convergence of theoretical probability and empirical probability , was taken up by many notable later day mathematicians like De Moivre , Laplace , Poisson , Chebyshev , Markov , Borel , <unk> , Kolmogorov and <unk> . The complete proof of the Law of Large Numbers for the arbitrary random variables was finally provided during first half of 20th century . 
 A significant indirect influence was Thomas Simpson , who achieved a result that closely resembled de Moivre 's . According to Simpsons ' work 's preface , his own work depended greatly on de Moivre 's ; the latter in fact described Simpson 's work as an abridged version of his own . Finally , Thomas Bayes wrote an essay discussing theological implications of de Moivre 's results : his solution to a problem , namely that of determining the probability of an event by its relative frequency , was taken as a proof for the existence of God by Bayes . Finally in 1812 , Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace published his Théorie analytique des <unk> in which he consolidated and laid down many fundamental results in probability and statistics such as the moment generating function , method of least squares , inductive probability , and hypothesis testing , thus completing the final phase in the development of classical probability . Indeed , in light of all this , there is good reason Bernoulli 's work is hailed as such a seminal event ; not only did his various influences , direct and indirect , set the mathematical study of combinatorics spinning , but even theology was impacted . 
 = Dolph Lundgren = 
 Dolph Lundgren ( born Hans Lundgren ; 3 November 1957 ) is a Swedish actor , director , martial artist , screenwriter and producer . 
 = = Career = = 
 Lundgren received a degree in chemistry from Washington State University , a degree in chemical engineering from the Royal Institute of Technology in the early 1980s , and a master 's degree in chemical engineering from the University of Sydney in 1982 . He holds the rank of 3rd dan black belt in Kyokushin karate and was European champion in 1980 and 1981 . While in Sydney , he became a bodyguard for Jamaican singer Grace Jones and began a relationship with her . They moved together to New York City , where , after a short stint as a model and bouncer at the Manhattan nightclub the Limelight , Jones got him a small debut role as a KGB henchman in the James Bond film A View to a Kill . 
 Lundgren 's breakthrough came when he starred in Rocky IV in 1985 as the imposing Russian boxer Ivan Drago . Since then , he has starred in more than 40 films , almost all of them in the action genre . He portrayed He @-@ Man in the 1987 science fantasy film Masters of the Universe and Frank Castle in the 1989 film The Punisher . In the early 1990s , he also appeared in films such as Dark Angel ( 1990 ) , Universal Soldier ( 1992 ) , Joshua Tree ( 1993 ) , Johnny Mnemonic ( 1995 ) , and Blackjack ( 1998 ) . In 2004 , he directed his first film , The Defender , and subsequently directed The Mechanik ( 2005 ) , Missionary Man ( 2007 ) , Command Performance ( 2009 ) , and Icarus ( 2010 ) , also starring in the latter . 
 After a long spell performing in direct @-@ to @-@ video films since 1995 , Lundgren returned to Hollywood in 2010 with the role of Gunner Jensen in The Expendables , alongside Stallone and an all @-@ action star cast . He reprised his role in The Expendables 2 ( 2012 ) and The Expendables 3 ( 2014 ) . Also in 2014 , he co @-@ starred in Skin Trade , an action thriller about human trafficking . The film marks his third collaboration with Cary @-@ Hiroyuki Tagawa , the previous two being Showdown in Little Tokyo ( 1991 ) and Bridge of Dragons ( 1999 ) . He is due to reprise his role as Gunner Jensen in The Expendables 4 ( 2017 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Hans Lundgren was born in 1957 in Stockholm to Sigrid Birgitta ( née <unk> ) , a language teacher , and Karl Johan Hugo Lundgren , an engineer and economist for the Swedish government . He lived in Stockholm until the age of 13 , when he moved to his grandparents ' home in Nyland , Ångermanland . Some sources wrongly state 1959 as his year of birth , but Lundgren himself has confirmed it to be 1957 . He has two sisters and an older brother . Lundgren was raised in the Lutheran church . Lundgren claims his father was physically abusive and vented his frustration on his wife and eldest son . He has stated that , during his tirades , his father would call him a " loser " , which motivated him later as he grew more ambitious to prove himself . But he also said , " I still love my father , no matter what happened . There are many things about him I still admire . As a child , I was probably too much like him , very stubborn — perhaps that 's what he couldn 't deal with . " He cites his troubled relationship with his father as the reason he developed a desire to participate in heavy contact sports such as boxing and karate . 
 Lundgren has said that as a child he was insecure and suffered from allergies . He even claimed to have been a runt . As a teenager , he grew up with his grandparents in the community of Nyland , north of <unk> . He showed a keen interest in drumming and had aspirations to become a rock star . At age seven , he tried judo and <unk> @-@ ryū . He took up Kyokushin karate at the age of 10 , and began training with weights as a teenager . Lundgren is a keen football fan . He supported Everton F.C. when he lived in Europe , but developed more of an interest in international football tournaments ( such as the European Championships and the FIFA World Cup ) after moving to Los Angeles . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Lundgren stated that " My dad always told me that if I wanted to make something special with my life , I had to go to America . " After graduating from high school with straight As , he spent some time in the United States in the 1970s on various academic scholarships , studying chemistry at Washington State University and Clemson University . He received a degree in Chemistry from Washington State University , following in the footsteps of his father and older brother , then served his mandatory one year in the Swedish Marine Corps at the Amphibious Ranger School . In the late 1970s , he enrolled at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm and graduated with a degree in chemical engineering . 
 Amidst his years of studying , Lundgren honed his karate skills by training hard in the dojo for five years , attaining the rank of 2nd dan black belt in Kyokushin in 1978 . He captained the Swedish Kyokushin karate team , and was a formidable challenger at the 1979 World Open Tournament ( arranged by the Kyokushin Karate Organization ) when he was only a green belt . He won the European championships in 1980 and 1981 , and a heavyweight tournament in Australia in 1982 . Dolph continued training kyokushin karate after leaving his tournament career , when his new career allowed , and eventually graded to 3rd dan in July 1998 , in the <unk> organization of Kyokushin karate . The formal grading took place in Stockholms kyokushin karate Gym , in Stockholm , Sweden . Lundgren is often seen on <unk> tournament events , doing karate exhibitions during breaks . 
 In 1982 , Lundgren graduated with a master 's degree in chemical engineering from the University of Sydney . During his time in Sydney , he earned a living as a bouncer in a nightclub in the renowned King 's Cross area . He was awarded a Fulbright Scholarship to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1983 . However , while preparing for the move to Boston , he was spotted in the nightclub he worked at in Sydney and was hired by Grace Jones as a bodyguard , and the two became lovers . Their relationship developed dramatically , and he moved with her to New York City . 
 = = = New York City = = = 
 While living with Grace Jones in her New York City apartment , Lundgren dabbled in modeling at the Zoli Agency but was described as " a bit too tall and muscular for a model 's size 40 " . He earned a living as a bouncer at the Manhattan nightclub The Limelight ; housed in a former Episcopal Church of the Holy Communion , working with Chazz Palminteri . 
 In the daytime , he studied drama at the Warren Robertson Theatre Workshop and has said that " my time in New York City opened up my adolescent Swedish eyes to a multitude of different people and lifestyles , mostly in the arts . I hung out with Andy Warhol , Keith Haring , Iman and Steve Rubell , danced at Studio 54 , and studied acting with Andie MacDowell and Tom Hulce . " 
 Standing 6 ' 5 " ( 195 cm ) , with a heavily muscular frame and distinctive looks , he stood out , and was told by friends that he could make it in movies . He would later quit studying at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology after two weeks to pursue acting . 
 = = Film career = = 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 On set of the James Bond film A View to a Kill , Jones suggested that he try out for a part in the film which led to his feature film debut playing the very minor role of a suited KGB henchman named Venz . In the film , Dolph is seen briefly in the scene in which the KGB 's General Gogol ( Walter Gotell ) confronts Max Zorin ( Christopher Walken ) about leaving the KGB at a racing ground and ends in a minor brawl in which Lundgren 's character Venz points a gun at Zorin . Roger Moore , in his last performance as James Bond , once memorably said " Dolph is larger than Denmark " . Lundgren found the entertainment business more attractive and rewarding than chemical engineering so he decided to pursue a career in acting despite having no formal training . Upon learning that Sylvester Stallone was on the lookout for an imposing fighter to play Ivan Drago in Rocky IV ( 1985 ) , Lundgren sent off videos and pictures of himself to a distant contact of Stallone , which eventually got through to him . Lundgren tried out for the role , but as he stated himself , he was initially turned down for the role because he was too tall . 
 However , he eventually beat 5 @,@ 000 other hopefuls to land his breakout role opposite Stallone , Carl Weathers and Brigitte Nielsen . To improve his physique and athletic abilities for the role of Drago , he trained intensely in bodybuilding and boxing for five months before the film was shot . Lundgren said , " We trained six days a week — weights in the morning for about an hour , then boxing in the afternoon . We did a split of chest and back one day and then shoulders , legs , and arms the next . We boxed for an hour and a half , practiced the fight choreography , and did bag work and abs . " He weighed 235 pounds ( 107 kg ) – 245 pounds ( 111 kg ) during the filming , but in the film he was billed at 261 pounds ( 118 kg ) ; one publisher said of Drago , " He 's a hulking 261 pounds of merciless fighting machine , the best that Soviet science & medicine can create " . His lines " If he dies , he dies " and " I must break you " are amongst the best known of the Rocky series and have been cited in popular culture . 
 Sylvester Stallone said in an interview : " During [ the filming of ] Rocky IV , Dolph had hit me so hard I had swelling around the heart and had to stay in intensive care at St. John 's Hospital for four days . " Lundgren later fought in a real boxing match against former UFC fighter Oleg <unk> , and lost via decision . Lundgren has highlighted the premiere of Rocky IV at Westwood Movie Theatre as the moment which changed his life , remarking , " I walked in to a Westwood movie theater as Grace Jones ' boyfriend and walked out ninety minutes later as the movie star Dolph Lundgren . I was shell @-@ shocked for years from the mind @-@ boggling and daunting experience of being a student @-@ athlete from tiny Sweden suddenly having to live up a new action @-@ star persona . " 
 Lundgren received his first lead role as the mighty He @-@ Man in Masters of the Universe ( 1987 ) , based on the popular children 's toyline and cartoon . He starred alongside Frank Langella , Meg Foster , Chelsea Field , Billy Barty and Courteney Cox . Lundgren weighed his all time heaviest during the filming at 250 pounds ( 110 kg ) . The film was a critical failure and viewed as far too violent for a family picture . It is referred to as a " flop " by Variety magazine , and has a 13 % " rotten " rating at Rotten Tomatoes . Lundgren was criticized for being too wooden as a leading man , and it was dismissed as " a glossy fantasy starring monosyllabic Dolph Lundgren . " Citing the reason Lundgren would never successfully make it as a top leading actor in Hollywood , one author said , " Lundgren is limited by his size and dead pan delivery : though often compared to Arnold , he has less range . " Lundgren released a workout video on VHS in 1987 called Maximum Potential . 
 Lundgren next starred in Joseph Zito 's Red Scorpion in 1989 , opposite M. Emmet Walsh , Al White , T. P. McKenna and Carmen <unk> . The plot centers on Lundgren 's character Nikolai , a Soviet <unk> @-@ trained KGB agent who is sent to an African country where Soviet , Czechoslovakia and Cuban forces are helping the government fight an anti @-@ communist rebel movement . Nikolai is ordered to assassinate the movement 's leader , but eventually turns against his government by switching sides . The film was partly shot in Namibia and it was claimed that Grace Jones joined him during production in Swakopmund , insisting on staying in a $ 3000 a month villa , even though his new girlfriend at the time was reported to be Paula Barbieri . The film was poorly received and has an 11 % " rotten " rating at Rotten Tomatoes . Stephen Holden of The New York Times said as follows : " Dolph Lundgren 's pectorals are the real stars of Red Scorpion , an action @-@ adventure movie set in the fictional African country of <unk> . Filmed from below so that one has the sense of peering up at a massive kinetic sculpture , his glistening torso , which over the course of the film is subjected to assorted tortures , is the movie 's primary visual focus whenever the action slows down . And since Mr. Lundgren remains stone @-@ faced , rarely speaking except to issue commands in a surprisingly hesitant monotone , his heaving chest actually communicates more emotion than his mumbling lips . " 
 Lundgren then starred as Marvel Comics character Frank Castle ( a.k.a. The Punisher ) in the 1989 film The Punisher . The film was directed by Mark Goldblatt , with a screenplay by Boaz Yakin . Although it is based on the Marvel Comics character , the film changes many details of the original comic book origin and the main character does not wear the trademark " skull " . The Punisher was filmed in Sydney , Australia and also featured Louis Gossett , Jr . , Jeroen Krabbé , Kim <unk> , Nancy Everhard and Barry Otto . The film received mainly negative reviews , currently holds a 24 % " rotten " rating at Rotten Tomatoes . Christopher Null gave the film 1 out of 5 , stating the film was " marred by <unk> sets and special effects , lame fight sequences , and some of the worst acting ever to disgrace the screen . " Whilst criticizing the film 's storyline and acting , Time Out magazine concluded the film was " destructive , reprehensible , and marvelous fun " . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 = = = = 1990 – 1994 = = = = 
 In 1990 , Lundgren starred in Craig R. Baxley 's sci @-@ fi thriller I Come in Peace ( also known as Dark Angel ) opposite Brian Benben , Betsy Brantley , Matthias Hues and Jay Bilas . Lundgren plays Jack Caine , a tough Houston cop with an inner sensitivity , who does not let the rules of police procedure prevent him pursuing his mission to wipe out the White Boys , a gang of white collar drug dealers who killed his partner while he was waylaid stopping a convenience store robbery . Lundgren said of his role , " What attracted me to Dark Angel is that I get to do more than just action . There 's some romance , some comedy , some drama . I actually have some clever dialogue in this one . I get to act . One author said " Universe ( 1987 ) or Dark Angel ( 1990 ) , demonstrates that nature and his [ Lundgren 's ] hairdresser have suited him perfectly to Nazi genetically engineered baddie roles . " 
 In 1991 , Lundgren starred in Manny Coto 's action film Cover Up opposite Louis Gossett Jr .. Lundgren portrays Mike Anderson , a tough American reporter and US Marine veteran who finds his own life in jeopardy after stumbling across a political cover @-@ up over a Middle Eastern terrorist plan to release toxic gas and kill thousands of people . The primary terrorist group in the film is the fictional group Black October , in reference to Black September . The film was shot in Israel and Lundgren stays at the famous King David Hotel . 
 Although the film was not a major success , Robert <unk> in his 2009 book Terrorism in American cinema : an analytical filmography , 1960 – 2008 argues that the film reveals an alarmingly realist insight into US @-@ Middle Eastern politics and terrorism since the 2000s , dealing with an al @-@ Qaeda @-@ esque terrorist organization and the conspiracy theories that some believe the US government is using the Middle East as a cover @-@ up . 
 Later in 1991 , Lundgren appeared in martial arts action film Showdown in Little Tokyo opposite Brandon Lee , Cary @-@ Hiroyuki Tagawa and Tia Carrere . Lundgren plays a police sergeant named Kenner working in Little Tokyo , Los Angeles who is partnered with Johnny Murata ( Lee ) , a Japanese American who are sent to infiltrate the operations of new Japanese drug gang named the Iron Claw manufacturing a lethal methamphetamine while using a local brewery and nightclub as a front for the operation . Along the way , Kenner discovers that Yoshida ( Tagawa ) , the head of the drug gang , is a member of the Yakuza who killed his parents in front of him as a young boy in Japan and the case becomes violent and personal . The film received a mainly negative reception from critics and was criticized for its violence ; Vincent Canby of the New York Times described it as " violent , but spiritless . " Variety wrote " Lundgren can hold his own with other action leads as an actor and could easily be Van Damme @-@ marketable if only he 'd devote as much attention to quality control as he does to pectoral development . " David J. Fox of the Los Angeles Times , however , described the film as a " class act " . 
 In 1992 , Lundgren starred in one of the biggest blockbusters of the year in the sci @-@ fi action picture Universal Soldier directed by Roland Emmerich . Lundgren ( as Sergeant Andrew Scott ) and Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme ( as Luc <unk> ) play U.S. soldiers during the Vietnam War who are sent to secure a village against North Vietnamese forces . However they end up shooting each other dead after Devereaux discovers that Scott has gone insane and has resorted to mutilating the villagers and <unk> cutting off their ears , taking an innocent girl and boy hostage . They are later reanimated in a secret Army project along with a large group of other previously dead soldiers and sent on a mission as GR operatives . At the 1992 Cannes Film Festival , Van Damme and Lundgren were involved in a verbal altercation that almost turned physical when both men pushed each other only to be separated , but it was believed to have only been a publicity stunt . Universal Soldier opened in theatres on 10 July 1992 , a moderate success domestically with $ 36 @,@ 299 @,@ 898 in US ticket sales , but a major blockbuster worldwide , making over $ 65 million overseas , which earned the film a total of $ 102 million worldwide , on a $ 23 million budget . Despite being a box office hit however , it was not well @-@ received ; mainstream critics dismissed the movie as a Terminator 2 clone , or as a typical , mindless action film . Film critic Roger Ebert said , " it must be fairly thankless to play <unk> who have to fight for the entire length of a movie while exchanging monosyllabic <unk> " , including it in his book I hated , hated , hated this movie . 
 In 1993 , Lundgren starred opposite Kristian Alfonso and George Segal in Joshua Tree , directed by Academy Award and BAFTA @-@ winning stunt coordinator Vic Armstrong . Lundgren plays Wellman Anthony Santee , a former racecar driver who has turned to hauling exotic stolen cars with his friend Eddie Turner ( Ken Foree ) . One day he is framed by police officer Frank Severance ( Segal ) for the murder of a highway patrolman , also killing his friend Eddie . Santee is sent to prison after recovering in a prison hospital , but escapes during transfer and takes a female hostage named Rita <unk> ( Alfonso ) at a gas station , not suspecting that she 's a cop . On the run from the law , involving exotic cars and desert scenery , Santee must prove his innocence and prove Severance guilty of being involved in the car ring and for murder . Much of the film was filmed in the Alabama Hills of the Sierra Nevada and the desert of the Joshua Tree National Park of southeast California . 
 In 1994 , Lundgren starred in Bruce <unk> 's Pentathlon as an East German Olympic gold medalist pentathlete on the run from an abusive coach ( David Soul ) . Lundgren trained with the U.S. pentathlon team in preparation for the role , which later led to him being selected to serve as the ( non @-@ competing ) Team Leader of the 1996 U.S. Olympic Modern Pentathlon team during the Atlanta Games , to promote the image of the sport and to coordinate planning and other details between the team and the United States Olympic Committee . The film was seen negatively by most critics ; Film Review said it was " appallingly acted and monotonous " and Video Movie Guide 2002 described it as a " silly Cold War thriller " . 
 Later in 1994 , Lundgren appeared in Perry Lang 's Men of War ( scripted by John Sayles ) alongside Charlotte Lewis and B. D. Wong as Nick <unk> , a former Special Ops soldier who leads a group of mercenaries to a treasure island in the South China Sea . The film was mainly shot in Thailand , with Krabi and Phong Nga making up most of the island scenery . The film was well received by some critics . One author said " Men of War invokes the most vividly remembered fighting in a foreign land of recent Western history . This innovation , associating the muscle image with the Vietnam experience , is carried over into other contemporary muscle films . " Another said , " fine performances by an all @-@ star Dolph Lundgren as a mercenary assigned to " convince " a cast in this offbeat and disturbing film . " 
 = = = = 1995 – 1999 = = = = 
 In 1995 , Lundgren appeared in Robert Longo 's Johnny Mnemonic , co @-@ starring Keanu Reeves . The film portrays screenwriter William Gibson 's dystopian cyberpunk view of the future with the world dominated by megacorporations and with strong East Asian influences . Reeves plays the title character , a man with a cybernetic brain implant designed to store information . Lundgren plays Karl Honig , a Jesus @-@ obsessed hit man and street preacher who wears a robe and carries a shepherd 's staff . The film was shot on location in Toronto and Montreal in 12 weeks , filling in for the film 's Newark , New Jersey and Beijing settings . The film was premiered in Japan first on 15 April 1995 and features a previously composed score by Michael Danna , different editing , and more scenes with Lundgren and Japanese star Takeshi Kitano . Critical response was negative overall ; Roger Ebert said , " Johnny Mnemonic is one of the great goofy gestures of recent cinema , a movie which doesn 't deserve one nanosecond of serious analysis . " The film was a financial disappointment , grossing $ 19 @,@ 075 @,@ 720 in the domestic American market against its $ <unk> budget . The cloak worn by Lundgren in the film is now located in the lobby of the Famous Players Coliseum in Mississauga , Ontario , it was his last theatrical release film until 2010 . Later in 1995 , Lundgren appeared in Ted Kotcheff 's The Shooter , also known as Hidden Assassin , an action drama in which he plays Michael Dane , a U.S. Marshall who gets caught up in politics when he is hired to solve the assassination of a Cuban ambassador . He featured alongside Maruschka Detmers , <unk> Serna , Gavan O 'Herlihy and John <unk> his first film Direct @-@ to @-@ video . 
 The Motion Picture Guide to the films of 1996 said , " in peak condition , Dolph Lundgren leaps trains , kicks the crap out of assailants , and handles a rifle like a pro . He 's still a terrific athlete , but shows signs of histrionic mobility here . " 
 In 1996 , Lundgren starred in Russell Mulcahy 's Silent Trigger , about a sniper ( Lundgren ) and his female spotter ( played by Gina Bellman ) . Lundgren plays a former Special Forces agent who joins a secretive government agency ( called " The Agency " ) as an assassin . The movie takes place in and around an unfinished city skyscraper , shot in Montreal . The Motion Picture Guide to the films of 1997 said , " this stylish but empty thriller gives square @-@ jawed Dolph Lundgren another shot at straight @-@ to @-@ video immortality " . 
 In 1997 , Dolph starred in Frédéric Forestier 's The Peacekeeper , playing Major Frank Cross of the US Air Force and the only man who can prevent the president being assassinated and with the ability to thwart an imposing nuclear holocaust . The threat is from a terrorist group , which has stolen the President 's personal communications computer with the capability of launching the US arsenal to threaten global security . The film co @-@ starred Michael Sarrazin , Montel Williams , Roy Scheider and Christopher Heyerdahl , and was shot on location in Montreal . The film was praised for its exciting action sequences . Doug Pratt described the first half of the film as " excellent " and described Dolph 's character as " tenacious " , although Robert <unk> wrote " the Peacekeeper trades on the presence of B @-@ movie action star Dolph Lundgren , an actor who never became as popular as his action contemporaries Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme and Steven Seagal . " 
 In 1998 , he appeared in Jean @-@ Marc <unk> 's action / supernatural horror film The Minion alongside Françoise Robertson Lundgren portrays Lukas <unk> , a middle eastern templar and member of an order who are charged with guarding the gateway to Hell that , if opened , will unleash all evil . The only thing that can open it is a key which is sought for by the Minion , a demonic spirit that transfers itself into the nearby host body when his previous one is killed off . Awakening in New York City , the Minion tracks down Karen <unk> as Lukas arrives to America to protect her and the key . Michael Haag in his book Templars : History and Myth : From Solomon 's Temple to the Freemasons ( 2009 ) said , " The budget for this film was $ 12 million . A pity they did not spend a cent on research ( citing that one reference was 600 years out ) . Dolph Lundgren is a butt @-@ kicking Templar monk with a spiked leather glove whose sacred duty it is to do what the Templars have always done and stop a key that has kept the Anti @-@ christ imprisoned for thousands of years from falling into the right hands . " . The DVD and Video Guide of 2005 described the film as being " possibly one of the worst films ever " . 
 Later in 1998 , Dolph appeared alongside Bruce Payne and Claire Stansfield in <unk> as Christian Erickson , a leading demolition expert and head of an elite team of specialists , trained to disarm mine fields in a humanitarian minesweeping operation in Angola . In the event his son is killed and he discovers that mines are being planted during the war to kill people in the area . The film was a joint American and South African production . The Video Guide to 2002 said , " that noise you hear isn 't the numerous on @-@ screen explosions but action star Lundgren 's career hitting rock bottom . " He also featured in the TV pilot Blackjack ( directed by John Woo ) as a former US Marshal who has a phobia of the color white , who becomes the bodyguard and detective of a young supermodel ( Kam <unk> ) who 's the target of a psychotic assassin ( Phillip MacKenzie ) . Shot on location in Toronto , the film was originally meant to be the pilot episode of a series focusing around his character , Jack Devlin but it was not accepted as a series as it was poorly received . One review said " the narrative is laughably stupid " and the DVD and Video Guide to 2005 said , " dull , lightweight , made @-@ for @-@ TV action fully to a satisfying climax " . 
 In 1999 , he appeared in Isaac Florentine 's Bridge of Dragons as a " human killing machine " mercenary named <unk> alongside Cary @-@ Hiroyuki Tagawa , who Lundgren had previously worked with in the 1991 film Showdown in Little Tokyo , Valerie Chow , Gary Hudson , John Bennett and Scott L. Schwartz . He then starred in Storm Catcher alongside Mystro Clark and Robert Miano under director Anthony Hickox , portraying a military pilot who is falsely accused of treason in a plot to overthrow the US Government . He is blackmailed into plotting an attack in which he would bomb Washington with a new jet called the " Storm Catcher " by a renegade general ( Miano ) . Film review dismissed the film and Lundgren 's performance as " more Lundgren lunacy " . Finally he starred in Hickox 's next picture , Jill Rips , based on a 1987 novel by Scottish writer Frederic Lindsay . He portrays Matt Sorenson , a former boxer and San Francisco cop who avenges the brutal death of his younger brother , Michael . Intent on finding his brother 's killer , Sorenson infiltrates the powerful inner world of politics , business intrigue and casual sex and sadomasochism . His obsession to discover the killer 's identity mounts as a series of other men are found murdered in a similar fashion , and he loses all objectivity and becomes a vigilante . The DVD and Video Guide to 2005 said , " not very believable but , as usual , it 's fun to watch Dolph Lundgren in action . " Film Review " shuddered " at the concept of the film and remarked that Lundgren " should be a long @-@ forgotten action @-@ star . " 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 = = = = 2000 – 2004 = = = = 
 In 2000 , Lundgren starred in The Last Warrior as Captain Nick Preston under director Sheldon <unk> . This post apocalyptic movie is set in 2006 in the context of a 9 @.@ 5 @-@ magnitude earthquake which kills millions of people , with Preston leading a motley military patrol on the island to help survivors in the pole shift @-@ affected world . The film was partly shot in Eilat , Israel . Later in 2000 , Dolph appeared in Damian Lee 's Agent Red ( also known as Captured ) , alongside Alexander Kuznetsov , Natalie Radford and Randolph <unk> . The film is set during the Cold War , and is about two soldiers trapped on a submarine with a group of terrorists who plan to use a chemical weapon against the United States . Lundgren 's character , Matt Hendricks , must work with his wife , a virologist , to prevent the scenario occurring . After the film was completed , producer Andrew Stevens thought it was too poor to be released and multiple people had to be hired to at least make the film half @-@ competent . The film was very poorly received , given its " shoestring budget " ; the DVD and Film Guide of 2005 wrote , " low @-@ budget mess stars Dolph Lundgren as a navy special operations commander trying to keep a deadly virus out of the hands of terrorists . This subpar effort sinks to the bottom of the ocean in a tidal wave of cliche . " During an interview on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in May 2008 , Gladiator director Ridley Scott said Lundgren had been considered for the part of undefeated fighter Tigris of Gaul in 2000 , but was eventually rejected because " as an actor , he just didn 't fit in with what we were trying to achieve " . 
 In 2001 , Lundgren starred in Hidden Agenda , directed by Marc S. Grenier . He plays Jason Price , an ex @-@ FBI agent who protects a witness . In 2003 , Lundgren featured in Sidney J. Furie 's Detention , opposite Alex <unk> , Kata <unk> and Anthony J. Mifsud . He portrays a soon to be retired high school history teacher and ex @-@ Special Forces soldier Sam Decker who has one last detention to proctor ; he must band together the trouble makers and misfits in detention to defeat a drug ring intent on taking over the school . 
 In 2004 , he starred in an unusually high number of films . He first appeared opposite Polly Shannon in Direct Action under Sidney J. Furie , portraying Sergeant Frank Gannon , an officer who has spent the last three years on the Direct Action Unit ( <unk> ) task force , fighting gang crime and corruption and after he leaves he is hunted down by former colleagues for betraying the brotherhood . Next he appeared in Ed Bye 's Fat <unk> , a film adaption of a comic strip The Fat <unk> which appeared in the " alternative " British comic Viz . His role was little more than a cameo role alongside Geri Halliwell , Naomi Campbell and Angus Deayton . Reviews of the film were so poor that it remains on the IMDb 's Bottom 100 as one of the worst movies ever made . He next appeared in Christopher <unk> 's science fiction picture Retrograde alongside Gary Daniels and Joe <unk> . It tells the story of " a group of genetically unique people who travel back in time to prevent the discovery of meteors containing deadly bacteria . " Shot in Italy , the film received the support of the Film Fund of Luxembourg . Finally he made his directorial debut , replacing Sidney J. Furie who got ill during pre @-@ production , with The Defender , in which he also starred alongside <unk> <unk> and Jerry Springer , who played the President of the United States . Lundgren plays Lance Rockford , the bodyguard of the head of the National Security Agency , Roberta Jones ( Caroline Lee @-@ Johnson ) , in a war on terror . 
 = = = = 2005 – 2009 = = = = 
 In 2005 , Lundgren starred and directed his second picture The Mechanik ( The Russian Specialist ) , playing a retired Russian Special Forces hit man Nikolai " Nick " <unk> caught in the crossfire with Russian mobsters . Sky Movies remarked that The Mechanik is " hardcore death @-@ dealing from the Nordic leviathan " and said that " The Mechanik delivers all the no @-@ nonsense gunplay you 'd want of a Friday night " . 
 In 2006 , Lundgren played gladiator <unk> in the Italian @-@ made historical / biblical drama , The Inquiry ( L <unk> ) , also known as The Final Inquiry , alongside Daniele <unk> , Mónica Cruz , Max von Sydow , F. Murray Abraham and Ornella Muti . It is the remake of the 1986 Italian film directed by Damiano Damiani and starring Keith Carradine and Harvey Keitel . Set in AD 35 in the Roman Empire , the story follows a fictional Roman general named Titus Valerius Taurus , a veteran of campaigns in Germania , who is sent to Judea by the emperor Tiberius to investigate the possibility of the divinity of the recently crucified Jesus . The film , shot on location in Tunisia and Bulgaria , featured a score from Andrea Morricone , the son of the acclaimed film score composer Ennio Morricone . It premiered at the Capri @-@ Hollywood and the Los Angeles @-@ Italia Film Festival . One reviewer on a website catering for historical movies said of the film , " The Final Inquiry is one of those movies you are glad you ran into .... I had such low expectations for this movie , but was glad to have been proven wrong . I know about the negative reviews this movie has gotten and some of the criticism is well deserved while some of it is a bit unfair . " 
 In 2007 , Lundgren directed and starred in the Mongolia @-@ based action adventure , Diamond Dogs . Lundgren portrays the character of Xander Ronson , a mercenary hired by a group of American fortune hunters to act as their guide and bodyguard , while they search for a priceless Buddhist artifact deep within the Chinese wilderness . They get more than they bargained for , however , as they come face to face with Russian mercenaries also after the artifact . The film , a Canadian @-@ Chinese production , was shot on location in Inner Mongolia . Later in 2007 , Lundgren wrote , directed and starred in Missionary Man alongside Charles Solomon Jr .. Described as a " modern western " by Lundgren , Dolph plays a lone , bible @-@ preaching stranger named Ryder who comes into a small Texas town on his 1970 's Harley @-@ Davidson motorcycle to attend the funeral of his good friend J.J. , a local Native American carpenter , only to later get mixed up in a series of brawls with a local gang . According to Lundgren , it had long been a desire of his to direct a western , having long been a fan of Clint Eastwood and John Wayne , yet he did not want to spend the time and money building an old western town and hiring horses , so decided to set it in modern times with a motorbike instead of entering the town on a horse in the manner than Clint Eastwood would . Lundgren 's co @-@ writer , Frank Valdez 's wife 's brother happened to be a notable actor working in Texas and invited Lundgren 's team to shoot there . The film was shot on location in Waxahachie , a southern suburb of Dallas and was produced by Andrew Stevens and it was specially screened at the 2008 AFI Dallas Film Festival . 
 In 2008 , Lundgren starred opposite Michael Paré in the direct to video action flick Direct Contact . He plays the role of Mike Riggins , an imprisoned ex @-@ US Special forces operative in Eastern Europe , who is offered his freedom and money to rescue an American woman , Ana Gale , who has been kidnapped by a ruthless warlord . This was followed by another direct to video film Command Performance ( 2009 ) , a hostage action drama in which Lundgren , a proficient musician in real life , plays a rock drummer forced to face terrorists at a concert in Moscow . The film co @-@ starred Canadian pop singer Melissa Smith , playing a world famous pop singer in the film and his own daughter Ida on her screen debut , who played one of the daughters of the Russian president . The story was inspired by a concert Madonna put on for Russian President Vladimir Putin , although Dolph has also likened the pop singer to Britney Spears . Filming took place over 5 weeks between August and September 2008 in Sofia , Bulgaria and Moscow , Russia . The film premiered at the Ischia Global Film & Music Festival on 18 July 2009 . 
 In 2009 , The Dolph Lundgren Scholarship was instituted in his name , which is awarded to the student with the best grades at <unk> in <unk> , the school where he himself studied . Lundgren then reunited with Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme in Universal Soldier : Regeneration , where he plays Andrew Scott 's clone . The film was released theatrically in the Middle East and Southeast Asia and directly to video in the United States and other parts of the world . Since its release , the film has received better than average reviews for a straight @-@ to @-@ DVD franchise sequel , with film critic Brian Orndorf giving the film a B , calling it " moody , pleasingly quick @-@ draw , and knows when to quit , making the Universal Soldier brand name bizarrely vital once again . " Dread Central gave it 3 out of 5 knives , saying " there is almost nothing but solid b @-@ level action until the credits roll . " On the negative side , Pablo <unk> said in his review that while he praised Van Damme 's performance , he criticized that of Lundgren and described the film " dull in concept and execution " . 
 Later in 2009 , Lundgren directed and starred in the hit @-@ man thriller Icarus ( retitled in the US and the UK as The Killing Machine ) . He plays a businessman named Edward Genn , working for an investment company , who has a shady past as a KGB special agent known as " Icarus " . He tries to escape from his past life , but his identity is discovered and he is hunted down , placing the lives of his wife and daughter and himself in jeopardy . Retitled in the US and the UK as The Killing Machine , it opened theatrically in Los Angeles on 10 September 2010 , for an exclusive one @-@ week engagement at <unk> 's Sunset 5 Theater in West Hollywood . 
 = = = 2010s : Return to the big screen = = = 
 = = = = 2010 – 2014 = = = = 
 In 2010 , Lundgren made a guest star appearance on the TV series Chuck in the fourth season premiere episode , " Chuck Versus the Anniversary " , as Russian spy Marco , with references to Rocky IV 's Ivan Drago . He then played a drug @-@ addled assassin alongside Sylvester Stallone , Jason Statham , Jet Li , Randy Couture , Steve Austin , Terry Crews , Mickey Rourke , Bruce Willis , and Arnold Schwarzenegger in the action film The Expendables , which opened in theatres on August 13 , 2010 . The film is about a group of elite mercenaries , tasked with a mission to overthrow a Latin American dictator . It was described by Lundgren as " an old @-@ school , kick @-@ ass action movie where people are fighting with knives and shooting at each other . " This was his first American theatrical release film since 1995 's Johnny Mnemonic , ( although The Inquiry ( The Final Inquiry ) and Missionary Man both played theatrically for one week in Dallas and San Diego in December 2007 ) . Film production began on March 3 , 2009 , with a budget of $ 82 million . Filming commenced 25 days later in Rio de Janeiro and other locations in Brazil , and later in Louisiana . The film received mixed reviews from critics but was very successful commercially , opening at number one at the box office in the United States , the United Kingdom , China and India . 
 Lundgren was one of three hosts for the 2010 Melodifestivalen , where the Swedish contribution to the Eurovision Song Contest is selected . In the first installation on February 6 , Lundgren co @-@ hosted the competition together with comedian Christine Meltzer and performer Måns <unk> . Lundgren 's appearance was hailed by critics and audience , particularly his rendition of Elvis Presley 's " A Little Less Conversation " . 
 Lundgren played the lead role in Uwe Boll 's In the Name of the King 2 : Two Worlds , and had supporting roles in Jonas Åkerlund 's Small Apartments and a thriller called Stash House . Principal photography for Universal Soldier : Day of Reckoning began on May 9 , 2011 in Louisiana , and filming wrapped on One in the Chamber ( co @-@ starring Cuba Gooding , Jr . ) around the same time . The Expendables 2 entered principal photography in late September / early October 2011 , with Lundgren reprising his role as Gunner Jensen . Filming wrapped in January 2012 , and it was released by Lionsgate on August 17 later that year . 
 In 2013 , Lundgren starred alongside Steve Austin in the The Package . Directed by Jesse Johnson , principal photography wrapped in March 2012 , and the film was released on February 9 , 2013 . For a direct @-@ to @-@ DVD film , The Package was not a financial success . In its first week of release , the film debuted at no . 81 ; grossing $ 1 @,@ 469 at the domestic box office . Lundgren starred in a number of other films later that year , including Legendary : Tomb of the Dragon ( co @-@ starring Scott Adkins ) , Battle of the Damned , <unk> ( with Randy Couture and Vinnie Jones ) , Blood of Redemption ( again with Jones and Billy Zane ) , and the uncompleted comedy @-@ western A Man Will Rise ( with Tony Jaa ) . 
 In 2014 , Lundgren co @-@ starred opposite Cung Le in the action film <unk> Wounds , and reprised his role as Gunner Jensen for a third time in The Expendables 3 . He then wrote , produced , and starred alongside Jaa and Ron Perlman in Skin Trade , an action thriller about human trafficking . Principal photography started on February 2 , 2014 in Thailand , and wrapped in Vancouver , Canada ; April the same year . The film received a limited theatrical release , followed by a Blu @-@ ray and DVD release on August 25 , 2015 . 
 = = = = 2015 – present = = = = 
 On January 21 , 2015 , Lundgren started filming Shark Lake on the Mississippi Gulf Coast . This was followed by a further six weeks of filming in the " Reno @-@ Tahoe area " . In the film , he portrays Clint Gray , a black @-@ market dealer of exotic species ' responsible for releasing a dangerous shark into Lake Tahoe . Directed by Jerry Dugan , the film 's budget was $ 2 million . In February , he filmed a cameo for the Coen brothers ' 2016 comedy film Hail , Caesar ! , portraying a Soviet submarine captain . On May 23 , War Pigs premiered at the GI Film Festival . In the film , Lundgren co @-@ starred ( alongside Luke Goss ) as Captain Hans <unk> , a French Legionnaire who trains a U.S. Army Infantry group to go behind enemy lines and exterminate the Nazis . In August 2015 , he started filming Kindergarten Cop 2 in Ontario , Canada , a sequel to the 1990 comedy film that starred Arnold Schwarzenegger . He portrays Agent Reed , a law enforcement officer who must go undercover as a kindergarten teacher , in order to recover a missing flash drive from the Federal Witness Protection Program . Throughout the rest of the year , Lundgren starred in a number of other films , including the crime thriller The Good , the Bad and the Dead ( opposite Danny Trejo and Vivica A. Fox ) and the prison film Riot ( opposite Matthew Reese and Chuck Lidell ) . He is due to star in the Mike Mendez horror thriller Don 't Kill It , portraying demon hunter Jebediah Woodley ; and in R Ellis Frazier 's thriller film Larceny , portraying Jack : a " former operative @-@ turned @-@ professional thief " . 
 = = Training and diet = = 
 Although Lundgren never competed as a professional bodybuilder , he has been closely associated with bodybuilding and fitness since his role as Drago in the mid @-@ 1980s . <unk> said " looking like a man in his 30s rather than his 50s , Lundgren is the poster boy of precise nutrition , supplementation and exercise application that he has practiced for over 35 years . " In an interview with them he claims to often train up to six days a week in the gym , usually one @-@ hour sessions completed in the morning , saying that " it 's just one hour a day , and then you can enjoy the other 23 hours " . Although he had begun lifting weights as a teenager , he cites Sylvester Stallone as the man who got him into serious bodybuilding for a period in the 1980s after arriving in the United States . Stallone had a lasting influence on his fitness regime and his diet , ensuring that he ate a much higher percentage of protein in his diet and eating 5 or 6 smaller meals a day . Lundgren has professed never to have been " <unk> " , saying that , " I 'm too tall and my arms are long . I think back then [ Rocky IV ] I was working with around 300 pounds on the bench and squat . " 
 In a January 2011 interview with GQ he announced he is working on releasing his own range of vitamins and supplements . He has also written an autobiographical fitness book entitled Train Like an Action Hero : Be Fit Forever being published in Sweden ( by Bonnier <unk> ) on 9 August 2011 , offering tips he learned over the years to work out in various situations ( with a busy schedule and a lot of traveling ) . When in Los Angeles he trains at the Equinox Gym in Westwood and when at home in Marbella , Spain , he trains at the Qi Sport Gym in Puerto Banús . Dolph does , however , also like to spar and practice his karate in the gym to keep in top shape aside from weight lifting . He cites dead lifting and squats as the best exercises for muscle building . Lundgren is not a heavy drinker , but has professed on many occasions to being fond of tequila and cocktails , citing his knowledge in chemical engineering as " making really good drinks " . On 9 September 2014 , Lundgren published Dolph Lundgren : Train Like an Action Hero : Be Fit Forever , a book which contains a detailed account of his earlier life and troubles . He cites a better quality of life as having inspired him to maintain his physical fitness . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Lundgren speaks Swedish and English , as well as smaller amounts of Spanish , German , French , Japanese and Italian , but is not fluent in five languages as has often been reported . 
 During the 1980s , Lundgren had relationships with Jamaican singer Grace Jones and American model Paula Barbieri . In 1994 , he married Anette <unk> , a jewellery designer and fashion stylist in Marbella . The couple decided they liked Marbella so much that they rented out accommodation there for years , before eventually buying a family home there . They have two daughters : Ida Sigrid Lundgren ( born 29 April 1996 ) and Greta Eveline Lundgren ( born November 2001 ) , both born in Stockholm . Lundgren and <unk> have cited the reason for living away from Hollywood is that they want to give their children as normal a childhood as possible . 
 In early May 2009 , Lundgren 's Marbella home was reportedly broken into by three masked burglars who tied up and threatened his wife , but fled when they found a family photo and realized that the house was owned by Lundgren . Lundgren later stated that he believed the intruders to be from Eastern Europe and had contacts in Bulgaria investigating them , but to no avail . After the incident , Lundgren 's daughter , Ida , suffered from post traumatic stress disorder . His wife was the " most traumatized " , and as of 2011 , they are divorced . 
 Lundgren currently lives in Los Angeles , California with his girlfriend , Jenny <unk> . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Feature films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = Special awards = = = 
 = Music of Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII = 
 The music for the 2013 action role @-@ playing game Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII , developed and published by Square Enix , was composed by Masashi Hamauzu , Naoshi Mizuta , and Mitsuto Suzuki . Hamauzu was the leader composer for XIII and XIII @-@ 2 , and Mizuta and Suzuki previously composed music for XIII @-@ 2 . Musicians who had previously worked with the composers on XIII @-@ 2 and The 3rd Birthday worked on the project in Japan , while the main soundtrack was performed and recorded in Boston by the Video Game Orchestra , conducted by Shota Nakama . Along with including more percussion and ethnic elements , the soundtrack used " Blinded by Light " , the main theme for main character Lightning , as a leitmotif . Unlike the previous XIII games , the soundtrack did not include a theme song , as the composers felt it would detract from the emotional impact of the ending . 
 Three albums have been released : the promotional Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Pre Soundtrack in July 2013 , the Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack in November 2013 , and Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Soundtrack Plus in March 2014 . The music has received a mostly positive response from reviewers . The main soundtrack , despite some tracks being critiqued , was generally praised as a good selection of music and a fitting conclusion to the music of the Final Fantasy XIII series . It was also praised by reviewers of the game as a whole . The Soundtrack Plus album was reviewed less favorably . Both commercial albums sold well enough to be placed on the Oricon charts , with the Original Soundtrack reaching # 29 and remaining on the charts for four weeks . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 The music of Lightning Returns was composed by Masashi Hamauzu , who composed the music for Final Fantasy XIII , Naoshi Mizuta and Mitsuto Suzuki , who co @-@ composed the music for Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 with Hamauzu . Japanese band Language was also contracted by Suzuki to help with recording and remixing . Several of the musicians in Japan had worked with the composers before on XIII @-@ 2 and The 3rd Birthday . Recording took place at the Mixer 's Lab recording studios in Tokyo . The Video Game Orchestra , founded by Shota Nakama , was contracted by Hamauzu to perform , record and mix the orchestral music at their studio on Boston . According to Hamauzu , they were his first and only choice for recording the score . Nakama received the final score in April 2013 , and Hamauzu was regularly at the studios to help with the recording process . Nakama was told by Hamauzu that he was allowed to do as he wished unless he did something " really wacky " , with Hamauzu relying on Nakama and mostly interacting and working on their tracks if he disliked some aspect of them . The orchestra worked on nearly all of Hamauzu 's music , including the opening and ending themes . 
 The score was created with far more percussion than previous entries in the series , and featured " Blinded by Light " , a recurring theme in the XIII games related to the series ' central character Lightning , as a leitmotif . The theme was meant to emphasize the focus on Lightning , with several tracks relating directly to her . Unspecified ethnic musical elements were also incorporated . Each composer worked on one of the four game 's key locations . Due to the game 's day @-@ night cycle , different music was composed for morning , afternoon , evening and nighttime . The thirteen @-@ minute @-@ long final boss theme was meant to reference the title 's numeral . Hamauzu wrote " Crimson Blitz " , the first piece of the score and one of the game 's battle themes , while on tour in Switzerland . Unlike the previous two games , Lightning Returns did not feature a theme song as it was felt that this would diminish the emotional impact of the ending . Instead , the composers created a purely orchestral piece . The final theme , " Epilogue " , was co @-@ composed by Hamauzu and Nakama . It was based on the concept of the XIII games coming to an end , and so was intended to convey the themes and atmosphere of the soundtrack . Nakama created multiple versions of the piece and sent them to Hamauzu , who performed alterations and made the final choice . The game also featured multiple musical Easter eggs , including tunes from previous entries in the franchise . 
 = = Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack = = 
 The main soundtrack album , Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack , was released on four compact discs on November 21 , 2013 . It was released by Square Enix under the catalog number SQEX @-@ 10392 ~ 5 , and the album features seventy @-@ four tracks spanning 5 : 07 : 27 . The first disc is devoted to the opening section and the city of Luxerion ; the second disc deals with the Dead Dunes and Wildlands ; the third covers the city of Yusnaan and important themes leading up to the game 's conclusion ; the fourth disc covers the final section of the game . Three tracks from the album , " Crimson Blitz " , " The Savior " , and " Lightning Returns " , were digitally released as singles on iTunes . Further samples from the track were released on a disc of Square Enix music sold as a promotion at Tokyo Game Show 2013 . Tracks from Lightning Returns , along with XIII and XIII @-@ 2 , were also included on a special disc released with the Japan @-@ exclusive " Lightning Ultimate box " , a package containing all three XIII games . The soundtrack album reached # 29 on the Oricon charts and remained on the charts for four weeks . 
 Reviews of the album have been positive . Derek Heemsbergen of RPGFan praised the consistency of the soundtrack both when compared to XIII @-@ 2 and the variety of locations . He said that the recurring motifs in the soundtrack " work to great effect " , noting how the tracks related to Lightning helped explore her personality . His highest praise went to the final disc due to " its sheer emotional intensity " . Despite the general praise , some tracks , such as " Marimba de Chocobo " , came in for minor critiques . Christopher Huynh of Video Game Music Online was also positive , noting the high production values of the album . He also generally praised the themes used both in battle and for the various locations , though he felt that the Dead Dunes tracks were the weakest on the album . His reaction to the new and rearranged characters ' themes were more mixed , with him praising " Snow 's Theme " while calling " Fang 's Theme " a " very odd and jarring failure " . The final disc also received high praise , with <unk> saying that it " succeeds at closing out the series on an emotional high " . 
 Reviewers of the game also noted and praised the soundtrack , despite giving more mixed opinions on other aspects of the game . Jeremy Parish , writing for USGamer , called the music " phenomenal from start to finish " . Destructoid 's Dale North called the music " fantastic , and even more varied than the previous Final Fantasy XIII games " . Bradley Hale of Hardcore Gamer was also positive , saying that the music " does an effective job at blending old jams with new ones , with the arrangements of already known songs being interesting , and new tunes coming off as far more inspiring and emotion @-@ filled than those found in XIII @-@ 2 . " 
 Tracklist 
 = = Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack Plus = = 
 A bonus album , Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Soundtrack Plus , was released on March 26 , 2014 . The album features remixes of tracks from the main album or tracks present in the game that were not released on the album . The remixes were done by Mizuta , Suzuki , Kengo Tokusashi , <unk> Andreas , Hiroshi Kaneko . Released under the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> , the album features 25 tracks with a total running time of 1 : 13 : 31 . The album reached # 211 on the Oricon charts , remaining there for one week . 
 RPGFan 's Neal Chandran was mostly negative regarding the album . He called the majority of tracks " just plain boring " , while he felt that the more exiting tunes " lack punch " . Some pieces such as " Captive Saint " he called " superficially pretty , but that 's really it " , while the remixes of music pieces by Uematsu he called " brief , but awful " . Huynh shared many points of criticism with Chandran , finding multiple tracks boring as they were just slight variations on tracks from the main soundtrack album , though some tracks such as " Dying World " and the piano version of " Serah 's Theme " were praised . 
 = = Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Pre Soundtrack = = 
 A promotional album , Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII Pre Soundtrack , was released on July 13 , 2013 . It contains six tracks from the game , three of which did not yet have an official title . The other three were the tracks that had then received a digital release . The album was available at a special Square Enix event at United States of Odaiba 2013 as a limited promotion for Lightning Returns . 
 = Bifröst = 
 In Norse mythology , Bifröst ( / <unk> / or sometimes Bilröst or <unk> ) is a burning rainbow bridge that reaches between Midgard ( the world ) and Asgard , the realm of the gods . The bridge is attested as Bilröst in the Poetic Edda ; compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and as Bifröst in the Prose Edda ; written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson , and in the poetry of skalds . Both the Poetic Edda and the Prose Edda alternately refer to the bridge as <unk> ( Old Norse " Æsir 's bridge " ) . 
 According to the Prose Edda , the bridge ends in heaven at Himinbjörg , the residence of the god Heimdallr , who guards it from the jötnar . The bridge 's destruction during Ragnarök by the forces of Muspell is foretold . Scholars have proposed that the bridge may have originally represented the Milky Way and have noted parallels between the bridge and another bridge in Norse mythology , <unk> . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Scholar Andy Orchard posits that Bifröst may mean " shimmering path . " He notes that the first element of Bilröst — bil ( meaning " a moment " ) — " suggests the fleeting nature of the rainbow , " which he connects to the first element of Bifröst — the Old Norse verb <unk> ( meaning " to shimmer " or " to shake " ) — noting that the element provokes notions of the " lustrous sheen " of the bridge . Austrian Germanist Rudolf Simek says that Bifröst either means " the swaying road to heaven " ( also citing <unk> ) or , if Bilröst is the original form of the two ( which Simek says is likely ) , " the fleetingly glimpsed rainbow " ( possibly connected to bil , perhaps meaning " moment , weak point " ) . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 Two poems in the Poetic Edda and two books in the Prose Edda provide information about the bridge : 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In the Poetic Edda , the bridge is mentioned in the poems Grímnismál and Fáfnismál , where it is referred to as Bilröst . In one of two stanzas in the poem Grímnismál that mentions the bridge , Grímnir ( the god Odin in disguise ) provides the young Agnarr with cosmological knowledge , including that Bilröst is the best of bridges . Later in Grímnismál , Grímnir notes that <unk> " burns all with flames " and that , every day , the god Thor wades through the waters of Körmt and Örmt and the two <unk> : 
 In Fáfnismál , the dying wyrm Fafnir tells the hero Sigurd that , during the events of Ragnarok , bearing spears , gods will meet at Óskópnir . From there , the gods will cross Bilröst , which will break apart as they cross over it , causing their horses to dredge through an immense river . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 The bridge is mentioned in the Prose Edda books Gylfaginning and Skáldskaparmál , where it is referred to as Bifröst . In chapter 13 of Gylfaginning , Gangleri ( King Gylfi in disguise ) asks the enthroned figure of High what way exists between heaven and earth . Laughing , High replies that the question isn 't an intelligent one , and goes on to explain that the gods built a bridge from heaven and earth . He incredulously asks Gangleri if he has not heard the story before . High says that Gangleri must have seen it , and notes that Gangleri may call it a rainbow . High says that the bridge consists of three colors , has great strength , " and is built with art and skill to a greater extent than other constructions . " 
 High notes that , although the bridge is strong , it will break when " Muspell 's lads " attempt to cross it , and their horses will have to make do with swimming over " great rivers . " Gangleri says that it doesn 't seem that the gods " built the bridge in good faith if it is liable to break , considering that they can do as they please . " High responds that the gods do not deserve blame for the breaking of the bridge , for " there is nothing in this world that will be secure when Muspell 's sons attack . " 
 In chapter 15 of Gylfaginning , Just @-@ As @-@ High says that Bifröst is also called <unk> , and that every day the gods ride their horses across it ( with the exception of Thor , who instead wades through the boiling waters of the rivers Körmt and Örmt ) to reach Urðarbrunnr , a holy well where the gods have their court . As a reference , Just @-@ As @-@ High quotes the second of the two stanzas in Grímnismál that mention the bridge ( see above ) . Gangleri asks if fire burns over Bifröst . High says that the red in the bridge is burning fire , and , without it , the frost jotnar and mountain jotnar would " go up into heaven " if anyone who wanted could cross Bifröst . High adds that , in heaven , " there are many beautiful places " and that " everywhere there has divine protection around it . " 
 In chapter 17 , High tells Gangleri that the location of Himinbjörg " stands at the edge of heaven where Bifrost reaches heaven . " While describing the god Heimdallr in chapter 27 , High says that Heimdallr lives in Himinbjörg by Bifröst , and guards the bridge from mountain jotnar while sitting at the edge of heaven . In chapter 34 , High quotes the first of the two Grímnismál stanzas that mention the bridge . In chapter 51 , High foretells the events of Ragnarök . High says that , during Ragnarök , the sky will split open , and from the split will ride forth the " sons of Muspell " . When the " sons of Muspell " ride over Bifröst it will break , " as was said above . " 
 In the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál , the bridge receives a single mention . In chapter 16 , a work by the 10th century skald Úlfr Uggason is provided , where Bifröst is referred to as " the powers ' way . " 
 = = Theories = = 
 In his translation of the Prose Edda , Henry Adams Bellows comments that the Grímnismál stanza mentioning Thor and the bridge stanza may mean that " Thor has to go on foot in the last days of the destruction , when the bridge is burning . Another interpretation , however , is that when Thor leaves the heavens ( i.e. , when a thunder @-@ storm is over ) the rainbow @-@ bridge becomes hot in the sun . " 
 John Lindow points to a parallel between Bifröst , which he notes is " a bridge between earth and heaven , or earth and the world of the gods " , and the bridge <unk> , " a bridge between earth and the underworld , or earth and the world of the dead . " Several scholars have proposed that Bifröst may represent the Milky Way . 
 = Bill of Middlesex = 
 The Bill of Middlesex was a legal fiction used by the Court of King 's Bench to gain jurisdiction over cases traditionally in the remit of the Court of Common Pleas . <unk> on the King 's Bench 's remaining criminal jurisdiction over the county of Middlesex , the Bill allowed it to take cases traditionally in the remit of other common law courts by claiming that the defendant had committed trespass in Middlesex . Once the defendant was in custody , the trespass complaint would be quietly dropped and other complaints ( such as debt or detinue ) would be substituted . Part of a large reform movement to prevent equitable courts such as the Court of Chancery undermining their business , the Bill was far cheaper and faster than the older equivalents used by the Chancery and Common Pleas , leading to a drop in their business and an increase in that of the King 's Bench . As such , the Chancery issued injunctions in an ineffective attempt to prevent its use . The Bill was finally abolished by the Uniformity of Process Act 1832 . 
 As a result of reforming actions such as the Bill of Middlesex , the Common Pleas became increasingly conservative and resistant to King 's Bench changes because of the impact they had on the business of the Common Pleas . This was best emphasised by Slade 's Case , a struggle between the old and new forms of suing for breach of contract ; although an equilibrium between the common law courts was finally reached , it eventually led to their dissolution with the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 , and merger into a single High Court of Justice . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Court of Common Pleas and Court of King 's Bench were two of the central common law courts in England and Wales from the 13th century until their dissolution in 1875 . The Common Pleas ' jurisdiction was over " common pleas , " cases where the king had no interest . This in practice meant cases between subject and subject , including all actions taken under <unk> to recover debts or property , which made up the vast majority of civil cases . The Jurisdiction of the King 's Bench , on the other hand , was over " pleas of the crown " ; cases which involved the king in some way . With the exception of revenue matters , which were handled by the Exchequer of Pleas , the King 's Bench held exclusive jurisdiction over these cases . Crucially , it retained some criminal jurisdiction over all cases in Middlesex , the county where it sat . 
 During the 15th century , the traditional superiority of the common law courts was challenged by ecclesiastical courts and the equitable jurisdiction of the Lord Chancellor , exercised through the Court of Chancery . These courts were more attractive to the common lawyers because of their informality and the simple method used to arrest defendants . The bills of complaint and subpoena used by the Chancery made court procedure far faster , and from 1460 to 1540 there was a steep decline in the number of cases in the common law courts , coinciding with a sharp increase in cases in the newer courts . This loss of business was quickly recognised by the King 's Bench , which was urged by Fairfax J in 1501 to develop new remedies so that " subpoenas would not be used as often as they are at present " . From 1500 the King 's Bench began reforming to increase its business and jurisdiction , with the tide finally turning in their favour by 1550 . The King 's Bench significantly reformed its mode of practice in response , and one of the developments was the Bill of Middlesex . 
 = = Bill = = 
 The Bill of Middlesex exploited the King 's Bench 's remaining criminal jurisdiction over Middlesex . Prior to the introduction of bills , a writ would have to be issued , with different writs depending on the issue . If A wished to sue B for trespass , debt and detinue , the court would have to issue an individual writ for each action , with associated delays and costs for A , and then ensure that B appeared in court . Bills , on the other hand , were traditionally used against court officials and the court 's prisoners ; as such , the defendant was assumed to already be in the court 's custody and presence in court was unnecessary . Thus a legal fiction arose ; if A wished to sue B for trespass , debt and detinue , he would have a writ issued for trespass . B would be arrested as a result , and the detinue and debt actions undertaken by bill after he had been detained . Eventually it became even more fictitious ; if A wished to sue B merely for debt and detinue , a trespass writ would be obtained and then quietly dismissed when B was detained in custody . This was originally undertaken through getting a writ of trespass from the Chancery , but eventually a shorter workaround was used ; as the King 's Bench retained criminal jurisdiction over Middlesex , the trespass ( which was fictitious anyway ) would be said to have occurred in that county , allowing the King 's Bench to issue its own bill of arrest . This became known as the Bill of Middlesex , and undermined the jurisdiction of the Court of Common Pleas , which normally dealt with such civil cases . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As a result of the procedural changes , including the Bill of Middlesex , the King 's Bench 's business rose tenfold between 1560 and 1640 . The simplicity and low cost of this procedure drove much business to the King 's Bench , which had a negative impact on the Court of Common Pleas and Court of Chancery . Historically , cases now covered by the Bill of Middlesex had been handled by the Common Pleas , using a specialist writ drafted by the Chancery . This writ was very expensive , and as such brought large amounts of revenue to the Chancery and the Common Pleas . Costs varied depending on the amount of money being claimed from the defendant ; it was 6 shillings and 8 pence to claim £ 40 , 10 shillings for £ 100 , and £ 5 for £ 1 @,@ 000 . In return , the Chancery began to bring injunctions against those who claimed Bills of Middlesex , " whereby [ the judges ] are hindered of their fine which should have been paid in [ the Chancery ] upon the original of the said case " . These injunctions were only temporary ; " once the fine had been paid there was nothing to prevent a continuation of proceedings in King ’ s Bench " . Relatively few injunctions were issued , and thanks to technical loopholes " it was a weapon too infrequently used , and too easily parried " to have any long @-@ term impact . The issuing of injunctions finally ended in 1590 , after an ordinance passed by James I increased the costs of King 's Bench proceedings . The Bill of Middlesex itself was finally abolished by the Uniformity of Process Act 1832 . 
 As a longer term and more significant development , the Bill of Middlesex was one of several revolutionary developments by the King 's Bench met with a conservative reaction from the Common Pleas , fearful of losing its own caseload . The troubles during this period are best illustrated by Slade 's Case . Under the medieval common law , claims seeking the repayment of a debt or other matters could only be pursued through a writ of debt in the Common Pleas , a problematic and archaic process . By 1558 the lawyers had succeeded in creating another method , enforced by the Court of King 's Bench , through the action of assumpsit , which was technically for deceit . The legal fiction used was that by failing to pay after promising to do so , a defendant had committed deceit , and was liable to the plaintiff . The conservative Common Pleas , through the appellate court the Court of Exchequer Chamber , began to overrule decisions made by the King 's Bench on assumpsit , causing friction between the courts . In Slade 's Case , the Chief Justice of the King 's Bench , John Popham , deliberately provoked the Common Pleas into bringing an assumpsit action to a higher court where the Justices of the King 's Bench could vote , allowing them to overrule the Common Pleas and establish assumpsit as the main contractual action . After the death of Edmund Anderson , the more activist Francis Gawdy became Chief Justice of the Common Pleas , which briefly led to a less reactionary and more revolutionary Common Pleas . 
 An equilibrium between the courts was eventually reached , but the result was three common law courts ( the Exchequer of Pleas , Common Pleas and King 's Bench ) with near @-@ identical jurisdictions . By the 18th century , it was customary to speak of the " twelve justices " of the three courts , not distinguishing them , and assize cases were shared equally between them . In 1828 , Henry Brougham complained in Parliament that 
 The jurisdiction of the Court of King 's Bench , for example , was originally confined to pleas of the Crown , and then extended to actions where violence was used – actions of trespass , by force ; but now , all actions are admissible within its walls , through the medium of a legal fiction , which was adopted for the purpose of enlarging its authority , that every person sued is in the custody of the marshal of the court and may , therefore , be proceeded against for any personal cause of actions . Thus , by degrees , this court has drawn over to itself actions which really belong to ... the Court of Common Pleas . The Court of Common Pleas , however ... never was able to obtain cognizance of – the peculiar subject of King 's Bench jurisdiction – Crown Pleas ... the Exchequer has adopted a similar course for , though it was originally confined to the trial of revenue cases , it has , by means of another fiction – the supposition that everybody sued is a debtor to the Crown , and further , that he cannot pay his debt , because the other party will not pay him , – opened its doors to every suitor , and so drawn to itself the right of trying cases , that were never intended to be placed within its jurisdiction . 
 The result was the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 , which unified the Common Pleas , Exchequer , King 's Bench and Court of Chancery into one body , the High Court of Justice , with the divisions between the courts to remain . Thus , while the reform epitomised by the Bill of Middlesex aided the King 's Bench in the short term , it eventually led to its dissolution . 
 = Brownsea Island Scout camp = 
 The Brownsea Island Scout camp began as a boys ' camping event on Brownsea Island in Poole Harbour , southern England , organised by Lieutenant @-@ General Baden @-@ Powell to test his ideas for the book Scouting for Boys . Boys from different social backgrounds participated from 1 to 8 August 1907 in activities around camping , observation , woodcraft , chivalry , lifesaving and patriotism . Recognised as the world 's first Scout camp , the event is regarded as the real origin of the worldwide Scout movement . 
 Up to the early 1930s , camping by Boy Scouts continued on Brownsea Island . In 1963 , a formal 50 @-@ acre ( 200 @,@ 000 m2 ) Scout campsite was opened by Olave Baden @-@ Powell , when the island became a nature conservation area owned by the National Trust . In 1973 , a Scout Jamboree was held on the island with 600 Scouts . 
 The worldwide centenary of Scouting took place at the Brownsea Island Scout camp , celebrating 1 August 2007 , the 100th anniversary of the start of the first encampment . Activities by The Scout Association at the campsite include four Scout camps and a Sunrise Ceremony . 
 = = Background = = 
 Robert Baden @-@ Powell had become a national hero during the Boer War as a result of his successful defence of the town of Mafeking , which was under siege from October 1899 to May 1900 . The Mafeking Cadets , made up of local boys aged 12 to 15 , acted as messengers throughout the siege , and had impressed him with their resourcefulness and courage . Baden @-@ Powell had also published a number of popular books on military scouting , including Aids to Scouting for NCOs and men , published in 1899 . Though written for non @-@ commissioned officers , it became a best @-@ seller and was used by teachers and youth organisations . In the years after the war Baden @-@ Powell broached the idea of a new youth organisation with a number of people , including William Alexander Smith , founder of the Boys ' Brigade , with whom he discussed setting up a Boys Brigade Scouting achievement . To test his ideas while writing Scouting for Boys , Baden @-@ Powell conceived of an experimental camp , creating a program to take place on Brownsea Island during the summer of 1907 . He invited his lifelong friend , Major Kenneth McLaren , to attend the camp as an assistant . 
 = = First Scout encampment = = 
 = = = Site and camp organisation = = = 
 Baden @-@ Powell had visited Brownsea Island as a boy with his brothers . It covers 560 acres ( 2 @.@ 3 km2 ) of woodland and open areas , and features two lakes . The island perfectly suited his needs for the camp as it was isolated from the mainland and hence from the press , yet was only a short ferry trip from the town of Poole , making for easy logistics . 
 Baden @-@ Powell invited boys from different social backgrounds to the camp , a revolutionary idea during the class @-@ conscious Edwardian era . Eleven came from the well @-@ to @-@ do private boarding schools of Eton and Harrow , mostly sons of Baden @-@ Powell 's friends . Seven came from the Boys ' Brigade at Bournemouth , and three came from the Brigade at Poole & Hamworthy . Baden @-@ Powell 's nine @-@ year @-@ old nephew Donald Baden @-@ Powell also attended . The camp fee was dependent on means : one pound for the public school boys , and three shillings and sixpence for the others . 
 The boys were arranged into four patrols , designated as the Wolves , Ravens , Bulls and Curlews . It is uncertain if 20 or 21 boys attended the camp . At least four authors list attendance at 20 boys , and that they were organised into five patrols with Baden @-@ Powell 's nephew Donald as camp orderly . These sources included an article in The Scout ( 1908 ) , Sir Percy Everett in The First Ten Years ( 1948 ) and Rover Word ( 1936 ) , and E. E. Reynolds in The Scout Movement ( 1950 ) . In 1964 , William Hillcourt added the fourth Rodney brother , Simon , in Two Lives of a Hero , bringing the total to 21 . This evidence was supported by the oldest Rodney brother , then the 8th Baron Rodney . The reasons why Simon Rodney was not listed by the other authors is not clear , but evidence that he was present and the 6th member of the Curlews Patrol , was recounted by Scouting historian Colin Walker . 
 As this was the first Boy Scouting event , the boys did not have uniform shirts , but they did wear khaki scarves and were presented with brass fleur @-@ de @-@ lis badges , the first use of the Scout emblem . They also wore a coloured knot on their shoulder indicating their patrol : green for Bulls , blue for Wolves , yellow for Curlews , and red for Ravens . The patrol leader carried a staff with a flag depicting the patrol animal . After passing tests on knots , tracking , and the national flag , they were given another brass badge , a scroll with the words Be Prepared , to wear below the fleur @-@ de @-@ lis . 
 = = = Programme = = = 
 Each patrol camped in an army bell tent . The camp began each day with a blast from a kudu horn that Baden @-@ Powell had found in the <unk> forest during the Matabele campaign of 1896 . He used the same kudu horn to open the Coming of Age Jamboree 22 years later in 1929 . The day began at 6 : 00 a.m. , with cocoa , exercises , flag break and prayers , followed by breakfast at 8 : 00 a.m. Then followed the morning exercise of the subject of the day , as well as bathing , if deemed necessary . After lunch there was a strict <unk> ( no talking allowed ) , followed by the afternoon activity based on the subject of the day . At 5 : 00 p.m. the day ended with games , supper , campfire yarns and prayers . Baden @-@ Powell made full use of his personal fame as the hero of the Siege of Mafeking . For many of the participants , the highlights of the camp were his campfire yarns of his African experiences , and the Zulu " <unk> " chant , translating to " he is a lion " . Turning in for the night was compulsory for every patrol at 9 : 00 p.m. , regardless of age . 
 Each day was based on a different theme : Day 1 was preliminary , day 2 was campaigning , day 3 was observation , day 4 for woodcraft , day 5 was chivalry , day 6 was saving a life , day 7 was patriotism , and day 8 was the conclusion . The participants left by ferry on the 9th day , 9 August 1907 . The camp cost £ 55 two shillings , and eight pence ; after the boys ' fees , and donations totaling £ 16 , this left a deficit of just over £ 24 . The deficit was cleared by Saxon Noble , whose two sons Marc and Humphrey had attended . Baden @-@ Powell considered the camp successful . 
 = = = Legacy and commemoration = = = 
 Following the successful camp , Baden @-@ Powell went on an extensive speaking tour arranged by his publisher , Pearsons , to promote his forthcoming Scouting for Boys , which officially began the Scout movement . It initially appeared as six fortnightly installments , beginning in January 1908 , and later appeared in book form . Scouting began to spread throughout Great Britain and Ireland , then through the countries of the British Empire , and soon to the rest of the world . A reunion of the original campers was held in 1928 at the Chief Scout 's home at Pax Hill in Hampshire . 
 A commemorative stone by sculptor Don Potter was unveiled on 1 August 1967 by the Hon. Betty Clay née Baden @-@ Powell , younger daughter of Lord and Lady Baden @-@ Powell . It is located near the encampment area . There is also a small bust of B @-@ P outside a wall of Brownsea Castle , flanked by two large information posters , and beside it is a copy of B @-@ P 's footprint . 
 In May 2000 , twenty trees were planted , one for each boys who attended . During the planting ceremony , the Scout Chief Commissioner for England , along with representatives of the Scouts and the Guides , planted the trees on the seaward side of the original site . The trees were designed to act as a permanent memorial to the camp , as well as providing a series of future windbreaks against coastal winds . 
 = = Campsite history = = 
 = = = From 1927 to 2000 = = = 
 After the death of owner Charles van Raalte in 1907 , his wife Florence stayed on Brownsea until 1925 . Mary Bonham @-@ Christie bought the island at an auction in 1927 . In 1932 , Bonham @-@ Christie allowed 500 Scouts to camp there to celebrate the Silver Jubilee of Scouting , but shortly afterwards she closed the island to the public and it became very overgrown . In 1934 , some Sea Scouts were camping on the island when a fire broke out . Mrs. Bonham @-@ Christie blamed the Sea Scouts , although the fire did not start where the Sea Scouts were camping . The fire engulfed most of the island , burning west to east . The eastern buildings were only saved by a subsequent change in wind direction . Although it was not known how the fire started , Scouts were not allowed to camp on the island again until after Bonham @-@ Christie 's death in 1961 . Her family becoming liable for inheritance tax on her estate , they put the island up for sale . Interested citizens who feared that the island would be bought by developers helped raise an endowment , and in 1962 the government allowed the National Trust to take over management of the island in lieu of the death duties . 
 The island was reopened to the public in 1963 by Lady Baden @-@ Powell when it came under the control of the National Trust . She planted a mulberry tree to mark the occasion . The Trust has continuously maintained the island since then as a conservation area . In 1964 , 50 acres ( 200 @,@ 000 m2 ) near the original campsite were set aside for Scout and Guide camping . In 1973 , a Jamboree was held on the island for 600 Scouts from seven nations , along with one of the original campers , then aged 81 . 
 = = = After 2000 = = = 
 The National Trust maintains the Scout and Guide campsite , South Shore Lodge and the Baden @-@ Powell Outdoor Centre where members of Brownsea Island Scout Fellowship and Friends of Guiding operate a small trading post . The Baden @-@ Powell Outdoor Centre was opened on 14 September 2007 . It contains a new camp reception , and new washroom facilities . The centre also hosts a small Scouting museum . The campsite is compartmentalised , with the memorial stone , shop , flags , and destination signs all in one area on the south @-@ west corner of the island . Radiating off from this centre are many small camp zones , about a dozen acres each , surrounded by trees and fences . The area set aside for camping now covers 50 acres ( 200 @,@ 000 m2 ) and there is room for between 300 and 400 campers on the site . 
 St. Mary 's Church , located on the island about 0 @.@ 2 miles ( 0 @.@ 3 km ) from the camp , posts Scout and Guide flags at the approach to the altar . In 2007 , to coincide with the Scouting centenary , about 40 new <unk> or <unk> were given to the church , decorated with the 21 World Scout Jamboree badges and other Scouting , Guiding and island badges . The church is often used for services during large camps . 
 Brownsea Island is generally open to the public from March to October , via ferry from Poole . The island was reserved for Scouts and Scouters on 1 August 2007 during the Sunrise Camp . The National Trust operates a number of events throughout the summer months including guided tours , trails , and activities in the visitor centre . 
 = = Centenary of Scouting = = 
 Since March 2006 , travel packages have been available for Scouts to camp on the island , and Scout and Guide groups can also book day activities . To celebrate one hundred years of Scouting , four camps were organised on the island by The Scout Association during July and August 2007 : 
 The Patrol Leaders Camp , ran from 26 until 28 July 2007 , was the first of the four camps and involved Scouts from the United Kingdom engaging in activities such as sea kayaking . 
 The Replica Camp was a living history recreation of the original 1907 camp on Brownsea Island , which ran from 28 July to 3 August 2007 , parallel to the other camps . 
 The Sunrise Camp ( 29 July to 1 August 2007 ) hosted over 300 Scouts from nearly every country in the world . The young people traveled from the 21st World Scout Jamboree in Hylands Park , Essex , to Brownsea Island on 1 August 2007 for the Sunrise Ceremony . At 8 : 00 a.m. , Scouts all over the world renewed their Scout promise , with a focus on making the world a better and more peaceful place . 
 Finally , the New Centenary Camp ( 1 – 4 August 2007 ) hosted Scouts from both the United Kingdom and abroad , celebrating the start of the second century for Scouting . Scouts from all backgrounds and religions came together to show the world that peace is possible in the same way that Baden @-@ Powell brought together boys from different classes for the first camp back in 1907 . 
 = Benjamin Freakley = 
 Benjamin C. Freakley ( born 21 August 1953 ) is a retired United States Army lieutenant general , and a professor & policy advisor at Arizona State University . From Woodstock , Virginia , Freakley was commissioned as an infantry officer in 1975 , and served in Operation Desert Storm , Operation Iraqi Freedom , and Operation Enduring Freedom - Afghanistan before retiring in 2012 . After retirement Freakley began a career in education . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Originally from Woodstock , Virginia , he graduated from Central High School in Woodstock in 1971 . Freakley also became an Eagle Scout . Applying for admission to three military schools ( Virginia Military Institute , The Citadel , and West Point ) , he ended up graduating from West Point with the Class of 1975 . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Being commissioned as a second lieutenant of infantry in 1975 , he was assigned to the 506th Infantry Regiment until 1979 . He then was an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the commanding general of the Military District of Washington , before being sent to West Germany to serve with the 2nd Battalion , 30th Infantry Regiment . During Operation Desert Shield , Freakley worked on the war plans , and served as battalion executive officer of the 3rd Battalion , 7th Infantry Regiment . Operation Desert Storm found him serving as the operations officer of the 1st Brigade of the 24th Infantry Division . 
 After Operation Desert Storm , Freakley commanded the 1st Battalion of the 5th Cavalry Regiment , before serving in staff positions with the 24th Infantry Division and III Corps , until being placed in command of the 3rd Brigade of the 1st Cavalry Division . 1999 found Freakley commanding the operations group at Fort Irwin 's National Training Center , before serving in staff positions at the National Military Command Center and Joint Staff . 
 In 2003 , Freakley served as assistant division commander , under David Petraeus , of the 101st Airborne Division , which found Freakley involved in combat in Iraq a second time during Operation Iraqi Freedom . After Iraq , Freakley became the Chief of Infantry at Fort Benning , during which time the Infantry Center became part of the Maneuver Center of Excellence . 
 In 2005 , Freakley commanded the 10th Mountain Division as it was deployed to Afghanistan , where he also became the commanding general of Combined Joint Task Force @-@ 76 . In 2007 , Freakley took command of <unk> Command , where he remained until he retired in 2012 . 
 = = Post @-@ military career = = 
 After retiring from the army , Freakley became a professor at Arizona State University , and special advisor to the university 's president . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Freakley has received the following awards : 
 Freakley was also named the policy leader of the year , by the National Association of State Boards of Education in 2010 . 
 = Thief II = 
 Thief II : The Metal Age is a 2000 stealth video game developed by Looking Glass Studios and published by Eidos Interactive . Like its predecessor Thief : The Dark Project , the game follows Garrett , a master thief who works in and around a steampunk metropolis called the City . The player assumes the role of Garrett as he unravels a conspiracy related to a new religious sect . Garrett takes on missions such as burglaries and <unk> , while trying to avoid detection by guards and automated security . 
 Thief II was designed to build on the foundation of its predecessor . In response to feedback from players of Thief , the team placed a heavy focus on urban stealth in the sequel , and they minimized the use of monsters and maze @-@ like levels . The game was made with the third iteration of the Dark Engine , which had been used previously to develop Thief and System Shock 2 . Thief II was announced at the 1999 Electronic Entertainment Expo , as part of an extended contract between Looking Glass and Eidos to release games in the Thief series . Looking Glass neared bankruptcy as the game was developed , and the company was kept running by advances from Eidos . 
 Thief II received positive reviews from critics , and its initial sales were stronger than those of its predecessor . However , the game 's royalties were processed slowly , which compounded Looking Glass 's financial troubles . As a result , the company closed in May 2000 , with plans for Thief III cancelled . The third game in the series , entitled Thief : Deadly Shadows , was developed by Ion Storm and published by Eidos in 2004 . Thief 2X : Shadows of the Metal Age , a widely praised expansion mod for Thief II , was released in 2005 . In 2013 , Eidos Montreal announced a reboot of the series ( Thief ) , and it was released the following year . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Thief II is a stealth game that takes place from a first @-@ person perspective in a three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) graphical environment . The player seeks to complete mission objectives and to evade the notice of opponents such as guards . The player must minimize the visibility and audibility of the player character , Garrett , to escape detection . Players try to avoid lit areas and loud flooring in favor of shadows and quiet flooring . A light monitor on the heads @-@ up display ( HUD ) indicates the player character 's visibility . While it is possible for the player character to engage in direct combat , he is easily defeated . 
 The game 's 15 missions take place in large levels that can be confronted in multiple ways . Guards may be knocked out with a blackjack or killed with a bow or sword , and their fallen bodies may be picked up and hidden . In addition to human enemies , the game features security automatons and surveillance cameras . While completing objectives such as <unk> and blackmail , the player steals valuables that may be used to purchase thieving gear between missions . The player 's main tools are specialized arrows , including water arrows to douse lights , moss arrows to dampen the player character 's footsteps and rope arrows to reach higher ground . 
 Thief II is designed to be played methodically , and the player plans ahead by scouting , reading the game 's map and observing patrol patterns . The player character has a zooming mechanical eye , which connects to throwable " Scouting Orb " cameras . One Scouting Orb may be deployed at a time ; when it lands , the player views the game world from its perspective until normal play is resumed . The player listens for noises , such as footsteps and humming , to determine the locations of enemies . On the highest of the game 's three difficulty levels , killing humans results in a game over , and in certain missions the player must not knock out any guards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Like its predecessor Thief : The Dark Project , Thief II is set in a steampunk metropolis called the City , whose appearance resembles that of both medieval and Victorian era cities . Magic and steam technology exist side by side , and three factions — the manipulative and enigmatic Keepers , the technology @-@ focused Hammerites and the " pagan " worshippers of the Pan @-@ like Trickster god — are in operation . Thief II takes place one year after the first game , in the aftermath of the Trickster 's defeat and the failure of his plan to revert the world to a wild , primitive state . A schism in the Hammerite religion spawns the " Mechanist " sect , which fanatically values technological progress . The new inventions of the Mechanists are used by a resurgent police force to crack down on crime . The pagans are in disarray , and have been driven into the wilderness beyond the City . From there , they engage in guerrilla warfare against the Mechanists . The Keeper faction is dormant as the game begins . 
 The game continues the story of Garrett ( voiced by Stephen Russell ) , the cynical master thief who defeated the Trickster . Pursuing Garrett is the new sheriff , Gorman Truart ( voiced by Sam Babbitt ) , who has imposed a zero tolerance policy on crime . Viktoria ( voiced by Terri Brosius ) , the former ally of the Trickster , eventually joins with Garrett to combat the Mechanists . The game 's primary antagonist is the founder of the Mechanists , Father Karras ( also voiced by Russell ) , a mentally unstable inventor who despises the natural world . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins as Garrett continues his life as a thief . However , he is ambushed while returning to his apartment after an early mission , and he determines that Truart , the local sheriff , is hunting him . Keepers take Garrett to hear a prophecy about the " Metal Age " , which he ignores . As Garrett leaves , one of the Keepers informs him that Truart had been hired to kill him , and he gives Garrett a letter that directs him to eavesdrop on a Mechanist meeting . There , Garrett overhears Truart and Father Karras discussing the conversion of street people into mindless " Servants " , who wear masks that emit a red vapor capable of reducing themselves and nearby humans to rust . Truart promises to provide Karras with twenty victims for the Servant project , not realizing that Karras is recording his words for use in blackmail . Garrett steals the recording from a safe deposit box , in order to coerce Truart into revealing his employer . 
 However , Garrett finds Truart murdered at his estate . Evidence at the crime scene leads him to spy on the police officer Lt. Mosley . Garrett sees Mosley deliver a suspicious letter , which is carried through a portal by a wounded pagan . Garrett enters the portal and finds himself outside the City , and he follows the pagan 's trail of blood to Viktoria , who persuades Garrett to join her against the Mechanists . On a lead from Viktoria , he infiltrates Karras ' office to learn about the " Cetus Project " , and inadvertently discovers that Karras is giving Servants to the City 's nobles . Garrett travels to a Mechanist base to find out more about the Cetus Project , which is revealed to be a submarine . In order to locate and kidnap a high @-@ ranking Mechanist named Brother <unk> , Garrett stows away in the vehicle . 
 After delivering <unk> to Viktoria , Garrett steals a Servant mask to learn about a Mechanist technology called a " <unk> " . Meanwhile , Karras hides inside the Mechanist cathedral in preparation for his plan . Garrett and Viktoria learn that it is the <unk> inside Servant masks which emit red vapor , or " rust gas " . Karras had provided Servants to nobles with gardens in order to set off an apocalyptic chain reaction . Viktoria plans to lure the Servants into the hermetically sealed Mechanist cathedral before Karras activates their masks , but Garrett believes this to be too dangerous and leaves . Viktoria goes to the cathedral alone and dies while filling it with plants , and Garrett completes her plan , killing Karras in the rust gas . Afterward , Garrett is approached by a Keeper who explains that Karras ' scheme and Viktoria 's death had been prophesied . Garrett demands to know the rest of the Keepers ' prophecies as the game ends . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 Looking Glass Studios began designing Thief II in January 1999 . The team 's goal was to build on the foundation of Thief : The Dark Project , a game that Thief II project director Steve Pearsall later said was an experiment . He explained that the team had played it safe by including certain " exploration ... or adventure oriented " missions with " jumping and climbing puzzles " in Thief , and that the new game was significantly more focused on stealth . Combat was given less prominence than in the original . Based on feedback from players and reviewers of Thief , the team decided to scale back the use of maze @-@ like levels and monsters such as zombies in favor of urban environments and human enemies . Pearsall stated that Thief 's monsters were negatively received because , unlike the game 's human enemies , they did not clearly indicate when they noticed the player . The team sought to remedy this problem by improving the audio cues given by non @-@ human enemies in the sequel . 
 Production of Thief II commenced in February . Looking Glass chose to compose the game 's team of " half the original designers and half new blood " , according to executive producer James Poole . The company tried to select people who meshed well both personally and creatively , in an attempt to guarantee a smooth development cycle . Adrenaline Vault editor @-@ in @-@ chief Emil Pagliarulo was hired as a junior designer , in part because of his positive review of Thief . Rich " <unk> " Carlson and <unk> <unk> joined from Ion Storm 's Daikatana team , and Looking Glass contractor Terri Brosius was hired as a full @-@ time designer . One @-@ third of the team was female , which Pearsall believed contributed to a strong group dynamic . As was typical at Looking Glass , the Thief II team worked in a wall @-@ less space called a " pit " , which allowed them to converse easily . Describing the work environment at the time , writer Laura Baldwin noted that " conversations dash madly about the room , [ and ] when someone is demonstrating something interesting everyone <unk> over to look . " 
 During the first months of development , the team regularly gathered to watch films pertinent to Garrett 's character and to the game 's visual design , such as The Third Man , The Castle of Cagliostro , M and Metropolis . Pearsall said that the latter two films were Thief II 's " biggest aesthetic influences " , while the main inspiration for its plot was Umberto Eco 's novel The Name of the Rose . The team also drew influence from Fritz Leiber 's Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser . The game 's story was written in the three @-@ act structure : Garrett was intended to transition from his " cynical self " in the first act to a private investigator in the second , and to a character similar to James Bond in the third . The City 's technology and architecture were influenced by the appearance of Victorian London , and certain areas were given an Art Deco theme to provide " sort of a ' Batman ' feel " , in reference to the 1989 film . Lead artist Mark <unk> captured over two @-@ thousand photographs during his vacation in Europe , and these were the basis for many of the game 's textures . 
 Thief II was built with the third iteration of the Dark Engine , which had been used previously for Thief and System Shock 2 . According to Pearsall , the Dark Engine had become " a very well understood development environment " , which made for an easier production process . Engine updates created for System Shock 2 , such as support for 16 @-@ bit color , were carried over to Thief II . The average character model in Thief II was given close to double the polygons of the average model in Thief , with much of the added detail focused on characters ' heads . This was an attempt to give the characters a " more organic " look . Certain artificial intelligence ( AI ) routines written into the Dark Engine , which allowed enemies to notice changes in the environment such as open doors , had not been used in Thief or in System Shock 2 but were implemented in Thief II . Weather effects such as fog and rain were added , and technology from Flight Unlimited III was used to generate the sky and clouds . 
 = = = Announcement and continued development = = = 
 Thief II was announced during the Electronic Entertainment Expo on May 13 , 1999 , as part of a contract between Looking Glass and Eidos Interactive to release four new games in the Thief series , beginning with Thief Gold . The deal had been signed on May 7 , roughly three months after Thief II entered production . A tech demo of the game , which Bruce Geryk of Games Domain described as " about three rooms with some Mages " , was displayed on the show floor . The demo was used to showcase the updated Dark Engine , which featured support for colored lighting , higher polygon models and larger environments . The team revealed their intention to include more levels with human enemies , and announced a projected release date of spring 2000 . Plans to include a cooperative multiplayer mode were also detailed at the show . IGN 's Jason Bates noted that the Thief II display attracted " a bit of a buzz and a small crowd of dedicated onlookers " . 
 By July , the team had begun initial construction of the game 's levels . Thief II 's increased focus on stealth necessitated new level design concepts : the most stealth @-@ based missions in Thief had centered on urban burglary , but Pearsall explained that this " would get tired pretty fast " if repeated in every level . The team diversified Thief II by designing missions with such objectives as kidnapping , blackmail and eavesdropping . The first two levels were designed to seamlessly introduce new players to the core game mechanics , without a tutorial mission that might lose the interest of experienced players . When creating a mission , the team would often begin by deciding on the player 's objective , after which they would produce a rough level design . The mission would then undergo a peer review to determine if it should be added to the game . Each of the game 's levels was a team effort rather than the work of a single designer . Designer Randy Smith explained that , while Thief 's levels had been designed to fit a pre @-@ existing story , the Thief II team " tried to think of really good missions first " and then adjusted the plot to suit them . He noted that it was highly difficult to harmonize the two . 
 The game 's sound team was composed of Kemal <unk> , <unk> Djawadi and audio director Eric Brosius . According to Brosius , each member of the audio department did " everything " , without clear <unk> between roles . Like Thief , Thief II features a sound engine that simulates propagation in real @-@ time . To achieve this effect , each level 's geometry was input both to the level editor and to a " separate [ sound ] database " , which mapped how sound would realistically propagate based on " the physical room characteristics [ ... and ] how all the different rooms and areas are connected together " . For example , noise travels freely through an open door but is blocked when the door is closed . The team used the new " occlusion " feature in EAX 2 @.@ 0 to make Thief II 's sound environment more realistic and to allow the player to listen through doors . The game features more sound effects , music and speech than the original Thief . Thief II 's score , as with that of its predecessor , was designed to " blur ambient [ sound ] and music " together . However , Brosius later stated that , while Thief 's soundtrack is composed of " simple and hypnotic " loops only a few seconds in length , Thief II features longer and " more thoughtfully " constructed pieces . He believed that this method had positive aspects , but that it resulted in a less immersive audio environment . 
 Artist Dan Thron returned to create the game 's cutscenes , with assistance from Jennifer <unk> @-@ Lesser . Thron later called <unk> @-@ Lesser " one of the greatest artists I 've ever seen " . The cutscenes , which Computer Games Magazine called " unique " , feature multiple layers of artwork and footage of live actors filmed against a green screen . These components were combined and animated in Adobe After Effects . The technique had been developed for the original Thief , as an evolution of designer Ken Levine 's suggestion to use motion comic cutscenes . David Lynch 's films Eraserhead and The Elephant Man were important influences on their style . 
 = = = Final months = = = 
 By October 1999 , the team had cut the game 's multiplayer feature . Pearsall explained that Looking Glass did not " have the resources to do a new kind of multiplayer and ship a finely tuned single @-@ player game " . Plans were announced in January 2000 to release a multiplayer @-@ only Thief game shortly after the completion of Thief II . As Thief II 's development continued , Looking Glass experienced extreme financial troubles . The company 's Marc LeBlanc later said that " Eidos was writing a check every week to cover our burn rate " during the last months of the project . The game 's final cost was roughly $ 2 @.@ 5 million . According to company head Paul Neurath , Eidos informed Looking Glass that " it was not an option " for Thief II to miss its release date , and that there would be " dire consequences if [ we ] missed by even a day " . An anonymous Looking Glass staffer later told Salon.com that Eidos " told us basically to ship [ Thief II ] by their fiscal quarter or die " . 
 By January , Pearsall confirmed that the game had reached beta , and that most of the team 's energy was being spent " tuning , polishing , and fixing bugs " . He noted in early February that Thief II had been produced almost entirely on schedule . The company slipped behind near the end of the project and entered crunch time to make up the loss . On February 24 , Thief II producer Michael McHale announced that the game had reached " feature freeze " , and that the team was in " super crunch mode " . Numerous game testers from Eidos joined the project . However , McHale said that the team was energized and that " spirits [ were ] high " . Certain employees slept in the office and avoided bathing so that the game could reach its March deadline . LeBlanc later stated his belief that the game was rushed , and that its quality suffered as a result . Nevertheless , the team met their goal , and the game was released on March 23 , 2000 . Eidos expedited the company 's payment for completing the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Thief II debuted high on the bestsellers list for computer games , and its initial sales were better than those of its commercially successful predecessor . In the United States , the game sold roughly 67 @,@ 000 copies and earned $ 2 @.@ 37 million by the end of 2000 . It received positive reviews from critics , with an aggregate score of 89 @.@ 14 % on GameRankings . Computer Gaming World 's Thomas L. McDonald wrote that " everything in Thief II is bigger , sharper , better , and more effective " than in its predecessor . He enjoyed its story and called its levels " vast and intricate " , with " astonishingly complex and often beautiful " architecture ; but he found the game 's graphics to be somewhat lackluster . McDonald summarized Thief II as a unique " gamer 's game " . Jim Preston of PC Gamer US considered the game to be " more focused and polished than the original " , and he praised the removal of " zombie battles " . While he faulted its graphics , he summarized it as " one hell of a good game " . 
 Jasen Torres of GameFan wrote , " If you liked Thief , you 'll love Thief 2 : The Metal Age ; it 's more of the stuff that made Thief great , with less of the annoying stuff " . He applauded the removal of " zombie killer " missions and believed the game 's sound to be " superior to any other game " . He considered its story to be " good " but " nothing great " and its graphics to be " decent " ; but he commented that the game was " really all about the gameplay " , which he praised as " quite compelling and fun " . Benjamin E. Sones of Computer Games Magazine considered the game 's story to be " quite good " , but he faulted Looking Glass for failing to detail the events of the first game for new players . He wrote that Thief II 's graphics were passable but that its sound design was " phenomenal " . Sones praised its missions as " very well crafted " , and noted that they gave the impression of being in " a living , breathing world . " He summarized , " It may not be perfect , but Thief 2 has got it where it counts " . 
 Charles Harold of The New York Times called the game a " refreshing alternative to games that glorify violence " . He found its story to be " slight " , but he lauded its world as " amazingly alive " and its AI as a " remarkable impersonation of real intelligence " . Writing for GamePro , Barry <unk> commented that Thief II " provides a solid gaming experience " but " doesn 't startle like its predecessor " . He wrote that its missions featured a " great deal of variety " , and he praised their " ability to casually suggest a much larger world " , but he complained that they were linear . He considered the game 's writing to be " among the best in the business " . While <unk> enjoyed the game 's textures and lighting , he noted the low detail of the game 's human models , whose animations he found to be " arthritic " . PC Zone 's Paul Presley wrote that the game 's levels were larger but easier than those of Thief , and he considered their objectives to be somewhat linear . He found Thief II 's graphics to be dated and wrote that its lack of real @-@ time lighting " tends to give each environment a sort of ' false ' quality " . However , he believed that the game " still has enough atmosphere to immerse you " , and he praised its sound design . Presley considered the game to be a straightforward rehash of its predecessor , and he finished , " A more clear @-@ cut case of sequel @-@ itis there has never been . " 
 = = Post @-@ release = = 
 While Thief II performed well commercially , Looking Glass was not set to receive royalties for several months . The company had struggled financially since the commercial failures of its self @-@ published games Terra Nova : Strike Force Centauri and British Open Championship Golf . Looking Glass 's Flight Unlimited III had flopped at retail , and the development of Jane 's Attack Squadron had gone over budget and fallen behind schedule . A deal to co @-@ develop the stealth game Deep Cover with Irrational Games had recently collapsed . According to Looking Glass 's Tim Stellmach , the delay in Thief II royalties " faced [ us ] with the prospect of running out of money . " Looking Glass management signed a deal in which Eidos Interactive would acquire the company , but Eidos fell into a sudden financial crisis , in part because of the failure of Ion Storm 's $ 40 million game Daikatana . These factors led to the closure of Looking Glass on May 24 , 2000 , with the planned Thief II successors Thief II Gold and Thief III cancelled . 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 The Thief series had been planned as a trilogy , and work on Thief III was " in a fairly advanced stage " when Looking Glass closed , according to PC Zone 's Keith Pullin . Randy Smith and Terri Brosius were appointed as lead designers , and they developed the game 's concept over several months . In an open letter published after the company 's bankruptcy , Smith wrote that the third game would have taken place in an " open @-@ ended , self @-@ directed city " , and that its plot would have centered on the Keepers . Brosius suggested that Thief III would have seen Garrett " accept [ ing ] that there are consequences to his actions " , and that he would likely have become " ready to give , rather than always take . " The player would have uncovered the game 's story gradually , while exploring a free @-@ roam environment . Serious plans had been made to include co @-@ operative multiplayer , and a new engine , Siege , had been in production . When Looking Glass closed , its assets were liquidated and the Thief intellectual property was sold at auction . This raised doubts that the Thief trilogy would be completed , a situation that Salon.com writer Wagner James Au compared to Lucasfilm closing after the release of The Empire Strikes Back . However , following rumors , Eidos announced on August 9 , 2000 that it had purchased the rights to Thief . 
 Development of Thief III was delegated to the Warren Spector @-@ supervised Ion Storm Austin , which had recently completed Deus Ex . According to Spector , Thief III would have been given to Core Design or Crystal Dynamics had he not accepted it . The game was announced for Windows and the PlayStation 2 . On August 10 , Spector commented that Ion Storm 's first goal was to assemble a core team , composed in part of former Looking Glass employees , to design and plot the game . Thief II team members Randy Smith , Lulu <unk> , Emil Pagliarulo and Terri Brosius were hired to begin the project . On August 16 , Ion Storm announced its hires , and stated that concept work on Thief III would begin in September . The team planned to " wrap up [ the ] loose ends " of the series , and they built directly upon the Thief III concept work done at Looking Glass . Thief III was eventually renamed Thief : Deadly Shadows , and it was released for Windows and the Xbox on May 25 , 2004 . 
 In May 2009 , after several months of rumors , a fourth game in the Thief series was announced by Deus Ex : Human Revolution developer Eidos Montreal . It was unveiled in the April 2013 issue of Game Informer . The game , entitled Thief , is a reboot of the Thief series ; and it does not feature the Hammerites , pagans or Keepers . Its plot follows Garrett ( voiced by Romano <unk> in place of Stephen Russell ) in the aftermath of an accident that leaves his protégé , Erin , missing . Garrett has amnesia after this incident , and the City is beset by a plague called the Gloom . The game was released for Windows and the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox One and PlayStation 4 in February 2014 . 
 = = = Fan expansion = = = 
 Soon after the bankruptcy of Looking Glass , a fan group called the Dark Engineering Guild began developing an expansion mod to Thief II , entitled Thief 2X : Shadows of the Metal Age . Initially , they hoped to fill the void left by the cancellation of Thief III , but they continued to work on the mod after the announcement and release of Thief : Deadly Shadows . Released in 2005 after five years in development , the mod follows <unk> , a young woman who is robbed while visiting the City and who then seeks revenge . She is mentored by a pagan hermit named Malak , who trains her as a thief but who has ulterior motives . The team designed <unk> to be physically capable and to have a " middle @-@ eastern / north @-@ <unk> look " , but made an effort to avoid similarities to Mulan . Chronologically , the story starts near the end of Thief and ends in the middle of Thief II , thereby depicting the rise of Gorman Truart and the early days of the Mechanists . Thief 2X features 13 missions , with new animated cutscenes and roughly 3 @,@ 000 new lines of recorded dialogue . 
 The mod was praised by critics and by the Thief fan community . Brett Todd of PC Gamer US awarded it " Mod of the Month " and wrote , " It doesn 't quite have the mysterious allure of the original games , but it 's awfully close " . A writer for Jolt Online Gaming praised the mod 's visuals and considered its missions to be " incredibly well designed " . While the writer commented that Thief 2X did not perfectly follow the series ' tone and that its voice acting was " not the best " , they finished by saying that fans of the Thief series had " no excuse not to play <unk> . " PC Gamer UK 's Kieron Gillen wrote that he had expected the mod to be cancelled , given that the " web is full of [ ... ] five @-@ percent finished masterworks from people who aimed far , far too high . " After Thief 2X 's release , he lauded it as the best Thief fan work , and as " one of the most impressive achievements of any fan community for any game . " 
 = Deathrow ( video game ) = 
 Deathrow is a sports video game developed by Southend Interactive and published by Ubisoft Entertainment . It was released as an Xbox gaming system exclusive on 18 October 2002 in Europe and four days later in North America . Deathrow 's development began in May 1999 as an online PC ( player computer ) game . In early 2001 , Southend transitioned to an Xbox console release , which let the team use pixel shaders , bump mapped textures , and specular lighting . Deathrow was built on an in @-@ house 3D game engine and was Southend 's first full release . 
 The game is based on the fictional extreme sport Blitz , a futuristic full @-@ contact hybrid of hockey and basketball played with a flying disc . Two teams of four players attempt to move the disc through their opponent 's goal , and teams can either win on points or by knocking out their opposing team . There are 150 individual characters across 18 thematic teams . The single @-@ player campaign 's plot is set in the 23rd century , when Blitz is a popular , televised sport and the teams battle to scale the ranks and win the championship . Players earn credits from their goals scored , opponent knockouts , and crowd @-@ pleasing to be spent on player upgrades , bets , and new teammates . The game also supports split @-@ screen and System Link multiplayer for up to eight players across up to eight Xbox consoles . 
 Deathrow received largely favorable reviews . Reviewers praised the game 's fast @-@ paced action , and surround sound , but complained of its high difficulty curve , generic soundtrack , and lack of online multiplayer . Some critics felt the game 's use of profanity was excessive , while others thought it was a highlight . Reviewers considered the game 's concept and mechanics similar to other series , specifically Speedball . IGN and TeamXbox both named Deathrow an Editor 's Choice . The game won the TeamXbox 2002 Breakthrough Game of the Year award and the IGN 2002 Best Game Nobody Played . IGN later reported that a sequel would be unlikely due to the original 's low revenue . Southend dissolved in 2013 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Deathrow is set in the year <unk> , where Blitz is the world 's most popular sport . Players attempt to toss a disc through a hoop while avoiding full @-@ contact from their opponents , including punches , kicks , throws , and stomps . Like a futuristic rugby , the sport combines elements of hockey , basketball , and full @-@ contact American football . Critics compared the game 's mechanics to Discs of Tron , Mortal Kombat , Blood Bowl , Final Fantasy X 's Blitzball , Blades of Steel , and Speedball , and its aesthetic to that of Blade Runner . The game 's premise was also compared to the 1975 film Rollerball . 
 There are four rounds in a match of Blitz , where two teams of four computer or human players score points for each energized Blitz disc thrown through their opponent 's hoop , which is eight feet off the ground . Players pass and travel with the disc across the arenas , and the game continues without pause between points scored . The team with the most points at the end of a match wins . Players can choose to brawl when not scoring points . Fighting depletes character health , depending on who takes the blows . Once his health is completely depleted , a character is removed from the game , and teams with all players knocked out are disqualified ( though players can be substituted between rounds ) . If a player tends towards belligerence , the game 's artificial intelligence will compensate and exact revenge for its teammates . Friendly fire , where teammates can intentionally or inadvertently hurt each other with attacks meant for their opponents , is permitted . 
 There are 150 unique players on 18 teams , each with thematic personalities in appearance , play style , and profanity . Teams also vary in skill set , and attributes such as defense , speed , strength , and teamwork . Examples include the Sea Cats ( fast all @-@ female team with European accents ) , the Marines ( who wear camouflaged garb and use military jargon ) , the Demons ( high strength attribute with demonic language ) , and the Black Dragons ( ninjas with high agility and combat skills ) . Teams battle in 32 arenas — one half with traditional , open @-@ style stadiums , and the other half with environmental obstacles , such as the underground mines . Minor power @-@ ups including health , credits , and skill augments for individual players regenerate regularly on the field . 
 Players earn credits for knocking out opponents , scoring points , and impressing the crowd with violence and skill . The credits can be used towards player enhancements such as black market performance @-@ enhancing drugs . A crowd meter displays audience support , which boosts the player 's team abilities when filled . IGN found the game to heavily rely on teamwork . Computer players on teams rated with low teamwork will not take initiative to pursue the disc or to help teammates in need . This attribute can be raised over the course of a game . Players can call plays including physical offense , fast offense , neutral , defense , and goal defense . 
 The game supports single @-@ player , four @-@ player local multiplayer , and System Link with up to eight players across up to eight Xbox consoles , but does not support Xbox Live online play . Deathrow has a futuristic electronic dance music soundtrack and over 3 @,@ 000 words of voice acting . It also supports 5 @.@ 1 surround sound and customized soundtracks . The game is backwards compatible with the Xbox 360 . 
 = = = Controls = = = 
 Players use the Xbox controller 's left analog stick to move the character , the right stick to strafe , and the main buttons to jump , block , punch , and kick . When on offense , the latter two functions become " pass " and " shoot " . Players switch between characters and taunt with the white and black buttons , respectively , and call plays with the directional pad . The left trigger modifies an existing action , such as running into dives , slide @-@ tackles , and grabs , and the right trigger orients the camera towards the objective ( either the disc or the goal , depending on the team in possession ) . This camera control is designed for precision when diving for the disc or shooting on goal . A character in possession of the disc will show a trajectory line of their potential shot or pass , which is altered by player movement , breath , and physical contact . Players charge the disc by holding the shooting button , whereby the disc turns greener as the shot grows more powerful . A fully charged shot called a Deathrow will incapacitate any player it hits , while overcharged shots electrify and stun the carrier . 
 Before each game and single @-@ player Conquest , players choose between Sports and Action camera views . Action view is a trailing third @-@ person shot similar to looking over the player @-@ character 's shoulder , while Sports view is a spectator perspective similar that of a televised basketball game . Enclosed arenas are inaccessible when using Sports view . The camera view cannot be changed once single @-@ player begins , so Conquest mode players in Sports view will not see the arenas they unlock . The Action view camera swings wildly and can be pulled back slightly in the menus . 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 The in @-@ game story of Blitz begins in 2197 as a Los Angeles gang sport used to find recruits . Over 20 years later , the illegal sport is picked up for broadcast by the Prime Network , who forms the Blitz Disc Association ( BDA ) and plans for the first Blitz competition with exhibition games and prize money . Through exhibition games and prize money , 13 teams of humans with various competitive augmentations are chosen to compete . 
 Conquest , the single @-@ player tournament career mode , pits the player 's team against the ranked hierarchy en route to the championship . Up to three additional human players can join in the single @-@ player . Players initially choose between four teams , though 13 total are unlockable . Teams begin with four players with no alternates for substitution , and fight their way from fourth place in the Rookie Division to first place against each team in between . Players can continue to take challenges within the division before irrevocably moving on to the next division . 
 The player 's team receives randomized , team @-@ specific textual messages in between games , including offers for free agent offers , training sessions , drugs , bets on the player 's performance , and events including accidental gifts from the player 's manager , threats from the team 's owner , and organized crime extortions . Players can buy character attribute increases with their credits . Single @-@ player progress unlocks concept art and game assets external to the game , as well as new teams , players , and arenas . Each of the unlockable 13 teams has six unlockable players ( for a total of 10 players on each ) , and five additional legacy teams are limited to four players apiece . Multi @-@ disc and " Extreme " difficulty gameplay options are also unlockable . 
 = = Development = = 
 Deathrow was developed by Southend Interactive and produced by Ubisoft Entertainment . Five friends opened Southend in Malmö , Sweden in 1998 to fulfill their childhood ambitions to make video games . Southend began Deathrow development in May 1999 and expected the game to be an online PC video game tentatively titled Blitz Disc Arena . The idea for the sports game descended from a combination of Speedball 2 , the Quake and Unreal series , and Tekken . Southend 's nine @-@ person team received Xbox development kits in June 2000 and decided to move the game to console in early 2001 . According to Southend animator Rodrigo Cespedes in a 2002 TeamXbox interview , " Xbox was the only console that would allow [ them ] to produce the game as it was originally envisioned " , adding that Microsoft and Ubisoft encouraged the mature direction with emphasis on blood , brutality , and profanity . Thus they began to port the game to the console for its feature capabilities , including vertex and pixel shaders for bump mapped environmental textures and character animations , specular lighting , and bumped reflection mapping . 
 The game was developed on an in @-@ house 3D game engine under construction for multiple years . Each character is made of over 7000 polygons and 55 bones , making for players with facial expressions , over 800 animations , and a capacity to blink . Character faces can additionally express emotions like happiness or anger , and feelings of pain . The move to Xbox led to greater variation in the team personalities . The artists drew many options for each team and the developers chose from the lot . Deathrow was designed for the Action camera view , but Sports view was introduced to expand the game 's appeal . 
 Deathrow was displayed at Ubisoft 's E3 2002 booth , and was released on 18 October 2002 in Europe , and on 22 October 2002 in the United States as an Xbox exclusive . The game did not include Xbox Live online multiplayer for want of development time . At the time of release , Southend had no plans to release downloadable content , though they implemented a method to do so . The game was Southend 's first full release . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Deathrow received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . IGN and TeamXbox both named Deathrow an Editor 's Choice . The game won TeamXbox 's 2002 Breakthrough Game of the Year award and IGN 's 2002 Best Xbox Game Nobody Played . It was also runner @-@ up for their Xbox action game of the year . IGN felt that of the year 's praiseworthy yet unappreciated games , Deathrow alone " truly blew [ them ] away " . Critics praised the game 's fast , chaotic action and use of surround sound . The reviewers bemoaned its high difficulty curve , generic soundtrack , and lack of online multiplayer . Some reviewers thought the game used profanity excessively , while others considered it a highlight . 
 David Hodgson of Electronic Gaming Monthly ( EGM ) found Deathrow 's European origins apparent as " awkward , over @-@ the @-@ top expletives in obnoxious American accents " were paired with rugby . Hodgson said that Deathrow struggled to show grittiness in a very shiny environment . He added that the game suffered from immoderate violence , frustrating fighting sequences , lack of online play , and " steep learning curve " . Hodgson compared the core mechanics to a " mini @-@ game masquerading as sports entertainment " . William Racer of the Official Xbox Magazine ( OXM ) praised the fast @-@ paced nature of the game and its eye for detail , and complained about the camera angles and difficulty . He placed the game in a lineage of invented sports from a dystopian future and found the game more entertaining than the rest . Racer also found the music generic , and the voice acting good . Eric Bush of TeamXbox complimented the computer opponents 's artificial intelligence and said that they put up a challenge . GameSpy 's Osborne appreciated the game 's small details like the streak trailing the disc through the air . IGN 's Kaiser Hwang called the arena lighting effects , bump mapping , and textures the best since Halo : Combat Evolved . 1UP.com , OXM 's Racer , and IGN 's Douglass Perry and David Clayman recommended Deathrow as a party game , with the IGN staff specifically recommending the game with System Link . 
 GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin spoke highly of the tight controls and accessible gameplay in spite of a larger learning curve . IGN 's Goldstein described the controls as " relatively simple " and easy to understand within a single game , and Scott Osborne of GameSpy found the controls awkward but easily learned . In comparison , Charles Herold of The New York Times and a friend could not figure out Blitz 's rules for 20 minutes , feeling " too macho " to do the tutorial . Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette 's Jonathan Silver thought the gameplay was too frenzied , like " NHL Hitz on steroids " . Hilary Goldstein of IGN 's only complaint about the controls was the camera 's looseness . She noted the game 's " serious attitude " and " very gritty view of sports " , and similar to hockey , felt that the non @-@ disc action was " one of the nicest aspects " of the game . She praised the graphics and environments , surround sound , the array of unlockables , the single @-@ player , and its replay value , but bemoaned the lack of options to change between camera views , the Action view in general , and the <unk> between players . Goldstein regarded Deathrow 's profanity as the " best use of endless cursing in a game ... ever " . Herold of The New York Times noted violence 's centrality to the game and figured that the game 's age restrictions were likely due to the " savage profanities " , which he felt gave the game personality unlike other sports video games . He added that the game 's frantic speed kept him too consumed to curse at the game himself . The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution 's Troy Oxford also connected the profanity to the game 's " ' M ' rating " . 
 Edge referred to Deathrow as a substance @-@ less and " contrived clone " of the 1990 Speedball 2 , which used a ball instead of a disc . David Hodgson of EGM similarly praised the 1990 title in comparison . William Racer of OXM did not mind the two games ' similarities and added that " you might as well copy from the best " . While Kasavin of GameSpot thought the theme was tired , The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution 's Oxford wrote that the game felt " fresh " . Reflecting on the release year , IGN director Peer Schneider said that games like Deathrow showed the games industry 's ability to make new , high @-@ caliber franchises . Two IGN staffers predicted the game to be a sleeper hit : one noted the sparse press compared to the game 's quality , and the other explained that Ubisoft was busy promoting bigger titles such as Tom Clancy 's Splinter Cell , Dragon 's Lair 3D , and Rayman . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In 2006 , TeamXbox 's Matthew Fisher determined that the game aged well . In 2012 , Complex Gaming listed Deathrow 13th on its 15 Most Violent Sports Video Games . Scottish developer <unk> described their 2014 video game <unk> as a spiritual successor to Deathrow , Speedball 2 , and <unk> , though the game is set in the medieval past instead of the <unk> future . 
 Around the time of launch , Southend was interested in producing a sequel . In March 2004 , IGN listed Deathrow 2 as one of its five desired Xbox sequels , specifically for Xbox Live online play support . IGN placed its chances at a 90 % likelihood . IGN reported a month later that despite interest from Southend , Ubisoft would be unlikely to release a forthcoming Deathrow sequel due to the original 's low revenue . Southend separated from its Swedish IT consulting firm parent company , <unk> Holding AB , and became a fully independent company in April 2013 . With it , Southend CEO Fredrik <unk> announced that " now is the right time for Southend to manage its own destiny and to invest in its own products " , of which Deathrow and <unk> were examples . Southend closed in June 2013 when its full 24 @-@ person staff was hired into Ubisoft Massive , another Swedish developer . 
 = History of the National Hockey League ( 1967 – 92 ) = 
 The expansion era of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) began when six new teams were added for the 1967 – 68 season , ending the Original Six era . The six existing teams were grouped into the newly created East Division , and the expansion teams — the Los Angeles Kings , Minnesota North Stars , Oakland Seals , Philadelphia Flyers , Pittsburgh Penguins and St. Louis Blues — formed the West Division . 
 The NHL added another six teams by 1974 to bring the league to 18 teams . This continued expansion was partially brought about by the creation of the World Hockey Association ( WHA ) , which operated from 1972 until 1979 and sought to compete with the NHL for markets and players . Bobby Hull was the most famous player to defect to the rival league , signing a $ 2 @.@ 75 million contract with the Winnipeg Jets . When the WHA ceased operations in 1979 , the NHL absorbed four of the league 's teams — the Edmonton Oilers , Hartford Whalers , Quebec Nordiques and Winnipeg Jets . This brought the NHL to 21 teams ( the Cleveland Barons had ceased operations in 1978 ) , a figure that remained constant until the San Jose Sharks joined as an expansion franchise in 1991 . 
 The NHL became involved in international play , starting with the Summit Series in 1972 , which pitted the top Canadian players of the NHL against the top players of the Soviet Union . Canada won the eight @-@ game series four wins to three with one tie . The success of the series led to the creation of the Canada Cup , held five times between 1976 and 1991 . NHL teams also faced Soviet League teams that toured North America between 1975 and 1991 in what was known as the Super Series . The fall of the Iron Curtain in 1989 saw many former Soviet @-@ Bloc players stream into the NHL , joining several players who had defected in the 1980s . 
 This was the highest scoring period in NHL history . It was led in the 1980s by the Edmonton Oilers and Wayne Gretzky , who scored 200 points or more four times , including a current league @-@ record 215 in 1985 – 86 . Gretzky 's 92 goals in 1981 – 82 also remains a league record . No other player in NHL history has scored 200 points , although Mario Lemieux came close in 1988 – 89 with 199 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Expansion had been a major topic of discussion among NHL owners since 1963 , when William M. Jennings of the New York Rangers proposed adding two new teams on the West Coast to counter fears that the Western Hockey League intended to compete as a major league . After several years of discussion , the NHL announced in February 1966 that it would expand by six teams , doubling the league 's size . The Los Angeles Kings , Minnesota North Stars , California Seals , Philadelphia Flyers , Pittsburgh Penguins and St. Louis Blues began play in the 1967 – 68 season . They formed the newly created West Division , and the existing teams were grouped into the East Division . The playoff format was constructed so that an established team would face an expansion team in the Stanley Cup Finals . The Clarence S. Campbell Bowl was created in honour of league president Clarence Campbell , and was awarded to the West Division champion . 
 The new teams were stocked by the NHL 's first expansion draft , as each team selected 20 players from the existing franchises . There was much debate over how many players each existing team could protect : the strongest clubs wished to protect more players , while the weaker clubs hoped that protecting fewer players would help improve the balance of competition . Montreal Canadiens manager Sam Pollock 's suggestion to allow each team to protect eleven players to start , then add an additional player to their protected list for each player selected in the draft , was ultimately agreed to as a compromise solution . In addition , an " intra @-@ league draft " was held following the 1968 and 1969 seasons to help accelerate the improvement of the expansion teams . Each team protected two goaltenders and fourteen skaters , leaving their remaining players open to be selected by any other team . 
 Some teams created instant farm systems by buying existing minor league franchises . The Kings bought the Springfield Indians of the American Hockey League the night before the expansion draft , leading the Flyers to purchase the Quebec Aces . Expansion also changed how the amateur draft was handled . The old system , in which franchises sponsored junior teams and players , was abandoned by 1969 when all junior @-@ aged players were made eligible for the entry draft . 
 = = Expansion years = = 
 In their inaugural season , the Flyers finished atop the West Division , recording 73 points in 74 games . The California Seals , a pre @-@ season favourite to win the division , changed their name to the Oakland Seals a month into the season . The team disappointed both on the ice and at the gate , finishing last in the NHL with 14 wins . The Blues defeated the Flyers and North Stars to become the first expansion team to play for the Stanley Cup , where they were defeated in four consecutive games by the Canadiens . The Blues reached the finals again in both 1969 and 1970 , but were similarly swept in both years , losing to the Canadiens and Boston Bruins , respectively . 
 On January 13 , 1968 , North Stars ' rookie Bill Masterton became the first and , to date , only player to die as a result of injuries suffered during an NHL game . Early in a game against the Seals , Masterton was checked hard by two players , Ron Harris and Larry Cahan , causing him to flip over backwards and land on his head . He was rushed to hospital with massive head injuries , and died there two days later . The National Hockey League Writers Association presented the league with the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy later in the season ; the trophy is awarded annually to the player who best exemplifies the qualities of perseverance , sportsmanship and dedication to hockey . Following Masterton 's death , players slowly began wearing helmets ; starting in the 1979 – 80 season , the league mandated that all players entering the league wear them . 
 = = = Bobby Orr = = = 
 In the 1968 – 69 season , second @-@ year defenceman Bobby Orr scored 21 goals , an NHL record for a defenceman , en route to winning his first of eight consecutive Norris Trophies as the league 's top defenceman . At the same time , Orr 's teammate , Phil Esposito , became the first player in league history to score 100 points in a season , finishing with 126 points . He was one of three players to break the century mark that year , including Bobby Hull and 41 @-@ year @-@ old Gordie Howe . 
 A gifted scorer , Orr revolutionized defencemen 's impact on the offensive side of the game , as blue @-@ liners began to be judged on how well they created goals in addition to how well they prevented them . Orr scored the Stanley @-@ Cup @-@ winning goal in overtime of the fourth game against the Blues in 1970 , which gave the Bruins their first championship in 29 years . The goal was highlighted by his famous flight through the air after being tripped up following his shot . Orr twice won the Art Ross Trophy as the NHL 's leading scorer , still the only defenceman in NHL history to do so . His plus / minus of + 124 in 1970 – 71 is a league record . Orr signed a five @-@ year contract that paid him $ 200 @,@ 000 per season in 1971 , the first $ 1 million contract in league history . 
 Chronic knee problems plagued Orr throughout his career . In 1972 , he tore ligaments in his left knee after a hard hit , leading to the first of six knee operations . He played 12 seasons in the NHL before injuries forced his retirement in 1978 . Orr finished with 270 goals and 915 points in 657 games and won the Hart Memorial Trophy as the league 's Most Valuable Player three times . The customary three @-@ year post @-@ retirement waiting period for entry into the Hockey Hall of Fame was waived as he was enshrined in 1979 . 
 = = = Buffalo and Vancouver = = = 
 In Canada , there was widespread outrage over the denial of an expansion team to Vancouver in 1967 . Three years later , the NHL added a third Canadian team when the Vancouver Canucks , formerly of the Western Hockey League , were admitted as an expansion team for the 1970 – 71 season , along with the Buffalo Sabres , another team whose owners had bid unsuccessfully for an expansion team in 1967 . The Canucks were placed in the East Division , despite being on the west coast , while the Chicago Black Hawks were shifted to the West in an attempt to equalize the divisions ' strength . The league also gave the Sabres and Canucks the first two picks in each round of the 1970 NHL Amateur Draft , offering them a better opportunity to build their rosters than the 1967 expansion teams had . Buffalo 's first round pick was Gilbert Perreault , a future Hall of Famer who would play seventeen seasons in Buffalo . 
 Before the 1971 – 72 season , Gordie Howe and Jean Beliveau announced their retirements . Beliveau finished his 18 @-@ year career with 10 Stanley Cups , 2 Hart Trophies and 1 @,@ 219 career points ; his points total was the second @-@ highest in NHL history . After playing 25 seasons in the NHL , Howe retired as the league 's all @-@ time leader in games played , goals , assists and points . Howe was a six @-@ time league scoring champion , and also won six Hart Trophies . Both players had the customary three @-@ year waiting period waived for entry into the Hockey Hall of Fame in acknowledgement of their achievements . 
 = = World Hockey Association = = 
 In 1972 , the NHL faced competition from the newly formed World Hockey Association ( WHA ) . The WHA lured many players away from the NHL , including Derek Sanderson , J. C. Tremblay and Ted Green . The WHA 's biggest coup was to lure Bobby Hull from the Black Hawks to play for the Winnipeg Jets . Hull signed a 10 @-@ year deal : five years as a player for $ 250 @,@ 000 per season , and five more for $ 100 @,@ 000 per season in a front @-@ office position . It also included a $ 1 million signing bonus . The deal totaled $ 2 @.@ 7 million , and lent instant credibility to the new league . After Hull signed , several other players quickly followed suit . Bernie Parent , Gerry Cheevers , Johnny McKenzie and Rick Ley jumped to the WHA as the NHL suddenly found itself in a war for talent . By the time the 1972 – 73 WHA season began , 67 players had switched from the NHL to the WHA . Defections continued following the season , and the WHA scored another major coup when it signed Gordie Howe 's sons Mark and Marty . The league then convinced Gordie to come out of retirement to play with them on the Houston Aeros . 
 The NHL tried to block several of the defections . The Bruins attempted to restrain Cheevers and Sanderson from joining the WHA , though a United States federal court refused to prohibit the signings . The Black Hawks were successful in having a restraining order filed against Hull and the Jets pending the outcome of legal action the Black Hawks were taking against the WHA . The WHA was eager for the court action , intending to challenge the legality of the reserve clause , which bound a player to their NHL team until that team released him . In November 1972 , a Philadelphia district court placed an injunction against the NHL , preventing it from enforcing the reserve clause and freeing all players who had restraining orders against them , including Hull , to play with their WHA clubs . The decision effectively ended the NHL 's monopoly on major league professional hockey talent . 
 The NHL also found itself competing with the WHA for markets . Initially , the league had no intention to expand past 14 teams , but the threat the WHA posed changed this . Hoping to keep the WHA out of the newly completed Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale , New York and the Omni Coliseum in Atlanta , Georgia , the league hastily announced the creation of the New York Islanders and Atlanta Flames as 1972 expansion teams . Following the 1972 – 73 season , the NHL announced it was further expanding to 18 teams for the 1974 – 75 season , adding the Kansas City Scouts and Washington Capitals . In just eight years , the NHL had tripled in size to 18 teams . 
 = = Summit Series = = 
 Internationally , Canada had long been protesting the Soviet Union 's use of " professional amateurs " at the World Championships and the Olympic Games , which were amateur events . Canada withdrew from international competition in 1969 and boycotted the 1972 Olympic hockey tournament . As an alternative , NHL Players ' Association executive director Alan Eagleson negotiated a deal with Soviet authorities to hold an eight @-@ game series between the Soviet national team and Canada 's top professionals . 
 The tournament was the NHL 's response to the defection of players to the WHA . Bobby Hull was barred from playing , as was any other player who signed a contract with the rival league , which was a heavily criticized move . Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau sent a telegram to NHL president Clarence Campbell , expressing his " intense interest which I share with millions of Canadians ... that Canada should be represented by its best hockey players , including Bobby Hull " . Echoing the feelings of the public , Hull called the decision " crazy " , and stated that " I 'm a Canadian and I want to play for my country . I don 't know why the NHL has to be so petty over this . I want to do this for Canada . " The NHL did not relent . 
 The series was tied at three wins apiece and a tie entering the eighth and deciding game , with millions of Canadians watching " the game of the century " . With the game tied at five late in the third , the Soviets were met with a concerted Canadian attack in the final seven minutes . With 34 seconds remaining in the game , Esposito took a shot at Vladislav Tretiak from 12 feet out . Paul Henderson scooped up the rebound and put it past the fallen Soviet goalie to score the goal that won the game , 6 – 5 , and the series . Later , Alexander <unk> , the former Soviet ambassador to Canada , argued that the Summit Series planted the seeds of glasnost and perestroika in the Soviet Union , as it was one of the first times that the Soviet people had seen so many foreigners who had not come to do harm , but to share in the game . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The series forced the NHL and the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association to reassess all aspects of how the game was played in North America . Journalist Herb Pinder described the NHL to that point in this way : " The Europeans took our game and evolved it , while we stood still or even went backwards . The Russians had a style , and the Czechs ' style was different from that ... There was this hockey world evolving through international competition , and we 're back here , stuck , just playing ourselves . It was a business monopoly . And like any monopoly , the NHL got stagnant . " Throughout the 1970s and 1980s , Canadian hockey encouraged the adoption of new coaching and training methods used in Europe , and emphasized conditioning and skills development . 
 The NHL took a greater interest in international play . The Canada Cup , a tournament that featured the top professional players in the world , was held first in 1976 , and then four more times until 1991 . It was succeeded by the World Cup of Hockey in 1996 . Beginning in 1975 , Soviet club teams began touring North America , playing NHL clubs in exhibition games that were known as the Super Series . The Calgary Flames and Washington Capitals similarly toured the Soviet Union in 1989 in the first " Friendship Series " . The Soviet national team defeated an NHL all @-@ star team in a 1979 challenge series , two games to one , and split Rendez @-@ vous ' 87 , a two @-@ game series held in Quebec City . 
 = = 1970s = = 
 = = = Broad Street Bullies = = = 
 The 1970s were associated with aggressive , and often violent , play . Known as the " Broad Street Bullies " , the Philadelphia Flyers are the most famous example of this style . The Flyers established league records for penalty minutes — Dave " the Hammer " Schultz 's total of 472 in 1974 – 75 remains a league record — and ended up in courtrooms multiple times when players went into the stands to challenge fans who got involved . One such incident occurred in Vancouver in December 1972 , when a fan reached over the glass to pull the hair of Don <unk> , who had a chokehold on Vancouver 's Barry Wilkins . Bobby Taylor and several Flyers teammates followed the fan into the stands . The next time Philadelphia went to Vancouver , several players were brought before the courts on charges that ranged from use of obscene language to common assault . Six players were fined , and Taylor received a 30 @-@ day suspended sentence . Despite these incidents , the Flyers won : they captured the 1974 Stanley Cup , becoming the first expansion team to win the league championship , and repeated as champions in 1975 . 
 In 1975 , Soviet club teams began to tour North America in the first Super Series . The Canadiens played Central Red Army to a 3 – 3 draw on New Year 's Eve 1975 , in a game that is considered one of the finest ever played . Red Army lost only one of four games against the NHL in the first tour , a 4 – 1 defeat to Philadelphia , who intimidated them as the Flyers did to their NHL opponents . At one point , Red Army threatened to forfeit the game after Ed Van Impe decked Valeri Kharlamov . Red Army was persuaded to complete the game after Alan Eagleson threatened to withhold their appearance fee if the team did not return to the ice . Super Series games continued until 1991 , when Soviet players were allowed to enter the NHL after the collapse of the Soviet Union . 
 = = = End of the two @-@ league era = = = 
 On February 7 , 1976 , Maple Leafs star Darryl Sittler set an NHL record , scoring 10 points in one game in an 11 – 4 victory over the Bruins . His six @-@ goal , four @-@ assist effort broke Maurice Richard 's record of eight points in a game . The game came shortly after the Bruins lured Gerry Cheevers back from the WHA , though Cheevers was given an extra night to rest , and rookie Dave Reece was the victim of all 11 Toronto goals . It was his 14th , and final , NHL game . 
 By 1976 , both leagues were dealing with serious financial problems . Talks of a merger between the NHL and the WHA were growing . Bobby Hull declared that a merger was " inevitable " , though WHA president Bill MacFarland stated that his league had no interest in joining with the NHL . In 1976 , for the first time in four decades , the NHL approved franchise relocations ; the Scouts moved after just two years in Kansas City to Denver to become the Colorado Rockies , while the California Golden Seals became the Cleveland Barons . In its wake , the league quietly shelved provisional expansion franchises granted to Seattle and Denver to take place in the 1977 season . Two years later , after failed overtures towards merging the Barons with Washington and Vancouver , they merged with the Minnesota North Stars , reducing the NHL to 17 teams for 1978 – 79 . 
 The WHA 's last triumph was to lure junior prodigy Wayne Gretzky to their league in 1978 – 79 . Nelson Skalbania , owner of the Indianapolis Racers and part owner of the Edmonton Oilers , was convinced to sign Gretzky to play for the Racers . The 17 @-@ year @-@ old Gretzky scored 110 points in his first professional season , split between the Racers and the Oilers . 
 The move towards a merger picked up in 1977 when John Ziegler succeeded Campbell as NHL president . After several years of negotiations , WHA owners thought they had an agreement in March 1979 . The motion to merge failed when supporters in the NHL lost by one vote . Word got out that the Montreal Canadiens , owned by Molson Brewery , and the Vancouver Canucks , who served Molson products at their games , had voted against the merger . Fans across Canada quickly organized a boycott of Molson products , while the House of Commons unanimously passed a motion urging the NHL to reconsider . Another vote was held , and both Montreal and Vancouver switched their votes , allowing the motion to pass . The WHA folded following the 1978 – 79 season , and the Edmonton Oilers , New England Whalers , Quebec Nordiques and Winnipeg Jets joined the NHL as expansion teams . 
