 = = Twenty @-@ one teams = = 
 The merger brought Gordie Howe back to the NHL for one final season in 1979 – 80 . At age 51 , Howe played all 80 games for the Whalers , scoring 15 goals to bring his NHL career total to 801 . He entered his second retirement as the league 's all @-@ time scoring leader with 1 @,@ 850 points . Howe 's final season was also the last for the Atlanta Flames . The team averaged an attendance of only 9 @,@ 800 fans per game and lost over $ 2 million in 1979 – 80 . They were sold for a record $ 16 million , and relocated north to become the Calgary Flames in 1980 – 81 . Two years later , the Rockies were sold for $ 30 million , and left Denver to become the New Jersey Devils for the 1982 – 83 season . 
 The St. Louis Blues nearly relocated to Saskatoon in 1983 , as Bill Hunter , an original investor in the WHA , announced an intention to purchase and relocate the team . Hunter quickly convinced 18 @,@ 000 people to commit to season tickets in a proposed arena for the city . The other team owners rejected the sale and relocation by a 15 – 3 vote , prompting the Blues ' owner , Ralston Purina , to file a $ 60 million anti @-@ trust lawsuit against the league . Both the league as a whole and the individual teams filed $ 78 million counter suits against Purina . As part of the conflict , Purina turned the team over to the NHL at the beginning of June 1983 to " operate , sell or dispose of in whatever manner the league desires " , while the Blues refused to participate in the 1983 NHL Entry Draft , forfeiting all of their draft picks . By the end of July , the league had sold the team to Harry Ornest , who vowed the team would remain in St. Louis . Ralston Purina and the NHL settled their legal issues in 1985 , though terms of the settlements were not released . 
 In 1980 , the New York Islanders won their first of four consecutive Stanley Cups . With the likes of Billy Smith , Mike Bossy , Denis Potvin , and Bryan Trottier , the Islanders dominated both the regular season and the playoffs . In 1981 , Bossy became the first player to score 50 goals in 50 games since Maurice Richard in 1945 . In 1982 – 83 , the Edmonton Oilers won the regular season championship . The Islanders and Oilers met in the Finals and New York swept Edmonton for their last Stanley Cup . They were the second franchise to win four straight championships , after the Canadiens . The 1984 playoffs would be the site of the infamous Good Friday Massacre between the Quebec Nordiques and the Montreal Canadiens . 
 The following season , the Oilers and Islanders met again in the playoffs . The Oilers won the rematch in five games , marking the start of another dynasty . Led by Wayne Gretzky and Mark Messier , the Oilers won five Stanley Cup championships between 1984 and 1990 . The Oilers won two consecutive Cups in the 1983 – 84 and 1984 – 85 seasons , and in the 1986 – 87 and 1987 – 88 seasons . They also won a Cup in the 1989 – 90 season . The Oilers ' Cup streaks were interrupted in the 1985 – 86 and 1988 – 89 seasons by two other Canadian teams . Edmonton 's hopes for a third consecutive title in 1986 were dashed by their provincial rival , the Calgary Flames , after Oilers ' rookie Steve Smith accidentally bounced the series @-@ winning goal off goaltender Grant Fuhr and into his own net . Smith 's error remains one of the most legendary blunders in hockey history . The Flames were defeated by the Canadiens in the finals , as rookie goaltender Patrick Roy led Montreal to their 23rd Stanley Cup . The 1989 final was a rematch between the Flames and the Canadiens and was won by Calgary , which captured its only championship in franchise history . The Flames also became the only team to defeat the Montreal Canadiens for the Stanley Cup at the Montreal Forum . 
 The 21 @-@ team era ended in 1990 , when the league revealed ambitious plans to double league revenues from $ 400 million within a decade and bring the NHL to 28 franchises during that period . The NHL quickly announced three new teams : The San Jose Sharks , who began play in the 1991 – 92 season , and the Ottawa Senators and Tampa Bay Lightning , who followed a year later . 
 The Sharks ' creation forestalled a unilateral franchise move by North Stars owners George and Gordon Gund to the San Francisco Bay Area . A settlement with the league granted them the expansion franchise , while they sold the North Stars to Howard Baldwin 's group in 1990 . Prior to the 1991 @-@ 92 season , the Sharks and North Stars participated in a unique expansion draft , which saw San Jose select unprotected players from Minnesota ( including future All @-@ Star goalie <unk> Irbe ) before both teams picked players from the remainder of the league . The Sharks would struggle in their inaugural season , finishing with a league @-@ low 17 wins and 39 points while playing out of the Cow Palace , while the North Stars ( who were sold again , to Norman Green , during the 1990 @-@ 91 season ) would make the playoffs for what proved to be the final time before their eventual relocation to Dallas in 1993 . 
 = = = Wayne Gretzky = = = 
 In the latter part of the 1980s , the Oilers won five Stanley Cup titles in seven years , becoming the only team to score 400 or more goals in a season , which they did four times . With future Hall of Famers Grant Fuhr , Paul Coffey , Jari Kurri , Mark Messier , and Glenn Anderson , they established numerous new scoring records . 
 The Oilers were led by Wayne Gretzky , who remained with the Oilers when they joined the NHL in 1979 . At 5 feet 11 inches ( 1 @.@ 80 m ) and 170 pounds ( 77 kg ) , some observers doubted that Gretzky could match his offensive performance from his lone WHA season . " I heard a lot of talk then that I 'd never get 110 points like I did in the WHA , " said Gretzky . He proved his critics wrong , scoring 137 points in 1979 – 80 and winning the first of nine Hart Trophies ( including 8 consecutive awards from 1980 – 1988 ) as the NHL 's most valuable player . Over the next several seasons , Gretzky established new highs in goals scored in a season , with 92 in the 1981 – 82 season ; in assists , with 163 in the 1985 – 86 ; and in total points , with 215 in 1985 – 86 . He also scored 50 goals in 39 games , the fastest any player had reached the total in a single season . Gretzky scored his 1,000th NHL point in his 424th game , breaking Guy Lafleur 's old record of 720 games . 
 Gretzky 's teammates set records of their own . Fuhr 's 14 assists in the 1983 – 84 season set a record for most points by a goaltender in a season . In 1985 – 86 , Coffey set a record for the most goals in a season by a defenceman , with 48 . Adding 90 assists , Coffey wound up a point short of tying Bobby Orr 's record for most points in a season by a blue @-@ liner . 
 On August 9 , 1988 , Oilers owner Peter Pocklington , in financial trouble , traded Gretzky , along with Marty McSorley and Mike Krushelnyski , to the Los Angeles Kings in exchange for Jimmy Carson , Martin Gelinas , US $ 15 million and three first @-@ round draft picks . Gretzky left Edmonton with a tear @-@ filled news conference , and later said that Edmonton was the only place he ever dreaded playing . Gretzky 's trade to the Kings popularized ice hockey in the United States , making hockey " cool " in Hollywood , and shocked fans across Canada . The Kings were the most popular Los Angeles sports team , and Gretzky 's fame rivaled that of his peers with baseball 's Los Angeles Dodgers and basketball 's Los Angeles Lakers . 
 With the Kings , Gretzky broke Gordie Howe 's record for career points . On October 15 , 1989 , against his former Oilers ' teammates , and with Howe in attendance , Gretzky tied the record with a first period assist before notching his <unk> career point with a third period goal . " An award such as this takes a lot of teamwork and help and both teams here today definitely have a part of the 1 @,@ 851 [ points ] . " said Gretzky . 
 = = Fall of the Iron Curtain = = 
 While European @-@ born players were a part of the NHL since its founding , it was still rare to see them in the league until 1980 . The WHA turned to the previously overlooked European market in search for talent , signing players from Finland and Sweden . Anders Hedberg , Lars @-@ Erik Sjoberg and Ulf Nilsson signed with the Jets in 1974 and thrived in North America , both in the WHA and later the NHL . The Jets won three of the six remaining WHA championships after signing European players , and their success sparked similar signings league @-@ wide . 
 Borje Salming was the first European star in the NHL . He signed with the Maple Leafs in 1973 , and played 16 seasons in the NHL , retiring in 1990 . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1996 . His fellow Swede , Pelle Lindbergh , was one of the top goaltenders in the world in the early 1980s . He led the Flyers to the 1985 Stanley Cup Finals before dying in a car accident during the 1985 – 86 season . Finns Jari Kurri and Esa Tikkanen helped lead the Oilers dynasty of the 1980s . 
 While the WHA opened the door , and players slowly joined the NHL , those behind the Iron Curtain were restricted from following suit . In 1980 , Peter Stastny , his wife , and his brother Anton secretly fled Czechoslovakia with the aid of Nordiques owner Marcel Aubut . The <unk> ' defection made international headlines , and contributed to the first wave of Eastern Europeans ' entrance into the NHL . Hoping that they would one day be permitted to play in the NHL , teams drafted Soviet players in the 1980s , 27 in all by the 1988 draft . However , defection was the only way such players could join the teams that drafted them . Michal <unk> defected from Czechoslovakia in 1986 , while Russian Alexander Mogilny defected following the 1989 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships in Anchorage , Alaska . Czech teenager Petr Nedved walked into a Calgary police station in January 1989 after playing in the Mac 's AAA midget hockey tournament . 
 Shortly before the end of the 1988 – 89 regular season , Flames general manager Cliff Fletcher announced that he had reached an agreement with Soviet authorities that allowed Sergei Pryakhin to play in North America . It was the first time a member of the Soviet national team was permitted to play for a non @-@ Soviet team . Shortly after , Soviet players began to flood into the NHL . Teams anticipated that there would be an influx of Soviet players in the 1990s , as 18 Soviets were selected in the 1989 NHL Entry Draft . The entire " KLM " line , the Soviet team 's top line , joined the NHL in 1989 as Vladimir Krutov and Igor Larionov played for the Canucks , while Sergei Makarov went to Calgary . Makarov won the Calder Memorial Trophy as rookie of the year in 1990 , a selection that caused controversy ; he was 32 years old and had played 11 pro seasons in the Soviet League . In the wake of the controversy , the NHL amended its rules : players over the age of 26 were no longer considered for the award . The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the demise of the Iron Curtain paved the way for more Eastern European players to play in North America . Only six European players were selected at the 1979 NHL Entry Draft . That number increased to 32 in 1989 , while a record 123 Europeans were drafted in 2000 . Europeans made up 22 @.@ 5 % of the NHL in 2013 @-@ 14 , totalling 232 players . 
 = = Rules and innovations = = 
 The early 1980s saw many tie games . The 1982 – 83 North Stars and Capitals both finished with 16 ties in 80 games , while 17 of 21 teams tied 10 or more games . The season before , the North Stars recorded 20 ties . As a result of the frequent ties , the NHL reintroduced overtime for the 1983 – 84 season . The effect was immediate , as only seven teams had ten or more ties . Before its discontinuation during World War II , the NHL played a full 10 @-@ minute overtime period . The modern overtime format was set as a five @-@ minute , sudden death period ; the game ended when either team scored . 
 The NHL changed its divisional alignment and playoff formats numerous times as it grew . The league 's doubling in 1967 also led to the expansion of the playoffs to eight teams from four the previous year . Expansion to 18 teams in 1974 caused the league to realign into two conferences and four divisions , each named after important figures in league history . The teams were split into the Campbell Conference , consisting of the Patrick and Smythe divisions , and the Prince of Wales Conference , consisting of the Adams and Norris divisions . The playoffs were expanded to 12 teams , and each division winner was granted a bye in the first round of the playoffs . The addition of the four WHA teams in 1979 saw the playoffs expanded to 16 teams . Finally , in 1981 , the league realigned all teams by geography . Eastern teams played in the Adams and Patrick divisions of the Wales Conference , and Western teams played in the Norris and Smythe divisions of the Campbell Conference . In addition , the playoff format was changed to have the top four teams in each division qualify rather than the top 16 teams overall . The first two playoff rounds were played entirely within each division . This format lasted until 1993 . 
 = = = Entry Draft = = = 
 During the late 1960s , the concept of sponsoring junior players and teams had been dismantled , meaning that for the 1969 NHL Amateur Draft , every player aged 20 or above was eligible to be selected . The Montreal Canadiens , however , exercised a special " cultural option " that allowed them to select two players of French @-@ Canadian heritage , before any other players were selected . These players counted as Montreal 's first two choices . After the Canadiens took Rejean Houle and Marc Tardif , the rest of the league voted to end the rule in 1970 , just before future star Gilbert Perreault was selected first in the 1970 expansion draft by the Buffalo Sabres . 
 In 1974 , Sabres general manager Punch Imlach decided to play a joke on the league during the draft . He selected Taro Tsujimoto of the " Tokyo <unk> " with his 11th round pick . Other teams were shocked that the Sabres had scouted for players in Japan , and the league made the pick official . Weeks later , Imlach admitted that he made the player up , choosing the name out of a phone book . 
 The league reformatted the Amateur Draft into the NHL Entry Draft in 1979 and simultaneously lowered the draft age to 19 . It was first opened to the public in 1980 , when 2 @,@ 500 fans attended the draft in the Montreal Forum . The public draft has grown such that it is now held annually in NHL arenas and televised internationally . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 Notes 
 The year given refers to the year in which that season began and not the year in which the Stanley Cup Playoffs took place 
 The California Golden Seals were known as the California Seals in 1967 and as the Oakland Seals from 1967 – 1970 . 
 The Cleveland Barons merged with the Minnesota North Stars in 1978 . 
 " SC " denotes teams that won the Stanley Cup . 
 = HMS Birkenhead ( 1845 ) = 
 HMS Birkenhead , also referred to as HM Troopship Birkenhead or Steam Frigate Birkenhead , was one of the first iron @-@ hulled ships built for the Royal Navy . She was designed as a steam frigate , but was converted to a troopship before being commissioned . 
 She was wrecked on 26 February 1852 , while transporting troops to Algoa Bay at Danger Point near Gansbaai , 140 kilometres from Cape Town , South Africa . There were not enough serviceable lifeboats for all the passengers , and the soldiers famously stood firm , thereby allowing the women and children to board the boats safely . 
 Only 193 of the 643 people on board survived , and the soldiers ' chivalry gave rise to the " women and children first " protocol when abandoning ship , while the " Birkenhead drill " of Rudyard Kipling 's poem came to describe courage in face of hopeless circumstances . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 The Birkenhead was laid down at John Laird 's shipyard at Birkenhead as the frigate HMS Vulcan , but renamed soon after to Birkenhead after the town where she was built . She had two 564 horsepower ( 421 kW ) steam engines from Forrester & Co that drove a pair of 6 @-@ metre ( 20 ft ) paddle wheels , and two masts rigged as a brig . 
 According to her designer , John Laird : 
 The designs I submitted , and which were finally approved , were of a vessel 210 feet ( 64 m ) long ( being about 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) longer than any vessel of her class had been built ) , and 37 • 6 beam with a displacement of 1918 tons on the load water @-@ line of 15 • 9 . The only change made by authorities at the Admiralty in these designs was the position of the paddle shaft , which they ordered to be moved several feet more forward ; the change was unfortunate as it makes the vessel , unless due care is taken in stowing the hold , trim by the head . With this exception , I am answerable for the model , specification , displacement and general arrangement of the hull of the vessel . 
 The ship was divided into eight watertight compartments , while the engine room was divided by two longitudinal bulkheads into four compartments , making 12 watertight compartments in total . She had a round stern and a bow that ended in a large figurehead of Vulcan , holding a hammer in one hand , and some of " the bolts of Jove " that he had just forged in the other . Her armament was originally intended to be two 96 @-@ pounder pivot guns , one forward and the other aft , and four 68 @-@ pounder broadside guns . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 The Birkenhead was launched on 30 December 1845 by the Marchioness of Westminster . Her hull then weighed 903 tons and drew 9 @.@ 75 feet ( 2 @.@ 97 m ) , although she was at this time missing approximately 15 tons of cabin fittings . Machinery , stores , and other fittings were expected to add an additional 1 @,@ 000 or so tons , increasing her draught six more feet . She undertook her maiden voyage to Plymouth in 1846 , averaging 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) to 13 knots ( 24 km / h ) for the journey . 
 She remained laid up for some time , before being put to varied use around England , Scotland and Ireland . In November 1846 , Isambard Kingdom Brunel 's iron ship SS Great Britain ran aground on the sands of Dundrum Bay , Ireland . There was doubt as to whether she could be re @-@ floated . Brunel advised that if anyone could rescue the ship then the man to do it was the naval engineer James Bremner . He was engaged and the Great Britain was re @-@ floated on 27 August 1847 with the assistance of HMS Birkenhead . 
 The Birkenhead was never commissioned as a frigate , as two factors came into play while she was still under construction , that resulted in her being converted into a troopship . Firstly , the Royal Navy 's warships were switched from paddle wheels to more efficient propeller propulsion , following an experiment organised by the Admiralty in 1845 in which the benefits of the propeller over the paddle wheel were dramatically demonstrated . Secondly , the Admiralty had doubts about the effects of cannon shot against iron hulls — in a number of trials carried out at Royal Arsenal in 1845 , at lower velocities shot made a jagged hole that was hard to plug . 
 As part of her conversion to a troopship in 1851 , a forecastle and poop deck were added to the Birkenhead to increase her accommodation , and a third mast added , to change her sail plan to a barquentine . Although she never served as a warship , she was faster and more comfortable than any of the wooden sail @-@ driven troopships of the time , making the trip from the Cape in 37 days in October 1850 . 
 = = Final voyage ( 1852 ) = = 
 In January 1852 , under the command of Captain Robert Salmond RN , the Birkenhead left Portsmouth conveying troops from ten different regiments , including the 74th Regiment of Foot and Queen 's Royal Regiment , to the 8th Xhosa War ( then called the " <unk> War " ) against the Xhosa in South Africa . On 5 January , she picked up more soldiers at Queenstown ( now Cobh ) , Ireland , and conveyed some officers ' wives and families . 
 On 23 February 1852 , Birkenhead docked briefly at Simonstown , near Cape Town . Most of the women and children disembarked along with a number of sick soldiers . Nine cavalry horses , several bales of hay and 35 tons of coal were loaded for the last leg of the voyage to Algoa Bay . 
 She sailed from Simon 's Bay at 06 : 00 on 25 February 1852 with between 630 and 643 men , women and children aboard , the exact number being in some doubt . In order to make the best possible speed , Captain Salmond decided to hug the South African coast , setting a course that was generally within 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) of the shore . Using her paddle wheels , she maintained a steady speed of 8 @.@ 5 knots ( 15 @.@ 7 km / h ) . The sea was calm and the night was clear as she left False Bay and headed east . 
 Shortly before 02 : 00 on 26 February , while Birkenhead was travelling at a speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ) , the <unk> made soundings of 12 fathoms ( 22 m ) . Before he could take another sounding , she struck an uncharted rock at 34 ° 38 ′ 42 ″ S 19 ° 17 ′ 9 ″ E with 2 fathoms ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) of water beneath her bows and 11 fathoms ( 20 m ) at her stern . The rock lies near Danger Point ( today near Gansbaai , Western Cape ) . Barely submerged , it is clearly visible in rough seas , but it is not immediately apparent in calmer conditions . 
 Captain Salmond rushed on deck and ordered the anchor to be dropped , the quarter @-@ boats to be lowered , and a turn astern to be given by the engines . However , as the ship backed off the rock , the sea rushed into the large hole made by the collision and the ship struck again , buckling the plates of the forward bilge and ripping open the bulkheads . Shortly , the forward compartments and the engine rooms were flooded , and over 100 soldiers were drowned in their berths . 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 The surviving soldiers mustered and awaited their officers ' orders . Salmond ordered Colonel Seton to send men to the chain pumps ; sixty were directed to this task , sixty more were assigned to the tackles of the lifeboats , and the rest were assembled on the poop deck in order to raise the forward part of the ship . The women and children were placed in the ship 's cutter , which lay alongside . Two other boats were manned , but one was immediately swamped and the other could not be launched due to poor maintenance and paint on the winches , leaving only three boats available . The two large boats , with capacities of 150 men each , were not among them . 
 The surviving officers and men assembled on deck , where Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Seton of the 74th Foot took charge of all military personnel and stressed the necessity of maintaining order and discipline to his officers . As a survivor later recounted : " Almost everybody kept silent , indeed nothing was heard , but the kicking of the horses and the orders of Salmond , all given in a clear firm voice . " 
 Ten minutes after the first impact , the engines still turning astern , the ship struck again beneath the engine room , tearing open her bottom . She instantly broke in two just aft of the mainmast . The funnel went over the side and the <unk> of the ship sank at once . The stern section , now crowded with men , floated for a few minutes before sinking . 
 Just before she sank , Salmond called out that " all those who can swim jump overboard , and make for the boats " . Colonel Seton , however , recognising that rushing the lifeboats would risk swamping them and endangering the women and children , ordered the men to stand fast , and only three men made the attempt . The cavalry horses were freed and driven into the sea in the hope that they might be able to swim ashore . 
 The soldiers did not move , even as the ship broke up barely 20 minutes after striking the rock . Some of the soldiers managed to swim the 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to shore over the next 12 hours , often hanging on to pieces of the wreck to stay afloat , but most drowned , died of exposure or were taken by sharks . 
 I remained on the wreck until she went down ; the suction took me down some way , and a man got hold of my leg , but I managed to kick him off and came up and struck out for some pieces of wood that were on the water and started for land , about two miles off . I was in the water about five hours , as the shore was so rocky and the surf ran so high that a great many were lost trying to land . Nearly all those that took to the water without their clothes on were taken by sharks ; hundreds of them were all round us , and I saw men taken by them close to me , but as I was dressed ( having on a flannel shirt and trousers ) they preferred the others . I was not in the least hurt , and am happy to say , kept my head clear ; most of the officers lost their lives from losing their presence of mind and trying to take money with them , and from not throwing off their coats . 
 - Letter from Lieutenant J.F. Girardot , 43rd Light Infantry , to his father , 1 March 1852 . 
 The next morning , the schooner Lioness discovered one of the cutters , and after saving the occupants of the second boat made her way to the scene of the disaster . Arriving in the afternoon , she found 40 people still clinging to the rigging . It was reported that of the approximately 643 people aboard , only 193 were saved . Captain Edward WC Wright of the 91st Argyllshire Regiment was the most senior army officer to survive ; he was awarded a brevet majority for his actions during the ordeal , dated 26 February 1852 . 
 The number of personnel aboard is in some doubt , but an estimate of 638 was published in The Times . It is generally thought that the survivors comprised 113 soldiers ( all ranks ) , 6 Royal Marines , 54 seamen ( all ranks ) , 7 women , 13 children and at least one male civilian , but these numbers cannot be substantiated , as muster rolls and books were lost with the ship . 
 Of the horses , eight made it safely to land , while the ninth had its leg broken while being pushed into the sea . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 A number of sailors were court martialled as a result of the accident . The court was held on 8 May 1852 on board HMS Victory in Portsmouth , and attracted a great deal of interest . However , as none of the senior naval officers of the Birkenhead survived , no @-@ one was found to be to blame . Captain Edward WC Wright of the 91st Argyllshire Regiment told the court martial : 
 The order and regularity that prevailed on board , from the moment the ship struck till she totally disappeared , far exceeded anything that I had thought could be effected by the best discipline ; and it is the more to be wondered at seeing that most of the soldiers were but a short time in the service . Everyone did as he was directed and there was not a murmur or cry amongst them until the ship made her final plunge – all received their orders and carried them out as if they were embarking instead of going to the bottom – I never saw any embarkation conducted with so little noise or confusion . 
 In 1895 , a lighthouse was erected at Danger Point to warn shipping of the dangerous reef . The lighthouse is about 18 metres ( 59 ft ) tall and is visible for approximately 25 nautical miles ( 46 km ) . In 1936 , a remembrance plate for the Birkenhead was affixed to its base by the Navy League of South Africa . A new Birkenhead memorial was erected nearby in March 1995 . In December 2001 , the plaque was moved closer to the lighthouse . 
 A memorial in St Giles ' Cathedral , Edinburgh , bears the following inscription : 
 In memory of <unk> Alexander Seton , Ensign Alex . C. Russell , and forty @-@ eight <unk> and men of the 74th Highlanders who were drowned at the wreck of H.M.S. ' Birkenhead ' on the 26th February 1852 , off Point Danger , Cape of Good Hope , after all the women and children on board had been safely landed in the ship 's boats . 
 Frederick William IV of Prussia recognised the bravery of the soldiers and ordered an account of the incident to be read at the head of every regiment in his army . Queen Victoria ordered the erection of an official Birkenhead monument at the Chelsea Royal Hospital . In 1892 , Thomas M. M. Hemy painted a widely admired maritime depiction of the incident , " The wreck of the Birkenhead " . Prints of this painting were distributed to the public . In 1977 , the South African mint issued a " Heroes of the Birkenhead Medallion " gold coin commemorating the 125 years since the sinking , featuring Hemy 's painting on one of the faces of the coin . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Birkenhead drill = = = 
 The sinking of the Birkenhead is the earliest maritime disaster evacuation during which the concept of " women and children first " is known to have been applied . " Women and children first " subsequently became standard procedure in relation to the evacuation of sinking ships , both in fiction and in real life . The synonymous " Birkenhead drill " became an exemplar of courageous behaviour in hopeless circumstances , and appeared in Rudyard Kipling 's 1893 tribute to the Royal Marines , " Soldier an ' Sailor Too " : 
 To take your chance in the thick of a rush , with firing all about , 
 Is nothing so bad when you 've cover to ' and , an ' leave an ' likin ' to shout ; 
 But to stand an ' be still to the Birken 'ead drill is a damn tough bullet to chew , 
 An ' they done it , the <unk> -- ' Er Majesty 's <unk> -- soldier an ' sailor too ! 
 Their work was done when it ' <unk> 't begun ; they was younger nor me an ' you ; 
 Their choice it was plain between <unk> ' in ' <unk> an ' bein ' mopped by the screw , 
 So they stood an ' was still to the Birken 'ead drill , soldier an ' sailor too 
 The phrase also appears in Robert A. Heinlein 's 1956 Double Star : 
 I knew I was sunk @-@ but , damn it , if you are caught by the Birkenhead Drill , the least you owe yourself is to stand at attention while the ship goes down . 
 And in David Weber 's 1991 novel Mutineers ' Moon : 
 And if he was caught in the Birkenhead Drill , he could at least try to do his best till the ship went down . 
 = = = Birkenhead treasure = = = 
 There is a persistent rumour that the Birkenhead was carrying a military payroll of £ 240 @,@ 000 in gold coins weighing about three tons , which had been secretly stored in the powder @-@ room before the final voyage . 
 Numerous attempts have been made to salvage the gold . In 1893 , the nephew of Colonel Seton wrote that a certain Mr. <unk> at the Cape obtained permission from the Cape Government to dive the wreck of the Birkenhead in search of the treasure . A June 1958 salvage attempt by a renowned Cape Town diver recovered anchors and some brass fittings , but no gold . In 1986 @-@ 1988 , a combined archaeological and salvage excavation was carried out by Aqua Exploration , Depth Recovery Unit and <unk> Marine Salvage Company . Only a few gold coins were recovered , which appear to have been the personal possessions of the passengers and crew . 
 The rumour of treasure and the shallow depth of the wreck at 30 metres ( 98 ft ) have resulted in the wreck being considerably disturbed over the years , despite its being a war grave . In 1989 , the British and South African governments entered into an agreement over the salvage of the wreck , sharing any gold recovered . 
 = = = HMS Birkenhead as namesake = = = 
 Three placenames in the Canadian province of British Columbia were conferred in honour of the Birkenhead disaster by Hudson 's Bay Company explorer Alexander Caulfield Anderson , a boyhood friend and cousin of Lt @-@ Col. Seton of the 74th Regiment of Foot , on a traverse of uncharted country between the Fraser Canyon and the coastal Lower Mainland in 1846 . Named after his cousin , Seton Lake cuts west through the Coast Mountains from the Fraser Canyon town of Lillooet , beyond which is its twin Anderson Lake . 
 A few miles southwest from the head of Anderson Lake is Mount Birkenhead , on the north side of the low pass connecting the valley of those lakes to that of the Birkenhead River . The river , the valley area near Mount Birkenhead known as Birken , and Birkenhead Lake at the summit of the pass were in turn named after the mountain , and not directly by Anderson . 
 = = = Other name legacies = = = 
 According to local tradition , <unk> Nature Reserve in the Overberg is named after Captain Robert Salmond . Locals to this day call Great White Sharks " Tommy Sharks " after the <unk> that were taken by them in water . 
 = Iðunn = 
 In Norse mythology , Iðunn is a goddess associated with apples and youth . Iðunn is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In both sources , she is described as the wife of the skaldic god Bragi , and in the Prose Edda , also as a keeper of apples and granter of eternal youthfulness . 
 The Prose Edda relates that Loki was once forced by the jötunn Þjazi to lure Iðunn out of Asgard and into a wood , promising her interesting apples . Þjazi , in the form of an eagle , snatches Iðunn from the wood and takes her to his home . Iðunn 's absence causes the gods to grow old and grey , and they realize that Loki is responsible for her disappearance . Loki promises to return her and , in the form of a falcon , finds her alone at Þjazi 's home . He turns her into a nut and takes her back to Asgard . After Þjazi finds that Iðunn is gone , he turns into an eagle and furiously chases after Loki . The gods build a pyre in Asgard and , after a sudden stop by Loki , Þjazi 's feathers catch fire , he falls , and the gods kill him . 
 A number of theories surround Iðunn , including potential links to fertility , and her potential origin in Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European religion . Long the subject of artworks , Iðunn is sometimes referenced in modern popular culture . 
 = = Name = = 
 The name Iðunn has been variously explained as meaning " ever young " , " <unk> " , or " the rejuvenating one " . As the modern English alphabet lacks the eth ( ð ) character , Iðunn is sometimes anglicized as Idun , Idunn or <unk> . An -a suffix is sometimes applied to denote femininity , resulting in forms such as Iduna and <unk> . 
 The name Iðunn appears as a personal name in several historical sources and the Landnámabók records that it has been in use in Iceland as a personal name since the pagan period ( 10th century ) . Landnámabók records two incidents of women by the name of Iðunn ; Iðunn <unk> , the daughter of an early settler , and Iðunn <unk> @-@ <unk> , granddaughter of one of the earliest settlers recorded in the book . The name Iðunn has been theorized as the origin of the Old English name Idonae . 19th century author Charlotte Mary Yonge writes that the derivation of Idonae from Idunn is " almost certain , " noting that although Idonae may be " the feminine of the Latin <unk> ( fit ) , its absence in the Romance countries may be taken as an indication that it was a mere <unk> of the northern goddess of the apples of youth . " 
 19th @-@ century scholar Jacob Grimm proposed a potential etymological connection to the <unk> . Grimm states that " with the original form idis the goddess Idunn may possibly be connected . " Grimm further states that Iðunn may have been known with another name , and that " Iðunn would seem by <unk> . <unk> to be an Elvish word , but we do not hear of any other name for the goddess . " 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 Iðunn appears in the Poetic Edda poem Lokasenna and , included in some modern editions of the Poetic Edda , in the late poem Hrafnagaldr Óðins . 
 Iðunn is introduced as Bragi 's wife in the prose introduction to the poem Lokasenna , where the two attend a feast held by Ægir . In stanzas 16 , 17 , and 18 , dialog occurs between Loki and Iðunn after Loki has insulted Bragi . In stanza 16 , Iðunn ( here anglicized as Idunn ) says : 
 Idunn said : 
 I ask you , Bragi , to do a service to your blood @-@ kin 
 and all the adoptive relations , 
 that you shouldn 't say words of blame to Loki , 
 in Ægir 's hall . 
 Loki said : 
 Be silent , Idunn , I declare that of all women 
 you 're the most man @-@ crazed , 
 since you placed your arms , washed bright , 
 about your brother 's slayer . 
 Idunn said : 
 I 'm not saying words of blame to Loki , 
 in Ægir 's hall 
 I quietened Bragi , made talkative with beer ; 
 and all living things love him . 
 In this exchange , Loki has accused Iðunn of having slept with the killer of her brother . However , neither this brother nor killer are accounted for in any other surviving source . Afterward , the goddess Gefjon speaks up and the poem continues in turn . 
 In the poem Hrafnagaldr Óðins , additional information is given about Iðunn , though this information is otherwise unattested . Here , Iðunn is identified as descending from elves , as one of " Ivaldi 's elder children " and as a dís who dwells in dales . Stanza 6 reads : 
 In the dales dwells , 
 the prescient Dís , 
 from Yggdrasil 's 
 ash sunk down , 
 of <unk> race , 
 Idun by name , 
 the youngest of Ivaldi 's 
 elder children . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 Iðunn is introduced in the Prose Edda in section 26 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning . Here , Iðunn is described as Bragi 's wife and keeper of an <unk> ( a wooden box made of ash wood and often used for carrying personal possessions ) within which she keeps apples . The apples are bitten into by the gods when they begin to grow old and they then become young again , which is described as occurring up until Ragnarök . Gangleri ( described as King Gylfi in disguise ) states that it seems to him that the gods depend greatly upon Iðunn 's good faith and care . With a laugh , High responds that misfortune once came close , that he could tell Gangleri about it , but first he must hear the names of more of the Æsir , and he continues providing information about gods . 
 In the book Skáldskaparmál , Idunn is mentioned in its first chapter ( numbered as 55 ) as one of eight ásynjur ( goddesses ) sitting in their thrones at a banquet in Asgard for Ægir . In chapter 56 , Bragi tells Ægir about Iðunn 's abduction by the jötunn Þjazi . Bragi says that after hitting an eagle ( Þjazi in disguise ) with a pole , Loki finds himself stuck to the bird . Loki is pulled further and further into the sky , his feet banging against stones , gravel , and trees . Loki feels that his arms might be pulled out from his shoulders . Loki shouts and begs the eagle for a truce , and the eagle responds that Loki would not be free unless he made a solemn vow to have Iðunn come outside of Asgard with her apples . Loki accepts Þjazi 's conditions and returns to his friends Odin and Hœnir . At the time Þjazi and Loki agreed on , Loki lures Iðunn out of Asgard into " a certain forest " , telling her that he had discovered some apples that she would find worth keeping , and told Iðunn that she ought to bring her own apples with her so that she may compare them with the apples he has discovered . Þjazi arrives in eagle shape , snatches Iðunn , flies away with her and takes her to his home , Þrymheimr . 
 The Æsir begin to grow grey and old at the disappearance of Idunn . The Æsir assemble at a thing where they ask one another when Iðunn had been seen last . The Æsir realize that the last time that Iðunn was seen was when she was going outside of Asgard with Loki , and so they have Loki arrested and brought to the thing . Loki is threatened with death and torture . Terrified , Loki says that if the goddess Freyja will lend him her " falcon shape " he will search for Iðunn in the land of Jötunheimr . Freyja lends the falcon shape to Loki , and with it he flies north to Jötunheimr . One day later , Loki arrives at Þjazi 's home . There he finds that Þjazi is out at sea in a boat , and that Iðunn is home alone . Loki turns her into a nut , holds her in his claws , and flies away with her as fast as possible . 
 When Þjazi arrives home he finds that Iðunn is gone . Þjazi gets " his eagle shape " , and chases Loki , which causes a storm wind . The Æsir see a falcon flying with a nut , as well as the pursuing eagle , so they bring out loads of wood shavings . The falcon flies over the fortification of Asgard and drops down by the wall . The eagle , however , misses the falcon and is unable to stop . His feathers catch fire and the eagle falls within the gates of Asgard . The Æsir kill the jötunn Þjazi " and this killing is greatly renowned . " 
 In chapter 10 , " husband of Iðunn " is given as a means of referring to Bragi . In chapter 86 , means of referring to Iðunn are given : " wife of Bragi " , " keeper of the apples " , and her apples " the Æsir 's age old cure " . Additionally , in connection to the story of her abduction by Þjazi , she may be referred to as " Þjazi 's booty " . A passage of the 10th @-@ century poem Haustlöng where the skald Þjóðólfr of Hvinir gives a lengthy description of a richly detailed shield he has received that features a depiction of the abduction of Iðunn . Within the cited portions of Haustlöng , Iðunn is referred to as " the maid who knew the Æsir 's age @-@ old cure " , " the gods ' lady " , " ale @-@ Gefn " , " the Æsir 's girl @-@ friend " , and once by name . 
 In chapter 33 , Iðunn is cited as one of the six ásynjur visiting Ægir . Iðunn appears a final time in the Prose Edda in chapter 75 , where she appears in a list of ásynjur . 
 = = Theories = = 
 = = = Apples and fertility = = = 
 Some surviving stories regarding Iðunn focus on her youth @-@ maintaining apples . English scholar Hilda Ellis Davidson links apples to religious practices in Germanic paganism . She points out that buckets of apples were found in the 9th @-@ century Oseberg ship burial site in Norway and that fruit and nuts ( Iðunn having been described as being transformed into a nut in Skáldskaparmál ) have been found in the early graves of the Germanic peoples in England and elsewhere on the continent of Europe which may have had a symbolic meaning and also that nuts are still a recognized symbol of fertility in Southwest England . 
 Davidson notes a connection between apples and the Vanir , a tribe of gods associated with fertility in Norse mythology , citing an instance of eleven " golden apples " being given to woo the beautiful Gerðr by Skírnir , who was acting as messenger for the major Vanir god Freyr in stanzas 19 and 20 of Skírnismál . In Skírnismál , Gerðr mentions her brother 's slayer in stanza 16 , which Davidson states has led to some suggestions that Gerðr may have been connected to Iðunn as they are similar in this way . Davidson also notes a further connection between fertility and apples in Norse mythology ; in chapter 2 of the Völsunga saga when the major goddess Frigg sends King Rerir an apple after he prays to Odin for a child , Frigg 's messenger ( in the guise of a crow ) drops the apple in his lap as he sits atop a mound . Rerir 's wife 's consumption of the apple results in a six @-@ year pregnancy and the caesarean section birth of their son — the hero Völsung . 
 Davidson points out the " strange " phrase " apples of Hel " used in an 11th @-@ century poem by the skald <unk> <unk> . Davidson states this may imply that the apple was thought of by the skald as the food of the dead . Further , Davidson notes that the potentially Germanic goddess <unk> is sometimes depicted with apples and parallels exist in early Irish stories . Davidson asserts that while cultivation of the apple in Northern Europe extends back to at least the time of the Roman Empire and came to Europe from the Near East , the native varieties of apple trees growing in Northern Europe are small and bitter . Davidson concludes that in the figure of Iðunn " we must have a dim reflection of an old symbol : that of the guardian goddess of the life @-@ giving fruit of the other world . " 
 = = = Indo @-@ European basis = = = 
 David Knipe theorizes Iðunn 's abduction by <unk> in eagle form as an example of the Indo @-@ European motif " of an eagle who steals the celestial means of immortality . " In addition , Knipe says that " a parallel to the theft of Iðunn 's apples ( symbols of fertility ) has been noted in the Celtic myth where Brian , <unk> , and <unk> , the sons of <unk> , assume the guise of hawks in order to steal sacred apples from the garden of <unk> . Here , too , there is pursuit , the guardians being female griffins . " 
 = = = Other = = = 
 John Lindow theorizes that the possible etymological meaning of Iðunn — " ever young " — would potentially allow Iðunn to perform her ability to provide eternal youthfulness to the gods without her apples , and further states that Haustlöng does not mention apples but rather refers to Iðunn as the " maiden who understood the eternal life of the Æsir . " Lindow further theorizes that Iðunn 's abduction is " one of the most dangerous moments " for the gods , as the general movement of female jötnar to the gods would be reversed . 
 Regarding the accusations leveled towards Iðunn by Loki , Lee Hollander opines that Lokasenna was intended to be humorous and that the accusations thrown by Loki in the poem are not necessarily to be taken as " generally accepted lore " at the time it was composed . Rather they are charges that are easy for Loki to make and difficult for his targets to disprove , or which they do not care to refute . 
 In his study of the skaldic poem Haustlöng , Richard North comments that " [ Iðunn ] is probably to be understood as an aspect of Freyja , a goddess whom the gods rely on for their youth and beauty [ ... ] " . 
 = = Modern influence = = 
 Iðunn has been the subject of a number of artistic depictions . These depictions include " Idun " ( statue , 1821 ) by H. E. Freund , " Idun " ( statue , 1843 ) and " Idun som <unk> av <unk> <unk> i <unk> " ( plaster statue , 1856 ) by C. G. <unk> , " Brage <unk> vid <unk> , Idun <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( 1846 ) by Nils <unk> , " <unk> <unk> nach Valhalla " by C. Hansen ( resulting in an 1862 woodcut modeled on the painting by C. Hammer ) , " Bragi und Idun , Balder und Nanna " ( drawing , 1882 ) by K. Ehrenberg , " Idun and the Apples " ( 1890 ) by J. Doyle Penrose , " Brita as Iduna " ( 1901 ) by Carl Larsson , " Loki och Idun " ( 1911 ) by John Bauer , " Idun " ( watercolor , 1905 ) by B. E. Ward , and " Idun " ( 1901 ) by E. Doepler . 
 The 19th @-@ century composer Richard Wagner 's Der Ring des Nibelungen opera cycle features <unk> , a version of the goddess Freyja combined with the Iðunn . 
 Idunn Mons , a mons of the planet Venus , is named after Iðunn . The publication of the United States @-@ based Germanic neopagan group The Troth ( <unk> , edited by Diana L. Paxson ) derives its name from that of the goddess . 
 The Swedish magazine Idun was named after the goddess ; she appears with her basket of apples on its banner . 
 Iðunn is one of the incarnated goddesses in the New Zealand comedy / drama " The Almighty Johnsons " . The part of " Iðunn " and her earthly counterparts " Helen <unk> " and " Gaia " are played by Sara Wiseman and Keisha Castle @-@ Hughes . 
 = Development of Grand Theft Auto V = 
 The development of Grand Theft Auto V began after Grand Theft Auto IV 's release in April 2008 . Rockstar Games published Grand Theft Auto V on 17 September 2013 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , on 18 November 2014 for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , and on 14 April 2015 for Microsoft Windows , as the fifteenth entry in the Grand Theft Auto series . Their flagship Scottish studio Rockstar North oversaw the work , sharing it with other studios around the world . The development team considered the game a spiritual successor to many of their previous projects like Red Dead Redemption and Max Payne 3 . Grand Theft Auto V was unexpectedly announced in 2011 ; it was heavily promoted and widely anticipated . 
 Rockstar overhauled their proprietary Rockstar Advanced Game Engine ( RAGE ) to increase its draw distance rendering capabilities . The game uses the Euphoria and Bullet engines for further animation and environment rendering tasks . The developers tried to use all of the potential power of both the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , having become familiar with the systems ' architectures over several years . The development team conducted extensive field research in Southern California while creating the game 's open world , set in and around Los Santos , a fictionalised depiction of Los Angeles . 
 Grand Theft Auto V is the first game in the series that allows players to control three protagonists , to distinguish the game from its predecessors and let players explore the open world with fewer constraints . The team used motion capture to record the facial and body movements of the characters . Like previous games in the series , Grand Theft Auto V has an in @-@ game radio that can tune into fifteen stations playing more than 241 tracks of licensed music , as well as two talk radio stations . The game also features an original score composed over many years by a team of five music producers . 
 = = Business = = 
 = = = Rumours and announcement = = = 
 During an earnings call in September 2009 , Take @-@ Two Interactive 's CEO Strauss Zelnick was asked about Grand Theft Auto V , the purported next game in the Grand Theft Auto series . He replied : 
 " We 're not going to announce it , we 're not going to announce when we are going to announce it , and we are not going to announce a strategy about announcing it or about when we are going to announce it either , or about the announcement strategy surrounding the announcement of the strategy . " 
 That November , vice president of Rockstar Games Dan Houser discussed with The Times his work on the series and the process that would be undertaken for the next Grand Theft Auto game . He expressed plans to co @-@ write a thousand @-@ page script and said that , when developing a new game , the company typically created a city and then from that developed the lead cast . In July 2010 , Rockstar North posted seven job advertisements related to a new title . The company wanted to recruit environment artists , physics programmers and character animators — the latter advertisement asked for recruits with " professional experience developing a third person action game " . Some journalists wrote that the job listing was indicative of Grand Theft Auto V 's existence . In June 2011 , anonymous sources allegedly close to the developer told GameSpot that the title was " well under way " , with a release date likely in 2012 . 
 Rockstar Games first confirmed the game 's existence on 25 October 2011 in an announcement on its official website and Twitter feed . The share price of the publisher 's parent company Take @-@ Two Interactive subsequently increased seven percent . Journalists said that the announcement of Grand Theft Auto V ignited significant anticipation within the gaming industry , which they ascribed to the cultural significance of the Grand Theft Auto series . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 The game was extensively marketed through video trailers and press demonstrations . On 3 November , a week after the game 's announcement , the debut trailer was released . It is narrated by one of the protagonists , Michael De Santa ( Ned Luke ) , and depicts the open world accompanied by the song " <unk> ' Nut Gone Flake " by English rock band Small Faces . A press release published the same day confirmed that the game would be set in an open world recreation of Southern California — including the city of Los Santos , a fictionalised depiction of Los Angeles . Almost a year later , Game Informer magazine ran a cover story on Grand Theft Auto V for their December 2012 issue . Rockstar intended to release the game 's second promotional trailer on 2 November . However , these plans were hampered by Hurricane Sandy , which cut power supplies to Rockstar 's New York offices . The trailer was eventually released on 14 November ; it introduces the lead protagonists ' back @-@ stories and features the song " Skeletons " by American musician Stevie Wonder . 
 To unveil the game 's cover art , Rockstar contracted artists to paint a mural on a wall in Manhattan , New York on 31 March 2013 , followed by the artwork 's digital release on 2 April . The artwork showed English model Shelby <unk> portraying a blonde beach @-@ goer . Three trailers were released on 26 April , each focusing on one of the game 's protagonists — Michael De Santa , Franklin Clinton and Trevor Philips . The songs " Radio Ga Ga " by English band Queen , " Hood Gone Love It " by American rapper Jay Rock and " Are You Sure Hank Done It This Way " by American musician Waylon Jennings are used in the Michael , Franklin and Trevor trailers respectively . 
 A trailer released on 9 July 2013 features Grand Theft Auto V 's first gameplay footage . It demonstrates the shooting and driving mechanics and the player 's ability to instantaneously swap between characters . The game 's online multiplayer mode Grand Theft Auto Online was unveiled in a trailer released on 15 August . The video displayed activities from the mode , including bank heists , small robberies , " traditional " game modes , purchase of property and bicycle @-@ riding . The final pre @-@ launch trailer was released on 29 August ; it was intended to be a television advertisement . The song " <unk> " by American band The Chain Gang of 1974 was used in this trailer . 
 Viral marketing strategies were used to promote the game . Visitors to the website of The Epsilon Program — a fictional religious cult within the Grand Theft Auto universe — were offered a chance to register for that group . After filling in an online membership form , the terms and conditions revealed that the site was a casting call for five people to appear in Grand Theft Auto V as members of the fictional cult . The official Grand Theft Auto V website was redesigned on 13 August 2013 to show a preview of activities and locales within the game 's world and an examination of the lead protagonists ' stories . More information was released on the website on 24 August , 6 September , and 13 September . 
 To encourage pre @-@ order sales , Rockstar collaborated with several retail outlets to provide special edition versions of the game . The " Special Edition " includes a unique case packaging , a game map and unlock codes for additional content in the single @-@ player and multiplayer modes . The publisher also collaborated with Sony to release a 500 GB PlayStation 3 console , which includes a copy of the game , a 30 @-@ day trial membership for the PlayStation Plus service and a set of Grand Theft Auto V @-@ branded headphones . All pre @-@ orders of the game granted the purchaser an access code for the Atomic Blimp , the in @-@ game aircraft . GameStop also held a promotional raffle for the game , wherein customers had a chance to win an actual Bravado Banshee sports car ( the game 's counterpart of the Dodge Viper ) . Rockstar collaborated with West Coast Customs to build the vehicle . 
 Shortly after the game 's release , an application called <unk> was released for iOS devices ; this allows players to customise vehicles , create custom license plates and teach Franklin 's dog Chop new tricks , which unlocks additional in @-@ game abilities . Upon its launch , some users reported problems connecting to the application 's servers ; these problems were resolved with an update on 25 September 2013 @.@ <unk> was released for Android on 29 October , and for Windows Phone devices on 19 November . 
 = = = Delays and leak = = = 
 Grand Theft Auto V did not meet its original projected release date of March – May 2013 . By 30 October 2012 , promotional posters had spread to the Internet and a listing by the retailer Game had leaked the projected release date . Rockstar announced that day that the game 's release was scheduled for Q2 2013 , and the company began accepting pre @-@ orders on 5 November 2012 . On 31 January 2013 , the company announced the game 's release date had been postponed until 17 September of that year . " It simply needs a little more polish to be of the standard we and , more importantly , you require " , Rockstar stated in a press release . It was released in Japan on 10 October 2013 . The Microsoft Windows version , initially announced at E3 2014 as scheduled for simultaneous release with the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions , was delayed three times : first to 27 January 2015 , later to 24 March 2015 , and again to 14 April 2015 . According to Rockstar , the game required extra development time for " polishing " . 
 On 23 August 2013 , reports said that some European PlayStation 3 users who had pre @-@ ordered Grand Theft Auto V were able to download parts of the game , including its soundtrack and some character dialogue . Details of the game were leaked later that day and on following days before Sony removed the pre @-@ order file from the European PlayStation Network and released an official apology to Rockstar and its fans . In response , Rockstar stated it was " deeply disappointed by leaks and spoilers being spread in advance of the game 's launch " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Preliminary work on Grand Theft Auto V began on Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , shortly after the release of Grand Theft Auto IV in April 2008 , but later gave way to focus more on the consoles before returning greater focus to the PlayStation 4 , Xbox One and Windows versions . Rockstar North , the core 360 @-@ person team behind the game , co @-@ opted studios owned by parent company Rockstar Games to facilitate development between a full team of over 1 @,@ 000 . These included Rockstar NYC , Rockstar San Diego , Rockstar Leeds , Rockstar Toronto , Rockstar New England , Rockstar London and Rockstar Lincoln . Technical director Adam Fowler said that , while development was shared between studios in different countries , the process involved close collaboration between the core team and others . This was necessary because many mechanics in the game work in tandem , which would have created difficulties if studios did not communicate with each other . 
 Like other projects since Rockstar Games Presents Table Tennis ( 2006 ) , the game uses the proprietary Rockstar Advanced Game Engine ( RAGE ) to perform animation and rendering tasks , and the Euphoria and Bullet engines for further animation and environment rendering tasks . By 25 August 2013 , development of Grand Theft Auto V stopped as the game was submitted for manufacturing . Media analyst Arvind Bhatia estimated the development budget for the game exceeded US $ 137 million , and The Scotsman reporter Marty McLaughlin estimated that the combined budget of the development and marketing efforts exceeded GB £ 170 million ( US $ 265 million ) , making Grand Theft Auto V the most expensive video game ever made . 
 The team found they could render the game world with greater detail than in Grand Theft Auto IV because they had become familiar with the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 's hardware . Art director Aaron Garbut said that while the ageing hardware of the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 were tiring to work with , the team were able to render lighting and shadows in detail while " maintain [ ing ] a consistent look " . Vice president Dan Houser agreed with this statement and felt that working on Grand Theft Auto IV with relatively new hardware was difficult , but added , " now we know what the hardware 's capable of , so it 's become a lot easier to move things along and a lot more fun , too " . The PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions fit onto one Blu @-@ Ray Disc ; Xbox 360 copies of the game are distributed on two DVD discs and require an 8 GB installation on the HDD or external storage device ; while the Microsoft Windows version takes up seven DVD disks . The team asserted that any differences between the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions would be negligible . 
 = = = Design goals = = = 
 Grand Theft Auto V was envisioned to improve the core mechanics of the Grand Theft Auto series by giving the player three lead protagonists to switch between . The team 's main motivation for including three protagonists was for Grand Theft Auto V to innovate game storytelling and to prevent the series from feeling stale by not evolving the core structure of the gameplay . Houser said , " We didn 't want to do the same thing over again " . The concept of having three interconnected protagonists was devised during the development of San Andreas , but the team felt they did not have the technical capabilities to realise it . Garbut explained , " It didn 't work from a tech point of view because the three characters need three times as much memory , three types of animation , and so on " . After the release of Grand Theft Auto IV , the team developed episodic content packages , The Lost and Damned and The Ballad of Gay Tony ( both 2009 ) , each of which introduced a new protagonist . The three interwoven stories had a positive critical reception and confirmed the team 's confidence that building Grand Theft Auto V around this model was an innovative decision . 
 A single @-@ player story revolving around three lead protagonists was one of Grand Theft Auto V 's earliest design objectives . Garbut felt that such a radical change to the gameplay 's core structure was a risk , recalling the team 's concern that a departure from Grand Theft Auto 's traditional , single lead character set @-@ up " might backfire " . In early <unk> , the game would have told three stories ; each through a different protagonist . Later , a concept that story trajectories would meet throughout the game was developed from the stories of Grand Theft Auto IV . Eventually , the concept evolved into three interconnected stories that intertwined through the game missions . According to Benzies , the team made the multiple @-@ character formula " integral to the structure of the gameplay as well as the narrative " . Houser opined that Grand Theft Auto V is their " strongest plotted game because the characters are so intertwined " and that the " meeting points [ between the character 's stories ] are very exciting " . 
 Grand Theft Auto V 's central story theme is the " pursuit of the almighty dollar " . Mission content is structured around the lead characters ' efforts to plan and execute complicated heists to accrue wealth for themselves . The team decided to focus on money as the game 's central theme in response to the 2007 – 08 financial crisis ; the effects of the crisis on the main characters are the catalyst for them to conduct heist missions . Houser explained , " We wanted this post @-@ crash feeling , because it works thematically in this game about bank robbers " . The team were encouraged by the positive reaction to the " Three Leaf Clover " mission in Grand Theft Auto IV — in which an elaborate heist is coordinated and executed by the lead protagonist Niko Bellic and accomplices — to develop the story around the heists . Houser said that while the " Three Leaf Clover " mission was well @-@ received , the team had not captured the thrill of the robbery sequence to the best of their capabilities and wanted to focus on achieving that in Grand Theft Auto V. He explained , " We wanted to have a couple of really strong bank robberies ... It felt like that was a good device that we 'd never used in the past . Repeating ourselves is a fear when we 're doing games where part of the evolution is just technological " . 
 = = = Research and open world design = = = 
 Initial work on Grand Theft Auto V involved designing the open world space ; preliminary models of the world were constructed during the game 's pre @-@ production phase . The open world of the game is the fictional U.S. state of San Andreas , which includes the city of Los Santos . San Andreas was also used as the setting of Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas ( 2004 ) , which included three cities separated by open countryside . The team thought that the ambition of including three cities in Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas was too great and that the game did not emulate the cities as well as they had hoped . Los Angeles was used as the model for Los Santos in both games ; Houser felt that " to do a proper version of L.A. ... the game has to give you a sense of that sprawl — if not completely replicate it " , and that dividing the budget and manpower between multiple cities would have detracted from capturing " what L.A. is " . Garbut said that in the PlayStation 2 era , the team did not have the technical capabilities to capture Los Angeles properly , resulting in the San Andreas rendition of Los Santos feeling like a " backdrop or a game level with pedestrians randomly milling about " . The team disregarded San Andreas as a departure point for Grand Theft Auto V because they had moved on to a new generation of consoles and wanted to build the city from scratch . According to Garbut , with the move to the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 hardware , " our processes and the fidelity of the world [ had ] evolved so much from San Andreas " that using it as a model would have been redundant . The team focused their efforts on one city instead of three and were able to produce Los Santos in higher quality and at greater scale than in the previous game . 
 Los Angeles was extensively researched for the game . The team organised field research trips with tour guides and architectural historians , and captured around 250 @,@ 000 photographs and many hours of video footage . Houser said , " We spoke to FBI agents that have been undercover , experts in the Mafia , street gangsters who know the slang — we even went to see a proper prison " . Houser considered the research and creation of the game world to be the most demanding aspects of the game 's production . The team viewed Google Maps and Google Street View projections of Los Angeles ; the field research team then used the coordinates to capture the photographs and video footage , which were used to design the layout of Los Santos . The team also studied virtual globe models of the city , census data and documentaries to recreate the geographical and demographic spread of Los Angeles . Reproducing Los Angeles as a play space required the team to condense the city 's spread into an area that the player could comfortably traverse ; according to Houser , they captured " the essence of what 's really there in a city , but in a far smaller area " . Sam Sweet of The New Yorker said , " [ The ] exhaustive field work ... wasn 't conducted to document a living space . Rather , it was collected to create an extremely realistic version of a Los Angeles that doesn 't actually exist . The map of Los Santos is familiar but its contents are condensed " . Garbut said the team were not " dictated by reality " when designing the city and instead used Los Angeles as a starting point for the city 's design . 
 Research for the game took the team to California 's rural regions ; Garbut recalled a visit he took with Houser to Bombay Beach , which inspired them to set Trevor 's initial story against a recreation of the Salton Sea , known as " Sandy Shores " in the game . The team made an open recreation of Southern California which includes vast tracts of countryside around the city proper . They wanted to a create a large world without open , empty spaces . The team focused on condensing the countryside of Southern California into a diverse and detailed playing space . The game world covers 49 square miles ( 130 km2 ) — about an eightieth of Los Angeles County . It is greater in scale than Rockstar 's previous open world games ; Garbut said it is large enough to fit the game maps of San Andreas , Grand Theft Auto IV and Red Dead Redemption ( 2010 ) combined inside . To accommodate the size of the world , the team overhauled the RAGE , allowing the game to render greater draw distances than in previous Grand Theft Auto games . The large , open space necessitated the re @-@ introduction of fixed @-@ wing aircraft , which had been absent in Grand Theft Auto IV because of the relatively small scale of the world . Houser explained , " We wanted somewhere big [ to allow the player to ] fly properly " . The large space demanded populating the open world with wildlife ; lead producer Leslie Benzies felt that " because of the scale of the map and the different kinds of areas involved , a countryside without animals would feel quite hollow " . 
 = = = Gameplay design = = = 
 The development team found that introducing three concurrent protagonists increased the freedom afforded to players in missions . Lead mission designer Imran Sarwar felt that having multiple protagonists allowed different strategic options to open up in missions . He said that in a combat scenario the player can set up Michael at a high vantage point with a sniper rifle to provide covering fire for Trevor , who provides a frontal assault on the enemy position , allowing Franklin to manipulate flank points . Benzies said that character @-@ switching would eliminate a problem the team felt San Andreas had ; the player would be exploring open countryside and would then need to drive a long distance to a mission start point . In Grand Theft Auto V , the interplay of free roaming and mission gameplay is more organic because the player can switch between characters . According to Benzies , " Having three characters allows players to explore the whole map without having to worry about the long drive back to their next objective " . Houser commented that the use of multiple characters could remove dead spots in missions , for example where a character has to drive to a meeting point , because the player can switch to another character and be pulled into the action of the game more quickly . The game includes dynamic mission content , a feature borrowed from Red Dead Redemption because of its positive reception in that game . Dynamic missions present themselves to the player while exploring the game world ; the player can choose to either accept or ignore them . The team developed the concept of dynamic mission content further in Grand Theft Auto V by delivering it in the open sections of the world and in Los Santos ; for example , the player can encounter an armoured van in the city and try to intercept it to steal its contents . 
 To reflect the advances made in other games since the release of Grand Theft Auto IV , the team overhauled many of the shooting and driving mechanics for Grand Theft Auto V. The public reception of the shooting mechanics of the team 's previous games were considered during this process . Grand Theft Auto IV , Red Dead Redemption and Max Payne 3 ( 2012 ) were scrutinised to establish which areas needed work in Grand Theft Auto V to make it surpass previous titles . To increase the pace of shootouts , the team removed hard locking — a central mechanic in Grand Theft Auto IV — that allows players to instantly lock on to enemies near their crosshair . Associate technical director Phil Hooker noted that the team " found [ hard locking ] too disorientating and often broke your immersion with the game , as you didn 't have to think about enemy locations " . Hooker said the team introduced a timer that breaks the player 's lock on a target after a certain time to combat the problem with Grand Theft Auto IV , in which the player can " just rely on holding and shooting until a target is dead " . Another natural progression was reworking the cover system in combat gameplay , which was remodelled on the cover system of Red Dead Redemption ; entering and exiting cover such as low walls and vehicles is more fluid in Grand Theft Auto V than in earlier games in the series . The team also reworked the driving mechanics for cars and motorcycles . Houser felt that the cars would handle better than they did in Grand Theft Auto IV , which he thought were " big and boat @-@ like " , whereas in Grand Theft Auto V the cars handle similarly to those in racing games . 
 = = = Character development = = = 
 The team drew upon game protagonist archetypes during the scripting of the characters . Michael was considered to embody greed , Franklin ambition and Trevor insanity . Houser felt the team characterised Michael and Trevor as juxtapositions of each other . He said , " Michael is like the criminal who wants to compartmentalise and be a good guy some of the time and Trevor is the maniac who isn 't a hypocrite " . He considered that having three lead characters would help move Grand Theft Auto V 's story into more original territory than its predecessors , which traditionally followed a single protagonist rising through the ranks of a criminal underworld . Ned Luke portrayed Michael , Shawn " Solo " Fonteno portrayed Franklin and Steven Ogg portrayed Trevor . Fonteno first became aware of the acting job through his friend DJ Pooh , who worked on San Andreas and was involved in Grand Theft Auto V 's music production . When Luke 's agent advised him of the casting call for Grand Theft Auto V , he initially did not want to audition for the part because it was in a video game . After reading the audition material and learning more about the project , Luke became interested in auditioning . He reflected , " I went immediately after reading the material from ' I 'm not doing it ' to ' nobody else is doing it ' . It was just brilliant " . During the initial audition process , Ogg noticed an on @-@ set chemistry between him and Luke , which he felt helped secure them the roles . Ogg explained , " When [ Luke ] and I went in the room together we immediately had something " . While the actors knew their auditions were for Rockstar Games , it was not until they signed contracts that they learnt they would be involved in a Grand Theft Auto title . 
 The actors began working on the game in 2010 . Their performances were mostly recorded using motion capture technology . Dialogue for scenes with characters seated in vehicles was recorded in studios . Because the actors had their dialogue and movements recorded on @-@ set , they found their performances no different to those of film or television roles . Their dialogue was scripted so that it did not allow the actors to ad @-@ lib ; however they sometimes made small changes to the performance with approval from the directors . To prepare for his role as Michael , Luke gained 25 pounds and studied Rockstar 's previous games , starting with Grand Theft Auto IV . Luke considers Michael 's characterisation to be an amalgamation of Hugh Beaumont 's portrayal of Ward Cleaver in the American sitcom Leave It to Beaver ( 1957 – 63 ) and Al Pacino 's portrayal of Tony Montana in the 1983 film Scarface . 
 Ogg felt Trevor 's characterisation had evolved over time . He said , " <unk> and character traits that began to appear — his walk , his manner of speech , his reactions , definitely informed his development throughout the game " . Ogg cites Tom Hardy 's depiction of English criminal Charles Bronson in the 2008 biopic Bronson as a strong stylistic influence on his portrayal of Trevor . Ogg opined that while Trevor embodies the violent , psychopathic Grand Theft Auto anti @-@ hero archetype , he wanted players to sympathise with Trevor 's story . " To elicit other emotions was tough , and it was the biggest challenge and it 's something that meant a lot to me " , Ogg explained . Fonteno felt that growing up in South Los Angeles and being exposed to gang culture helped him connect to the character of Franklin . He drew upon his earlier involvement with a gang and trafficking drugs in his portrayal of Franklin . " I lived his life before ... He 's been surrounded by drugs , the crime , living with his aunt — I lived with my grandmother — so there was a lot of familiarity " , Fonteno said . Having not worked as an actor since portraying Face in the 2001 film The Wash , Fonteno sought counsel from Luke and Ogg to refine his acting skills . 
 = = = Re @-@ release = = = 
 Development of the Microsoft Windows version of the game began in parallel with the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions . At E3 2014 , a re @-@ release of the game was announced for Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . This enhanced version of the game features an increased draw distance , finer texture details , denser traffic , upgraded weather effects , and new wildlife and vegetation , as well as a new on @-@ foot first @-@ person view option . Animation director Rob Nelson said that a first @-@ person option was raised during development on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , but that the consoles ' relatively smaller banks of memory were already being pushed , such that adding new first @-@ person animations would have inhibited the open world render . According to Nelson , the first @-@ person view required more development effort than simply repositioning the camera , because of the need to adapt combat to a different view . The weapons were upgraded to a higher resolution , and new animations including weapon recoil , reload and switch were added . " I think we created 3 @,@ 000 animations on weapons alone " , said Nelson . The re @-@ release features more than 100 new songs across the game 's radio stations . Players may transfer characters and progression of Grand Theft Auto Online between some platforms and gain exclusive content . 
 Art director Aaron Garbut said that the enhanced version 's graphical upgrade came largely from the addition of first @-@ person . Remodelled cars feature interior effects including functional <unk> , fuel gauges and dashboard handbrake lights . The team added new particle and lighting effects , " like fireflies at night in the countryside , or ambient light pollution over Los Santos at night " , according to Garbut . Red Dead Redemption ( 2010 ) inspired the team to add more vegetation to " break up the hard edges [ and ] straight lines " of the open world . The original version 's vegetation was replaced with more detailed equivalents in the enhanced version . An upgraded weather system lets tree branches and leaves blow realistically in the wind . The team hand placed weeds along fences and walls , and placed grass over many of the open world 's terrains . They then layered flowers , plants , stones , leaves and litter over the grass . An upgraded screen space ambient occlusion system renders dynamic shadows that may cast through weather effects including volumetric fog , and particle effects including light reflections in water bodies or neon reflections in cars at night . The ambient light pollution over nighttime Los Santos may dissipate in poor weather . A dynamic depth of field system sharpens and softens images to emulate camera autofocus , and improved shaders produce new colours in skin and terrain textures . 
 = = = Music production = = = 
 Grand Theft Auto V is the first game in the series to use an original score . Music supervisor Ivan Pavlovich commented that creating the score was " daunting " because it would be unprecedented for a Grand Theft Auto game . Like most previous games in the series , Grand Theft Auto V also contains licensed music tracks provided by an in @-@ game radio . Pavlovich said the team did not want the original music to detract from the use of licensed music , but rather to accompany it . To work on the score , Rockstar engaged The Alchemist , Oh No and Tangerine Dream with Woody Jackson , who had collaborated with the team on Red Dead Redemption , L.A. Noire ( 2011 ) and Max Payne 3 . In collaboration with each other , the team of producers composed twenty hours of music which scores the game 's missions . In addition , music plays dynamically throughout the game in both the single @-@ player and multiplayer modes . Pavlovich felt that at times , Rockstar gave the team missions to score but that some of the team 's music composed for no specific purpose influenced other missions and provided inspiration for further score development . He described a " stem @-@ based " system that was used to make the music fit dynamic factors in the game ; after a piece of music was assigned to a particular mission , the team composed music to underscore outcomes the player could make after completing it . 
 Early in the game 's development , the music team were shown an early build of the game before working on the score . Their work was mostly complete later in the game 's development but they continued composing until the final build of the game had to be submitted for manufacturing . Edgar Froese , Tangerine Dream 's founding member , was not initially interested in being involved in producing music for the game . After he was flown to the studio and shown Grand Theft Auto V , he was impressed by the game 's scale and cinematic nature , and changed his mind . Froese 's first eight months of work on the score produced 62 hours of music . He recorded with Tangerine Dream in Austria but further work was conducted at Jackson 's studio in the United States , which The Alchemist and Oh No also used . Jackson learnt that the composers would be building on each other 's work and expressed concern that the finished product could be disjointed . His initially provided score for Trevor 's missions , citing The Mars Volta and Queens of the Stone Age as stylistic influences . After sending his work to the other members of the team , Jackson was impressed by Froese 's contributions to his work . " Edgar evolved the music , made it into a whole other thing " , he said . Froese had taken Jackson 's hip hop @-@ influenced work and interpolated it with a funk sound . Froese and Jackson also sent their work between The Alchemist and Oh No , who heavily sampled their work . The Alchemist opined , " We were sampling , taking a piece form here , a piece from there ... We pitched stuff up , chopped it , tweaked it . Then we chose the tracks that worked and everyone came in and layered on that " . DJ Shadow then mixed the team 's creations together and matched it to the gameplay . 
 In developing the radio stations , the Rockstar team wanted to reinforce the game 's recreation of California by licensing tracks they felt imparted an appropriate " Cali feel " . About the inclusion of the pop station Non @-@ Stop @-@ Pop FM , Pavlovich said that " the first time you get off an airplane in L.A. and you hear the radio and the pop just seeps out ... We wanted that . It really connects you to the world " . He felt that licensing music for the game involved a greater discernment than in Grand Theft Auto IV because the music in Grand Theft Auto V played a greater role in generating a Californian atmosphere . Pavlovich said , " It reflects the environment in which the game is set " . Initially , the team planned to license over 900 tracks for the radio but they refined the number to 241 . The tracks are shared between fifteen stations ; the radio also includes two talk @-@ back stations and a radio station for custom audio files on the Windows version . Some of the tracks were written specifically for the game ; for example , rapper and producer Flying Lotus hosts the station <unk> FM , which includes original work he composed for the game . Pavlovich commented that for each radio station , the team would develop an understanding of where the station 's music was going and select a DJ to host it . Each station 's DJ was selected to match the genre of music the station hosts ; in developing Los Santos Rock Radio the team licensed classic rock tracks and chose Kenny Loggins as the station 's DJ . Pavlovich felt that striking a balance between the radio and the score was a meticulous process . He cited a mission template as an example in which the player would drive to an objective while listening to the radio ; the score would begin once the player left the vehicle and moved into the next stage of the mission . 
 = Camouflage = 
 Camouflage is the use of any combination of materials , coloration , or illumination for concealment , either by making animals or objects hard to see ( crypsis ) , or by disguising them as something else ( mimesis ) . Examples include the leopard 's spotted coat , the battledress of a modern soldier , and the leaf @-@ mimic katydid 's wings . A third approach , motion dazzle , confuses the observer with a conspicuous pattern , making the object visible but momentarily harder to locate . The majority of camouflage methods aim for crypsis , often through a general resemblance to the background , high contrast disruptive coloration , eliminating shadow , and countershading . In the open ocean , where there is no background , the principal methods of camouflage are transparency , silvering , and countershading , while the ability to produce light is among other things used for counter @-@ illumination on the undersides of cephalopods such as squid . Some animals , such as chameleons and octopuses , are capable of actively changing their skin pattern and colours , whether for camouflage or for signalling . 
 Military camouflage was spurred by the increasing range and accuracy of firearms in the 19th century . In particular the replacement of the inaccurate musket with the rifle made personal concealment in battle a survival skill . In the 20th century , military camouflage developed rapidly , especially during the First World War . On land , artists such as André Mare designed camouflage schemes and observation posts disguised as trees . At sea , merchant ships and troop carriers were painted in dazzle patterns that were highly visible , but designed to confuse enemy submarines as to the target 's speed , range , and heading . During and after the Second World War , a variety of camouflage schemes were used for aircraft and for ground vehicles in different theatres of war . The use of radar since the mid @-@ 20th century has largely made camouflage for fixed @-@ wing military aircraft obsolete . 
 Non @-@ military use of camouflage includes making cell telephone towers less obtrusive and helping hunters to approach wary game animals . Patterns derived from military camouflage are frequently used in fashion clothing , exploiting their strong designs and sometimes their symbolism . Camouflage themes recur in modern art , and both figuratively and literally in science fiction and works of literature . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = In zoology = = = 
 In ancient Greece , Aristotle ( 384 BC – 322 BC ) commented on the colour @-@ changing abilities , both for camouflage and for signalling , of cephalopods including the octopus , in his Historia animalium : 
 The octopus ... seeks its prey by so changing its colour as to render it like the colour of the stones adjacent to it ; it does so also when alarmed . 
 Camouflage has been a topic of interest and research in zoology for well over a century . According to Charles Darwin 's 1859 theory of natural selection , features such as camouflage evolved by providing individual animals with a reproductive advantage , enabling them to leave more offspring , on average , than other members of the same species . In his Origin of Species , Darwin wrote : 
 When we see leaf @-@ eating insects green , and bark @-@ feeders mottled @-@ grey ; the alpine ptarmigan white in winter , the red @-@ grouse the colour of heather , and the black @-@ grouse that of peaty earth , we must believe that these tints are of service to these birds and insects in preserving them from danger . Grouse , if not destroyed at some period of their lives , would increase in countless numbers ; they are known to suffer largely from birds of prey ; and hawks are guided by eyesight to their prey , so much so , that on parts of the Continent persons are warned not to keep white pigeons , as being the most liable to destruction . Hence I can see no reason to doubt that natural selection might be most effective in giving the proper colour to each kind of grouse , and in keeping that colour , when once acquired , true and constant . 
 The English zoologist Edward Bagnall Poulton studied animal coloration , especially camouflage . In his 1890 book The Colours of Animals , he classified different types such as " special protective resemblance " ( where an animal looks like another object ) , or " general aggressive resemblance " ( where a predator blends in with the background , enabling it to approach prey ) . His experiments showed that <unk> moth pupae were camouflaged to match the backgrounds on which they were reared as larvae . Poulton 's " general protective resemblance " was at that time considered to be the main method of camouflage , as when Frank Evers Beddard wrote in 1892 that " tree @-@ frequenting animals are often green in colour . Among vertebrates numerous species of parrots , iguanas , tree @-@ frogs , and the green tree @-@ snake are examples " . Beddard did however briefly mention other methods , including the " alluring coloration " of the flower mantis and the possibility of a different mechanism in the orange tip butterfly . He wrote that " the scattered green spots upon the under surface of the wings might have been intended for a rough sketch of the small <unk> of the plant [ an <unk> ] , so close is their mutual resemblance . " He also explained the coloration of sea fish such as the mackerel : " Among pelagic fish it is common to find the upper surface dark @-@ coloured and the lower surface white , so that the animal is inconspicuous when seen either from above or below . " 
 The artist Abbott Handerson Thayer formulated what is sometimes called Thayer 's Law , the principle of countershading . However , he overstated the case in the 1909 book Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom , arguing that " All patterns and colors whatsoever of all animals that ever preyed or are preyed on are under certain normal circumstances obliterative " ( that is , cryptic camouflage ) , and that " Not one ' mimicry ' mark , not one ' warning color ' ... nor any ' sexually selected ' color , exists anywhere in the world where there is not every reason to believe it the very best conceivable device for the concealment of its wearer " , and using paintings such as Peacock in the Woods ( 1907 ) to reinforce his argument . Thayer was roundly mocked for these views by critics including Teddy Roosevelt . 
 The English zoologist Hugh Cott 's 1940 book Adaptive Coloration in Animals corrected Thayer 's errors , sometimes sharply : " Thus we find Thayer straining the theory to a fantastic extreme in an endeavour to make it cover almost every type of coloration in the animal kingdom . " Cott built on Thayer 's discoveries , developing a comprehensive view of camouflage based on " maximum disruptive contrast " , countershading and hundreds of examples . The book explained how disruptive camouflage worked , using streaks of boldly contrasting colour , paradoxically making objects less visible by breaking up their outlines . While Cott was more systematic and balanced in his view than Thayer , and did include some experimental evidence on the effectiveness of camouflage , his 500 @-@ page textbook was , like Thayer 's , mainly a natural history narrative which illustrated theories with examples . 
 Camouflage is a soft @-@ tissue feature that is rarely preserved in the fossil record , but rare fossilised skin samples from the Cretaceous period show that some marine reptiles were countershaded . The skins , pigmented with dark @-@ coloured eumelanin , reveal that both leatherback turtles and mosasaurs had dark backs and light bellies . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 = = = = Before 1800 = = = = 
 Ship camouflage was occasionally used in ancient times . Philostratus ( c . 172 – 250 AD ) wrote in his Imagines that Mediterranean pirate ships could be painted blue @-@ gray for concealment . Vegetius ( c . 360 – 400 AD ) says that " Venetian blue " ( sea green ) was used in the Gallic Wars , when Julius Caesar sent his <unk> <unk> ( reconnaissance boats ) to gather intelligence along the coast of Britain . The ships were painted entirely in bluish @-@ green wax , with sails , ropes and crew the same colour . There is little evidence of military use of camouflage on land before 1800 , but two unusual ceramics show men in Peru 's <unk> culture from before 500 AD , hunting birds with <unk> which are fitted with a kind of shield near the mouth , perhaps to conceal the hunters ' hands and faces . Another early source is a 15th @-@ century French manuscript , The Hunting Book of Gaston <unk> , showing a horse pulling a cart which contains a hunter armed with a crossbow under a cover of branches , perhaps serving as a hide for shooting game . Jamaican Maroons are said to have used plant materials as camouflage in the First Maroon War ( c . 1655 – 1740 ) . 
 = = = = 19th @-@ century origins = = = = 
 The development of military camouflage was driven by the increasing range and accuracy of infantry firearms in the 19th century . In particular the replacement of the inaccurate musket with weapons such as the Baker rifle made personal concealment in battle essential . Two Napoleonic War skirmishing units of the British Army , the 95th Rifle Regiment and the 60th Rifle Regiment , were the first to adopt camouflage in the form of a rifle green jacket , while the Line regiments continued to wear scarlet tunics . A contemporary study in 1800 by the English artist and soldier Charles Hamilton Smith provided evidence that grey uniforms were less visible than green ones at a range of 150 yards . 
 In the American Civil War , rifle units such as the 1st United States Sharp Shooters ( in the Federal army ) similarly wore green jackets while other units wore more conspicuous colours . The first British Army unit to adopt khaki uniforms was the Corps of Guides at Peshawar , when Sir Harry Lumsden and his second in command , William Hodson introduced a " drab " uniform in 1848 . Hodson wrote that it would be more appropriate for the hot climate , and help make his troops " invisible in a land of dust " . Later they improvised by dyeing cloth locally . Other regiments in India soon adopted the khaki uniform , and by 1896 khaki drill uniform was used everywhere outside Europe ; by the Second Boer War six years later it was used throughout the British Army . 
 = = = = First World War = = = = 
 In the First World War , the French army formed a camouflage corps , led by Lucien @-@ Victor Guirand de Scévola , employing artists known as camoufleurs to create schemes such as tree observation posts and covers for guns . Other armies soon followed them . The term camouflage probably comes from <unk> , a Parisian slang term meaning to disguise , and may have been influenced by <unk> , a French term meaning smoke blown in someone 's face . The English zoologist John Graham Kerr , artist Solomon J. Solomon and the American artist Abbott Thayer led attempts to introduce scientific principles of countershading and disruptive patterning into military camouflage , with limited success . 
 Ship camouflage was introduced in the early 20th century as the range of naval guns increased , with ships painted grey all over . In April 1917 , when German U @-@ boats were sinking many British ships with torpedoes , the marine artist Norman Wilkinson devised dazzle camouflage , which paradoxically made ships more visible but harder to target . In Wilkinson 's own words , dazzle was designed " not for low visibility , but in such a way as to break up her form and thus confuse a submarine officer as to the course on which she was heading " . 
 = = = = Second World War = = = = 
 In the Second World War , the zoologist Hugh Cott , a protégé of Kerr , worked to persuade the British army to use more effective camouflage techniques , including countershading , but , like Kerr and Thayer in the First World War , with limited success . For example , he painted two rail @-@ mounted coastal guns , one in conventional style , one countershaded . In aerial photographs , the countershaded gun was essentially invisible . The power of aerial observation and attack led every warring nation to camouflage targets of all types . The Soviet Union 's Red Army created the comprehensive doctrine of <unk> for military deception , including the use of camouflage . For example , during the Battle of Kursk , General <unk> , the commander of the Soviet 1st Tank Army , remarked that the enemy " did not suspect that our well @-@ camouflaged tanks were waiting for him . As we later learned from prisoners , we had managed to move our tanks forward unnoticed " . The tanks were concealed in previously prepared defensive emplacements , with only their turrets above ground level . In the air , Second World War fighters were often painted in ground colours above and sky colours below , attempting two different camouflage schemes for observers above and below . Bombers and night fighters were often black , while maritime reconnaissance planes were usually white , to avoid appearing as dark shapes against the sky . For ships , dazzle camouflage was mainly replaced with plain grey in the Second World War , though experimentation with colour schemes continued . 
 As in the First World War , artists were pressed into service ; for example , the surrealist painter Roland Penrose became a lecturer at the newly founded Camouflage Development and Training Centre at Farnham Castle , writing the practical Home Guard Manual of Camouflage . The film @-@ maker Geoffrey Barkas ran the Middle East Command Camouflage Directorate during the 1941 – 1942 war in the Western Desert , including the successful deception of Operation Bertram . Hugh Cott was chief instructor ; the artist camouflage officers , who called themselves camoufleurs , included Steven Sykes and Tony Ayrton . In Australia , artists were also prominent in the Sydney Camouflage Group , formed under the chairmanship of Professor William John Dakin , a zoologist from Sydney University . Max <unk> , Sydney Ure Smith and William Dobell were among the members of the group , which worked at Bankstown Airport , RAAF Base Richmond and Garden Island Dockyard . 
 = = = = After 1945 = = = = 
 Camouflage has been used to protect military equipment such as vehicles , guns , ships , aircraft and buildings as well as individual soldiers and their positions . Vehicle camouflage techniques begin with paint , which offers at best only limited effectiveness . Other methods for stationary land vehicles include covering with improvised materials such as blankets and vegetation , and erecting nets , screens and soft covers which may suitably reflect , scatter or absorb near infrared and radar waves . Some military textiles and vehicle camouflage paints also reflect infrared to help provide concealment from night vision devices . After the Second World War , radar made camouflage generally less effective , though coastal boats are sometimes painted like land vehicles . Aircraft camouflage too came to be seen as less important because of radar , and aircraft of different air forces , such as the Royal Air Force 's Lightning , were often uncamouflaged . 
 Many camouflaged textile patterns have been developed to suit the need to match combat clothing to different kinds of terrain ( such as woodland , snow , and desert ) . The design of a pattern effective in all terrains has proved elusive . The American Universal Camouflage Pattern of 2004 attempted to suit all environments , but was withdrawn after a few years of service . Terrain @-@ specific patterns have sometimes been developed but are ineffective in other terrains . The problem of making a pattern that works at different ranges has been solved with pixellated shapes , often designed digitally , that provide a fractal @-@ like range of patch sizes so they appear disruptively coloured both at close range and at a distance . The first genuinely digital camouflage pattern was the Canadian CADPAT , issued to the army in 2002 , soon followed by the American MARPAT . A pixellated appearance is not essential for this effect , though it is simpler to design and to print . 
 = = Principles = = 
 Camouflage can be achieved by different methods , described below . Most of the methods contribute to crypsis , helping to hide against a background ; but mimesis and motion dazzle protect without hiding . Methods may be applied on their own or in combination . 
 = = = Crypsis = = = 
 Crypsis means making the animal or military equipment hard to see ( or to detect in other ways , such as by sound or scent ) . Visual crypsis can be achieved in many different ways , such as by living underground or by being active only at night , as well as by a variety of methods of camouflage . 
 = = = = Resemblance to the surroundings = = = = 
 Some animals ' colours and patterns resemble a particular natural background . This is an important component of camouflage in all environments . For instance , tree @-@ dwelling parakeets are mainly green ; woodcocks of the forest floor are brown and speckled ; reedbed bitterns are streaked brown and buff ; in each case the animal 's coloration matches the hues of its habitat . Similarly , desert animals are almost all desert coloured in tones of sand , buff , ochre , and brownish grey , whether they are mammals like the gerbil or fennec fox , birds such as the desert lark or sandgrouse , or reptiles like the skink or horned viper . Military uniforms , too , generally resemble their backgrounds ; for example khaki uniforms are a muddy or dusty colour , originally chosen for service in South Asia . Many moths show industrial melanism , including the peppered moth which has coloration that blends in with tree bark . The coloration of these insects evolved between 1860 and 1940 to match the changing colour of the tree trunks on which they rest , from pale and mottled to almost black in polluted areas . This is taken by zoologists as evidence that camouflage is influenced by natural selection , as well as demonstrating that it changes where necessary to resemble the local background . 
 = = = = Disruptive coloration = = = = 
 Disruptive patterns use strongly contrasting , non @-@ repeating markings such as spots or stripes to break up the outlines of an animal or military vehicle , or to conceal telltale features , especially the eyes , as in the common frog . Disruptive patterns may use more than one method to defeat visual systems such as edge detection . Predators like the leopard use disruptive camouflage to help them approach prey , while potential prey like the Egyptian nightjar use it to avoid detection by predators . Disruptive patterning is common in military usage , both for uniforms and for military vehicles . Disruptive patterning , however , does not always achieve crypsis on its own , as an animal or a military target may be given away by factors like shape , shine , and shadow . 
 The presence of bold skin markings does not in itself prove that an animal relies on camouflage , as that depends on its behaviour . For example , although giraffes have a high contrast pattern that could be disruptive coloration , the adults are extremely conspicuous when in the open . Some authors have argued that adult giraffes are cryptic , since when standing among trees and bushes they are hard to see at even a few metres ' distance . However , adult giraffes move about to gain the best view of an approaching predator , relying on their size and ability to defend themselves , even from lions , rather than on camouflage . A different explanation is implied by the fact that young giraffes are far more vulnerable to predation than adults : more than half of all giraffe calves die within a year , and giraffe mothers hide their calves , which spend much of the time lying down in cover while their mothers are away feeding . Since the presence of a mother nearby does not affect survival , it is argued that young giraffes must be extremely well camouflaged ; this is supported by the fact that coat markings are strongly inherited . 
 = = = = Eliminating shadow = = = = 
 Some animals , such as the horned lizards of North America , have evolved elaborate measures to eliminate shadow . Their bodies are flattened , with the sides thinning to an edge ; the animals habitually press their bodies to the ground ; and their sides are fringed with white scales which effectively hide and disrupt any remaining areas of shadow there may be under the edge of the body . The theory that the body shape of the horned lizards which live in open desert is adapted to minimise shadow is supported by the one species which lacks fringe scales , the <unk> horned lizard , which lives in rocky areas and resembles a rock . When this species is threatened , it makes itself look as much like a rock as possible by curving its back , emphasizing its three @-@ dimensional shape . Some species of butterflies , such as the speckled wood , <unk> <unk> , minimise their shadows when perched by closing the wings over their backs , aligning their bodies with the sun , and tilting to one side towards the sun , so that the shadow becomes a thin inconspicuous line rather than a broad patch . Similarly , some ground @-@ nesting birds including the European nightjar select a resting position facing the sun . The elimination of shadow was identified as a principle of military camouflage during the Second World War . 
 = = = = Self @-@ decoration = = = = 
 Some animals actively seek to hide by decorating themselves with materials such as twigs , sand , or pieces of shell from their environment , to break up their outlines , to conceal the features of their bodies , and to match their backgrounds . For example , a caddis fly larva builds a decorated case and lives almost entirely inside it ; a decorator crab covers its back with seaweed , sponges and stones . The nymph of the predatory masked bug uses its hind legs and a ' tarsal fan ' to decorate its body with sand or dust . There are two layers of bristles ( trichomes ) over the body . On these , the nymph spreads an inner layer of fine particles and an outer layer of coarser particles . The camouflage may conceal the bug from both predators and prey . 
 Similar principles can be applied for military purposes , for instance when a sniper wears a ghillie suit designed to be further camouflaged by decoration with materials such as tufts of grass from the sniper 's immediate environment . Such suits were used as early as 1916 , the British army having adopted " coats of motley hue and stripes of paint " for snipers . Cott takes the example of the larva of the blotched emerald moth , which fixes a screen of fragments of leaves to its specially hooked bristles , to argue that military camouflage uses the same method , pointing out that the " device is ... essentially the same as one widely practised during the Great War for the concealment , not of caterpillars , but of caterpillar @-@ tractors , [ gun ] battery positions , observation posts and so forth . " 
 = = = = Cryptic behaviour = = = = 
 Movement catches the eye of prey animals on the lookout for predators , and of predators hunting for prey . Most methods of crypsis therefore also require suitable cryptic behaviour , such as lying down and keeping still to avoid being detected , or in the case of stalking predators such as the tiger , moving with extreme stealth , both slowly and quietly , watching its prey for any sign they are aware of its presence . As an example of the combination of behaviours and other methods of crypsis involved , young giraffes seek cover , lie down , and keep still , often for hours until their mothers return ; their skin pattern blends with the pattern of the vegetation , while the chosen cover and lying position together hide the animals ' shadows . The flat @-@ tail horned lizard similarly relies on a combination of methods : it is adapted to lie flat in the open desert , relying on stillness , its cryptic coloration , and concealment of its shadow to avoid being noticed by predators . In the ocean , the leafy sea dragon sways <unk> , like the seaweeds amongst which it rests , as if rippled by wind or water currents . 
 = = = = Motion camouflage = = = = 
 Most forms of camouflage are ineffective when the camouflaged animal or object moves , because the motion is easily seen by the observing predator , prey or enemy . However , insects such as hoverflies and dragonflies use motion camouflage : the hoverflies to approach possible mates , and the dragonflies to approach rivals when defending territories . Motion camouflage is achieved by moving so as to stay on a straight line between the target and a fixed point in the landscape ; the pursuer thus appears not to move , but only to loom larger in the target 's field of vision . The same technique can be used for military purposes , for example by missiles to minimise their risk of detection by the enemy . However , missile engineers , and animals such as bats , use the technique primarily for its efficiency rather than camouflage . 
 = = = = <unk> skin pattern / colour = = = = 
 Animals such as chameleon , frog , flatfish such as the peacock flounder , squid and octopus actively change their skin patterns and colours using special chromatophore cells to resemble their current background ( as well as for signalling ) . 
 Each chromatophore contains pigment of only one colour . In fish and frogs , colour change is mediated by the type of chromatophores known as melanophores that contain dark pigment . A <unk> is star @-@ shaped ; it contains many small pigmented organelles which can be dispersed throughout the cell , or aggregated near its centre . When the pigmented organelles are dispersed , the cell makes a patch of the animal 's skin appear dark ; when they are aggregated , most of the cell , and the animal 's skin , appears light . In frogs , the change is controlled relatively slowly , mainly by hormones . In fish , the change is controlled by the brain , which sends signals directly to the chromatophores , as well as producing hormones . 
 The skins of cephalopods such as the octopus contain complex units , each consisting of a chromatophore with surrounding muscle and nerve cells . The cephalopod chromatophore has all its pigment grains in a small elastic sac , which can be stretched or allowed to relax under the control of the brain to vary its opacity . By controlling chromatophores of different colours , cephalopods can rapidly change their skin patterns and colours . 
 On a longer timescale , animals like the Arctic hare , Arctic fox , stoat , and rock ptarmigan change their coat colour ( by moulting and growing new fur or feathers ) from brown or grey in the summer to white in the winter ; the Arctic fox is the only species in the dog family to do so . However , Arctic hares which live in the far north of Canada , where summer is very short , remain white year @-@ round . 
 The principle of varying coloration either rapidly or with the changing seasons has military applications . Active camouflage could in theory make use of both dynamic colour change and counterillumination . Simple techniques such as changing uniforms and repainting vehicles for winter have been in use since the Second World War . In 2011 , BAE Systems announced their <unk> infrared camouflage technology . It uses about 1000 hexagonal panels to cover the sides of a tank . The panels are heated and cooled to match either the vehicle 's surroundings ( crypsis ) , or an object such as a car ( mimesis ) , when viewed in infrared . 
 = = = = Countershading = = = = 
 Countershading uses graded colour to counteract the effect of self @-@ shadowing , creating an illusion of flatness . Self @-@ shadowing makes an animal appear darker below than on top , grading from light to dark ; countershading ' paints in ' tones which are darkest on top , lightest below , making the countershaded animal nearly invisible against a suitable background . Thayer observed that " Animals are painted by Nature , darkest on those parts which tend to be most lighted by the sky 's light , and vice versa " . Accordingly , the principle of countershading is sometimes called Thayer 's Law . Countershading is widely used by terrestrial animals , such as gazelles and grasshoppers ; marine animals , such as sharks and dolphins ; and birds , such as snipe and dunlin . 
 Countershading is less often used for military camouflage , despite Second World War experiments that showed its effectiveness . English zoologist Hugh Cott encouraged the use of techniques including countershading , but despite his authority on the subject , failed to persuade the British authorities . Soldiers often wrongly viewed camouflage netting as a kind of invisibility cloak , and they had to be taught to look at camouflage practically , from the enemy observer 's point of view . At the same time in Australia , zoologist William John Dakin advised soldiers to copy animals ' methods , using their instincts for wartime camouflage . 
 The term countershading has a second meaning unrelated to " Thayer 's Law " . It is that the upper and undersides of animals such as sharks , and of some military aircraft , are different colours to match the different backgrounds when seen from above or from below . Here the camouflage consists of two surfaces , each with the simple function of providing concealment against a specific background , such as a bright water surface or the sky . The body of a shark or the fuselage of an aircraft is not <unk> from light to dark to appear flat when seen from the side . The camouflage techniques used are the matching of background colour and pattern , and disruption of outlines . 
 = = = = Counter @-@ illumination = = = = 
 Counter @-@ illumination means producing light to match a background that is brighter than an animal 's body or military vehicle ; it is a form of active camouflage . It is notably used by some species of squid , such as the firefly squid and the midwater squid . The latter has light @-@ producing organs ( photophores ) scattered all over its underside ; these create a sparkling glow that prevents the animal from appearing as a dark shape when seen from below . Counterillumination camouflage is the likely function of the bioluminescence of many marine organisms , though light is also produced to attract or to detect prey and for signalling . 
 Counterillumination has rarely been used for military purposes . " <unk> lighting camouflage " was trialled by Canada 's National Research Council during the Second World War . It involved projecting light on to the sides of ships to match the faint glow of the night sky , requiring awkward external platforms to support the lamps . The Canadian concept was refined in the American Yehudi lights project , and trialled in aircraft including B @-@ 24 Liberators and naval Avengers . The planes were fitted with forward @-@ pointing lamps automatically adjusted to match the brightness of the night sky . This enabled them to approach much closer to a target – within 3 @,@ 000 yards ( 2 @,@ 700 metres ) – before being seen . Counterillumination was made obsolete by radar , and neither diffused lighting camouflage nor Yehudi lights entered active service . 
 = = = = Transparency = = = = 
 Many marine animals that float near the surface are highly transparent , giving them almost perfect camouflage . However , transparency is difficult for bodies made of materials that have different refractive indices from seawater . Some marine animals such as jellyfish have gelatinous bodies , composed mainly of water ; their thick <unk> is acellular and highly transparent . This conveniently makes them buoyant , but it also makes them large for their muscle mass , so they cannot swim fast , making this form of camouflage a costly trade @-@ off with mobility . Gelatinous planktonic animals are between 50 and 90 percent transparent . A transparency of 50 percent is enough to make an animal invisible to a predator such as cod at a depth of 650 metres ( 2 @,@ 130 ft ) ; better transparency is required for invisibility in shallower water , where the light is brighter and predators can see better . For example , a cod can see prey that are 98 percent transparent in optimal lighting in shallow water . Therefore , sufficient transparency for camouflage is more easily achieved in deeper waters . 
 Some tissues such as muscles can be made transparent , provided either they are very thin or organised as regular layers or fibrils that are small compared to the wavelength of visible light . A familiar example is the transparency of the lens of the vertebrate eye , which is made of the protein crystallin , and the vertebrate cornea which is made of the protein collagen . Other structures cannot be made transparent , notably the retinas or equivalent light @-@ absorbing structures of eyes — they must absorb light to be able to function . The camera @-@ type eye of vertebrates and cephalopods must be completely opaque . Finally , some structures are visible for a reason , such as to lure prey . For example , the nematocysts ( stinging cells ) of the transparent siphonophore <unk> <unk> resemble small copepods . Examples of transparent marine animals include a wide variety of larvae , including <unk> , siphonophores , salps ( floating tunicates ) , gastropod molluscs , polychaete worms , many shrimplike crustaceans , and fish ; whereas the adults of most of these are opaque and pigmented , resembling the seabed or shores where they live . Adult comb jellies and jellyfish obey the rule , often being mainly transparent . Cott suggests this follows the more general rule that animals resemble their background : in a transparent medium like seawater , that means actually being transparent . The small Amazon river fish <unk> <unk> and the shrimps it associates with , <unk> <unk> , are so transparent as to be " almost invisible " ; further , these species appear to select whether to be transparent or more conventionally mottled ( disruptively patterned ) according to the local background in the environment . 
 = = = = Silvering = = = = 
 Where transparency cannot be achieved , it can be imitated effectively by silvering to make an animal 's body highly reflective . At medium depths at sea , light comes from above , so a mirror oriented vertically makes animals such as fish invisible from the side . Most fish in the upper ocean such as sardine and herring are camouflaged by silvering . 
 The marine hatchetfish is extremely flattened laterally , leaving the body just millimetres thick , and the body is so silvery as to resemble aluminium foil . The mirrors consist of microscopic structures similar to those used to provide structural coloration : stacks of between 5 and 10 crystals of guanine spaced about ¼ of a wavelength apart to interfere constructively and achieve nearly 100 per cent reflection . In the deep waters that the hatchetfish lives in , only blue light with a wavelength of 500 nanometres percolates down and needs to be reflected , so mirrors 125 nanometres apart provide good camouflage . 
 In fish such as the herring which live in shallower water , the mirrors must reflect a mixture of wavelengths , and the fish accordingly has crystal stacks with a range of different spacings . A further complication for fish with bodies that are rounded in cross @-@ section is that the mirrors would be ineffective if laid flat on the skin , as they would fail to reflect horizontally . The overall mirror effect is achieved with many small reflectors , all oriented vertically . Silvering is found in other marine animals as well as fish . The cephalopods , including squid , octopus and cuttlefish , have multi @-@ layer mirrors made of protein rather than guanine . 
 = = = Mimesis = = = 
 In mimesis ( also called masquerade ) , the camouflaged object looks like something else which is of no special interest to the observer . Mimesis is common in prey animals , for example when a peppered moth caterpillar mimics a twig , or a grasshopper mimics a dry leaf . It is also found in nest structures ; some eusocial wasps , such as <unk> <unk> , build a nest envelope in patterns that mimic the leaves surrounding the nest . 
 Mimesis is also employed by some predators and parasites to lure their prey . For example , a flower mantis mimics a particular kind of flower , such as an orchid . This tactic has occasionally been used in warfare , for example with heavily armed Q @-@ ships disguised as merchant ships . 
 The common cuckoo , a brood parasite , provides examples of mimesis both in the adult and in the egg . The female lays her eggs in nests of other , smaller species of bird , one per nest . The female mimics a sparrowhawk . The resemblance is sufficient to make small birds take action to avoid the apparent predator . The female cuckoo then has time to lay her egg in their nest without being seen to do so . The cuckoo 's egg itself mimics the eggs of the host species , reducing its chance of being rejected . 
 = = = Motion dazzle = = = 
 Most forms of camouflage are made ineffective by movement : a deer or grasshopper may be highly cryptic when motionless , but instantly seen when it moves . But one method , motion dazzle , requires rapidly moving bold patterns of contrasting stripes . Motion dazzle may degrade predators ' ability to estimate the prey 's speed and direction accurately , giving the prey an improved chance of escape . Motion dazzle distorts speed perception and is most effective at high speeds ; stripes can also distort perception of size ( and so , perceived range to the target ) . As of 2011 , motion dazzle had been proposed for military vehicles , but never applied . Since motion dazzle patterns would make animals more difficult to locate accurately when moving , but easier to see when stationary , there would be an evolutionary trade @-@ off between motion dazzle and crypsis . 
 An animal that is commonly thought to be dazzle @-@ patterned is the zebra . The bold stripes of the zebra have been claimed to be disruptive camouflage , background @-@ blending and countershading . After many years in which the purpose of the coloration was disputed , an experimental study by Tim Caro suggested in 2012 that the pattern reduces the attractiveness of stationary models to biting flies such as horseflies and tsetse flies . However , a simulation study by Martin How and Johannes <unk> in 2014 suggests that when moving , the stripes may confuse observers , such as mammalian predators and biting insects , by two visual illusions : the wagon @-@ wheel effect , where the perceived motion is inverted , and the <unk> illusion , where the perceived motion is in a wrong direction . 
 = = Civil applications = = 
 Camouflage is occasionally used to make buildings less conspicuous : for example , in South Africa , towers carrying cell telephone antennae are sometimes camouflaged as tall trees with plastic branches , in response to " resistance from the community " . Since this method is costly ( a figure of three times the normal cost is mentioned ) , alternative forms of camouflage can include using neutral colours or familiar shapes such as cylinders and flagpoles . <unk> can also be reduced by siting masts near or actually on other structures . 
 Hunters of game have long made use of camouflage in the form of materials such as animal skins , mud , foliage , and green or brown clothing to enable them to approach wary game animals . Field sports such as driven grouse shooting conceal hunters in hides ( also called blinds or shooting butts ) . Modern hunting clothing makes use of fabrics that provide a disruptive camouflage pattern ; for example , in 1986 the hunter Bill Jordan created cryptic clothing for hunters , printed with images of specific kinds of vegetation such as grass and branches . 
 Automotive manufacturers often use patterns to disguise upcoming products . This camouflage is designed to obfuscate the vehicle 's visual lines , and is used along with padding , covers , and decals . The patterns ' purpose is to prevent visual observation ( and to a lesser degree photography ) , that would subsequently enable reproduction of the vehicle 's form factors . 
 = = Fashion , art and society = = 
 Military camouflage patterns influenced fashion and art from the time of the First World War onwards . Gertrude Stein recalled the cubist artist Pablo Picasso 's reaction in around 1915 : 
 I very well remember at the beginning of the war being with Picasso on the boulevard Raspail when the first camouflaged truck passed . It was at night , we had heard of camouflage but we had not seen it and Picasso amazed looked at it and then cried out , yes it is we who made it , that is cubism . 
 In 1919 , the attendants of a " dazzle ball " , hosted by the Chelsea Arts Club , wore dazzle @-@ patterned black and white clothing . The ball influenced fashion and art via postcards and magazine articles . The Illustrated London News announced : 
 The scheme of decoration for the great fancy dress ball given by the Chelsea Arts Club at the Albert Hall , the other day , was based on the principles of " Dazzle " , the method of " camouflage " used during the war in the painting of ships ... The total effect was brilliant and fantastic . 
 More recently , fashion designers have often used camouflage fabric for its striking designs , its " patterned disorder " and its symbolism . Camouflage clothing can be worn largely for its symbolic significance rather than for fashion , as when , during the late 1960s and early 1970s in the United States , anti @-@ war protestors often ironically wore military clothing during demonstrations against the American involvement in the Vietnam War . 
 Modern artists such as Ian Hamilton Finlay have used camouflage to reflect on war . His 1973 <unk> of a tank camouflaged in a leaf pattern , Arcadia , is described by the Tate as drawing " an ironic parallel between this idea of a natural paradise and the camouflage patterns on a tank " . The title refers to the Utopian Arcadia of poetry and art , and the memento mori Latin phrase Et in Arcadia ego which recurs in Hamilton Finlay 's work . In science fiction , Camouflage is a novel about shapeshifting alien beings by Joe Haldeman . The word is used more figuratively in works of literature such as <unk> Frank 's collection of stories of love and loss , A Brief History of Camouflage . 
 = = = Camouflage in nature = = = 
 Pioneering research 
 Beddard , Frank Evers ( 1892 ) . Animal Coloration : an account of the principal facts and theories relating to the colours and markings of animals . Swan Sonnenschein . 
 Cott , Hugh B ( 1940 ) . Adaptive Coloration in Animals . Methuen . 
 Darwin , Charles ( 1859 ) . On the Origin of Species . John Murray . Reprinted 1985 , Penguin Classics . 
 Poulton , Edward B ( 1890 ) . The Colours of Animals : their meaning and use , especially considered in the case of insects . Kegan Paul , Trench , Trübner . 
 Thayer , Abbott H ; Thayer , Gerald H. ( 1909 ) . Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom . Macmillan . 
 General reading 
 Elias , Ann ( 2011 ) . Camouflage Australia : Art , Nature , Science and War . Sydney University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 73 @-@ 8 . 
 Forbes , Peter ( 2009 ) . Dazzled and Deceived : Mimicry and Camouflage . Yale University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Herring , Peter ( 2002 ) . The Biology of the Deep Ocean . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Rothenberg , David ( 2011 ) . Survival of the Beautiful : Art , Science and Evolution . Bloomsbury . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 216 @-@ 8 . 
 = = = Military camouflage = = = 
 Barkas , Geoffrey ; Barkas , Natalie ( 1952 ) . The Camouflage Story ( from Aintree to Alamein ) . Cassell . 
 Casson , Lionel ( 1995 ) . Ships and <unk> in the Ancient World . JHU Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8018 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Newark , Tim ( 2007 ) . Camouflage . Thames and Hudson , with Imperial War Museum . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 500 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 = New Jersey Route 72 = 
 Route 72 is a state highway in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It runs 28 @.@ 74 mi ( 46 @.@ 25 km ) from the Four Mile Circle with Route 70 in Woodland Township in Burlington County to County Route 607 ( CR 607 ) in Ship Bottom on Long Beach Island in Ocean County . Route 72 travels through the Pine Barrens as a two @-@ lane undivided road . After an interchange with the Garden State Parkway , the route becomes a four- to six @-@ lane divided highway through built @-@ up areas of <unk> and crosses the Manahawkin Bay via the Manahawkin Bay Bridge onto Long Beach Island . 
 What is now Route 72 was originally designated as Route S40 in 1927 , a spur of Route 40 ( now Route 70 ) running from Four Mile to Manahawkin . The road was extended to Ship Bottom by 1941 before it was renumbered to Route 72 in 1953 . A realignment that took place in 1969 between U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) and the Manahawkin Bay Bridge resulted in the designation of Route 180 on the former alignment ; this road is now CR 50 . Plans in the late 1960s and the 1970s called for a proposed Route 72 freeway , running from the western terminus at Route 70 to the concurrently proposed Interstate 895 ( I @-@ 895 ) at the New Jersey Turnpike in Westampton Township , connecting Philadelphia 's northern suburbs with the Jersey Shore . The freeway plans along with I @-@ 895 were canceled by the 1980s . The Manahawkin Bay Bridge underwent deck repairs completed in May 2010 , with the bridge slated to be rehabilitated and a parallel span to be built to the south . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 72 begins at the Four Mile Circle intersection with Route 70 , CR 644 , and CR 646 in Woodland Township , Burlington County , heading to the southeast on Barnegat Road , a two @-@ lane undivided road . The route passes through heavily wooded areas of the Pine Barrens that are a part of the Brendan T. Byrne State Forest . The road passes near a state hospital before coming to an intersection with the northern terminus of CR 563 . Past CR 563 , the route continues through the Pine Barrens , passing under an abandoned railroad line prior to a junction with CR 532 . Here , Route 72 forms a concurrency with CR 532 and the road enters Barnegat Township in Ocean County , where it comes to a crossroads with CR 539 . From this intersection , Route 72 and CR 532 continue to a junction with CR 610 , where CR 532 splits from the route by heading to the east . A short distance later , the route intersects the western terminus of CR 554 , which continues along Barnegat Road , and Route 72 turns to the south @-@ southeast through more wooded areas . 
 The highway enters Stafford Township and passes to the southwest of the residential Ocean Acres community . After a junction with Nautilus Drive ( CR 111 ) , Route 72 widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway , intersecting CR 105 and CR 2 before coming to an interchange with the Garden State Parkway . Following this interchange , the route enters the Manahawkin area and widens to six lanes as it passes woods to the northeast and business areas to the southwest . Route 72 interchanges with US 9 and continues southeast through a mix of woods and commercial areas as a four @-@ lane road , with CR 50 ( Bay Avenue ) paralleling the route to the north . The road intersects CR 20 and CR 6 before it passes to the north of the Beach Haven West residential development and passes near wetlands . A road provides access to Bay Avenue before Route 72 crosses the Manahawkin Bay on the Manahawkin Bay Bridge , also known as the Dorland J. Henderson Memorial Bridge . After traversing two small islands consisting of a mix of residences and marshland , the road continues into Ship Bottom on Long Beach Island . Upon entering Ship Bottom , the route splits into a one @-@ way pair following 9th Street eastbound and 8th Street westbound . Route 72 passes by resort businesses , intersecting CR 4 and CR 89 before ending at CR 607 a block from the Atlantic Ocean . 
 Route 72 is a major route providing access to Long Beach Island , a popular Jersey Shore resort , from Philadelphia via Route 70 and from New York City via the Garden State Parkway . As such , the portion of the route east of the Garden State Parkway interchange sees congestion during the summer months . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now Route 72 was originally designated as Route S40 in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering . It was to be a spur of Route 40 that was to run from Route 40 at Four Mile to Route 4 ( now US 9 ) in Manahawkin . By 1941 , the route was extended east to the intersection with Long Beach Boulevard in Ship Bottom . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route S40 was renumbered to Route 72 . By 1969 , Route 72 was moved to a new alignment to the south between US 9 and the Manahawkin Bay Bridge ; the old alignment became Route 180 . This route was eventually removed from the state highway system and is now CR 50 , although more commonly known as " Bay Avenue " . 
 A freeway was originally proposed for the Route 72 corridor in the late 1960s . The Route 72 freeway was planned to run from the Four Mile Circle to the New Jersey Turnpike in Westampton Township , where it would connect to the proposed I @-@ 895 that would continue to I @-@ 95 near Bristol , Pennsylvania . The existing Route 72 would also be widened into a four @-@ lane divided highway . Both I @-@ 895 and Route 72 were intended to connect Bucks County , Pennsylvania and the Willingboro area with the Jersey Shore . The proposed freeway for Route 72 was to cost $ 39 million . However , construction costs and the desire to use money for mass transit led to cancellation of both I @-@ 895 and the Route 72 freeway by the 1980s . 
 In 2000 , the Manahawkin Bay Bridge was dedicated the Dorland J. Henderson Memorial Bridge in honor of Dorland J. Henderson , who was one of NJDOT ’ s top engineers that designed the lighting system for the Manahawkin Bay Bridge . In September 2009 , the NJDOT began repairs to the deck of the Manahawkin Bay Bridge . This project , completed in May 2010 , cost $ 4 million and received funding from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 . The Manahawkin Bay Bridge is to undergo a rehabilitation project and a parallel bridge will be built to the south . Construction began on May 3 , 2013 with completion expected in 2019 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Robert F. Christy = 
 Robert Frederick Christy ( May 14 , 1916 – October 3 , 2012 ) was a Canadian @-@ American theoretical physicist and later astrophysicist who was one of the last surviving people to have worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II . He was also briefly president of California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) . 
 A graduate of the University of British Columbia ( UBC ) in the 1930s where he studied physics , he followed George Volkoff , who was a year ahead of him , to the University of California , Berkeley , where he was accepted as a graduate student by Robert Oppenheimer , the leading theoretical physicist in the United States at that time . Christy received his doctorate in 1941 and joined the physics department of Illinois Institute of Technology . 
 In 1942 he joined the Manhattan Project at the University of Chicago , where he was recruited by Enrico Fermi to join the effort to build the first nuclear reactor , having been recommended as a theory resource by Oppenheimer . When Oppenheimer formed the Manhattan Project 's Los Alamos Laboratory in 1943 , Christy was one of the early recruits to join the Theory Group . Christy is generally credited with the insight that a solid sub @-@ critical mass of plutonium could be explosively compressed into supercriticality , a great simplification of earlier concepts of implosion requiring hollow shells . For this insight the solid @-@ core plutonium model is often referred to as the " Christy pit " . 
 After the war , Christy briefly joined the University of Chicago Physics department before being recruited to join the Caltech faculty in 1946 when Oppenheimer decided it was not practical for him to resume his academic activities . He stayed at Caltech for his academic career , serving as Department Chair , Provost and Acting President . In 1960 Christy turned his attention to astrophysics , creating some of the first practical computation models of stellar operation . For this work Christy was awarded the Eddington Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1967 . In the 1980s and 1990s Christy participated in the National Research Council 's Committee on <unk> , an extended effort to better understand the actual radiation exposure due to the Japanese bombs , and on the basis of that learning , better understand the medical risks of radiation exposure . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robert Frederick Cohen was born in May 14 , 1916 in Vancouver , British Columbia , the son of Moise Jacques Cohen , an electrical engineer , and his wife Hattie Alberta née Mackay , a school teacher . He was named Robert after his maternal great uncle Robert Wood , and Frederick after Frederick Alexander Christy , the second husband of his maternal grandmother . He had an older brother , John , who was born in 1913 . Moise changed the family surname to Christy by deed poll on August 31 , 1918 . On November 4 , Moise was accidentally electrocuted at work . Hattie died after goitre surgery in 1926 . Christy and his brother were then cared for by Robert Wood , their grandmother Alberta Mackay , and their great aunt Maud Mackay . 
 Christy was educated at Magee High School , graduating in 1932 with the highest examination score in the province of British Columbia . He was awarded the Governor General 's Academic Medal , and , importantly in view of his family 's limited ability to pay , free tuition to attend the University of British Columbia ( UBC ) . At the award dinner he met the second place winner , Dagmar Elizabeth von Lieven , whom he dated while at UBC . He received his Bachelor of Arts ( BA ) degree in mathematics and physics with first class honors in 1935 , and his Master of Arts ( MA ) degree in 1937 , writing a thesis on " Electron attachment and negative ion formation in oxygen " . 
 George Volkoff , a friend of Christy who was a year ahead of him at UBC , was accepted as a graduate student at the University of California , Berkeley , by Robert Oppenheimer , who led the most active school of theoretical physics in the United States at that time . This inspired Christy to apply to the University of California as well . He was accepted , and was awarded a fellowship for his first year . At Berkeley he shared an apartment with Volkoff , Robert Cornog , Ken McKenzie and McKenzie 's wife Lynn McKenzie . For his thesis , Oppenheimer had him look at mesotrons , subatomic particles called muons today that then recently been found in cosmic rays . They were so @-@ called because they were larger than electrons but smaller than protons . With the help of Shuichi Kusaka he performed detailed calculations of the particle 's spin . He published two papers on mesotrons with Kusaka in the Physical Review , which formed the basis of his 1941 Doctor of Philosophy ( PhD ) thesis 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 Christy could have graduated in 1940 , but could not then be a teaching assistant , and this would have left him jobless and without income . In 1941 , Oppenheimer found him a post at the physics department at Illinois Institute of Technology ( IIT ) . In May 1941 , he married Dagmar von Lieven . They had two sons : Thomas Edward ( Ted ) , born in 1944 , and Peter Robert , born in 1946 . IIT paid Christy $ 200 per month to teach 27 hours per week for 11 months per annum . To keep abreast of developments in physics , he attended seminars at the University of Chicago . This brought him to the attention of Eugene Wigner , who hired him for the same money that IIT was paying him as a full @-@ time research assistant , commencing in January 1942 . 
 Enrico Fermi and his team from Columbia University arrived at the University of Chicago in January 1942 as part of an effort to concentrate the Manhattan Project 's reactor work at the new Metallurgical Laboratory . Fermi arranged with Wigner for Christy to join his group , which was building a nuclear reactor , which Fermi called a " pile " , in the squash court under Stagg Field at the University of Chicago . Construction began on November 6 , 1942 , and Christy was present when Chicago Pile @-@ 1 went critical on December 2 . 
 In early 1943 , Christy joined Oppenheimer 's Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico , where he became an American citizen in 1943 or 1944 . Hans Bethe , the head of T ( Theoretical ) Division , detailed his physicists to assist with the projects at the laboratory . With his knowledge of reactors , Christy 's assignment was to help Donald W. Kerst 's Water Boiler group . The Water Boiler was an aqueous homogeneous reactor intended as a laboratory instrument to test critical mass calculations and the effect of various tamper materials . It was the first reactor to use enriched uranium as a fuel , and the first to use liquid fuel in the form of soluble uranium sulfate dissolved in water . Christy estimated that it would require 600 grams ( 21 oz ) of pure uranium @-@ 235 , a figure he subsequently revised to 575 grams ( 20 @.@ 3 oz ) . When the reactor went critical on May 9 , 1944 with 565 grams ( 19 @.@ 9 oz ) , the accuracy of Christy 's figures raised the laboratory 's confidence in T Division 's calculations . 
 The discovery by Emilio Segrè 's group in April and May 1944 of high levels of plutonium @-@ 240 in reactor @-@ produced plutonium meant that an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon was required , but studies indicated that this would be extremely difficult to achieve . By August 1944 , the calculations had been made of how an ideal spherical implosion would work ; the problem was how to make it work in the real world where jets and spalling were a problem . Christy worked in Rudolf Peierls 's T @-@ 1 Group , which studied the theory of implosion . He suggested the possibility of using a solid plutonium core that would form a critical mass when compressed . This was an ultra @-@ conservative design that solved the problem of jets by brute force . It became known as the " Christy pit " or " Christy gadget " , " gadget " being the laboratory euphemism for a bomb . However the solid pit was intrinsically less efficient than a hollow pit , and it required a modulated neutron initiator to start the chain reaction . Christy worked with Klaus Fuchs , Paul Stein and Hans Bethe to develop a suitable initiator design , which became known as an " urchin " . The Gadget used in the Trinity nuclear test and the Fat Man used in the atomic bombing of Nagasaki used Christy pits . 
 Later in life , Christy would agree to give a number of both oral history and video interviews in which he discussed his role in the Manhattan Project and latter interests . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the war ended , Christy accepted an assistant professorship at the University of Chicago , at a salary of $ 5 @,@ 000 per annum , twice what he had been making before the war . He moved back to Chicago in February 1946 , but suitable housing was hard to find in the immediate post @-@ war period , and Christy and his family shared a mansion with Edward Teller and his family . 
 Before the war , Oppenheimer had spent part of each year teaching at California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) . Christy was one of Oppenheimer 's Berkeley students who made the trip down to Pasadena , California , each year to continue studying with Oppenheimer . After the war , Oppenheimer decided that with his additional responsibilities he could no longer continue this arrangement . The head of the W. K. Kellogg Radiation Laboratory at Caltech , Charles Lauritsen therefore asked Oppenheimer for the name of a theoretical physicist that he would recommend as a replacement . Oppenheimer recommended Christy . Willy Fowler then approached Christy with an offer of a full @-@ time position at Caltech at $ 5 @,@ 400 per annum , and Christy accepted . He would remain at Caltech for the rest of his academic career . The drawback to working at Caltech was that neither Lauritsen nor Fowler was a theoretical physicist , so a heavy workload fell on Christy . This was recognised by a pay raise to $ 10 @,@ 000 per annum in 1954 . 
 Christy joined Oppenheimer , Lauritsen and Robert Bacher , who joined the faculty at Caltech in 1949 , in Project Vista , a detailed 1951 study on how Western Europe could be defended against the Soviet Union . Christy was distraught at the outcome of the 1954 Oppenheimer security hearing . When he encountered Teller , who had testified against Oppenheimer , at Los Alamos in 1954 , Christy publicly refused to shake Teller 's hand . " I viewed Oppenheimer as a god " , he later recalled , " and I was sure that he was not a treasonable person . " Asked about his relationship with Teller in 2006 , Christy said : 
 I ’ ve seen him from time to time . Our relationship has remained cool . Since that time , I have disagreed with him in a number of areas . For example , the Strategic Defense Initiative . I have disagreed with him , but I have not argued with him publicly , because Teller operates at a much different level than I do . He ’ s a confidant of presidents ; I ’ m not . As I say , I merely disagree privately , and that ’ s the way it is . 
 In 1956 , Christy was one of a number of scientists from Caltech who publicly called for a ban on atmospheric nuclear testing . The 1963 Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty that Christy advocated put an end to one of his most unusual projects . He worked with Freeman Dyson on Project Orion , the design of a spacecraft propelled by atomic bombs . 
 During a sabbatical year at Princeton University in 1960 , Christy began an investigation of Cepheid variables and the smaller RR Lyrae variables , classes of luminous variable stars . At the time it was a mystery as to why they varied . He used the knowledge of the hydrodynamics of implosion gained at Los Alamos during the war to explain this phenomenon . This earned him the Royal Astronomical Society 's Eddington Medal for contributions to theoretical astrophysics in 1967 . 
 Christy was appointed Vice President and Provost of Caltech in 1970 . Under Christy and President Harold Brown Caltech expanded its humanities and added economics to allow students to broaden their education . He had David <unk> appointed as Vice President for Financial Affairs , and they steered Caltech through the financially stringent 1970s . The first women were admitted as undergraduates in the 1970s . 
 When Jenijoy La Belle , who had been hired in 1969 but refused tenure in 1974 , filed suit with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission , Christy pressed for the case to be settled and La Belle to be given tenure . The <unk> ruled against Caltech in 1977 , adding that she had been paid less than male colleagues . La Belle received tenure in 1979 . 
 In 1970 he became romantically involved with Inge @-@ Juliana <unk> , a fellow physicist 26 years his junior . He divorced Dagmar in early 1971 , and married Juliana on August 4 , 1973 . They had two daughters , Illia Juliana Lilly Christy , born in 1974 , and Alexandra Roberta ( Alexa ) Christy , born in 1976 . 
 Christy briefly became acting President of Caltech in 1977 when Brown left to become Secretary of Defense . Christy returned to teaching after Marvin L. Goldberger became President in 1978 . He became Institute Professor of Theoretical Physics in 1983 , and Institute Professor Emeritus in 1986 . 
 Christy died on October 3 , 2012 . He was survived by his wife Juliana , their two daughters , Illia and Alexa , and his two sons , Peter and Ted . He was buried at Mountain View Cemetery in Altadena , California . 
 = Ice Hockey World Championships = 
 The Ice Hockey World Championships are an annual men 's ice hockey tournament organized by the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) . First officially held at the 1920 Summer Olympics , it is the sport 's highest profile annual international tournament . 
 The IIHF was created in 1908 while the European Championships , the precursor to the World Championships , were first held in 1910 . The tournament held at the 1920 Summer Olympics is recognized as the first Ice Hockey World Championship . Between 1920 and 1968 , the Olympic hockey tournament was also considered the World Championship for that year . The first World Championship that was held as an individual event was in 1930 in which twelve nations participated . In 1931 , ten teams played a series of round @-@ robin format qualifying rounds to determine which nations participated in the medal round . Medals were awarded based on the final standings of the teams in the medal round . This basic format would be used until 1992 ( although small variations were made ) . In 1951 , thirteen nations took part and were split into two groups . The top seven teams ( Pool A ) played for the World Championship . The other six ( Pool B ) played for ranking purposes . During a congress in 1990 , the IIHF introduced a playoff system . As the IIHF grew , more teams began to participate at the World Championships , so more pools ( later renamed divisions ) were introduced . 
 The modern format for the World Championship features 16 teams in the championship group , 12 teams in Division I and 12 teams in Division II . If there are more than 40 teams , the rest compete in Division III . The teams in the championship play a preliminary round , then the top eight teams play in the playoff medal round and the winning team is crowned World Champion . Over the years , the tournament has gone through several rule changes . In 1969 body @-@ checking in all three zones in a rink was allowed , helmets and goaltender masks became mandatory in the early 1970s and in 1992 the IIHF began using the shootout . The current IIHF rules differ slightly from the rules used in the NHL . The World Championships have been open to all players , both professional and amateur , since 1977 . The IIHF requires that players are citizens of the country they represent and allow players to switch national teams provided that they play in their new nation for a certain period of time . 
 Canada was the tournament 's first dominant team , winning the tournament 12 times between 1930 and 1952 . The United States , Czechoslovakia , Sweden , Great Britain and Switzerland were also competitive during this period . The Soviet Union first participated in 1954 and soon became rivals with Canada . From 1963 until the nation 's breakup in 1991 , the Soviet Union was the dominant team , winning 20 championships . During that period , only three other nations won medals : Canada , Czechoslovakia and Sweden . Russia first participated in 1992 and the Czech Republic and Slovakia began competing in 1993 . In the 2000s , the competition became more open as the " Big Six " teams – Canada , the Czech Republic , Finland , Russia , Sweden , and the United States – as well as Slovakia became more evenly matched . 
 As this tournament takes place during the same time period as the NHL 's Stanley Cup playoffs , many of the best players do not participate , and it is considered secondary in importance among North American fans and players to the Stanley Cup . Thus , NHL players generally only participate once their respective team is eliminated from Stanley Cup contention . 
 The 79th World Championship was held in Prague and Ostrava , Czech Republic , and was the most successful to date in terms of overall attendance . In the final , Canada defeated Russia to win their twenty @-@ fifth title . 
 = = Background = = 
 The International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) , the sport 's governing body , was created on 15 May 1908 under the name Ligue Internationale de Hockey sur Glace ( <unk> ) . In 1908 , organised ice hockey was still relatively new ; the first organised indoor ice hockey game took place on 3 March 1875 at Montreal 's Victoria Skating Rink . In 1887 , four clubs from Montreal formed the Amateur Hockey Association of Canada ( AHAC ) and developed a structured schedule . Lord Stanley donated the Stanley Cup and the trustees decided to award it to either the best team in the AHAC , or to any pre @-@ approved team that won it in a <unk> the Eastern Canada Amateur Hockey Association ( ECAHA ) was formed in 1905 , which mixed paid and amateur players in its rosters . The ECAHA eventually folded and as a result of the dissolution , the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) formed . 
 The Ice Hockey European Championships , first held in Les Avants , Switzerland in January 1910 , were the precursor to the World Championships . It was the first official tournament meant for national teams , the participating nations were Great Britain , Germany , Belgium and Switzerland . In North America , professional hockey was continuing to grow , the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , the largest professional hockey league in the world , was formed in 1917 . The European Championships were held for five consecutive years but were not held between 1915 and 1920 due to World War I. 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1920 – 1928 : Olympic Games = = = 
 The IIHF considers the ice hockey tournament held at the 1920 Summer Olympics to be the first Ice Hockey World Championship . It was organized by a committee that included future IIHF president Paul <unk> . The tournament was played from 23 April to 29 April . Seven teams participated : Canada , Czechoslovakia , the United States , Switzerland , Sweden , France and Belgium . Canada , represented by the Winnipeg Falcons , won the gold medal , outscoring opponents 27 – 1 . The United States and Czechoslovakia won the silver and bronze medals respectively . Following the 1921 Olympic Congress in Lausanne , the first Winter Olympics were held in 1924 in Chamonix , France , though they were only officially recognized by the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) as such in the following year . 
 Subsequently , every Olympic tournament up to and including the 1968 Winter Olympics is counted as the World Championship . Canada won the gold medal at both the 1924 and 1928 Winter Olympics . In 1928 , the Swedish and Swiss teams won their first medals – silver and bronze , respectively – and a German team participated for the first time , finishing ninth . 
 = = = 1930 – 1953 : Canadian dominance = = = 
 The first World Championship that was held as an individual event was in 1930 . It was held in Chamonix , France ; Vienna , Austria ; and Berlin , Germany . Canada , represented by the Toronto <unk> , defeated Germany in the gold medal game , and Switzerland won the bronze . Canada , represented by the Manitoba Grads , won the following year , and the Winnipeg Winnipegs won Gold for Canada at the 1932 Winter Olympics . At the 1933 World Championships in Prague , Czechoslovakia , the United States won the gold medal , becoming the first non @-@ Canadian team to win the competition . As of 2015 , it is the only gold medal the United States has won at a non @-@ Olympic tournament . Two days before the 1936 Winter Olympics in Germany , Canadian officials protested that two players on the British team — James Foster and Alex Archer — had played in Canada but transferred without permission to play for clubs in the English National League . The IIHF agreed with Canada , but Britain threatened to withdraw if the two could not compete . Canada withdrew the protest before the games started . Britain became the first non @-@ Canadian team to win Olympic gold , with Germany taking bronze . Canada won the remainder of the World Championship tournaments held in the 1930s . The 1939 World Championships marked the first time that a team from Finland competed in the tournament . World War II forced the cancellation of the 1940 and 1944 Winter Olympics and the World Championships from 1941 to 1946 . 
 Following World War II , Czechoslovakia 's team was quickly improving . They won the 1947 World Championships , although a Canadian team had not participated in the event . In 1949 , they became the third nation to win a World Championship tournament that Canada participated in . During the run @-@ up to the 1948 Winter Olympics in St. Moritz , Switzerland , a conflict broke out between the two American hockey bodies : the American Hockey Association ( AHA ) and the Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) . The AAU refused to support the AHA 's team because they believed that AHA players were " openly paid salaries " and at the time , the Olympics were strictly for amateur players . A compromise was reached that the AHA team would be allowed to compete but would be considered unofficial and unable to win a medal . By the end of the tournament , the AHA team finished fourth in the standings but was disqualified . Both Czechoslovakia and the RCAF Flyers of Canada won seven games and tied when they played each other . The gold medal winner was determined by goal difference : Canada won the gold because they had an average of 13 @.@ 8 compared to Czechoslovakia 's average of 4 @.@ 3 . 
 At the 1952 Winter Olympics in Oslo , Norway , the Edmonton <unk> won Canada 's second consecutive Olympic gold medal . It was the last time that a Canadian team would win an Olympic gold medal in hockey for 50 years . The 1953 tournament featured only three teams that played all of their games : Sweden , West Germany , Switzerland . Sweden finished the tournament undefeated and won their first World Championship . 
 = = = 1954 – 1962 : Canada @-@ Soviet Union rivalry = = = 
 The 1954 World Championships has been described by the IIHF as " the start of the modern era of international hockey . " The tournament saw the first participation of the Soviet Union in international competition . The Soviet Union had organized its first ice hockey league in 1946 , having previously focused on bandy . Led by coach Arkady <unk> , the Soviet national team finished their first six games undefeated . Canada , represented by the East York <unk> , was also undefeated and , in the final game of the tournament , the two teams met for the first time in international competition . The Soviet Union won the game 7 – 2 , becoming the fifth team to win a World Championship tournament . The 1955 World Championship was held in West Germany , and the two teams again met in the final game of the tournament . The game was so high profile in Canada that announcer Foster Hewitt flew to Germany to provide play @-@ by @-@ play coverage . Both teams were undefeated and Canada , represented by the Penticton Vees , defeated the Soviets 5 – 0 to reclaim the World Championship . At the 1956 Winter Olympics in Cortina d 'Ampezzo , Italy , Canada 's Kitchener @-@ Waterloo Dutchmen lost to both the Soviets and the United States in the medal round and won the bronze . The Soviets went undefeated and won their first Olympic ice hockey gold medal . It would be seven years until the Soviet Union won another World Championship . 
 The 1957 World Championships were held in Moscow . Canada and the United States did not participate in protest of the Soviet occupation of Hungary . Most of the games were held in the Luzhniki Sports Palace , but the Soviet officials decided to hold the final game in a nearby outdoor soccer stadium . The game was attended by at least 55 @,@ 000 people , which stood as a World Championship attendance record until 2010 . In the final game , Sweden tied the Soviet Union to finish with six wins and one tie ( the Soviet Union had five wins and two ties ) and won the gold medal . Canada returned to the World Championship in 1958 and won two consecutive titles , with the Soviets winning silver both times . At the 1960 Winter Olympics in Squaw Valley , California , Canada , the Soviet Union , Czechoslovakia and Sweden were the top four teams heading into the Games . All four were defeated by the American team , which won all seven games en route to its first Olympic gold medal . 
 In 1961 , Czechoslovakia defeated the Soviet Union and tied Canada to make it a three @-@ way race for gold . In the final game , Canada defeated the Soviets 5 – 1 to win their nineteenth gold medal . The Trail Smoke Eaters became the final club team to represent Canada . The following year , Canada implemented a national team program , led by Father David Bauer . Canada would not win another world championship gold until 1994 . In 1962 , the World Championships were held in North America for the first time . The tournament was held in Denver , United States , and was boycotted by the Soviet and Czechoslovak teams . Sweden defeated Canada for the first time in the history of the competition and won their third gold medal . 
 = = = 1963 – 1976 : Soviet dominance = = = 
 At the 1963 World Championships in Stockholm , the Soviet Union won the gold medal , beginning a streak of nine consecutive World Championship golds . The 1964 Winter Olympics in Innsbruck , Austria marked the first time that Canada failed to win an Olympic medal in hockey . The Soviet Union won all seven of their games and the gold medal , but Canada finished the tournament with five wins and two losses , putting them in a three @-@ way tie for second place with Sweden and Czechoslovakia . Prior to 1964 , the tie @-@ breaking procedure was based on goal difference from games against teams in the medal round and under that system , Canada would have placed third ahead of the Czechoslovaks . The procedure had been changed to count all games and that meant the Canadians finished fourth . However , the Olympics also counted as the World Championships , and under IIHF rules , Canada should have won a bronze . In April 2005 , the IIHF admitted that a mistake had occurred and announced that they had reviewed the decision and would award the 1964 Canadian team a World Championship bronze medal . However , two months later , the IIHF over @-@ turned their decision and rejected an appeal in September . 
 The Soviets dominated the remainder of the decade . Following 1963 , the team went undefeated in Olympic and World Championship competition for four years . Their streak was broken by Czechoslovakia at the 1968 Winter Olympics . Despite the loss , the Soviets still won gold . It was the last time that the Olympics were also counted as the World Championships . In 1969 , the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia played " the most emotionally charged games in the history of international hockey . " The rights to host the tournament had originally been awarded to Czechoslovakia but they were forced to decline the rights following the Soviet @-@ led Warsaw Pact invasion of the nation in August 1968 . The tournament was held in Stockholm , Sweden , and with these international tensions , the Czechoslovak team was determined to defeat the Soviets . They won both of their games 2 – 0 and 4 – 3 but despite these wins , the Czechoslovaks lost both of their games to Sweden and won bronze . 
 With European teams constantly improving , the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association ( CAHA ) felt their amateur players could no longer be competitive and pushed for the ability to use players from professional leagues . At the IIHF Congress in 1969 , the IIHF voted to allow Canada to use nine non @-@ NHL professional players at the 1970 World Championships . The rights to host the tournament were awarded to Canada for the first time – in Montreal and Winnipeg . However , the decision to allow the use of professionals was reversed in January 1970 . IOC president Avery Brundage was opposed to the idea of amateur and professional players competing together and said that ice hockey 's status as an Olympic sport would be in jeopardy if the change was made . In response , Canada withdrew from International ice hockey competition . Canada 's ice hockey team did not participate in the 1972 and 1976 Winter Olympics . Canada also waived their rights to host the 1970 World Championship , so it was held in Stockholm , Sweden instead . 
 Led by goaltender Vladislav Tretiak and forwards Valeri Kharlamov , Alexander Yakushev , Vladimir Petrov and Boris Mikhailov , the Soviet Union won gold at the 1970 and 1971 World Championships and the 1972 Winter Olympics . 1972 marked the first time that both the Olympics and World Championships were held in the same year as separate events . At the World Championships in Prague , the Czechoslovak team ended the Soviet team 's streak and won their first gold since 1949 . The Soviet team quickly returned to their winning ways , winning 1973 and 1974 World Championships . However , during the latter tournament , the Czechoslovak team defeated the Soviets 7 – 2 . It was one of the biggest margins the Soviet team had ever lost by in an official game . The 1976 World Championships were held in Katowice , Poland . On the opening day of the tournament , Poland defeated the Soviet Union 6 – 4 thanks to a hat @-@ trick from forward <unk> <unk> and the goaltending of Andrzej <unk> . It was one of the biggest upsets in international hockey history ; two months earlier at the 1976 Winter Olympics , Poland had lost 16 – 1 to the Soviets . The Soviets lost two more games and won the silver , and Czechoslovakia won gold . Poland finished seventh and was relegated to Pool B , the division in which teams play for ranking purposes and not the championship ( now known as Division I ) . 
 = = = 1976 – 1987 : First years of open competition = = = 
 Günther Sabetzki became president of the IIHF in 1975 and helped to resolve the dispute with the CAHA . The IIHF agreed to allow " open competition " between all players in the World Championships , and moved the competition to later in the season so players not involved in the NHL playoffs could participate . However , NHL players were still not allowed to play in the Olympics , because of both the unwillingness of the NHL to take a break mid @-@ season and the IOC 's strict amateur @-@ only policy . The IIHF also agreed to endorse the Canada Cup , a competition meant to bring together the best players from the top hockey @-@ playing countries . 
 The 1976 World Ice Hockey Championships in Katowice were the first to feature professionals although in the end only the United States made use of the new rule , recalling eight pros from the Minnesota North Stars and Minnesota Fighting Saints . The first fully open World Championship was held in 1977 in Vienna , Austria , and saw the first participation of active Canadian NHL players , including two @-@ time NHL MVP Phil Esposito . Sweden and Finland also augmented their rosters with a few NHL and WHA players . Many of the players on the Canadian team were not prepared for the tournament and were unfamiliar with the international game . The team finished fourth , losing both games to the Soviet Union by a combined score of 19 – 2 . Czechoslovakia won gold , becoming the third team ( after Canada and the Soviet Union ) to win consecutive championships . 
 With NHL players participating in the tournament , IIHF officials began to fear that true amateurs and young players were losing their places . As a result , full world championship status was given to the IIHF World Under @-@ 20 Championship , which had been held annually since 1974 as an unofficial invitational tournament . Colloquially known as the World Junior Hockey Championship , the event was structured after the World Championships , but limited to players under the age of 20 . The World Under @-@ 18 Championship was established in 1999 and typically held in April . It usually does not involve the top North American players because they are involved in University or junior league playoffs at the time . 
 Starting in 1978 , the Soviet team won five consecutive World Championships , and had an unbeaten streak that lasted from 1981 through the 1984 Winter Olympics and until 1985 . During that period , Canada remained competitive , winning three bronze medals . World Championship tournaments were not held in 1980 , 1984 or 1988 – the Olympic years . 
 The 1987 World Championships in Vienna were over @-@ shadowed by several controversies . At the beginning of the tournament , the roster of the West German team included Miroslav <unk> , a Polish @-@ German forward who had previously played for Poland at the 1977 World Under @-@ 20 Championship . <unk> became a naturalized citizen of West Germany and played in the first three games , scoring a goal in a 3 – 1 win over Finland . Following the game , Finland launched a protest , demanding that the result be over @-@ turned because the Germans had used an ineligible player . At the time , players were not allowed to switch nationalities under any circumstances and the IIHF agreed to overturn the result and award the two points to Finland . This angered German officials , who filed a protest in an Austrian court . The court agreed with the Germans , overturning the IIHF decision and allowing them to keep their points . The result affected the final standings because had the IIHF 's decision stood , Finland would have advanced to the medal round instead of Sweden . However , the Finns finished out of the medal round , and Sweden won their first gold medal since 1962 . The tournament format also became controversial because the Soviet Union finished undefeated but the Swedish team , which had lost three games in the preliminary round , won on goal differential because of a 9 – 0 win over Canada . 
 = = = 1989 – 1992 : Fall of the Iron Curtain = = = 
 Before 1989 , players that lived in the Soviet Union , Czechoslovakia , and other nations behind the Iron Curtain were not allowed to leave and play in the NHL . In March 1989 , Sergei Pryakhin became the first member of the Soviet national team who was permitted to play for a non @-@ Soviet team . Several Soviet players , including Igor Larionov and Viacheslav Fetisov , wanted to leave and play in the NHL . Soviet officials agreed to allow players to leave if they played one final tournament with the national team . Players agreed to this , and the Soviet Union won its 21st World Championship . Shortly after , Soviet players began to flood into the NHL . Many of the Soviet Union 's top players left , including the entire " Green Unit " – Larionov , Fetisov , Vladimir Krutov , Sergei Makarov and Alexei Kasatonov . The following year , the Soviet team was in disarray but still managed to win the 1990 World Championships . It was the final championship the Soviet team would win . In 1991 , Swedish forward Mats Sundin – the first European player to be drafted first overall in the NHL – led his team to the gold medal . The Soviets won bronze – the last medal the team would ever win . 
 The Soviet Union dissolved in December 1991 . Nine former soviet states became part of the IIHF and began competing in international competitions , including Belarus , Kazakhstan , Latvia and Ukraine . Russia was named the successor to the Soviet Union . With this flood of new teams , the IIHF expanded the number of spots from eight to twelve . From 1963 to 1991 , only four teams won a World Championship medal : the Soviet Union , Czechoslovakia ( failing to win a medal only three times ) , Sweden and Canada . The Soviets won a medal in every tournament they participated in ( 1954 to 1991 ) . At the 1992 World Championships , Sweden won their second consecutive gold . Finland won the silver medal , the nation 's first ever World Championship medal ( the Finnish team had previously won a silver at the 1988 Winter Olympics ) . 
 = = = 1993 – present = = = 
 Czechoslovakia split into the Czech Republic and Slovakia in January 1993 . The IIHF recognized the Czech Republic 's team as the successor to Czechoslovakia and it retained its position in the top division . Slovakia 's team began in the lowest division ( Pool C ) in 1994 and was forced to work its way up . Following this , the next decade was dominated by the so @-@ called " Big Six " – Canada , the Czech Republic , Finland , Russia , Sweden and the United States . From 1992 to 1996 , five different teams won the World Championship . At the 1993 World Championships , Russia won its first title as an independent nation and the Czech Republic won its first medal ( bronze ) . In 1994 , the Canadian team finished the preliminary round undefeated and defeated Finland in the final to win their first World Championship since 1961 . The following year in Sweden , the Finnish team won its first ever World Championship . Led by their top line of Saku Koivu , Ville Peltonen and Jere Lehtinen , the Finns defeated rival Sweden in the gold medal game . At the 1995 Pool B championships , Slovakia , led by Peter Šťastný won Pool B and was promoted to the top division , where it has remained ever since . In 1996 , the Czech Republic won its first World Championship as a separate country . During this period , the United States was the only one of the " Big Six " not to win the World Championship , although they did win the 1996 World Cup of Hockey . In the mid @-@ 1990s , several new teams such as Latvia , Belarus , Kazakhstan and Ukraine were quickly improving and older nations such as Austria , Italy and Switzerland were at risk of being relegated to Pool B. The IIHF feared that it would lose advertising revenue if that happened , so the number of teams was increased to 16 starting in 1998 . 
 From 1996 to 2001 , the Czech Republic won six consecutive World Championship medals , including World Championship gold from 1999 to 2001 , as well as gold at the 1998 Winter Olympics . In 2002 , the Czechs were favoured to win , but were upset in the quarter final by Russia . In the gold medal game between Russia and Slovakia , Slovakian Peter Bondra scored in the final two minutes of the game and the nation won its first ever World Championship . At the 2003 World Championships , Sweden made one of the biggest comebacks in tournament history , rallying from a 5 – 1 deficit in their quarterfinal game against Finland to win 6 – 5 . The gold medal game between Canada and Sweden went into overtime . Canada 's Anson Carter scored the winning goal 13 minutes into play , but the goal had to be reviewed for ten minutes to determine if the puck had crossed the line . In a rematch between the two nations the following year , Canada won and repeated as champions . 
 The 2004 – 05 NHL season was locked out , and eventually cancelled , because of a labour dispute between the league and the players . The 2005 World Championships , which featured more top players than normal , was won by the Czech Republic . At the 2006 Winter Olympics , Sweden won the gold medal over Finland . Three months later , Sweden defeated the Czech Republic and won the 2006 World Championships . They became the first team to win Olympic gold and a separate World Championship tournament in the same year . At the 2007 World Championship in Moscow , Canada defeated Finland to win the gold medal . The following year , the tournament was held in Canada for the first time . Russia defeated the home team to win their first gold medal since 1993 . The Russian team successfully defended their title with a 2 – 1 win over Canada in 2009 . In 2009 , NHL Players ' Association director Paul Kelly suggested that the World Championships be held every other year and that the NHL go on break to allow full player participation . IIHF president René Fasel responded that the tournament has television contracts and hosting commitments and that a large change would be difficult to put in place . 
 The 2010 tournament took place in Germany . The first game , between Germany and the United States , was played at <unk> @-@ Arena in Gelsenkirchen and was attended by 77 @,@ 803 people , setting a new record for the most attended game in hockey history . The tournament was noted for having several surprising preliminary round results , including : Switzerland beating Canada for the first time in World Championship play ; Norway defeating eventual champions the Czech Republic ; and Denmark upsetting Finland and the United States en route to their first ever quarterfinal appearance . The German team , which had finished 15th in 2009 and only avoided relegation to Division I because they were set to host the 2010 tournament , advanced to the semi @-@ finals for the first time since the new playoff format was adapted . They finished fourth , losing to Sweden in the bronze medal game . In the gold medal game , the Czech Republic upset the Russian team , winning gold and ending the defending champions ' 27 @-@ game winning streak . 
 The 2011 tournament was held in independent Slovakia for the first time . Finland won its second world championship with a 6 @-@ 1 victory over Sweden . The Czech Republic won the bronze medal over Russia . 
 The 2012 tournament was held in Sweden and Finland . Russia beat Slovakia in the finals , while the Czech Republic beat Finland in the bronze medal game . 
 In 2013 , Switzerland finished the preliminary round undefeated before losing the gold medal game 5 – 1 to co @-@ hosts Sweden . Switzerland 's silver medal was the first for the nation since 1953 . Sweden 's gold made them the first team to win the tournament at home since the Soviet Union in 1986 . 
 The 2014 was held for the first time in the independent Belarus in spite of concerns of the human rights abuses perpetuated by the authoritarian government . The tournament saw more upsets by the less prominent ice @-@ hockey nations . France has beaten Canada for the second time in the modern history and made it to the quarterfinal . Eventual finalists Finland lost to Latvia and made it to the quarterfinals only due to a shootout win over Switzerland . The tournament was won by Russia , Finland won silver and Sweden won bronze defeating the Czech republic . 
 The 2015 IIHF World Championship was held in Prague . It was to be the last appearance of Jaromír Jágr on the Czech national hockey team , and the home crowd had great expectations for its national team , who had failed to win a gold medal since 2010 , matching its longest run without a win since the break @-@ up of Czechoslovakia . However the tournament was dominated by an excellent Canadian team , which went undefeated and beat Russia 6 @-@ 1 in the gold medal match . Its captain , Sidney Crosby joined the Triple Gold Club , and became the first player to captain each team to a gold medal . The bronze was won by United States , condemning the Czechs to the second consecutive fourth place . 
 = = Tournament structure = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 The first World Championship to be held as an individual event was in 1930 . Twelve different nations participated . Canada 's team was given a bye to the gold medal game , and the rest of the nations played an elimination tournament to determine which nation would also play for the gold . 
 In 1931 , the World Championships switched to a similar format to what was used at the Olympics . Ten teams played series of round @-@ robin format qualifying rounds were played to determine which nations participated in the medal round . Medals were awarded based on the final standings of the teams in the medal round . The format was changed several times in the 1930s , in some years there was a gold medal game , while in others the gold medal was awarded based on points . 
 In 1937 , the tournament format was again switched to being similar to the version used at the Olympics . A preliminary round involving 11 teams was played , then the top four advanced to the medal round and medals were awarded based on points ; no gold medal game was played . A gold medal game was played in 1938 ; it was the last gold medal game played in the World Championships until 1992 . 
 In 1951 , thirteen nations took part and were split into two groups . The top seven teams ( Pool A ) played for the World Championship . The other six ( Pool B ) played for ranking purposes . Generally eight teams played in the top @-@ level Championship , although the number varied over the years , going as low as three ( in 1953 ) and as high as twelve ( in 1959 ) . The same format was used until 1992 . The format was criticized because often the gold medal winner was decided before the final game was played , such as at the 1988 Winter Olympics . 
 During a congress in 1990 , the IIHF introduced a playoff system . 
 As the IIHF grew , more teams began to participate at the World Championships , so more pools were introduced . Pool C games were first played in 1961 and Pool D was introduced in 1987 . In 2001 , the pools were renamed : Pool B became Division I , Pool C became Division II and Pool D became Division III . 
 = = = Modern Champion Group , Division I , II and III format = = = 
 The modern format for the World Championship features a minimum of 40 teams : 16 teams in the main championship group , 12 teams in Division I and 12 teams in Division II . If there are more than 40 teams , the rest compete in Division III . 
 From 1998 to 2011 , the teams were divided into four groups and played each other in a round robin format preliminary round , and the top 3 teams in each group advance into the qualifying round . The qualifying round is another round of group play with two groups of six , with the top four teams in each group advancing into the knockout playoff stage . The bottom four teams in the preliminary round played in another group as well ; this group determined relegation . After a round @-@ robin format , the bottom two teams were usually relegated to play in Division I the following year . 
 Between 1998 and 2004 , the IIHF held a " Far East " qualifying tournament for Asian teams with an automatic berth in the championship division on the line . Japan always won this tournament , but finished last at every World Championship except in 2004 , when they finished 15th . The IIHF discontinued the qualifying tournament following the 2004 tournament , and Japan was relegated to compete in Division I. 
 = = = Champion group format from 2012 = = = 
 The main group features 16 teams . The 16 teams are split into two groups based on their world ranking . The ranking is based on the standings of the last Winter Olympics and the last four World Championships . The results of more recent tournaments have a higher weight in the ranking . The last World Championship has 100 % value , the tournament before 75 % and so on . The Olympic tournament has the same value as the World Championship the same year . 
 Beginning with the 2012 tournament , the qualifying round will be eliminated , and the 16 teams will be divided into two groups of eight , with each team playing seven games in the preliminary round . 
 The top four teams from these groups will advance to the knockout playoff stage . In the quarterfinals , the first place team from one group plays the fourth place team from the opposite group , and the second place team from one group plays the third place team from the opposite group . The winners advance to the semi @-@ finals . In cases where the quarter @-@ final venues are deemed too far apart to allow easy travel between them , the teams stay within their groups for the quarters . The winners of the quarter @-@ finals advance to the semi @-@ finals , with the winners of the semi @-@ finals advancing to the Gold medal game and the losers advancing to the Bronze medal game . 
 Also starting in 2012 , there will no longer be a relegation round . Instead , the eighth @-@ place team in each group will be relegated to Division I. 
 = = = Division I , II and III formats from 2012 = = = 
 Division I is split into two groups of six , both groups play in round robin tournaments independent of each other and the championship division . Previously the top team from both groups was promoted to the championship , while the bottom team was relegated to Division II . Beginning in 2012 , the top two teams from the ' A ' group will be promoted to the championship , the bottom team will be exchanged with the group ' B ' winner , and that group 's last place team will go down to Division II . 
 Division II works similarly to Division I , with two six @-@ team groups where group ' A ' promotes one team to Division I and group ' B ' exchanges its last placed team with Division III . Division III is now composed of one group of six , and if more than six nations register for this , the lowest level , then a qualification tournament will be held . 
 = = Rules = = 
 = = = Game rules = = = 
 At the first tournament in 1920 , there were many differences from the modern game : games were played outdoors on natural ice , forward passes were not allowed , the rink was <unk> metres ( the current International standard is <unk> metres ) and two twenty @-@ minute periods were played . Each side had seven players on the ice , the extra position being the rover . Following the tournament , the IIHF held a congress and decided to adopt the " Canadian rules " – six men per side and three periods of play . 
 At an IIHF congress in 1969 , officials voted to allow body @-@ checking in all three zones in a rink similar to the NHL . Prior to that , body @-@ checking was only allowed in the defending zone in international hockey . The IIHF later described the rule change as " arguably the most substantial and dramatic rule changes in the history of international hockey " because it allowed for a more aggressive game . The rule , which was first applied at the 1970 World Championships , was controversial : IIHF president Bunny Ahearne feared it would make ice hockey " a sport for goons . " Several other rule changes were implemented in the early 1970s : players were required to wear helmets starting in 1970 and goaltender masks became mandatory in 1972 . In 1992 , the IIHF switched to using a playoff system to determine medalists and decided that tie games in the medal round would be decided in a shootout . The IIHF decided to test a new rule in 1997 that would allow two @-@ line passes . Prior to that , the neutral zone trap had slowed the game down and reduced scoring . At the 1997 World Championships , teams were allowed to decide if they wanted to test the rule . Although no team accepted the offer , the rule was adopted . The IIHF described it as " the most revolutionary rule change since allowing body @-@ checking in all three zones in 1969 . [ ... ] The new rule almost immediately changed the game for the better . The 1999 IIHF World Championship in Norway was a stark contrast to the finals the year before with many more goals scored and with end @-@ to @-@ end action – not defence – dominating play . " 
 The current IIHF rules differ slightly from the rules used in the NHL . One difference between NHL and IIHF rules is rink dimensions : the NHL rink is narrower , measuring <unk> metres ( <unk> feet ) , instead of the international size of <unk> metres ( <unk> feet ) . Another rule difference between the NHL and the IIHF rules concerns how <unk> are called . As of the 2013 @-@ 14 regular NHL season , a linesman stops play due to icing using the hybrid icing method , instead of the former method , where a defending player ( other than the goaltender ) touched the puck before an attacking player was able to , in contrast to the IIHF rules that use " no @-@ touch " icing , where play is stopped the moment the puck crosses the goal line . The NHL and IIHF differ also in penalty rules . The NHL , in addition to the minor and double minor penalties called in IIHF games , calls major penalties which are more dangerous infractions of the rules , such as fighting , and have a duration of five minutes . This is in contrast to the IIHF rule , in which players who fight are ejected from the game . 
 Beginning with the 2005 – 06 season , the NHL instituted several new rules . Some of them were already used by the IIHF , such as the shootout and making the two @-@ line pass legal . Others which were not picked up by the IIHF , such as requiring smaller goaltender equipment and the addition of the goaltender trapezoid to the rink . However , the IIHF did agree to follow the NHL 's league 's zero @-@ tolerance policy on obstruction and required referees to call more hooking , holding and interference penalties . In 2006 , the IIHF voted to eliminate tie games and institute a three @-@ point system : wins in regulation time would be worth three points , overtime wins would be two points and over @-@ time losses would be worth one point . The system was first used at the 2007 World Championships . 
 = = = Player eligibility = = = 
 The World Championships have been open to all players , both professional and amateur , since 1977 . The IIHF lists the following requirements for a player to be eligible to play : 
 " Each player must be under the jurisdiction of an IIHF member national association . " 
 " Each player must be a citizen of the country he represents . " 
 Each player must be at least 18 years of age on the day the respective championship starts , or be at least 16 and obtain an under age waiver 
 If a player who has never played in an IIHF competition changes their citizenship , they must participate in national competitions in their new country for at least two consecutive years and have an international transfer card ( ITC ) . If a player who has previously played in an IIHF tournament wishes to change their national team , they must have played in their new country for four years . A player can only do this once . 
 As this tournament takes place during the same time period as the NHL 's Stanley Cup playoffs , NHL players generally only become available if their respective NHL team did not make the playoffs , or once they have been eliminated from Stanley Cup contention . It is therefore common for several NHL players to join the World Championships while the tournament is already in progress . 
 = = Divisions = = 
 As of 2015 , the IIHF World Championships are split up into four different divisions . This is the alignment of the divisions , accurate as of the 2015 IIHF World Ranking . Teams that are not ranked are not included here , for a full list of IIHF members , see List of members of the International Ice Hockey Federation . 
 Keys : 
 Promoted 
 Never been promoted / relegated ( began in that division / group ) 
 Relegated 
 = = = Championship = = = 
 The Championship division comprises the top sixteen hockey nations in the world . The 80th championship was held from May 6 – 22 , in Moscow and Saint Petersburg , Russia . 
 ^ A. The IIHF recognizes Bohemia , which joined in 1908 , and Czechoslovakia as the predecessors to the Czech Republic , which officially became a member in 1993 . ^ B. The IIHF recognizes the Soviet Union , which joined in 1952 , as the predecessor to Russia , which officially became a member in 1992 . 
 = = = Division I = = = 
 Division I is comprised twelve teams . Group A teams compete for promotion to the Elite Division with the loser being relegated to Division I Group B. Group B teams compete for promotion to Division I Group A while the loser is relegated to Division II Group A. In 2015 , Group A games were played in Kraków , Poland from 19 to 25 April 2015 and Group B games were played in Eindhoven , Netherlands from 13 to 19 April 2015 . 
 = = = Division II = = = 
 Division II comprises twelve teams . Group A teams compete for promotion to Division I Group B with the loser being relegated to Division II Group B. Group B teams compete for promotion to Division II Group A while the loser is relegated to Division III . In 2015 , Group A games were played in Reykjavík , Iceland from 13 – 19 April and Group B games were played in Cape Town , South Africa from 13 – 19 April . 
 ^ C. The IIHF recognizes Yugoslavia , which joined in 1939 , as the predecessor to Serbia , which officially became a member in 2007 . 
 = = = Division III = = = 
 Division III is usually made up of one group of six to eight teams . The top team in each year 's tournament is promoted to Division II Group B. The 2015 Division III tournament , which saw seven teams participate , was held in Izmir , Turkey , 3 – 12 April 2015 . 
 Ranked teams that did not participate in 2015 
 = = Overall participation totals = = 
 78 championships ( as of 2016 ) ; 56 teams 
 Key : Current division ( if no window is coloured , country doesn 't play in any competition in the current year ) 
 = = Directorate Awards = = 
 Since 1954 , the IIHF has given awards for play during the World Championship tournament . Voted on by the tournament directorate , the first awards recognised the top goaltender , forward and defenceman . In 1999 , an award for the most valuable player was added . There is also an all @-@ star team voted on by members of the media . In 2004 , Canadian Dany Heatley became the first player to lead in scoring , win the MVP award , win the best forward award and be named to the all @-@ star team in the same year . He repeated the feat in 2008 . 
 = = Other men 's national team tournaments = = 
 World Championships 
 IIHF World U18 Championship 
 IIHF World U20 Championship 
 NHL participation 
 Ice hockey at the Olympic Games 
 Canada Cup – An NHL @-@ sanctioned tournament played between professional players from the top teams in the world five times between 1976 and 1991 . 
 World Cup of Hockey – The successor to the Canada Cup , played in 1996 and 2004 . 
 Summit Series – The series played between Canada and the Soviet Union in 1972 . 
 Other 
 Spengler Cup – An invitational ice hockey tournament hosted by HC Davos and held in Davos , Switzerland . A Canadian national team – mostly made up of Canadians playing in Europe – has participated in the tournament since 1984 . On two occasions the Rochester Americans of the AHL have participated in this tournament . 
 World U @-@ 17 Hockey Challenge – A tournament held by Hockey Canada played by regional teams from Canada as well as several under @-@ 17 national teams from other nations . 
 Ivan Hlinka Memorial Tournament – An unofficial tournament for players under 18 . It was previously known as the U @-@ 18 Junior World Cup , but renamed following the death of Ivan Hlinka . 
 = Q @-@ Less = 
 " Q @-@ Less " is the sixth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine ( DS9 ) . Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures on Deep Space Nine , a space station located near a stable wormhole between the Alpha and Gamma quadrants of the Milky Way Galaxy . In this episode , Vash ( Jennifer Hetrick ) , a former love interest of Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard , arrives aboard the Deep Space Nine station trying to elude her companion , Q ( John de Lancie ) , and make a profit selling archaeological artefacts from the Gamma Quadrant , including a mysterious alien crystal . " Q @-@ Less " saw the return of Vash and Q , two recurring characters from Star Trek : The Next Generation ( TNG ) . It was Jennifer Hetrick 's final performance as Vash and John de Lancie 's only appearance as Q on Deep Space Nine . 
 Two former writers from TNG , Hannah Louise Shearer and Robert Hewitt Wolfe , wrote the episode . While it would be Shearer 's last Star Trek credit , Wolfe 's work on the script led to him joining the writing team on DS9 . The producers wanted to introduce Q to the show in a seamless manner ; when Shearer proposed a Vash @-@ centric story , Q was added to the script . " Q @-@ Less " highlights the differences between DS9 and TNG by comparing the reactions of Commander Benjamin Sisko ( Avery Brooks ) and Captain Picard to Q. On its first broadcast , " Q @-@ Less " received Nielsen ratings of 12 @.@ 8 percent , placing it as the fifth most watched episode of the season . Reception was mixed , with reviewers criticizing the imbalance of time spent with Vash and Q in contrast to the rest of the cast , as well as the unnecessary technobabble in the story and the MacGuffin @-@ like plot device represented by the alien crystal . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lt. Jadzia Dax ( Terry Farrell ) returns from the Gamma Quadrant in her runabout with a woman that Chief Miles O 'Brien ( Colm Meaney ) recognizes as Vash ( Jennifer Hetrick ) from his time on board the Enterprise . Although the crew is unaware of his presence , Q ( John de Lancie ) — a nearly omnipotent prankster — has also stowed away on the runabout . Vash explains that she has spent the past two years in the Gamma Quadrant , but she describes her method of getting there as a " private matter " . During their trip back to Deep Space Nine , the vessel undergoes a series of unusual power drains . 
 Soon after Vash 's arrival , the station begins to experience similar power failures . In the meantime , Q appears to Vash , apparently infatuated with her . Q was the one who transported Vash to the Gamma Quadrant two years earlier , but now she wants nothing to do with him , much to Q 's annoyance . When Dr. Julian Bashir ( Alexander Siddig ) asks Vash out for dinner , a jealous Q uses his powers to send Bashir off to sleep . Meanwhile , Quark ( Armin Shimerman ) arranges to auction off various items Vash has found in the Gamma Quadrant , including an unusual crystal that might fetch a high price . 
 Remembering Q from the Enterprise , O 'Brien spots Q on the station and warns Commander Benjamin Sisko ( Avery Brooks ) , speculating that Q may be responsible for the power drains . When confronted , Q denies any wrongdoing , although he offers no alternative explanation . As the power drains become more severe , an unknown gravimetric field begins pulling the station toward the nearby wormhole . Q challenges Sisko to a boxing match on the Promenade , and suddenly , they are both wearing antique @-@ style boxing costumes . A few punches are thrown , and Q is shocked when Sisko knocks him down . " You hit me ! Picard never hit me ! " Q exclaims . 
 Vash and Quark auction the artifacts and the crystal receives bids in excess of one thousand bars of gold @-@ pressed <unk> . Casually joining the bid process , Q ups the ante on Vash 's crystal to 2501 bars before bidding one million . Soon after , however , the source of the gravimetric field and power losses is traced to the crystal itself . The crystal is quickly beamed into space before it can destroy the station . Once outside , it transforms into an alien life form and travels into the wormhole . After the incident , Bashir finally awakens from his slumber . Unaware of what has just transpired , he yawns and tells Dax that he feels like he has been asleep for days . A bemused Dax gives him a strange look to which Bashir replies " <unk> I miss something ? " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The writers and producers of " Q @-@ Less " developed the episode to show that DS9 was still connected to the Star Trek universe . To facilitate this idea , two TNG characters , Vash , played by Jennifer Hetrick , and Q , played by John de Lancie , returned to DS9 . Vash made her first appearance on TNG in the episode " Captain 's Holiday " , and then returned in " Qpid " ; Q had appeared in most seasons of TNG since the first season . TNG writer Hannah Louise Shearer , known for writing episodes such as " The Price " and " We 'll Always Have Paris " , also crossed over to DS9 . " Q @-@ Less " was the last Star Trek writing credit for Shearer . 
 Shearer 's pitch featured Vash , who had last been seen at the end of " <unk> " leaving with Q , but the pitch did not include Q himself . Executive producer Michael Piller explained that they had already been looking for a way to introduce Q into DS9 , and felt that bringing Vash onto the show would be a good way to seamlessly introduce Q. There were concerns about shoving Q into an episode but the idea of " Q @-@ Less " alleviated them . " If you just have him come on and say ' Look , is this the new show ? ' it 's silly , but this seemed to be a justifiable way " , Piller recalled . 
 TNG writer Robert Hewitt Wolfe , who had writing credits on a number of episodes , including both the previous Vash stories , converted Shearer 's story into a script . His work on the first draft led to a full @-@ time position on the writing staff for DS9 ; Q was added to the story at this stage . Q 's motivations were drawn from his previous appearances on TNG , but Wolfe found it difficult to create the interactions between Q and the other characters on DS9 . At the time the script was under development , there was little footage of DS9 available . Wolfe could only characterize the motivations towards Q as annoyance rather than any real emotional engagement . However , he came upon the idea that he could demonstrate the difference between DS9 and TNG by showing the reactions of the characters to Q instead . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Wolfe believed that if he had written the episode later in the series he would have concentrated more on the established characters and less on Q and Vash . De Lancie felt that the episode never explained Q 's motivation for wanting to stay with Vash . " I think Q is best used when he deals with large philosophical issues , and skirt chasing just isn 't one of them " , he said . Because certain aspects of Q 's character are left unexplored , De Lancie found that " the style , the quips and the panache in which things are done become very important " . 
 The boxing scene was intended to differentiate the relationship between Q and Sisko from that of Q and Picard . " Picard is an explorer , and in some ways , very much an intellectual . Sisko is a builder , a different kind of guy . He wears his heart a little more on his sleeve , and he acts on emotion , on instinct , more than Picard " , Wolfe explained . John de Lancie offered a similar opinion : " Q 's relationship with Picard has always been a battle of wits , but I come into Deep Space Nine , and Sisko just <unk> me on the nose ! From a character point of view , that 's a very big difference . " 
 Hetrick felt that the move away from TNG gave Vash more independence , and she enjoyed the new relationship between Vash and Quark , calling them " kindred spirits " . She was also pleased to be working with de Lancie again . " I love the way they write for John , and I loved the stuff we got to do together in ' Q @-@ Less ' " , she said . Hetrick underwent ten hours of make @-@ up for the sequence where Q shows Vash what could have happened if he did not save her life following an insect bite in the Gamma Quadrant . The experience left her with a newfound appreciation for not having to wear prosthetics like other members of the cast . 
 Hetrick thought that if she returned to DS9 as Vash , then something could be built around the Vash @-@ Quark relationship : " That would be a really nice pairing , because you have these two different backgrounds but they 're both after the same thing . " Towards the end of the second season , the producers inquired about Hetrick 's availability . The actress was ready to appear on another DS9 episode , but the writers changed direction and there were no further plans for the Vash character . " Q @-@ Less " was the final Star Trek appearance for Hetrick , and the only appearance in DS9 for John de Lancie . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Director Paul Lynch compared the production on " Q @-@ Less " to a typical TNG episode . On DS9 , the shots were more complex and generally featured more special effects . Lynch said that the scene which showed Q seamlessly teleporting himself from one chair to another , changing his costume as he went , was particularly difficult . The producers , particularly Rick Berman , were determined for DS9 to be the best that it could be , notes Lynch . The comedic elements of the episode required precise timing , with Lynch comparing it to the television series Moonlighting . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Q @-@ Less " was first shown on February 8 , 1993 , in broadcast syndication . It received a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 8 percent , placing fifth in its time slot . " Q @-@ Less " was the fifth highest rated episode of the season , behind " Emissary " , " Past Prologue " , " A Man Alone " and " Captive Pursuit " . 
 Zack Handlen reviewed the episode for The A.V. Club in 2012 , calling Q an " iconic figure " . Handlen said Q allowed the writers to compare the different reaction of the characters to his presence in DS9 and TNG . However , Handlen felt that Q was not a good fit for DS9 , as the character seemed like an afterthought . Also , the pairing of Vash and Q took up too much screen time compared to the main cast , Handlen noted , while the overall plot involving the " stealth alien " embryo " plays like an abandoned script from early in TNG 's run , and an example of a fascinating concept reduced to a perfunctory MacGuffin , " Handlen wrote . 
 Keith DeCandido , in a review of " Q @-@ Less " for Tor.com , praised the relationship between Vash and Quark and thought that it should have been explored further . Like Handlen , DeCandido also felt that Q did not quite fit in DS9 , but acknowledged that his performance in this episode was an improvement over his later appearances in Star Trek : Voyager . DeCandido described the boxing scene where Sisko punches Q as " wonderful " and " spectacular " . However , he thought that aspects of the plot had too much technobabble ; for example , the embryo plotline could have been resolved by a form of Customs procedure . " Ultimately " , DeCandido concludes , " none of this matters , because it comes down to one great moment of Sisko decking Q. Bliss . " 
 In Atara Stein 's The Byronic Hero in Film , Fiction , and Television ( 2009 ) , she compared the role of Q in both " Q @-@ Less " and " True Q " as one where he reprises his " satanic role " and " in each case [ tries ] to lure a woman to join him " . Stein also explains the Q / Vash relationship , saying " Q 's demeanor toward Vash is clearly coded as that of a potential rapist . He pushes her onto a bed and shows no compunction about threatening and brutalizing her . " She explained that despite this treatment and the feminist stance taken by Vash , Q is treated sympathetically by the writers of the episode . It is made clear that Q could have won Vash around if he chose to , and so the character seemed " sensitive and vulnerable , and Vash seems cold @-@ hearted by comparison . " 
 " Q @-@ Less " was first released for home media in the United States on VHS on November 19 , 1996 . It was released in the United Kingdom on DVD as part of the season one box set on March 24 , 2003 , and in the United States on June 3 . The episode is also included in the Star Trek : Q Fan Collective compilation DVD set , which was released in the United States on June 6 , 2006 , and later that year in the UK on September 4 . 
 = Baelor = 
 " Baelor " is the ninth episode of the HBO medieval fantasy television series Game of Thrones . First aired on June 12 , 2011 , it was written by the show 's creators and executive producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss , and directed by Alan Taylor . 
 The plot depicts Eddard Stark , imprisoned and accused of high treason , struggling with the decision whether to falsely confess to save his daughters . His wife Catelyn negotiates with Lord Walder Frey for the use of a strategic river crossing and his son Robb fights his first battle in the war against the Lannisters . Meanwhile , Jon Snow discovers a secret about Maester Aemon , and Daenerys stands up to Qotho and challenges Dothraki traditions to care for Khal Drogo . In this episode , The Twins is added to the Opening . 
 The episode matched the previous week 's season @-@ high viewership and was well received by critics , many of whom called it the best episode of the season . The episode was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series and Peter Dinklage won the award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for his performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Like previous episodes , " Baelor " interweaves action in multiple separate locations in and around the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros . 
 = = = At the Lannister camp = = = 
 At dinner , Lord Tywin ( Charles Dance ) tells his son Tyrion ( Peter Dinklage ) that Tyrion and his barbarian allies will fight in the vanguard of the army . Tyrion suspects his father is trying to get him killed . Tyrion returns to his camp and finds the prostitute Shae ( Sibel Kekilli ) whom Bronn ( Jerome Flynn ) found for him at Tyrion 's request . As the three of them swap stories , Tyrion reveals that , when he was 16 , he married a woman named Tysha whom Jaime and he had rescued . When his father Tywin learned of this , he made Jaime confess that Tysha was actually a hired prostitute . Tywin then made Tyrion watch as Lannister guardsmen all had sex with her , each paying her one silver coin provided by Lord Tywin . 
 Later , Tyrion is awakened by Bronn as a Stark force approaches . Tyrion leaves his tent dressed in armor and orders the hill tribes to combat , but he is trampled as they rush to war . By the time he regains consciousness , the battle has been played out . Lord Tywin reveals that the Stark host was only 2 @,@ 000 men , leaving them to wonder where the other 18 @,@ 000 went . 
 = = = At the Twins = = = 
 The Stark army arrives at the Twins , a fortified bridge stronghold controlled by the cranky Lord Walder Frey ( David Bradley ) , who is nominally sworn to Catelyn 's ( Michelle Fairley ) father <unk> Tully . However , Lord Frey has sealed off the bridge and refuses to let the army cross , so Catelyn negotiates on her son Robb 's behalf . After some hard bargaining , Frey agrees to allow the Stark army to cross through The Twins and to commit some of his troops to the conflict with the Lannisters , but , in return , he wants Robb ( Richard Madden ) and his sister Arya ( Maisie Williams ) to marry two of his children , to which Robb reluctantly agrees . 
 After crossing the river , Robb divides his forces , sending the aforementioned 2 @,@ 000 men to distract Lord Tywin 's army . Due to the false information Robb gave to the captured Lannister scout , Lord Tywin 's force believes it is the whole Stark army . The remainder of Robb 's men sneak up on Jaime Lannister 's ( Nikolaj Coster @-@ Waldau ) army , defeating them and capturing Jaime . When captured , Jaime challenges Robb to a one @-@ on @-@ one duel to settle the matter , which Robb declines . 
 = = = At the Wall = = = 
 Lord Commander Mormont ( James Cosmo ) gives Jon Snow ( Kit Harington ) House Mormont 's ancestral <unk> steel sword <unk> , which was originally meant for his son Ser Jorah ( Iain Glen ) before Jorah 's exile , as a reward for saving his life from the undead ranger . Jon is upset , however , when Sam ( John Bradley ) tells him about Robb 's war against the Lannisters , feeling that he should be there to help Robb . 
 Maester Aemon ( Peter Vaughan ) summons Jon and explains to him the reason why members of the Night 's Watch do not marry : it would force them to choose between their duty to the order or loyalty to their loved ones . Aemon knows this very well because he is actually Aemon Targaryen , the Mad King Aerys Targaryen 's uncle and Daenerys ' ( Emilia Clarke ) great @-@ uncle , who dutifully and reluctantly stayed at the Wall while his family members were killed or exiled when the Targaryens were overthrown . Aemon advises Jon that he must choose either his duty to the Night 's Watch or his family , but also warns that the consequences of his choice will haunt him for the rest of his life . 
 = = = In Lhazar = = = 
 Khal Drogo ( Jason Momoa ) , delirious from an infection caused by the chest wound inflicted by Mago , falls from his saddle , a sign of weakness among the Dothraki . Daenerys takes Drogo into her tent and sends for Mirri Maz <unk> ( Mia Soteriou ) to help him . However , Ser Jorah Mormont advises Daenerys that they should leave now because the Dothraki only respect the physically strong . He explains that , if Drogo dies , Qotho ( Dar Salim ) and the other <unk> will fight amongst themselves to be his successor ; whoever wins will kill her and her unborn child to prevent Drogo 's son from growing up to be a rival . Daenerys refuses to abandon her husband , even when Mirri tells Daenerys that she cannot save him and instead advises giving Drogo a quick , clean death . In desperation , Daenerys encourages Mirri to use blood magic despite Mirri 's warning about the consequences of such a spell , that only death can pay for life . Mirri brings Drogo 's horse into the tent , slits its throat , orders everyone to leave , and warns that none must enter during the spell . Qotho , shocked at what Daenerys has done , tries to stop the spell , but Mormont kills him to prevent interference . Daenerys then goes into premature labor , but none of the Dothraki midwives help her , owing to their belief that she is cursed . In desperation , Mormont carries Daenerys into Drogo 's tent to seek Mirri 's help . 
 = = = In King 's Landing = = = 
 Varys ( Conleth Hill ) visits Ned ( Sean Bean ) in the dungeons and tells Ned that if he makes a false confession and swears loyalty to King Joffrey ( Jack Gleeson ) , Cersei ( Lena Headey ) will spare Ned and let him serve the Night 's Watch as his exile . Ned initially refuses but relents after Varys tells him that his daughter Sansa 's ( Sophie Turner ) life is also at stake . 
 Arya , who has been living as a beggar in the streets of King 's Landing since her escape from the Lannisters , learns a crowd is gathering at the Great Sept of Baelor , where her father will be judged before the gods , and in order to see over the crowd , climbs onto the statue of Baelor the Blessed . As he is dragged through the crowd , Ned notices Arya on the statue , and alerts the Night 's Watch recruiter Yoren ( Francis Magee ) to her location . With Sansa , Cersei , Joffrey and the Small Council looking over him , Ned confesses to treason and swears fealty to Joffrey in front of the crowd . Satisfied , Sansa and Cersei ask Joffrey to spare Ned as Joffrey promised , but Joffrey breaks his promise and orders Ned to be executed . As Sansa watches in horror , Cersei , Varys and the Small Council attempt to intervene , and Arya tries to rescue Ned , only to be stopped by Yoren , who prevents her from seeing her father 's execution . When he sees that Arya has been rescued , Ned accepts his fate and is beheaded by Ser <unk> Payne ( Wilko Johnson ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode was written by the showrunners David Benioff and D. B. Weiss , based on the original book by George R. R. Martin . 
 The title of the episode refers to the Great Sept of Baelor , the main religious building in King 's Landing , where the episode 's pivotal scene takes place . In the world created by George R. R. Martin , Baelor I Targaryen was a king during a previous century , revered as a patron and supporter of the Faith of the Seven . " Baelor " includes the content of the book 's chapters Eddard XV , Catelyn IX , Jon VIII , Tyrion VIII , Catelyn X , Daenerys VIII and Arya V ( 59 – 61 and 63 – 66 ) . 
 The scene with the drinking game between Tyrion , Bronn and Shae was written specifically for the episode , but the story of Tyrion 's ill @-@ fated marriage to Tysha was taken from a previous chapter of the books . Shae 's background was changed from <unk> to foreign to accommodate Kekilli 's accent . Other notable divergence from the books include the modification of the whole strategy of Robb Stark when dividing his forces , and a change to the Targaryen genealogy as explained by Maester Aemon : in the TV adaptation the Mad King is described as the son , rather than the grandson , of Aegon V ( thus eliminating <unk> II from the succession of kings ) . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " Baelor " marks the first appearance of the German actress Sibel Kekilli , in the role of the prostitute Shae . Executive producer George R. R. Martin commented that she was extraordinary in her audition , in which she read the scene where Shae meets Tyrion in a tent the night before the battle of the Green Fork . According to Martin , " a lot of beautiful young women read for Shae . [ ... ] But there 's another dimension to Shae as well . She 's not as practiced and hardened at this as a more seasoned pro . There 's still a girl next door quality to her , a sense of vulnerability , playfulness , and , yes , innocence . [ ... ] All of our <unk> were hot as hell . But only a handful of them captured that other quality , maybe three out of twenty , and Sibel was the standout . [ ... ] Watching those auditions , any red @-@ blooded male would want to take every one of our Shae candidates to bed . But Sibel made you fall in love with her as well . " 
 Also introduced in this episode was the English actor David Bradley , playing the role of the Lord of the Crossing " Late " Walder Frey . 
 = = = Filming locations = = = 
 The interiors of the episode were filmed at the Paint Hall studios , close to Belfast . The area of the Castle Ward estate , also in Northern Ireland , was used to film on location the Stark and Lannister camps , the Crossing , and the battlefields of the Green Fork and the Whispering Woods . 
 The climactic scene before the Great Sept of Baelor was shot at Fort Manoel , in the Maltese town of <unk> . The filming took place in the last week of October 2010 . 
 = = = Execution = = = 
 Years later , showrunner D. B. Weiss commented that the explicit style of the execution scene was selected in part to make it clear to the viewers that Eddard Stark , despite being the arguable protagonist of season one , actually was dead : " It ’ s that rule : ' If don 't see the body then they ’ re not really dead . ' Like when we cut Ned ’ s head off , we didn ’ t want a gory Monty Python geyser of blood , but we needed to see the blade enter his neck and cut out on the frame where the blade was mid @-@ neck . [ ... ] we needed Ned 's death to be totally unambiguous . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Baelor " gathered 2 @.@ 7 million viewers in its premiere telecast in the United States , equaling the season high reached with the previous week 's episode . The total for the night , including the repeat , was slightly lower , with 3 @.@ 4 million viewers . In the United Kingdom , the episode was viewed by 1 @.@ 043 million viewers , making it the highest @-@ rated broadcast that week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode received great acclaim among the critics . From the reviewers of The A.V. Club , where it was rated with an A , Todd VanDerWerff called it " unquestionably the finest episode of Game Of Thrones yet , " and David Sims found it " terrific " and with a conclusion that would be " sure to blow the minds ( and break the hearts ) " of the watchers Matt Fowler of IGN TV gave the episode a perfect " 10 " saying that it was a " clean and epic entry with a daring , tragic finish " that had " an admirable undercurrent of audience contempt . " 
 The focus of most reviews was in the climactic final scene , whose directing and acting is universally acclaimed by critics . Writing for Cultural Learnings , Myles McNutt stated : " the final shot , with Arya looking to the sky as everything goes to silence and all she sees is the birds flying was just wonderfully haunting . Alan Taylor 's direction sold both the chaos and the resignation of that moment . " HitFix 's Alan Sepinwall felt that " that final scene was so gorgeously shot , and the weariness of Bean 's performance and the horror of Maisie Williams ' so perfectly conveyed the emotions of it , even as things seemed so chaotic . " 
 The emotional charge of the scene hit home for many reviewers : Scott Meslow of The Atlantic called it " an absolutely nightmarish scene " and labelled Eddard 's death " horrific in its indignity . " Jace Lacob from <unk> and Maureen Ryan from AOL TV admitted having shed tears at the episode 's dramatic conclusion . The latter found the scene " masterful " and felt that the visual medium and Alan Taylor 's excellent work had made it more powerful than the book 's original version . 
 Besides the final scene , other aspects were discussed : Garcia noted the acting of Richard Madden and how the <unk> had been introduced . Ryan praised the wide range of emotions used by Emilia Clarke while playing Daenerys , and how Peter Dinklage played Tyrion 's frustration and confusion during the episode . Both she and McNutt were glad that Tyrion 's exposition scene in the tent with Bronn and Shae did not use sex to keep viewers , as was done in past episodes . 
 There was debate about the merits of the producer 's decision to avoid depicting the two battles between the Starks and Lannisters . Ryan criticized it and confessed being " a little disappointed that many of the major characters are caught up in a war and we 're not seeing it . " Sims regretted not seeing the fight , and although he claimed to understand the budget constrictions , he felt that " all this off @-@ screen fighting is just getting my blood rushing for some on @-@ screen fighting . " Sepinwall concludes : " Ideally , we 'd get a few epic , Braveheart @-@ level battle scenes at some point , but I also respect the demands of time and budget here . Those kinds of sequences cost a fortune , and they eat up a lot of screen time , and I think ultimately I 'd have rather had the time , say , that we spent in Tyrion 's tent the night before the battle , with the mortifying story of his ex @-@ wife , and then whatever it cost to make the execution sequence look as good as it did , than for the episode to have given us one or two long fight scenes . " 
 In 2013 , TV Guide ranked the final scene as the second greatest twist of all time . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Peter Dinklage chose this episode as his submission named in his candidacy for the 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series . Spenser Davis , writing for entertainment industry awards website <unk> , noted that the choice was curious because while the episode itself was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series ( which it lost to Friday Night Lights ' " Always " ) , Dinklage 's screen time in the episode was rather limited . Davis noted that Dinklage 's nomination was the only acting Emmy nomination among the 13 received by the show , and opined that " A Golden Crown " better showcased Dinklage 's contributions to the series . Dinklage 's win was the only major award received by the series and the first Emmy of his career . 
 = = = = Awards and nominations = = = = 
 = Giants : Citizen Kabuto = 
 Giants : Citizen Kabuto is a third @-@ person shooter video game with real @-@ time strategy elements . It was the first project for Planet Moon Studios , which consisted of former Shiny Entertainment employees who had worked on the game MDK . Giants went through four years of development before Interplay Entertainment published it on December 6 , 2000 , for Microsoft Windows . A Mac OS X port was published by MacPlay in 2001 and the game was also ported to the PlayStation 2 later that year . 
 Players take control of a single character from one of three humanoid races to complete the story or to challenge other players in online multiplayer matches . They can select heavily armed Meccaryns equipped with jet packs , or amphibious spellcasting Sea Reapers . The game 's subtitle " Citizen Kabuto " refers to the last selectable race , a thundering behemoth who can execute <unk> professional wrestling attacks to pulverize its enemies . The single @-@ player mode is framed as a sequential story , putting the player through a series of missions , several of which test the player 's reflexes in action game @-@ like puzzles . 
 Game critics praised Giants for state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art graphics , humorous story , and success in blending in one genre with another . Criticisms of the game centered on crippling software bugs and lack of an in @-@ game save feature . The console version rectified some of the flaws found in the PC versions , at the cost of removing several features . Giants sold poorly initially for both Windows and PlayStation 2 ; however , it sold well afterwards and the game has gained a cult following . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Giants : Citizen Kabuto , players take on the roles of three humanoid races : gun @-@ toting Meccaryns , magic @-@ wielding Sea Reapers , and the gigantic Kabuto . Each player is assigned direct control of a single character . The game 's developers , Planet Moon Studios , created this design to encourage players to focus on the action and not to be burdened with micromanagement . Players can customize the controls , which are largely the same for each race , with slight differences for abilities . 
 The single @-@ player mode consists of a sequence of missions set as an overarching story . Each mission requires the completion of certain objectives to progress to the next mission . The objectives are usually the elimination of enemies or a certain structure , but several of them test the player 's eye – hand coordination or require the player to rescue and protect certain units . Players control their characters from a default third person perspective ; a first person view is optional . Each race has its own offensive style , and a special mode of fast movement . Killing a creature releases a power @-@ up , which heals or awards weapons to its collector . 
 The real @-@ time strategy elements of Giants consist of base building and resource gathering , wherein the resources are small humanoids called ' Smarties ' . There are a limited number of Smarties in a mission , and players must rush to gather them , or kidnap them from each other to gain an advantage . Players also gather sustenance for the Smarties to make them work ; Meccaryn and Reaper players hunt the cattle @-@ like <unk> for meat and souls respectively . The options in building a base are limited ; players can neither choose the locations for the structures nor manage their workforce in detail . Players in control of Kabuto need not build a base , whereas the character gains strength and produces subordinate characters by hunting for food . Kabuto consumes Smarties to increase its size and power ; at maximum size , he can produce smaller Tyrannosaurus @-@ like units as subordinates . To restore his health , Kabuto eats <unk> and other units ( <unk> and computer @-@ controlled ) . 
 Multiplayer mode allows a maximum of five Meccaryn , three Sea Reaper , and one Kabuto player ( s ) to play in each session . Due to the lack of a game server browser , players connect through online services <unk> or GameSpy Arcade for the Windows version , and GameRanger for the Mac OS X version . Besides the standard " destroy all enemy bases and units " missions , the multiplayer mode includes deathmatches and " Capture the Smartie ( flag ) " -type games . Players are permitted either to start with a full base , or to build one from foundations . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game world of Giants is set on a fictional " Island " traveling through space . Its surface comprises grasslands , deserts , and forests , surrounded by azure seas . Players have an unobstructed view of the game world to its horizon ; whereas distant objects are slightly blurred to convey a sense of distance . Missions for Meccaryns provide cover to hide behind , large spaces of water for Reapers , and creatures for Kabuto to eat . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Planet Moon intended for the player characters to provide a diverse gameplay experience , laying down requirements to make the characters distinct with unique advantages and disadvantages . 
 Meccaryns use high technology and attack as a pack led by the player . Meccaryn players sport guns , explosives , and backpacks that provide special abilities : jet packs allow players to fly over obstacles and outmaneuver opponents , and the " Bush " <unk> camouflages the character as a shrub . In single @-@ player mode , players assume the role of Baz , leader of a group of Meccaryns comprising Gordon , Bennett , Tel , and Reg . Several scenarios in the game shows the responsible Baz frustrated with the laxity of Gordon and Bennett , and the inquisitive Tel and Reg . 
 Sea Reapers are amphibious , humanoid swimmers . Therefore , they regain health in contact with water , and the game 's Piranhas do not attack them . To travel fast over land , players can " turbo boost " their Reapers to targeted areas . The Reapers can use swords , bows , and spells , such as summoning firestorms or tornadoes , in combat . Planet Moon Studios initially conceived the Sea Reaper single @-@ player character , Delphi , as evil , but later gave her a conscience . 
 Kabuto is the titular creature of the game , and the only one of his race . In his back @-@ story , the Reapers created him as their guardian , but found him beyond control . Creative Director , Tim Williams gave the " Citizen " title to Kabuto for its allusion to the character 's wish for a sense of belonging to the Island . The game developer modeled Kabuto 's attacks after those of giant monsters in classic monster movies , allowing him to use professional wrestling attacks and aerial techniques such as elbow drops , foot stomps , and the " butt flop " described as " like the body slam , but with less dignity " . To balance his strength , a weak point at his waist inflicts heavy damage when struck . Players playing the giant monster can assume a perspective through his mouth to target prey . 
 For non @-@ playable races , the team designed Smarties to have oversized heads , bulging eyes , and idiotic personalities for comedic effects . Players labor for the Smarties while witnessing their hedonistic indulgences . The payoff , however , is a " giant gun " . Standard enemies include Reaper Guards ( male Reapers with no magical ability , who serve as common soldiers ) , as well as fauna such as the insectoid Rippers , beast @-@ of @-@ burden <unk> , and bat @-@ like <unk> . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Originally featuring each race in its own distinct story , the single @-@ player mode now depicts a single sequential story wherein the players begin as Baz , and must complete a sequence of missions before assuming the role of Delphi . On completion of Delphi 's story , players take control of a Kabuto character . Williams used cut scenes to introduce and conclude each mission . 
 As Baz , the player searches for Reg and Tel . Timmy , a Smartie rescued in the first mission , functions as a guide for the player : introducing other Smartie characters , and providing exposition of the scenario . The plot portrays the Smarties as suffering under the reign of the Sea Reapers and their Queen Sappho . Alluding to the film , The Magnificent Seven , Baz gathers the separated Meccaryns , and takes on a quest to solve the Smarties ' predicaments . In a climactic cut scene , Sappho sacrifices Timmy to Kabuto , and the young Smartie 's grandfather , <unk> , becomes the player 's guide . Baz leads an escape from the area , and sets up a base to lead a counterattack . Thereafter Delphi becomes the player 's character . Yan , the Samurai Smartie serves as the guide for this story segment , giving instructions on Delphi 's abilities . After completing the training missions under Yan , Delphi attacks Sappho 's base and the Reapers , eventually confronting the queen in a boss fight . When defeated , Sappho summons Kabuto to destroy the Smarties , but Kabuto eats her instead . 
 In the final story , Delphi has transformed herself into a Kabuto @-@ like creature to challenge the original . The player wanders around the islands as the Delphi @-@ Kabuto character , searching for prey to increase her size . After Delphi @-@ Kabuto achieves her maximum size , she proceeds to a boss fight with the original Kabuto . Despite her victory , Kabuto revives in a triggered cut scene and restores her Reaper form ; whereupon the player takes the role of Baz against the revived monster . After defeating Kabuto , Baz is shown in the final cut scene , flying off to Planet Majorca with Delphi , <unk> , and his fellow Meccaryns . 
 = = Development = = 
 When five members of Shiny Entertainment 's MDK development team broke off to set up Planet Moon Studios in 1997 with software engineer , Scott Guest , they decided to make their first project fun and original , a game with graphics and gameplay unseen at that time . Nick <unk> , Bob Stevenson , and Tim Williams initially conceived the idea of pitting players as spacemen , pirates , and giants against each other and having fun . Initially projected for release in late 1999 , the game suffered delays to its development largely due to the illness of their chief programmer , Andy Astor ; he was suffering from stage IV mantle cell lymphoma in late 1999 . The team realized they needed more resources and by 2000 , they had hired two more programmers and an artist . Producing a next @-@ generation game required them to keep up with 1998 – 2000 's rapid advancement of technology , which resulted in further delays . The team upsized the graphic textures as they changed the graphical software to support NVIDIA graphics cards . Within a year after development started in 1999 , the initial minimum graphics specification climbed from requiring Voodoo 1 graphics cards to those of the GeForce @-@ series . Planet Moon deemed game engines available during development too restrictive and inappropriate for their requirements , and built their own . Called Amityville , it could support Glide , OpenGL , and Direct3D . The team used it to create the required " lush and vibrant " outdoor environments , and terrain deformation effects . 
 Planet Moon designed the structure of the single @-@ player mode to be a gradual learning process for the players ; the game would introduce new command sets to the players as they progress , and encourage them to repeat using the new commands for that mission . From the start of the project , the team intended the controls to be simple , and mapped commonly used commands to a few keys . Focus groups consisting more than 25 testers went through this design to verify its ease . Planet Moon aimed for a complex artificial intelligence ( AI ) ; computer @-@ controlled characters would evade shots and take cover . The enemy AI would plot its actions according to long @-@ term goals . The development team consulted Mark Frohnmayer , lead programmer of the multiplayer game Tribes 2 , for advice on implementing the multiplayer portion . To balance the characters in combat , Planet Moon focused on characteristics that could affect the fighting capabilities , instead of tweaking the damage output . The team faced a tight schedule , and abandoned several features initially in the game . Early designs allowed players to change the landscape ; they could gorge out water channels and isolate segments of the land by playing as Reapers . The Kabuto character initially could bake mud into " mud shepherd " units and use them to defend its herd of food . 
 Interplay Entertainment released the Windows version of the game on December 7 , 2000 . Planet Moon later created a special version of the game optimized for the GeForce 3 graphics card to display water reflections , soft @-@ edged shadows , and weather effects . This version was not sold as a standalone commercial product but as a part of certain GeForce 3 graphic card package deals . MacPlay announced on November 1 , 2000 , it was publishing the Mac OS X version of the game . The Omni Group was responsible for the porting of the game ; they rewrote the game 's software to take advantage of the symmetric multi @-@ processing capability of Mac OS X. Eleven months later , MacPlay released the port . Multiplayer mode was initially disabled in the retail release but was re @-@ inserted in a later patch . Giants was also ported to the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) , a process overseen by Interplay 's division , Digital Mayhem , who posted updates of their progress on IGN . Their greatest challenge for the PS2 port was converting and storing the special effects of the Windows version onto the lesser storage space of the PS2 . LightWave 3D was used by the team to convert the graphic resources . Although they had to reduce the image resolution , Digital Mayhem increased the number of polygons that composed the player character models , making them smoother and more detailed in shape . Due to the limited capabilities of the PS2 as compared to the Windows platform and the addition of a save feature , the team focused on enhancing the action gameplay , streamlining the interfaces , and tweaking the Reaper ski races , level designs , and game balance . They redesigned the controls for the PS2 's controller , and after finding the analog sticks less easy to aim with than a mouse , implemented a feature to help the player 's aim . Digital Mayhem originally intended to retain the multiplayer mode , but discarded it , believing the PS2 environment could not generate the same multiplayer atmosphere as the Windows platform . Interplay released the PS2 port on December 21 , 2001 . They also announced plans for an Xbox port but nothing resulted from this . 
 Near the release of the United States ( US ) Windows version of the game , Planet Moon failed to obtain a " Teen " rating from the ESRB despite changing the original red blood to green and covering Delphi 's <unk> with a bikini top . They made the changes to broaden retail opportunities because many large retailers in the US refused to sell " Mature " -rated games ; Wal @-@ Mart reiterated in October 2002 that they would never stock their shelves with software that contained vulgarity or nudity . Planet Moon Studios later released a patch that reverted the color of the blood to red , and computer gamers found they could restore Delphi 's <unk> by deleting a file . 
 Interplay offered a bonus disc containing extra multiplayer levels to those who pre @-@ ordered the Windows version of the game . On October 5 , 2003 , they offered the game 's soundtrack to those who purchased Giants from their online store . Composers Mark Snow ( noted for his The X @-@ Files musical scores ) , Mark Morgan , and Jeremy Soule ( both known for the music of several video games ) were involved in the music for Giants . Interplay hired Morgan to compose the scores , although reports showed they initially hired Snow for the task . Morgan , however , could not fully concentrate on the task due to personal reasons and handed it over to Soule . Closing credits of the game listed only Morgan and Soule , and Soule compiled their works onto the original soundtrack of the game . Soule originally offered to autograph the soundtrack on its release in the United States ; however , he stopped his offer when email feedback revealed many were intending to pirate his work through the peer @-@ to @-@ peer file sharing software Napster instead of buying it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Planet Moon Studios ' blending of two genres in Giants has earned the acclaim of reviewers . Game Revolution and GameSpot found the simplified real @-@ time strategy task of resource gathering in Giants more interesting than tedious , and Troy <unk> , Microsoft 's Head of Game Design in 2002 , commented that the real @-@ time strategy elements enhanced the game 's shooter aspect rather than making it a hybrid of two genres . Sci Fi Weekly was impressed that both styles of play never interfered with each other , which was complemented by the unique gameplay of each race . The Entertainment Depot , however , found the base building in several missions tedious ; they said the player had to rebuild the base several times due to being forced to leave the base defenseless , which allowed the enemy destroy the structures . 
 Reviewers commented that the imaginative character designs and use of advanced graphics technology , such as hardware transform and lighting , and bump mapping , made the graphics of the game unrivaled in its time ; ActionTrip was so impressed by the game 's visuals that they thought their graphics card was supporting the complex hardware environmental bump mapping it was incapable of . The animation of Kabuto 's antics such as elbow dropping onto tiny enemies , and tossing up and catching food with his mouth , in particular , won the praises of reviewers . Many critics , however , were disappointed that the computer versions of the game could not run smoothly at full details on the recommended system specifications . 
 The AI in the game was also the subject of much commentary . Reviewers said they needed to prompt the allied non @-@ player characters to perform actions on several occasions , although the allied AI performed pretty well most of the time . FiringSquad disagreed , calling their computer controlled teammates worthless and finding joy in leaving them to their deaths . The game review site thought the same of the enemy AI , a view echoed by IGN ; enemies were unaware of the deaths of nearby teammates , and kept running into obstacles . ActionTrip , however , stated the enemy AI did well enough to take cover or flee when hurt , and constantly attack the player 's base . 
 Many reviewers found the best part of Giants to be its bawdy humor ; the scenes were " bizarre and funny without ever letting the silliness distract or annoy the player " . FiringSquad claimed the humor kept them plowing through the game regardless of the issues they encountered , and were disappointed when the game steadily lost this approach in the later stages . Mac Guild and Macworld UK , however , considered the humor crude on a childlike level and its delivery forced . In spite of the humor , many reviewers found themselves bored by the monotony and slow pace of certain segments , According to ActionTrip , Giants lacked a unique quality to capture attention , compared to its contemporaries such as American McGee 's Alice , MechWarrior 4 : Vengeance , and Sea Dogs . 
 The frequent crashes of the retail Windows versions infuriated many reviewers ; Game Revolution censured Interplay for focusing on censoring the game for marketing purposes instead of testing for and fixing the software bugs before release . Several reviewers could not connect to multiplayer games due to failed connections or bugs . The reviewers who managed to play online , commented the games were fun , although they were occasionally disconnected or lagged . <unk> lamented the lack of dedicated low ping servers , and several reviewers declared that the computer versions of the game was flawed for not implementing an in @-@ game save feature . 
 Reviewers appreciated the PS2 version for including the asked @-@ for save feature , but complained the ported game retained the AI and level design issues associated with the Windows version . IGN remarked that it looked less impressive than the computer versions . The lower resolution , flat textures , washed out colors , and sparser environments made the game average looking . The PS2 version also exhibited clipping issues ; character models and projectiles would pass through objects on occasion . The game reviewer , however , praised the console version for presenting a smooth animation , rarely dropping frames . On the contrary , other reviewers stated the frame rate dropped when there are several objects on the screen , presenting a heavy load on the graphics engine . The lack of replay value for the console version after completing the single player mode was a common complaint among the reviewers . 
 Review aggregators Metacritic and GameRankings calculated scores of 85 and 86 @.@ 7 % from their selected reviews for Giants as of 2007 . Although most critics had awarded high scores to the game , GamesRadar and <unk> reported the Windows version sold poorly . In contrast , the Mac OS X version sold out within months of its release , in spite of its smaller market base . According to the quarterly sales reports by <unk> , the PS2 version sold 11 @,@ 272 copies in the US for the six months since its release . This is a poor sales figure compared to the 51 @,@ 726 copies of Shadow Hearts and 753 @,@ 251 copies of Max Payne sold in the same period for the PS2 . Despite the poor overall sales , reviewers have nominated Giants as a game deserving a sequel , and have kept it on PC Gamer UK 's Top 100 as of 2007 . In 2009 , Andrew Groen of GameZone ran a retrospective on Giants and suggested that the game 's mix of humor and action inspired later games such as Ratchet & Clank and Jak and Daxter . He further commented that games of 2004 – 09 were influenced by Giants in one way or another . 
 = = Possible sequel = = 
 On September 25 , 2015 , the independent studio Rogue Rocket Games , co @-@ founded by Nick <unk> , former Planet Moon Studios founder , started a Kickstarter campaign for developing a new independent crowd @-@ funded game said to be " the spiritual successor of Giants : Citizen Kabuto " , titled First Wonder . They failed . 
 = Hurricane Carlotta ( 2012 ) = 
 Hurricane Carlotta was the easternmost tropical cyclone in the Eastern Pacific to make landfall at hurricane intensity since 1966 . The third tropical cyclone and third named storm of the 2012 Pacific hurricane season , Carlotta developed slowly into a tropical depression from a tropical wave southwest of Central America on June 14 . It moved generally west @-@ northwestward and by the following day , strengthened into tropical storm strength . Thereafter , gradual intensification occurred and the storm reached hurricane strength on June 15 . Rapid intensification ensued further , as Carlotta peaked as a 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) Category 2 hurricane on the same day on June 15 . At 0100 UTC the following day , Carlotta made landfall near Puerto Escondido , becoming the easternmost landfalling Pacific hurricane in recorded history . The next day the storm began to weaken as it moved onshore Southwestern Mexico . Carlotta continued to weaken rapidly , eventually dissipating on June 16 . 
 Throughout Mexico , widespread power outages and wind damage was reported , particularly in Oaxaca . Infrastructural damage was also reported due to winds and rain , as well as damage to crops . Rainfall from Carlotta peaked at 13 @.@ 78 in ( 35 @.@ 0 cm ) in San Juan Bautista Tuxtepec . Numerous mudslides resulted from the heavy rains , which blocked roads and damaged structures . At least 29 @,@ 000 homes and 2 @,@ 500 businesses sustained damage from Carlotta , mostly in Oaxaca . Seven people were killed by Carlotta , and the state of Oaxaca requested MX $ 1 @.@ 4 billion ( US $ 107 @.@ 7 million ) for repairs to public infrastructure . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On June 12 , a tropical disturbance developed off the west coast of Costa Rica , moved westward and entered the eastern Pacific after crossing Panama . The system became better organized as it tracked to the west @-@ northwest as a westerly Kelvin wave provided favorable conditions for development . Convection increased around a developing low pressure area , and the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) estimated a 50 % chance of tropical cyclogenesis by late on June 12 . After further organization , the NHC initiated advisories on Tropical Depression Three @-@ E at 0300 UTC on June 14 , while the system was located about 515 mi ( 830 km ) south @-@ southeast of Puerto Ángel , Oaxaca . At the time , the depression was located in an area of low wind shear and warm sea surface temperature conditions that were considered favorable for intensification . In addition , it had a small circulation , which increased the possibility for rapid deepening . The system moved northwestward after forming due to an extended ridge to the northeast . About six hours after forming , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Carlotta , after rainbands increased around the center . 
 With continued favorable conditions , Carlotta quickly developed a ragged central dense overcast , or centralized area of convection . An eye feature began developing on June 15 , and later that day Carlotta intensified into a hurricane while approaching southeastern Mexico . A Hurricane Hunters flight late on June 15 indicated Carlotta was rapidly intensifying , observing winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) in the eye and well @-@ established outflow ; the crew also observed flight @-@ level winds of 114 mph ( 183 km / h ) . The NHC initially predicted the hurricane would move along the Mexican coast just offshore , which would have allowed Carlotta to maintain much of its intensity . Shortly after its peak , Hurricane Carlotta weakened slightly as to the eye 's began to interact with land . The hurricane made landfall near Puerto Escondido , Oaxaca early on June 16 , with winds estimated at 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 976 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) shortly after 0100 UTC on June 16 becoming the easternmost tropical cyclone in the Eastern Pacific to make landfall at hurricane intensity since 1966 . Carlotta rapidly weakened while moving inland , and it had deteriorated to tropical depression status by 12 hours after landfall . Although the cloud pattern became disrupted , the storm maintained a large area of thunderstorms . Very early on June 17 , the NHC reported that Carlotta had weakened into a post @-@ tropical remnant low ; the system still had a broad circulation over southwestern Mexico at the time . Later that day , the low degenerated into a trough along the west coast of Mexico . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 When the system was first classified as a tropical cyclone on June 14 , the government of Mexico issued hurricane watch and a tropical storm watch for a portion of the Mexican Coast from Barra de Tonala to Punta <unk> . Later that day , the watch was upgraded into a hurricane warning . Meanwhile , authorities issued an orange alert for most of Oaxaca , the second highest alert , and a yellow alert , the third highest alert , for northern Oaxaca , Chiapas and Guerrero . A green alert was issued for the state of Puebla , and blue alert , the second lowest alert , for southern Veracruz , Tabasco , Tlaxcala , Morelos and Michoacán . In Oaxaca , officials arranged evacuations for residents in low @-@ lying areas to go to schools , halls , and churches . In the fishing port of Puerto Angel , boating access was <unk> and the port of Salina Cruz was closed . To avoid family separations , schools were closed for several states . The government electricity agency channeled 608 electrical workers due to the threat of damage in the states of Oaxaca and Guerrero . A total of 23 plants were moved to provide emergency power supply . 
 Seven people were killed by the storm . A 56 @-@ year @-@ old woman was killed in a traffic accident that is blamed by the storm 's gusty winds that flipped over her car . In <unk> Hidalgo , Carlotta destroyed a clay house that killed a 13 @-@ year @-@ old girl and her 7 @-@ year @-@ old sister . The hurricane ripped off roofs of houses and caused widespread power outages and small landslides . About 1 @,@ 200 people moved to shelters throughout the city . According to authorities in Oaxaca , some roads were affected by mudslides ; subsequently , they had opened emergency shelters and evacuated many of families from low @-@ lying areas . In Puerto Escondido , near where the storm made landfall , billboards were toppled and windows were shattered . Towns throughout Oaxaca reported damage to roads , bridges , telephone lines , and crops . Rainfall from Carlotta peaked at 13 @.@ 78 in ( 35 @.@ 0 cm ) in San Juan Bautista Tuxtepec . In wake of the storm , the governor of Oaxaca requested the Mexican government to declare his state a disaster area , and requested MX $ 1 @.@ 44 billion ( US $ 113 million ) for repairs to public infrastructure . At least 29 @,@ 000 homes and 2 @,@ 500 businesses sustained damage from Carlotta , mostly in Oaxaca . Total insured losses caused by Carlotta were estimated to be about US $ 12 @.@ 4 million . 
 = HMS Grafton ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Grafton ( <unk> ) was a G @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy during the mid @-@ 1930s . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 the ship spent considerable time in Spanish waters , enforcing the non @-@ intervention measures agreed by Britain and France . After the beginning of World War II she was transferred from the Mediterranean Fleet to Great Britain for escort and contraband inspection duties . Grafton was refitting when the Norwegian Campaign began in April 1940 , but the ship escorted convoys to Norway once her refit was completed . She evacuated British troops from the Dunkirk bridgehead in May , but was sunk by a German submarine after she stopped to rescue survivors from another British destroyer . 
 = = Description = = 
 Grafton displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Grafton carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 137 officers and men in peacetime , but in increased to 146 in wartime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft defence Hostile had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Service = = 
 Grafton was laid down by John I. Thornycroft & Company , at Woolston , Hampshire on 30 August 1934 , launched on 18 September 1935 and completed on 20 March 1936 . Excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament , the ship cost £ 248 @,@ 485 . Aside from a brief period when she was assigned to the 20th Destroyer Flotilla after her commissioning , Grafton spent the prewar period assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla with the Mediterranean Fleet . Between 10 August and 9 September 1936 , she escorted the yacht <unk> as King Edward VIII cruised the eastern Mediterranean . Afterwards Grafton patrolled Spanish waters during the Spanish Civil War enforcing the policies of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee . The ship was refitting in Malta when World War II began in September 1939 . 
 Grafton and three of her sisters were transferred to the Western Approaches Command at Plymouth in October . The following month , however , the ship was reassigned at the end of the month to the 22nd Destroyer Flotilla in Harwich of the Nore Command for patrol and escort duties . On 10 January 1940 , she was transferred to the reconstituted 1st Destroyer Flotilla , also based at Harwich , where Grafton inspected ships travelling between German and Dutch ports for contraband . Between 26 March and 14 April the ship was given a brief overhaul in Hull in the shipyard of Brigham and Cowan . As the Norwegian Campaign had begun while Grafton was refitting , she was reassigned to the Home Fleet where she escorted convoys to Norway until 11 May . 
 = = = Operation Dynamo = = = 
 During the Siege of Calais , Grafton escorted the light cruisers Arethusa and Galatea as they provided naval gunfire support for the 30th Motor Brigade on 26 May . The following day she evacuated over 1 @,@ 600 troops from the beaches of La Panne and Bray , northeast of Dunkirk . On the morning of 29 May , she stopped to rescue survivors from the destroyer Wakeful , which had been torpedoed and sunk earlier that morning by the German E @-@ boat S @-@ 30 . While rescuing survivors from Wakeful off Nieuwpoort , Belgium , Grafton was struck in the stern by a torpedo from the German submarine U @-@ 62 . This seriously damaged the ship , and also triggered a secondary explosion which damaged the bridge , killing the captain and another officer . 13 ratings and the Canteen Manager were also killed . The ship 's back was broken , but she remained afloat long enough for all survivors to be rescued by the destroyer Ivanhoe and the transport Malines . Ivanhoe sank Grafton with naval gunfire , as she was too badly damaged to be towed to safety . 
 = Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) = 
 Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) is the sixth studio album by English musician George Harrison , released in September 1975 . It was Harrison 's final album under his contract with Apple Records and EMI , and the last studio album issued by Apple . The release came nine months after his troubled 1974 North American tour with Ravi Shankar and the poorly received Dark Horse album . The melancholic mood of the recording reflects Harrison 's depressed state at the harsh criticism generated by these projects . 
 Among his solo releases , Extra Texture is notable as the only album whose lyrics are devoid of any obvious spiritual message . Uniquely also , it was recorded mostly in America rather than England , while Harrison was working in Los Angeles in his role as head of Dark Horse Records . Gary Wright , David Foster , Jim Keltner , Jesse Ed Davis , Leon Russell , Tom Scott , Billy Preston and Jim Horn were among the many contributing musicians . The keyboard @-@ heavy sound incorporates elements of soul music and the influence of mellow @-@ voiced Smokey Robinson , signalling a further departure by Harrison from the rock and folk @-@ rock approach of his popular early @-@ 1970s work . Contrasting with the musical content , the album 's art design adopted an upbeat theme , which included an innovative die @-@ cut cover . 
 Despite its generally downcast mood and an unfavourable response from music critics , Extra Texture was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America within two months of release . It produced a hit single in the Motown @-@ inspired " You " , originally recorded in London in 1971 with co @-@ producer Phil Spector . The album also includes " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " , which was both a sequel to Harrison 's 1968 Beatles composition " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " and a rebuttal to his detractors . The album was reissued in remastered form on 22 September 2014 , as part of the Apple Years 1968 – 75 Harrison box set . 
 = = Background = = 
 In its 13 February 1975 issue , Rolling Stone magazine derided George Harrison 's North American tour with Ravi Shankar over November – December 1974 , and the accompanying Dark Horse album , as " disastrous " . Previously viewed as " the surprise winner of the ex @-@ Beatle sweepstakes " , in the words of author Nicholas Schaffner – the dark horse – Harrison had disappointed many fans of his former group by failing to acknowledge the Beatles ' legacy , both in the content of his 1974 shows and in his dealings with the media . In addition , his commitment to launching his Dark Horse record label had left Harrison rushing to finish the album while rehearsing for the concerts ; as a result , he contracted laryngitis and sang hoarse on much of the recordings and throughout the tour . While Dark Horse sold well initially in America , it failed to place at all on Britain 's top 50 albums chart . 
 Despite Harrison 's claims during the tour that the negative press only made him more determined , the criticism hit him hard , following the end of his marriage to Pattie Boyd . In a radio interview with Dave Herman of WNEW @-@ FM in April 1975 , recorded in Los Angeles , Harrison said that he accepted the validity of professional criticism , but objected when it came continually from " one basic source " ; then , he added , it became " a personal thing " . Author Simon Leng writes that the " bitterness and dismay " Harrison felt manifested itself on his follow @-@ up to Dark Horse , titled Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) , which would be the final studio album issued on the Beatles ' Apple record label . 
 The album came about while Harrison was in Los Angeles overseeing projects by some of his Dark Horse signings , one of which , Splinter , became unavailable to attend sessions pre @-@ booked for them at A & M Studios . Although Harrison was unimpressed with the recording facility , he chose to use the vacated studio time himself . Authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter suggest that this decision was influenced by his business relationship with A & M Records , who were Dark Horse 's worldwide distributor and the company with which Harrison was widely expected to sign as a solo artist , following the expiration of his EMI / Capitol @-@ affiliated Apple contract in January 1976 . Having barely written a song in the six months since completing Dark Horse , in late October 1974 , he swiftly completed some half @-@ finished compositions and wrote " a couple of new ones " . Leng cites these circumstances , together with Harrison 's eagerness " to cut a new album as soon as possible , to extricate himself from the Capitol / EMI contract " , as part of an expedient quality that defines Extra Texture . 
 = = Songs = = 
 Writing for Rolling Stone in 2002 , Mikal Gilmore commented that " the crises [ Harrison ] faced in the mid @-@ 1970s changed him " , and that depression was a key factor . Depression permeated many of the songs that Harrison wrote during this period , an issue that was not helped by his continued heavy drinking and cocaine use . While viewing this mindset as an extension of the artist 's " unholy coping mechanisms " over 1973 – 74 , author Robert Rodriguez writes : " What 's interesting is how he chose to address what he 'd been grappling with , musically . In the end , Extra Texture is unique within the Harrison catalog as essentially an LP @-@ length excursion into soul [ music ] . " 
 Lyrically , " The Answer 's at the End " , " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " , " World of Stone " and " Grey Cloudy Lies " all steer clear of his usual subject matter – Hindu spirituality – and instead appear to ask the listener for compassion . According to author and theologian Dale Allison , Extra Texture is " the sole Harrison album that fails to make any positive theological statements " . Allison adds that its " confused melancholy " provides a sharp contrast with the " confident religious advocacy " of the artist 's previous successes All Things Must Pass ( 1970 ) and Living in the Material World ( 1973 ) . Harrison 's wavering from his Krishna @-@ conscious path was most evident in " World of Stone " , writes author Gary Tillery : " ' Such a long way from home , ' he says , but in his autobiography he renders it , ' Such a long way from OM ' – confessing inner turmoil at having strayed from his faith . " The same despair was evident in " Grey Cloudy Lies " , a track that Harrison described to Paul Gambaccini in September 1975 as " one of those depressing , 4 o 'clock in the morning sort of songs " . 
 Harrison had begun writing " World of Stone " , " Grey Cloudy Lies " and the soul @-@ pop love song " Can 't Stop Thinking About You " in 1973 . He started " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " in Hawaii over Christmas 1974 , while holidaying with his new girlfriend ( later his wife ) , Olivia Arias , a secretary at Dark Horse 's LA office . The song is a sequel to Harrison 's popular Beatles track " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , and the lyrics serve as a rebuttal to his critics , particularly Rolling Stone , whose savaging of the tour he would never forgive . 
 Harrison wrote " Tired of Midnight Blue " in Los Angeles , where he continued to be based for much of 1975 on business relating to Dark Horse Records . In his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , he says that the song 's lyrics focused on his " depressed " state following a night in an LA club with " a lot of grey @-@ haired naughty people " . In Tillery 's estimation , with its chorus line " Made me chill right to the bone " , " Tired of Midnight Blue " was Harrison reaching " rock bottom " . As the most obvious example of his embracing of soul music on the album , he wrote " Ooh Baby ( You Know That I Love You ) " as the first of two tributes to Smokey Robinson , a singer whose work with the Miracles he had admired since the early 1960s . 
 In addition to these compositions , Harrison revisited two unused recordings : the Motown @-@ styled " You " , and " His Name Is Legs ( Ladies and Gentlemen ) " , which open and close the album , respectively . Co @-@ produced with Phil Spector in London , " You " was among the basic tracks taped in February 1971 for a planned Apple solo album by Spector 's wife , Ronnie , formerly Veronica Bennett of the Ronettes . A reprise of the completed song , in the form of a brief instrumental titled " A Bit More of You " , also appears on Extra Texture , opening side two in the LP format . " His Name Is Legs " was recorded at Harrison 's Friar Park studio , FPSHOT , shortly before the 1974 tour , with Billy Preston , Tom Scott , Willie Weeks and Andy Newmark . In a private joke that few listeners were able to appreciate , the song features a hard @-@ to @-@ decipher monologue performed by " Legs " Larry Smith , formerly a member of Bonzo Dog Doo Dah Band . The inclusion of these two older tracks provided some upbeat material on an album predominantly filled with ballads . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Alone among the studio albums that Harrison released between the break @-@ up of the Beatles and his death in 2001 , most of the recording for Extra Texture was carried out in the United States . The sessions took place on part of A & M 's block along La Brea Avenue in Hollywood , where both the studio and the record company were based . Throughout the spring and summer of 1975 , Harrison regularly attended Dark Horse 's office , located in a bungalow shared with A & M @-@ distributed Ode Records , and otherwise became fully involved in the Los Angeles music scene . Shortly before starting work on the album , he was among the guests at Wings ' party on the Queen Mary ocean liner , at Long Beach , where a " drawn " -looking Harrison was seen socialising with Paul McCartney for the first time since the Beatles ' break @-@ up five years before . Often accompanied by Arias , Harrison caught shows by Bob Marley & the Wailers , Smokey Robinson and Santana , socialised with Ringo Starr , and met up with Preston and Ronnie Wood backstage after one of the Rolling Stones ' concerts at the LA Forum . New friends such as Eric Idle entered Harrison 's social circle that summer , although the Python 's influence only extended to Extra Texture 's quirky artwork and packaging rather than its musical content . 
 With Norman Kinney as engineer , Harrison recorded the basic tracks for the new songs between 21 April and 7 May 1975 , beginning with " Tired of Midnight Blue " and " The Answer 's at the End " . Among the musicians on the album were many of Harrison 's previous collaborators and associates , including Jim Keltner ( drums ) , Gary Wright ( keyboards ) , Jesse Ed Davis ( guitar ) , Klaus Voormann ( bass ) , and Tom Scott , Jim Horn and Chuck Findley ( all horns ) . Along with Keltner , the most regular participant was a young David Foster , then the piano player in Keltner 's band , Attitudes , while the group 's bassist and singer , Paul Stallworth , also contributed . On what would turn out to be a noticeably keyboard @-@ dominated sound , Leon Russell and Nicky Hopkins made guest appearances as well . 
 Voormann , a close friend of Harrison 's since 1960 , found the atmosphere at the sessions unpleasant ; he later cited the heavy drug use typical of the LA music scene , in particular , but also the ex @-@ Beatle 's " frame of mind when he was doing this album " . Keltner , who described his own friendship with Harrison as " like brothers " , has similarly spoken of Los Angeles as an unsuitable environment for Harrison during this period , while commenting that Arias " came into the picture at just the right time , a crazy , dark time " . With Voormann choosing to absent himself , Harrison played some of the album 's bass parts himself , using either ARP or Moog synthesizer . 
 = = = Overdubbing and mixing = = = 
 After a few weeks ' break , the overdubbing phase began at A & M on 31 May . That day , instruments were added to the 1971 basic track for " You " , including a saxophone solo ( played by Horn ) , extra keyboards and a second drum part . Over 2 – 3 June , Scott and Findley overdubbed horns on " Ooh Baby " and " His Name Is Legs " . The Foster @-@ arranged strings for " This Guitar " , " The Answer 's at the End " and " Can 't Stop Thinking About You " were recorded between 6 and 9 June . Final mixing of the album 's ten songs lasted through July and possibly into August . 
 Between June and October 1975 , Preston 's It 's My Pleasure album , Peter <unk> 's Hard Times and Splinter 's Harder to Live were released , and sessions took place in August for Scott 's New York Connection . All of these albums include guitar cameos from Harrison ( often credited to his pseudonym " Hari Georgeson " ) , yet his playing on Extra Texture was surprisingly minimal . Harrison 's signature instrument since 1970 , the slide guitar , appeared significantly on " Tired of Midnight Blue " only , and in his extended solo on " This Guitar " , on which he shared the lead guitarist 's role with Jesse Ed Davis . 
 Harrison 's voice had fully recovered from the effects of laryngitis , allowing him to reach falsetto and indulge in gospel @-@ style scat singing . In author Alan Clayson 's estimation , with Harrison adopting a new , " close @-@ miked " soft vocal style , much of Extra Texture reflected " the more feathery emanations from Philadelphia by the likes of The Stylistics and Jerry Butler " . Leng considers that Harrison " was clearly targeting the mainstream U.S. audience " and adds : " There were few spiritual lyrics and absolutely no references to Krishna , while his much @-@ criticized vocals were stronger , but recorded at a low level , as if the goal was to create a Harrison soul album for lovers . " 
 = = Album artwork and title = = 
 The album 's art design was credited to Capitol 's in @-@ house designer , Roy Kohara . Harrison supplied sketches for each item of the artwork , which adopted a humorous , " wacky " theme throughout the packaging . The vivid @-@ orange front cover featured a die @-@ cut design around the words " <unk> <unk> " , through which an inner @-@ sleeve , blue @-@ tinted picture of Harrison was visible . Some vinyl editions presented the words as simple blue text on an orange background , however , doing away with the expensive cut @-@ out detail . In keeping with the album title , the thin cardboard used for the LP cover was similar in texture to the " animal skin used on a football " , according to Beatles author Bruce Spizer . The front cover included an Om symbol , positioned below the angled title text and also coloured blue . On the back of the inner sleeve , there was a second Henry Grossman tour photo of Harrison , clearly enjoying himself on stage . 
 Seen as a joke referencing the demise of the Beatles ' record label , the Apple logo was presented on Extra Texture as an eaten @-@ away apple core . In addition , the blue inner @-@ sleeve photo of Harrison – " grinning like a Monty Python choirboy " , in the words of Robert Christgau – was captioned " <unk> " ( " Oh not him again " ) , Harrison 's self @-@ deprecating take on his dwindling popularity in 1974 – 75 . The album 's full title was a pun on the slogan that street @-@ corner <unk> would yell out to sell late @-@ breaking news editions of their newspapers : " Extra ! Extra ! Read all about it ! " Harrison had intended to call the album <unk> , until a studio discussion with Paul Stallworth suggested an alternative . According to Harrison , just as he himself was talking about an overdub needing something " extra " , Stallworth happened to say the word " texture " . 
 As on Dark Horse , Harrison listed contributing musicians for each song , on the LP 's back cover , but this time with an additional list for those not appearing . The first of these is guitarist Danny <unk> , the fourth member of Attitudes ; others include Derek Taylor , Eric Idle , Peter Sellers and Dark Horse executive Dino <unk> . 
 = = Release = = 
 Appearing nine months after Dark Horse , Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) was completed more quickly than any of Harrison 's previous post @-@ Beatles solo albums . The haste with which it was made was out of character for Harrison , and apparently symbolic of a wish to redeem himself with his audience before he left EMI for A & M Records . Preceded by its advance single , " You " backed with " World of Stone " , the album was released on 22 September 1975 in America ( as Apple SW <unk> ) and on 3 October in Britain ( Apple PAS <unk> ) . 
 In another departure from past form , Harrison undertook promotion for his new album , in Britain . One of these activities , broadcast on 6 September , was his track @-@ by @-@ track discussion with Paul Gambaccini on the BBC Radio 1 show <unk> . The same day , Melody Maker published an interview with Harrison , the magazine 's cover declaring : " George <unk> Back ! " Although he later admitted to being " in a real down place " while making the album , the Melody Maker interview found Harrison in good humour , pointing the way to a return in form the following year ; " I 'd rather be an ex @-@ Beatle than an ex @-@ Nazi ! " he joked , referring to his recent uneasy experience with the musical John , Paul , George , Ringo … and Bert . Harrison 's other activities in late 1975 likewise centred on comedy , beginning with his production of Monty Python 's single " The Lumberjack Song " , released in November , and including a humorous star turn , again with Eric Idle , on Rutland Weekend Television 's Christmas special . 
 Extra Texture peaked at number 8 on the Billboard Top LPs & Tape chart on 25 October , holding the position for three weeks , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America on 11 November . The album marked a welcome , though brief , return for Harrison to the official UK Albums Chart ( now a top 60 ) , reaching number 16 there in late October . " You " peaked at number 20 on Billboard 's Hot 100 singles listings , while in the UK , despite the song receiving substantial airplay on Radio 1 , its highest position was number 38 , equalling that of his Dark Horse single " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " . As the follow @-@ up to " You " , Apple issued " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " backed by the 1974 album track " Māya Love " , in December , with a UK release following in February 1976 . Apple 's final single in its original incarnation , " This Guitar " failed to chart in either America or Britain , a fate that Rodriguez partly attributes to a lack of promotion from a label that was " [ r ] <unk> on fumes " . 
 = = = Reissue = = = 
 Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) was remastered for CD release in January 1992 . The album was remastered again and reissued in September 2014 , as both a separate release and as part of the Harrison box set The Apple Years 1968 – 75 . The 2014 reissue includes a liner note essay by radio producer and author Kevin Howlett , and adds a new version of " This Guitar " , based on a demo that Harrison recorded in 1992 for Dave Stewart . Previously issued only as a digital download for the latter 's Platinum Weird project , in 2006 , the track features overdubs from Stewart , Harrison 's son Dhani , Ringo Starr and singer Kara DioGuardi . Previewing the release on <unk> , Olivia Harrison spoke of the " strong melodies and thought @-@ provoking lyrics " of many of the songs on Extra Texture , adding : " They are moody and personal and some of my favourites . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 Discussing the album 's reception in his 1977 book The Beatles Forever , Nicholas Schaffner wrote : " Harrison 's worldly critics , who had long found his sermons insufferable , responded like bulls to a red flag to Extra Texture , which contains a number of treatises on how reviewers always ' miss the point . ' " Even Harrison 's loyal " disciples " , Schaffner continued , tended to view the album as " plodding and aimless " . Rolling Stone 's reviewer , Dave Marsh , highlighted " You " as a return to All Things Must Pass @-@ style grandeur , and " Can 't Stop Thinking About You " and " Tired of Midnight Blue " as " the most effective nine minutes of music " the artist had made since 1970 . Generally , on an album that was " sketchy at best " , however , Marsh bemoaned the over @-@ reliance on " merely competent " keyboards and Harrison 's " <unk> feeble voice " , before concluding : " Harrison is no longer a Beatle , as he has reminded us more than we have asked . But if he learned nothing else from his experience in that organization , it ought to have been that a good guitar player isn 't worth much without a band . " 
 In the NME , Neil Spencer wrote that " Though ' Extra Texture ' isn 't the Harrison revival that many might have hopes for , it 's still several leagues superior to Hari 's more recent efforts ; and just as ' All Things Must Pass ' would have made a great single album , so ' Extra Texture ' would make a more than commendable single side . " Spencer described the album 's content as " the customary mournful and doom @-@ laden Harrison we 've come to know and fear , only this time the rigours of love take precedence over matters spiritual " , and he advised his readers : " I 've played it , I don 't mind it … Hari fans can anticipate purchase with glee . Others approach with cautious optimism . " 
 In the 1977 edition of their book The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , Roy Carr and Tony Tyler described Extra Texture as " another lugubrious offering " and concluded : " the needle of the listener 's personal <unk> points sullenly towards zero throughout . " Harrison 's pleas for tolerance and understanding , like his self @-@ deprecation on the album sleeve , seemed to backfire . Writing in 1981 , Bob Woffinden found that the album showed signs that Harrison was " no longer so scornful of his audience " compared with Dark Horse . Woffinden wrote of the songs that " plead plaintively with critics not to judge too severely " : " In this different context , such pleas are more sympathetic . Very well , then , we will not . Extra Texture wasn 't really very good musically … but it did have some appealing qualities , and barely any disagreeable ones . " 
 = = = Retrospective reviews and legacy = = = 
 In his book subtitled The Beatles ' Solo Years , 1970 – 1980 , Robert Rodriguez features Extra Texture in a chapter dedicated to the worst solo albums released by the four ex @-@ Beatles between 1970 and 1980 – the only one of Harrison 's albums to be included there . Rodriguez writes : " To be sure , Extra Texture boasted several fine cuts … but the remainder of the collection was almost entirely weary in tone , amounting to a prolonged buzz kill . " Nick DeRiso , co @-@ founder of the music website Something Else ! , includes it on his list of the five worst solo albums by either John Lennon , McCartney or Harrison , and describes it as a " grinding , relentlessly downbeat album , where even the name Extra Texture has come to feel like a cruel joke " . 
 Several Harrison biographers likewise hold Extra Texture in low esteem , with Alan Clayson describing it as his " artistic nadir " and " a bedsit record rather than a dancing one " . Simon Leng writes that Harrison 's post @-@ Dark Horse " rehabilitation disc " came way too soon , resulting in an uncharacteristically passionless work , with its singer sounding " punch drunk " . Aside from the uplifting " You " , both authors identify " Tired of Midnight Blue " as the only saving grace . Gary Tillery notes the " darkly sarcastic " album title for a collection full of such " downbeat " tracks , the darkest of which is " Grey Cloudy Lies " . Harrison himself rated Extra Texture as his worst solo release of the 1970s . Speaking to Musician magazine in 1987 , he dismissed it as " a grubby album " and added : " The production left a lot to be desired , as did my performance … Some songs I like , but in retrospect I wasn 't very happy about it . " 
 The album has its admirers , however . Writing in a Rolling Stone Press tribute book , Greg Kot labels Extra Texture as " something of a return to form for Harrison " . AllMusic 's Richard Ginell views " You " , " The Answer 's at the End " and " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " as some of Harrison 's best post @-@ Beatles compositions and identifies other " musical blossoms " on a collection that stands up relatively well to the passing of time . Writing in the 2004 Rolling Stone Album Guide , Mac Randall considered it to be an album that " starts off well , then runs out of steam midway through " , while John Harris , in his 2011 review for Mojo , described it as " a classic case of contractual obligation " but still a " decided improvement " on Dark Horse . More impressed , Harrison biographer Elliot Huntley admires the album as " a welcome return to form " that offers " some gorgeous love songs , a truly commercial lead single , and flashes of the humour that define George Harrison as a songwriter " . 
 Reviewing the Apple Years box set for Blogcritics , Seattle @-@ based critic Chaz Lipp opines of Extra Texture : " Though not without a few notable tracks , it 's the least satisfying album of Harrison 's entire career … The essential cut is the grooving ' Tired of Midnight Blue . ' " In his review for Classic Rock , Paul Trynka writes that the album " boasts neither the highs nor lows of its predecessors " and is " the work of a man wounded by criticism " . In Trynka 's assessment , whereas " You " " sounds dull today " , " confessional songs " such as " World of Stone " , " Tired of Midnight Blue " and " Grey Cloudy Lies " " have worn well " . Writing for the website Vintage Rock , Shawn Perry similarly considers " You " to be " out of sync " , and he highlights " This Guitar " and " Grey Cloudy Lies " on " a creative and introspective album that 's aged well " . 
 In another 2014 review , for the Lexington Herald @-@ Leader , Walter Tunis writes : " [ Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) ] is a delight from the start of the brightly orchestrated pop of ' You ' to a series of light soul @-@ savvy reveries that culminate in the playful ' His Name is Legs ' . The record places the secular and spiritual concerns of Harrison 's music in animated balance to close out The Apple Years in a state of hapless harmony . " Writing in Mojo , Tom Doyle concedes that , being the final album in the box set , " It 's possibly a downbeat note to end on " , but welcomes the reissue for " allow [ ing ] us time to dig for the diamonds in the dirt " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by George Harrison . 
 Side one 
 Side two 
 2014 remaster bonus track 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – vocals ( 1 – 5 , 7 – 10 ) , electric and acoustic guitars ( 1 – 10 ) , ARP synthesizer ( 3 , 9 ) , Moog synthesizer ( 9 ) , piano ( 10 ) , backing vocals ( 1 , 2 , 7 – 10 ) 
 David Foster – piano ( 2 , 3 , 5 , 9 ) , organ ( 1 , 6 ) , ARP synthesizer ( 1 , 5 , 6 ) , electric piano ( 7 ) , tack piano ( 10 ) , string arrangement ( 2 , 3 , 7 ) 
 Gary Wright – organ ( 2 , 5 ) , electric piano ( 1 , 4 , 6 ) , ARP synthesizer ( 3 , 7 ) 
 Jim Keltner – drums ( 1 – 9 ) , percussion ( 8 ) 
 Jesse Ed Davis – electric guitar ( 3 – 5 , 7 , 9 ) 
 Klaus Voormann – bass ( 4 – 5 , 7 ) 
 Paul Stallworth – bass ( 2 , 8 ) , background vocals ( 7 ) 
 Leon Russell – piano ( 1 , 6 , 8 ) 
 Tom Scott – saxophones ( 4 , 10 ) 
 Chuck Findley – trumpet ( 4 , 10 ) , trombone ( 10 ) 
 Nicky Hopkins – piano ( 7 ) 
 Jim Horn – saxophone ( 1 , 6 ) 
 Jim Gordon – drums ( 1 , 6 ) , percussion ( 1 , 6 ) 
 Carl Radle – bass ( 1 , 6 ) 
 Billy Preston – electric piano ( 10 ) 
 Willie Weeks – bass ( 10 ) 
 Andy Newmark – drums ( 10 ) 
 Legs Larry Smith – vocal ( 10 ) 
 Ronnie Spector – vocal ( 1 ) 
 Norm Kinney – percussion ( 2 ) 
 Supplementary credits for 2014 reissue ( track 11 ) 
 George Harrison – vocals , acoustic guitars 
 Dave Stewart – electric guitars , bass , organ 
 Dhani Harrison – acoustic guitar 
 Ringo Starr – drums 
 Kara DioGuardi – backing vocals 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Battle of Stockach ( 1799 ) = 
 The [ First ] Battle of Stockach occurred on 25 March 1799 , when French and Austrian armies fought for control of the geographically strategic Hegau region in present @-@ day Baden @-@ Württemberg . In the broader military context , this battle constitutes a keystone in the first campaign in southwestern Germany during the Wars of the Second Coalition , part of the French Revolutionary Wars . 
 It was the second battle between the French Army of the Danube , commanded by Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan , and the Habsburg Army under Archduke Charles ; the armies had met a few days earlier , 20 – 22 March , on the marshy fields southeast of Ostrach and the Pfullendorf heights . The Austrian Army 's superior strength , almost three @-@ to @-@ one , forced the French to withdraw . 
 At Stockach , the French concentrated their forces into shorter lines , creating intense fighting conditions ; initially , Charles 's line was more extended , but he quickly pulled additional troops from his reserves to strengthen his front . When a small French force commanded by Dominique Vandamme nearly flanked the Austrian Army , Charles 's personal intervention was crucial for the Austrians , buying time for reinforcements to arrive . General Jourdan , while trying to rally his men , was nearly trampled to death . Ultimately , the French were driven back upon the Rhine River . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although the First Coalition forces achieved several initial victories at Verdun , Kaiserslautern , Neerwinden , Mainz , Amberg and Würzburg , the efforts of Napoleon Bonaparte in northern Italy pushed Austrian forces back and resulted in the negotiation of the Peace of Leoben ( 17 April 1797 ) and the subsequent Treaty of Campo Formio ( October 1797 ) . This treaty proved difficult to administer . Austria was slow to give up some of the Venetian territories . A Congress convened at Rastatt for the purposes of deciding which southwestern German states would be <unk> to compensate the dynastic houses for territorial losses , but was unable to make any progress . Supported by French republican forces , Swiss insurgents staged several uprisings , ultimately causing the overthrow of the Swiss Confederation after 18 months of civil war . 
 By early 1799 , the French Directory had become impatient with stalling tactics employed by Austria . The uprising in Naples raised further alarms , and recent gains in Switzerland suggested the timing was fortuitous to venture on another campaign in northern Italy and southwestern Germany . 
