 = = Professional baseball = = 
 = = = The " Pretzel Curve " = = = 
 During his career , Getzein 's drew acclaim for his curveball . Getzein 's version of the pitch was sometimes referred to as the " pretzel curve . " Sporting Life described Getzein 's unusual delivery as follows : " In delivering his ' pretzels ' ' Getz ' faces third base with one foot in either corner of the lower end of the box . Bending the left knee slightly , he draws his right arm well back . Then , straightening up quickly , he slides the left foot forward with a characteristic little skip , and , bringing his arm around with a swift overhand swing , drives the ball in at a lively pace . " 
 After a Getzein victory over the Kansas City Cowboys in 1886 , the Detroit Free Press wrote : " The Pretzel is all right . He went into the box to @-@ day and pitched one of his finest , his curves circling around in the form of the delicious pastry from which Getz takes his sobriquet . " However , the editor of the Grand Rapids World opined that Getzein 's " curved ball " was a fiction . He wrote : 
 " The baseball enthusiasts claim for Getzein that he is able to so pitch a ball that it will describe the arc of a circle on a horizontal plane before reaching the catcher , and that therein lies the secret of his marvelous pitching . . . Scientifically , this theory is utterly absurd . The forces that act upon a ball pitched by Getzein are not different from those which operate upon a projectile thrown from any other source , and the results must be the same , and governed by the same laws . The curves are in the imagination of Getzein 's admirers . When the ball leaves his hand it is beyond his control , and it moves forward from the impulse last given it as it leaves his hand . It is then controlled by the force of propulsion , the resistance of the atmosphere , and gravitation . . . . Getzein 's antic and deceptive motions may deceive the batter , so that he is unable to discover the exact course of the ball in time to strike it , but he cannot throw a ball so as to make a curve on the horizontal plane . " 
 The Scientific American magazine responded in July 1886 by publishing an article written by Henry Chadwick ( accompanied by several diagrams , two of which are reproduced above ) explaining the physics behind the curve ball pitch . 
 In 1891 , O. P. Caylor in Outing magazine examined " The Theory and Introduction of Curve Pitching " and noted that many " ignorant ball players " had believed that Getzein was capable of throwing a " double curve . " Caylor deemed the " double curve " to be " an ocular delusion " , but claimed that Getzein 's nickname was based on the delusion : " [ W ] e have the nickname of ' the Pretzel Pitcher , ' given to Getzein by players who imagine the curve from his hands comes at them with the curves of a pretzel . " 
 Getzein was known by the nickname " Pretzels " . Sources conflict as to whether the nickname was derived from his German ethnicity or from the belief that he was able to throw a " double curve " following " the curves of a pretzel . " 
 = = = Grand Rapids = = = 
 Getzein was listed at 5 feet , 10 inches , and 172 pounds , and he batted and threw right handed . In 1882 , Getzein made his professional baseball debut with the Grand Rapids , Michigan , team in the Northwestern League . According to an account published in The Sporting News , he " pitched his puzzling twisters and curves in the Northwestern League while that organization was in existence . " 
 During the 1884 season , Getzein started and completed 30 games , and threw 11 shutouts , for Grand Rapids , compiling a record of 27 – 4 win – loss record with a 0 @.@ 52 earned run average ( ERA ) . 
 = = = Detroit Wolverines = = = 
 On August 9 , 1884 , the Grand Rapids team was dropped from the Northwestern League and disbanded . Jack Chapman , manager of the Detroit Wolverines , seized the opportunity to sign five former Grand Rapids players , including " what is known as the ' G ' battery -- Getzein and <unk> . " The Detroit Free Press reported that Getzein " has been a formidable man to face in the Northwestern League , in one instance striking out sixteen batters . " 
 Getzein made his major league debut at Detroit 's Recreation Park on August 13 , 1884 . Getzein faced Cleveland and did not allow an earned run . The Detroit Free Press took note of Getzein 's performance : 
 " Getzien caused the Cleveland batters to pound the air thirty @-@ seven times , and eleven more strikes were called . It is a great record , and one that is seldom equaled . He had great speed at the outset , and struck out six of the first eight men who came to the bat . He could not maintain the pace , however , and was not so effective in the latter portion of the game , but was sufficiently so to prevent any one from earning a run . " 
 Despite Getzein 's pitching performance , Detroit lost the game by a 1 – 0 score as Cleveland scored an unearned run . Getzein went on to start ( and complete ) 17 games for the Wolverines during the remaining two months of the 1883 season . He posted a 5 – 12 record for a Detroit team that finished in last place in the National League with a 28 – 84 record , 56 games out of contention . Getzein provided one of the few highlights for the 1884 Wolverines , pitching a six @-@ inning no @-@ hitter against the Philadelphia Phillies on October 1 , 1884 . The Detroit Free Press reported on Getzein 's no @-@ hitter as follows : 
 " When Spalding compiles the history of remarkable games for his Guide for 1885 , it will embrace the fact that in the Detroit @-@ Philadelphia game of October 1 Getzien , the Detroit pitcher , was not batted for a base – a feat seldom accomplished . It should contain further fact that of eighteen men at bat he struck out ten , and of the other eight but one hit the ball beyond the diamond – Purcell , in the first inning , a fly to Weidman . Of the other seven , only three hit to the diamond , or a total of four balls struck inside the foul lines . Of the eighteen , [ Detroit catcher ] <unk> put out eleven and threw out three others , Bennett , Scott and Weidman each had a fly , and Jones threw one out at first . " 
 Getzein finished the 1884 season with a 1 @.@ 95 ERA , third best in the National League behind Old Hoss Radbourn ( 1 @.@ 38 ) and Charlie Sweeney ( 1 @.@ 95 ) , both of whom played for the league champion Providence Grays . 
 Over the course of the full 1884 season , pitching for both Grand Rapids and Detroit , Getzein started and completed 47 games and pitched 423 @-@ 1 / 3 innings . 
 In 1885 , Getzein compiled a 12 – 25 record as his ERA jumped to 3 @.@ 03 . His record in 1885 was again impacted by playing with an noncompetitive team . The 1885 Wolverines finished the season in sixth place with a 41 – 67 record . 
 In 1886 , Getzein and the Wolverines saw their fortunes rise as the Wolverines assembled one of the best hitting teams in National League history featuring , among others , Dan Brouthers , Sam Thompson , Hardy Richardson , and Jack Rowe . Despite having a 3 @.@ 03 ERA ( precisely the same as his 1885 performance ) , Getzein won a career @-@ high 30 victories against 11 losses . Getzein was not the Wolverines ' leading pitcher in 1886 , as teammate Lady Baldwin led the National League with 42 wins . The 1886 Wolverines finished in second place , 2 ½ games behind the Chicago White Stockings , with an 87 – 36 record and a <unk> winning percentage . 
 In 1887 , Getzein was the leading pitcher on a Detroit Wolverines team that won the National League pennant and then defeated the St. Louis Browns in the 1887 World Series . Getzein compiled a 29 – 13 record and a 3 @.@ 73 ERA , leading the league in winning percentage ( .690 ) but also in home runs allowed ( 24 ) . In September 1887 , a group of influential fans in Detroit contributed money to purchase " an elegant two hundred dollar gold watch and chain " for Getzein to express their admiration for Getzein 's " magnificent work for the club . " 
 In the 1887 World Series ( which Detroit won , 10 games to 5 ) , Getzein pitched six complete games and compiled a 4 – 2 record with a 2 @.@ 48 ERA . On October 17 , 1887 , Getzein pitched a no @-@ hitter through the first eight innings in Game 10 of the World Series played before 10 @,@ 000 spectators at the Polo Grounds in New York . The Detroit Free Press wrote : " Getzien made a remarkable showing . Up to and including the eighth inning only twenty @-@ seven men went to the bat and not a clean hit had been scored . Not till the ninth did the world beaters succeed in getting a hit , and then they failed to score the much desired run . " 
 In 1888 , Getzein compiled an 18 – 22 record and a 3 @.@ 05 ERA . He started 46 games and completed 45 of them with 404 innings pitched . However , Getzein lost his role at the team 's leading pitcher , as Pete Conway compiled a 30 – 14 record and a 2 @.@ 25 ERA for the 1888 Wolverines . After Getzein gave up 10 runs in an August 1888 game against Washington , the Detroit Free Press dubbed him the " Pulverized Pretzel . " The newspaper reported : " The <unk> were defeated again to @-@ day ... simply because Getzein could not keep the ball away from the Senatorial bat . When he pitched high they hit it . When he delivered his famous drop , he was knocked out of the lot , and his in and out curves were as big as balloons to Ted Sullivan 's men . " As the 1888 season progressed , relations between Getzein and the Detroit manager became strained . After a game in which Getzein gave up 21 hits against Boston , The Sporting Life reported on speculation that Getzein may have intentionally thrown the game : 
 " The Getzein episode makes <unk> weary . The Bostons have no license to make 21 hits off the Pretzel when he pitches his game . Either he was not in condition to pitch or he didn 't try to . . . . If the latter , and he repeated his performance against the Kansas Citys a few years ago , when he deliberately tossed the balls to the plate and permitted the Cowboys to make 13 runs in one inning , why no one here would mourn much if he was fined to the limit . What the merits of his quarrel with Watkins are of course are not known here . But Getzein is inclined to be very free with his tongue . Considering his fine treatment here it is time for him to get over his childish humors and do the best he knows how whenever called on . " 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Getzein 's career with the Wolverines ended after the 1888 season . On March 5 , 1889 , he was sold by Detroit to the Indianapolis Hoosiers . During the 1889 season , he compiled an 18 – 22 record and a 4 @.@ 54 ERA for the Hoosiers and led the National League in home runs allowed with 27 . 
 After a sub par season with the Hoosiers , Getzein was acquired by the Boston Beaneaters in March 1890 . He returned to good form in 1890 , compiling a 23 – 17 record with a 3 @.@ 19 ERA for the fifth @-@ place Beaneaters . While pitching for Detroit in 1887 , Getzein was teamed up with catcher Charlie Ganzel , and the pair became known as the " Pretzel Battery " because of their shared German ethnicity . When Getzein signed with Boston in 1890 , he was reunited with Ganzel . The Sporting Life reported : " The signing of Getzein by the Boston League Club re @-@ unites the famous ' Pretzel Battery , ' Getzein and Ganzel , of the Detroit ex @-@ champions . " 
 Getzein began the 1891 season with Boston , but he was released by the team on July 16 , 1891 , after compiling a 4 – 5 record in nine starts . He attempted a comeback with the Cleveland Spiders in August 1891 , but he appeared in only one game for the Spiders , allowing nine runs in nine innings . He concluded his major league career appearing in 13 games for the St. Louis Browns in 1892 . 
 In 1894 , Getzein was reported to be playing first base for a Chicago City League team . 
 = = = Career statistics = = = 
 During nine major league seasons , he compiled a 145 – 139 record and a 3 @.@ 46 earned run average ( ERA ) in 296 games . He totaled 292 games started and threw 277 complete games , a total that ranks 58th in major league history . Only three pitchers in major league history ( Ed Morris , Mark Baldwin , and Hall of Famer Albert Spalding ) threw more complete games in careers shorter than Getzein 's nine @-@ year career . 
 Getzein 's record for complete games is based in part on the customs of the 1880s . In 1915 , Baseball Magazine reported that managers were not allowed to freely pull the starting pitcher from a game in the bygone era . It cited an incident involving Getzein to illustrate the old practice : 
 " The Nationals got onto Getzein in the fourth inning and batted him all over the field . In the fifth inning they kept up the slugging until Getzein said he was ill , and Manager Hanlon wanted the Nationals to allow Getzein to retire , claiming that he was too sick to play . Baker , captaining the home club , said he would call a doctor and have him examine Getzein , and if the latter was really sick he would probably allow the change to be made . Dr. Bond , who happened to be present , was called on , and he examined the pitcher , while the crowd guyed Getzein terribly . The doctor announced that he did not consider Getzein sick , only discouraged at the pounding he had received , and that he would be able to finish the game . " 
 = = Family and death = = 
 Getzien was married to Rose Dibble . He died in June 1932 after suffering a heart attack at his home in Chicago . He was buried at Concordia Cemetery in Forest Park , Illinois . 
 = Guatemalan Revolution = 
 The Guatemalan Revolution ( Spanish : Revolución de Guatemala ) was the period in Guatemalan history between the popular uprising that overthrew dictator Jorge Ubico in 1944 and the United States @-@ orchestrated coup d 'état in 1954 that unseated President Jacobo Árbenz . It is also known as the Ten Years of Spring , highlighting the only years of representative democracy in Guatemala from 1930 until the end of the civil war in 1996 , and included a program of agrarian reform that was enormously influential across Latin America . 
 From the late 19th century until 1944 Guatemala was governed by a series of authoritarian rulers who sought to strengthen the economy by supporting the export of coffee . Between 1898 and 1920 , Manuel Estrada Cabrera granted significant concessions to the United Fruit Company , an American corporation that traded in tropical fruit , and dispossessed many indigenous people of their communal lands . Under Jorge Ubico , who ruled as a dictator between 1931 and 1944 , this process was intensified , with the institution of harsh labor regulations and a police state . 
 In June 1944 , a popular pro @-@ democracy movement led by university students and labor organizations forced Ubico to resign . He appointed a three @-@ person military junta to take his place , led by Federico Ponce Vaides . This junta continued Ubico 's oppressive policies , until it was toppled in a military coup led by Jacobo Árbenz in October 1944 , an event also known as the " October Revolution " . The coup leaders formed a junta which swiftly called for open elections . These elections were won in a landslide by Juan José Arévalo , a progressive professor of philosophy who had become the face of the popular movement . He implemented a moderate program of social reform , including a widely successful literacy campaign and a largely free election process , although illiterate women were not given the vote and communist parties were banned . 
 Following the end of Arévalo 's presidency in 1951 , Jacobo Árbenz was elected to the presidency in a landslide . The progressive military leader of 1944 continued Arévalo 's reforms , and began an ambitious land @-@ reform program , known as Decree 900 . Under it , the uncultivated portions of large land @-@ holdings were expropriated in return for compensation , and redistributed to poverty @-@ stricken agricultural laborers . Approximately 500 @,@ 000 people benefited from the decree . The majority of them were indigenous people , whose forebears had been dispossessed after the Spanish invasion . Árbenz ' policies ran afoul of the United Fruit Company , which lost some of its uncultivated land . The company lobbied the US government for Árbenz ' overthrow , and the State Department responded by engineering a coup under the pretext that Árbenz was a communist . Carlos Castillo Armas took power at the head of a military junta , provoking the Guatemalan Civil War . The war lasted from 1960 to 1996 , and saw the US @-@ backed military commit genocide against the indigenous Maya peoples , and widespread human rights violations against civilians . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Early 20th Century = = = 
 Prior to the Spanish invasion in 1524 , the population of Guatemala was almost exclusively Maya . The Spanish conquest created a system of wealthy European landowners overseeing a labor force composed of slaves and bonded laborers . However , the community lands of the indigenous population remained in their control until the late 19th century . At this point , rising global demand for coffee made its export a significant source of income for the government . As a result , the state supported the coffee growers by passing legislation that took land away from the Indian population , as well as relaxing labor laws so that bonded labor could be used on the plantations . 
 The US @-@ based United Fruit Company ( UFC ) was one of many foreign companies that acquired large tracts of both state land and indigenous land . Manuel Estrada Cabrera , who was president of Guatemala from 1898 to 1920 , permitted limited unionization in rural Guatemala , but also made further concessions to the UFC . In 1922 , the Communist Party of Guatemala was created , and became a significant influence among urban laborers ; however , it had little reach among the rural and Indian populations . In 1929 , the Great Depression led to the collapse of the economy and a rise in unemployment , leading to unrest among workers and laborers . Fearing the possibility of a revolution , the landed elite lent their support to Jorge Ubico y Castañeda , who had built a reputation for ruthlessness and efficiency as a provincial governor . Ubico won the election that followed in 1931 , in which he was the only candidate . 
 = = = Dictatorship of Jorge Ubico = = = 
 Ubico had made statements supporting the labor movement when campaigning for the presidency , but after his election his policy quickly became authoritarian . He abolished the system of debt peonage , and replaced it with a vagrancy law , which required all men of working age who did not own land to perform a minimum of 100 days of hard labor . In addition , the state made use of unpaid Indian labor to work on public infrastructure like roads and railroads . Ubico also froze wages at very low levels , and passed a law allowing land @-@ owners complete immunity from prosecution for any action they took to defend their property , an action described by historians as legalizing murder . He greatly strengthened the police force , turning it into one of the most efficient and ruthless in Latin America . The police were given greater authority to shoot and imprison people suspected of breaking the labor laws . The result of these laws was to create tremendous resentment against him among agricultural laborers . Ubico was highly contemptuous of the country 's indigenous people , once stating that they resembled donkeys . 
 Ubico had great admiration for the fascist leaders of Europe , such as Francisco Franco and Benito Mussolini . However , he saw the United States as an ally against the supposed communist threat of Mexico . He made a concerted effort to gain American support ; when the US declared war on Germany and Japan in 1941 , Ubico followed suit , and acting on American instructions arrested all people of German descent in Guatemala . He permitted the US to establish an air base in Guatemala , with the stated aim of protecting the Panama Canal . Like his predecessors , he made large concessions to the United Fruit Company , granting it 200 @,@ 000 hectares ( 490 @,@ 000 acres ) hectares of public land in exchange for a promise to build a port . He later released the company from this obligation as well , citing the economic crisis . Since its entry into Guatemala , the UFC had expanded its land @-@ holdings by displacing the peasantry and converting their farmland into banana plantations . This process accelerated under Ubico , whose government doing nothing to stop it . 
 = = October revolution = = 
 = = = June 1944 general strike = = = 
 The onset of World War II increased economic unrest in Guatemala . Ubico responded by cracking down more fiercely on any form of protest or dissent . In 1944 , popular revolt broke out in neighboring El Salvador , which briefly toppled dictator Maximiliano Hernández Martínez . However , he quickly returned to power , leading to a flood of exiled El Salvadorian revolutionaries moving to Guatemala . This coincided with a series of protests at the university in Guatemala City . Ubico responded by suspending the constitution on 22 June 1944 . The protesters , who by this point included many middle @-@ class members in addition to students and workers , called for a general strike , and presented an ultimatum to Ubico the next day , demanding the reinstatement of the constitution . They also presented him a petition signed by 311 of the most prominent Guatemalan citizens . Ubico sent the police to disrupt the protests by firing on them , and declared martial law . Clashes between protesters and the military continued for a week , during which the revolt gained momentum . At the end of June , Ubico submitted his resignation to the National Assembly , leading to huge celebrations in the streets . 
 The resignation of Ubico did not restore democracy . Ubico appointed three generals , Federico Ponce Vaides , Eduardo <unk> Ariza , and Buenaventura Pineda , to a junta which would lead the provisional government . A few days later , Ponce Vaides persuaded the congress to appoint him interim president . Ponce pledged to hold free elections soon , while at the same time suppressing the protests . Press freedom was suspended , arbitrary detentions continued , and memorial services for slain revolutionaries were prohibited . However , the protests had grown to the point where the government could not stamp them out , and rural areas also began organizing against the dictatorship . The government began using the police to intimidate the indigenous population to keep the junta in power through the forthcoming election . This resulted in growing support for an armed revolution among some sections of the populace . By now , the army was disillusioned with the junta , and progressives within it had begun to plot a coup . 
 = = = Interim presidency of Ponce Vaides = = = 
 On 1 October 1944 , Alejandro Cordova , the editor of El Imparcial , the main opposition newspaper , was assassinated . This led to the military coup plotters reaching out to the leaders of the protests , in an attempt to turn the coup into a popular uprising . Ponce Vaides announced elections , but the pro @-@ democracy forces denounced them as a fraud , citing his attempts to rig them . Ponce Vaides sought to stabilize his regime by playing on inter @-@ racial tension within the Guatemalan population . The most vocal support for the revolution had come from the <unk> , or people of mixed racial descent . Ponce Vaides sought to exploit their fear of the Indians by paying thousands of indigenous peasants to march in Guatemala City in his support , and promising them land if they supported the Liberal party that Ubico had begun as a front for the dictatorship . 
 By mid @-@ October , several different plans to overthrow the junta had been set in motion by various factions of the pro @-@ democracy movement , including teachers , students , and progressive factions of the army . On 19 October , the government learned of one of these conspiracies . That same day , a small group of army officers launched a coup , led by Francisco Javier Arana and Jacobo Árbenz Guzmán . They were joined the next day by other factions of the army and the civilian population . Initially , the battle went against the revolutionaries , but after an appeal for support their ranks were swelled by unionists and students , and they eventually subdued the police and army factions loyal to Ponce Vaides . On October 20 , the next day , Ponce Vaides surrendered unconditionally . 
 Ponce Vaides was allowed to leave the country safely , as was Ubico himself . The military junta was replaced by another three @-@ person junta consisting of Árbenz , Arana , and an upper @-@ class youth named Jorge Toriello , who had played a significant role in the protests . Although Arana had come to the military conspiracy relatively late , his defection had brought the powerful Guardia de Honor ( Honor Guard ) over to the revolutionaries , and for this crucial role he was rewarded with a place on the junta . The junta promised free and open elections to the presidency and the congress , as well as for a constituent assembly . 
 The resignation of Ponce Vaides and the creation of the junta has been considered by scholars to be the beginning of the Guatemalan Revolution . However , the revolutionary junta did not immediately threaten the interests of the landed elite . Two days after Ponce Vaides ' resignation , a violent protest erupted at <unk> , a small Indian hamlet . The junta responded with swift brutality , silencing the protest . The dead civilians included women and children . 
 = = = Election of Arévalo = = = 
 Juan José Arévalo Bermejo was born into a middle @-@ class family in 1904 . He became a primary school teacher for a brief while , and then earned a scholarship to a university in Argentina , where he earned a doctorate in the philosophy of education . He returned to Guatemala in 1934 , and sought a position in the Ministry of Education . However , he was denied the position he wished for , and felt uncomfortable under the dictatorship of Ubico . He left the country and held a faculty position in Argentina until 1944 , when he returned to Guatemala . In July 1944 the Renovación Nacional , the teachers ' party , had been formed , and Arévalo was named its candidate . In an unexpected surge of support , his candidacy was endorsed by many of the leading organizations among the protesters , including the student federation . His lack of connection to the dictatorship and his academic background both worked in his favor among the students and teachers . At the same time , the fact that he had chosen to go into exile in conservative Argentina rather than revolutionary Mexico reassured landowners worried about socialist or communist reform . 
 The subsequent elections took place in December 1944 , and were broadly considered free and fair , although only literate men were given the vote . Unlike in similar historical situations , none of the junta members stood for election . Arévalo 's closest challenger was Adrián Recinos , whose campaign included a number of individuals identified with the Ubico regime . The ballots were tallied on 19 December 1944 , and Arévalo won in a landslide , receiving more than four times as many ballots as the other candidates combined . 
 = = Presidency of Arévalo = = 
 Arévalo took office on 15 March 1945 , inheriting a country with numerous social and economic issues . Despite Ubico 's policy of using unpaid labor to build public roads , internal transport was severely inadequate . 70 % of the population was illiterate , and malnutrition and poor health were widespread . The wealthiest 2 % of landowners owned nearly three quarters of agricultural land , and as a result less than 1 % was cultivated . The indigenous peasants either had no land , or had far too little to sustain themselves . Three quarters of the labor force were in agriculture , and industry was essentially nonexistent . 
 = = = Ideology = = = 
 Arévalo identified his ideology as " spiritual socialism . " He held the belief that the only way to alleviate the backwardness of most Guatemalans was through a paternalistic government . He was strongly opposed to classical Marxism , and believed in a capitalist society that was regulated to ensure that its benefits went to the entire population . Arévalo 's ideology was reflected in the new constitution that the Guatemalan assembly ratified soon after his inauguration , which was one of the most progressive in Latin America . It mandated suffrage for all but illiterate women , a decentralization of power , and provisions for a multiparty system . Communist parties were , however , forbidden . The constitution and Arévalo 's socialist ideology became the basis for much of the reform enacted under Arévalo and ( later ) Jacobo Árbenz . Although the US government would later portray the ideology of the revolution as radical communist , it did not in fact represent a major shift leftward , and was staunchly anti @-@ communist . Arévalo 's economic vision for the country was centered around private enterprise . 
 = = = Labor movement = = = 
 The revolution in 1944 left many of the biggest opponents of organized labor unaffected , such as the landed elite and the United Fruit Company . The revolution , and election of Arévalo , nonetheless marked a significant shift in the fortunes of labor unions . The protests of 1944 strengthened the labor movement to the point where Ponce Vaides stopped enforcing the repressive vagrancy law , which was abolished in the 1945 constitution . On 1 May 1945 , Arévalo made a speech celebrating organized labor , to a tremendously positive reception . The freedom of press guaranteed in the new constitution also drew much attention to the brutal working conditions in Guatemala City . From the beginning , the new unions that were formed fell into two camps , those that were communist and those that were not . The repressive policies of the Ubico government had driven both factions underground , but they re @-@ emerged after the revolution . 
 The communist movement was also strengthened by the release of those of its leaders who had been imprisoned by Ubico . Among them were Miguel Mármol , Víctor Manuel Gutiérrez , and Graciela García , the latter unusual for being a woman in a movement that women were discouraged from participating in . The communists began to organize in the capital , and established a school for workers , known as the Escuela <unk> , or the Clarity School , which taught reading , writing , and also helped organize unions . Six months after the school was established , President Arévalo closed the school down , and deported all the leaders of the movement who were not Guatemalan . However , the communist movement survived , mostly by its dominance of the teacher 's union . 
 Arévalo 's response toward the non @-@ communist unions was mixed . In 1945 , he criminalized all rural labor unions in workplaces with fewer than 500 workers , which included most plantations . One of the few unions big enough to survive this law was of the banana workers employed by the UFC . In 1946 this union organized a strike , which provoked Arévalo into outlawing all strikes until a new labor code was passed . This led to efforts on the part of employers to stall the labor code , as well as to exploit workers as far as possible before it was passed . The unions were also damaged when the US government persuaded the American Federation of Labor to found the Organización Regional Internacional del Trabajo ( <unk> ) , a union that took a virulently anti @-@ communist stance . 
 Despite the powerful opposition , by 1947 the labor unions had managed to organize enough support to force the congress to pass a new labor code . This law was revolutionary in many ways ; it forbade discrimination in salary levels on the basis of " age , race , sex , nationality , religious beliefs , or political affiliation . " It created a set of health and safety standards in the workplace , and standardized an eight @-@ hour working day and a 45 @-@ hour working week , although the congress succumbed to pressure from the plantation lobby and exempted plantations from this provision . The code also required plantation owners to construct primary schools for the children of their workers , and expressed a general commitment to " dignifying " the position of workers . Although many of these provisions were never enforced , the creation of administrative mechanisms for this law in 1948 allowed several of its provisions to be systematically enforced . The law as a whole had a huge positive impact on worker rights in the country , including raising the average wages by a factor of three or more . 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 The Arévalo government attempted to support democratic ideals abroad as well . One of Arévalo 's first actions was to break diplomatic relations with the government of Spain under dictator Francisco Franco . At two inter @-@ American conferences in the year after his election , Arévalo recommended that the republics in Latin America not recognize and support authoritarian regimes . This initiative was defeated by the dictatorships supported by the United States , such as the Somoza regime in Nicaragua . In response , Arévalo broke off diplomatic ties with the Nicaraguan government and with the government of Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic . Frustrated by the lack of results from working with the other Latin American governments , Arévalo began to support the Caribbean Legion , which sought to replace dictatorships with democracies across Latin America , by force if necessary . This led to the administration being labelled as communist by the dictatorial governments in the region . 
 The Arévalo government also floated the idea of a Central American Federation , as being the only way that a democratic government could survive in the region . He approached several leaders of democratic Central American countries , but was rejected by all except Castañeda Castro , the president of El Salvador . The two leaders began talks to build a union , and set up several commissions to look into the issue . In late 1945 they announced the formation of the union , but the formalization of the process got delayed by internal troubles in both countries , and in 1948 the Castro government was toppled in a military coup led by Óscar Osorio . 
 = = = 1949 coup attempt = = = 
 As the highest @-@ ranking military officer in the October Revolution , Francisco Arana had led the three @-@ man junta that formed the interim government after the coup . He was opposed to handing over power to a civilian government , first seeking to postpone the 1944 election , and then to annul it . In return for allowing Arévalo to become president , Arana was granted the newly created position of " chief of the armed forces , " ranked above the minister of defense . The position had a six @-@ year term , and controlled all military appointments . In December 1945 , Arévalo was involved in a motoring accident which left him seriously injured . Fearing a military coup , the leaders of the Revolutionary Action Party ( PAR ) made a pact with Arana , in which the party agreed to support his candidacy in the 1950 elections in return for a promise to refrain from a coup . 
 Arana 's support began to be solicited by the landed elite , who felt threatened by Arévalo 's reforms . Arana , who was not initially inclined to get involved with politics , began to make occasional statements against the government . In the 1948 parliamentary election , he backed a number of opposition candidates , all of whom were defeated . By 1949 the National Renovation Party and the PAR were both openly hostile to Arana , while a small fragment of the Popular Liberation Front split off to support him . The leftist parties decided to back Árbenz instead , as they believed that only a military officer could defeat Arana . 
 On 16 July 1949 , Arana delivered an ultimatum to Arévalo , demanding the expulsion of all of Árbenz ' supporters from the cabinet and the military ; he threatened a coup if his demands were not met . Arévalo informed Árbenz and other progressive leaders of the ultimatum , who all agreed that Arana should be exiled . Two days later , Arévalo and Arana had another meeting ; on the way back , Arana 's convoy was intercepted by a small force led by Árbenz . A shootout ensued , killing three men , including Arana . Arana 's supporters in the military rose up in revolt , but they were leaderless , and by the next day the rebels asked for negotiations . The coup attempt left approximately 150 dead and 200 wounded . Many of Arana 's supporters , including Carlos Castillo Armas , were exiled . The details of the incident were not made public . 
 = = Presidency of Árbenz = = 
 = = = Election = = = 
 Árbenz 's role as defense minister had already made him a strong candidate for the presidency , and his firm support of the government during the 1949 uprising further increased his prestige . In 1950 , the economically moderate Partido de <unk> Nacional ( PIN ) announced that Árbenz would be its presidential candidate in the upcoming election . This announcement was quickly followed by endorsements from most parties on the left , including the influential PAR , as well as from labor unions . Árbenz had only a couple of significant challengers in the election , in a field of ten candidates . One of these was Jorge García Granados , who was supported by some members of the upper @-@ middle class who felt the revolution had gone too far . Another was Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes , who had been a general under Ubico , and who had the support of the hardline opponents of the revolution . During his campaign , Árbenz promised to continue and expand the reforms begun under Arévalo . The election was held on 15 November 1950 , and Árbenz won more than 60 % of the vote , in elections that were free and fair with the exception of the disenfranchisement of illiterate female voters . Árbenz was inaugurated as president on 15 March 1951 . 
 = = = Árbenz ' personal background = = = 
 Árbenz was born in 1913 into a middle @-@ class family of Swiss heritage . In 1935 he had graduated from the Escuela <unk> , Guatemala 's national military academy , with excellent grades , and had subsequently became an officer in the Guatemalan army under Ubico . As an officer , Árbenz himself had been required to escort chain @-@ gangs of prisoners . This process had radicalized him , and he had begun to form links to the labor movement . In 1938 he had met and married María Vilanova , who was also interested in social reform , and who became a significant influence on him and a national figure in her own right . Another strong influence on him was José Manuel Fortuny , a well @-@ known Guatemalan communist , who was one of his main advisers during his government . In 1944 , disgusted with Ubico 's authoritarian regime , he and his fellow officers had begun plotting against the government . When Ubico resigned in 1944 , Árbenz had witnessed Ponce Vaides intimidate the congress into naming him president . Highly offended by this , Árbenz had plotted against Ponce Vaides , and was one of the military leaders of the coup that toppled him , in addition to having been one of the few officers in the revolution who had formed and maintained connections to the popular civilian movement . 
 = = = Agrarian reform = = = 
 The biggest component of Árbenz 's project of modernization was his agrarian reform bill . Árbenz drafted the bill himself with the help of advisers that included some leaders of the communist party as well as non @-@ communist economists . He also sought advice from numerous economists from across Latin America . The bill was passed by the National Assembly on 17 June 1952 , and the program went into effect immediately . The focus of the program was on transferring uncultivated land from large landowners to their poverty stricken laborers , who would then be able to begin a viable farm of their own . Árbenz was also motivated to pass the bill because he needed to generate capital for his public infrastructure projects within the country . At the behest of the United States , the World Bank had refused to grant Guatemala a loan in 1951 , which made the shortage of capital more acute . 
 The official title of the agrarian reform bill was Decree 900 . It expropriated all uncultivated land from landholdings that were larger than 673 acres ( 272 ha ) . If the estates were between 672 acres ( 272 ha ) and 224 acres ( 91 ha ) in size , uncultivated land was expropriated only if less than two @-@ thirds of it was in use . The owners were compensated with government bonds , the value of which was equal to that of the land expropriated . The value of the land itself was the value that the owners had declared in their tax returns in 1952 . The redistribution was organized by local committees that included representatives from the landowners , the laborers , and the government . Of the nearly 350 @,@ 000 private land @-@ holdings , only 1710 were affected by expropriation . The law itself was cast in a moderate capitalist framework ; however , it was implemented with great speed , which resulted in occasional arbitrary land seizures . There was also some violence , directed at land @-@ owners , as well as at peasants that had minor landholdings of their own . 
 By June 1954 , 1 @.@ 4 million acres of land had been expropriated and distributed . Approximately 500 @,@ 000 individuals , or one @-@ sixth of the population , had received land by this point . The decree also included provision of financial credit to the people who received the land . The National Agrarian Bank ( Banco Nacional Agrario , or BNA ) was created on 7 July 1953 , and by June 1951 it had disbursed more than $ 9 million in small loans . 53 @,@ 829 applicants received an average of 225 US dollars , which was twice as much as the Guatemalan per capita income . The BNA developed a reputation for being a highly efficient government bureaucracy , and the United States government , Árbenz 's biggest detractor , did not have anything negative to say about it . The loans had a high repayment rate , and of the $ 3 @,@ 371 @,@ 185 handed out between March and November 1953 , $ 3 @,@ 049 @,@ 092 had been repaid by June 1954 . The law also included provisions for nationalization of roads that passed through redistributed land , which greatly increased the connectivity of rural communities . 
 Contrary to the predictions made by the detractors of the government , the law resulted in a slight increase in Guatemalan agricultural productivity , and to an increase in cultivated area . Purchases of farm machinery also increased . Overall , the law resulted in a significant improvement in living standards for many thousands of peasant families , the majority of whom were indigenous people . Historian Piero Gleijeses stated that the injustices corrected by the law were far greater than the injustice of the relatively few arbitrary land seizures . Historian Greg Grandin stated that the law was flawed in many respects ; among other things , it was too cautious and deferential to the planters , and it created communal divisions among peasants . Nonetheless , it represented a fundamental power shift in favor of those that had been marginalized before then . 
 = = United Fruit Company = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 The United Fruit Company had been formed in 1899 by the merger of two large American corporations . The new company had major holdings of land and railroads across Central America , which it used to support its business of exporting bananas . In 1900 it was already the world 's largest exporter of bananas . By 1930 it had an operating capital of 215 million US dollars , and had been the largest landowner and employer in Guatemala for several years . Under Manuel Estrada Cabrera and other Guatemalan presidents , the company obtained a series of concessions in the country that allowed it to massively expand its business . These concessions frequently came at the cost of tax revenue for the Guatemalan government . The company supported Jorge Ubico in the leadership struggle that occurred from 1930 to 1932 , and upon assuming power , Ubico expressed willingness to create a new contract with it . This new contract was immensely favorable to the company . It included a 99 @-@ year lease to massive tracts of land , exemptions from virtually all taxes , and a guarantee that no other company would receive any competing contract . Under Ubico , the company paid virtually no taxes , which hurt the Guatemalan government 's ability to deal with the effects of the Great Depression . Ubico asked the company to pay its workers only 50 cents a day , to prevent other workers from demanding higher wages . The company also virtually owned Puerto Barrios , Guatemala 's only port to the Atlantic ocean , allowing the company to make profits from the flow of goods through the port . By 1950 , the company 's annual profits were 65 million US dollars , twice the revenue of the Guatemalan government . 
 = = = Impact of the revolution = = = 
 Due to its long association with Ubico 's government , the United Fruit Company ( UFC ) was seen as an impediment to progress by Guatemalan revolutionaries after 1944 . This image was worsened by the company 's discriminatory policies towards its colored workers . Thanks to its position as the country 's largest landowner and employer , the reforms of Arévalo 's government affected the UFC more than other companies . Among other things , the labor code passed by the government allowed its workers to strike when their demands for higher wages and job security were not met . The company saw itself as being specifically targeted by the reforms , and refused to negotiate with the numerous sets of strikers , despite frequently being in violation of the new laws . The company 's labor troubles were compounded in 1952 when Jacobo Árbenz passed Decree 900 , the agrarian reform law . Of the 550 @,@ 000 acres ( 220 @,@ 000 ha ) that the company owned , 15 % were being cultivated ; the rest of the land , which was idle , came under the scope of the agrarian reform law . 
 = = = Lobbying efforts = = = 
 The United Fruit Company responded with intensive lobbying of members of the United States government , leading many US congressmen and senators to criticize the Guatemalan government for not protecting the interests of the company . The Guatemalan government responded by saying that the company was the main obstacle to progress in the country . American historians observed that " To the Guatemalans it appeared that their country was being mercilessly exploited by foreign interests which took huge profits without making any contributions to the nation 's welfare . " In 1953 , 200 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 @,@ 000 ha ) of uncultivated land was expropriated by the government , which offered the company compensation at the rate of 2 @.@ 99 US dollars to the acre , twice what the company had paid when it bought the property . More expropriation occurred soon after , bringing the total to over 400 @,@ 000 acres ( 160 @,@ 000 ha ) ; the government offered compensation to the company at the rate at which the UFC had valued its own property for tax purposes . This resulted in further lobbying in Washington , particularly through Secretary of State John Foster Dulles , who had close ties to the company . The company had begun a public relations campaign to discredit the Guatemalan government ; it hired public relations expert Edward Bernays , who ran a concerted effort to portray the company as the victim of the Guatemalan government for several years . The company stepped up its efforts after Dwight Eisenhower had been elected in 1952 . These included commissioning a research study on Guatemala from a firm known to be hawkish , which produced a 235 @-@ page report that was highly critical of the Guatemalan government . Historians have stated that the report was full of " exaggerations , scurrilous descriptions and bizarre historical theories . " The report nonetheless had a significant impact on the Congressmen that it was sent to . Overall , the company spent over a half @-@ million dollars to influence both lawmakers and members of the public in the US that the Guatemalan government needed to be overthrown . 
 = = CIA instigated coup d 'état = = 
 = = = Political motivations = = = 
 In addition to the lobbying of the United Fruit Company , several other factors also led the United States to launch the coup that toppled Árbenz in 1954 . During the years of the Guatemalan Revolution , military coups occurred in several other Central American countries that brought firmly anti @-@ communist governments to power . Army officer Major Oscar Osorio won staged elections in El Salvador in 1950 , Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista took power in 1952 . Honduras , where the land @-@ holdings of the United Fruit Company were the most extensive , had been ruled by an anti @-@ communist government sympathetic to the United States since 1932 . These developments created tension between the other governments and Árbenz , which was exacerbated by Arévalo 's support for the Caribbean Legion . This support also worried the United States and the newly formed Central Intelligence Agency . According to US historian Richard <unk> , during the beginning of the Cold War , the US and the CIA tended to assume that everybody who opposed it was a communist . Thus , despite Arévalo 's ban of the communist party , important figures in the US government were already predisposed to believe that the revolutionary government had been infiltrated by communists , and was a danger to the US . During the years of the revolution , several reports and memoranda were circulated amongst US government agencies that furthered this belief . 
 = = = Operation PBFORTUNE = = = 
 Although the administration of Harry Truman had become convinced that the Guatemalan government had been penetrated by communists , it relied on purely diplomatic and economic means to try and reduce the communist influence , at least until the end of its term . The United States had refused to sell arms to the Guatemalan government after 1944 ; in 1951 it began to block weapons purchases by Guatemala from other countries . In 1952 Truman became sufficiently convinced of the threat posed by Árbenz to start planning a covert overthrow , titled Operation PBFORTUNE . The plan had originally been suggested by the US supported dictator of Nicaragua , Anastasio Somoza García , who said that if he were given weapons , he could overthrow the Guatemalan government . Truman gave the CIA permission to go ahead with the plan , without informing the state department . The CIA placed a shipment of weapons on a vessel owned by the United Fruit Company , and the operation was paid for by Rafael Trujillo and Marcos Pérez Jiménez , the right @-@ wing anti @-@ communist dictators of the Dominican Republic and Venezuela , respectively . The operation was to be led by Carlos Castillo Armas . However , the US state department discovered the conspiracy , and secretary of state Dean Acheson persuaded Truman to abort the plan . 
 = = = Operation PBSUCCESS = = = 
 In November 1952 , Dwight Eisenhower was elected president of the US . Eisenhower 's campaign had included a pledge for a more active anti @-@ communist policy . Several figures in his administration , including Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and his brother and CIA director Allen Dulles had close ties to the United Fruit Company . Both of these factors made Eisenhower predisposed to supporting the overthrow of Árbenz . 
 The CIA operation to overthrow Jacobo Árbenz , code @-@ named Operation PBSUCCESS , was authorized by Eisenhower in August 1953 . The operation was granted a budget of 2 @.@ 7 million dollars for " <unk> warfare and political action . " The total budget has been estimated at between 5 and 7 million dollars , and the planning employed over 100 CIA agents . The CIA planning included drawing up lists of people within Árbenz ' government to be assassinated if the coup were to be carried out . Manuals of assassination techniques were compiled , and lists were also made of people whom the junta would dispose of . After considering several candidates to lead the coup , including Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes , the CIA settled on Carlos Castillo Armas . The US state department also embarked on a campaign to ensure that other countries would not sympathize with the Guatemalan government , by linking it to communism and the Soviet Union . By 1954 Árbenz had become desperate for weapons , and decided to acquire them secretly from Czechoslovakia , which would have been the first time that a Soviet bloc country shipped weapons to the Americas . The shipment of these weapons acted as the final spur for the CIA to launch its coup . 
 = = = Invasion = = = 
 On 18 June 1954 , Castillo Armas led a convoy of trucks carrying 480 men across the border from Honduras into Guatemala . The weapons had come from the CIA , which had also trained the men in camps in Nicaragua and Honduras . Since his army was badly outnumbered by the Guatemalan army , the CIA plan required Castillo Armas to camp within the Guatemalan border , while it mounted a psychological campaign to convince the Guatemalan people and government that Armas ' victory was a fait accompli . This campaign included using Catholic priests to give anti @-@ communist sermons , strafing several towns using CIA aircraft , and placing a naval blockade around the country . It also involved dropping leaflets by airplane through the country , and carrying out a radio broadcast entitled " The Voice of Liberation " which announced that Guatemalan exiles led by Castillo Armas were shortly about to liberate the country . 
 The military force led by Castillo Armas attempted to make forays towards the towns of Zacapa and Puerto Barrios ; however , these were beaten back by the Guatemalan army . The propaganda broadcast by the CIA had far more effect ; it succeeded in leading a Guatemalan pilot to defect , which led to Árbenz grounding the entire air force , fearing its defection . The CIA also used its planes , flown by American pilots , to bomb Guatemalan towns for psychological effect . When the old planes used by the invasion force were found to be inadequate , the CIA persuaded Eisenhower to authorize the use of two additional planes . Guatemala made an appeal to the United Nations , but the US vetoed an investigation into the incident by the Security Council , stating that it was an internal matter in Guatemala . On 25 June , a CIA plane bombed Guatemala City , destroying the government 's main oil reserves . Frightened by this , Árbenz ordered the army to distribute weapons to local peasants and workers . The army refused to do this , instead demanding that Árbenz either resign or come to terms with Castillo Armas . 
 Knowing that he could not fight on without the support of the army , Jacobo Árbenz resigned on 27 June 1954 , handing over power to Colonel Carlos Enrique Diaz . US ambassador John Peurifoy then mediated negotiations held in El Salvador between the army leadership and Castillo Armas which led to Armas being included in the ruling military junta on 7 July 1954 , and was named provisional president a few days later . The US recognized the new government on 13 July . Elections were held in early October , from which all political parties were barred from participating , and Castillo Armas was the only candidate , winning the election with 99 % of the vote . Among the outcomes of the meeting in El Salvador was a planned new constitution , which would rollback most of the progressive reform brought by the revolution . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Following the coup , hundreds of peasant leaders were rounded up and executed . Historian Greg Grandin has stated that " There is general consensus today among academics and Guatemalan intellectuals that 1954 signaled the beginning of what would become the most repressive state in the hemisphere — a state responsible for the torture and murder of two hundred thousand of its citizens . " Following the coup and the establishment of the military dictatorship , a series of leftist insurgencies began in the countryside , frequently with a large degree of popular support , which triggered the Guatemalan Civil War that lasted until 1996 . The largest of these movements was led by the Guerrilla Army of the Poor , which at its largest point had 270 @,@ 000 members . 200 @,@ 000 civilians were killed in the war , and numerous human rights violations committed , including massacres of civilian populations , rape , aerial bombardment , and forced disappearances . Historians estimate that 93 % of these violations were committed by the United States @-@ backed military , which included a genocidal scorched @-@ earth campaign against the indigenous Maya population in the 1980s . 
 = Black Lab = 
 Black Lab is an alternative rock band founded in Berkeley , California and currently based in Los Angeles and Montana . 
 They released one album on Geffen Records , entitled Your Body Above Me , and scored two rock radio hits in the US , " Wash It Away " in 1997 and " Time Ago " in 1998 . After leaving Geffen in 1999 , the band signed to Epic Records , but did not release any material , and left the label after two years . 
 The band is now unsigned . They have independently released an EP and three full @-@ length albums since 2003 , the latest being Two Strangers released in October 2010 . Passion Leaves a Trace , released in 2007 , featured the single " Mine Again " and gained significant exposure through internet media outlets . Paul Durham and Andy Ellis are currently the core members , with Isaac Carpenter and Brian <unk> accompanying in the studio . The band works with Secret Road Music Services and Paul Durham 's licensing company , Snap Music Licensing , to make the band 's available for licensing . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Your Body Above Me ( 1995 @-@ 1999 ) = = = 
 Twin Falls , Idaho native Paul Durham 's singing career began when he was offered a spot singing in a local youth choir . After graduating from Oberlin College , Durham supported himself as a substitute teacher in the San Francisco Bay Area while fronting his acoustic band , Durham . Durham did not have any official releases , but some of their recorded material was released in 2004 as part of Paul Durham 's solo album Ten Million Years . Paul Durham disbanded this band in 1995 , signed to Geffen Records in 1996 after attracting attention from a number of labels , and hired bassist Geoff Stanfield , guitarist Michael Belfer and drummer Bryan Head to form Black Lab . The name is an amalgamation of two of the band 's influences , Black Sabbath and Stereolab . 
 Their debut album , Your Body Above Me , co @-@ produced by David Bianco and the band , was released on October 21 , 1997 in the United States . Two singles from the album charted in the U.S. , the power ballad " Time Ago " and the alternative rock hit " Wash It Away " ; the album also featured the PJ Harvey @-@ penned " All the Money in the World " . The LP peaked on Billboard 's Heatseekers charts at No. 19 in 1998 , and sales of the album eventually topped 120 @,@ 000 . Reviews of Your Body Above Me noted the album 's dark , melodic modern rock sound , and were mixed but generally positive . The Washington Post called Your Body Above Me " moodily sumptuous " , Guitar Player described the music as having " drama and rhythmic urgency " , and Allmusic noted the album 's " brooding yet propulsive sound that 's actually quite intriguing " . The band subsequently toured with Days of the New , Cracker , and Our Lady Peace , and were called " The American U2 " by the San Francisco Chronicle . Black Lab songs were featured on soundtracks to Can 't Hardly Wait , Varsity Blues , Permanent Midnight , and Buffy the Vampire Slayer , and the song " Wash It Away " was also included on a charity album , Live in the X Lounge . Just as momentum was building on their debut , however , Geffen went out of business after being subsumed by Universal ; dissatisfied with the new label arrangement , Durham moved to Los Angeles , and the band broke up in 1999 . 
 = = = See the Sun ( 2000 @-@ 2005 ) = = = 
 In 2000 , Paul Durham re @-@ formed Black Lab with an alternate lineup after Epic Records expressed an interest in releasing a second album from the band . The band was quiet until 2002 , which saw the release of " Learn to Crawl " on the Spider @-@ Man soundtrack , with a band consisting of Paul Durham , Andy Ellis , bassist Eve Hill and drummer Scotty Coogan . The electronic @-@ flavored result was described as " tightly spun , highly melodic rock " by Rolling Stone . 
 After a series of delays , Black Lab asked to be released from Epic ; legal problems with the record label ensued , but the band won the rights to the master recordings of the material they had been working on . While searching for a new label , the band self @-@ released a six @-@ song EP in 2003 , first online and then on CD , which featured " Learn to Crawl " and the single " See the Sun " . However , the planned second full @-@ length , called See the Sun , wouldn 't see light until 2005 , after the band decided on an independent release . See the Sun did not receive any mainstream press coverage , but online reviews noted the band 's turn toward increasing use of keyboards and synthesizers to introduce and underlay tracks , describing it as " startling , but in a good way " . The band benefited heavily from promotion from online rock site Alternative Addiction , who included the track " Lonely Boy " on one of its compilations , regularly reports on the band 's music , and places them in heavy rotation on its internet radio station . 
 After leaving the major labels , Black Lab essentially ceased touring , fearing that a self @-@ booked and promoted national tour would not be cost @-@ effective . They maintained a relationship with fans via their website and MP3 of the Month Club , through which users were able to subscribe to monthly tracks of new content , such as soundtrack songs , unreleased works , and insights into the band 's songwriting process . 
 = = = Passion Leaves a Trace and other projects ( 2006 @-@ 2009 ) = = = 
 Early in 2006 , Durham and a few of his old friends reacquainted to record as a side project , called Cake or Death . This band , featuring Kristin Kelly , Joshua Leavitt and <unk> <unk> , have recorded one full @-@ length self @-@ titled LP . At the end of October 2006 , Paul also announced that a special " Director 's Cut " edition of Your Body Above Me was being released . The rerelease contained two songs originally recorded for the album , extended cuts of several songs , new liner notes and photos . A third Black Lab album , entitled Passion Leaves a Trace , was released on January 16 , 2007 . The track " This Night " was featured on the promotional advertisement for the sixth series of The Shield ; tracks from this album were also featured in CBS 's Numb3rs , ABC 's 6 Degrees and the films The <unk> and <unk> . The song was also featured in the television series House M.D. in season 7 episode 16 , and the Season 2 finale of Cinemax 's Banshee ( TV series ) . 
 The band attracted media attention in March 2007 through the campaign " Bum Rush the Charts " , in which one of their songs was promoted through podcasting and blogging . The aim of this was to harness independent media and music to promote unsigned bands and to raise money for a scholarship fund . As a result of this effort , on March 22 , 2007 , the single " Mine Again " was purchased over 14 @,@ 000 times in the United States . The iTunes charts represent a weekly average of purchases , not just “ a snapshot of the previous 24 hours ’ worth of sales , ” as a spokesman for Apple reported in a Washington Post story about the campaign . “ Mine Again , ” however , still cracked the top 100 songs on the U.S. chart at No. 99 , and peaked at No. 11 on the U.S. rock chart . The campaign had a significant international impact , selling songs in every country in which iTunes has stores and pushing " Mine Again " to No. 53 on the Canadian chart ( # 10 rock ) , No. 15 in the Netherlands ( # 2 rock ) , and No. 73 in Germany ( # 12 rock ) , among others . The song broached the iTunes rock charts in eleven additional countries as well . Songs from the album also became popular on the PMC Top10 podcast , with three of them reaching the site 's year @-@ end Top 10 : " Mine Again " ( # 8 ) , " Broken Heart " ( # 6 ) , and " Hole in My Heart " ( # 5 ) . 
 In June 2007 , Black Lab released its second album of the year , Technologie . It is described as an album of electronica , techno @-@ rock and remixes . It features remixes of previously released songs , several songs released on movie soundtracks and brand new material , including the band 's cover of the Transformers theme song . 
 In 2009 , the band released Give Us Sugar , a compilation of assorted rarities from throughout their career including non @-@ LP b @-@ sides and songs previously exclusive to movie soundtracks . It was intended to be released as a limited edition of only 250 autographed copies , but the number of pre @-@ orders far surpassed that limit , forcing the band to change the publishing and distribution approach . 
 = = = Two Strangers and A Raven Has My Heart ( 2010 @-@ present ) = = = 
 On October 19 , Black Lab released Two Strangers . Two Strangers introduces orchestrations and pianos by Jonathan Grand on several tracks , cello by Zach <unk> and Banjo by Paul <unk> , on track 11 . 
 In November 2011 , Black Lab released their first acoustic album which features unplugged versions of 13 previously released Black Lab songs , as well as 3 new songs . 
 In April 2014 , Black Lab released A Raven Has My Heart . This is the first Black Lab album to be crowd @-@ funded on Kickstarter . The funding was successful , and resulted in live performances in Los Angeles and New York City in August 2014 . 
 = = Members = = 
 Current members 
 Paul Durham – lead vocals , guitar , Pro Tools ( 1995 – present ) 
 Andy Ellis – guitar , keyboards , programming ( 2000 – present ) 
 Brian <unk> - bass , guitar , programming ( 2007 – present ) 
 Isaac Carpenter - drums , percussion ( 2007 – present ) 
 Past members 
 Michael Belfer – guitar ( 1996 – 1999 ) 
 Geoff Stanfield – bass guitar ( 1996 – 1999 ) 
 Bryan Head – drums , percussion ( 1997 – 1999 ) 
 Eve Hill – bass guitar ( 2000 – 2003 ) 
 Scotty Coogan – drums , percussion ( 2000 – 2003 ) 
 Michael Urbano – drums , percussion ( 1996 – 1997 ) 
 Josh Freese - drums , percussion ( 1999 ) ( Recorded only 3 songs with the band , one of which was released on Give Us Sugar ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Your Body Above Me ( Geffen , October 21 , 1997 ) 
 See the Sun ( Self @-@ released , June 2005 ) 
 Passion Leaves a Trace ( Self @-@ released , January 16 , 2007 ) 
 Two Strangers ( Self @-@ released , October 2010 ) 
 A Raven Has My Heart ( Self @-@ released , April 2014 ) 
 = = Photos = = 
 = Kenneth Walker = 
 Brigadier General Kenneth Newton Walker ( 17 July 1898 – 5 January 1943 ) was a United States Army aviator and a United States Army Air Forces general who exerted a significant influence on the development of airpower doctrine . He posthumously received the Medal of Honor in World War II . 
 Walker joined the United States Army in 1917 , after the American entry into World War I. He trained as an aviator and became a flying instructor . In 1920 , after the end of the war , he received a commission in the Regular Army . After service in various capacities , Walker graduated from the Air Corps Tactical School in 1929 , and then served as an instructor there . He supported the creation of a separate air organization that is not subordinate to other military branches . He was a forceful advocate of the efficacy of strategic bombardment , publishing articles on the subject and becoming part of a clique known as the " Bomber Mafia " that argued for the primacy of bombardment over other forms of military aviation . He advanced the notion that fighters could not prevent a bombing attack . He participated in the Air Corps Tactical School 's development of the doctrine of industrial web theory , which called for precision attacks against carefully selected critical industrial targets . Shortly before the United States entered World War II , Walker became one of four officers assigned to the Air War Plans Division , which was tasked with developing a production requirements plan for the war in the air . Together , these officers devised the AWPD @-@ 1 plan , a blueprint for the imminent air war against Germany that called for the creation of an enormous air force to win the war through strategic bombardment . 
 In 1942 , Walker was promoted to brigadier general and transferred to the Southwest Pacific , where he became Commanding General , V Bomber Command , Fifth Air Force . The Southwest Pacific contained few strategic targets , relegating the bombers to the role of interdicting supply lines and supporting the ground forces . This resulted in a doctrinal clash between Walker and Lieutenant General George C. Kenney , an attack aviator , over the proper method of employing bombers . Walker frequently flew combat missions over New Guinea , for which he received the Silver Star . On 5 January 1943 , he was shot down and killed leading a daylight bombing raid over Rabaul , for which he was awarded the Medal of Honor . 
 = = Early life and World War I = = 
 Walker was born in Los Cerrillos , New Mexico , on 17 July 1898 to Wallace Walker and his wife Emma née <unk> . The family subsequently moved to Denver , Colorado . Kenneth 's father left when he was young , and Emma became a single mother . Kenneth began his education at the Maria Mitchell School in Denver , Colorado , from 1905 to 1908 , and then attended the Columbian School there from 1908 to 1912 . He went to Central High School for a time until 1913 when he started at the Omaha High School of Commerce , from which he graduated in 1915 . From January to June 1917 he took a course at the YMCA Night School in Denver . He then studied business administration at La Salle Extension University . 
 Walker enlisted in the United States Army in Denver , on 15 December 1917 . He received flight training at the University of California 's School of Military Aeronautics and at the pilot training base at Mather Field , near Sacramento , California . He was awarded his Aircrew Badge and commissioned as a temporary second lieutenant in the United States Army Air Service on 2 November 1918 . He then attended the Flying Instructor 's School at Brooks Field in San Antonio , Texas , and became an instructor at the flight training center at Barron Field . In March 1919 , he was posted to Fort Sill as an instructor at the Air Service Flying School . During 1918 , the School for Aerial Observers and the Air Service Flying School were built at nearby Post Field , where Walker spent the next four years as a pilot , instructor , supply officer , and post adjutant . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Walker became one of many officers holding wartime commissions to receive a commission in the Regular Army , into which he was commissioned as a first lieutenant on 1 July 1920 , but was subsequently reduced in rank to second lieutenant on 15 December 1922 , another common occurrence in the aftermath of World War I when the wartime army was demobilized . Already a command pilot , he also qualified as a combat observer in 1922 . He was promoted to first lieutenant again on 24 July 1924 . 
 Walker courted Marguerite Potter , a sorority member and sociology graduate at the Norman campus of the University of Oklahoma . The two were married in September 1922 . In lieu of a honeymoon , they boarded a troop transport to the Philippines on 12 December 1922 . Walker initially became Commander of the Air Intelligence Section at Camp Nichols . He was then posted to the Philippine Air Depot , where he served at various times as property officer , supply officer , adjutant , and depot inspector , before ultimately being assigned to the 28th Bombardment Squadron in 1924 . In August 1923 he crashed an Airco DH.4 on take off but walked away unhurt . The Walkers had two sons , Kenneth Jr . , born in February 1927 , and Douglas , born in January 1933 . 
 Walker returned to the United States in February 1925 and was posted to Langley Field , where he became a member of the Air Service Board . He served successively as adjutant of the 59th Service Squadron , commander of the 11th Bombardment Squadron , and operations officer of the 2nd Bomb Group there . In June 1929 he graduated from the Air Corps Tactical School , where he studied under Captain Robert Olds , a former aide to air power pioneer Billy Mitchell and a passionate advocate of strategic bombing . He then served at the Air Corps Tactical School as an instructor under Captain Olds in the Bombardment Section until July 1933 , both at Langley and at Maxwell Field , where the school was relocated in 1931 . Walker became part of a small clique of Air Corps Tactical School instructors that became known as the " Bomber Mafia " , that argued that bombardment was the most important form of airpower . Its members also included Haywood Hansell , Donald Wilson , Harold L. George , and Robert M. Webster , Their influence was such that , during their tenure , bombardment achieved primacy over pursuit in the development of Air Corps doctrine . 
 One of Walker 's tasks was to rewrite the bombardment text . He felt it was flawed because it failed to drive home what he saw as the most important fact , that " bombardment aviation is the basic arm of the air force " . Following the views of air power theorists Billy Mitchell , Hugh Trenchard , and Giulio Douhet , Walker enunciated two fundamental principles : that bombardment would take the form of daylight precision bombing ; and that it should be directed against critical industrial targets . In his article " Driving Home the Bombardment Attack " , published in the Coast Artillery Journal in October 1930 , he argued that fighters could not prevent a bombing attack and that " the most efficacious method of stopping a bombardment attack would appear to be an offensive against the bombardment airdrome . " The Bomber Mafia argued that bombers flew too high and too fast to be intercepted by fighters , that even if they were intercepted , the bombers had enough firepower to drive off their attackers , and enough armor and resilience to absorb any damage their attackers might attempt to inflict . The Air Corps Tactical School developed a doctrine that became known as industrial web theory , which called for precision attacks against carefully selected critical industrial targets . Walker drove home his belief in bombardment with a famous dictum from his lectures : " A well @-@ organized , well @-@ planned , and well @-@ flown air force attack will constitute an offensive that can not be stopped . " 
 Walker published another professional article in 1933 , entitled " Bombardment Aviation : Bulwark of National Defense " . " Whenever we speak in terms of ' air force ' we are thinking of bombardment aviation , " he wrote , dismissing other forms of aviation . This was orthodox at the Air Corps Tactical School , which taught that " every dollar which goes into the building of auxiliary aviation and special types , which types are not essential for the efficient functioning of the striking force can only occur at the expense of that air force 's offensive power . " Walker 's major thesis was that " a determined air attack , once launched , is most difficult , if not impossible to stop when directed against land objectives . " At the conclusion of his article , he renewed his call for the creation of an independent air force " as a force with a distinct mission , of importance co @-@ equal to that of the Army and the Navy . " Walker 's persistent advocacy of strategic bombing led to frequent clashes with Captain Claire Chennault , who led instruction in pursuit aviation at the Air Corps Tactical School from 1931 to 1936 . Chennault believed that the right mix of fighters and ground defenses could successfully defeat a bomber assault and ridiculed Walker for suggesting that bombers could not be stopped , leading to " legendary " debates between the two . 
 In November 1934 , Walker , now a student at the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , testified with Robert Olds , Claire Chennault , Donald Wilson , Harold George and Robert Webster on the military aspects of aviation before the Howell Commission on Federal Aviation . All were current or former instructors at the Air Corps Tactical School , and all except Chennault were part of the Bomber Mafia . They argued for an independent air force , in contradiction to Army doctrine . Walker told the commission : " unless we create an adequate and separate Air Force , this next war ' will begin in the air and end in the mud ' -in the mud and debris of the demolished industries that have brought us to our knees . " They were unable to persuade the commission to recommend an independent air force , although it did agree that the Air Corps should be granted greater autonomy within the Army . The commission concluded that " there is ample reason to believe that aircraft have now passed far beyond their former position as useful auxiliaries ... An adequate striking force for use against objectives both near and remote is a necessity for a modern army " . 
 The appearance in 1935 of the Boeing B @-@ 17 bomber gave the bombardment advocates the weapon they had long dreamt of . Not only could it carry an impressive bomb load of 2 @,@ 500 pounds ( 1 @,@ 100 kg ) of bombs for 2 @,@ 260 miles ( 3 @,@ 640 km ) or 5 @,@ 000 pounds ( 2 @,@ 300 kg ) for 1 @,@ 700 miles ( 2 @,@ 700 km ) , but its top speed of 250 miles per hour ( 400 km / h ) was faster than that of the contemporary P @-@ 26 fighter . Its high speed also led the bombardment advocates to downplay the danger posed by antiaircraft fire . 
 Walker 's marriage ended in divorce in 1934 , after he had an affair . He remarried and had a son named John , but his second marriage also ended in divorce . Walker graduated from the Command and General Staff School in June 1935 and was posted to Hamilton Field , first as Intelligence and Operations Officer of the 7th Bombardment Group , and then as commander of the 9th Bombardment Squadron . While landing a Martin B @-@ 12 bomber , he overshot the runway . The station commander , Brigadier General Henry Arnold reported that Walker , " supposed to be one of our best pilots , apparently cuts out completely , uses up 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) and finally hits a concrete block and spoils a perfectly good airplane when he normally would have given her the gun and gone around again . " After fifteen years in the rank , jokes circulated about his being the most senior first lieutenant in the Air Corps , but he was finally promoted to captain on 1 August 1935 . He was temporary major from 20 October 1935 to 16 June 1936 , and again on 4 October 1938 , before the rank finally became substantive on 1 July 1940 . He had another accident in 1937 , when he crashed a B @-@ 17 on take off from Denver Municipal Airport but this time his flying skills were credited with saving the entire crew of nine from injury . 
 In 1938 Walker began a three @-@ year tour in Hawaii , where he was operations officer of the 5th Bombardment Group at Luke Field , executive officer at Hickam Field , and then commander of the 18th Pursuit Group at Wheeler Field . Commanding a pursuit group involved a considerable change of pace for a man whose career thus far had been spent in bombers . His adjutant , First Lieutenant Bruce K. Holloway felt that Walker never demonstrated the " emotional exhilaration toward flying a high performance machine that is so typical of fighter pilots . " Nor did he warm to the Curtiss P @-@ 36 Hawk fighter , especially after a near @-@ fatal accident . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Air War Plans Division = = = 
 Walker returned to the United States in January 1941 and joined the Air War Plans Division in the Office of the Chief of the United States Army Air Corps in Washington , D.C. , as an assistant chief of staff . Brigadier General Carl Andrew Spaatz was head of the division . Lieutenant Colonels Olds and Muir S. Fairchild , old colleagues of Walker 's from the Air Corps Tactical School , were two of Spaatz ' assistants . Walker was promoted to temporary lieutenant colonel on 15 July 1941 . In the June 1941 reorganization of the Air Corps , Spaatz became chief of staff to the Commanding General , United States Army Air Forces , Major General Henry H. Arnold , who appointed Colonel Harold L. George , a former student of Walker at the Air Corps Tactical School from 1931 to 1932 , to replace Spaatz as head of the Air War Plans Division . Walker joined George 's planning team , along with Majors Haywood S. Hansell and Laurence S. Kuter . All were former instructors at the Air Corps Tactical School and members of the " Bomber Mafia " . 
 The Air War Plans Division was tasked with developing a production requirements plan for President Franklin D. Roosevelt , who wanted it by 10 September 1941 . In just nine days in August 1941 , George , Olds , Fairchild , Walker , Kuter and Hansell drafted the AWPD @-@ 1 plan for a war against Germany . Reflecting their belief in bombardment as the principal form of aviation , the plan was based upon the number of bombers that they estimated would be required to knock out Germany 's key industries – electric power , transportation and petroleum . In order to neutralize anticipated opposition from the German Air Force , they planned for bombing aircraft factories and the sources of the light metals needed for aircraft production . These targets were collated along with the estimated tonnage of bombs required to destroy them . 
 The plan called for a bomber force of 98 medium , heavy and very heavy bomber groups , totaling 6 @,@ 834 aircraft . Sixteen fighter groups would defend the bombers ' bases . Should this bomber force prove insufficient to defeat Germany without a major land offensive , provision was made for a tactical air force of 13 light bomber groups , two photo reconnaissance groups , five fighter groups , 108 observation squadrons and 19 transport groups . In retrospect , this part of the plan represented a considerable underestimate . The plan required 2 @,@ 164 @,@ 916 personnel , including 103 @,@ 482 pilots . At the moment though , the United States had , as General Arnold put it , " plans but not planes " . Due to poor security , verbatim extracts of AWPD @-@ 1 were published in the Chicago Tribune and other newspapers on 4 December . 
 The war in Europe had cast grave doubt on the Air Corps ' doctrine that fighters could not shoot down bombers and the bomber will always get through . In the Battle of Britain the British Royal Air Force had demonstrated that it could shoot down bombers , while its own bomber force had suffered such heavy losses over Germany that it had abandoned daylight bombing in favor of night raids . Nonetheless , the planners held firm in their belief that , since American bombers were better armed and armored than their British or German counterparts , the bombers would get through , even in daylight , and that enemy fighter strength could be destroyed on the ground by bombing airbases and factories . " Each of us , " Kuter wrote years later , " scoffed at the idea that fighters would be needed to protect bombers , to enable bombers to reach their objective . In preparing AWPD @-@ l , we stayed in that rut . " Walker was promoted to colonel on 1 February 1942 . 
 In April 1942 Walker joined the Operations Division ( OPD ) of the War Department General Staff as executive officer of Brigadier General St. Clair Streett 's Theater Group . He co @-@ authored a memorandum with Brigadier General Dwight Eisenhower in which they advanced the position that the determinations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff " must be taken as authoritative unless and until modified by the same or higher authority . " After his death , Walker was awarded the Legion of Merit in recognition of his contributions as a staff officer at OPD . 
 = = = Papuan Campaign = = = 
 Walker was promoted to brigadier general on 17 June 1942 and was transferred to the Southwest Pacific Area , flying to Australia in the company of Brigadier General Ennis Whitehead , another newly promoted brigadier general . The commander of Allied Air Forces there , Lieutenant General George Brett , aware that he would soon be replaced , sent the two newcomers on an inspection trip . Walker learned a great deal . He joined three combat missions over New Guinea , experiencing for himself the difficulties that his aircrews faced . He also experienced an air raid in Port Moresby . For this , Walker was awarded the Silver Star . His citation read : 
 For gallantry in action over Port Moresby , New Guinea , during July 1942 . This Officer took part in four different missions over enemy territory , each time being subjected to heavy enemy fire from anti @-@ aircraft and fighter planes . The large amount of firsthand information gained by General Walker has proved of inestimable value in the performance of his duties . His complete disregard for personal safety , above and beyond the call of duty , has proved highly stimulating to the morale of all Air Force personnel with whom he has come in contact . Such courage and gallantry are in keeping with the finest American traditions and are worthy of the highest commendation . 
 Brett 's replacement , Major General George Kenney , arrived in the theater in August , and Walker was appointed Commanding General , V Bomber Command , Fifth Air Force on 3 September , with his headquarters in Townsville . At this time , Port Moresby was subject to frequent Japanese air raids , so the bombers were generally based in the Townsville area and staged through Port Moresby to minimize their chance of loss or damage on the ground . In mid @-@ September 1942 , at the height of the Kokoda Track campaign , Kenney sent Walker to Port Moresby for a few weeks to direct the advanced echelon , to give Whitehead a rest and Walker more experience . Walker attempted to lift morale by improving the men 's living conditions . He made a point of small gestures of fellowship , such as standing in line with the men at meal times . But what endeared him most to his men was his willingness to share the dangers as well as their hardships , by flying a mission a week on average . In October , General Douglas MacArthur gave Kenney a dressing down for flying over the Owen Stanley Range . In turn , Kenney ordered Walker , Wilson and Whitehead not to fly any more missions . For a variety of reasons , all four of them eventually disobeyed their orders . 
 The Southwest Pacific was not a promising theater of war for the strategic bomber . The bombers of the day did not have the range to reach Japan from Australia , and there were no typical strategic targets in the theater other than a few oil refineries . Thus , " The air mission was to interdict Japan 's sea supply lanes and enable the ground forces to conduct an island @-@ hopping strategy . " This set up a doctrinal clash between Kenney , an attack aviator , and Walker , the bomber advocate . The long @-@ standing Air Corps tactic for attacking shipping called for large formations of high @-@ altitude bombers . With sufficient mass , so the theory went , bombers could bracket any ship with walls of bombs , and do so from above the effective range of the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft fire . However the theoretical mass required was two orders of magnitude greater than what was available in the Southwest Pacific . A dozen or so bombers was the most that could be put together , owing to the small number of aircraft in the theater and the difficulties of keeping them serviceable . The results were therefore generally ineffective , and operations incurred heavy casualties . 
 Walker objected to Kenney 's suggestion that the bombers conduct attacks from low level with bombs armed with instantaneous fuses . Kenney ordered Walker to try the instantaneous fuses for a couple of months , so that data could be gained about their effectiveness ; a few weeks later Kenney discovered that Walker had discontinued the use of the instantaneous fuses . In November , Kenney arranged for a demonstration attack on the SS Pruth , a ship that had sunk off Port Moresby in 1924 and was often used for target practice . After the attack Walker and Kenney took a boat out to the wreck to inspect the damage . As expected , none of the four bombs dropped had hit the stationary wreck ; but the instantaneous fuses had detonated the bombs when they struck the water , and bomb fragments had torn holes in the sides of the ship . Walker reluctantly conceded the point . " Ken was okay , " Kenney later recalled . " He was stubborn , over @-@ sensitive , and a prima donna , but he worked like a dog all the time . His gang liked him a lot but he tended to get a staff of ' yes @-@ men ' . He did not like to delegate authority . I was afraid that Ken was not durable enough to last very long under the high tension of this show . " 
 In December , Kenney learned that Whitehead had been on board a B @-@ 25 in which a Japanese antiaircraft gun had blown a hole in the wing " big enough for him to jump through without touching the sides " , and that Walker had flown on a B @-@ 17 that had clipped a tree and lost part of a wing . Kenney then repeated his earlier order , explaining the reasons behind it : 
 I told him that from then on I wanted him to run his command from his headquarters . In the airplane he was just extra baggage . He was probably not as good in any job on the plane as the man already assigned to it . In fact , in case of trouble , he was in the way . On the other hand , he was the best bombardment commander I had and I wanted to keep him so that the planning and direction would be good and his outfit take minimum losses in the performance of their missions . One of the big reasons for keeping him home was that I would hate to have him taken prisoner by the Japs . They would have known that a general was bound to have access to a lot of information and there was no limit to the lengths they would go to extract that knowledge from him . We had plenty of evidence that the <unk> had tortured their prisoners until they either died or talked . After the prisoners talked they were beheaded , anyhow , but most of them had broken under the strain . I told Walker that frankly I didn 't believe he could take it without telling everything he knew , so I was not going to let him go on any more combat missions . 
 On 9 January 1943 , MacArthur issued a communiqué praising the forces under his command for the victory that had been achieved at Buna and announcing the award of the Distinguished Service Cross to twelve officers , including Walker . 
 = = = Battle of Wau = = = 
 On 3 January 1943 , Kenney received intelligence from Allied Ultra codebreakers that the Japanese were about to attempt a reinforcement run from their main base at Rabaul to Lae , on the mainland of New Guinea . He ordered Walker to carry out a full @-@ scale dawn attack on the harbor 's shipping before it could depart . Walker demurred . His bombers would have difficulty making their rendezvous if they had to leave Port Moresby in the dark . He recommended a noon attack instead . Kenney acknowledged Walker 's concerns but was insistent ; he preferred bombers out of formation to bombers shot down by the enemy fighters that were certain to intercept a daylight attack . In spite of this , Walker ordered that the attack be made at noon on 5 January . 
 Bad weather over northern Australia prevented participation by the bombers there , which left Walker with only those based at Port Moresby : six B @-@ 17s and six B @-@ 24s . This force was far too small for the tactics that he wanted to use . He flew in the lead plane , B @-@ 17 # 41 @-@ <unk> , nicknamed " San Antonio Rose I " , from the 64th Bombardment Squadron , 43rd Bombardment Group , which was piloted by Lieutenant Colonel Jack W. Bleasdale , the group 's executive officer . The 64th Bombardment Squadron 's commanding officer , Major Allen Lindberg was also on board . The briefing officer for the mission , Major David <unk> , did not think that it was a good idea for so many senior officers to fly in the same plane , but his objection was overruled . 
 They encountered heavy flak and continuous fighter attacks . Owing to the delay , the ten @-@ ship convoy that they were sent to attack had departed two hours earlier , but there were still plenty of targets . Forty 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) and twenty four 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 450 kg ) bombs were dropped from 8 @,@ 500 feet ( 2 @,@ 600 m ) . The mission claimed hits on nine ships , totaling 50 @,@ 000 tons . After the war , <unk> confirmed the sinking of only one Japanese merchant ship , the 5 @,@ 833 @-@ ton <unk> Maru . Two other ships were damaged , as was the destroyer <unk> . Two B @-@ 17s were shot down , including Walker 's . 
 Fred <unk> flew the 5 January mission over Rabaul . He later recalled : 
 On January 5th of 1943 , I was on one of what most of us thought was a suicide mission ... The Japanese were getting ready to mount a large expeditionary force to relieve their garrisons on New Guinea , and Brigadier General Walker , who was the commanding general of the V Bomber Command there , was flying in the lead ship , and I was flying on his wing . When it was announced that it was going to be done in broad daylight at noontime , as a matter @-@ of @-@ fact , at low altitude , something like 5000 feet over the most heavily defended target in the Pacific almost ... most of us went away shaking our heads . Many of us believed we wouldn 't come back from it . Anyway , we went over the target and all of us got attacked . I was shot up . Nobody was injured , fortunately , but the airplane was kind of banged up a little bit . We had to break formation over the target to bomb individually and then we were supposed to form up immediately after crossing the target , but no sooner had we dropped our bombs that my tail gunner says , " Hey , there 's somebody in trouble behind us " So we made a turn and looked back and here was an airplane , one of our airplanes , going down , smoking and on fire , not necessarily fire , but smoke anyway , and headed down obviously for a cloud bank with a whole cloud of fighters on top of him . There must have been 15 or 20 fighters . Of course they gang up on a cripple , you know , polish that one off with no trouble , but he disappeared into a cloud bank and we never saw him again . It turns out it was the general ... He actually had a pilot , but he was the overall air commander for the operation . He was conducting it from the <unk> , just behind the pilot 's seat , where he could look out with a microphone and directing what should be done and so on ... The results of the raid , I 'm not sure what it was , whether it was successful or not , but it certainly was a most hair @-@ raising experience you want to go through . I mean , suddenly , you look ahead of you and see about fifteen or twenty airplanes all shooting at you at the same time , you see ... he won the Congressional Medal for that . The rest of us got the Air Medal , and , of course , he did all the planning and whatnot , too , even though many of us thought it was foolhardy , to tell you the truth . 
 Kenney was furious when he discovered that Walker had not only changed the takeoff time without notice , but had also defied his orders by accompanying the mission . He told MacArthur that when Walker showed up he was going to give him a reprimand and send him back to Australia on leave for two weeks . " Alright George , " MacArthur replied , " but if he doesn 't come back , I 'm going to send his name in to Washington recommending him for a Congressional Medal of Honor . " All available aircraft were sent to search for Walker , preventing attacks on the Japanese convoy as it headed for Lae . They managed to locate and rescue the crew of the other B @-@ 17 that had been shot down in the raid , but not Walker 's . 
 MacArthur 's recommendation therefore went ahead . The Adjutant General , Major General James A. <unk> , queried whether it was " considered above and beyond the call of duty for the commanding officer of a bomber command to accompany it on bombing missions against enemy held territory . " Major General George Stratemeyer , the chief of the air staff , replied that it was . In March 1943 , Roosevelt presented Kenneth Walker Jr. with the medal in a ceremony at the White House . It was one of 38 Medals of Honor awarded to flying personnel of the US Army Air Forces in World War II . The citation read : 
 For conspicuous leadership above and beyond the call of duty involving personal valor and intrepidity at an extreme hazard to life . As commander of the V Bomber Command during the period from 5 September 1942 , to 5 January 1943 , Brigadier General Walker repeatedly accompanied his units on bombing missions deep into enemy @-@ held territory . From the lessons personally gained under combat conditions , he developed a highly efficient technique for bombing when opposed by enemy fighter airplanes and by antiaircraft fire . On 5 January 1943 , in the face of extremely heavy antiaircraft fire and determined opposition by enemy fighters , he led an effective daylight bombing attack against the shipping in the harbor at Rabaul , New Britain , which resulted in direct hits on 9 enemy vessels . During this action his airplane was disabled and forced down by the attack of an overwhelming number of enemy fighters . 
 Neither Walker 's body nor the wreck of his aircraft was found , and as of June 2013 it remains undiscovered . Walker was therefore listed on the Tablets of the Missing at Manila American Cemetery and Memorial , Philippines , where servicemen missing in action or buried at sea in the Southwest Pacific are commemorated . On 7 December 2001 , a headstone marker was erected in Section MC @-@ <unk> of Arlington National Cemetery to give family members a place to gather in the United States . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 General Walker 's military awards include : 
 Source : Fogerty , USAF Historical Study 91 , Biographical Data on Air Force General Officers 1917 – 1952 ( 1953 ) Air Force Historical Research Agency 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In January 1948 , Roswell Army Air Field in Roswell , New Mexico , was renamed Walker Air Force Base in honor of Walker . The base was inactivated on 2 July 1965 and closed on 30 June 1967 . Walker Hall , and its Walker Air Power Room , at Maxwell Air Force Base , home of the Air Force Doctrine Development and Education Center , are also named after him . The Walker Papers is an Air Force Fellows program that annually honors the top three research papers produced by Air Force Fellows with the Walker Series award . The Walker Series recognizes the contributions each Fellow has made to research supporting air and space power and its use in the implementation of US strategic policy . 
 = Balbergbakken = 
 Balbergbakken or <unk> was a ski jumping hill complex located at Fåberg in Lillehammer , Norway . The centerpiece consisted of a large hill with a construction point of 120 meters ( 390 ft ) ( K @-@ 120 ) , in addition to three smaller K @-@ 40 , K @-@ 25 and K @-@ 15 hills . The venue was opened in 1972 , having cost slightly more than one million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) after significant cost overruns . Balbergbakken hosted three Norwegian Championships , in 1973 , 1978 and 1983 , and a FIS Ski Jumping World Cup in 1984 . The hill record of 130 @.@ 5 meters was set by Tom <unk> in 1981 . It was planned that the venue would be used for the 1994 Winter Olympics , but because of lack of infrastructure , the new Lysgårdsbakken was built instead . Balbergbakken was closed in 1992 . 
 = = History = = 
 The old hill at Lysgård in Lillehammer was closed in 1964 , and Lillehammer SK spent some time deciding where to build a new venue . <unk> , <unk> and Kanthaugen were all considered as locations , although <unk> was eventually chosen . The municipal council passed the plans in May 1969 . The original cost estimate was for NOK 347 @,@ 065 . The hill opened in 1972 , having cost more than NOK 1 million to be built . In addition to the large K @-@ 120 hill , it consisted of three smaller training hills , at K @-@ 40 , K @-@ 25 and K @-@ 15 . The hills were owned by Lillehammer SK . 
 The construction was controversial in Lillehammer , both amongst the general public and politicians . The chief of administration had doubted whether he should recommend construction . The original plans had called for both a large and normal hill , but lack of funding meant that the normal hill was never built , meaning that the number of competitions in the hill would be severely limited . The cost overruns were largely created by errors in the plans , which estimated too little earthwork to fill the hillside , and not enough blasting . To cut costs , a floodlighting system was taken out of the plans , so the venue could not be used during the evenings , limiting the amount of time the venue could be used . It was also a concern that very few locals were able to jump on such a large hill . Many politicians stated in 1972 that the money should have been spent instead on an indoor hall for handball . The first trial jump was made by Helge Nordstrand , while Jan <unk> is credited with the first hill record , at 110 @.@ 5 meters . 
 In Lillehammer 's bids for the 1992 and 1994 Winter Olympics , Balbergbakken was the proposed site of ski jumping . Lillehammer was awarded the 1994 Olympics in 1988 , but a year later the plans to use <unk> were abandoned . The venue was regarded as unsuitable ; for instance NOK 30 million would have to be spent on building a new access road . In addition , a new water and sewer system , new stands , participant facilities and a normal hill would have to be built . The available space at Balbergbakken was limited , and the organizers saw it as advantageous to have the ski stadium close to the ski jumping hills . 
 = = Events = = 
 The hill was used for 31 tournaments , of which six had to be cancelled because of wind or snow conditions . The tournaments included the Norwegian Championships in 1973 , 1978 and 1983 ; the Norwegian champions in Balbergbakken were Nils @-@ Per <unk> ( 1973 ) and Per <unk> ( 1978 and 1983 ) . A FIS Ski Jumping World Cup race was held on 9 March 1984 . It saw Pavel Ploc win ahead of Matti Nykänen and Ernst Vettori . The event drew 5 @,@ 000 spectators . The World Cup race incurred a large loss , with the organizers only covering half of the NOK 260 @,@ 000 it cost to host . The hill record was set by Tom <unk> in 1981 , who reached 130 @.@ 5 meters . The final race was scheduled to be the 1992 Junior Norwegian Championships , but they were canceled because of lack of snow . 
 = Rufus Wilmot Griswold = 
 Rufus Wilmot Griswold ( February 13 , 1815 – August 27 , 1857 ) was an American anthologist , editor , poet , and critic . Born in Vermont , Griswold left home when he was 15 years old . He worked as a journalist , editor , and critic in Philadelphia , New York City , and elsewhere . He built up a strong literary reputation , in part due to his 1842 collection The Poets and Poetry of America . This anthology , the most comprehensive of its time , included what he deemed the best examples of American poetry . He produced revised versions and similar anthologies for the remainder of his life , although many of the poets he promoted have since faded into obscurity . Many writers hoped to have their work included in one of these editions , although they commented harshly on Griswold 's abrasive character . Griswold was married three times : his first wife died young , his second marriage ended in a public and controversial divorce , and his third wife left him after the previous divorce was almost repealed . 
 Edgar Allan Poe , whose poetry had been included in Griswold 's anthology , published a critical response that questioned which poets were included . This began a rivalry which grew when Griswold succeeded Poe as editor of Graham 's Magazine at a higher salary than Poe 's . Later , the two competed for the attention of poet Frances Sargent Osgood . They never reconciled their differences and , after Poe 's mysterious death in 1849 , Griswold wrote an unsympathetic obituary . Claiming to be Poe 's chosen literary executor , he began a campaign to harm Poe 's reputation that lasted until his own death eight years later . 
 Griswold considered himself an expert in American poetry and was an early proponent of its inclusion on the school curriculum . He also supported the introduction of copyright legislation , speaking to Congress on behalf of the publishing industry , although he was not above infringing the copyright of other people 's work . A fellow editor remarked , " even while haranguing the loudest , [ he ] is <unk> the fastest " . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Griswold was born to Rufus and Deborah ( Wass ) Griswold on February 13 , 1815 , in Vermont , near Rutland , and raised a strict Calvinist in the hamlet of Benson . He was the twelfth of fourteen children and his father was a farmer and shoemaker . In 1822 , the family sold the Benson farm and moved to nearby Hubbardton . As a child , Griswold was complex , unpredictable , and reckless . He left home when he was 15 , calling himself a " solitary soul , wandering through the world , a homeless , joyless outcast " . 
 Griswold moved to Albany , New York , to live with a 22 @-@ year @-@ old flute @-@ playing journalist named George C. Foster , a writer best known for his work New @-@ York by Gas @-@ Light . Griswold lived with Foster until he was 17 , and the two may have had a romantic relationship . When Griswold moved away , Foster wrote to him begging him to return , signing his letter " come to me if you love me " . Griswold attempted to enroll at the Rensselaer School in 1830 , but was not allowed to take any classes after he was caught attempting to play a prank on a professor . 
 = = = Early career and first marriage = = = 
 After a brief spell as a printer 's apprentice , Griswold moved to Syracuse where , with some friends , he started a newspaper called The Porcupine . This publication purposefully targeted locals for what was later remembered as merely malicious critique . 
 He moved to New York City in 1836 and , in March of that year , was introduced to 19 @-@ year @-@ old Caroline Searles , whom he later married . He was employed as an editor for various publications in the New York area . In October , he considered running for office as a Whig but did not receive the party 's support . In 1837 he was licensed as a Baptist clergyman , although he never had a permanent congregation . 
 Griswold married Caroline on August 12 , 1837 , and the couple had two daughters . Following the birth of their second daughter , Griswold left his family behind in New York and moved to Philadelphia . His departure on November 27 , 1840 , was by all accounts abrupt , leaving his job with Horace Greeley 's New York Tribune , and his library of several thousand volumes . He joined the staff of Philadelphia 's Daily Standard and began to build his reputation as a literary critic , becoming known for his savagery and vindictiveness . 
 On November 6 , 1842 , Griswold visited his wife in New York after she had given birth to their third child , a son . Three days later , after returning to Philadelphia , he was informed that both she and the infant had died . Deeply shocked , Griswold traveled by train alongside her coffin , refusing to leave her side for 30 hours . When fellow passengers urged him to try to sleep , he answered by kissing her dead lips and embracing her , his two children crying next to him . He refused to leave the cemetery after her funeral , even after the other mourners had left , until forced to do so by a relative . He wrote a long poem in blank verse dedicated to Caroline , " Five Days " , which was printed in the New York Tribune on November 16 , 1842 . Griswold had difficulty believing she had died and often dreamed of their reunion . Forty days after her entombment , he entered her vault , cut off a lock of her hair , kissed her on the forehead and lips , and wept for several hours , staying by her side until a friend found him 30 hours later . 
 = = = <unk> and critic = = = 
 In 1842 , Griswold released his 476 @-@ page anthology of American poetry , The Poets and Poetry of America , which he dedicated to Washington Allston . Griswold 's collection featured poems from over 80 authors , including 17 by Lydia Sigourney , three by Edgar Allan Poe , and 45 by Charles Fenno Hoffman . Hoffman , a close friend , was allotted twice as much space as any other author . Griswold went on to oversee many other anthologies , including Biographical Annual , which collected memoirs of " eminent persons recently deceased " , Gems from American Female Poets , Prose Writers of America , and Female Poets of America . 
 Between 1842 and 1845 while Griswold was collecting material for Prose Writers of America he discovered the identity of Horace Binney Wallace , who had been writing in various literary magazines at the time ( including Burton 's ) under the pen name William Landor . Wallace declined to be included in the anthology but the two became friends , exchanging many letters over the years . Wallace eventually ghostwrote Griswold 's Napoleon and the Marshals of the Empire ( 1847 ) . 
 Prose Writers of America , published in 1847 , was prepared specifically to compete with a similar anthology by Cornelius Mathews and Evert Augustus Duyckinck . The prose collection earned Griswold a rivalry with the two men , which Griswold expected . As it was being published , Griswold wrote to Boston publisher James Thomas Fields that " Young America will be rabid " . In preparing his anthologies , Griswold would write to the living authors whose work he was including to ask their suggestions on which poems to include , as well as to gather information for a biographical sketch . 
 In 1843 Griswold founded The Opal , an annual gift book that collected essays , stories , and poetry . Nathaniel Parker Willis edited its first edition , which was released in the fall of 1844 . For a time , Griswold was editor of the Saturday Evening Post and also published a collection of poetry , The Cypress Wreath ( 1844 ) . His poems , with titles such as " The Happy Hour of Death " , " On the Death of a Young Girl " , and " The Slumber of Death " , emphasized mortality and mourning . Another collection of his poetry , Christian Ballads and Other Poems , was published in 1844 , and his nonfiction book , The Republican Court or , American Society in the Days of Washington , was published in 1854 . The book is meant to cover events during the presidency of George Washington , though it mixes historical fact with apocryphal legend until one is indistinguishable from the other . During this period , Griswold occasionally offered his services at the pulpit delivering sermons and he may have received an honorary doctorate from Shurtleff College , a Baptist institution in Illinois , leading to his nickname the " Reverend Dr. Griswold " . 
 = = = Second marriage = = = 
 On August 20 , 1845 , Griswold married Charlotte Myers , a Jewish woman ; she was 42 and he was 33 . Griswold had been pressured into the marriage by the woman 's aunts , despite his concern about their difference in religious beliefs . This difference was strong enough that one of Griswold 's friends referred to his wife only as " the little Jewess " . On their wedding night , he discovered that she was , according to Griswold biographer Joy Bayless , " through some physical misfortune , incapable of being a wife " or , as Poe biographer Kenneth Silverman explains , incapable of having sex . Griswold considered the marriage void and no more valid " than there would have been had the ceremony taken place between parties of the same sex , or where the sex of one was doubtful or ambiguous " . Still , the couple moved together to Charleston , South Carolina , Charlotte 's home town , and lived under the same roof , albeit sleeping in separate rooms . Neither of the two was happy with the situation , and at the end of April 1846 she had a lawyer write up a contract " to separate , altogether and forever , ... which would in effect be a divorce " . The contract forbade Griswold from remarrying and paid him $ 1 @,@ 000 for expenses in exchange for his daughter Caroline staying with the Myers family . After this separation , Griswold immediately moved back to Philadelphia . 
 = = = Move to New York City = = = 
 A few years later , Griswold moved back to New York City , leaving his younger daughter in the care of the Myers family and his elder daughter , Emily , with relatives on her mother 's side . He had by now earned the nickname " Grand Turk " , and in the summer of 1847 made plans to edit an anthology of poetry by American women . He believed that women were incapable of the same kind of " intellectual " poetry as men and believed they needed to be divided : " The conditions of aesthetic ability in the two sexes are probably distinct , or even opposite " , he wrote in his introduction . The selections he chose for The Female Poets of America were not necessarily the greatest examples of poetry but instead were chosen because they emphasized traditional morality and values . That same year , Griswold began working on what he considered " the maximum opus of his life " , an extensive biographical dictionary . Although he worked on it for several years and even advertised for it , it was never produced . He also helped Elizabeth F. Ellet publish her book Women of the American Revolution , and was angered when she did not acknowledge his assistance in the book . In July 1848 , he visited poet Sarah Helen Whitman in Providence , Rhode Island , although he had been suffering with vertigo and exhaustion , rarely leaving his apartment at New York University , and was unable to write without taking opium . In autumn of that year , he had an epileptic fit , the first of many he would suffer for the remainder of his life . One fit caused him to fall out of a ferry in Brooklyn and nearly drown . He wrote to publisher James T. Fields : " I am in a terrible condition , physically and mentally . I do not know what the end will be ... I am exhausted — betwixt life and death — and heaven and hell . " In 1849 , he was further troubled when Charles Fenno Hoffman , with whom he had become good friends , was committed to an insane asylum . 
 Griswold continued editing and contributing literary criticism for various publications , both full @-@ time and freelance , including 22 months from July 1 , 1850 , to April 1 , 1852 , with The International Magazine . There , he worked with contributors including Elizabeth Oakes Smith , Mary E. Hewitt and John R. Thompson . In the November 10 , 1855 , issue of The Criterion , Griswold anonymously reviewed the first edition of Walt Whitman 's Leaves of Grass , declaring : " It is impossible to image how any man 's fancy could have conceived such a mass of stupid filth " . Griswold charged that Whitman was guilty of " the vilest imaginings and <unk> license " , a " degrading , beastly sensuality . " Referring to Whitman 's poetry , Griswold said he left " this gathering of muck to the laws which ... must have the power to suppress such gross obscenity . " Whitman later included Griswold 's review in a new edition of Leaves of Grass . He ended his review with a phrase in Latin referring to " that horrible sin , among Christians not to be named " , the stock phrase long associated with Christian condemnations of sodomy . Griswold was the first person in the 19th century to publicly point to and stress the theme of erotic desire and acts between men in Whitman 's poetry . More attention to that aspect of Whitman 's poetry would only surface late in the 19th century . 
 = = = Divorce and third marriage = = = 
 After a brief flirtation with poet Alice Cary , Griswold pursued a relationship with Harriet McCrillis . He originally did not want to divorce Charlotte Myers because he " dreaded the publicity " and because of her love for his daughter . He applied for divorce at the Court of Common Pleas in Philadelphia on March 25 , 1852 . Elizabeth Ellet and Ann S. Stephens wrote to Myers urging her not to grant the divorce , and to McCrillis not to marry him . To convince Myers to agree to the divorce , Griswold allowed her to keep his daughter Caroline if she signed a statement that she had deserted him . She agreed and the divorce was made official December 18 ; he likely never saw Myers or his daughter again . McCrillis and Griswold were married shortly thereafter on December 26 , 1852 , and settled at 196 West Twenty @-@ third Street in New York . Their son , William , was born on October 9 , 1853 . 
 Ellet and Stephens continued writing to Griswold 's ex @-@ wife , urging her to have the divorce repealed . Myers was finally convinced and filed in Philadelphia on September 23 , 1853 . The court , however , had lost records of the divorce and had to delay the appeal . Adding to Griswold 's troubles , that fall , a gas leak in his home caused an explosion and a fire . He was severely burned , losing his eyelashes , eyebrows , and seven of his finger nails . That same year , his 15 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Emily , nearly died in Connecticut . A train she was riding on had fallen off a drawbridge into a river . When Griswold arrived he saw 49 corpses in a makeshift morgue . Emily had been pronounced dead when pinned underwater but a doctor was able to revive her . On February 24 , 1856 , the divorce appeal went to court , with Ellet and Stephens providing lengthy testimony against Griswold 's character . Neither Griswold nor Myers attended and the appeal was dismissed . Embarrassed by the ordeal , McCrillis left Griswold in New York and moved in with family in Bangor , Maine . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Griswold died of tuberculosis in New York City on August 27 , 1857 . Sarah Anna Lewis , a friend and writer , suggested that the interference of Elizabeth Ellet had exacerbated Griswold 's condition and that she " goaded Griswold to his death " . At the time of his death , the sole decorations found in his room were portraits of himself , Frances Osgood , and Poe . A friend , Charles Godfrey Leland , found in Griswold 's desk several documents attacking a number of authors which Griswold was preparing for publication . Leland decided to burn them . 
 Griswold 's funeral was held on August 30 . His pallbearers included Leland , Charles Frederick Briggs , George Henry Moore , and Richard Henry Stoddard . His remains were left for eight years in the receiving tomb of Green @-@ Wood Cemetery before being buried on July 12 , 1865 , without a headstone . Although his library of several thousand volumes was auctioned off , raising over $ 3 @,@ 000 to be put towards a monument , none was ever commissioned . 
 = = Reputation and influence = = 
 Griswold 's anthology The Poets and Poetry of America was the most comprehensive of its kind to date . As critic Lewis Gaylord Clark said , it was expected Griswold 's book would " become incorporated into the permanent undying literature of our age and nation " . The anthology helped Griswold build up a considerable reputation throughout the 1840s and 1850s and its first edition went through three printings in only six months . His choice of authors , however , was occasionally questioned . A British editor reviewed the collection and concluded , " with two or three exceptions , there is not a poet of mark in the whole Union " and referred to the anthology as " the most conspicuous act of martyrdom yet committed in the service of the transatlantic muses " . Even so , the book was popular and was even continued in several editions after Griswold 's death by Richard Henry Stoddard . 
 In more modern times , The Poets and Poetry of America has been nicknamed a " graveyard of poets " because its anthologized writers have since passed into obscurity to become , as literary historian Fred Lewis <unk> wrote , " dead ... beyond all resurrection " . <unk> also called the book a " collection of poetic trash " and " voluminous worthlessness " . 
 Within the contemporary American literary scene Griswold became known as erratic , dogmatic , pretentious , and vindictive . As historian Perry Miller wrote , " Griswold was about as devious as they came in this era of deviousness ; did not ample documentation prove that he actually existed , we might suppose him ... one of the less plausible inventions of Charles Dickens " . Later anthologies such as Prose Writers of America and Female Poets of America helped him become known as a literary dictator , whose approval writers sought even while they feared his growing power . Even as they tried to impress him , however , several authors voiced their opinion on Griswold 's character . Ann S. Stephens called him two @-@ faced and " constitutionally incapable of speaking the truth " . Even his friends knew him as a consummate liar and had a saying : " Is that a Griswold or a fact ? " Another friend once called him " one of the most irritable and vindictive men I ever met " . Author Cornelius Mathews wrote in 1847 that Griswold fished for writers to exploit , warning " the poor little innocent fishes " to avoid his " Griswold Hook " . A review of one of Griswold 's anthologies , published anonymously in the Philadelphia Saturday Museum on January 28 , 1843 , but believed to have been written by Poe , asked : " What will be [ Griswold 's ] fate ? Forgotten , save only by those whom he has injured and insulted , he will sink into oblivion , without leaving a landmark to tell that he once existed ; or if he is spoken of hereafter , he will be quoted as the unfaithful servant who abused his trust . " 
 James Russell Lowell , who had privately called Griswold " an ass and , what 's more , a knave " , composed a verse on Griswold 's temperament in his satirical A Fable for Critics : 
 Griswold was one of the earliest proponents of teaching schoolchildren American poetry in addition to English poetry . One of his anthologies , Readings in American Poetry for the Use of Schools , was created specifically for that purpose . His knowledge in American poetry was emphasized by his claim that he had read every American poem published before 1850 — an estimated 500 volumes . " He has more literary patriotism , if the phrase be allowable ... than any person we ever knew " , wrote a contributor to Graham 's . " Since the Pilgrims landed , no man or woman has written anything on any subject which has escaped his untiring research . " Oliver Wendell Holmes , Sr. noted that Griswold researched literature like " a kind of naturalist whose subjects are authors , whose memory is a perfect fauna of all flying and creeping things that feed on ink . " 
 Evert Augustus Duyckinck commented that " the thought [ of a national literature ] seems to have entered and taken possession of [ Griswold 's ] mind with the force of <unk> " . Poet Philip Pendleton Cooke questioned Griswold 's sincerity , saying he " should have loved [ it ] ... better than to say it " . By the 1850s , Griswold 's literary nationalism had subsided somewhat , and he began following the more popular contemporary trend of reading literature from England , France , and Germany . He disassociated himself from the " absurd notion ... that we are to create an entirely new literature " . 
 Publicly , Griswold supported the establishment of international copyright , although he himself often duplicated entire works during his time as an editor , particularly with The Brother Jonathan . A contemporary editor said of him , " He takes advantage of a state of things which he declares to be ' immoral , unjust and wicked , ' and even while haranguing the loudest , is <unk> the fastest . " Even so , he was chosen to represent the publishing industry before Congress in the spring of 1844 to discuss the need for copyright law . 
 = = Relationship with Poe = = 
 Griswold first met Edgar Allan Poe in Philadelphia in May 1841 while working for the Daily Standard . At the outset , their relationship was cordial , at least superficially . In a letter dated March 29 , 1841 , Poe sent Griswold several poems for The Poets and Poetry of America anthology , writing that he would be proud to see " one or two of them in the book " . Griswold included three of these poems : " Coliseum " , " The Haunted Palace " , and " The Sleeper " . In November of that year , Poe , who had previously praised Griswold in his " <unk> " series as " a gentleman of fine taste and sound judgment " , wrote a critical review of the anthology , on Griswold 's behalf . Griswold paid Poe for the review and used his influence to have it published in a Boston periodical . The review was generally favorable , although Poe questioned the inclusion of certain authors and the omission of others . Poe also said that Griswold " unduly favored " New England writers . Griswold had expected more praise and Poe privately told others he was not particularly impressed by the book , even calling it " a most outrageous humbug " in a letter to a friend . In another letter , this time to fellow writer Frederick W. Thomas , Poe suggested that Griswold 's promise to help get the review published was actually a bribe for a favorable review , knowing Poe needed the money . 
 Making the relationship even more strained , only months later , Griswold was hired by George Rex Graham to take up Poe 's former position as editor of Graham 's Magazine . Griswold , however , was paid more and given more editorial control of the magazine than Poe . Shortly after , Poe began presenting a series of lectures called " The Poets and Poetry of America " , the first of which was given in Philadelphia on November 25 , 1843 . Poe openly attacked Griswold in front of his large audience and continued to do so in similar lectures . Graham said that during these lectures , Poe " gave Mr. Griswold some raps over the knuckles of force sufficient to be remembered " . In a letter dated January 16 , 1845 , Poe tried to reconcile with Griswold , promising him that his lecture now omitted all that Griswold found objectionable . 
 Another source of animosity between the two men was their competition for the attention of the poet Frances Sargent Osgood in the mid to late 1840s . While both she and Poe were still married to their respective spouses , the two carried on a public flirtation that resulted in much gossip among the literati . Griswold , who was smitten with Osgood , escorted her to literary salons and became her staunchest defender . " She is in all things the most admirable woman I ever knew " , he wrote to publisher James T. Fields in 1848 . Osgood responded by dedicating a collection of her poetry to Griswold , " as a souvenir of admiration for his genius , of regard for his generous character , and of gratitude for his valuable literary counsels " . 
 = = = " Ludwig " obituary = = = 
 After Poe 's death , Griswold prepared an obituary signed with the pseudonym " Ludwig " . First printed in the October 9 , 1849 , issue of the New York Tribune , it was soon republished many times . Here he asserted that " few will be grieved " by Poe 's death as he had few friends . He claimed that Poe often wandered the streets , either in " madness or melancholy " , mumbling and cursing to himself , was easily irritated , was envious of others , and that he " regarded society as composed of villains " . Poe 's drive to succeed , Griswold wrote , was because he sought " the right to despise a world which galled his self @-@ conceit " . Much of this characterization of Poe was copied almost verbatim from that of the fictitious Francis Vivian in The <unk> by Edward Bulwer @-@ Lytton . 
 Griswold biographer Joy Bayless wrote that Griswold used a pseudonym not to conceal his relationship to the obituary but because it was his custom never to sign his newspaper and his magazine contributions . Regardless , Griswold 's true identity was soon revealed . In a letter to Sarah Helen Whitman dated December 17 , 1849 , he admitted his role in writing Poe 's death notice . " I was not his friend , nor was he mine " , he wrote . 
 = = = Memoir = = = 
 Griswold claimed that " among the last requests of Mr. Poe " was that he become his literary executor " for the benefit of his family " . Griswold claimed that Poe 's aunt and mother @-@ in @-@ law Maria Clemm said Poe had made such a statement on June 9 , 1849 , and that she herself released any claim to Poe 's works . And indeed a document exists in which Clemm transfers power of attorney to Griswold , dated October 20 , 1849 , although there are no signed witnesses . Clemm , however , had no right to make such a decision ; Poe 's younger sister Rosalie was his closest next of kin . Although Griswold had acted as a literary agent for other American writers , it is unclear if Poe really appointed Griswold his executor ( perhaps as part of his " Imp of the Perverse " ) , if it were a trick on Griswold 's part , or a mistake on Maria Clemm 's . It is also possible that Osgood persuaded Poe to name Griswold as his executor . 
 In any case , Griswold , along with James Russell Lowell and Nathaniel Parker Willis , edited a posthumous collection of Poe 's works published in three volumes starting in January 1850 . He did not share the profits of his edition with Poe 's surviving relatives . This edition included a biographical sketch titled " Memoir of the Author " which has become notorious for its inaccuracy . The " Memoir " depicts Poe as a madman , addicted to drugs and chronically drunk . Many elements were fabricated by Griswold using forged letters as evidence and it was denounced by those who knew Poe , including Sarah Helen Whitman , Charles Frederick Briggs , and George Rex Graham . In March , Graham published a notice in his magazine accusing Griswold of betraying trust and taking revenge on the dead . " Mr. Griswold " , he wrote , " has allowed old prejudices and old enmities to steal ... into the coloring of his picture . " Thomas Holley Chivers wrote a book called New Life of Edgar Allan Poe which directly responded to Griswold 's accusations . He said that Griswold " is not only incompetent to Edit any of [ Poe 's ] works , but totally unconscious of the duties which he and every man who sets himself up as a Literary Executor , owe the dead " . 
 Today Griswold 's name is usually associated with Poe 's as a character assassin , although not all believe that Griswold deliberately intended to cause harm . Some of the information that Griswold asserted or implied was that Poe was expelled from the University of Virginia and that Poe had tried to seduce his guardian John Allan 's second wife . Even so , Griswold 's attempts only drew attention to Poe 's work ; readers were thrilled at the idea of reading the works of an " evil " man . Griswold 's characterization of Poe and the false information he originated appeared consistently in Poe biographies for the next two decades . 
 = Israel the Grammarian = 
 Israel the Grammarian ( c . 895 – c . 965 ) was one of the leading European scholars of the mid @-@ tenth century . In the 930s , he was at the court of King Æthelstan of England ( r . 924 – 39 ) . After Æthelstan 's death , Israel successfully sought the patronage of Archbishop Rotbert of Trier and became tutor to Bruno , later the Archbishop of Cologne . In the late 940s Israel is recorded as a bishop , and at the end of his life he was a monk at the Benedictine monastery of Saint @-@ Maximin in Trier . 
 Israel was an accomplished poet , a disciple of the ninth @-@ century Irish philosopher John Scottus Eriugena and one of the few Western scholars of his time to understand Greek . He wrote theological and grammatical tracts , and commentaries on the works of other philosophers and theologians . 
 = = Background = = 
 The reign of Charlemagne saw a revival in learning in Europe from the late eighth century , known as the Carolingian Renaissance . The Carolingian Empire collapsed in the late ninth century , while the tenth is seen as a period of decline , described as the " Age of Iron " by a Frankish Council in 909 . This negative picture of the period is increasingly challenged by historians ; in Michael Wood 's view " the first half of the tenth century saw many remarkable and formative developments that would shape European culture and history . " The Bible remained the primary fount of knowledge , but study of classical writers , who had previously been demonised as pagans , became increasingly acceptable . 
 When Alfred the Great became King of Wessex in 871 , learning in southern England was at a low level , and there were no Latin scholars . He embarked on a programme of revival , bringing in scholars from Continental Europe , Wales and Mercia , and himself translated works he considered important from Latin to the vernacular . His grandson , Æthelstan , carried on the work , inviting foreign scholars such as Israel to England , and appointing a number of continental clerics as bishops . In the 930s the level of learning was still not high enough to supply enough literate English priests to fill the bishoprics . The generation educated in Æthelstan 's reign , such as the future Bishop of Winchester , Æthelwold , who was educated at court , and Dunstan , who became Archbishop of Canterbury , went on to raise English learning to a high level . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Very little is known about Israel 's early life . Michael Lapidge dates his birth to around 900 , while Wood places it slightly earlier , around 890 . He was a disciple of Ambrose and spent time at Rome , but it is unknown who Ambrose was or whether he was Israel 's tutor in Rome . In Wood 's view Israel was a monk at Saint @-@ Maximin in Trier in the 930s . 
 Tenth @-@ century sources provide conflicting evidence on Israel 's origin . Ruotger in his life of Bruno referred to Israel as Irish , whereas Flodoard in his Chronicle described him as " Britto " , which may refer to Brittany , Cornwall or Wales , all three of which were Celtic speaking refuges for Britons who had fled the Anglo @-@ Saxon invasion of England . According to Lapidge : " The consensus of modern scholarship is in favour of an Irish origin , but the matter has not been properly investigated . " He argues that the bishop of Bangor in County Down , Dub Innse , described Israel as a " Roman scholar " , and that he therefore does not appear to have recognised him as a fellow Irishman . Lapidge states that Flodoard was contemporary with Israel and may have known him , whereas Ruotger wrote after Israel 's death and probably did not have first hand knowledge . Giving children Old Testament Hebrew names such as Israel was common in Celtic areas in the tenth century . Lapidge concludes that Brittany is more likely than Wales or Cornwall , as manuscripts associated with him have Breton glosses , and Æthelstan 's court was a haven for Breton scholars fleeing Viking occupation of their homeland . 
 In 2007 , Wood revived the Irish theory , questioning whether Flodoard 's " Israel Britto " means " Breton " , and stating that Ruotger knew Israel . Æthelstan 's biographer , Sarah Foot , mentions Wood 's view , but she rejects it , stating that Israel was not Irish and may have been a Breton . Thomas Charles @-@ Edwards , a historian of medieval Wales , thinks he may have been Welsh . 
 = = Æthelstan 's court = = 
 Israel 's presence in England is known from a gospel book written in Ireland in about 1140 , which contains a copy of a tenth @-@ century drawing and explanation of a board game called Alea Evangelii ( Gospel Game ) , based on canon tables ( concordances for parallel texts of the four gospels ) . According to a translation by Lapidge of a note on the manuscript : 
 Here begins the Gospel Dice which Dub Innse , bishop of Bangor , brought from the English king , that is from the household of Æthelstan , King of England , drawn by a certain Franco [ or Frank ] and by a Roman scholar , that is Israel . 
 The twelfth @-@ century copyist appears to have changed Dub Innse 's first person note to the third person . In a later passage , he interprets " Roman scholar , that is Israel " as meaning a Roman Jew ( <unk> Romanus ) . This has been taken by some historians , including David Wasserstein , as showing that there was a Jewish scholar at Æthelstan 's court , but Lapidge argues that this interpretation was a misunderstanding by the copyist , and his view has been generally accepted by historians . Israel is thought to be Israel the Grammarian , described as a Roman scholar because of his time in the city , and the Gospel Game manuscript shows that he spent a period at Æthelstan 's court . A number of manuscripts associated with Israel , including two of the four known copies of his poem De arte metrica , were written in England . In Foot 's view : 
 Israel provides a tantalising link between the spheres of masculine camaraderie of a conventional royal court and the more rarefied , scholarly atmosphere that Æthelstan may have liked both his contemporaries and posterity to think he was keen to promote . 
 Israel was a practitioner of the " hermeneutic style " of Latin , characterised by long , convoluted sentences and a predilection for rare words and neologisms . He probably influenced the scribe known to historians as " Æthelstan A " , an early exponent of the style in charters he drafted between 928 and 935 . Hermeneutic Latin was to become the dominant style of the English Benedictine reform movement of the later tenth century , and Israel may have been an early mentor of one of its leaders , Æthelwold , at Æthelstan 's court in the 930s . The Latin texts which Israel brought to Æthelstan 's court were influenced by Irish writers , and the historian Jane Stevenson sees them as contributing a Hiberno @-@ Latin element to the hermeneutic style in England . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Israel 's poem De arte metrica was dedicated to Rotbert , Archbishop of Trier . It was almost certainly composed in England , and the dedication was probably a successful plea for Rotbert 's patronage when Æthelstan died in 939 . From about 940 Israel was the tutor of Bruno , the future Archbishop of Cologne and brother of the Holy Roman Emperor , Otto the Great . <unk> of Tegernsee described Israel as Rotbert 's " shining light " . In 947 Israel attended a synod at Verdun presided over by Rotbert , where he was referred to as a bishop , but without identification of his see . He was famous as a schoolmaster and probably played an important role in Emperor Otto 's establishment of a court school at Aachen . 
 Tenth @-@ century sources describe Israel as a bishop ; around 950 a man with this name is identified as Bishop of Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence , but it is not certain that he was the same person . Between 948 and 950 he may have held a bishopric in Aachen , where he debated Christian ideas about the Trinity with a Jewish intellectual called Salomon , probably the Byzantine ambassador of that name . He retired to become a monk at the Benedictine monastery of Saint @-@ Maximin in Trier , and died on 26 April in an unknown year . Lapidge sets his death in about 970 , whereas Wood dates it before 967 – 68 . 
 = = Scholarship = = 
 Charters produced from 928 by King Æthelstan 's scribe , " Æthelstan A " , include unusual words almost certainly copied from the Hiberno @-@ Irish poems Adelphus <unk> and <unk> . The poems display a sophisticated knowledge of Greek and are described by Lapidge as " immensely difficult " . It is likely that they were brought by Israel from the Continent , while Adelphus <unk> was probably , and <unk> possibly , his work . 
 Mechthild Gretsch describes Israel as " one of the most learned men in Europe " , and Lapidge says that he was " an accomplished grammarian and poet , and one of the few scholars of his time to have first @-@ hand knowledge of Greek " . Greek scholarship was so rare in western Europe during this period that in the 870s Anastasius the Librarian was unable to find anyone competent to edit his translation of a text from Greek , and had to do it himself . Israel wrote on theology and collected works of medicine . In the 940s he became interested in the Irish philosopher John Scottus Eriugena , and commented on his works in a manuscript which survives in Saint Petersburg . In a manuscript glossing Porphyry 's <unk> , he recommended John 's <unk> . His redaction of a commentary on Donatus 's Ars Minor was a major teaching text in the Middle Ages , and still in print in the twentieth century . 
 = 2009 Ford 400 = 
 The 2009 Ford 400 was the thirty @-@ six and final stock car race of the 2009 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series as well as the tenth and final race of the season @-@ ending Chase for the Sprint Cup . It was held on November 22 , 2009 at Homestead @-@ Miami Speedway , in Homestead , Florida before a crowd of 70 @,@ 000 people . The 267 @-@ lap race was won by Denny Hamlin of the Joe Gibbs Racing team after starting from thirty @-@ eighth position . Jeff Burton finished second and his teammate Kevin Harvick came in third . 
 Jimmie Johnson won the pole position and maintained his lead on the first lap of the race . Many Chase for the Sprint Cup participants , including Johnson , Kurt Busch and Mark Martin , were in the top ten for most of the race , although some encountered problems in the closing laps . Kyle Busch was leading the race with forty @-@ four laps remaining , giving the lead to Hamlin who maintained it to win the race . There were seven cautions in the race , as well as eighteen lead changes among ten different drivers . 
 The race was Hamlin 's fourth win in the 2009 season , and the eighth of his career . Johnson became the first driver to win four consecutive Drivers ' Championships and was 141 points ahead of Mark Martin . Johnson 's team owner Jeff Gordon won the Owners ' Championship . Chevrolet won the Manufacturers ' Championship with 262 points , fifty @-@ five points ahead of Toyota and ninety @-@ eight ahead of Ford . The race attracted 5 @.@ 60 million television viewers . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Homestead Miami Speedway is one of ten intermediate tracks to hold NASCAR races , the others being Atlanta Motor Speedway , Kansas Speedway , Chicagoland Speedway , Darlington Raceway , Texas Motor Speedway , New Hampshire Motor Speedway , Kentucky Speedway , Las Vegas Motor Speedway , and Charlotte Motor Speedway . The race was held on the standard track at Homestead Miami Speedway ; a four @-@ turn oval track that is 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked from 18 to 20 degrees , and both the front stretch ( the location of the finish line ) and the back stretch are banked at three degrees . 
 Before the final race of the season , Jimmie Johnson led the Drivers ' Championship with 6 @,@ 492 points ; Mark Martin was second with 6 @,@ 384 points , 92 points behind Johnson . A maximum of 195 points were available for the final race . Behind Johnson and Martin in the Drivers ' Championship , Jeff Gordon was third with 6 @,@ 323 , and Kurt Busch was fourth with 6 @,@ 281 points . Chevrolet had already secured the Manufacturer 's Championship , and entered the race on 256 points , 58 points ahead of Toyota on 198 points , with a maximum of nine points available at the Ford 400 . Carl Edwards was the race 's defending champion . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — one on Friday , and two on Saturday . The first session lasted 90 minutes , and the second 45 minutes . The final session lasted 60 minutes . In the first practice session , Kurt Busch was fastest , placing ahead of Juan Pablo Montoya in second and Clint Bowyer in third . Ryan Newman took fourth position and Joey Logano placed fifth . Tony Stewart , Edwards , Dale Earnhardt , Jr . , Kevin Harvick and David Reutimann rounded out the top ten fastest drivers in the session . 
 Although forty @-@ eight drivers were entered in the qualifier ; according to NASCAR 's qualifying procedure , only forty @-@ three could race . Each driver ran two laps , with the starting order determined by the competitor 's fastest times . Johnson clinched his fifth pole position of the season , with a time of 31 @.@ 049 . He was joined on the grid 's front row by Scott Speed . Marcos Ambrose qualified third , Martin took fourth and Stewart started fifth . Harvick , Newman , Greg Biffle , Bill Elliott and Bowyer completed the top ten fastest qualifiers . Kurt Busch , one of the drivers in the Chase for the Sprint Cup , qualified twelfth , while Jeff Gordon set the twentieth fastest time . The five drivers who failed to qualify were Joe Nemechek , Dave Blaney , Mike Skinner , Max Papis and David Stremme . After the qualifier Johnson said , " I had a talk with myself to do what I could today and don 't freak out if it 's not as good as what Mark [ Martin ] ran . I kept my emotions in check and drove the car with the right touch and feel , and that comes from being relaxed , so it went well . " 
 On Saturday morning , Martin was fastest in the second practice session , ahead of Denny Hamlin in second , and Johnson in third . Newman was fourth quickest , and Kyle Busch took fifth . Jeff Burton managed sixth . Biffle , Kasey Kahne , Joey Logano and Martin Truex , Jr. followed in the top ten . Of the other drivers in the Chase , Jeff Gordon finished with the seventeenth fastest time , while Stewart set the twenty @-@ fourth fastest time . Burton paced the final practice session , with Harvick and Martin followed in second and third respectively . Truex was fourth fastest , ahead of Newman and Logano . Johnson was scored seventh , Casey Mears eighth , Brad Keselowski ninth and Hamlin tenth . The other Chase drivers , Jeff Gordon and Kurt Busch were scored fifteenth and eleventh respectively . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The race , the last in the 2009 season , began at 3 : 15 pm EDT and was televised live in the United States on ABC . Around the start of the race , weather conditions were partly cloudy with the air temperature 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) . Fidel Gomez , assistant pastor of Calvary Chapel Fort Lauderdale in Fort Lauderdale , Florida , began pre @-@ race ceremonies with an invocation . Actress Anika Noni Rose performed the national anthem , and Actor Mike Rowe commanded the drivers to start their engines . During the pace laps , Robby Gordon had to move to the back of the grid because of him changing his engine . 
 Johnson retained his pole position lead into the first corner , with Speed behind him . Two laps later , Harvick had moved into fourth position ; Jamie McMurray , who began the race in eleventh , had moved up four positions to seventh place . By lap six , Ambrose began to reduce the lead of Johnson , and Martin got loose on the same lap but regained control of his car . On lap nine , Stewart passed Martin for fourth . One lap later , Ambrose passed Johnson to become the new race leader . On lap 13 , Johnson retook the lead off Ambrose . After having made three positions early , Harvick moved up into second position by passing Ambrose . On lap 16 , Ambrose 's car suffered a flat tire and came into the pit road . 
 Earnhardt who began the race in thirty @-@ second , had moved up nineteen positions to thirteenth by lap 24 . Two laps later , Ambrose began to slow and made a pit stop three laps later to change his car 's battery . On lap 33 , Stewart passed Johnson to become the new race leader while Ambrose 's car went into his garage . Three laps later , <unk> had passed McMurray for tenth position . On lap 38 , Clint Bowyer passed Martin for fourth position , as Ambrose rejoined the race four laps later . On lap 47 , Kurt Busch passed Martin to claim sixth position . Three laps later , green flag pit stops began , as Matt Kenseth and Martin were the first to pit . Johnson made his pit stop one lap later . 
 On lap 53 , Kurt Busch became the new race leader after Stewart came into his pit stall . One lap later , Kurt Busch came onto pit road and Bowyer became the new race leader . On lap 57 , Harvick passed Bowyer to clinch the lead . Two laps later , Bowyer moved into second position by passing Stewart . Four laps later , Stewart reclaimed the lead after passing Harvick . On lap 64 , Johnson passed Martin to move into ninth . By lap 73 , Stewart had a 2 @.@ 4 second lead over Harvick . One lap later , Newman collided with the wall , falling to eleventh place , and escaped with minor damage . On the 79th lap , Truex moved into seventh after passing Jeff Gordon . Two laps later , Ambrose spun at turn four but avoided contact with the barriers , causing the first caution of the race , and the pace car came out on track . During the caution , most of the leaders made pit stops . 
 Stewart maintained his lead on the restart , but Harvick reclaimed the lead immediately afterward , and Stewart was passed by Bowyer for second . One lap later , Stewart dropped to sixth as he was passed by Johnson , Montoya and Kurt Busch . On lap 89 , Montoya passed Kurt Busch to move into fourth position . Two laps later , Montoya moved into third position after passing Johnson . On lap 92 , Montoya passed Bowyer for second , as Burton moved into third . Three laps later , Kurt Busch moved up into sixth after passing Johnson . On lap 101 , John Andretti collided with the wall , causing the second caution of the race . As with the first caution , most of the leaders made their pit stops . 
 Harvick maintained his lead on the restart . Three laps later , Ambrose collided with the wall which prompted the third caution . Most of the drivers stayed on track during the caution , allowing Harvick to remain the leader on the restart . A collision involving Montoya and Stewart occurred on lap 116 and the third caution was given as a result . Harvick led on the restart , although he was passed by Kurt Busch within eleven laps . By lap 143 , Kurt Busch had a 1 @.@ 5 second lead over Harvick . Two laps later , Hamlin passed Harvick to claim second . On lap 155 , Montoya and Stewart were involved in a collision and prompted the fifth caution . During the caution , all of the leaders made pit stops and Montoya was black @-@ flagged for two laps . On lap 158 , Hamlin reclaimed the lead , followed by Kurt Busch and Burton . 
 On lap 165 , Johnson moved into seventh . Afterward , Johnson passed Jeff Gordon for sixth position . Seven laps later , Kurt Busch reclaimed the lead off Hamlin . During the 184th lap , Burton passed Hamlin for second . Ten laps later , a sixth caution came out as Robby Gordon spun sideways . All leading cars made pit stops , with Hamlin maintaining his lead until Burton passed him on the restart . By lap 205 , Burton had a lead of over two seconds . On lap 216 , debris was spotted on the track and the seventh and final caution was prompted . The lead drivers made their pit stops . One lap later , Michael Waltrip became the new leader , followed by Andretti . Kurt Busch regained the lead one lap later , when Waltrip and Andretti made their pit stops . Kyle Busch immediately passed Kurt Busch on the restart for the lead . One lap later , Hamlin reclaimed the lead off Kyle Busch . 
 On lap 229 , Jeff Gordon passed Johnson for the seventh position . Seven laps later , Martin moved into twelfth . After 247 laps , Hamlin 's lead over Kyle Busch was 2 @.@ 3 seconds . During the 249th lap , Edwards passed Bowyer for eighth . Six laps later , Kurt Busch passed Kyle Busch for third , and Kyle Busch lost fourth place to Johnson on lap 256 . Hamlin maintained the lead to win his fourth race of the 2009 season . Burton finished second , ahead of Harvick and Kurt Busch . Johnson , who finished fifth , became the first driver to clinch four consecutive Drivers ' Championships . Gordon , Edwards , Kyle Busch , Truex and A.J. Allmendinger rounded out the top ten finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Hamlin appeared in victory lane to start celebrating his fourth win of the season in front of 70 @,@ 000 who attended the race . Hamlin also earned $ 347 @,@ 975 in race winnings . After winning the race , Hamlin described his disappointment by saying , " The car took off and it was game @-@ over , Everyone 's got a little fight in them , especially when they get done wrong . After our performance today , it 's easy to put yesterday behind me . 
 Afterward , Johnson began celebrating his fourth consecutive Sprint Cup Series championship . During the celebration , Johnson was delighted with his performance , saying , " The truth of it is , to do something that 's never been done in this sport -- to love the sport like I do and respect it like I do -- and the greats : Petty , Earnhardt , Gordon ... to do something they 've never done is so awesome . To win four championships in eight years , what this team has done ... I don 't know where to start . It 's unbelievable . " Burton , who finished second , commended Johnson 's achievements saying , " It ’ s hard to say he ’ s the best when you ’ re out there racing against him , but you have to put him on the list . ” Martin , who finished second in points , said , 
 " Our car didn 't work well [ Sunday ] , It didn 't work well , and we really struggled with it . And as the sun went down , we went to the back . We came in and pitted and tried to do some work on it to try to improve it , and it didn 't really improve it a whole lot , so then we were stuck with sorry track position on top of not having a great race car . We just fought and fought and fought , and actually the last adjustment <unk> it up , and we drove from 21st to 10th , and then right at the end a couple of the guys got the high line going and got me back . " 
 In the Drivers ' Championship , Johnson finished first with 6 @,@ 652 points , one @-@ hundred and forty one ahead of Martin in second . Jeff Gordon followed in third with 6 @,@ 473 . Kurt Busch and Hamlin rounded out the top five positions with 6 @,@ 446 and 6 @,@ 335 points respectively . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet won with 262 points , fifty @-@ five ahead of Toyota and ninety @-@ eight ahead of Ford . Dodge finished fourth with 159 points . 5 @.@ 60 million people watched the race on television . The race took three hours , six minutes and eighteen seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 2 @.@ 632 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = 1867 Manhattan , Kansas earthquake = 
 The 1867 Manhattan earthquake struck Riley County , Kansas on April 24 at 14 : 22 local time . It measured 5 @.@ 1 on a seismic scale that is based on an isoseismal map or the event 's felt area . The earthquake 's epicenter was by the town of Manhattan and is the strongest earthquake to originate in the state . 
 The earthquake had an intensity of VII ( Very strong ) on the Mercalli intensity scale , and was felt over an area of roughly 193 @,@ 051 square miles ( 500 @,@ 000 km2 ) . It caused largely minor damage , reports of which were confined to Kansas , Iowa , and Missouri , according to the United States Geological Survey . 
 Manhattan is near the Nemaha Ridge , a long structure that is bounded by several faults . The nearby Humboldt Fault Zone in particular poses a threat to the city ; though Kansas is not known for earthquake activity , an earthquake could occur at any time . 
 = = Background and geography = = 
 The earthquake 's epicenter lay near Manhattan , Kansas , a town just off the connection of the Kansas River and the Big Blue River . Nearby is the anticline Nemaha Ridge , which has been associated with at least a few earthquakes of Kansas . A 300 ‑ million @-@ year @-@ old Precambrian granite range bounded by faults , it hosts the Humboldt Fault Zone , which , in addition to serving as the range 's easternmost boundary , has produced a large portion of the state 's earthquakes . Each year , it is responsible for at least several small tremors less than magnitude 2 @.@ 7 . It cuts through Permian rock , and according to the Geological Society of America , may actually be a complex fault . Previously , it was believed to be a simple , Precambrian structure . 
 The Nemaha Range lies roughly 50 miles ( 80 km ) east of the Midcontinent rift , which forms a layer of basaltic rock around 1 @.@ 1 billion years old . This rift extends northward to Lake Superior and the surrounding area and southward to Kansas , then stops abruptly . Also present in the state is the Central Kansas Uplift , the faults of which produced several small earthquakes during the late 1980s . According to United States Geological Survey geophysicist Don Steeples , earthquakes at the Humboldt Zone have decreased and activity at the Uplift has increased . 
 Felt over an area of 193 @,@ 051 square miles ( 500 @,@ 000 km2 ) , the earthquake followed the Midcontinent seismic trend : unlike earthquakes on the Western Coast of the US , events in the central and east @-@ central sectors of the country are spread out over extensive areas ; for example , the 1968 Illinois earthquake also followed this trend . 
 The 1867 Manhattan earthquake remains the only notable earthquake to originate in the state , though 25 in total have taken place since . According to a report in the Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America , the frequency between earthquakes is between 40 and 45 years . 
 = = Damage and casualties = = 
 Originating at 20 : 22 UTC , or around 2 : 30 local time , the earthquake was assigned a maximum intensity of VII . Minor damage occurred throughout the geographical region . Injuries were reported as well . The earthquake fractured walls , downed chimneys , and interfered with the stability of structures , even loosening stones . In Louisville and Leavenworth , chimneys fell ; in Paola , the earthquake destroyed one wall of a large post office building . Waves were observed on the Kansas River , 2 feet ( 1 m ) in height . Isolated reports from Iowa and Missouri , describing fallen and cracked plaster in Dubuque and Chillicothe , compliment additional reports of fallen plaster and roof shingles , damaged wells , and cracked walls . 
 A series of articles were published by the Chicago Tribune describing the extent of the damage throughout the state of Kansas . " At Kansas City " details that the earthquake jolted homes with a sudden burst , giving off a resonating roar like thunder . The earthquake also extended into Indiana and Illinois , according to the United States Geological Survey . 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 The Chicago Tribune observed in its article " At Leavenworth , Kansas " that the earthquake was completely unexpected , describing the event as " [ ... ] sudden in its coming and departure . " It confirms that earthquakes were not common in earlier time and states that " all were more or less startled , and , indeed , frightened . " 
 The earthquake renewed geological interest of the state , and scientists began to analyze faults and earthquakes . One study found that between December 1977 and June 1989 , more than 200 earthquakes were recognized by a seismograph network . All were between 4 and .8 on the Richter magnitude scale . 
 = = Future threat = = 
 Despite the fact that Kansas is not seismically active , a strong earthquake could pose significant threats to the state . If an earthquake were to occur , it would likely be along the Nemaha Ridge , which is still active . The Humboldt Fault Zone , a fault just off the Ridge , lies just 12 miles ( 19 km ) eastward of the Tuttle Creek Reservoir near Manhattan . If an earthquake were to occur here , it would likely destroy the dam , releasing 300 @,@ 000 feet ( 91 @,@ 440 m ) of water per second and flooding the nearby area , also threatening roughly 13 @,@ 000 people and 5 @,@ 900 homes . A moderate earthquake " between 5 @.@ 7 to 6 @.@ 6 would cause sand underneath the dam to liquefy into quicksand , causing the dam to spread out and the top to drop up to three feet . " A large earthquake would spawn gaps , forcing water to leak and eventually cause the dam to collapse . Any earthquake that could pose a threat occurs on a cycle of roughly 1 @,@ 800 years , according to the United States Army Corps of Engineers , who studied the area first in 1980 . 
 To counter this threat , the group has galvanized an effort to strengthen the dam . Replacing the sand , which could shift during an earthquake , with more than 350 walls , the group has equipped the dam with sensors . Alarms are connected to these sensors , which would alert nearby citizens to the earthquake . 
 = Delaware Route 20 = 
 Delaware Route 20 ( DE 20 ) is an east – west highway in Sussex County , Delaware . Its western terminus is the Maryland state line in Reliance , where it continues as Maryland Route 392 ( MD 392 ) . Its eastern terminus is DE 54 west of Fenwick Island . The route runs through rural areas of Sussex County and passes through the towns of Seaford , Millsboro , and Dagsboro . DE 20 intersects U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) in Seaford , US 9 in Hardscrabble , US 113 and DE 24 / DE 30 in Millsboro , DE 26 in Dagsboro , and DE 17 in Roxana . DE 20 was originally created by 1936 to run from the Maryland border east to US 113 in Millsboro . By 1970 , it was realigned to bypass Seaford . The route was extended east to DE 1 in Fenwick Island by 1994 ; however , the eastern terminus was cut back to DE 54 in 2005 to avoid the concurrency with that route . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 20 begins at the Maryland border in Reliance , where the road continues west into that state as MD 392 . From the state line , the route heads east on two @-@ lane undivided Stein Highway through farmland with some woods and homes . The road crosses the Maryland and Delaware Railroad 's Seaford Line and continues into Seaford , where it heads into industrial areas . DE 20 widens into a five @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane and passes through residential and commercial areas of the city . The road becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway and comes to a bridge over Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line , turning back into a five @-@ lane road . The route becomes a divided highway again as it intersects with Front Street / Bridgeville Highway . Past this intersection , DE 20 becomes Norman A. Eskridge Highway and bends northeast , reaching an intersection with US 13 . 
 At this point , DE 20 turns south for a concurrency with US 13 on the four @-@ lane divided Sussex Highway . The road crosses Williams Pond before passing through commercial areas and coming to a bridge over the Nanticoke River . Near Blades , DE 20 splits from US 13 by turning east on two @-@ lane undivided Concord Road . The road passes through wooded residential neighborhoods , reaching the community of Concord . The route continues southeast through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes , curving to the east . DE 20 reaches the community of Hardscrabble and intersects US 9 , at which point it is briefly a divided highway . Past this intersection , the name changes to Hardscrabble Road and the road becomes undivided again . The road heads southeast before it makes a turn to the east . The route comes to an intersection with US 113 northwest of Millsboro . 
 DE 20 turns southeast to form a concurrency with US 113 on four @-@ lane divided Dupont Boulevard , entering Millsboro . The road passes through commercial areas , intersecting DE 24 / DE 30 . The two routes run past more businesses and a few homes before leaving Millsboro . DE 20 splits from US 113 by turning southeast on two @-@ lane undivided Dagsboro Road . The road continues through wooded areas with some homes before heading into farmland and crossing Norfolk Southern 's Indian River Secondary railroad line . The route enters Dagsboro and becomes Main Street , passing homes and a few businesses . DE 20 comes to an intersection with DE 26 , at which point that route becomes concurrent with DE 20 . The two routes curve east and leave town on Vines Creek Road . 
 Upon leaving Dagsboro , the road passes to the south of Prince George 's Chapel and DE 20 splits from DE 26 by heading southeast on Armory Road . The road heads to the north of Indian River High School and runs through agricultural areas with some woods and homes , reaching Omar . In Omar , the route crosses Omar Road and becomes Pyle Center Road . DE 20 continues to an intersection with DE 17 in Roxana . Following , the route becomes Zion Church Road and runs through more rural land , crossing DE 54 Alt . Farther southeast , residential development near the road increases and it widens to four lanes . DE 20 comes to its eastern terminus at an intersection with DE 54 west of Fenwick Island . 
 The portion of the route between Bridgeville Highway and US 13 in Seaford is designated as part of the Nanticoke Heritage Byway , a Delaware Byway . DE 20 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 34 @,@ 190 vehicles at the north end of Millsboro to a low of 3 @,@ 030 vehicles at the Shiloh Church Road intersection between Hardscrabble and Millsboro . The portions of DE 20 concurrent with US 13 and US 113 are part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What would become DE 20 was originally an unimproved county road in 1920 , with the portion between Seaford and Concord under contract as a state highway . By 1924 , the road was completed as a state highway from the Maryland border east to Concord . The portion of road between Concord and Hardscrabble was proposed as a state highway a year later . By 1931 , the state highway was extended from Concord to Hardscrabble . A portion of what would become DE 20 west of Millsboro was built as a state road the following year . 
 DE 20 was designated to run from the Maryland border in Reliance east to US 113 in Millsboro by 1936 , following its current alignment to Seaford before heading south along what was then US 13 ( Front Street ) to Blades , where it turned east onto High Street and picked up its current alignment to Millsboro . In 1939 , plans were made to eliminate the grade crossing with the Pennsylvania Railroad ( now Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary ) in Seaford by replacing it with a bridge over the tracks . Construction on this bridge began a year later . On September 2 , 1941 , the DE 20 bridge over the railroad tracks in Seaford opened to traffic . 
 By 1970 , the Norman Eskridge Highway was built between Front Street and US 13 in Seaford , and DE 20 was moved to its current alignment bypassing Seaford and Blades to the north and northeast along the Norman Eskridge Highway and US 13 . In 1985 , the highway was widened into a four @-@ lane road through Seaford , with a parallel bridge built over Conrail 's Delmarva Secondary ( now Norfolk Southern ) . The route was extended to DE 1 in Fenwick Island by 1994 , following its current alignment between Millsboro and DE 54 before overlapping with DE 54 ( Lighthouse Road ) for the easternmost portion of the route . In 2005 , DE 20 was removed from the DE 54 concurrency after it was determined unnecessary for there to be two route numbers for that stretch of road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Sussex County . 
 = Lothian Buses = 
 Lothian Buses is the largest municipal bus company in the United Kingdom . It is the dominant provider of bus services in Lothian . Transport for Edinburgh , a company wholly owned by the City of Edinburgh Council , owns 91 % of the company , with the remainder being owned by the East Lothian , West Lothian and Midlothian councils . 
 Lothian Buses operates the majority of bus services in Edinburgh , extending to outlying suburbs , towns and villages . The company also operates several limited stop express routes , an Edinburgh Airport service , park & ride services and a night bus network as well as several tourist services . 
 The company operates four travel shops ( three in the city centre and one in Dalkeith ) , and operates buses from three depot locations ; <unk> , Annandale Street and Marine at Seafield . The company also maintains a driver training school and an engineering depot at Seafield . 
 = = History = = 
 The company can trace its history back to the Edinburgh Street Tramways Company of 1871 , also involving at various times the tramway companies of Leith , Musselburgh and Edinburgh North . The City Council ( Edinburgh Corporation Tramways Department ) took over operation of the tramways in 1919 , at which time most of the system was cable operated . Electrification of the tram network was completed in 1923 , but the first motor buses had arrived in 1919 . 
 The tramway was closed between 1950 and 1956 , after which the operation became the Edinburgh Corporation Transport Department . In 1965 , it purchased its first rear @-@ engined double @-@ decker bus , <unk> , a Leyland Atlantean <unk> / 1 , which is currently preserved at the Scottish Vintage Bus Museum in Fife . Almost 600 buses were added to the fleet over the next 17 years . 
 In 1975 Edinburgh Corporation Transport was renamed Lothian Region Transport . In 2000 , it was again renamed as Lothian Buses . 
 On 15 August 2013 , Edinburgh Council announced the creation of Transport for Edinburgh , a new public body meant to oversee public transport in Edinburgh , including both buses and the new tram system . Transport convener for Edinburgh Council Lesley Hinds stated : " Our first priority will be integration between bus and tram services and we will have the executive directors of Lothian Buses on the board of the new organisation " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Lothian Buses have won several awards for their services to the Lothian region including Bus Operator of the Year in the 2007 UK Bus Awards , and has subsequently been voted Public Transport Operator of the Year ( Bus ) at the 2008 National Transport Awards . When the company was cited for its substantial route development , 32 % growth in passenger numbers since 1998 and £ 100 million investment in low @-@ floor buses since 2000 . 
 Lothian Buses was voted Best UK Bus Company in 2002 and 2003 , and vehicles previously carried the wording Voted Scotland 's Best Bus Company 2006 in a laurel wreath type logo near the <unk> . 
 In November 2011 , the company won the Top City Operator of the Year award at the UK Bus Awards . 
 = = Fares = = 
 Lothian Buses have operated a flat @-@ fare system , charged per adult , since March 2006 ; child fares , all @-@ day tickets , pre @-@ paid multiple singles and ' <unk> ' are also available , with senior citizens travelling on free travel passes in line with the rest of Scotland . Since April 2016 , an Adult single fare is £ 1 @.@ 60 , and a child is 80p . A day ticket is £ 4 @.@ 00 since 19 April 2015 . 
 Cash payment is placed in a hopper , which automatically dumps into a vault that the driver has no access to . Change is not given , increasing security and allowing passengers to board more quickly . 
 The Lothian ' Ridacard ' bus pass is a pre @-@ paid plastic smartcard giving unlimited travel on regular daytime and night bus services , as well as Edinburgh Trams services . It is purchased initially from a Transport for Edinburgh <unk> , where the owner 's picture is incorporated on the card to prevent mis @-@ use . Once purchased , the card can be placed on an on @-@ board reader , which reads the contactless chip in the smartcard . Cards can be credited for a weekly , 4 weekly or annual period . A warning is displayed on the last five days of validity . The card can then be topped up at Transport for Edinburgh <unk> or Pay Point equipped retailers . 
 = = Bus network = = 
 In conjunction with management changes and route branding , the route network has undergone considerable change with the removal of several apparently confusing aspects such as letter prefixed routes and clockwise / anticlockwise circular services . Some services have been transferred to and re @-@ routed via Princes Street from the parallel George Street in New Town , after the banning of cars from most of Princes Street and the closing of certain access points . 
 The majority of the current network comprises through routes that pass through the city centre from opposing termini . Most services pass in part or in full along Princes Street , with Bristo Place and Leith Walk being the crossing points for the remaining cross city services . There also exists a northern and a southern semi @-@ circle orbital routes , and a local loop in the <unk> area . 
 Many routes are contained within the Edinburgh conurbation , whereas others , most notably the ' playing card ' branded routes , extend into surrounding areas , such as Penicuik , <unk> , Mayfield , Balerno and Edinburgh Airport . 
 Double deck buses show an intermediate points display , as well as a final destination . The company 's double decker buses are unique in Scotland in still displaying the destination at both the front and rear . In early mornings and late evenings , some services are curtailed to the city centre or to early termini , in the transition to the night bus service . In such cases , ' Part Route ' is displayed in the intermediate display . Certain routes have all day short working termini , and minor diversions which are often indicated through the use of internal or external ' tram boards ' . Since 2006 double @-@ deck deliveries feature a ' Route Diverted ; intermediate display , used when road closures cause a service to be diverted from its normal route . 
 = = = Night buses = = = 
 Lothian Buses also operates a <unk> network . Ridership increased when the routes were re @-@ numbered and re @-@ routed to match daytime routes and increased in frequency . The operation of night buses provides a continuous 24 @-@ hour bus service to some areas of the city . This ticket allows for unlimited travel all night on any night bus . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 Lothian Buses operates three garages , and have an engineering works at Seafield , where major work on buses is carried out . 
 The previous company headquarters and engineering works in Shrub Hill , off Leith Walk , were sold in 1999 subject to planning permission , after being occupied by the company since 1871 . After repeated delays , controversies and a public inquiry , in 2004 , the site was sold to BL Developments for £ 12m so that the site could be developed flats and houses . Lothian Buses also maintain four Travel Shops . Three of these are in the city at Waverley Bridge , Hanover Street and Haymarket . A Travel Shop opened at the <unk> Court shopping mall in Dalkeith town centre on 4 February 2008 . 
 = = Trams = = 
 Lothian Buses ' services have been integrated with Edinburgh Trams , since the trams commenced operation in 2014 – both are owned by the council , and Lothian Buses services interchange with the trams at various locations . The now closed guided busway element of <unk> formed part of phase 1a of the tram permanent way . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 Edinburgh Corporation and Lothian Buses have historically employed a high degree of standardisation of their service bus fleet , including the use of low @-@ floor buses to facilitate maintenance savings . Lothian have never employed minibuses on their services , although some <unk> were used for a time . As at December 2012 the fleet consisted of 721 buses . 
 = = = Current vehicles = = = 
 Lothian Buses has a modern fleet by national standards , with an average vehicle age of 5 @.@ 6 years . As of 1 September 2009 the main service fleet is all low floor . 
 The majority of the current main service fleet comprises : 
 Single @-@ deck 
 Volvo B7RLE with Wright Eclipse bodies ( 68 ) 
 Volvo B7RLE with Wright Eclipse 2 bodies ( 29 ) 
 Optare Solo SR ( 6 ) 
 Volvo 7900 diesel @-@ electric hybrids ( 50 ) 
 Double @-@ deck 
 Dennis Trident 2 with Plaxton President bodies ( 95 ) 
 Volvo <unk> with Plaxton President and Wright Eclipse Gemini bodies ( 125 ) 
 Volvo B9TL with Wright Eclipse Gemini bodies ( 100 ) 
 Volvo B9TL with Wright Eclipse Gemini 2 bodies ( 135 ) 
 Scania <unk> ( 15 ) 
 Alexander Dennis <unk> Hybrid ( 15 ) 
 Twenty @-@ eight Plaxton President Dennis Trident 2s have been converted to open @-@ top , all for use on tour and sightseeing operations . 
 All vehicles are fitted with internal and external CCTV cameras and cab radios , for passenger and driver safety , bus lane enforcement and assisting the police , although they have also been used in action against the company 's own drivers . 
 At the end of 2009 , Lothian Buses started replacing their ticket machines with the Wayfarer 200 ticket machines . These machines have been supplied by Transport Scotland as part of the National Concessionary Travel Scheme to improve free travel throughout Scotland . 
 = = = Preserved vehicles = = = 
 Many vehicles previously used by Lothian Buses and its predecessors have been preserved ( or are awaiting preservation ) by various groups and societies . Several of the vehicles regularly appear at events , rallies and running days around the country . 
 = = Main fleet liveries and route branding = = 
 Traditionally , Edinburgh Corporation , Lothian Regional Transport and Lothian Buses had a livery of madder ( a dark red ) and cream , with matching madder leatherette seating . Some coach @-@ seated Alexander RH bodied Leyland Olympians and Alexander Royale bodied Volvo Olympians were painted in the same scheme , but with red in place of the madder . These vehicles are not branded for , but usually operated only on routes 15 / 15A . 
 While the company have traditionally maintained a uniform livery for all buses , deliveries of low floor vehicles has seen a new standard livery introduced . Route branding has been increasingly used by Lothian since the introduction of low floor vehicles . Route branding highlights the route of certain services making the buses easier to be spotted throughout Lothian . Since May 2010 the Harlequin livery used to identify low floor buses has started to be phased out , as the company is now a full low floor operation , with a return to the traditional madder and white livery although the style has been altered slightly to suit the lines of modern buses . Each type of bus owned directly by Lothian Buses has had at least one of their type painted in the new livery . 
 In July 2011 Lothian Buses introduced 60 new double deck buses . These buses continued with the same madder red and white pattern on the outside of the bus but Lothian Buses changed the seats to a matching madder red colour . They also changed the entrance to the bus to a more wooden effect . Routes 4 , 5 , 19 , 23 and 27 were the first buses to receive this branding . 
 Eco branding 
 New branding was created to go with the reintroduction of the madder and white livery to Edinburgh . The buses used on route 36 were gradually repainted in green promoting colours to reflect the type of engine used . In 2011 , 15 Alexander Dennis <unk> hybrid buses were added to the fleet and began operating on route 10 between Western Harbour and <unk> . The new hybrids had some first for Lothian Buses : a madder and gold colour scheme , free Wi @-@ Fi , alloy wheels and electronic destination displays . 
 In 2013 , Lothian Buses took delivery of 10 Volvo 7900 single @-@ deck hybrids . These have entered service on route 1 . Another 20 were delivered in summer 2014 for route 30 , and a further 20 in December of that year for work on services 12 @,@ 24 & 36 
 Penicuik City Link 
 Buses for routes 37 , 47 and <unk> between Edinburgh and Penicuik were branded as Penicuik City Link , with blue uppers and roofline , and the positions of the red and madder on the skirting transposed . In 2011 , one of these buses was repainted into madder and white , with no roof colour . However , the other vehicles in Penicuik City Link colours were repainted into the new madder and white livery with a turquoise mint coloured roof and the name Pen @-@ Y @-@ Cog . This is to celebrate the history of the area as Pen @-@ Y @-@ Cog is the original name for Penicuik . These buses were de @-@ branded in 2014 due to high fuel consumption of the <unk> 's used and the 37 / 47 / <unk> is now worked by standards liveries Volvo B9TL 's . 
 Playing cards theme 
 Four double decker routes using the low @-@ floor scheme are , or have been , based on a playing card theme , with the symbol of the suit incorporating the route number ; 
 Route 3 / 3A was , until September 2010 , Club Class – across the City and Midlothian with extra yellow on the uppers and roofline and a black " club " symbol . Bus 720 , formerly one of the " Club Class " branded buses , was repainted into the new madder and white livery with a yellow roof and " 3 Connect " branding in spring 2010 , and it was expected that this would replace the Club Class branding . However , in September 2010 , it was announced that the 3 and 3A would be rebranded , using the same livery style as trialled on 720 , as The Lady Victoria to honour Midlothian 's mining heritage as the routes pass the Scottish Mining Museum based in the former Lady Victoria Colliery in Newtongrange . 
 Route 26 was , until mid @-@ 2009 , East to West Through the Heart of the City featuring red on the roofline , gold between the decks and a large heart with an arrow symbol . 
 Route 31 was Ace of Spades – cutting across the city and Midlothian with orange uppers and roofline , and a black spade symbol , which was worn by buses 751 – 768 . However , these buses have been repainted into madder and white with no route branding . 
 Route 44 was Service with a Sparkle with black uppers and roofline and a yellow diamond symbol . This was superseded by a new branding , " The Mill Race " , with pebble grey uppers and roofline , but was later removed due to the high fuel consumption of the long route diagram . 
 Two single @-@ deck routes also received branding based on the playing card theme , Route 29 was branded as The Best Deal ( Volvos 136 – 150 , red ) and route 49 Leader of the Pack ( Volvos 151 – 160 and 170 , blue ) . Volvos 151 – 160 were repainted into a new branding for route 49 , The Queen of Scots with 136 – 138 and 170 now repainted into standard madder and white . Meanwhile , Route 29 was rebranded as The Stock Brig until both of these routes commenced double decker operation in June 2014 and March 2015 respectively . The 29 has retained an orange roof but with no " Stock Brig " branding . 
 Connect branding 
 Mid 2009 saw the introduction of Connect branding , with the first example being red @-@ based 26 Connect : <unk> , City Centre , Seton Sands / <unk> This supersedes the earlier playing card theme . The second example applies to new , buggy friendly vehicles on route 22 , with the branding 22 Connect : Gyle + Edinburgh Park , City Centre , Ocean Terminal The base colour here is pink . A third example was applied to bus 720 on route 3 , with the legend 3 Connect . The base colour here is yellow , and was applied together with a new interpretation of the classic madder and white livery . The 3 Connect branding was replaced by The Lady Victoria branding in October 2010 . 
 Zoom to the Zoo advertising 
 In June 2009 Lothian Buses entered into a two @-@ year deal with Edinburgh Zoo to create a fleet of ten vehicles carrying animal @-@ themed advertising designs over Route 26 Connect branding . Five variations exist , on two vehicles each : 
 " <unk> Anyone ? " – featuring the chimps 
 " Dive On " – penguins 
 " Have a <unk> day Out " – tigers 
 " Go Faster Stripes " – zebras 
 " Take Off ! " – rainbow lorikeets 
 = = Tourism = = 
 = = = History of tour operations = = = 
 Lothian Buses have operated city tours using white liveried coaches . Later , Leyland Atlanteans were employed in this same livery , with blinds for City Tour . These wore an updated version of the white livery with blue detailing after a short period . An Edinburgh Classic Tour was set up in 1989 using open top Leyland Atlanteans , and later Leyland Olympians , which competed with Guide Friday . This was as a result of Guide Friday introducing competition on the city centre to Airport route . The buses wore a blue and white livery , each carrying a name <unk> Star , Lothian Star and Highland Star . Lothian Buses also operated open top tours in Oxford ( in conjunction with local operator <unk> ) and Cambridge under the Classic Tour identity . 
 = = = Edinburgh Bus Tours = = = 
 Lothian Buses operate several open top double deck tour bus services under four distinct brands : City Sightseeing , Edinburgh Tours , Mac Tours and The Majestic Tour . The City Sightseeing tour is operated as a franchise of the City Sightseeing brand . In 2013 , all were brought under the control of one entity , Edinburgh Bus Tours , although the separate trading names are retained . 
 City Sightseeing , Edinburgh Tours and Mac Tours visit the Old Town , New Town , Calton Hill , Holyrood Palace and Edinburgh Castle , albeit on slightly differing routes . The Majestic Tour operates a long loop from Holyrood and New Town , via the Royal Botanic Garden , to the coast at Ocean Terminal , the site of the former Royal Yacht Britannia . 
 The Mac Tours operation uses AEC Routemaster buses in a dark red and cream livery , with See Edinburgh By Vintage Bus branding . All other tours use Plaxton President bodied Dennis Trident 2s . For the City Sightseeing tours , the livery is red , for Edinburgh Tours the livery is white and green , and Majestic Tours use yellow and blue coloured vehicles . 
 = = = Forth Tours = = = 
 Since 2007 Mac Tours has operated a bus for Forth Tours providing <unk> from Waverley Bridge for their various tours and cruises of the Firth of Forth . The bus used is a dedicated Plaxton President bodied Dennis Trident painted in a special yellow , blue and green Forth Tours livery . ( <unk> 1484 ) . 
 = = Services = = 
 = = = Airlink 100 = = = 
 Lothian Buses operates a dedicated limited stop service , route 100 , to Edinburgh Airport from Waverley Bridge along Corstorphine Road . This service uses a dedicated fleet , special fares and its own web @-@ site . An orange winged ' A ' logo adorns the web site and the interior / exterior of the vehicles . 
 After the original Leyland Olympians in plain Airline blue , the later Scania <unk> were replaced by new Wright Eclipse Gemini 2 bodied Volvo <unk> in March 2010 . The new vehicles included " E @-@ leather " upholstery ( a type of manmade composition leather made from recycled waste leather <unk> ) , power sockets , CCTV which enables passengers on the top deck to watch their luggage on the lower deck , LED lights and free wi @-@ fi . The vehicles cost over £ 200 @,@ 000 each , £ 30 @,@ 000 more than standard vehicles , and carry a two @-@ tone blue and red livery . The previous <unk> carried a livery of white and light / dark blue , with orange detailing . 
 = = = Park & Ride = = = 
 Edinburgh has a network of existing and proposed park & ride sites . Lothian buses call at some of these sites : 
 = = Lothian Country Buses = = 
 In June 2012 Lothian Buses expanded into East Lothian with the introduction of route 113 from <unk> to Edinburgh , replacing First Group 's <unk> service following them withdrawing from the area . Route 113 is operated by a separate legal entity , Lothian Country Buses . Initially operated by existing Lothian buses , the service is now operated by five Wright Eclipse bodied Volvo <unk> and two Plaxton President bodied Dennis Trident 2s painted in a green and cream livery similar to that of the former Scottish Motor Traction / Eastern Scottish buses . In September 2014 , a second service commenced from Haddington to Edinburgh . This service is run by 5 Volvo B7RLE Wright Eclipse Urban 2 bodies buses which were formally liveried for Lothian 's " The Queen Of Scots " route 49 branding . 
 = = East Coast Buses = = 
 In August 2016 , the Musselburgh and North Berwick garages of First Scotland East will be taken over . These will be operated as East Coast Buses . 
 = = Vehicle tracking = = 
 Lothian Buses are active members of the Bustracker system and are responsible for the funding of it as well as being partly responsible for the operation of it . It operates by tracking the movements of buses ; computers then relay this information to the designated bus tracker signs throughout the city giving real @-@ time and more up @-@ to @-@ date information on when buses are due to the passengers . 
 In December 2009 , it was announced that following the success of Bustracker , an application had been developed for the iPhone that is similar to the way Bustracker works . It allows people to download an application to their iPhone that enables them to see where their nearest bus stop is and when the bus is due . Although not developed by Lothian Buses or The City of Edinburgh Council , the application has now won the backing of both companies . My Bus Edinburgh is an application developed for the Android platform which is similar in functionality to the iPhone application . Like the iPhone application , this application is developed by an independent developer , backed by Lothian Buses and The City of Edinburgh Council , and is available free of charge . 
 In August 2010 , the company introduced an early running alarm system for drivers , which is linked into the automatic vehicle tracking system , and sounds an alarm and displays warning messages if the bus is running early . This was as a result of the company being fined £ 10 @,@ 500 by the Traffic Commissioner for Scotland , having been found to be running buses early . After a customer complaint , Vehicle and Operator Services Agency monitored services 45 , 27 , 4 and 16 in February 2010 , and found that of 303 instances , 44 buses were running early , despite starting the route on time , while 20 were running late . The company 's defence was that they had built in some running time to cope with the delays due to tram works , but in some places , these works had ended early . The Commissioner accepted this defence , and chose not to take action against the company 's operating licence ( which authorises a maximum of 700 vehicles ) . Instead the Commissioner imposed a fine set much lower than the legal maximum ( calculated as £ 550 * 700 vehicles = £ 385 @,@ 000 ) 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Since 2006 , Lothian Buses Seafield depot has been used as the setting for the CBeebies programme Me Too ! under the name of <unk> Buses . The company 's staff also feature in the show . Of the firm 's participation in the series , the company 's then Chief executive officer Neil <unk> said " It 's a good opportunity to keep public transport in the eye of the next generation of customers . " 
 = Effect of Hurricane Katrina on the New Orleans Hornets = 
 After Hurricane Katrina devastated the U.S. city of New Orleans , Louisiana on August 29 , 2005 , and caused extensive damage to the New Orleans Arena , the New Orleans Hornets ( now known as the New Orleans Pelicans ) of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) were unable to play any home games there for the entire 2005 – 06 season . They temporarily relocated to Oklahoma City , Oklahoma , becoming the New Orleans / Oklahoma City Hornets . After playing the majority of home games for both the 2005 – 06 and 2006 – 07 seasons at the Ford Center in Oklahoma City , the Hornets returned to New Orleans for the 2007 – 08 season . 
 Following the success of the Hornets ' tenure in the city , the Seattle SuperSonics relocated to Oklahoma City for the 2008 – 09 season , and now compete as the Oklahoma City Thunder . 
 = = Response = = 
 Because of the extensive damage resulting from the hurricane , where the Hornets would play for the 2005 – 06 season came into question . Although the New Orleans Arena suffered only slight damage , the flooding surrounding the area made it impossible to use . With the training camp scheduled to begin on October 4 , the team announced that the first three weeks of camp would be held at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs , Colorado , instead of their usual location , <unk> Center in <unk> . Additionally the team stated that they wanted to play home games within Louisiana , at either the Pete Maravich Assembly Center or the <unk> in Baton Rouge . On September 3 , Hornets owner George Shinn stated that the storm would not be used as a reason to permanently relocate the franchise . 
 By September 10 , the prospect of securing a Baton Rouge location to host the Hornets was fading as a result of the facilities being utilized for hurricane related relief operations . Numerous cities inquired about hosting the franchise for the season , including Kansas City , Louisville , Nashville , Oklahoma City and San Diego . During this period , Oklahoma City announced that it was the favored choice to serve as the temporary home of the franchise , although by mid @-@ September SMG announced that the New Orleans arena could potentially be ready for occupancy by the All @-@ Star Break . However , by late September the Hornets finalized a move to Oklahoma City , where 35 games would be played at the Ford Center , as well as six in Baton Rouge at the Pete Maravich Assembly Center . Additionally , it was announced that three of the games in March could be moved to New Orleans if the arena repairs were complete . At the same time , the NBA also announced the team would be referred to officially as the New Orleans / Oklahoma City Hornets , and that the deal reached with Oklahoma City would allow for the team to return for the 2006 – 07 season , if necessary . 
 = = Delayed return = = 
 In order to allow for a full recovery of the New Orleans market in the wake of the storm , the NBA announced on January 31 , 2006 , that the Hornets would remain in Oklahoma City for the 2006 – 07 season and return for the 2007 – 08 season . The league also announced that New Orleans would play host for the 2008 All @-@ Star Game , in addition to hosting the team for six of their 41 home games during the season . Although guarantees by the league and organization indicated a return for 2007 – 08 , many fans in New Orleans were still skeptical of a permanent return due to the popularity of the team in Oklahoma City . Meanwhile , the Hornets opened their season in Oklahoma City with a 26 @-@ point win over the Sacramento Kings on November 1 , 2005 . They played their first game in Louisiana in a loss to the Phoenix Suns on December 21 , 2005 , and they played the first professional sports event in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina on March 8 , 2006 , where they lost to the Los Angeles Lakers . The Hornets completed the 2005 – 06 season by winning 38 games , tenth in the Western Conference . They became the first team since the 1974 – 75 Boston Celtics to play home games at four separate venues : the Ford Center in Oklahoma City , the New Orleans Arena in New Orleans , the Pete Maravich Assembly Center in Baton Rouge , and the Lloyd Noble Center in Norman , Oklahoma . The Hornets had finished last in attendance in the previous season in New Orleans , but playing in Ford Center , they averaged 18 @,@ 168 fans , a 78 % increase . Referring to the fan support in Oklahoma City , Hornets star Chris Paul said that " You get a feeling you 're a part of something special " ; mayor Mick Cornett said , " My expectations were lofty , but we 've exceeded them . " 
 All repair work on the New Orleans Arena was finished by March 2006 , and a new scoreboard and video displays were added during the process . In June 2006 , Shinn stated he was pleased with the ongoing recovery process in New Orleans and again reaffirmed his desire to permanently return for the 2007 – 08 season . However , the Hornets also announced that they were in the process of negotiating with Oklahoma City to play the 2007 – 08 season at the Ford Center as a contingency plan . The Hornets opened the 2006 – 07 season at New Orleans with a win over the Boston Celtics . They improved their final record from the previous season by one game , and again finished tenth in the Western Conference , three games out of the playoffs . Their attendance declined slightly compared to the previous season , and they finished 15th overall in attendance . The Hornets made their permanent return to New Orleans on October 31 , 2007 , when they defeated the Sacramento Kings 109 @-@ 90 to open the 2007 – 08 season . In the following two seasons , the Hornets averaged an attendance of 15 @,@ 574 . During the 2008 All @-@ Star Game , the NBA donated $ 5 million towards relief work , and staged an NBA Cares program throughout the city to help rebuilding efforts . 
 = Old Tjikko = 
 Old Tjikko is a 9 @,@ 558 -year @-@ old Norway Spruce , located on <unk> Mountain of Dalarna province in Sweden . Old Tjikko originally gained fame as the " world 's oldest tree " , however , this is inaccurate , as only clonal trees , and not individual trees , are known to live this long . Though there are older clonal trees , Old Tjikko is recognized as the oldest living clonal Norway Spruce . 
 The age of the tree was determined by carbon dating of genetically matched plant material collected from under the tree , as dendrochronology would cause damage . The trunk itself is estimated to be only a few hundred years old , but the plant has survived for much longer due to a process known as layering ( when a branch comes in contact with the ground , it sprouts a new root ) , or vegetative cloning ( when the trunk dies but the root system is still alive , it may sprout a new trunk ) . 
 = = Discovery and details = = 
 Old Tjikko is estimated to be at least 9 @,@ 550 years old , making it the world 's oldest known individual vegetatively cloned tree . It stands 5 metres ( 16 ft ) tall and is located on <unk> Mountain of Dalarna province in Sweden . For thousands of years , the tree appeared in a stunted shrub formation ( also known as a krummholz formation ) due to the harsh extremes of the environment in which it lives . During the warming of the 20th century , the tree sprouted into a normal tree formation . The man who discovered the tree , Leif <unk> ( Professor of Physical Geography at Umeå University ) , has attributed this growth spurt to global warming , and given the tree its nickname " Old Tjikko " after his late dog . 
 The tree has survived for so long due to vegetative cloning . The visible tree is relatively young , but it is part of an older root system which dates back thousands of years . The trunk of the tree may die and regrow multiple times , but the tree 's root system remains intact and in turn sprouts another trunk . The trunk may only live for about 600 years , and when one trunk dies another eventually grows back in its place . Also , each winter , heavy snow may push the tree 's low @-@ lying branches to ground level , where they take root and survive to grow again the next year in a process known as layering . <unk> occurs when a tree 's branch comes in contact with the earth , and new roots sprout from the contact point . Other trees , such as coast redwoods and western <unk> are known to reproduce by layering . The tree 's age was determined by carbon @-@ 14 dating of the root system , which found roots dating back to 375 , 5 @,@ 660 , 9 @,@ 000 , and 9 @,@ 550 years . Carbon dating is not accurate enough to pin down the exact year the tree sprouted from seed , but given the estimated age the tree is supposed to have sprouted around <unk> BC . For comparison , the invention of writing ( and thus , the beginning of recorded history ) did not occur until around 4000 BC . Researchers have found a cluster of around 20 spruce trees in the same area , all over 8 @,@ 000 years old . Previous researchers considered the Norway spruce species to be a relative newcomer to Sweden , with theories postulating the tree migrated into the area around 2 @,@ 000 years ago . Trees much older than 10 @,@ 000 years would be practically impossible in Sweden , because until around 11 @,@ 000 years ago the area was in the grip of a world @-@ wide ice age . Nature conservancy authorities are considering putting a fence around the tree to protect it from possible vandals or trophy hunters . 
 = = Access = = 
 There is a small path leading up towards the tree . However , it is unmarked , as park rangers do not want to encourage large groups of tourists to surround the tree . A free guided tour can be arranged at the entrance ( <unk> ) that can take tourists to the tree . 
 = Andrew M. Gleason = 
 Andrew Mattei Gleason ( November 4 , 1921 – October 17 , 2008 ) was an American mathematician who as a young World War II naval officer broke German and Japanese military codes , then over the succeeding sixty years made fundamental contributions to widely varied areas of mathematics , including the solution of Hilbert 's fifth problem , and was a leader in reform and innovation in math ­ e ­ mat ­ ics teaching at all levels . Gleason 's theorem in quantum logic and the Greenwood – Gleason graph , an important example in Ramsey theory , are named for him . 
 Gleason 's entire academic career was at Harvard , from which he retired in 1992 . His numerous academic and scholarly leadership posts included chairmanship of the Harvard Mathematics Department and Harvard Society of Fellows , and presidency of the American Mathematical Society . He continued to advise the United States government on cryptographic security , and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts on math ­ e ­ mat ­ ics education for children , almost until the end of his life . 
 Gleason won the Newcomb Cleveland Prize in 1952 and the Gung – Hu Distinguished Service Award of the American Mathematical Society in 1996 . He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences and of the American Philosophical Society , and held the Hollis Chair of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy at Harvard . 
 He was fond of saying that math ­ e ­ mat ­ ic ­ al proofs " really aren 't there to convince you that something is true — ​ ​ they 're there to show you why it is true . " The Notices of the American Mathematical Society called him " one of the quiet giants of twentieth @-@ century mathematics , the consummate professor dedicated to scholarship , teaching , and service in equal measure . " 
 = = Biography = = 
 Gleason was born in Fresno , California , the youngest of three children ; his father Henry Gleason was a botanist and a member of the Mayflower Society , and his mother was the daughter of Swiss @-@ American winemaker Andrew Mattei . His older brother Henry , Jr. became a linguist . He grew up in Bronxville , New York , where his father was the curator of the New York Botanical Garden . 
 After briefly attending Berkeley High School ( Berkeley , California ) he graduated from Roosevelt High School in Yonkers , winning a scholarship to Yale University . Though Gleason 's mathematics education had gone only so far as some self @-@ taught calculus , Yale mathematician William Raymond Longley urged him to try a course in mechanics normally intended for juniors . 
 So I learned first year calculus and second year calculus and became the consultant to one end of the whole Old Campus ... I used to do all the homework for all the sections of [ first @-@ year calculus ] . I got plenty of practice in doing elementary calculus problems . I don 't think there exists a problem — ​ ​ the classical kind of pseudo reality problem which first and second @-@ year students are given — ​ ​ that I haven 't seen . " 
 One month later he enrolled in a differential equations course ( " mostly full of seniors " ) as well . When Einar Hille temporarily replaced the regular instructor , Gleason found Hille 's style " unbelievably different ... He had a view of mathematics that was just vastly different ... That was a very important experience for me . So after that I took a lot of courses from Hille " including , in his sophomore year , graduate @-@ level real analysis . " Starting with that course with Hille , I began to have some sense of what mathematics is about . " 
 While at Yale he competed three times ( 1940 , 1941 and 1942 ) in the recently founded William Lowell Putnam Mathematical Competition , always placing among the top five entrants in the country ( making him the second three @-@ time Putnam Fellow ) . 
 After the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor during his senior year , Gleason applied for a commission in the US Navy , and on graduation joined the team working to break Japanese naval codes . ( Others on this team included his future collaborator Robert E. Greenwood and Yale professor Marshall Hall , Jr . ) He also collaborated with British researchers attacking the German Enigma cipher ; Alan Turing , who spent substantial time with Gleason while visiting Washington , called him " the brilliant young Yale graduate mathematician " in a report of his visit . 
 In 1946 , at the recommendation of Navy colleague Donald Howard Menzel , Gleason was appointed a Junior Fellow at Harvard . An early goal of the Junior Fellows program was to allow young scholars showing extraordinary promise to sidestep the lengthy PhD process ; four years later Harvard appointed Gleason an assistant professor of mathematics , though he was almost immediately recalled to Washington for cryptographic work related to the Korean War . He returned to Harvard in the fall of 1952 , and soon after published the most important of his results on Hilbert 's fifth problem ( see below ) . Harvard awarded him tenure the following year . 
 In January 1959 he married Jean <unk> whom he had met at a party featuring the music of Tom Lehrer . <unk> , a <unk> , worked for many years at Boston University . They had three daughters . 
 In 1969 Gleason took the Hollis Chair of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy , the oldest ( est . 1727 ) scientific endowed professorship in the US . He retired from Harvard in 1992 but remained active in service to Harvard ( as chair of the Society of Fellows , for example ) and to mathematics : in particular , promoting the Harvard Calculus Reform Project and working with the Massachusetts Board of Education . 
 He died in 2008 from complications following surgery . 
 = = Teaching and education reform = = 
 Gleason said he " always enjoyed helping other people with math " — ​ ​ a colleague said he " regarded teaching mathematics — ​ ​ like doing mathematics — ​ ​ as both important and also genuinely fun . " At fourteen , during his brief attendance at Berkeley High School , he found himself not only bored with first @-@ semester geometry , but also helping other students with their homework — ​ ​ including those taking the second half of the course , which he soon began auditing . 
 At Harvard he " regularly taught at every level " , including administratively burdensome <unk> courses . One class presented Gleason with a framed print of Picasso 's Mother and Child in recognition of his care for them . 
 In 1964 he created " the first of the ' bridge ' courses now ubiquitous for math majors , only twenty years before its time . " Such a course is designed to teach new students , accustomed to rote learning of mathematics in secondary school , how to reason abstractly and construct mathematical proofs . That effort led to publication of his Fundamentals of Abstract Analysis , of which one reviewer wrote : 
 This is a most unusual book ... Every working mathematician of course knows the difference between a lifeless chain of formalized propositions and the " feeling " one has ( or tries to get ) of a mathematical theory , and will probably agree that helping the student to reach that " inside " view is the ultimate goal of mathematical education ; but he will usually give up any attempt at successfully doing this except through oral teaching . The originality of the author is that he has tried to attain that goal in a textbook , and in the reviewer 's opinion , he has succeeded remarkably well in this all but impossible task . Most readers will probably be delighted ( as the reviewer has been ) to find , page after page , painstaking discussions and explanations of standard mathematical and logical procedures , always written in the most felicitous style , which spares no effort to achieve the utmost clarity without falling into the vulgarity which so often mars such attempts . 
 But Gleason 's " talent for exposition " did not always imply that the reader would be enlightened without effort of his own . Even in a wartime a memo on the urgently important decryption of the German Enigma cipher , Gleason and his colleagues wrote : 
 The reader may wonder why so much is left to the reader . A book on swimming strokes may be nice to read , but one must practice the strokes while actually in the water before one can claim to be a swimmer . So if the reader desires to actually possess the knowledge for recovering wiring from a depth , let the reader get his paper and pencils , using perhaps four colors to avoid confusion in the connecting links , and go to work . 
 His notes and exercises on probability and statistics , drawn up for his lectures to code @-@ breaking colleagues during the war ( see below ) remained in use in National Security Agency training for several decades ; they were published openly in 1985 . 
 In a 1964 Science article , Gleason wrote of an apparent paradox arising in attempts to explain mathematics to <unk> : 
 It is notoriously difficult to convey the proper impression of the frontiers of mathematics to <unk> . Ultimately the difficulty stems from the fact that mathematics is an easier subject than the other sciences . Consequently , many of the important primary problems of the subject — ​ ​ that is , problems which can be understood by an intelligent outsider — ​ ​ have either been solved or carried to a point where an indirect approach is clearly required . The great bulk of pure mathematical research is concerned with secondary , tertiary , or higher @-@ order problem , the very statement of which can hardly be understood until one has mastered a great deal of technical mathematics . 
 Gleason was part of the School Mathematics Study Group , which helped define the New Math of the 1960s — ​ ​ ambitious changes in American elementary and high school mathematics teaching emphasizing understanding of concepts over rote algorithms . Gleason was " always interested in how people learn " ; as part of the New Math effort he spent most mornings over several months with second @-@ graders . Some years later he gave a talk in which he described his goal as having been : 
 to find out how much they could figure out for themselves , given appropriate activities and the right guidance . At the end of his talk , someone asked Andy whether he had ever worried that teaching math to little kids wasn 't how faculty at research institutions should be spending their time . [ His ] quick and decisive response : " No , I didn 't think about that at all . I had a ball ! " 
 In 1986 he helped found the Calculus Consortium , which has published a successful and influential series of " calculus reform " textbooks for college and high school , on <unk> , calculus , and other areas . His " credo for this program as for all of his teaching was that the ideas should be based in equal parts of geometry for visualization of the concepts , computation for grounding in the real world , and algebraic manipulation for power . " However , the program faced heavy criticism from the mathematics community for its omission of topics such as the mean value theorem , and for its perceived lack of mathematical rigor . 
 = = <unk> work = = 
 During World War II Gleason was part of OP @-@ 20 @-@ G , the U.S. Navy 's signals intelligence and cryptanalysis group , one task of which ( in collaboration with British cryptographers at Bletchley Park such as Alan Turing ) was to penetrate German Enigma machine communications networks . The British had great success with two of these networks , but the third , used for German @-@ Japanese naval coordination , remained unbroken because of a faulty assumption that it employed a simplified version of Enigma . After OP @-@ 20 @-@ G 's Marshall Hall observed that certain metadata in Berlin @-@ to @-@ Tokyo transmissions used letter sets disjoint from those used in Tokyo @-@ to @-@ Berlin metadata , Gleason hypothesized that the corresponding unencrypted letters sets were A @-@ M ( in one direction ) and N @-@ Z ( in the other ) , then devised novel statistical tests by which he confirmed this hypothesis . The result was routine decryption of this third network by 1944 . ( This work also involved deeper math ­ e ­ mat ­ ics related to permutation groups and the graph isomorphism problem . ) 
 OP @-@ 20 @-@ G then turned to the Japanese navy 's " Coral " cipher , a key tool for the attack on which was the " Gleason crutch " , a form of Chernoff bound on tail distributions of sums of independent random variables , but predating Chernoff 's work by a decade . 
 Toward the end of the war he concentrated on documenting the work of OP @-@ 20 @-@ G and developing systems for training new cryptographers . 
 In 1950 Gleason returned to active duty for the Korean War , serving as a Lieutenant Commander in the Nebraska Avenue Complex ( which much later became the home of the DHS Cyber Security Division ) . His cryptographic work from this period remains classified , but it is known that he recruited mathematicians and taught them cryptanalysis . He served on the advisory boards for the National Security Agency and the Institute for Defense Analyses , and he continued to recruit , and to advise the military on cryptanalysis , almost to the end of his life . 
 = = Mathematics research = = 
 Gleason made fundamental contributions to widely varied areas of mathematics , including the theory of Lie groups , quantum mechanics , and combinatorics . According to Freeman Dyson 's famous classification of mathematicians as being either birds or frogs , Gleason was a frog : he worked as a problem solver rather than a visionary formulating grand theories . 
 = = = Hilbert 's fifth problem = = = 
 In 1900 David Hilbert posed 23 problems he felt would be central to next century of mathematics research . Hilbert 's fifth problem concerns the characterization of Lie groups by their actions on topological spaces : to what extent does their topology provide information sufficient to determine their geometry ? 
 The " restricted " version of Hilbert 's fifth problem ( solved by Gleason ) asks , more specifically , whether every locally Euclidean topological group is a Lie group . That is , if a group G has the structure of a topological manifold , can that structure be strengthened to a real analytic structure , so that within any neighborhood of an element of G , the group law is defined by a convergent power series , and so that overlapping neighborhoods have compatible power series definitions ? Prior to Gleason 's work , special cases of the problem had been solved by <unk> <unk> Jan Brouwer , John von Neumann , Lev Pontryagin , and Garrett Birkhoff , among others . 
 Gleason 's interest in the fifth problem began in the late 1940s , sparked by a course he took from George Mackey . In 1949 he published a paper introducing the " no small subgroups " property of Lie groups ( the existence of a neighborhood of the identity within which no nontrivial subgroup exists ) that would eventually be crucial to its solution . His 1952 paper on the subject , together with a paper published concurrently by Deane Montgomery and Leo Zippin , solves affirmatively the restricted version of Hilbert 's fifth problem , showing that indeed every locally Euclidean group is a Lie group . Gleason 's contribution was to prove that this is true when G has the no small subgroups property ; Montgomery and Zippin showed every locally Euclidean group has this property . As Gleason told the story , the key insight of his proof was to apply the fact that monotonic functions are differentiable almost everywhere . On finding the solution , he took a week of leave to write it up , and it was printed in the Annals of Mathematics alongside the paper of Montgomery and Zippin ; another paper a year later by Hidehiko <unk> removed some technical side conditions from Gleason 's proof . 
 The " unrestricted " version of Hilbert 's fifth problem , closer to Hilbert 's original formulation , considers both a locally Euclidean group G and another manifold M on which G has a continuous action . Hilbert asked whether , in this case , M and the action of G could be given a real analytic structure . It was quickly realized that the answer was negative , after which attention centered on the restricted problem . However , with some additional smoothness assumptions on G and M , it might yet be possible to prove the existence of a real analytic structure on the group action . The Hilbert – Smith conjecture , still unsolved , encapsulates the remaining difficulties of this case . 
 = = = Quantum mechanics = = = 
 The Born rule states that an observable property of a quantum system is defined by a Hermitian operator on a separable Hilbert space , that the only observable values of the property are the eigenvalues of the operator , and that the probability of the system being observed in a particular eigenvalue is the square of the absolute value of the complex number obtained by projecting the state vector ( a point in the Hilbert space ) onto the corresponding eigenvector . George Mackey had asked whether Born 's rule is a necessary consequence of a particular set of axioms for quantum mechanics , and more specifically whether every measure on the lattice of projections of a Hilbert space can be defined by a positive operator with unit trace . Though Richard <unk> proved this was false for two @-@ dimensional Hilbert spaces , Gleason 's theorem ( published 1957 ) shows it to be true for higher dimensions . 
 Gleason 's theorem implies the nonexistence of certain types of hidden variable theories for quantum mechanics , strengthening a previous argument of John von Neumann . Von Neumann had claimed to show that hidden variable theories were impossible , but ( as Grete Hermann pointed out ) his demonstration made an assumption that quantum systems obeyed a form of <unk> of expectation for <unk> operators that might not hold a priori . In 1966 , John Stewart Bell showed that Gleason 's theorem could be used to remove this extra assumption from von Neumann 's argument . 
 = = = Ramsey theory = = = 
 The Ramsey number R ( k , l ) is the smallest number r such that every graph with at least r vertices contains either a k @-@ vertex clique or an l @-@ vertex independent set . Ramsey numbers require enormous effort to compute ; when max ( k , l ) ≥ 3 only finitely many of them are known precisely , and an exact computation of R ( 6 @,@ 6 ) is believed to be out of reach . In 1953 , the calculation of R ( 3 @,@ 3 ) was given as a question in the Putnam Competition ; in 1955 , motivated by this problem , Gleason and his co @-@ author Robert M. Greenwood made significant progress in the computation of Ramsey numbers with their proof that R ( 3 @,@ 4 ) 
 = 9 , R ( 3 @,@ 5 ) = 
 14 , and R ( 4 @,@ 4 ) 
 = 18 . Since then , only five more of these values have been found . In the same 1955 paper , Greenwood and Gleason also computed the multicolor Ramsey number R ( 3 @,@ 3 @,@ 3 ) : the smallest number r such that , if a complete graph on r vertices has its edges colored with three colors , then it necessarily contains a monochromatic triangle . As they showed , R ( 3 @,@ 3 @,@ 3 ) = 
 17 ; this remains the only nontrivial multicolor Ramsey number whose exact value is known . As part of their proof , they used an algebraic construction to show that a 16 @-@ vertex complete graph can be decomposed into three disjoint copies of a triangle @-@ free 5 @-@ regular graph with 16 vertices and 40 edges ( sometimes called the Greenwood – Gleason graph ) . 
 Ronald Graham writes that the paper by Greenwood and Gleason " is now recognized as a classic in the development of Ramsey theory " . In the late 1960s , Gleason became the doctoral advisor of Joel Spencer , who also became known for his contributions to Ramsey theory . 
 = = = Coding theory = = = 
 Gleason published few contributions to coding theory , but they were influential ones , and included " many of the seminal ideas and early results " in algebraic coding theory . During the 1950s and 1960s , he attended monthly meetings on coding theory with Vera <unk> and others at the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory . <unk> , who had previously worked in abstract algebra but became one of the world 's leading experts in coding theory during this time , writes that " these monthly meetings were what I lived for . " She frequently posed her mathematical problems to Gleason and was often rewarded with a quick and insightful response . 
 The Gleason – Prange theorem is named after Gleason 's work with <unk> researcher Eugene Prange ; it was originally published in a 1964 <unk> research report by H. F. Mattson , Jr. and E. F. <unk> , Jr . It concerns the quadratic residue code of order n , extended by adding a single parity check bit . This " remarkable theorem " shows that this code is highly symmetric , having the projective linear group <unk> ( n ) as a subgroup of its symmetries . 
 Gleason is also the namesake of the Gleason polynomials , a system of polynomials that generate the weight enumerators of linear codes . These polynomials take a particularly simple form for self @-@ dual codes : in this case there are just two of them , the two bivariate polynomials x2 + y2 and <unk> + <unk> + <unk> . Gleason 's student Jessie MacWilliams continued Gleason 's work in this area , proving a relationship between the weight enumerators of codes and their duals that has become known as the MacWilliams identity . 
 = = = Other areas = = = 
 Gleason founded the theory of Dirichlet algebras , and made other math ­ e ­ mat ­ i ­ cal contributions including work on the enumerative combinatorics of permutations . ( In 1959 he wrote that his research " sidelines " included " an intense interest in combinatorial problems . " ) As well , he was not above publishing research in more elementary mathematics , such as the derivation of the set of polygons that can be constructed with compass , straightedge , and an angle <unk> . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 In 1952 Gleason was awarded the American Association for the Advancement of Science 's Newcomb Cleveland Prize for his work on Hilbert 's fifth problem . He was elected to the National Academy of Sciences and the American Philosophical Society , was a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , and belonged to the Société Mathématique de France . 
 In 1981 and 1982 he was president of the American Mathematical Society , and at various times held numerous other posts in professional and scholarly organizations , including chairmanship of the Harvard Department of Mathematics . In 1986 he chaired the organizing committee for the International Congress of Mathematicians in Berkeley , California , and was president of the Congress . 
 In 1996 the Harvard Society of Fellows held a special symposium honoring Gleason on his retirement after seven years as its chairman ; that same year , the Mathematics Association of America awarded him the Yueh @-@ Gin Gung and Dr. Charles Y. Hu Distinguished Service to Mathematics Award . A past president of the Association wrote : 
 In thinking about , and admiring , Andy Gleason 's career , your natural reference is the total profession of a mathematician : designing and teaching courses , advising on education at all levels , doing research , consulting for the users of mathematics , acting as a leader of the profession , cultivating math ­ e ­ mat ­ i ­ cal talent , and serving one 's institution . Andy Gleason is that rare individual who has done all of these superbly . 
 After his death a 32 @-@ page collection of essays in the Notices of the American Mathematical Society recalled " the life and work of [ this ] eminent American mathematician " , calling him " one of the quiet giants of twentieth @-@ century mathematics , the consummate professor dedicated to scholarship , teaching , and service in equal measure . " 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 Research papers 
 Gleason , A. M. ( 1952 ) , " One @-@ parameter subgroups and Hilbert 's fifth problem " ( PDF ) , Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians , Cambridge , Mass . , 1950 , Vol . 2 , Providence , R. I. : American Mathematical Society , pp. 451 – 452 , MR <unk> 
 — — ( 1956 ) , " Finite Fano planes " , American Journal of Mathematics 78 : 797 – 807 , doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> , MR <unk> . 
 — — ( 1957 ) , " Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space " , Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics 6 : 885 – 893 , doi : 10 @.@ 1512 / <unk> , MR <unk> . 
 — — ( 1958 ) , " Projective topological spaces " , Illinois Journal of Mathematics 2 : 482 – 489 , MR <unk> , <unk> <unk> @.@ <unk> . 
 — — ( 1967 ) , " A characterization of maximal ideals " , Journal d <unk> Mathématique 19 : 171 – 172 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> , MR <unk> . 
 — — ( 1971 ) , " Weight polynomials of self @-@ dual codes and the MacWilliams identities " , Actes du Congrès International des <unk> ( Nice , 1970 ) , Tome 3 , Paris : Gauthier @-@ Villars , pp. 211 – 215 , MR <unk> . 
 Greenwood , R. E. ; Gleason , A. M. ( 1955 ) , " Combinatorial relations and chromatic graphs " , Canadian Journal of Mathematics 7 : 1 – 7 , doi : 10 @.@ <unk> / <unk> @-@ 1955 @-@ 001 @-@ 4 , MR <unk> . 
 Books 
 Gleason , Andrew M. ( 1966 ) , Fundamentals of Abstract Analysis , Addison @-@ Wesley Publishing Co . , Reading , <unk> @-@ Don Mills , Ont . , MR <unk> . Corrected reprint , Boston : Jones and Bartlett , 1991 , MR <unk> . 
 — — ; Greenwood , Robert E. ; Kelly , Leroy Milton ( 1980 ) , The William Lowell Putnam Mathematical Competition : Problems and Solutions 1938 – 1964 , Mathematical Association of America , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 462 @-@ 4 , MR <unk> . 
 — — ; Penney , Walter F. ; Wyllys , Ronald E. ( 1985 ) , Elementary Course in Probability for the <unk> , Laguna Hills , CA : Aegean Park Press . Unclassified reprint of a book originally published in 1957 by the National Security Agency , Office of Research and Development , Mathematical Research Division . 
 — — ; Hughes @-@ Hallett , Deborah ( 1994 ) , Calculus , Wiley . Since its original publications this book has been extended to many different editions and variations with additional co @-@ authors . 
 Film 
 Gleason , Andrew M. ( 1966 ) , Nim and other oriented @-@ graph games , Mathematical Association of America . 63 minutes , black & white . Produced by Richard G. Long and directed by Allan <unk> . 
 = Bishop 's Palace , Wells = 
 The Bishop 's Palace and accompanying Bishops House at Wells in the English county of Somerset , is adjacent to Wells Cathedral and has been the home of the Bishops of the Diocese of Bath and Wells for 800 years . It has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building . 
 Building of the palace started around 1210 by Bishops Jocelin of Wells and Reginald Fitz Jocelin . The chapel and great hall were added by Bishop Robert Burnell between 1275 and 1292 . The walls , gatehouse and moat were added in the 14th century by Bishop Ralph of Shrewsbury . The Bishops House was added in the 15th century by Bishop Thomas Beckington . The great hall later fell into disrepair and was partially demolished around 1830 . 
 The palace was originally surrounded by a medieval deer park . When the walls were built , streams were diverted to form the moat as a reservoir . In the 1820s , the grounds within the walls were planted and laid out as pleasure grounds by Bishop George Law , who created a reflecting pond near the springs . Parts of the buildings are still used as a residence by the current bishop , however much of the palace is now used for public functions and as a tourist attraction . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction began around 1210 by Bishop Jocelin of Wells but principally dates from 1230 . Bishop Jocelin continued the cathedral building campaign begun by Bishop Reginald Fitz Jocelin , and was responsible for building the Bishop 's Palace , as well as the choristers ' school , a grammar school , a hospital for travellers and a chapel within the liberty of the cathedral . He also built a manor house at Wookey , near Wells . The chapel and great hall were built between 1275 and 1292 for Bishop Robert Burnell . The windows had stone tracery . Stone bosses where the supporting ribs meet on the ceiling are covered with representations of oak leaves and the Green Man . The building is seen as a fine example of the Early English architectural style . 
 In the 14th century , Bishop Ralph of Shrewsbury continued the building . He had an uneasy relationship with the citizens of Wells , partly because of his imposition of taxes , and surrounded his palace with crenellated walls , a moat and a drawbridge . The 5 metres ( 16 ft ) high three @-@ storey gatehouse , which dates from 1341 , has a bridge over the moat . The entrance was protected by a heavy gate , portcullis and drawbridge , operated by machinery above the entrance , and spouts through which defenders could pour scalding liquids onto any attacker . The drawbridge was still operational in 1831 when it was closed after word was received that the Palace of the Bishop of Bristol was subject to an arson attack during the Bristol riots . These took place after the House of Lords rejected the second Reform Bill . The proposal had aimed to get rid of some of the rotten boroughs and give Britain 's fast growing industrial towns such as Bristol , Manchester , Birmingham , Bradford and Leeds greater representation in the House of Commons ; however there was no rioting in Wells . The water which filled the moat flowed from the springs in the grounds which had previously chosen its own course as a small stream separating the cathedral and the palace and causing marshy ground around the site . The moat acted as a reservoir , controlled by sluice gates , which powered watermills in the town . 
 The north wing ( now the Bishop 's House ) was added in the 15th century by Bishop Beckington , with further modifications in the 18th century , and in 1810 by Bishop Beadon . It was restored , divided , and the upper storey added by Benjamin Ferrey between 1846 and 1854 . Following the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1548 , Bishop Barlow sold Edward Seymour , 1st Duke of Somerset the palace and grounds . These were recovered after the Duke 's execution in 1552 . 
 In the 1550s , Bishop Barlow sold the lead from the roofs of the great hall . This resulted in it falling into a ruined state . It can be seen in an engraving of 1733 but was largely demolished around 1830 by Bishop Law . He created a " more picturesque ruin " by removing the south and east walls and laying out and planting the area previously occupied by the great hall . The palace was used as a garrison for troops in both the English Civil War and Monmouth Rebellion after which it was used as a prison for rebels after the Battle of Sedgemoor . 
 Bishop Kidder was killed during the Great Storm of 1703 , when two chimney stacks in the palace fell on him and his wife , while they were asleep in bed . A central porch was added around 1824 and , in the 1840s and 1850s , Benjamin Ferrey restored the palace and added an upper storey . He also restored the chapel using stained glass from ruined French churches . 
 In 1953 , it was designated as a Grade I listed building . In February 2008 , the poet laureate of the United Kingdom , Andrew Motion , was commissioned by the BBC West television programme Inside Out West to write a poem in Harry Patch 's honour . Entitled " The Five Acts of Harry Patch " it was first read at a special event at the Bishop 's Palace , where it was introduced by the Prince of Wales and received by Harry Patch . 
 = = = The Glastonbury Chair = = = 
 One of the two surviving Glastonbury chairs is on display in the palace . It was made in Britain from a description brought back from Rome in 1504 by Abbot Richard Beere to Glastonbury Abbey , and was produced for or by John Arthur Thorne , a monk who was the treasurer at the abbey . Arthur perished on Glastonbury Tor in 1539 , hanged , drawn and quartered alongside his master , Richard Whiting , the last Abbot of Glastonbury , during the dissolution of the monasteries . The Abbot sat on a Glastonbury chair of this type during his trial at the Bishop 's Palace . Other chairs of this age and later reproductions can also be seen . 
 = = = Current use = = = 
 The palace now belongs to the Church Commissioners and is managed and run by The Palace Trust . The main palace is open to the public , including the medieval vaulted undercroft , chapel and a long gallery , although the Bishops House is still used as a residence and offices . There is a café overlooking the Croquet Lawn . The palace is licensed for weddings and used for conferences and meetings . The croquet lawn in front of the palace is used on a regular basis . The palace was used as a location for some of the scenes in the 2007 British comedy Hot Fuzz , and more recently in the 2016 film The Huntsman . 
 On 10 December 2013 , it was announced that Peter Hancock would become Bishop of Bath and Wells in 2014 . A few days earlier , the Church Commissioners had announced that the new bishop would work , but not live , in the Palace ; it was later announced that he would instead live , at least temporarily , at The Old Rectory a few miles away at Croscombe . 
 However that decision proved controversial . The Bishops ' Council formally objected to the Commissioners ' decision , and the matter was referred by the Archbishops ' Council to a committee which , in May 2014 , decided that the house in Croscombe was not suitable to be a see house , and that the bishop should remain living in the Palace . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Bishop 's Eye = = = 
 The Bishop 's Palace lies within the Liberty of St Andrew , which encloses the cathedral , the Bishop 's Palace , Vicar 's Close and the residences and offices of the clergy who serve the cathedral . The palace is accessible from the adjacent market place through an archway known as The Bishop 's Eye in the gatehouse to the walled precinct . The Bishop 's Eye was built around 1450 , by Bishop Beckington . It is a three @-@ storey building of Doulting ashlar stone , with a copper roof and has been designated as a Grade I listed building . The Bishop 's Eye forms one of a pair with the Penniless Porch which is the gateway into the Cathedral from the market place , which was built at the same time and in a similar style . 
 = = = Bishop 's Palace = = = 
 The palace is a two @-@ storey building of seven bays , with three gables over alternating bays , two of which are supported by buttresses . There is an attic beneath the coped gables and surmounted by octagonal chimney stacks . The interior is laid out with a hall , solar and gallery with an undercroft . It has flagstone floors and a 16th @-@ century stone fireplace . 
 To the right of the building is an aisless chapel in the early Decorated Gothic style of the late 13th century , built of local stone with Doulting Stone dressings . The remains of the 13th century great hall are the north wall and some column bases of an internal arcade , indicating that it was a five bayed aisled hall with crenellations and tall windows in the Decorated Gothic style . 
 = = = Bishops House = = = 
 The Bishops House consists of two narrow ranges with a narrow courtyard . The front of the building on the south side is crenelated . The arrangement of the rooms inside has been changed many times over the years . It still includes features from the 15th century including a doorway and oak screens . The windows include some remnants of 16th century stained glass . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 The grounds of the palace in the 13th century included a medieval deer park . The right to form the park was granted by King John to Bishop Jocelin in 1207 . The Palace <unk> was planted with orchards , a herbarium and kitchen gardens to provide food for the Bishop and staff . 
 There are now 14 acres ( 5 @.@ 7 ha ) of gardens including St Andrew 's Spring from which the city takes its name . The spring supplies St. Andrew 's Well from which water flows at a rate of 40 imperial gallons ( 180 L ) per second into the moat which holds 4 million imperial gallons ( 18 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) . The water emerging from the spring originates from the cave system of the Mendip Hills including Thrupe Lane Swallet . The Well House was built in 1451 , for Bishop Beckington to provide water to the citizens of Wells in the market place . The small stone building with a slate roof has a central hole in the stone floor giving access to the well itself . The gardens are listed , Grade II * , on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England . 
 The grounds included The Bishop 's Barn which was built as a tithe barn in the 15th century , and the area next to it which is now a public park and play area . The barn was built of local stone roughly squared , with Doulting ashlar dressings and a Westmorland slate roof . Royalist troops were quartered in the barn during the Bloody Assizes . 
 Much of the existing landscaping on the south lawn was carried out by Bishop George Henry Law in the 1820s . This included the incorporation of the remains of the roofless great hall and the construction of a raised rampart around the inside of the wall accessible from one of the towers . Bishop Law also created a grotto which he used to display fossils from Banwell Caves which were also part of his estate . A range of tress and shrubs were planted including : a black walnut , Lebanon cedar , catalpa and ginkgo . In the 1830s , Bishop Law had a pool created next to the springs . This acts as a mirror on a still day providing reflections of the east end of the cathedral in the water . 
 In the outer garden is an arboretum , planted in 1977 by Bishop John Bickersteth to commemorate the Silver Jubilee of Elizabeth II . The mute swans on the moat have been trained to ring bells by pulling strings , to beg for food . The first swans were trained by one of the daughters of Bishop Hervey in the 1870s . Two swans which were given to the bishop by Queen Elizabeth II in 2006 , are still able to ring for lunch fed to them by the caretakers who live in the gatehouse . 
 Every August bank holiday , the moat is used for the Wells Moat Boat Race , a charity raft race organised by Wells Lions Club and Air Training Corps . In 2007 , the Bishop entered a raft into the race . In 2013 , a " tree of heaven " on the south lawn , which had been planted in 1885 , was blown down during the St. Jude storm . 
 = Ethnic Cleansing ( video game ) = 
 Ethnic Cleansing is a first @-@ person shooter video game for Microsoft Windows computers , created by the American White nationalist organization National Alliance ( and published by its record label Resistance Records on January 21 , 2002 . As part of a " Race War " , the player controls a neo @-@ Nazi or a Klansman and is tasked with killing stereotypical African @-@ American , Latino , and Jewish enemies , ending with former Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon . 
 Using the Genesis3D engine , the National Alliance created the game to be provocative and promote their white supremacist messages . The game has been controversial , with the Anti @-@ Defamation League taking particular issue ; it has been ranked several times as one of the most controversial games ever created . It was planned to be followed by a long line of sequels , but only one , titled White Law , has been released . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Ethnic Cleansing is a standard , short @-@ length first @-@ person shooter set in a single level . The player can select a neo @-@ Nazi , a Skinhead , or a Klansman to control . They run through a ghetto that has been compared to New York City and shoot African @-@ Americans and Latinos , before descending into a subway system to kill Jews . Finally , the player reaches the " Yiddish Control Center " , where a fictionalized version of Ariel Sharon , then Prime Minister of Israel , is directing plans for world domination . He carries a rocket launcher ; the player must kill him to complete the game . The heads @-@ up display contains a map of nearby enemies and a counter of remaining ammunition . 
 The game 's soundtrack consists of white power rock music . The game 's art assets and sound effects feature racial stereotypes : when shot , black enemies make monkey noises and Jewish enemies shout " <unk> vey ! " . In addition , black enemies are drawn to resemble apes and some wear T @-@ shirts with the lettering " <unk> " , while Latino enemies wear <unk> . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Ethnic Cleansing was developed by members of the National Alliance , an American white supremacist organization , and published by Resistance Records , its subsidiary record label that specializes in white power music . It was developed for Microsoft Windows personal computers using Eclipse Entertainment 's open @-@ source game engine Genesis3D along with the Reality Factory development kit . The source code was not substantially changed from the original . Instead , the developers simply plugged in images and sounds that they had created in freely available editing programs . 
 Shaun Walker , the chairman of the National Alliance , explained to the United Press that the intent was to produce a racially provocative video game and promote racial segregation . National Alliance founder William Luther Pierce , who also appears in the game to discuss an " upcoming white revolution " , considered video games to be simply another medium to promote his organization 's messages . Resistance released the game on Martin Luther King , Jr . Day ( January 21 ) of 2002 . It was priced at USD $ 14 @.@ 88 , a reference to the white supremacist Fourteen Words slogan and the neo @-@ Nazi numerical code " 88 " ( which stands for " HH " or " Heil Hitler " ) . 
 = = Reception and controversy = = 
 While it received little attention from the mainstream media , the game was immediately controversial among Americans on both sides of the political spectrum . The Anti @-@ Defamation League , an anti @-@ racist organization that especially covers anti @-@ Semitism , publicized the existence of the game and unsuccessfully lobbied the developers of Genesis3D to change their licensing conditions to prohibit the use of the engine to develop racist games . They lobbied the Interactive Digital Software Association to encourage its members to adopt such policies . 
 The game 's reception from critics was extremely negative . David Leonard of PopMatters decried the game 's graphics and " playability , " While not approving of the game 's message , he argued that it was only the latest in a long line of racist video games that included the likes of Grand Theft Auto III , NFL Street , and Freedom Fighters . In January 2003 , Stuff named Ethnic Cleansing the 40th most controversial video game of all time . The staff opined that only " very stupid children " would be susceptible to its message and that it would make players feel like " small @-@ minded assholes . " Complex and UGO ranked it as the single most racist video game in history ; UGO staff writer K. Thor Jensen called it " profoundly stupid . " 
 Pierce estimated that " a couple thousand " copies of the game had been sold within a month of its release and that 90 percent of consumers had been white teenage boys . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 The National Alliance and Resistance Records released a similar game , White Law , in June 2003 . It starred an Irish @-@ American police officer taking up arms to protect his territory from racial minorities . It has been compared to Freedom Fighters , though it was based on the events of Pierce 's novel The Turner Diaries . The National Alliance intended to create an entire line of racist games , but no more have surfaced . 
 = Charlie Chan = 
 Charlie Chan is a fictional character created by Earl Derr Biggers . Biggers loosely based Chan on Honolulu , Hawaii detective Chang Apana , and conceived of the benevolent and heroic Chan as an alternative to Yellow Peril stereotypes and villains like Fu Manchu . Chan is a detective for the Honolulu police , though many stories feature Chan traveling the world as he investigates mysteries and solves crimes . 
 Chan first appeared in Biggers ' novels , then was featured in a number of media . Over four dozen films featuring Charlie Chan were made , beginning in 1926 . The character was first portrayed by East Asian actors , and the films met with little success . In 1931 , the Fox Film Corporation cast Swedish actor Warner Oland as Chan in Charlie Chan Carries On ; the film became popular , and Fox went on to produce fifteen more Chan films with Oland in the title role . After Oland 's death , American actor Sidney Toler was cast as Chan ; Toler made twenty @-@ two Chan films , first for Fox and then for Monogram Studios . After Toler 's death , six films were made , starring Roland Winters . 
 Readers and movie @-@ goers of white America greeted Chan warmly , seeing him as an attractive character who is portrayed as intelligent , heroic , benevolent and honorable in contrast to the racist depictions of evil or conniving Asians which dominated Hollywood and national media . However , in later decades critics took contending views , finding that Chan , despite his good qualities , reinforces condescending Asian stereotypes such as an alleged incapacity to speak idiomatic English and a tradition @-@ bound and subservient nature . Many found it objectionable that he was played on screen by Caucasian actors in <unk> . 
 Film adaptations in the 1990s have been poorly received . The character has been featured in several radio programs , two television shows , and comics . 
 = = Books = = 
 The character of Charlie Chan was created by Earl Derr Biggers . In 1919 , while visiting Hawaii , Biggers planned a detective novel to be called The House Without a Key . He did not begin to write that novel until four years later , however , when he was inspired to add a Chinese @-@ American police officer to the plot after reading in a newspaper of Chang Apana ( <unk> ) and Lee Fook , two detectives on the Honolulu police force . Biggers , who disliked the Yellow Peril stereotypes he found when he came to California , explicitly conceived of the character as an alternative : " Sinister and wicked Chinese are old stuff , but an amiable Chinese on the side of law and order has never been used . " 
 It overwhelms me with sadness to admit it … for he is of my own origin , my own race , as you know . But when I look into his eyes I discover that a gulf like the heaving Pacific lies between us . Why ? Because he , though among Caucasians many more years than I , still remains Chinese . As Chinese to @-@ day as in the first moon of his existence . While I – I bear the brand – the label – Americanized .... I traveled with the current .... I was ambitious . I sought success . For what I have won , I paid the price . Am I an American ? No . Am I , then , a Chinese ? Not in the eyes of Ah Sing . 
 The " amiable Chinese " made his first appearance in The House Without a Key ( 1925 ) . The character was not central to the novel and was not mentioned by name on the dust jacket of the first edition . In the novel , Chan is described as walking with " the light dainty step of a woman " and as being " very fat indeed … an undistinguished figure in his Western clothes . " According to critic Sandra Hawley , this description of Chan allows Biggers to portray the character as <unk> , the opposite of evil Chinese characters , such as Fu Manchu , while simultaneously emphasizing supposedly Chinese characteristics such as impassivity and stoicism . 
 Biggers wrote six novels in which Charlie Chan appears : 
 The House Without a Key ( 1925 ) 
 The Chinese Parrot ( 1926 ) 
 Behind That Curtain ( 1928 ) 
 The Black Camel ( 1929 ) 
 Charlie Chan Carries On ( 1930 ) 
 Keeper of the Keys ( 1932 ) 
 = = Film , radio , and television adaptations = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 The first Charlie Chan film was The House Without a Key ( 1926 ) , a ten @-@ chapter serial produced by Pathé Studios , starring George Kuwa , a Japanese actor , as Chan . A year later Universal Pictures followed with The Chinese Parrot , starring Japanese actor , Kamiyama Sojin , in the starring role . In both productions , Charlie Chan 's role was minimized . Contemporary reviews were unfavorable ; in the words of one reviewer , speaking of The Chinese Parrot , Sojin plays " the Chink sleuth as a Lon Chaney cook @-@ waiter … because Chaney can 't stoop that low . " 
 In 1929 , the Fox Film Corporation opted Charlie Chan properties and produced Behind That Curtain , starring Korean actor E.L. Park . Again , Chan 's role was minimal , with Chan appearing only in the last ten minutes of the film . Not until a white actor was cast in the title role in 1931 did a Chan film meet with success . In Charlie Chan Carries On Chan was played by Swedish actor Warner Oland , who had also played Fu Manchu in an earlier film . Oland , who claimed some Mongolian ancestry , played the character as more gentle and self @-@ effacing than he had been in the books , perhaps in " a deliberate attempt by the studio to downplay an uppity attitude in a Chinese detective . " Oland starred in sixteen Chan films for Fox , often with Keye Luke , who played Chan 's " Number One Son " , Lee Chan . Oland 's " warmth and gentle humor " helped make the character and films popular ; the Oland Chan films were among Fox 's most successful . By attracting " major audiences and box @-@ office grosses on a par with A 's " they " kept Fox afloat " during the Great Depression . 
 Oland died in 1938 , and the Chan film , Charlie Chan at the Ringside , was rewritten with additional footage as Mr. Moto 's Gamble , an entry in the Mr. Moto series , another contemporary series featuring an East Asian protagonist ; Luke appeared as Lee Chan , not only in already shot footage but also in scenes with Moto actor Peter Lorre . Fox hired another white actor , Sidney Toler , to play Charlie Chan , and produced eleven Chan films through 1942 . Toler 's Chan was less mild @-@ mannered than Oland 's , a " switch in attitude that added some of the vigor of the original books to the films . " He is frequently accompanied , and irritated , by his Number Two Son , Jimmy Chan , played by Sen Yung . 
 When Fox decided to produce no further Chan films , Sidney Toler purchased the film rights . Producers Philip N. Krasne and James S. Burkett of Monogram Pictures produced and released further Chan films , starring Toler . The budget for these films was reduced from Fox 's average of $ 200 @,@ 000 to $ 75 @,@ 000 . For the first time , Chan was portrayed on occasion as " openly contemptuous of suspects and superiors . " African @-@ American comedic actor <unk> Moreland played chauffeur Birmingham Brown in 13 films ( 1944 – 1949 ) which led to criticism of the Monogram films in the forties and since ; some call his performances " brilliant comic turns " , while others describe Moreland 's roles as an offensive and embarrassing stereotype . Toler died in 1947 and was succeeded by Roland Winters for six films . Keye Luke , missing from the series after 1938 's Mr. Moto rework , returned as Charlie 's son in the last two entries . 
 = = = = Spanish @-@ language adaptations = = = = 
 Three Spanish @-@ language Charlie Chan films were made in the 1930s and 1950s . The first , Eran Trece ( There Were Thirteen ) ( 1931 ) , is a Spanish @-@ language version of Charlie Chan Carries On ( 1931 ) . The two films were made concurrently and followed the same production schedule , with each scene filmed twice the same day , once in English and then in Spanish . The film followed essentially the same script as the <unk> version , with minor additions such as brief songs and skits and some changes to characters ' names ( for example , the character Elmer Benbow was renamed Frank Benbow ) . A Cuban production , La Serpiente Roja ( The Red Snake ) , followed in 1937 . In 1955 , Producciones Cub @-@ Mex produced a Mexican version of Charlie Chan called El <unk> en la Sombra ( Monster in the Shadow ) , starring Orlando Rodriguez as " Chan Li Po " ( Charlie Chan in the original script ) . The film was inspired by La Serpiente Roja as well as the American Warner Oland films . 
 = = = = Chinese @-@ language adaptations = = = = 
 During the 1930s and 1940s , five Chan films were produced in Shanghai and Hong Kong . In these films , Chan owns his detective agency and is aided , not by a son , but by a daughter , Manna , played first by Gu <unk> ( <unk> ) in the Shanghai productions and then by Bai Yan ( <unk> ) in postwar Hong Kong . 
 Chinese audiences also saw the original American Charlie Chan films . They were by far the most popular American films in 1930s China and among Chinese expatriates ; " one of the reasons for this acceptance was this was the first time Chinese audiences saw a positive Chinese character in an American film , a departure from the sinister East Asian stereotypes in earlier movies like Thief of Baghdad and Welcome Danger , which incited riots that shut down the Shanghai theater showing it . " Oland 's visit to China was reported extensively in Chinese newspapers , and the actor was respectfully called " Mr. Chan " . 
 = = = = Modern adaptations = = = = 
 In Neil Simon 's Murder By Death , Peter Sellers plays a Chinese detective called Sidney Wang , a parody of Chan . 
 In 1980 , Jerry Sherlock began production on a comedy film to be called Charlie Chan and the Dragon Lady . A group calling itself <unk> ( Coalition of Asians to Nix ) was formed , protesting the fact that non @-@ Chinese actors , Peter Ustinov and Angie Dickinson , had been cast in the primary roles . Others protested that the film script contained a number of stereotypes ; Sherlock responded that the film was not a documentary . The film was released the following year as Charlie Chan and the Curse of the Dragon Queen and was an " abysmal failure . " An updated film version of the character was planned in the 1990s by Miramax . While this Charlie Chan was to be " hip , slim , cerebral , sexy and ... a martial @-@ arts master , " nonetheless the film did not come to fruition . Actress Lucy Liu is slated to star in and executive @-@ produce a new Charlie Chan film for Fox . The film has been in preproduction since 2000 ; as of 2009 it is slated to be produced . 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 On radio , Charlie Chan was heard in several different series on three networks ( the NBC Blue Network , Mutual , and ABC ) between 1932 and 1948 . Walter Connolly initially portrayed Chan on Esso Oil 's Five Star Theater , which serialized adaptations of Biggers novels . Ed Begley , Sr. had the title role in <unk> ' s The Adventures of Charlie Chan ( 1944 – 45 ) , followed by Santos Ortega ( 1947 – 48 ) . Leon Janney and Rodney Jacobs were heard as Lee Chan , Number One Son , and Dorian St. George was the announcer . Radio Life magazine described Begley 's Chan as " a good radio match for Sidney Toler 's beloved film enactment . " 
 = = = Television adaptations = = = 
 In 1956 – 57 , The New Adventures of Charlie Chan , starring J. Carrol Naish in the title role , were made independently for TV syndication in 39 episodes , by Television Programs of America . The series was filmed in England . In this series , Chan is based in London rather than the United States . Ratings were poor , and the series was canceled . 
 In the 1960s , Joey Forman played an obvious parody of Chan named " Harry Hoo " in two episodes of Get Smart . 
 In the 1970s , Hanna @-@ Barbera produced an animated series called The Amazing Chan and the Chan Clan . Keye Luke , who had played Chan 's son in many Chan films of the 1930s and ' 40s , lent his voice to Charlie , employing a much @-@ expanded vocabulary . The series focused on Chan 's children , played initially by East Asian @-@ American child actors before being recast , due to concerns that younger viewers would not understand the accented voices . The title character bears some resemblance to the Warner Oland depiction of Charlie Chan . Leslie <unk> voiced Chan 's daughter Anne , before being replaced by Jodie Foster . 
 The Return of Charlie Chan , a television film starring Ross Martin as Chan , was made in 1971 but did not air until 1979 . 
 = = Comics and games = = 
 A Charlie Chan comic strip , drawn by Alfred <unk> , was distributed by the McNaught Syndicate beginning 24 October 1938 . <unk> was chosen by Biggers to draw the character . Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , the strip was dropped in May 1942 . 
 Over decades , other Charlie Chan comic books have been published : Joe Simon and Jack Kirby created Prize Comics ' Charlie Chan ( 1948 ) which ran for five issues . It was followed by a Charlton Comics title ( four issues , 1955 ) . DC Comics published The New Adventures of Charlie Chan , a 1958 tie @-@ in with the TV series ; the DC series lasted for six issues . Dell Comics did the title for two issues in 1965 . In the 1970s , Gold Key Comics published a short @-@ lived series of Chan comics based on the Hanna @-@ Barbera animated series . 
 In addition , a board game , The Great Charlie Chan Detective Mystery Game ( 1937 ) , and a Charlie Chan Card Game ( 1939 ) , have been released . 
 = = Modern interpretations and criticism = = 
 The character of Charlie Chan has been the subject of controversy . Some find the character to be a positive role model , while others argue that Chan is an offensive stereotype . Critic John <unk> argues that Charlie Chan is both ; when Biggers created the character , he offered a unique alternative to stereotypical evil <unk> , a man who was at the same time " sufficiently accommodating in personality ... unthreatening in demeanor ... and removed from his Asian homeland ... to quell any underlying xenophobia . " 
 Critic Michael Brodhead argues that " Biggers 's sympathetic treatment of the Charlie Chan novels convinces the reader that the author consciously and forthrightly spoke out for the Chinese – a people to be not only accepted but admired . Biggers 's sympathetic treatment of the Chinese reflected and contributed to the greater acceptance of Chinese @-@ Americans in the first third of [ the twentieth ] century . " S. T. Karnick writes in the National Review that Chan is " a brilliant detective with understandably limited facility in the English language [ whose ] powers of observation , logic , and personal rectitude and humility made him an exemplary , entirely honorable character . " Ellery Queen called Biggers 's characterization of Charlie Chan " a service to humanity and to inter @-@ racial relations . " Dave Kehr of The New York Times said Chan " might have been a stereotype , but he was a stereotype on the side of the angels . " Luke agreed ; when asked if he thought that the character was demeaning to the race , he responded , " <unk> to the race ? My God ! You 've got a Chinese hero ! " and " [ W ] e were making the best damn murder mysteries in Hollywood . " 
 Other critics , such as Yen Le Espiritu and Huang <unk> , argue that Chan , while portrayed positively in some ways , is not on a par with white characters , but a " benevolent Other " who is " one @-@ dimensional . " The films ' use of white actors to portray East Asian characters indicates the character 's " absolute Oriental Otherness ; " the films were only successful as " the domain of white actors who impersonated heavily @-@ accented masters of murder mysteries as well as purveyors of cryptic proverbs . Chan 's character " embodies the stereotypes of Chinese Americans , particularly of males : smart , subservient , effeminate . " Chan is representative of a model minority , the good stereotype that counters a bad stereotype : " Each stereotypical image is filled with contradictions : the bloodthirsty Indian is tempered with the image of the noble savage ; the <unk> exists along with the loyal sidekick ; and Fu Manchu is offset by Charlie Chan . " However , Fu Manchu 's evil qualities are presented as inherently Chinese , while Charlie Chan 's good qualities are exceptional ; " Fu represents his race ; his counterpart stands away from the other Asian Hawaiians . " 
 Some argue that the character 's popularity is dependent on its contrast with stereotypes of the Yellow Peril or Japanese people in particular . American opinion of China and Chinese @-@ Americans grew more positive in the 1920s and 30s in contrast to the Japanese , who were increasingly viewed with suspicion . Sheng @-@ mei Ma argues that the character is a psychological over @-@ compensation to " rampant paranoia over the racial other . " 
 In June 2003 , the Fox Movie Channel cancelled a planned Charlie Chan Festival , soon after beginning restoration for <unk> , after a special @-@ interest group protested . Fox reversed its decision two months later , and on 13 September 2003 , the first film in the festival was aired on Fox . The films , when broadcast on the Fox Movie Channel , were followed by round @-@ table discussions by prominent East Asians in the American entertainment industry , led by George Takei , most of whom were against the films . Collections such as Frank Chin 's <unk> ! An Anthology of Asian @-@ American Writers and Jessica Hagedorn 's Charlie Chan is Dead are put forth as alternatives to the Charlie Chan stereotype and " [ articulate ] cultural anger and exclusion as their animating force . " Fox released the restored versions on <unk> in 2006 ; as of mid @-@ 2008 , Fox has released all of the extant Warner Oland titles and has begun issuing the Sidney Toler series . The first six Monogram productions , all starring Sidney Toler , were released by MGM in 2004 . 
 Some modern critics , particularly East Asian @-@ Americans , dismiss the Charlie Chan character as " bovine " and " asexual " , allowing " white America … [ to be ] securely indifferent about us as men . " Charlie Chan 's good qualities are the product of what Frank Chin and Jeffery Chan call " racist love " , arguing that Chan is a model minority and " <unk> " . Fletcher Chan , however , argues that the Chan of Biggers 's novels is not subservient to white characters , citing The Chinese Parrot as an example ; in this novel , Chan 's eyes blaze with anger at racist remarks and in the end , after exposing the murderer , Chan remarks " Perhaps listening to a ' Chinaman ' is no disgrace . " In the films , both Charlie Chan in London ( 1934 ) and Charlie Chan in Paris ( 1935 ) " contain scenes in which Chan coolly and wittily dispatches other characters ' racist remarks . " <unk> Huang manifests an ambivalent attitude , stating that in the USA , Chan " epitomizes the racist heritage and the creative genius of this nation ’ s culture . " Huang also suggests that critics of Charlie Chan may have themselves , at times , " caricatured " Chan himself . 
 Chan 's character has also come under fire for " nuggets of fortune cookie Confucius " and the " counterfeit proverbs " which became so widespread in popular culture . The Biggers novels did not introduce the " Confucius say " proverbs , which were added in the films , but one novel features Chan remarking : " As all those who know me have learned to their distress , Chinese have proverbs to fit every possible situation . " Huang <unk> gives as examples " Tongue often hang man quicker than rope , " " Mind , like parachute , only function when open , " and " Man who flirt with dynamite sometime fly with angels . " He argues , however , that these " colorful aphorisms " display " amazing linguistic acrobatic skills . " Like the African American " signifying monkey , " Huang continues , Chan " imparts as much insult as wisdom . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Unless otherwise noted , information is taken from Charles P. Mitchell 's A Guide to Charlie Chan Films ( 1999 ) . 
 = SMS Preussen ( 1873 ) = 
 For the battleship of the same name , see SMS Preussen 
 SMS Preussen was an armored frigate of the German Kaiserliche Marine . The ship was built by the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin in 1871 – 1876 ; she was commissioned into the fleet in July 1876 . She was the first large warship of the German navy built by a private shipyard ; all previous vessels had been ordered abroad or built by Royal or Imperial dockyards . Her main battery of four 26 cm ( 10 in ) guns was mounted in a pair of twin gun turrets amidships . 
 Preussen served with the fleet from her commissioning until 1891 , though she was frequently placed in reserve throughout her career . She cruised the Mediterranean Sea several times during her service , including during a mission in 1877 after unrest in the Ottoman Empire threatened German citizens living there . The ship was withdrawn from service at the end of 1891 and used as a harbor guard ship until 1896 , when she was relegated to being a supply ship in Wilhelmshaven . She ended her career as a coal hulk for torpedo boats . In 1903 , she was renamed Saturn so her name could be reused . The ship was ultimately sold to shipbreakers in 1919 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Preussen was ordered by the Imperial Navy from the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin ; her keel was laid in 1871 under construction number 66 . This was the first time a private German shipbuilder was given a contract to build a large warship for the navy . The ship was launched on 22 November 1873 and commissioned into the German fleet on 4 July 1876 . Preussen cost the German government 7 @,@ 303 @,@ 000 gold marks . Although she was the third and final ship in her class to be laid down , she was the first to be launched and commissioned . This was because her two sisters , Friedrich der Grosse and Grosser Kurfürst , were built by newly established Imperial dockyards , while Preussen was built by an experienced commercial ship builder . 
 The ship was 96 @.@ 59 meters ( 316 @.@ 9 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 16 @.@ 30 m ( 53 @.@ 5 ft ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 12 m ( 23 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . Preussen was powered by one 3 @-@ cylinder single @-@ expansion steam engine , which was supplied with steam by six coal @-@ fired transverse trunk boilers . The ship 's top speed was 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) , at 5 @,@ 471 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 080 kW ) . She was also equipped with a full ship rig . Her standard complement consisted of 46 officers and 454 enlisted men . 
 She was armed with four 26 cm ( 10 @.@ 2 in ) L / 22 guns mounted in a pair of gun turrets placed amidships . As built , the ship was also equipped with two 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) L / 25 chase guns . After being rebuilt in 1888 – 1890 , her armament was increased by six and later ten 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 30 quick @-@ firing guns , a pair of machine guns , and five 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes , all submerged in the ship 's hull . Preussen 's armor was made of wrought iron and backed with teak . The armored belt was arrayed in two strakes . The upper strake was 203 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) thick ; the lower strake ranged in thickness from 102 to 229 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 to 9 @.@ 0 in ) . Both were backed with 234 to 260 mm ( 9 @.@ 2 to 10 @.@ 2 in ) of teak . The gun turrets were protected by 203 to 254 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 to 10 @.@ 0 in ) armor on the sides , backed by 260 mm of teak . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning in July 1876 , Preussen served with the fleet . She joined a squadron sent to the Mediterranean Sea in 1877 in response to unrest in the Ottoman Empire related to the Russo @-@ Turkish War ; the violence threatened German citizens living there . The squadron , under the command of Rear Admiral Carl Ferdinand Batsch , steamed to the ports of Haifa and Jaffa in July 1877 , but found no significant tensions ashore . Batsch then departed and cruised the Mediterranean for the remainder of the summer , returning to Germany in October . 
 In April 1878 , Preussen participated in the fleet maneuvers , again under the command of Rear Admiral Batsch . By this time , she was joined by her two sister ships , Friedrich der Grosse and Grosser Kurfürst . While steaming in the English Channel on 31 May , the armored frigate König Wilhelm accidentally rammed Grosser Kurfürst ; the latter quickly sank with the loss of 276 men . After assisting in the rescue attempt , Preussen escorted the damaged König Wilhelm to Portsmouth , where the Royal Navy made available a dry dock for emergency repairs . Albrecht von Stosch , the chief of the Kaiserliche Marine , ordered Rear Admiral Batsch and his staff to return to Germany immediately aboard Preussen and the dispatch vessel Falke . The annual summer maneuvers for 1878 were canceled within a week of the sinking . 
 In May 1879 , the armored squadron was reactivated , composed of Preussen , her sister Friedrich der Grosse , and the old armored frigates Kronprinz and Friedrich Carl . The annual summer training cruise was primarily conducted in just the Baltic Sea , apart from a short voyage in June to the coast of Norway . The four ships returned to Kiel in September , where they were demobilized for the winter . The new armored corvette Sachsen replaced Kronprinz in the squadron in 1880 . Wilhelm von Wickede , a former Austrian naval officer , replaced Batsch as the squadron commander . Again , the squadron remained in the Baltic for the summer cruise , with the exception of a short visit to Wilhelmshaven and Cuxhaven in August . 
 The summer cruise in 1881 followed the same pattern as the year previous , though Kronprinz returned in place of Sachsen , which was plagued with engine problems . Wickede again served as the commander . In July , the ships hosted a visit by the British reserve squadron , which by this time included the first British ironclad , HMS Warrior . Preussen and the rest of the squadron visited Danzig in September during a meeting between Kaiser Wilhelm I and the Russian Tsar Alexander III . The 1882 summer cruise included the same four ironclads from the previous year , and was again commanded by Wickede , who had by then been promoted to Rear Admiral . Preussen was kept in reserve during the annual summer maneuvers starting in 1883 , as new ships , including the rest of the Sachsen @-@ class ironclads entered service . 
 In August 1889 , Preussen was reactivated to participate in Kaiser Wilhelm II 's visit to Great Britain . The ship was assigned to the II Division , along with her sister Friedrich der Grosse and the central battery ironclads Kaiser and Deutschland , under command of Rear Admiral Friedrich Hollmann . The fleet then conducted maneuvers in the North Sea before returning to Germany . Preussen and the rest of the II Division became the training squadron for the fleet in 1889 – 1890 , the first year the Kaiserliche Marine maintained a year @-@ round ironclad force . The squadron escorted Wilhelm II 's imperial yacht to the Mediterranean ; the voyage included state visits to Italy and the Ottoman Empire . The squadron remained in the Mediterranean until April 1890 , when it returned to Germany . 
 Preussen participated in the ceremonial transfer of the island of Helgoland from British to German control in the summer of 1890 . She was present during the fleet maneuvers in September , where the entire eight @-@ ship armored squadron simulated a Russian fleet blockading Kiel . The II Division , including <unk> , served as the training squadron in the winter of 1890 – 1891 . The squadron again cruised the Mediterranean , under the command of Rear Admiral Wilhelm Schröder . Preussen saw one final round of fleet maneuvers with the II Division in 1891 . She was removed from fleet duty to serve as a harbor guard ship at the end of 1891 . 
 She was based in Wilhelmshaven as a harbor ship starting on 16 November 1896 . She was renamed Saturn on 12 November 1903 , so her name could be reused on the new battleship Preussen . The ship was formally stricken from the naval register on 21 May 1906 . She was subsequently used as a coal hulk for torpedo boats . After being converted for this use , Saturn could hold up to 5 @,@ 000 t ( 4 @,@ 900 long tons ; 5 @,@ 500 short tons ) of coal . She was eventually sold for scrapping on 27 June 1919 and broken up that year in Wilhelmshaven . Her figurehead is on display in the Militärhistorisches Museum der Bundeswehr in Dresden , while her bow ornament is located in the Deutsches Museum in Munich . 
 = Taoism = 
 Taoism , also known as Daoism , is a religious or philosophical tradition of Chinese origin with an emphasis on living in harmony with , and in accordance to the natural flow or cosmic structural order of the universe commonly referred to as the Tao ( 道 , also romanized as Dao ) . Taoist thought and philosophy was later incorporated into the religious traditions and practices of the ancient Chinese religion hundreds of years after its original development . The term Tao means the " natural way of the universe " , " the way " , " path " , or " principle " , and can also be found in other unrelated ancient Chinese philosophies and religions other than Taoism . In Taoism , however , Tao denotes something that is both the source of , and the force behind , everything that exists . 
 Taoism drew its cosmological notions from the tenets of the School of Yin Yang , and is heavily influenced and informed by the acknowledged oldest text of ancient Chinese classics , the I Ching , which prescribes a system of philosophical thought on the ethics of human behaviours based on articulating cycles of change in the natural and social worlds by means of hexagrams , and includes instructions for divination practice still adhered to by modern @-@ day religious Taoists . Daoism , as Taoism is sometimes referred , diverged sharply from Confucian thoughts by scorning rigid rituals and social classes . The Tao Te Ching , a compact and ambiguous book containing teachings attributed to Laozi ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Lǎozǐ ; Wade – Giles : Lao Tzu ) , is widely considered the keystone work of this philosophy . Together with the writings of Zhuangzi , which interprets and adds to the teaching of Laozi , these classic texts provide the philosophical foundation of Taoism deriving from the 8 trigrams ( <unk> ) of Fu Xi in the <unk> BC in China , the various combinations of which creates the 64 hexagrams as documented in the I Ching . 
 Taoist propriety and ethics may vary depending on the particular school , but in general they tend to emphasize wu @-@ wei ( action through non @-@ action ) , " naturalness " , simplicity , spontaneity , and the Three Treasures : jing ( sperm / ovary energy , or the essence of the physical body ) , qi ( energy , including the thoughts and emotions ) , and <unk> ( spirit or spiritual power ) . 
 Taoism has had a profound influence on Chinese culture in the course of the centuries , and clerics of institutionalised Taoism ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) usually take care to note distinction between their ritual tradition and the customs and practices found in Chinese folk religion as these distinctions sometimes appear blurred . Chinese alchemy ( especially <unk> ) , Chinese astrology , Chan ( Zen ) Buddhism , several martial arts , traditional Chinese medicine , feng shui , and many styles of qigong have been intertwined with Taoism throughout history . Beyond China , Taoism also had influence on surrounding societies in Asia . 
