 = = = New York Mets = = = 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 On January 17 , 2011 , Young signed a contract with the New York Mets worth $ 1 @.@ 1 million with the ability to reach up to $ 4 @.@ 5 million through incentives . In his first career start with the Mets on April 5 , 2011 , Young went five and a third innings while striking out seven batters , recording the victory in a 7 – 1 Mets win over the Philadelphia Phillies . He also went three for three at the plate with two runs batted in against Phillies starter Cole Hamels . In that game , Young became the first Mets pitcher in team history to record two hits in a single inning . Shortly after the start of the season , Young sustained an arm injury which forced him to miss the remainder of the 2011 season on the disabled list . Following the season , he was a free agent . 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 On March 26 , 2012 , Young signed on a minor league deal with the Mets . He had recently undergone surgery to repair a torn anterior capsule in his right shoulder . He spent the first 33 days of the season on the triple A Buffalo Bisons ' disabled list before being activated on May 10 . Young subsequently made three starts with the single A St. Lucie Mets on May 11 , May 16 and 25 before being promoted back to Buffalo on May 27 . He compiled a 1 – 0 record with 3 @.@ 18 ERA in 17 @.@ 0 innings during the three starts . On May 31 , he pitched 6 scoreless innings for the Bisons against the Columbus Clippers . The Mets announced on June 4 that they would call Young up to the major league roster on June 5 . On June 5 , 2012 , Young made his return against the Washington Nationals at Nationals Park with the Mets , giving up 3 runs ( 2 earned ) over 5 innings in a game that was eventually decided in 12 innings . On June 6 his wife gave birth and he was placed on a paternity leave , which was not intended to interfere with his June 10 scheduled start . The move was for the purpose of freeing up a roster spot during Young 's off days under a Major League Baseball rule that allows for a three @-@ day leave . Young made his next start on June 12 against the Tampa Bay Rays , earning his first win in over a year . 
 = = = Washington Nationals = = = 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 = = = = 
 On February 21 , 2013 , Young signed a minor league deal with the Washington Nationals and an invitation to training camp . On March 26 , 2013 he was granted his unconditional release by the Nationals after opting out of his contract . He was re @-@ signed by the Nationals on April 4 , 2013 . He was then assigned to Triple @-@ A Syracuse . He made his season debut on April 23 against Rochester , giving up 6 runs in 4 @.@ 2 innings . He made 6 additional starts before going on the disabled list with a neck injury on May 28 , 2 days after leaving a start against Columbus after the first inning . He made 2 starts at the end of the year in the Gulf Coast League and with Short @-@ Season Auburn before the end of the injury @-@ marred season . In 9 total starts , he went 1 – 2 with a 6 @.@ 81 ERA , striking out 21 in 37 innings . After experiencing pain in his shoulder and neck , he had surgery to repair what was diagnosed as thoracic outlet syndrome . This condition is a nerve problem that puts pressure on a pitcher ’ s shoulder . On November 19 , 2013 , Young re @-@ signed with the Nationals on a minor league deal . He was released on March 25 , 2014 . 
 = = = Seattle Mariners = = = 
 = = = = 2014 = = = = 
 Young signed a highly incentivized one @-@ year deal with the Seattle Mariners on March 27 , 2014 . Young was scheduled to debut as a starter for the Mariners on April 4 . However , the Oakland Coliseum had its first rainout since 1998 . As a result , after 159 Major League starts and 102 Minor League starts , Young made his first appearance as a relief pitcher ( other than the 2007 All @-@ Star Game ) and he pitched two shutout innings on April 6 against the Oakland A 's later in that series . He made his first Major League start since September 9 , 2012 on April 13 against Oakland . He posted six scoreless innings , while scattering 4 hits and 3 walks . By early June , Young was in the conversation for Major League Baseball Comeback Player of the Year Award , with a 5 – 2 start and 3 @.@ 27 ERA , according to MLB.com 's Adam Lewis . In helping to stabilize a rotation battered by injuries and ineffectual fifth starters , Mariners manager Lloyd McClendon was unabashed in his praise of the right @-@ hander at the time , calling him a " godsend . " Young finished the season with a 12 – 9 record and a 3 @.@ 65 ERA in 29 starts . His 7 @.@ 8 hits per nine innings was the sixth in the AL . Following the season , Young was recognized with the Major League Baseball Comeback Player of the Year Award , The Sporting News American League Comeback Player of the Year Award , and Players Choice Comeback Player of the Year Award . At the conclusion of the season , Young became a free agent . 
 = = = Kansas City Royals = = = 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 On March 7 , 2015 , Young signed with the Kansas City Royals . Young entered the season in the long reliever role with the Royals . He appeared in the Royals ' sixth game on April 12 against the Los Angeles Angels with two scoreless innings as the Royals started the season 6 – 0 . Young made his first start with the Royals on May 1 . He tossed five no @-@ hit innings against the Detroit Tigers . On June 16 , Young posted 7 shutout innings and 3 runs batted in against the Milwaukee Brewers , becoming the first Royals pitcher to tally 3 RBI in a game since 1972 . After achieving a record of 8 – 6 with a 3 @.@ 25 ERA through the end of July , Young was returned to the bullpen on July 31 after posting a 5 @.@ 11 ERA over a 5 @-@ game stretch . On September 27 ( one day after his father died ) , Young made his first start since July 28 and pitched 5 no @-@ hit innings against the Cleveland Indians . On October 20 , Young started and pitched 4 2 / 3 innings in a game 4 victory in the 2015 American League Championship Series against the Toronto Blue Jays . It was Young 's first postseason start since the 2006 National League Division Series . He earned the win in the October 27 game 1 of the 2015 World Series when he shut down the New York Mets , giving up a walk and no hits while striking out 4 over the final three innings , to help the Royals win 5 – 4 in 14 innings . 
 = = = = 2016 = = = = 
 On December 7 , 2015 , the Royals announced that they had signed Young to a two @-@ year $ 11 @.@ 75 million contract with mutual third @-@ year option . After beginning the 2016 season with a record of 1 @-@ 5 in 7 starts , Young was placed on the disabled list with a strained right forearm from May 12 to May 28 . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 = = = Pitching style = = = 
 Young is not a traditional power pitcher . He is said to be a control pitcher in a 6 feet 10 inches ( 2 @.@ 08 m ) power pitcher 's body — his pitching style is more like Greg Maddux 's than that of five @-@ time Cy Young Award winner Randy Johnson , who is the same height as Young . Young has been traded three times partly because of the low velocity of his fastball , which is in the 83 – 87 miles per hour ( 133 @.@ 6 – 140 km / h ) range . Young has learned how to use precise location to make his fastball effective . He has also been compared to another control pitcher , Jim Palmer , because Young similarly induces <unk> and fly ball outs with deceptive late movement on his high fastballs . Over 50 % of the balls put in play against him are fly balls . Of the <unk> hit off Young in 2007 , 3 @.@ 8 % were home <unk> while the average is about 11 % . From 2003 to 2006 the best single @-@ season percentage was 6 @.@ 2 % by Dontrelle Willis in 2005 . 
 Young 's mid @-@ 2000s repertoire included fastballs , curveballs , sliders and changeups . His curveball is a slow curveball and his 85 miles per hour ( 137 km / h ) fastball has been described by former teammate and catcher Mike Piazza as having late life and late movement that seems to jump . His curveball is used to keep the hitters off balance so that they do not jump on his low @-@ velocity fastball . Former Ranger pitching coach Orel Hershiser says Young has the ability to throw his fastball to all locations effectively which gives him a chance at success . Hershiser describes Young 's pitches as sneaky fast because his methodical delivery and size give him deception . This delivery has also left him susceptible to stolen bases due to the relatively long time it takes for him to deliver a pitch from the stretch . By 2012 , nearly all of his pitches were fastballs or sliders . 
 = = = Batting = = = 
 As of the end of the 2015 season , Young has a career .150 batting average , including 31 hits , eight of which were extra base hits ( six doubles , one triple , and one home run ) . He has yet to record a stolen base . The only Princeton players who have hit a home run or recorded a stolen base at least once during their careers , along with Young , are Moe Berg , Dutch Sterrett , Homer Hillebrand , Dutch Meier , Ted Reed , Bobby Vaughn , and Will Venable . Venable is the most recent player to have accomplished the feat . These same players join Young as Princeton alumni to have hit a home run . Berg had been the last to do so before Young hit his home run on September 20 , 2008 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Young 's wife , Elizabeth Patrick , is the granddaughter of Lester Patrick , who was the namesake of the National Hockey League 's Patrick Division and the Lester Patrick Trophy . She was also a member of the Princeton University class of 2002 , and she attends law school in Washington , D.C. On March 4 , 2008 , she was induced into labor four days before her due date to deliver a girl named Catherine Elizabeth . In July 2010 , the Youngs had their second child ( first son ) , Scott Patrick . On June 6 , 2012 , the Youngs had their third child , Grant Christopher . 
 = Sonia Sotomayor = 
 Sonia Maria Sotomayor ( / <unk> <unk> / , Spanish : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born June 25 , 1954 ) is an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States , serving since August 2009 . She has the distinction of being its first justice of Hispanic heritage , the first Latina , its third female justice , and its twelfth Roman Catholic justice . Sotomayor , along with John Roberts and Elena Kagan , is one of the youngest justices on the Supreme Court . 
 Sotomayor was born in The Bronx , New York City , to Puerto Rican @-@ born parents . Her father died when she was nine , and she was subsequently raised by her mother . Sotomayor graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University in 1976 and received her J.D. from Yale Law School in 1979 , where she was an editor at the Yale Law Journal . She was an advocate for the hiring of Latino faculty at both schools . She worked as an assistant district attorney in New York for four and a half years before entering private practice in 1984 . She played an active role on the boards of directors for the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund , the State of New York Mortgage Agency , and the New York City Campaign Finance Board . 
 Sotomayor was nominated to the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York by President George H. W. Bush in 1991 ; confirmation followed in 1992 . In 1997 , she was nominated by President Bill Clinton to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit . Her nomination was slowed by the Republican majority in the United States Senate , but she was eventually confirmed in 1998 . On the Second Circuit , Sotomayor heard appeals in more than 3 @,@ 000 cases and wrote about 380 opinions . Sotomayor has taught at the New York University School of Law and Columbia Law School . 
 In May 2009 , President Barack Obama nominated Sotomayor to the Supreme Court following the retirement of Justice David Souter . Her nomination was confirmed by the Senate in August 2009 by a vote of 68 – 31 . Sotomayor has supported , while on the court , the informal liberal bloc of justices when they divide along the commonly perceived ideological lines . During her tenure on the Supreme Court , Sotomayor has been identified with concern for the rights of defendants , calls for reform of the criminal justice system , and making impassioned dissents on issues of race , gender and ethnic identity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sonia Maria Sotomayor was born in the New York City borough of The Bronx . Her father was Juan Sotomayor ( born c . 1921 ) , from the area of Santurce , San Juan , Puerto Rico , and her mother was Celina Báez ( born 1927 ) , an orphan from the neighborhood of Santa Rosa in <unk> , a still mostly rural area on Puerto Rico 's southwest coast . 
 The two left Puerto Rico separately , met , and married during World War II after Celina served in the Women 's Army Corps . Juan Sotomayor had a third @-@ grade education , did not speak English , and worked as a tool and die worker ; Celina Baez worked as a telephone operator and then a practical nurse . Sonia 's younger brother , Juan Sotomayor ( born c . 1957 ) , later became a physician and university professor in the Syracuse , New York , area . 
 Sotomayor was raised a Catholic and grew up in Puerto Rican communities in the South Bronx and East Bronx ; she self @-@ identifies as a " Nuyorican " . The family lived in a South Bronx tenement before moving in 1957 to the well @-@ maintained , racially and ethnically mixed , working @-@ class Bronxdale Houses housing project in <unk> ( which has over time been thought as part of both the East Bronx and South Bronx ) . Her relative proximity to Yankee Stadium led to her becoming a lifelong fan of the New York Yankees . The extended family got together frequently and regularly visited Puerto Rico during summers . 
 Sonia grew up with an alcoholic father and a mother who was emotionally distant ; she felt closest to her grandmother , who she later said gave her a source of " protection and purpose " . Sonia was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes at age seven , and began taking daily insulin injections . Her father died of heart problems at age 42 , when she was nine years old . After this , she became fluent in English . Sotomayor has said that she was first inspired by the strong @-@ willed Nancy Drew book character , and then after her diabetes diagnosis led doctors to suggest a different career from detective , she was inspired to go into a legal career and become a judge by watching the Perry Mason television series . She reflected in 1998 : " I was going to college and I was going to become an attorney , and I knew that when I was ten . Ten . That 's no jest . " 
 Celina Sotomayor put great stress on the value of education ; she bought the Encyclopædia Britannica for her children , something unusual in the housing projects . Despite the distance between the two , which became even worse after her father 's death and which was not fully reconciled until decades later , Sotomayor has credited her mother with being her " life inspiration " . For grammar school , Sotomayor attended Blessed Sacrament School in <unk> , where she was valedictorian and had a near @-@ perfect attendance record . Although underage , Sotomayor worked at a local retail store and a hospital . Sotomayor passed the entrance tests for and then attended Cardinal Spellman High School in the Bronx . Meanwhile , the Bronxdale Houses had fallen victim to increasing heroin use , crime , and the emergence of the Black Spades gang . In 1970 , the family found refuge by moving to Co @-@ op City in the Northeast Bronx . At Cardinal Spellman , Sotomayor was on the forensics team and was elected to the student government . She graduated as valedictorian in 1972 . 
 = = College and law school = = 
 Sotomayor entered Princeton University on a full scholarship , by her own later description gaining admission in part due to her achievements in high school and in part because affirmative action made up for her standardized test scores not being fully comparable to those of other applicants . She would later say that there are cultural biases built into such testing and praise affirmative action for fulfilling " its purpose : to create the conditions whereby students from disadvantaged backgrounds could be brought to the starting line of a race many were unaware was even being run . " 
 She would describe her time at Princeton as a life @-@ changing experience . Initially , she felt like " a visitor landing in an alien country " as her exposure had been limited to the Bronx and Puerto Rico . Princeton had few women students and fewer Latinos ( about 20 ) . She was too intimidated to ask questions during her freshman year ; her writing and vocabulary skills were weak , and she lacked knowledge in the classics . She put in long hours in the library and over summers , worked with a professor outside of class , and gained skills , knowledge , and confidence . She became a moderate student activist and co @-@ chair of the Acción Puertorriqueña organization , which served as a social and political hub and sought more opportunities for Puerto Rican students . She worked in the admissions office , traveling to high schools and lobbying on behalf of her best prospects . 
 As an activist , Sotomayor focused on faculty hiring and curriculum , since Princeton did not have a single full @-@ time Latino professor nor any class on Latin American studies . A meeting with university president William G. Bowen in her sophomore year saw no results , leading to Sotomayor 's saying in a New York Times story at the time that " Princeton is following a policy of benign neutrality and is not making substantive efforts to change . " So , Acción Puertorriqueña filed a formal letter of complaint in April 1974 with the Department of Health , Education and Welfare , saying the school discriminated in its hiring and admission practices . Sotomayor wrote opinion pieces for the Daily Princetonian with the same theme . The university began to hire Latino faculty , and Sotomayor established an ongoing dialogue with Bowen . Sotomayor also successfully persuaded historian Peter Winn to create a seminar on Puerto Rican history and politics . Sotomayor joined the governance board of Princeton 's Third World Center and served on the university 's student – faculty Discipline Committee , which issued rulings on student infractions . She also ran an after @-@ school program for local children and volunteered as an interpreter for Latino patients at Trenton Psychiatric Hospital . 
 A history major , Sotomayor received almost all A 's in her final two years of college . Sotomayor wrote her senior thesis at Princeton on Luis Muñoz Marín , the first democratically elected governor of Puerto Rico , and on the territory 's struggles for economic and political self @-@ determination . The 178 @-@ page work , " La Historia <unk> de Puerto Rico : The Impact of the Life of Luis Muñoz Marin on the Political and Economic History of Puerto Rico , 1930 – 1975 " , won honorable mention for the Latin American Studies Thesis Prize . As a senior , Sotomayor won the Pyne Prize , the top award for undergraduates , which reflected both strong grades and extracurricular activities . In 1976 , she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and awarded an A.B. from Princeton , graduating summa cum laude . She was influenced by the then @-@ fashionable critical race theory , which would be reflected in her later speeches and writings . 
 On August 14 , 1976 , just after graduating from Princeton , Sotomayor married Kevin Edward Noonan , whom she had dated since high school , in a small chapel at St. Patrick 's Cathedral in New York . She used the married name Sonia Sotomayor de Noonan . He became a biologist and a patent lawyer . 
 Sotomayor entered Yale Law School in the fall of 1976 , once more on a scholarship . While she believes she again benefited from affirmative action to compensate for somewhat lower standardized test scores , a former dean of admissions at Yale has said that given her record at Princeton , it probably had little effect . At Yale she fit in well although she found there were again few Latino students . She was known as a hard worker but she was not considered among the star students in her class . Yale General Counsel and professor José A. Cabranes acted as an early mentor to her to successfully transition and work within " the system " . She became an editor of the Yale Law Journal and was also managing editor of the student @-@ run Yale Studies in World Public Order publication ( later known as the Yale Journal of International Law ) . Sotomayor published a law review note on the effect of possible Puerto Rican statehood on the island 's mineral and ocean rights . She was a semi @-@ finalist in the Barristers Union mock trial competition . She was co @-@ chair of a group for Latin , Asian , and Native American students , and her advocacy to hire more Hispanic faculty was renewed . 
 Following her second year , she gained a job as a summer associate with the prominent New York law firm Paul , Weiss , Rifkind , Wharton & Garrison . By her own later evaluation , her performance there was lacking . She did not receive an offer for a full @-@ time position , an experience that she later described as a " kick in the teeth " and one that would bother her for years . In her third year , she filed a formal complaint against the established Washington , D.C. , law firm of Shaw , Pittman , Potts & Trowbridge for suggesting during a recruiting dinner that she was at Yale only via affirmative action . Sotomayor refused to be interviewed by the firm further and filed her complaint with a faculty – student tribunal , which ruled in her favor . Her action triggered a campus @-@ wide debate , and news of the firm 's subsequent December 1978 apology made the Washington Post . 
 In 1979 , Sotomayor was awarded a J.D. from Yale Law School . She was admitted to the New York Bar the following year . 
 = = Early legal career = = 
 On the recommendation of Cabranes , Sotomayor was hired out of law school as an assistant district attorney under New York County District Attorney Robert Morgenthau starting in 1979 . She said at the time that she did so with conflicted emotions : " There was a tremendous amount of pressure from my community , from the third world community , at Yale . They could not understand why I was taking this job . I 'm not sure I 've ever resolved that problem . " It was a time of crisis @-@ level crime rates and drug problems in New York , Morgenthau 's staff was overburdened with cases , and like other rookie prosecutors , Sotomayor was initially fearful of appearing before judges in court . Working in the trial division , she handled heavy <unk> as she prosecuted everything from shoplifting and prostitution to robberies , assaults , and murders . She also worked on cases involving police brutality . She was not afraid to venture into tough neighborhoods or endure squalid conditions in order to interview witnesses . In the courtroom , she was effective at cross examination and at simplifying a case in ways to which a jury could relate . In 1983 in her highest profile case she helped convict the " Tarzan Murderer " ( who acrobatically entered apartments , robbed them , and shot residents for no reason ) . She felt lower @-@ level crimes were largely products of socioeconomic environment and poverty , but she had a different attitude about serious felonies : " No matter how liberal I am , I 'm still outraged by crimes of violence . Regardless of whether I can sympathize with the causes that lead these individuals to do these crimes , the effects are outrageous . " Hispanic @-@ on @-@ Hispanic crime was of particular concern to her : " The saddest crimes for me were the ones that my own people committed against each other . " In general , she showed a passion for bringing law and order to the streets of New York , displaying special zeal in pursuing child pornography cases , unusual for the time . She worked 15 @-@ hour days and gained a reputation for being driven and for her preparedness and fairness . One of her job evaluations labelled her a " potential superstar " . Morgenthau later described her as " smart , hard @-@ working , [ and having ] a lot of common sense , " and as a " fearless and effective prosecutor . " She stayed a typical length of time in the post and had a common reaction to the job : " After a while , you forget there are decent , law @-@ abiding people in life . " 
 Sotomayor and Noonan divorced amicably in 1983 ; they did not have children . She has said that the pressures of her working life were a contributing factor , but not the major factor , in the breakup . From 1983 to 1986 , Sotomayor had an informal solo practice , dubbed Sotomayor & Associates , located in her Brooklyn apartment . She performed legal consulting work , often for friends or family members . 
 In 1984 , she entered private practice , joining the commercial litigation practice group of Pavia & Harcourt in Manhattan as an associate . One of 30 attorneys in the law firm , she specialized in intellectual property litigation , international law , and arbitration . She later said , " I wanted to complete myself as an attorney . " Although she had no civil litigation experience , the firm recruited her heavily , and she learned quickly on the job . She was eager to try cases and argue in court , rather than be part of a larger law firm . Her clients were mostly international corporations doing business in the United States ; much of her time was spent tracking down and suing counterfeiters of Fendi goods . In some cases , Sotomayor went on @-@ site with the police to Harlem or Chinatown to have illegitimate merchandise seized , in the latter instance pursuing a fleeing culprit while riding on a motorcycle . She said at the time that Pavia & Harcourt 's efforts were run " much like a drug operation " , and the successful rounding up of thousands of counterfeit accessories in 1986 was celebrated by " Fendi Crush " , a destruction @-@ by @-@ garbage @-@ truck event at Tavern on the Green . At other times , she dealt with dry legal issues such as grain export contract disputes . In a 1986 appearance on Good Morning America that profiled women ten years after college graduation , she said that the bulk of law work was drudgery , and that while she was content with her life , she had expected greater things of herself coming out of college . In 1988 she became a partner at the firm ; she was paid well but not extravagantly . She left in 1992 when she became a judge . 
 In addition to her law firm work , Sotomayor found visible public service roles . She was not connected to the party bosses that typically picked people for such jobs in New York , and indeed she was registered as an independent . Instead , District Attorney Morgenthau , an influential figure , served as her patron . In 1987 , Governor of New York Mario Cuomo appointed Sotomayor to the board of the State of New York Mortgage Agency , which she served on until 1992 . As part of one of the largest urban rebuilding efforts in American history , the agency helped low @-@ income people get home mortgages and to provide insurance coverage for housing and AIDS hospices . Despite being the youngest member of a board composed of strong personalities , she involved herself in the details of the operation and was effective . She was vocal in supporting the right to affordable housing , directing more funds to lower @-@ income home owners , and in her skepticism about the effects of gentrification , although in the end she voted in favor of most of the projects . 
 Sotomayor was appointed by Mayor Ed Koch in 1988 as one of the founding members of the New York City Campaign Finance Board , where she served for four years . There she took a vigorous role in the board 's implementation of a voluntary scheme wherein local candidates received public matching funds in exchange for limits on contributions and spending and agreeing to greater financial disclosure . Sotomayor showed no patience with candidates who failed to follow regulations and was more of a stickler for making campaigns follow those regulations than some of the other board members . She joined in rulings that fined , audited , or reprimanded the mayoral campaigns of Koch , David Dinkins , and Rudy Giuliani . 
 Based upon another recommendation from Cabranes , Sotomayor was a member of the board of directors of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund from 1980 to 1992 . There she was a top policy maker who worked actively with the organization 's lawyers on issues such as New York City hiring practices , police brutality , the death penalty , and voting rights . The group achieved its most visible triumph when it successfully blocked a city primary election on the grounds that New York City Council boundaries diminished the power of minority voters . 
 During 1985 and 1986 , Sotomayor served on the board of the Maternity Center Association , a Manhattan @-@ based non @-@ profit group which focused on improving the quality of maternity care . 
 = = Federal district judge = = 
 = = = Nomination and confirmation = = = 
 Sotomayor had wanted to become a judge since she was in elementary school , and in 1991 she was recommended for a spot by Democratic New York senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan . Moynihan had an unusual bipartisan arrangement with his fellow New York senator , Republican Al D 'Amato , whereby he would get to choose roughly one out of every four New York district court seats even though a Republican was in the White House . Moynihan also wanted to fulfill a public promise he had made to get a Hispanic judge appointed for New York . When Moynihan 's staff recommended her to him , they said " Have we got a judge for you ! " Moynihan identified with her socio @-@ economic and academic background and became convinced she would become the first Hispanic Supreme Court justice . D 'Amato became an enthusiastic backer of Sotomayor , who was seen as politically centrist at the time . Of the impending drop in salary from private practice , Sotomayor said : " I 've never wanted to get adjusted to my income because I knew I wanted to go back to public service . And in comparison to what my mother earns and how I was raised , it 's not modest at all . " 
 Sotomayor was thus nominated on November 27 , 1991 , by President George H. W. Bush to a seat on the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York vacated by John M. Walker , Jr . Senate Judiciary Committee hearings , led by a friendly Democratic majority , went smoothly for her in June 1992 , with her pro bono activities winning praise from Senator Ted Kennedy and her getting unanimous approval from the committee . Then a Republican senator blocked her nomination and that of three others for a while in retaliation for an unrelated block Democrats had put on another nominee . D 'Amato objected strongly ; some weeks later , the block was dropped , and Sotomayor was confirmed by unanimous consent of the full United States Senate on August 11 , 1992 , and received her commission the next day . 
 Sotomayor became the youngest judge in the Southern District and the first Hispanic federal judge in New York State . She became the first Puerto Rican woman to serve as a judge in a U.S. federal court . She was one of seven women among the district 's 58 judges . She moved from Carroll Gardens , Brooklyn , back to the Bronx in order to live within her district . 
 = = = Judgeship = = = 
 Sotomayor generally kept a low public profile as a district court judge . She showed a willingness to take anti @-@ government positions in a number of cases , and during her first year in the seat , she received high ratings from liberal public @-@ interest groups . Other sources and organizations regarded her as a centrist during this period . In criminal cases , she gained a reputation for tough sentencing and was not viewed as a pro @-@ defense judge . A Syracuse University study found that in such cases , Sotomayor generally handed out longer sentences than her colleagues , especially when white @-@ collar crime was involved . Fellow district judge Miriam Goldman <unk> was an influence on Sotomayor in adopting a narrow , " just the facts " approach to judicial decision @-@ making . 
 As a trial judge , she garnered a reputation for being well @-@ prepared in advance of a case and moving cases along a tight schedule . Lawyers before her court viewed her as plain @-@ spoken , intelligent , demanding , and sometimes somewhat unforgiving ; one said , " She does not have much patience for people trying to snow her . You can 't do it . " 
 = = = Notable rulings = = = 
 On March 30 , 1995 , in Silverman v. Major League Baseball Player Relations Committee , Inc . , Sotomayor issued a preliminary injunction against Major League Baseball , preventing it from unilaterally implementing a new collective bargaining agreement and using replacement players . Her ruling ended the 1994 baseball strike after 232 days , the day before the new season was scheduled to begin . The Second Circuit upheld Sotomayor 's decision and denied the owners ' request to stay the ruling . The decision raised her profile , won her the plaudits of baseball fans , and had a lasting effect on the game . In the preparatory phase of the case , Sotomayor informed the lawyers of both sides that , " I hope none of you assumed ... that my lack of knowledge of any of the intimate details of your dispute meant I was not a baseball fan . You can 't grow up in the South Bronx without knowing about baseball . " 
 In Dow Jones v. Department of Justice ( 1995 ) , Sotomayor sided with the Wall Street Journal in its efforts to obtain and publish a photocopy of the last note left by former Deputy White House Counsel Vince Foster . Sotomayor ruled that the public had " a substantial interest " in viewing the note and enjoined the U.S. Justice Department from blocking its release . 
 In New York Times Co. v. <unk> ( 1997 ) , freelance journalists sued the New York Times Company for copyright infringement for the New York Times ' inclusion in an electronic archival database ( LexisNexis ) of the work of freelancers it had published . Sotomayor ruled that the publisher had the right to license the freelancers ' work . This decision was reversed on appeal , and the Supreme Court upheld the reversal ; two dissenters ( John Paul Stevens and Stephen Breyer ) took Sotomayor 's position . 
 In Castle Rock Entertainment , Inc. v. Carol Publishing Group ( also in 1997 ) , Sotomayor ruled that a book of trivia from the television program Seinfeld infringed on the copyright of the show 's producer and did not constitute legal fair use . The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upheld Sotomayor 's ruling . 
 = = Court of Appeals judge = = 
 = = = Nomination and confirmation = = = 
 On June 25 , 1997 , Sotomayor was nominated by President Bill Clinton to a seat on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit , which was vacated by J. Daniel Mahoney . Her nomination was initially expected to have smooth sailing , with the American Bar Association Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary giving her a " well qualified " professional assessment . However , as The New York Times described , " [ it became ] embroiled in the sometimes tortured judicial politics of the Senate . " Some in the Republican majority believed Clinton was eager to name the first Hispanic Supreme Court justice and that an easy confirmation to the appeals court would put Sotomayor in a better position for a possible Supreme Court nomination ( despite there being no vacancy at the time nor any indication the Clinton administration was considering nominating her or any Hispanic ) . Therefore , the Republican majority decided to slow her confirmation . Radio commentator Rush Limbaugh weighed in that Sotomayor was an <unk> who was on a " rocket ship " to the highest court . 
 During her September 1997 hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee , Sotomayor parried strong questioning from some Republican members about mandatory sentencing , gay rights , and her level of respect for Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas . After a long wait , she was approved by the committee in March 1998 , with only two dissensions . However , in June 1998 , the influential Wall Street Journal editorial page opined that the Clinton administration intended to " get her on to the Second Circuit , then elevate her to the Supreme Court as soon as an opening occurs " ; the editorial criticized two of her district court rulings and urged further delay of her confirmation . The Republican block continued . 
 Ranking Democratic committee member Patrick Leahy objected to Republican use of a secret hold to slow down the Sotomayor nomination , and Leahy attributed that anonymous tactic to GOP reticence about publicly opposing a female Hispanic nominee . The prior month , Leahy had triggered a procedural delay in the confirmation of fellow Second Circuit nominee Chester J. Straub — who , although advanced by Clinton and supported by Senator Moynihan , was considered much more acceptable by Republicans — in an unsuccessful effort to force earlier consideration of the Sotomayor confirmation . 
 During 1998 , several Hispanic organizations organized a petition drive in New York State , generating hundreds of signatures from New Yorkers to try to convince New York Republican senator Al D 'Amato to push the Senate leadership to bring Sotomayor 's nomination to a vote . D 'Amato , a backer of Sotomayor to begin with and additionally concerned about being up for re @-@ election that year , helped move Republican leadership . Her nomination had been pending for over a year when Majority Leader Trent Lott scheduled the vote . With complete Democratic support , and support from 25 Republican senators including Judiciary chair Orrin Hatch , Sotomayor was confirmed on October 2 , 1998 , by a 67 – 29 vote . She received her commission on October 7 . The confirmation experience left Sotomayor somewhat angry ; she said shortly afterwards that during the hearings , Republicans had assumed her political beliefs based on her being a Latina : " That series of questions , I think , were symbolic of a set of expectations that some people had [ that ] I must be liberal . It is stereotyping , and stereotyping is perhaps the most insidious of all problems in our society today . " 
 = = = Judgeship = = = 
 Over her ten years on the Second Circuit , Sotomayor heard appeals in more than 3 @,@ 000 cases and wrote about 380 opinions where she was in the majority . The Supreme Court reviewed five of those , reversing three and affirming two — not high numbers for an appellate judge of that many years and a typical percentage of reversals . 
 Sotomayor 's circuit court rulings led to her being considered a political centrist by the ABA Journal and other sources and organizations . Several lawyers , legal experts , and news organizations identified her as someone with liberal inclinations . In any case , the Second Circuit 's caseload typically skewed more toward business and securities law rather than hot @-@ button social or constitutional issues . Sotomayor tended to write narrow , practiced rulings that relied on close application of the law to the facts of a case rather than import general philosophical viewpoints . A Congressional Research Service analysis found that Sotomayor 's rulings defied easy ideological categorization , but did show an adherence to precedent and an avoidance of overstepping the circuit court 's judicial role . Unusually , Sotomayor read through all the supporting documents of cases under review ; her lengthy rulings explored every aspect of a case and tended to feature leaden , ungainly prose . Some legal experts have said that Sotomayor 's attention to detail and re @-@ examination of the facts of a case came close to overstepping the traditional role of appellate judges . 
 Across some 150 cases involving business and civil law , Sotomayor 's rulings were generally unpredictable and not consistently pro @-@ business or anti @-@ business . Sotomayor 's influence in the federal judiciary , as measured by the number of citations of her rulings by other judges and in law review articles , increased significantly during the length of her appellate judgeship and was greater than that of some other prominent federal appeals court judges . Two academic studies showed that the percentage of Sotomayor 's decisions that overrode policy decisions by elected branches was the same as or lower than that of other circuit judges . 
 Sotomayor was a member of the Second Circuit Task Force on Gender , Racial and Ethnic Fairness in the Courts . In October 2001 , she presented the annual Judge Mario G. Olmos Memorial Lecture at UC Berkeley School of Law ; titled " A Latina Judge 's Voice " ; it was published in the Berkeley La Raza Law Journal the following spring . In the speech , she discussed the characteristics of her Latina upbringing and culture and the history of minorities and women ascending to the federal bench . She said the low number of minority women on the federal bench at that time was " shocking " . She then discussed at length how her own experiences as a Latina might affect her decisions as a judge . In any case , her background in activism did not necessarily influence her rulings : in a study of 50 racial discrimination cases brought before her panel , 45 were rejected , with Sotomayor never filing a dissent . An expanded study showed that Sotomayor decided 97 cases involving a claim of discrimination and rejected those claims nearly 90 percent of the time . Another examination of Second Circuit split decisions on cases that dealt with race and discrimination showed no clear ideological pattern in Sotomayor 's opinions . 
 In the Court of Appeals seat , Sotomayor gained a reputation for vigorous and blunt behavior toward lawyers appealing before her , sometimes to the point of brusque and curt treatment or testy interruptions . She was known for extensive preparation for oral arguments and for running a " hot bench " , where judges ask lawyers plenty of questions . Unprepared lawyers suffered the consequences , but the vigorous questioning was an aid to lawyers seeking to tailor their arguments to the judge 's concerns . The 2009 Almanac of the Federal Judiciary , which collected anonymous evaluations of judges by lawyers who appear before them , contained a wide range of reactions to Sotomayor . Comments also diverged among lawyers willing to be named . Attorney Sheema Chaudhry said , " She 's brilliant and she 's qualified , but I just feel that she can be very , how do you say , temperamental . " Defense lawyer Gerald B. <unk> said , " She used her questioning to make a point , as opposed to really looking for an answer to a question she did not understand . " In contrast , Second Circuit Judge Richard C. Wesley said that his interactions with Sotomayor had been " totally antithetical to this perception that has gotten some traction that she is somehow confrontational . " Second Circuit Judge and former teacher Guido <unk> said his tracking showed that Sotomayor 's questioning patterns were no different from those of other members of the court and added , " Some lawyers just don ’ t like to be questioned by a woman . [ The criticism ] was sexist , plain and simple . " Sotomayor 's law clerks regarded her as a valuable and strong mentor , and she said that she viewed them like family . 
 In 2005 , Senate Democrats suggested Sotomayor , among others , to President George W. Bush as an acceptable nominee to fill the seat of retiring Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O 'Connor . 
 = = = Notable rulings = = = 
 Abortion 
 In the 2002 decision Center for Reproductive Law and Policy v. Bush , Sotomayor upheld the Bush administration 's implementation of the Mexico City Policy , which states that " the United States will no longer contribute to separate nongovernmental organizations which perform or actively promote abortion as a method of family planning in other nations . " Sotomayor held that the policy did not constitute a violation of equal protection , as " the government is free to favor the anti @-@ abortion position over the pro @-@ choice position , and can do so with public funds . " 
 First Amendment rights 
 In Pappas v. Giuliani ( 2002 ) , Sotomayor dissented from her colleagues ' ruling that the New York Police Department could terminate from his desk job an employee who sent racist materials through the mail . Sotomayor argued that the First Amendment protected speech by the employee " away from the office , on [ his ] own time " , even if that speech was " offensive , hateful , and insulting " , and that therefore the employee 's First Amendment claim should have gone to trial rather than being dismissed on summary judgment . 
 In 2005 , Sotomayor wrote the opinion for United States v. Quattrone . Frank Quattrone had been on trial on charges of obstructing investigations related to technology IPOs . Some members of the media had wanted to publish the names of the jurors deciding Quattrone 's case , and a district court had issued an order to forbid the publication of the juror 's names . In United States v. Quattrone , Sotomayor wrote the opinion for the Second Circuit panel striking down this order on First Amendment grounds , stating that the media should be free to publish the names of the jurors . The first trial ended in a deadlocked jury and a mistrial , and the district court ordered the media not to publish the names of jurors , even though those names had been disclosed in open court . Sotomayor held that although it was important to protect the fairness of the retrial , the district court 's order was an unconstitutional prior restraint on free speech and violated the right of the press " to report freely on events that transpire in an open courtroom " . 
 In 2008 , Sotomayor was on a three @-@ judge panel in <unk> v. Niehoff that unanimously affirmed , in an opinion written by Second Circuit Judge Debra Livingston , the district court 's judgment that Lewis S. Mills High School did not violate the First Amendment rights of a student when it barred her from running for student government after she called the superintendent and other school officials " <unk> " in a blog post written while off @-@ campus that encouraged students to call an administrator and " piss her off more " . Judge Livingston held that the district judge did not abuse her discretion in holding that the student 's speech " <unk> create [ d ] a risk of substantial disruption within the school environment " , which is the precedent in the Second Circuit for when schools may regulate off @-@ campus speech . Although Sotomayor did not write this opinion , she has been criticized by some who disagree with it . 
 Second Amendment rights 
 Sotomayor was part of the three @-@ judge Second Circuit panel that affirmed the district court 's ruling in Maloney v. Cuomo ( 2009 ) . Maloney was arrested for possession of nunchucks , which are illegal in New York ; Maloney argued that this law violated his Second Amendment right to bear arms . The Second Circuit 's per curiam opinion noted that the Supreme Court has not , so far , ever held that the Second Amendment is binding against state governments . On the contrary , in Presser v. Illinois , a Supreme Court case from 1886 , the Supreme Court held that the Second Amendment " is a limitation only upon the power of Congress and the national government , and not upon that of the state " . With respect to the Presser v. Illinois precedent , the panel stated that only the Supreme Court has " the prerogative of overruling its own decisions , " and the recent Supreme Court case of District of Columbia v. Heller ( which struck down the district 's gun ban as unconstitutional ) did " not invalidate this longstanding principle " . The panel upheld the lower court 's decision dismissing Maloney 's challenge to New York 's law against possession of nunchucks . On June 2 , 2009 , a Seventh Circuit panel , including the prominent and heavily cited judges Richard Posner and Frank Easterbrook , unanimously agreed with Maloney v. Cuomo , citing the case in their decision turning back a challenge to Chicago 's gun laws and noting the Supreme Court precedents remain in force until altered by the Supreme Court itself . 
 Fourth Amendment rights 
 In <unk> & S.G. ex rel . S.C. v. Connecticut ( 2004 ) , Sotomayor dissented from her colleagues ’ decision to uphold a series of strip searches of " troubled adolescent girls " in juvenile detention centers . While Sotomayor agreed that some of the strip searches at issue in the case were lawful , she would have held that due to " the severely intrusive nature of strip searches " , they should not be allowed " in the absence of individualized suspicion , of adolescents who have never been charged with a crime " . She argued that an " individualized suspicion " rule was more consistent with Second Circuit precedent than the majority 's rule . 
 In Leventhal v. <unk> ( 2001 ) , Sotomayor rejected a Fourth Amendment challenge by a U.S. Department of Transportation employee whose employer searched his office computer . She held that , " Even though [ the employee ] had some expectation of privacy in the contents of his office computer , the investigatory searches by the DOT did not violate his Fourth Amendment rights " because here " there were reasonable grounds to believe " that the search would reveal evidence of " work @-@ related misconduct " . 
 Alcohol in commerce 
 In 2004 , Sotomayor was part of the judge panel that ruled in Swedenburg v. Kelly that New York 's law prohibiting out @-@ of @-@ state wineries from shipping directly to consumers in New York was constitutional even though in @-@ state wineries were allowed to . The case , which invoked the 21st Amendment , was appealed and attached to another case . The case reached the Supreme Court later on as Swedenburg v. Kelly and was overruled in a 5 – 4 decision that found the law was discriminatory and unconstitutional . 
 Employment discrimination 
 Sotomayor was involved in the high @-@ profile case Ricci v. DeStefano that initially upheld the right of the City of New Haven to throw out its test for firefighters and start over with a new test , because the City believed the test had a " disparate impact " on minority firefighters . ( No black firefighters qualified for promotion under the test , whereas some had qualified under tests used in previous years . ) The City was concerned that minority firefighters might sue under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . The City chose not to certify the test results and a lower court had previously upheld the City 's right to do this . Several white firefighters and one Hispanic firefighter who had passed the test , including the lead plaintiff who has dyslexia and had put much extra effort into studying , sued the City of New Haven , claiming that their rights were violated . A Second Circuit panel that included Sotomayor first issued a brief , unsigned summary order ( not written by Sotomayor ) affirming the lower court 's ruling . Sotomayor 's former mentor José A. Cabranes , by now a fellow judge on the court , objected to this handling and requested that the court hear it en banc . Sotomayor voted with a 7 – 6 majority not to rehear it and a slightly expanded ruling was issued , but a strong dissent by Cabranes led to the case reaching the Supreme Court in 2009 . There it was overruled in a 5 – 4 decision that found the white firefighters had been victims of racial discrimination when they were denied promotion . 
 Business 
 In Clarett v. National Football League ( 2004 ) , Sotomayor upheld the National Football League 's eligibility rules requiring players to wait three full seasons after high school graduation before entering the NFL draft . Maurice Clarett challenged these rules , which were part of the collective bargaining agreement between the NFL and its players , on antitrust grounds . Sotomayor held that Clarett 's claim would upset the established " federal labor law favoring and governing the collective bargaining process " . 
 In Merrill Lynch , Pierce , Fenner & Smith , Inc. v. <unk> ( 2005 ) , Sotomayor wrote a unanimous opinion that the Securities Litigation Uniform Standards Act of 1998 did not preempt class action claims in state courts by stockbrokers alleging misleading inducement to buy or sell stocks . The Supreme Court handed down an 8 – 0 decision stating that the Act did preempt such claims , thereby overruling Sotomayor 's decision . 
 In Specht v. Netscape Communications Corp. ( 2001 ) , she ruled that the license agreement of Netscape 's Smart Download software did not constitute a binding contract because the system didn 't give " sufficient notice " to the user . 
 Civil rights 
 In Correctional Services Corp. v. <unk> ( 2000 ) , Sotomayor , writing for the court , supported the right of an individual to sue a private corporation working on behalf of the federal government for alleged violations of that individual 's constitutional rights . Reversing a lower court decision , Sotomayor found that an existing Supreme Court doctrine , known as " <unk> " — which allows suits against individuals working for the federal government for constitutional rights violations — could be applied to the case of a former prisoner seeking to sue the private company operating the federal halfway house facility in which he resided . The Supreme Court reversed Sotomayor 's ruling in a 5 – 4 decision , saying that the <unk> doctrine could not be expanded to cover private entities working on behalf of the federal government . Justices Stevens , Souter , Ginsburg , and Breyer dissented , siding with Sotomayor 's original ruling . 
 In Gant v. Wallingford Board of Education ( 1999 ) , the parents of a black student alleged that he had been harassed due to his race and had been discriminated against when he was transferred from a first grade class to a kindergarten class without parental consent , while similarly situated white students were treated differently . Sotomayor agreed with the dismissal of the harassment claims due to lack of evidence , but would have allowed the discrimination claim to go forward . She wrote in dissent that the grade transfer was " contrary to the school 's established policies " as well as its treatment of white students , which " supports the inference that race discrimination played a role " . 
 Property rights 
 In <unk> v. Kelly ( 2002 ) , Sotomayor wrote an opinion halting New York City 's practice of seizing the motor vehicles of drivers accused of driving while intoxicated and some other crimes and holding those vehicles for " months or even years " during criminal proceedings . Noting the importance of cars to many individuals ' livelihoods or daily activities , she held that it violated individuals ' due process rights to hold the vehicles without permitting the owners to challenge the City 's continued possession of their property . 
 In Brody v. Village of Port Chester ( 2003 and 2005 ) , a takings case , Sotomayor first ruled in 2003 for a unanimous panel that a property owner in Port Chester , New York was permitted to challenge the state 's Eminent Domain Procedure Law . A district court subsequently rejected the plaintiff 's claims and upon appeal the case found itself again with the Second Circuit . In 2005 , Sotomayor ruled with a panel majority that the property owner 's due process rights had been violated by lack of adequate notice to him of his right to challenge a village order that his land should be used for a redevelopment project . However , the panel supported the village 's taking of the property for public use . 
 In <unk> v. Village of Port Chester ( 2006 ) , an unrelated case brought about by the same town 's actions , Sotomayor joined a unanimous panel 's summary order to uphold a trial court 's dismissal – due to a statute of limitations lapse – of a property owner 's objection to his land being condemned for a redevelopment project . The ruling further said that even without the lapse , the owner 's petition would be denied due to application of the Supreme Court 's recent <unk> v. City of New London ruling . The Second Circuit 's reasoning drew criticism from libertarian commentators . 
 = = Supreme Court justice = = 
 = = = Nomination and confirmation = = = 
 Since President Barack Obama 's election there was speculation that Sotomayor could be a leading candidate for a Supreme Court seat . New York Senators Charles Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand wrote a joint letter to Obama urging him to appoint Sotomayor , or alternatively Interior Secretary Ken Salazar , to the Supreme Court if a vacancy should arise during his term . The White House first contacted Sotomayor on April 27 , 2009 , about the possibility of her nomination . On April 30 , 2009 , Justice David Souter 's retirement plans leaked to the media , and Sotomayor received early attention as a possible nominee for Souter 's seat to be vacated in June 2009 . On May 25 , Obama informed Sotomayor of his choice ; she later said , " I had my [ hand ] over my chest , trying to calm my beating heart , literally . " On May 26 , 2009 , Obama nominated her . She became only the second jurist to be nominated to three different judicial positions by three different presidents . The selection appeared to closely match Obama 's presidential campaign promise that he would nominate judges who had " the heart , the empathy , to recognize what it 's like to be a teenage mom . The empathy to understand what it 's like to be poor , or African @-@ American , or gay , or disabled , or old . " 
 Sotomayor 's nomination won praise from Democrats and liberals , and Democrats appeared to have sufficient votes to confirm her . The strongest criticism of her nomination came from conservatives and some Republican senators regarding a line she had used in similar forms in a number of her speeches , particularly in a 2001 Berkeley Law lecture : " I would hope that a wise Latina woman with the richness of her experiences would more often than not reach a better conclusion than a white male who hasn 't lived that life . " Sotomayor had made similar remarks in other speeches between 1994 and 2003 , including one she submitted as part of her confirmation questionnaire for the Court of Appeals in 1998 , but they had attracted little attention at the time . The remark now became widely known . The rhetoric quickly became inflamed , with radio commentator Rush Limbaugh and former Republican Speaker of the House of Representatives Newt Gingrich calling Sotomayor a " racist " ( although the latter later backtracked from that claim ) , while John Cornyn and other Republican senators denounced such attacks but said that Sotomayor 's approach was troubling . Backers of Sotomayor offered a variety of explanations in defense of the remark , and White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs stated that Sotomayor 's word choice in 2001 had been " poor " . Sotomayor subsequently clarified her remark through Senate Judiciary Committee chair Patrick Leahy , saying that while life experience shapes who one is , " ultimately and completely " a judge follows the law regardless of personal background . Of her cases , the Second Circuit rulings in Ricci v. DeStefano received the most attention during the early nomination discussion , motivated by the Republican desire to focus on the reverse racial discrimination aspect of the case . In the midst of her confirmation process the Supreme Court overturned that ruling on June 29 . A third line of Republican attack against Sotomayor was based on her ruling in Maloney v. Cuomo and was motivated by gun ownership advocates concerned about her interpretation of Second Amendment rights . Some of the fervor with which conservatives and Republicans viewed the Sotomayor nomination was due to their grievances over the history of federal judicial nomination battles going back to the 1987 Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination . 
 A Gallup poll released a week after the nomination showed 54 percent of Americans in favor of Sotomayor 's confirmation compared with 28 percent in opposition . A June 12 Fox News poll showed 58 percent of the public disagreeing with her " wise Latina " remark but 67 percent saying the remark should not disqualify her from serving on the Supreme Court . The American Bar Association gave her a unanimous " well qualified " assessment , its highest mark for professional qualification . Following the Ricci overruling , Rasmussen Reports and CNN / Opinion Research polls showed that the public was now sharply divided , largely along partisan and ideological lines , as to whether Sotomayor should be confirmed . 
 Sotomayor 's confirmation hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee began on July 13 , 2009 , during which she backed away from her " wise Latina " remark , declaring it " a rhetorical flourish that fell flat " and stating that " I do not believe that any ethnic , racial or gender group has an advantage in sound judgment . " When Republican senators confronted her regarding other remarks from her past speeches , she pointed to her judicial record and said she had never let her own life experiences or opinions influence her decisions . Republican senators said that while her rulings to this point might be largely traditional , they feared her Supreme Court rulings – where there is more latitude with respect to precedent and interpretation – might be more reflective of her speeches . Sotomayor defended her position in Ricci as following applicable precedent . When asked whom she admired , she pointed to Justice Benjamin N. Cardozo . In general , Sotomayor followed the hearings formula of recent past nominees by avoiding stating personal positions , declining to take positions on controversial issues likely to come before the Court , agreeing with senators from both parties , and repeatedly affirming that as a justice she would just apply the law . On July 28 , 2009 , the Senate Judiciary Committee approved Sotomayor 's nomination ; the 13 – 6 vote was almost entirely along party lines , with no Democrats opposing her and only one Republican supporting her . On August 6 , 2009 , Sotomayor was confirmed by the full Senate by a vote of 68 – 31 . The vote was largely along party lines , with no Democrats opposing her and nine Republicans supporting her . 
 President Obama commissioned Sotomayor on the day of her confirmation ; Sotomayor was sworn in on August 8 , 2009 , by Chief Justice John Roberts . Sotomayor is the first Hispanic to serve on the Supreme Court . Some attention has been given to Justice Benjamin Cardozo – a Sephardic Jew believed to be of distant Portuguese descent – as the first Hispanic on the court when appointed in 1932 , but his roots were uncertain , the term " Hispanic " was not in use as an ethnic identifier at the time , and the Portuguese are generally excluded from its meaning . Sotomayor is among four women to have historically served on the Court , together with Sandra Day O 'Connor , Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Elena Kagan , the last of whom won confirmation a year after Sotomayor by a comparable 63 – 37 vote . Sotomayor 's appointment gives the Court a record six Roman Catholic justices serving at the same time . Sotomayor became one of the three youngest of the justices sitting on the Court , along with John Roberts and Elena Kagan . 
 = = = Justiceship = = = 
 Sotomayor cast her first vote as an associate Supreme Court justice on August 17 , 2009 , in a stay of execution case . She was given a warm welcome onto the Court and was formally invested in a September 8 ceremony . Sotomayor 's inaugural case in which she heard arguments was on September 9 during a special session , Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission . It involved the controversial aspect of the First Amendment and the rights of corporations in campaign finance ; Sotomayor dissented . In her vigorous examination of Floyd Abrams , representing the First Amendment issues in the case , Sotomayor challenged him , questioning 19th century rulings of the Court and saying , " What you are suggesting is that the courts , who created corporations as persons , gave birth to corporations as persons , and there could be an argument made that that was the Court 's error to start with ... [ imbuing ] a creature of State law with human characteristics . " 
 Sotomayor 's first major written opinion was a dissent in the Berghuis v. Thompkins case dealing with Miranda rights . As her first year neared completion , Sotomayor said she felt swamped by the intensity and heavy workload of the job . During the oral arguments for National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius , Sotomayor showed her increasing familiarity with the Court and its protocols by directing the opening questions of the arguments to Donald Verrilli , the Solicitor General who was representing the government 's position . 
 In succeeding Justice Souter , Sotomayor had done little to change the philosophical and ideological balance of the Court . While many cases are decided unanimously or with different voting coalitions , Sotomayor has continued to be a reliable member of the liberal bloc of the court when the justices divide along the commonly perceived ideological lines . Specifically , her voting pattern and judicial philosophy has been in close agreement with that of Justices Breyer , Ginsburg and Kagan . During her first couple of years there , Sotomayor voted with Ginsburg and Breyer 90 percent of the time , one of the highest agreement rates on the Court . In a 2015 article titled " Ranking the Most Liberal Modern Supreme Court Justices " , Alex Greer identified Sotomayor as representing a more liberal voting pattern than both Elena Kagan and Ruth Bader <unk> . Greer placed Sotomayor as having the most liberal voting history of all the current sitting Justices , and slightly less liberal than her predecessors Thurgood Marshall and John Marshall Harlan II on the Court . 
 Justices Roberts , Kennedy , Thomas , and Alito ( and former Justice Scalia ) have comprised the identifiable conservative wing of the Court . Although , five of the justices on the Supreme Court self @-@ identify themselves as having Roman Catholic affiliation , Sotomayor 's voting history identifies her singly among them with the liberal bloc of the Court . However , there is a wide divergence among Catholics in general in their approaches to the law . Due to her upbringing and her past jobs and positions , Sotomayor has brought one of the more diverse set of life experiences to the court . 
 There have been some deviations from the ideological pattern . In a 2013 book on the Roberts Court , author Marcia Coyle assessed Sotomayor 's position on the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment as a strong guarantee of the right of a defendant to confront his or her accusers . Sotomayor 's judicial philosophy on the issue is seen as being in parity with Elena Kagan and , unexpectedly for Sotomayor , also in at least partial agreement with the originalist reading of Antonin Scalia when applied to the clause . 
 On January 20 and 21 , 2013 , Sotomayor administered the oath to Vice President Joe Biden for the inauguration of his second term . Sotomayor became the first Hispanic and fourth woman to administer the oath to a president or vice president . 
 By the end of her fifth year on the court , Sotomayor had become especially visible in oral arguments and in passionate dissents from various majority rulings , especially those involving issues of race , gender and ethnic identity . Sotomayor has shown her individuality on the Court in a number of decisions . In her reading of the constitutionality of the Obama health care law favoring the poor and disabled , she sided with Ginsburg against fellow liberals Breyer and Kagan . In dealing with the Chief Justice , Sotomayor had no difficulty in responding to his statement that " the way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discrimination on the basis of race , " by stating , " I don 't borrow Chief Justice Roberts 's description of what color @-@ blindness is ... Our society is too complex to use that kind of analysis . " In the manufacturer liability case of Williamson v. Mazda , which the court decided unanimously , she wrote a separate concurring opinion . Sotomayor 's rapport with her clerks is seen as more formalistic than some of the other justices as she requires detailed and rigorous evaluations of cases she is considering with a table of contents attached . When compared to Kagan directly , one of their colleagues stated , " Neither of them is a shrinking violet " . Coyle , in her 2013 book on the Roberts Court stated that : " Both women are more vocal during arguments than the justices whom they succeeded , and they have energized the moderate @-@ liberal side of the bench . " 
 During her tenure on the court , Sotomayor has also become recognizable as being among the court 's strongest voices in supporting the rights of the accused . She has been identified by Laurence Tribe as the foremost voice on the court calling for reforming criminal justice adjudication – in particular as it relates misconduct by police and prosecutors , abuses in prisons , concerns about how the death penalty is used , and the potential for loss of privacy – and Tribe has compared her will to reform in general to that of past Chief Justice Earl Warren . 
 = = = Notable rulings = = = 
 J.D.B. v. North Carolina was a 2011 case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that age is relevant when determining police custody for Miranda purposes . Sotomayor was assigned to write the majority opinion in the case . J.D.B. was a 13 @-@ year @-@ old student enrolled in special education classes whom police had suspected of committing two robberies . A police investigator visited J.D.B. at school , where he was interrogated by the investigator , a uniformed police officer , and school officials . J.D.B. subsequently confessed to his crimes and was convicted . J.D.B. was not given a Miranda warning during the interrogation , nor an opportunity to contact his legal guardian . During the trial , attempts to suppress the statements given by J.D.B. because he was not given a Miranda warning were denied on the grounds that J.D.B. was not in police custody . The case was appealed and the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case . Sotomayor 's opinion for the Court held that a child 's age properly informs the Miranda custody analysis . Her opinion underscored the dangers of not applying age to the custody analysis , writing : " to hold ... that a child 's age is never relevant to whether a suspect has been taken into custody — and thus to ignore the very real differences between children and adults — would be to deny children the full scope of the procedural safeguards that Miranda guarantees to adults " . The opinion cited Stansbury v. California where the Court held that a child 's age " would have affected how a reasonable person " in the suspect 's position " would perceive his or her freedom to leave " . Yarborough v. Alvarado was also cited , where the Court wrote that a child 's age " generates commonsense conclusions about behavior and perception " . Finally , Sotomayor 's opinion pointed out that the law reflects the idea that a child 's judgment is not the same as an adult 's , in the form of legal disqualifications on children as a class ( e.g. limitations on a child 's ability to marry without parental consent ) . Sotomayor 's opinion was challenged by Associate Justice Samuel Alito who wrote a dissenting opinion for four Justices . 
 A particularly fractious United States Supreme Court case was 2012 's United States v. Alvarez , involving judicial review in which the Court struck down the Stolen Valor Act , a federal law that criminalized false statements about having a military medal . The law had been passed as an effort to stem instances where people falsely claimed to have won the medal in an attempt to protect the " valor " of those who really had . While a 6 @-@ 3 majority of the Supreme Court agreed that the law was unconstitutional under the First Amendment 's free speech protections , it could not agree on a single rationale . Sotomayor was among four justices , along with Justices Roberts , Ginsburg and Kennedy , who concluded that a statement 's falsity is not enough , by itself , to exclude speech from First Amendment protection . Justices Breyer and Kagan concluded that while false statements were entitled to some protection , the Stolen Valor Act was invalid because it could have achieved its objectives in less restrictive ways . Justices Scalia , Thomas and Alito were in dissent . 
 Most visibly during the 2012 term , in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius , Sotomayor was part of a landmark 5 – 4 majority that upheld most of the provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ( while being part of a dissent against the reliance upon the Constitution 's Taxing and Spending Clause rather than Commerce Clause in arriving at the support ) . Legal writer Jeffrey Toobin wrote , " Sotomayor 's concerns tended toward the earthbound and practical . Sometimes , during oral arguments , she would go on tangents involving detailed questions about the facts of cases that would leave her colleagues stupefied , sinking into their chairs . This time , though , she had a simple line of inquiry . States require individuals to buy automobile insurance ( implicitly suggesting the unavoidable comparison to health insurance and the fairness of the applying the same principle to health insurance as well ) . " Sotomayor concluded with the incisive rhetorical flourish in the Court directed at the attorneys : " Do you think that if some states decided not to impose an insurance requirement that the federal government would be without power to legislate and require every individual to buy car insurance ? " For Toobin , this distinction drawn by Sotomayor was the heart of the argument for the case in which she was part of the prevailing majority opinion . 
 In another high @-@ profile June 2012 decision at the end of her third term , Sotomayor was part of a 5 – 3 majority in Arizona v. United States that struck down several aspects of the Arizona SB 1070 anti @-@ illegal immigration law . The Arizona case was decided as a compromise verdict with Sotomayor joining Justices Roberts , Kennedy , Ginsburg and Breyer in the majority , with Justice Kagan not participating . 
 In 2013 , Sotomayor 's unjoined concurrence in the prior year 's United States v. Jones decision , in which she said that in the digital age , " It may be necessary to reconsider the premise that an individual has no reasonable expectation of privacy in information voluntarily disclosed to third parties , " was cited by federal judge Richard Leon in his ruling that the National Security Agency 's bulk collection of Americans ' telephony records likely violated the Fourth Amendment . Law professors Adam Winkler and Laurence Tribe were among those who said that Sotomayor 's Jones concurrence had been influential in calling out the need for a new basis in understanding privacy requirements in a world , as she wrote , " in which people reveal a great deal of information about themselves to third parties in the course of carrying out mundane tasks . " 
 On July 3 , 2014 , six justices ordered an injunction that allowed Wheaton College of Illinois , a religiously affiliated university , an exemption from complying with Affordable Care Act 's mandate on contraception . It came in the immediate wake of the Court 's 5 – 4 decision in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby , in which the conservative bloc had prevailed , and was opposed by the court 's three female members : Sotomayor , Ginsburg and Kagan . They suggested that the Hobby Lobby decision was not the Court 's conclusive opinion on birth control . In her dissent to the injunction , Sotomayor wrote that , " Those who are bound by our decisions usually believe they can take us at our word ... Not today . " Sotomayor stated further her opinion that the decision compromised " hundreds of Wheaton 's employees and students of their legal entitlement to contraceptive coverage . " 
 = = Other activities = = 
 Sotomayor was an adjunct professor at New York University School of Law from 1998 to 2007 . There she taught trial and appellate advocacy as well as a federal appellate court seminar . Beginning in 1999 , she was also a lecturer in law at Columbia Law School in a paying , adjunct faculty position . While there she created and co @-@ taught a class called the Federal Appellate <unk> each semester from 2000 until her departure ; it combined classroom , moot court , and Second Circuit chambers work . She became a member of the Board of Trustees of Princeton University in 2006 , concluding her term in 2011 . In 2008 , Sotomayor became a member of the Belizean Grove , an invitation @-@ only women 's group modeled after the men 's Bohemian Grove . On June 19 , 2009 , Sotomayor resigned from the Belizean Grove after Republican politicians voiced concerns over the group 's membership policy . 
 Sotomayor has maintained a public presence , mostly through making speeches , since joining the federal judiciary and throughout her time on the Supreme Court . She gave over 180 speeches between 1993 and 2009 , about half of which either focused on issues of ethnicity or gender or were delivered to minority or women 's groups . While on the Supreme Court she has been invited to give commencement addresses at a number of universities including New York University ( 2012 ) , Yale University ( 2013 ) , and the University of Puerto Rico ( 2014 ) . Her speeches have tended to give a more defined picture of her worldview than her rulings on the bench . The themes of her speeches have often focused on ethnic identity and experience , the need for diversity , and America 's struggle with the implications of its diverse makeup . She has also presented her career achievements as an example of the success of affirmative action policies in university admissions , saying " I am the perfect affirmative action baby " in regard to her belief that her admission test scores were not comparable to those of her classmates . During 2012 while already on the Supreme Court , Sotomayor made two appearances as herself on the children 's television program Sesame Street , explaining what a vocational career is in general and then demonstrating how a judge hears a case . 
 Sotomayor long lived in Greenwich Village in New York City and had few financial assets other than her home . She enjoys shopping , traveling , and giving gifts and helps support her mother and her mother 's husband in Florida . Regarding her short financial disclosure reports prior to her Supreme Court nomination , she has said , " When you don 't have money , it 's easy . There isn 't anything there to report . " As a federal judge , she is entitled to a pension equal to her full salary upon retirement . Upon joining the Supreme Court , she took up residence in Washington but sorely missed the faster @-@ paced life of New York . After renting in the Cleveland Park neighborhood for three years , in 2012 she purchased a condominium in the U Street Corridor . She said , " I picked [ that area ] because it 's mixed . I walk out and I see all kinds of people , which is the environment I grew up in and the environment I love . " 
 She takes several daily insulin injections , and her diabetes is considered to be well controlled . Sotomayor does not belong to a Catholic parish or attend Mass , but does attend church for important occasions . She has said , " I am a very spiritual person [ though ] maybe not traditionally religious in terms of Sunday Mass every week , that sort of thing . The trappings are not important to me , but , yes , I do believe in God . And , yes , I do believe in the commandments . " 
 She maintains ties with Puerto Rico , visiting once or twice a year , speaking there occasionally , and visiting cousins and other relatives who still live in the Mayagüez area . She has long stressed her ethnic identity , saying in 1996 , " Although I am an American , love my country and could achieve its opportunity of succeeding at anything I worked for , I also have a Latina soul and heart , with the magic that carries . " 
 Sotomayor said of the years following her divorce , that " I have found it difficult to maintain a relationship while I 've pursued my career . " She has talked of herself as " emotionally withdrawn " and lacking " genuine happiness " when living by herself ; after becoming a judge , she said she would not date lawyers . In 1997 , she was engaged to New York construction contractor Peter White , but the relationship had ended by 2000 . 
 In July 2010 , Sotomayor signed a contract with Alfred A. Knopf to publish a memoir about the early part of her life . She received an advance of nearly $ 1 @.@ 2 million for the work , which was published in January 2013 and titled My Beloved World ( Mi mundo <unk> in the simultaneously published Spanish edition ) . It focuses on her life up to 1992 , with recollections of growing up in housing projects in New York and descriptions of the challenges she faced . It received good reviews , with Michiko Kakutani of the New York Times describing it as " a compelling and powerfully written memoir about identity and coming of age . ... It 's an eloquent and affecting testament to the triumph of brains and hard work over circumstance , of a childhood dream realized through extraordinary will and dedication . " She staged a book tour to promote the work , and it debuted atop the New York Times Best Seller List . 
 On December 31 , 2013 , Sotomayor pressed the ceremonial button and led the final 60 @-@ second countdown at the Times Square New Year 's Eve ball drop , being the first United States Supreme Court justice to perform the task . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Sotomayor has received honorary law degrees from Lehman College ( 1999 ) , Princeton University ( 2001 ) , Brooklyn Law School ( 2001 ) , Pace University School of Law ( 2003 ) , Hofstra University ( 2006 ) , Northeastern University School of Law ( 2007 ) , Howard University ( 2010 ) , St. Lawrence University ( 2010 ) , New York University ( 2012 ) , Yale University ( 2013 ) , and the University of Puerto Rico ( 2014 ) . 
 She was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society in 2002 . She was given the Outstanding Latino Professional Award in 2006 by the Latino / a Law Students Association . In 2008 , Esquire magazine included Sotomayor on its list of " The 75 Most Influential People of the 21st Century " . In 2013 , Sotomayor won the Woodrow Wilson Award at her alma mater Princeton University . 
 In June 2010 , the Bronxdale Houses development , where Sotomayor grew up , was renamed after her . The Justice Sonia Sotomayor Houses and Justice Sonia Sotomayor Community Center comprise 28 buildings with some 3 @,@ 500 residents . While many New York housing developments are named after well @-@ known people , this was only the second to be named after a former resident . In 2011 , the Sonia M. Sotomayor Learning Academies , a public high school complex in Los Angeles , was named after her . 
 In 2013 , a painting featuring her , Sandra Day O 'Connor , Ruth Bader Ginsburg , and Elena Kagan was unveiled at the Smithsonian 's National Portrait Gallery in Washington , D.C. According to the Smithsonian at the time , the painting was on loan to the museum for three years . 
 In May 2015 she received the Katharine Hepburn medal from Bryn Mawr College . The Katharine Hepburn Medal recognizes women who change their worlds : those whose lives , work , and contributions embody the intelligence , drive , and independence of the four @-@ time Oscar winner and her namesake mother , an early feminist activist . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Books 
 My Beloved World . Alfred A. Knopf ( 2013 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 307 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Articles 
 " Statehood and the Equal Footing Doctrine : The Case for Puerto Rican Seabed Rights " , 88 Yale Law Journal 825 ( 1979 ) 
 " Returning Majesty to the Law and Politics : A Modern Approach " ( with Nicole A. Gordon ) , 30 Suffolk University Law Review 35 ( 1996 ) 
 " La Independencia Judicial : Que <unk> Para <unk> " 60 Revista Colegio de <unk> de Puerto Rico 59 ( 1999 ) 
 Forewords 
 " Foreword " , The International Judge : An Introduction to the Men and Women Who Decide the World 's Cases by Daniel Terris , Cesare P. R. Romano , and Leigh <unk> , University Press of New England ( 2007 ) 
 Speeches 
 " A Latina Judge 's Voice " ( Judge Mario G. Olmos Memorial Lecture ) , in symposium " Raising the Bar : Latino and Latina Presence in the Judiciary and the Struggle for Representation " , Berkeley La Raza Law Journal ( Spring 2002 ) 
 " Tribute to John Sexton " 60 NYU Annual Survey of American Law 23 ( 2004 ) 
 = Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories = 
 Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories ( Japanese : キングダム ハーツ <unk> オブ <unk> , Hepburn : Kingudamu Hātsu <unk> Obu Memorīzu ) is an action role @-@ playing game developed by Jupiter and published by Square Enix in 2004 for the Game Boy Advance . The game serves as an intermediary between the two larger @-@ scale PlayStation 2 games in the Kingdom Hearts series . It was one of the first GBA games to incorporate full motion video ( FMV ) . The game was remade into a PlayStation 2 game titled Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories , which was released in Japan as a second disc packaged with Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix in March 2007 . The remake was released in North America on December 2 , 2008 . 
 Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories is the second game in the Kingdom Hearts series . It is a direct sequel to Kingdom Hearts , and its ending is set about a year before Kingdom Hearts II . The story centers on the protagonist of the first game , Sora , exploring a mysterious castle in search of his friends . As he ascends the castle , his friend and rival , Riku , explores the basement levels and fights his inner darkness . The game introduces new characters and plotlines that further expand the Kingdom Hearts universe and set up the premise for Kingdom Hearts II . 
 Though not as successful as the other Kingdom Hearts games , it received positive reviews and sold well . It was praised for its story , graphics , and FMVs . The game features a new card @-@ based battle system that is a departure from its predecessor . When it debuted in Japan , it sold 104 @,@ 000 units in 48 hours . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories is a combination between a role @-@ playing video game and collectible card game . The main role @-@ playing aspect is an experience point system that is used to increase the character 's maximum health or Card Points , or to learn a new skill . The cards are utilized in the progression of the story as well as in combat . The game features a field map and battle screen . The field map is an isometric area where the player can traverse between rooms . Enemies inhabit the field map and track the player to engage in combat , which can be initiated through contact between the player and an enemy . Once combat has been engaged , the game switches to the battle screen which utilizes a card @-@ based battle system . 
 A unique aspect to this game is " room synthesis " : to advance through the game , the player must utilize Map cards that he has found after winning battles to synthesize rooms . The properties of each room ― including quality of items and strength of enemies ― are determined by the Map cards that the player chooses . Each card has a specific effect : red cards affect the number and type of enemies ; green cards affect the power of the player 's deck ; and blue cards affect the properties of the room itself , such as allowing treasure chests or a save point to appear . 
 The game features three modes of gameplay . The first two are story modes that feature either Sora or Riku , and the third is a two player battle mode . Initially only Sora 's story mode is available ; once completed , " Reverse / Rebirth " mode becomes available . Reverse / Rebirth allows the player to play a second story mode featuring Riku and a link mode where players can battle each other via a Game Link Cable . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Combat uses a card @-@ based battle system executed in real time . The player can jump and maneuver around the battle screen as they would on the field map , but all physical attacks , magic , items , and summonings are activated by playing cards . Cards are ranked from zero to nine , and are used for making attack combos or breaking enemy cards . With the exception of zero @-@ ranked cards which are more expensive in terms of Card Points ( CP ) compared to other cards of the same type and have other ranks , more CP are required to place higher @-@ ranked cards in the player 's deck . Card Points — increased through level up — limit the number of cards the player can use in a deck . Cards with rank " zero " can break any opposing card or combo if played after the opposing card or combo , but they can be broken by any card or combo as well if it is played after the zero card is played . Breaking an opposing card will cancel that attack and stun the loser of a card break for a short time . Special enemy cards may be obtained by defeating enemies and bosses , and are used to give the player a temporary ability , ranging from enhanced offensive and defensive capabilities to modifying the attributes of certain cards . 
 Combining cards in sets of three will create combo attacks that are usually more difficult to break because the rank of the combo will be the sum of the ranks of the three cards in the combo . Certain card combinations will create a " sleight " , a special combination that will create a powerful physical attack , magical spell , or summon attack . When the player runs out of cards , the deck must be reloaded . Additionally , using a card combination will cause the first card in the combo to become unusable until the end of combat . 
 Sora 's and Riku 's stories differ gameplay @-@ wise in several ways . In Sora 's story , Sora obtains cards by defeating enemies or through Moogle Shops . In some cases , Sora must earn the specific card first through a plot event before it becomes available . Sora can create and store three different decks in the pause menu . Unlike Sora , Riku has a closed deck that cannot be customized . The cards in his deck change depending on the world in which he is traveling . Riku is limited to mainly physical attacks , enemy cards , and Mickey Mouse ally cards . Riku can activate " dark mode " and unlock his sleight attacks if he accumulates enough " dark points " . Dark points are earned by breaking enemy cards and combos , and the difference between Riku 's card or combo and the enemy 's card or combo is how many dark points he will accumulate for that card break . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories takes place directly after the ending of the first game , Kingdom Hearts . The game is set in Castle Oblivion , a mysterious castle kept by Lord Marluxia . Sora and his teammates are told that the castle causes visitors to lose their memories upon entering . The lobby and areas between floors are white with flower @-@ themed decorations , but each floor can be transformed into a different world from the first Kingdom Hearts game using " world cards " created from Sora 's memories . Like before , many of the worlds are based on Disney films while the rest were created by Square Enix . 
 Unlike the previous game , the worlds are created from Sora 's memories . As such , many of the events experienced in Kingdom Hearts are relived in this game ; Sora encounters memory @-@ based versions of Disney characters that he has met before ( the exception being the Deep Jungle world based on Disney 's Tarzan ) . The individual plotlines differ from those in the original game and revolve around the theme of memory . Just as Kingdom Hearts had several worlds created specifically for that game , Chain of Memories introduces Twilight Town as a world created from memories on " the other side of Sora 's heart " , in addition to the original worlds of Kingdom Hearts . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Sora returns as the protagonist of the game . Donald Duck and Goofy also return , but are less involved in the gameplay and story . Like the first game , Chain of Memories features numerous characters from both the Final Fantasy series and the Disney animated features canon . Being a direct sequel , many of the characters from the first Kingdom Hearts reappear in this game . As each world and the related characters are recreated from Sora 's memories , they interact with Sora as if they had never met before . Chain of Memories also introduces a handful of new characters . Several are members of the enigmatic Organization . Other new characters include Naminé , a young girl capable of manipulating memories , and DiZ , a mysterious man concealed by red robes and bandages . Riku is also featured as a playable character in the second story mode . After being sealed in the realm of darkness at the end of Kingdom Hearts , Riku appears in the basement of Castle Oblivion . During his story , he is aided by King Mickey and DiZ . 
 Six members of the Organization serve as the antagonists of the game , though only four appear in Sora 's story mode , while the rest appear in Riku 's story mode . Among the four are Marluxia , the antagonist and lord of Castle Oblivion ; Larxene , a female member assisting Marluxia ; Axel , a double agent whose loyalties are hidden ; and Vexen , an unwilling participant in Marluxia 's plan . Zexion and Lexaeus , allies of Vexen , appear only in Riku 's story mode . Ansem also appears in Riku 's story as an entity within Riku trying to gain control of him . Many of the Disney villains return ; although they are memory @-@ based recreations like the rest of the Disney characters , they have different motivations compared to their Kingdom Hearts counterparts . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Sora and his friends Donald , Goofy , and Jiminy Cricket walk down a winding path in search of the missing Riku and King Mickey . A man dressed in a black , hooded coat appears and directs Sora towards a massive fortress called Castle Oblivion . Upon entering , the travelers realize that they have forgotten all of their abilities . The hooded man explains that the deeper they go into the castle , the more memories they will lose , but they will also uncover new memories in the process . He creates a deck of cards made from Sora 's and his friends ' memories , and tells them that everything they encounter in this castle will be based on their memories . 
 Sora ascends the castle , facing off against other hooded figures who form a group called " the Organization " along the way . As Sora begins losing his memories , he gradually appears to remember a girl named Naminé as an old friend of his , and learns from the Organization member Larxene that she is being held prisoner in the castle . He also clashes with a replica of Riku created and controlled by another Organization member , Vexen , and believed by both Sora and the replica himself to be the real Riku . Axel , an Organization double agent , releases Naminé and allows her to meet Sora in person . Sora discovers Naminé to be the one manipulating his memories , having been forced to do so by Marluxia , the lord of Castle Oblivion and the figure who lured Sora there , as part of his plan to overthrow the rest of the Organization with Larxene . Sora climbs to the top of the tower and defeats Marluxia and the other Organization members , after which Naminé puts Sora and his friends into pod @-@ like machines to help them regain the memories they lost in the castle , even though they will forget the events that transpired in the castle . Before they are put to sleep , Sora and Naminé promise to meet again as real friends once he reawakens , Sora firmly believing that his memories of her and the castle will remain in his heart despite being forgotten . 
 In Reverse / Rebirth , Riku has been transported from the realm of darkness and fights his inner darkness as he battles upward from the basement levels of Castle Oblivion . Vexen fights Riku to obtain his data and creates the replica of him to counter Marluxia 's plan . Ansem , who had previously taken over Riku 's body , tries to regain control of Riku , but King Mickey 's support keeps Ansem at bay . On the way , Riku battles and defeats Lexaeus , a member of Vexen 's circle , only to be dragged into the realm of darkness . However , he is saved by King Mickey when Ansem nearly succeeds in taking Riku 's body as his own . With Marluxia eliminated by this time , another of Vexen 's allies , Zexion , attempts to dispose of Riku by drowning him in light . Riku is saved by Naminé disguised as Kairi , who helps him to control his darkness , allowing him to defeat Zexion . Riku later meets DiZ , an enigmatic individual interested in Riku who sends him to find Naminé . Riku 's replica , who has since learned of his altered memories and seeks to justify his existence , fights Riku only to be destroyed by him . Riku chooses to face Ansem upon learning from Naminé that Ansem lives in his heart , and defeats him after DiZ summons him for Riku to fight . Riku then sets out on a journey to utilize both his darkness and his light with King Mickey as his companion . 
 = = Development = = 
 The idea for an intermediary title was developed after director Tetsuya Nomura and his team had already begun to develop ideas for the second Kingdom Hearts game , which he had intended to be set a year after the original . Originally titled Kingdom Hearts : Lost Memories , Nomura changed the name to match the overall outline of the story , while still reflecting the theme of memories . Chain of Memories was developed to bridge the gap between Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II . Like most sequels , Kingdom Hearts II was planned to have the character start from the beginning , ability @-@ wise . To explain the loss of abilities gained in the previous game , Nomura had the story revolve around Sora 's memories getting corrupted and implemented the card battle system to symbolize Sora 's various memories . 
 Nomura was hesitant about releasing a Kingdom Hearts title on the Game Boy Advance , feeling that the 3D graphics of the original game would not translate well into 2D . Nomura changed his position after hearing that children wanted to play Kingdom Hearts on the GBA . After exploring ideas for the gameplay , he felt that a 2D Kingdom Hearts game would be possible , and that it could still feel like and play like what gamers were used to in the original . Meanwhile , Nomura wanted to give the game a " lighter tone " than the PlayStation 2 games . 
 Chain of Memories was announced along with Kingdom Hearts II at the Tokyo Game Show in September 2003 . Initial details included the switch to 2D graphics , the use of cards to perform attacks , and that compressed movies would be utilized in some cut scenes . The cut scene animations were rendered using the graphical engine of the PlayStation 2 iteration and then encoded for the Game Boy Advance by using a technology developed by Japanese company , <unk> . To help market the game , Disney and Square Enix launched official Japanese websites . A playable demo was first made available to the public at the 2003 Jump Festa in Japan ; this demo and subsequent demos highlighted the card @-@ based combat system . Aside from information gathered from the opening sequences , most details regarding the story were kept secret until the release . 
 The card @-@ based gameplay of Chain of Memories would later serve to inspire the gameplay of Jupiter 's next game , The World Ends with You ; originally , the team envisioned a similar card game @-@ based system taking place on the lower screen of the Nintendo DS , but eventually this morphed to a battle system taking place on both screens , with a card game controlled on the upper screen . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Much of the music from the original Kingdom Hearts is present in Chain of Memories ; the main vocal theme for the Japanese release is " Hikari " ( 光 ) , while the English version of " Hikari " , " Simple And Clean " , is used in the Western releases . Additional and reworked tracks were created for its PlayStation 2 rerelease , Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories . Since the music is reused from the original , a Chain of Memories soundtrack was never released . The new reworked tracks , however , are included on two CDs in the Kingdom Hearts Original Soundtrack Complete . 
 Due to the technological limitations of the Game Boy Advance cartridge size , voice acting was kept to a minimum . Though many characters from Kingdom Hearts were voiced by the cast from before , the Japanese version used the following voice actors : Keiji Fujiwara as Axel ; Tatsuya Kando as Vexen , Marluxia , and Lexaeus ; and Rieko Katayama as Larxene . A limited amount of voice acting was added only for the battle sequences . Voice clips from the first Kingdom Hearts were inserted into Chain of Memories . The English version is absent of dialogue ; voices during Organization battles are replaced with simple grunts , laughter , and other battle cries . 
 = = Reception = = 
 While the least successful in the series commercially , Chain of Memories received generally positive reviews and met with successful sales figures . In Japan , it sold 104 @,@ 000 units in 48 hours , a record for a Game Boy Advance title at the time . Its positive debut sales placed it in the top spot of sales charts in Japan . In the first month of its North American release , it was ranked 1st on GameSpot 's <unk> for portable systems and 6th for all consoles . By February 2005 , it had sold over one million copies in Japan and North America . Worldwide sales of the game reached 1 @.@ 50 million copies by the end of 2006 . As of August 2009 , Chain of Memories has sold over 1 @.@ 55 million copies worldwide , with 200 @,@ 000 units in PAL regions , 410 @,@ 000 units in Japan , and 940 @,@ 000 units in North America . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The game received positive ratings from critics . The card @-@ based battle system received mixed reviews . GameSpot called it " unwieldy " , while GameSpy called it " engaging " and <unk> called it original . Reviews also cited that the card battle system was awkward and made it difficult to plan strategies . G4TV commented that the gameplay was well suited for portable play and that it successfully combined card battles and random dungeons , " two much @-@ maligned RPG " elements . Some critics found the Room Synthesis to be far too linear . The most frequent praise went towards the story . IGN called it an " engrossing storyline that actually changes up after the adventure comes to an end " and rated the presentation a 10 out of 10 . 
 The quality of the graphics was well received , particularly the cut scenes . IGN cited them as " wonderfully produced FMV sequences " . GameSpot stated that the movies were true to the art style of the original and were on par with GBA video <unk> . They also commented on the detailed and well animated game sprites . <unk> described the event scenes as " high quality " . Many critics stated that though the graphics were not as good as the PlayStation 2 predecessor , they were very good for a GBA game . G4TV complimented the graphics stating that Chain of Memories was " one of the best @-@ looking GBA games out there . " 
 = = Versions and merchandise = = 
 Like its predecessor , a great deal of merchandise was produced to help market the release of the game . Square Enix released two products to coincide with the release of the video game . The first was a limited edition Kingdom Hearts Game Boy Advance SP set released only in Japan . The set contained the game , a " Kingdom deep silver " GBA SP with the Kingdom Hearts logo , and a carrying strap . The second was a Kingdom Hearts trading card game produced by Tomy . The TCG featured starter decks , playing mats , and booster packs . Fantasy Flight Games later acquired the rights to market it to English @-@ speaking countries . In 2007 , a remake for the PlayStation 2 , titled Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories was released along with Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix in a set , Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix + . A manga series ran in Monthly Shōnen Gangan in Japan , and was later released in the United States . It is accompanied by three novels — two set during Sora 's storyline and the third during Reverse / Rebirth , Riku 's story . Like with the Final Fantasy games and the first Kingdom Hearts game , Square released an Ultimania book on Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories following the release of the game . In North America , BradyGames released a strategy guide with a comprehensive walkthrough . 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories = = = 
 Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories was remade for the PlayStation 2 , titled Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories . It was developed by Square Enix 's fifth Product Development Division , based in Osaka , and released as the second disc of Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix + in Japan on March 29 , 2007 and as a standalone title in North America on December 2 , 2008 . It has not been released in Europe or Australia for the PlayStation 2 , but has seen a worldwide release as part of Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix . The remake includes polygonal 3D battles and worlds using the same graphics as Kingdom Hearts , as well as voice acting and an improved soundtrack . While the card @-@ based battle system and room synthesis aspects of the gameplay stayed mostly the same , there were additions , such as the " Reaction Command " function from Kingdom Hearts II . Voice @-@ acted scenes only occur in Castle Oblivion , as well as the Destiny Islands and Twilight Town simulations . The remake also includes new cutscenes and battles that were not in the original game . IGN ranked it as the 92nd best PlayStation 2 game . The staff felt that it stood out among other card @-@ based RPGs . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Like the first Kingdom Hearts , Chain of Memories was adapted into a manga by Shiro Amano , following the same plot as the video game . It was serialized in Square 's Monthly Shōnen Gangan in Japan , then released in two volumes in Japan and later in the United States by TOKYOPOP . The first volume was released in Japan on October 22 , 2005 . A year later , it was released in English on October 10 , 2006 , followed by the second volume on February 6 , 2007 . 
 The manga series has had moderate success . The first volume was ranked 112th on USA Today 's " Top 150 best sellers " during the week of its release . IGN praised Amano 's renditions of the characters and the humor added into scenes . They also commented the weak elements of the game lessened the manga 's overall quality . The series was followed by a third manga series , Kingdom Hearts II . The Chain of Memories manga series was re @-@ released in a boxed set in the United States on October 9 , 2007 . 
 = = = HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix = = = 
 In September 2012 , Square Enix announced Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix a compilation for the PlayStation 3 to include both Kingdom Hearts Final Mix and Re : Chain of Memories in high definition and trophy support . Additionally , the collection includes HD cinematic scenes from Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days . It was released in Japan on March 14 , 2013 and in North America on September 10 , 2013 . Releases on September 12 , 2013 for Australia and September 13 , 2013 for Europe marked the first time Re : Chain of Memories was available in both of those territories . 
 = This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like = 
 " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " is the debut single of American industrial singer @-@ songwriter Porcelain Black , featuring American rapper Lil Wayne . This song serves as the lead single from the singer 's debut studio album , Mannequin Factory . Produced by Moroccan @-@ Swedish producer RedOne , who had originally discovered Black , " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " is influenced by the genre of rock , lyrically stating how the listener should be proud of who they are . The song was released digitally in the United States on March 29 , 2011 , and managed to chart at number forty @-@ four on the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs . 
 A music video for " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " , shot and directed by Sanaa Hamri , was released on March 27 , 2011 . The music video pays homage to Porcelain Black 's high school experiences , where she was constantly teased by " snobby rich kids " , but never gave in to the pressure of her peers around her . The video serves as a form of revenge for Porcelain Black against high school tormentors . " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " garnered mixed reviews from critics , most of whom were shocked by Porcelain Black 's image and sounds but favored her apparent perception of herself as the " offspring " of fellow musicians Britney Spears and Marilyn Manson and their individual styles . Porcelain Black performed the song on the Late Show with David Letterman , marking her debut televised appearance . 
 The song was featured in an episode of Beavis and Butthead and the 2013 film , The Smurfs 2 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " was written by Porcelain Black , Lil Wayne , RedOne , Bilal Hajji , with RedOne providing the song 's production . In the song 's writing credits , Porcelain Black and Lil Wayne are credited under their real names , Alaina Beaton and Dwayne Carter , Jr. respectively . After being introduced to Lil Wayne 's manager , Derrick " EI " Lawrence , by producer RedOne , Porcelain Black stated that she met Lil Wayne in New York when he heard " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " , where he expressed an interest in adding his vocals to the song . The single cover for " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " was revealed on March 21 , 2011 , alongside a snippet of the song . 
 " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " was released digitally through the United States iTunes Store on March 29 , 2011 . Following the release of Porcelain Black 's second single , " Naughty Naughty , " Dutch DJ , remixer and house music producer R3hab produced a remix of " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like , " making it available for free download through SoundCloud on January 24 , 2012 . R3hab went on to compliment Porcelain Black 's original song , stating , " The original vibe is crazy , and I am a big fan of Lil Wayne . This track makes you wanna rage like the lyrics say ! I see [ the remix ] as a rollercoaster ride . Breaks slow it down . Then there is a climb , and the big drop ! " Porcelain Black complimented R3hab 's remix in an interview with MTV News : " I wish [ ed ] his remixes were the official singles because they really pop off next level . I love all the spooky horror pop synths he throws in the mixes , and the breakdowns make me wanna throw back shots of whiskey and hair whip . If I could have sex with a song I 'd def be <unk> ’ dat remix ! " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Described as " in @-@ your @-@ face " , " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " is influenced by the genres of rock , dance @-@ pop , and power pop , while containing " roaring " guitars and lyrics which aim to remind listeners to be proud of who they are . Vocally , Porcelain Black sings as if straining through " a maze of <unk> , " according to Steven J. Horowitz of <unk> Magazine . The RedOne @-@ produced track employs a beat that is reminiscent of his work with Lady Gaga . Porcelain Black screams in the chorus " Hey hey hey if you 're ready to rage / Raise your hands up , this what rock and roll looks like / Yeah yeah yeah , wearing leather and lace / Raise your hands up , this what rock and roll looks like . " While being interviewed by the Los Angeles Times , Porcelain Black discussed in depth about the genre mix in " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " : 
 Although the song 's title references the physical appearance of what rock and roll looks like , Porcelain Black revealed in an interview with AOL 's <unk> that rock and roll is not dependent on the physical appearance of someone . She stated : 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " received generally mixed reviews by critics , most of whom were surprised with Porcelain Black 's outgoing persona and the pop production by RedOne . Gerrick D. Kennedy of Los Angeles Times complimented the song 's production by stating that it could have been used by Lady Gaga . Ian Drew of Us Weekly called the single " shocking " and " electric " . Allison Stewart of The Washington Post gave " This Is What Rock ‘ n ’ Roll Looks Like ” a mixed review , describing Porcelain Black as a " girl @-@ fronted version of Mötley Crüe circa Dr. Feelgood " . Jon Wiederhorn of <unk> dubbed the song " a [ sic ] euphoric digital feast of raspy melodic vocals , four @-@ to @-@ the @-@ floor beats , and keyboards that buzz like electric guitars . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " debuted on the U.S. Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs at number forty @-@ six , on the week ending July 18 , 2011 . The following week , the song went up two spots , peaking at number forty @-@ four . The following two weeks , " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " remained stationary at number forty @-@ four on the weeks ending August 1 , 2011 and August 8 , 2011 , respectively . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " was shot and directed by Sanaa Hamri at Citrus College in Glendora , California . Porcelain Black discussed the idea behind the music video for " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " with AOL 's Carlos Ramirez , stating it was based on real life experiences . After Porcelain Black 's mother had re @-@ married , she was forced to move to Rochester , Michigan , which Porcelain Black described as " a really rich area " . Attending high school , Porcelain Black was surrounded by " snotty rich kids " who would tease her saying " You 're a fucking freak , what 's your problem ? " , to which Porcelain Black would reply " You 're boring and fake , get away from me . " Reviewing her past , Porcelain Black realized it would make for a good music video . A behind the scenes look at shooting the music video was released on May 12 , 2011 . 
 In an interview with AOL Music 's Contessa Gayles , Porcelain Black discussed the concept of the video as revenge . She stated : 
 It was about getting revenge . People were always hating on me , because I was different . I was like , " I 'm going to sing , I 'm going to do this , I 'm going to do that , " they were like " OK , sure you are . " And I was like " No , I 'm serious . This is what I 'm going to do . " And everybody was like , " Yeah right . " Even when I told everyone I was moving to LA to do music and had a going away party , only one person showed up , because no one believed that I was really going away . They were like , " You 'll be back . " So it was kind of just like my revenge , and just a statement , like throwing it back in their face . 
 The music video debuted on March 27 , 2011 . The music video begins with a young Porcelain Black being teased by a group of blonde girls , who resemble " The Plastics " in Mean Girls ( 2004 ) . As Porcelain Black is being teased , a young version of Lil Wayne comes to the defense of Porcelain Black , scaring away the group of blonde girls . The video then fast forwards nine years where Black , accompanied by her own entourage , walks past a group of snobby girls , giving them the middle @-@ finger as she walks away leaving them in shock . As the video continues , Black gets revenge on her high school enemies by tearing up the school 's library and cafeteria . During Lil Wayne 's verse , the two are seen raging in the school 's gym . Rapper Birdman makes a cameo appearance in this scene . 
 = = Performances and usage in media = = 
 Porcelain Black performed the song as the opening act for Lil Wayne on the I Am Music II tour . Porcelain Black made her first ever television appearance on the Late Show with David Letterman on Thursday , July 21 , 2011 . Porcelain Black wore a leather , leotard @-@ like <unk> number , complete with mesh , fringe and metallic studs as she whipped her black @-@ and @-@ blonde hair around , while prancing across the stage with her gothic dancers . While making her debut televised performance , Lil Wayne did not appear alongside Porcelain Black . In an interview with AOL 's <unk> , Porcelain Black described her first televised appearance as " intense , amazing , surreal " , revealing that prior to the performance she was very nervous stating " Oh my god ! I 'm about to give birth to a panic attack ! " Becky Bain of Idolator compared Black 's styling to that of Lady Gaga 's . Contessa Gayles of AOL described Porcelain Black 's choreography as " racy , " later complimenting Porcelain Black on her " two @-@ toned , Cruella De Vil @-@ inspired <unk> . " Porcelain Black walked down the runway in a camouflage corset designed by Falguni and Shane Peacock at the 2012 Spring Fashion Week , as her song played in the background . Her appearance there was used to promote the single . 
 " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " appeared in the tenth episode of the eighth season of Beavis and Butthead . Expecting the duo to comment on the disparity between the song 's title and its genre , R.L. Shaffer of IGN noticed that no such comparison was made ; instead , the classroom setting was criticized while the presence of Lil Wayne was appreciated . The song was also used in the 2013 film , The Smurfs 2 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital release : 
 " This Is What Rock n ' Roll Looks Like " ( featuring Lil Wayne ) – 4 : 12 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Soviet cruiser Maxim Gorky = 
 Maxim Gorky ( Russian : <unk> <unk> ) was a Project 26bis Kirov @-@ class cruiser of the Soviet Navy that saw action during World War II and continued in service into the Cold War . The ship ’ s bow was blown @-@ off by a mine in the Gulf of Riga during the opening stages of Operation Barbarossa , but she made it to Kronstadt for repairs . However , after being repaired , the ship was trapped in harbour for most of the war , by Axis minefields at Leningrad and Kronstadt . Despite being trapped , Maxim Gorky was active in two engagements : the ship provided gunfire in support for the defenders during the Siege of Leningrad , and she later bombarded Finnish positions during the Vyborg – Petrozavodsk Offensive in mid @-@ 1944 . She saw no further action in World War II . A major modernization was begun in 1953 , but the navy reconsidered the cost @-@ effectiveness of the refit and work was cancelled in 1955 . Maxim Gorky was sold for scrap in 1959 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Maxim Gorky was 187 meters ( 613 ft 6 in ) long at the waterline , and 191 @.@ 4 meters ( 627 ft 11 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 17 @.@ 66 meters ( 57 ft 11 in ) and had a draft between 5 @.@ 87 to 6 @.@ 3 meters ( 19 ft 3 in to 20 ft 8 in ) . She displaced 8 @,@ 177 metric tons ( 8 @,@ 048 long tons ) at standard load and 9 @,@ 728 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 574 long tons ) at full load . Her steam turbines produced a total of 129 @,@ 750 shaft horsepower ( 96 @,@ 750 kW ) during her sea trials and propelled the ship to a maximum speed of 36 @.@ 72 knots ( 68 @.@ 01 km / h ; 42 @.@ 26 mph ) . This was barely short of her designed speed of 37 knots and was because she was over 900 tonnes ( 886 long tons ) overweight . She normally carried 650 metric tons ( 640 long tons ) of fuel oil , 1 @,@ 660 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 630 long tons ) at full load and 1 @,@ 750 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 720 long tons ) at overload . This gave her an endurance of 4 @,@ 220 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 820 km ; 4 @,@ 860 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Maxim Gorky carried nine 180 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) 57 @-@ calibre B @-@ 1 @-@ P guns in three electrically powered MK @-@ 3 @-@ 180 triple turrets . Her secondary armament consisted of six single 100 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) 56 @-@ calibre B @-@ 34 anti @-@ aircraft guns fitted on each side of the rear funnel . Her light anti @-@ aircraft guns consisted of nine semi @-@ automatic 45 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) 21 @-@ K guns and four DShK 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) machine guns . Six 533 @-@ millimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) 39 @-@ Yu torpedo tubes were fitted in two triple mountings . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 By 1944 Maxim Gorky had exchanged her 45 mm guns for 15 fully automatic 37 mm 70 @-@ K AA guns with one thousand rounds per gun , two extra <unk> machine guns and two quadruple Lend @-@ Lease Vickers .50 machine gun MK III mounts . 
 When war broke out in 1941 Maxim Gorky lacked radar , but she was equipped with British Lend @-@ Lease radar by 1944 . One Type 291 was used for air search . One Type 284 and two Type 285 radars were for main battery fire control , while anti @-@ aircraft fire control was provided by two Type 282 radars . 
 = = Service = = 
 Maxim Gorky was laid down at the Ordzhonikidze Yard , Leningrad on 20 December 1936 as a slightly improved version , Project 26bis as designated by the Soviets , of the first pair of Kirov @-@ class cruisers , which were called Project 26 . She was launched on 30 April 1938 and was completed on 12 December 1938 . The ship , and her escorts , ran into the German @-@ laid " <unk> " minefield in the Gulf of Riga while providing cover for Soviet defensive mining efforts on 23 June 1941 and Maxim Gorky and the destroyer Gnevny both lost their bows , although Gorky made it to port where temporary repairs were made . The ship was transferred , with assistance , to Tallinn and later to Kronstadt . She had a new bow section fabricated at Kronstadt and it was mated with the ship on 21 July . For most of the rest of the war she was blockaded in Leningrad and Kronstadt by Axis minefields and could only provide gunfire support for the defenders during the Siege of Leningrad , for example she fired 285 180 mm shells on 4 September 1941 and 701 rounds during the <unk> Selo – Ropsha Offensive in January 1944 . She also bombarded Finnish positions during the Soviet Vyborg – Petrozavodsk Offensive in June 1944 . Maxim Gorky was repeatedly , if lightly , damaged by German air and artillery attacks , but her only extended refit occurred over the winter of 1942 — 43 when her upper deck was reinforced with 37 @-@ millimetre armour plates . 
 = = Postwar career = = 
 Maxim Gorky tested the first Soviet naval helicopter , the Kamov Ka @-@ 10 in December 1950 and began her refit in mid @-@ 1953 . This was planned to include a complete overhaul of her machinery while her radar , fire @-@ control systems and anti @-@ aircraft guns were to be replaced by the latest Soviet systems . Torpedo bulges were to be fitted which would increase her displacement by 1 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 980 long tons ) , with consequent penalties to her speed and range . The navy re @-@ evaluated the scope of the work in 1955 and deemed it insufficient to create a fully modern ship and suspended the refit . Maxim Gorky was sold for scrapping on 18 April 1959 after the navy had decided that she wasn 't needed as a missile @-@ test ship . 
 = Apollo 1 = 
 Apollo 1 , initially designated AS @-@ 204 , was the first manned mission of the United States Apollo program , which had as its ultimate goal a manned lunar landing . The low Earth orbital test of the Apollo Command / Service Module never made its target launch date of February 21 , 1967 . A cabin fire during a launch rehearsal test on January 27 at Cape Kennedy Air Force Station Launch Complex 34 killed all three crew members — Command Pilot Virgil I. " Gus " Grissom , Senior Pilot Edward H. White II , and Pilot Roger B. Chaffee — and destroyed the Command Module ( CM ) . The name Apollo 1 , chosen by the crew , was officially retired by NASA in commemoration of them on April 24 , 1967 . 
 Immediately after the fire , NASA convened the Apollo 204 Accident Review Board to determine the cause of the fire , and both houses of the United States Congress conducted their own committee inquiries to oversee NASA 's investigation . The ignition source of the fire was determined to be electrical , and the fire spread rapidly due to combustible nylon material , and the high pressure , pure oxygen cabin atmosphere . The astronauts ' rescue was prevented by the plug door hatch , which could not be opened against the higher internal pressure of the cabin . A failure to identify the test as hazardous , based on the fact that the rocket was <unk> , led to the rescue being hampered by poor emergency preparedness . 
 During the Congressional investigation , then @-@ Senator Walter Mondale publicly revealed a NASA internal document citing problems with prime Apollo contractor North American Aviation , which became known as the " Phillips Report " . This disclosure embarrassed NASA Administrator James E. Webb , who was unaware of the document 's existence , and attracted controversy to the Apollo program . Despite congressional displeasure at NASA 's lack of openness , both congressional committees ruled that the issues raised in the report had no bearing on the accident . 
 Manned Apollo flights were suspended for 20 months while the Command Module 's hazards were addressed . However , the development and unmanned testing of the Lunar Module ( LM ) and Saturn V Moon rocket continued . The Saturn IB launch vehicle for Apollo 1 , AS @-@ 204 , was used for the first LM test flight , Apollo 5 . The first successful manned Apollo mission was flown by Apollo 1 's backup crew on Apollo 7 in October 1968 . 
 = = Crew = = 
 = = = First backup crew ( April – December 1966 ) = = = 
 = = = Second backup crew ( December 1966 – January 1967 ) = = = 
 = = Apollo manned test flight plans = = 
 AS @-@ 204 was to be the first manned test flight of the Apollo Command / Service Module ( CSM ) to Earth orbit , launched on a Saturn IB rocket . AS @-@ 204 was to test launch operations , ground tracking and control facilities and the performance of the Apollo @-@ Saturn launch assembly and would have lasted up to two weeks , depending on how the spacecraft performed . 
 The CSM for this flight , number 012 built by North American Aviation ( NAA ) , was a Block I version designed before the lunar orbit rendezvous landing strategy was chosen ; therefore it lacked capability of docking with the Lunar Module . This was incorporated into the Block II CSM design , along with lessons learned in Block I. Block II would be test @-@ flown with the LM when the latter was ready , and would be used on the Moon landing flights . 
 Deke Slayton , the Mercury astronaut who was grounded and became Director of Flight Crew Operations , selected the first Apollo crew in January 1966 , with Grissom as Command Pilot , White as Senior Pilot , and rookie Donn F. Eisele as Pilot . But Eisele dislocated his shoulder twice aboard the KC135 weightlessness training aircraft , and had to undergo surgery on January 27 . Slayton replaced him with Chaffee , and NASA announced the crew selection on March 21 , 1966 . James McDivitt , David Scott and Russell Schweickart were named as the backup crew . 
 On September 29 , Walter Schirra , Eisele , and Walter Cunningham were named as the prime crew for a second Block I CSM flight , AS @-@ 205 . NASA planned to follow this with an unmanned test flight of the LM ( AS @-@ 206 ) , then the third manned mission would be a dual flight designated AS @-@ 278 ( or AS @-@ 207 / 208 ) , in which AS @-@ 207 would launch the first manned Block II CSM , which would then rendezvous and dock with the LM launched unmanned on AS @-@ 208 . 
 In March , NASA was studying the possibility of flying the first Apollo mission as a joint space rendezvous with the final Project Gemini mission , Gemini 12 in November 1966 . But by May , delays in making Apollo ready for flight just by itself , and the extra time needed to incorporate compatibility with the Gemini , made that impractical . This became moot when slippage in readiness of the AS @-@ 204 spacecraft caused the last @-@ quarter 1966 target date to be missed , and the mission was rescheduled for February 21 , 1967 . 
 = = Mission background = = 
 Grissom declared his intent to keep his craft in orbit for a full 14 days . A newspaper article published on August 4 , 1966 , referred to the flight as " Apollo 1 " . CM @-@ 012 arrived at the Kennedy Space Center on August 26 , labeled Apollo One by NAA on its packaging . 
 In October 1966 , NASA announced the flight would carry a small television camera to broadcast live from the Command Module . The camera would also be used to allow flight controllers to monitor the spacecraft 's instrument panel in flight . Television cameras were carried aboard all manned Apollo missions . 
 = = = Insignia = = = 
 Grissom 's crew received approval in June 1966 to design a mission patch with the name Apollo 1 . The design 's center depicts a Command / Service Module flying over the southeastern United States with Florida ( the launch point ) prominent . The Moon is seen in the distance , symbolic of the eventual program goal . A yellow border carries the mission and astronaut names with another border set with stars and stripes , trimmed in gold . The insignia was designed by the crew , with the artwork done by North American Aviation employee Allen Stevens . 
 = = = Spacecraft preparation = = = 
 The Apollo Command / Service Module was much bigger and far more complex than any previously implemented spacecraft design . In October 1963 , Joseph F. Shea was named Apollo Spacecraft Program Office ( ASPO ) manager , responsible for managing the design and construction of both the CSM and the LM . In a spacecraft review meeting held with Shea on August 19 , 1966 ( a week before delivery ) , the crew expressed concern about the amount of flammable material ( mainly nylon netting and Velcro ) in the cabin , which both astronauts and technicians found convenient for holding tools and equipment in place . Though Shea gave the spacecraft a passing grade , after the meeting they gave him a crew portrait they had posed with heads bowed and hands clasped in prayer , with the inscription : 
 It isn 't that we don 't trust you , Joe , but this time we 've decided to go over your head . 
 Shea gave his staff orders to tell North American to remove the <unk> from the cabin , but did not supervise the issue personally . 
 North American shipped spacecraft CM @-@ 012 to Kennedy Space Center on August 26 , 1966 under a conditional Certificate of Flight <unk> : 113 significant incomplete planned engineering changes had to be completed at KSC . But that was not all ; an additional 623 engineering change orders were made and completed after delivery . Grissom became so frustrated with the inability of the training simulator engineers to keep up with the spacecraft changes , that he took a lemon from a tree by his house and hung it on the simulator . 
 The Command and Service Modules were mated in the KSC altitude chamber in September , and combined system testing was performed . Altitude testing was performed first unmanned , then with both the prime and backup crews , from October 10 through December 30 . During this testing , the Environmental Control Unit in the Command Module was found to have a design flaw , and was sent back to the manufacturer for design changes and rework . The returned ECU then leaked water / glycol coolant , and had to be returned a second time . Also during this time , a propellant tank in Service Module 017 had ruptured during testing at NAA , prompting the separation of the modules and removal from the chamber so the Service Module could be tested for signs of the tank problem . These tests were negative . 
 In December , the second Block I flight AS @-@ 205 was canceled as unnecessary ; and Schirra , Eisele and Cunningham were reassigned as the backup crew for Apollo 1 . McDivitt 's crew was now promoted to prime crew of the Block II / LM mission , re @-@ designated AS @-@ 258 because the AS @-@ 205 launch vehicle would be used in place of AS @-@ 207 . A third manned mission was planned to launch the CSM and LM together on a Saturn V ( AS @-@ 503 ) to an elliptical medium Earth orbit ( <unk> ) , to be crewed by Frank Borman , Michael Collins and William Anders . McDivitt , Scott and Schweickart had started their training for AS @-@ 258 in CM @-@ 101 at the NAA plant in Downey , California , when the Apollo 1 accident occurred . 
 Once all outstanding CSM @-@ 012 hardware problems were fixed , the reassembled spacecraft finally completed a successful altitude chamber test with Schirra 's backup crew on December 30 . According to the final report of the accident investigation board , " At the post @-@ test debriefing the backup flight crew expressed their satisfaction with the condition and performance of the spacecraft . " This would appear to contradict the account given in Lost Moon : The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13 by Jeffrey Kluger and astronaut James Lovell , that " When the trio climbed out of the ship , … Schirra made it clear that he was not pleased with what he had seen , " and that he later warned Grissom and Shea that " there 's nothing wrong with this ship that I can point to , but it just makes me uncomfortable . Something about it just doesn 't ring right , " and that Grissom should get out at the first sign of trouble . 
 Following the successful altitude tests , the spacecraft was removed from the altitude chamber on January 3 , 1967 , and mated to its Saturn IB launch vehicle on pad 34 on January 6 . 
 You sort of have to put that out of your mind . There 's always a possibility that you can have a catastrophic failure , of course ; this can happen on any flight ; it can happen on the last one as well as the first one . So , you just plan as best you can to take care of all these eventualities , and you get a well @-@ trained crew and you go fly . 
 = = Accident = = 
 = = = <unk> @-@ out test = = = 
 The launch simulation on January 27 , 1967 , on pad 34 , was a " plugs @-@ out " test to determine whether the spacecraft would operate nominally on ( simulated ) internal power while detached from all cables and <unk> . Passing this test was essential to making the February 21 launch date . The test was considered non @-@ hazardous because neither the launch vehicle nor the spacecraft was loaded with fuel or cryogenics , and all pyrotechnic systems were disabled . 
 At 1 : 00 pm EST ( 1800 GMT ) on January 27 , first Grissom , then Chaffee , and White entered the Command Module fully pressure @-@ suited , and were strapped into their seats and hooked up to the spacecraft 's oxygen and communication systems . Grissom immediately noticed a strange odor in the air circulating through his suit which he compared to " sour buttermilk " , and the simulated countdown was held at 1 : 20 pm , while air samples were taken . No cause of the odor could be found , and the countdown was resumed at 2 : 42 pm . The accident investigation found this odor not to be related to the fire . 
 Three minutes after the count was resumed , the hatch installation was started . The hatch consisted of three parts : a removable inner hatch , which stayed inside the cabin ; a hinged outer hatch , which was part of the spacecraft 's heat shield ; and an outer hatch cover , which was part of the boost protective cover enveloping the entire Command Module to protect it from aerodynamic heating during launch , and from launch escape rocket exhaust in the event of a launch abort . The boost hatch cover was partially , but not fully , latched in place because the flexible boost protective cover was slightly distorted by some cabling run under it to provide the simulated internal power . ( The spacecraft 's fuel cell reactants were not loaded for this test . ) After the hatches were sealed , the air in the cabin was replaced with pure oxygen at 16 @.@ 7 psi ( 115 kPa ) , 2 psi ( 14 kPa ) higher than atmospheric pressure . 
 Movement by the astronauts was detected by the spacecraft 's inertial measurement unit and the astronaut 's biomedical sensors , and also indicated by increases in oxygen spacesuit flow , and sounds from Grissom 's stuck @-@ open microphone . There was no evidence to identify the movement , or whether it was related to the fire . The stuck microphone was part of a problem with the communications loop connecting the crew , the Operations and Checkout Building , and the Complex 34 blockhouse control room . The poor communications led Grissom to remark : " How are we going to get to the Moon if we can 't talk between two or three buildings ? " The simulated countdown was held again at 5 : 40 pm while attempts were made to troubleshoot the communications problem . All countdown functions up to the simulated internal power transfer had been successfully completed by 6 : 20 pm , but at 6 : 30 the count remained on hold at T minus 10 minutes . 
 = = = Fire = = = 
 The crew members were using the time to run through their checklist again , when a momentary increase in AC Bus 2 voltage occurred . Nine seconds later ( at 6 : 31 : 04 @.@ 7 ) , one of the astronauts ( some listeners and laboratory analysis indicate Grissom ) exclaimed " Hey ! " or " Fire ! " ; this was followed by two seconds of scuffling sounds through Grissom 's open microphone . This was immediately followed at 6 : 31 : 06 @.@ 2 ( 23 : 31 : 06 @.@ 2 GMT ) by someone ( believed by most listeners , and supported by laboratory analysis , to be Chaffee ) saying , " [ I 've , or We 've ] got a fire in the cockpit . " After 6 @.@ 8 seconds of silence , a second , badly garbled transmission occurred , interpreted by various listeners as : 
 " They 're fighting a bad fire — Let 's get out .... Open ' er up " 
 " We 've got a bad fire — Let 's get out .... We 're burning up " , or 
 " I 'm reporting a bad fire .... I 'm getting out .... " . 
 This transmission , believed by some listeners to be White , lasted 5 @.@ 0 seconds and ended with a cry of pain . 
 Some blockhouse witnesses said that they saw White on the television monitors , reaching for the inner hatch release handle as flames in the cabin spread from left to right . 
 The intensity of the fire fed by pure oxygen caused the pressure to rise to 29 psi ( 200 kPa ) , which ruptured the Command Module 's inner wall at 6 : 31 : 19 ( 23 : 31 : 19 GMT , initial phase of the fire ) . Flames and gases then rushed outside the Command Module through open access panels to two levels of the pad service structure . Intense heat , dense smoke , and ineffective gas masks designed for toxic fumes rather than heavy smoke hampered the ground crew 's attempts to rescue the men . There were fears the Command Module had exploded , or soon would , and that the fire might ignite the solid fuel rocket in the launch escape tower above the Command Module , which would have likely killed nearby ground personnel , and possibly have destroyed the pad . 
 As the pressure was released by the cabin rupture , the convective rush of air caused the flames to spread across the cabin , beginning the second phase . The third phase began when most of the oxygen was consumed and was replaced with atmospheric air , essentially quenching the fire , but causing high concentrations of carbon monoxide and heavy smoke to fill the cabin , and large amounts of soot to be deposited on surfaces as they cooled . 
 It took five minutes for the pad workers to open all three hatch layers , and they could not drop the inner hatch to the cabin floor as intended , so they pushed it out of the way to one side . Although the cabin lights remained lit , they were at first unable to find the astronauts through the dense smoke . As the smoke cleared , they found the bodies , but were not able to remove them . The fire had partly melted Grissom 's and White 's nylon space suits and the hoses connecting them to the life support system . Grissom had removed his restraints and was lying on the floor of the spacecraft . White 's restraints were burned through , and he was found lying sideways just below the hatch . It was determined that he had tried to open the hatch per the emergency procedure , but was not able to do so against the internal pressure . Chaffee was found strapped into his right @-@ hand seat , as procedure called for him to maintain communication until White opened the hatch . Because of the large strands of melted nylon fusing the astronauts to the cabin interior , removing the bodies took nearly 90 minutes . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 As a result of the in @-@ flight failure of the Gemini 8 mission on March 17 , 1966 , NASA Deputy Administrator Robert Seamans wrote and implemented Management Instruction <unk> @.@ 1 on April 14 , 1966 , defining Mission Failure Investigation Policy And Procedures . This modified NASA 's existing accident procedures , based on military aircraft accident investigation , by giving the Deputy Administrator the option of performing independent investigations of major failures , beyond those for which the various Program Office officials were normally responsible . It declared , " It is NASA policy to investigate and document the causes of all major mission failures which occur in the conduct of its space and aeronautical activities and to take appropriate corrective actions as a result of the findings and recommendations . " 
 Immediately after the Apollo 1 fire , to avoid appearance of a conflict of interest , NASA Administrator James E. Webb asked President Lyndon B. Johnson to allow NASA to handle the investigation according to its established procedure , promising to be truthful in assessing blame , and to keep the appropriate leaders of Congress informed . Seamans then directed establishment of the Apollo 204 Review Board chaired by Langley Research Center director Floyd L. Thompson , which included astronaut Frank Borman , spacecraft designer Maxime Faget , and six others . On February 1 , Cornell University professor Frank A. Long left the board , and was replaced by Dr. Robert W. Van <unk> , of the U.S. Bureau of Mines . The next day , North American 's Chief engineer for Apollo , George Jeffs , also left . 
 Seamans immediately ordered all Apollo 1 hardware and software impounded , to be released only under control of the board . After thorough stereo photographic documentation of the CM @-@ 012 interior , the board ordered its disassembly using procedures tested by disassembling the identical CM @-@ 014 , and conducted a thorough investigation of every part . The board also reviewed the astronauts ' autopsy results and interviewed witnesses . Seamans sent Webb weekly status reports of the investigation 's progress , and the board issued its final report on April 5 , 1967 . 
 = = = Cause of death = = = 
 According to the Board , Grissom suffered severe third degree burns on over one @-@ third of his body and his spacesuit was mostly destroyed . White suffered third degree burns on almost half of his body and a quarter of his spacesuit had melted away . Chaffee suffered third degree burns over almost a quarter of his body and a small portion of his spacesuit was damaged . The autopsy report confirmed that the primary cause of death for all three astronauts was cardiac arrest caused by high concentrations of carbon monoxide . Burns suffered by the crew were not believed to be major factors , and it was concluded that most of them had occurred postmortem . <unk> happened after the fire melted the astronauts ' suits and oxygen tubes , exposing them to the lethal atmosphere of the cabin . 
 = = = Major causes of accident = = = 
 The review board identified several major factors which combined to cause the fire and the astronauts ' deaths : 
 An ignition source most probably related to " vulnerable wiring carrying spacecraft power " and " vulnerable plumbing carrying a combustible and corrosive coolant " 
 A pure oxygen atmosphere at higher than atmospheric pressure 
 A cabin sealed with a hatch cover which could not be quickly removed at high pressure 
 An extensive distribution of combustible materials in the cabin 
 Inadequate emergency preparedness ( rescue or medical assistance , and crew escape ) 
 = = = = Ignition source = = = = 
 The review board determined that the electrical power momentarily failed at 23 : 30 : 55 GMT , and found evidence of several electric arcs in the interior equipment . However , they were unable to conclusively identify a single ignition source . They determined that the fire most likely started near the floor in the lower left section of the cabin , close to the Environmental Control Unit . It spread from the left wall of the cabin to the right , with the floor being affected only briefly . 
 The board noted that a silver @-@ plated copper wire running through an environmental control unit near the center couch had become stripped of its Teflon insulation and abraded by repeated opening and closing of a small access door . 
 This weak point in the wiring also ran near a junction in an ethylene glycol / water cooling line that had been prone to leaks . The electrolysis of ethylene glycol solution with the silver anode was discovered at MSC on May 29 , 1967 to be a hazard capable of causing a violent exothermic reaction , igniting the ethylene glycol mixture in the CM 's pure oxygen atmosphere . Experiments at the Illinois Institute of Technology confirmed the hazard existed for silver @-@ plated wires , but not for copper @-@ only or nickel @-@ plated copper . In July , ASPO directed both North American and Grumman to ensure no silver or silver @-@ coated electrical contacts existed in the vicinity of possible glycol spills in the Apollo spacecraft . 
 = = = = Pure oxygen atmosphere = = = = 
 The plugs @-@ out test had been run to simulate the launch procedure , with the cabin pressurized with pure oxygen at the nominal launch level of 16 @.@ 7 psi ( 115 kPa ) , 2 psi ( 14 kPa ) above standard sea level atmospheric pressure . This is more than five times the 3 psi ( 21 kPa ) partial pressure of oxygen in the atmosphere , and provides an environment in which materials not normally considered highly flammable will burst into flame . 
 The high @-@ pressure oxygen atmosphere was consistent with that used in the Mercury and Gemini programs . The pressure before launch was deliberately greater than ambient in order to drive out the nitrogen @-@ containing air and replace it with pure oxygen , and also to seal the plug door hatch cover . During launch , the pressure would have been gradually reduced to the in @-@ flight level of 5 psi ( 34 kPa ) , providing sufficient oxygen for the astronauts to breathe while reducing the fire risk . The Apollo 1 crew had tested this procedure with their spacecraft in the Operations and Checkout Building altitude ( vacuum ) chamber on October 18 and 19 , 1966 , and the backup crew of Schirra , Eisele and Cunningham had repeated it on December 30 . The investigation board noted that , during these tests , the Command Module had been fully pressurized with pure oxygen four times , for a total of six hours and fifteen minutes , two and a half hours longer than it had been during the plugs @-@ out test . 
 = = = = Flammable materials in the cabin = = = = 
 The review board cited " many types and classes of combustible material " close to ignition sources . The NASA crew systems department had installed 34 square feet ( 3 @.@ 2 m2 ) of Velcro throughout the spacecraft , almost like carpeting . This Velcro was found to be flammable in a high @-@ pressure 100 % oxygen environment . Astronaut Buzz Aldrin states in his book Men From Earth that the flammable material had been removed per the crew 's August 19 complaints and Joseph Shea 's order , but was replaced before the August 26 delivery to Cape Kennedy . 
 = = = = Hatch design = = = = 
 The inner hatch cover used a plug door design , sealed by higher pressure inside the cabin than outside . The normal pressure level used for launch ( 2 psi ( 14 kPa ) above ambient ) created sufficient force to prevent removing the cover until the excess pressure was vented . Emergency procedure called for Grissom to open the cabin vent valve first , allowing White to remove the cover , but Grissom was prevented from doing this because the valve was located to the left , behind the initial wall of flames . Also , while the system could easily vent the normal pressure , its flow capacity was utterly incapable of handling the rapid increase to 29 psi ( 200 kPa ) absolute caused by the intense heat of the fire . 
 North American had originally suggested the hatch open outward and use explosive bolts to blow the hatch in case of emergency , as had been done in Project Mercury . NASA did not agree , arguing the hatch could accidentally open , as it had on Grissom 's Liberty Bell 7 flight , so the Manned Spacecraft Center designers rejected the explosive design in favor of a mechanically operated one for the Gemini and Apollo programs . Before the fire , the Apollo astronauts had recommended changing the design to an outward @-@ opening hatch , and this was already slated for inclusion in the Block II Command Module design . According to Donald K. Slayton 's testimony before the House investigation of the accident , this was based on ease of exit for spacewalks and at the end of flight , rather than for emergency exit . 
 = = = = Emergency preparedness = = = = 
 The board noted that : the test planners had failed to identify the test as hazardous ; the emergency equipment ( such as gas masks ) were inadequate to handle this type of fire ; that fire , rescue , and medical teams were not in attendance ; and that the spacecraft work and access areas contained many hindrances to emergency response such as steps , sliding doors , and sharp turns . 
 = = Choice of pure oxygen atmosphere = = 
 When designing the Mercury spacecraft , NASA had considered using a nitrogen / oxygen mixture to reduce the fire risk near launch , but rejected it based on two considerations . First , nitrogen used with the in @-@ flight pressure reduction carried the clear risk of decompression sickness ( known as " the bends " ) . But the decision to eliminate the use of any gas but oxygen was <unk> when a serious accident occurred on April 21 , 1960 , in which McDonnell Aircraft test pilot G.B. North passed out and was seriously injured when testing a Mercury cabin / spacesuit atmosphere system in a vacuum chamber . The problem was found to be nitrogen @-@ rich ( oxygen @-@ poor ) air leaking from the cabin into his spacesuit feed . North American Aviation had suggested using an oxygen / nitrogen mixture for Apollo , but NASA overruled this . The pure oxygen design was judged to be safer , less complicated , and lighter in weight . 
 In his monograph Project Apollo : The Tough Decisions , Deputy Administrator Seamans wrote that NASA 's single worst mistake in engineering judgment was not to run a fire test on the Command Module before the plugs @-@ out test . In the first episode of the 2009 BBC documentary series NASA : Triumph and Tragedy , Jim McDivitt said that NASA had no idea how a 100 % oxygen atmosphere would influence burning . Similar remarks by other astronauts were expressed in the 2007 documentary film In the Shadow of the Moon . 
 = = = Other oxygen incidents = = = 
 Several fires in high @-@ oxygen test environments had occurred before the Apollo fire . In 1962 , USAF Colonel B. Dean Smith was conducting a test of the Gemini space suit with a colleague in a pure oxygen chamber at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio , Texas when a fire broke out , destroying the chamber . Smith and his partner narrowly escaped . 
 Other oxygen fire occurrences are documented in reports archived in the National Air and Space Museum , such as : 
 Selection of Space Cabin Atmospheres . Part II : Fire and Blast <unk> [ sic ] in Space Cabins . ( Emanuel M. Roth ; Dept of Aeronautics Medicine and <unk> , Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and <unk> <unk> – 1966 . ) 
 " Fire Prevention in Manned Spacecraft and Test Chamber Oxygen Atmospheres . " ( MSC . NASA General Working Paper 10 063 . October 10 , 1966 ) 
 Incidents had also occurred in the Soviet space program , but due to the government 's policy of secrecy , these were not disclosed to the West until well after the Apollo 1 fire . Cosmonaut Valentin Bondarenko died on March 23 , 1961 , from burns sustained in a fire while participating in a 15 @-@ day endurance experiment in a high @-@ oxygen isolation chamber , less than three weeks before the first Vostok manned space flight ; this was disclosed on January 28 , 1986 . 
 During the Voskhod 2 mission in March 1965 , cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Alexey Leonov could not completely seal the spacecraft hatch after Leonov 's historic first walk in space . The spacecraft 's environmental control system responded to the leaking air by adding more oxygen to the cabin , causing the concentration level to rise as high as 45 % . The crew and ground controllers worried about the possibility of fire , remembering Bondarenko 's death four years earlier . 
 = = Political fallout = = 
 Committees in both houses of the United States Congress with oversight of the space program soon launched investigations , including the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences , chaired by Senator Clinton P. Anderson . Seamans , Webb , Manned Space Flight Administrator Dr. George E. Mueller , and Apollo Program Director Maj Gen Samuel C. Phillips were called to testify before Anderson 's committee . 
 In the February 27 hearing , Senator Walter F. Mondale asked Webb if he knew of a report of extraordinary problems with the performance of North American Aviation on the Apollo contract . Webb replied he did not , and deferred to his subordinates on the witness panel . Mueller and Phillips responded they too were unaware of any such " report " . 
 However , in late 1965 , just over a year before the accident , Phillips had headed a " tiger team " investigating the causes of inadequate quality , schedule delays , and cost overruns in both the Apollo CSM and the Saturn V second stage ( for which North American was also prime contractor ) . He gave an oral presentation ( with transparencies ) of his team 's findings to Mueller and Seamans , and also presented them in a memo to North American president John L. Atwood , to which Mueller appended his own strongly worded memo to Atwood . 
 During Mondale 's 1967 questioning about what was to become known as the " Phillips Report " , Seamans was afraid Mondale might actually have seen a hard copy of Phillips ' presentation , and responded that contractors have occasionally been subjected to on @-@ site progress reviews ; perhaps this was what Mondale 's information referred to . Mondale continued to refer to " the Report " despite Phillips ' refusal to characterize it as such , and angered by what he perceived as Webb 's deception and concealment of important program problems from Congress , he questioned NASA 's selection of North American as prime contractor . Seamans later wrote that Webb roundly chastised him in the cab ride leaving the hearing , for volunteering information which led to the disclosure of Phillips ' memo . 
 On May 11 , Webb issued a statement defending NASA 's November 1961 selection of North American as the prime contractor for Apollo . This was followed on June 9 by Seamans filing a seven @-@ page memorandum documenting the selection process . Webb eventually provided a controlled copy of Phillips ' memo to Congress . The Senate committee noted in its final report NASA 's testimony that " the findings of the [ Phillips ] task force had no effect on the accident , did not lead to the accident , and were not related to the accident " , but stated in its recommendations : 
 Notwithstanding that in NASA 's judgment the contractor later made significant progress in overcoming the problems , the committee believes it should have been informed of the situation . The committee does not object to the position of the Administrator of NASA , that all details of Government / contractor relationships should not be put in the public domain . However , that position in no way can be used as an argument for not bringing this or other serious situations to the attention of the committee . 
 Freshman Senators Edward W. Brooke III and Charles H. Percy jointly wrote an Additional Views section appended to the committee report , chastising NASA more strongly than Anderson for not having disclosed the Phillips review to Congress . Mondale wrote his own , even more strongly worded Additional View , accusing NASA of " evasiveness , … lack of candor , … patronizing attitude toward Congress , … refusal to respond fully and forthrightly to legitimate Congressional inquiries , and … solicitous concern for corporate sensitivities at a time of national tragedy . " 
 The potential political threat to Apollo blew over , due in large part to the support of President Lyndon B. Johnson , who at the time still wielded a measure of influence with the Congress from his own Senatorial experience . He was a staunch supporter of NASA since its inception , had even recommended the Moon program to President John F. Kennedy in 1961 , and was skilled at portraying it as part of Kennedy 's legacy . 
 Relations between NASA and North American deteriorated over assignment of blame . North American argued unsuccessfully it was not responsible for the fatal error in spacecraft atmosphere design . Finally , Webb contacted Atwood , and demanded either he or Chief Engineer Harrison A. Storms resign . Atwood elected to fire Storms . 
 On the NASA side , Joseph Shea resorted to barbiturates and alcohol in order to help him cope . NASA administrator James Webb became increasingly worried about Shea 's mental state . Shea was asked to take an extended voluntary leave of absence , but Shea refused , threatening to resign rather than take leave . As a compromise , he agreed to meet with a psychiatrist and to abide by an independent assessment of his psychological fitness . This approach to remove Shea from his position was also unsuccessful . Finally , six months after the fire , Shea 's superiors reassigned him to NASA headquarters in Washington , D.C. Shea felt that his new post was a " non @-@ job , " and left after only two months . 
 = = Program recovery = = 
 Gene Kranz called a meeting of his staff in Mission Control three days after the accident , delivering a speech which has subsequently become one of NASA 's principles . Speaking of the errors and overall attitude surrounding the Apollo program before the accident , he stated : " We were too ' gung @-@ ho ' about the schedule and we blocked out all of the problems we saw each day in our work . Every element of the program was in trouble and so were we . " He reminded the team of the perils and <unk> of their endeavor , and stated the new requirement that every member of every team in mission control be " tough and competent " , requiring nothing less than perfection throughout NASA 's programs . In 2003 , following the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster , NASA administrator Sean O 'Keefe quoted Kranz 's speech , applying it to the Columbia crew . 
 = = = Command Module redesign = = = 
 After the fire , the Apollo program was grounded for review and redesign . The Command Module was found to be extremely hazardous and in some instances , carelessly assembled ( for example , a misplaced socket wrench was found in the cabin ) . 
 It was decided that remaining Block I spacecraft would be used only for unmanned Saturn V test flights . All manned missions would use the Block II spacecraft , to which many Command Module design changes were made : 
 The cabin atmosphere at launch was adjusted to 60 % oxygen and 40 % nitrogen at sea @-@ level pressure : 14 @.@ 7 psi ( 101 kPa ) . During ascent the cabin rapidly vented down to 5 psi ( 34 kPa ) , releasing approximately 2 / 3 of the gas originally present at launch . The vent then closed and the environmental control system maintained a nominal cabin pressure of 5 psi ( 34 kPa ) as the spacecraft continued into vacuum . The cabin was then very slowly purged ( vented to space and simultaneously replaced with 100 % oxygen ) , so the nitrogen concentration fell asymptotically to zero over the next day . Although the new cabin launch atmosphere was significantly safer than 100 % oxygen , it still contained almost three times the amount of oxygen present in ordinary sea level air ( 20 @.@ 9 % oxygen ) . This was necessary to ensure a sufficient partial pressure of oxygen when the astronauts removed their helmets after reaching orbit . ( 60 % of 5 psi is 3 psi , compared to 20 @.@ 9 % of 14 @.@ 7 psi ( 101 kPa ) , or 3 @.@ 07 psi ( 21 @.@ 2 kPa ) in sea @-@ level air . ) 
 The environment within the astronauts ' pressure suits was not changed . Because of the rapid drop in cabin ( and suit ) pressures during ascent , decompression sickness was likely unless the nitrogen had been purged from the astronauts ' tissues before launch . They would still breathe pure oxygen , starting several hours before launch , until they removed their helmets on orbit . Avoiding the " bends " was considered worth the residual risk of an oxygen @-@ accelerated fire within a suit . 
 Nylon used in the Block I suits was replaced in the Block II suits with Beta cloth , a non @-@ flammable , highly melt @-@ resistant fabric woven from fiberglass and coated with Teflon . 
 Block II had already been planned to use a completely redesigned hatch which opened outward , and could be opened in less than five seconds . Concerns of accidental opening were addressed by using a cartridge of pressurized nitrogen to drive the release mechanism in an emergency , instead of the explosive bolts used on Project Mercury . 
 Flammable materials in the cabin were replaced with self @-@ extinguishing versions . 
 Plumbing and wiring were covered with protective insulation . Aluminum tubing was replaced with stainless steel tubing that used brazed joints when possible . 
 Thorough protocols were implemented for documenting spacecraft construction and maintenance . 
 = = = New mission naming scheme = = = 
 The astronauts ' widows asked that Apollo 1 be reserved for the flight their husbands never made , and on April 24 , 1967 , Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight , Dr. George E. Mueller , announced this change officially : AS @-@ 204 would be recorded as Apollo 1 , " first manned Apollo Saturn flight – failed on ground test " . Since three unmanned Apollo missions ( AS @-@ 201 , AS @-@ 202 , and AS @-@ 203 ) had previously occurred , the next mission , the first unmanned Saturn V test flight ( AS @-@ 501 ) would be designated Apollo 4 , with all subsequent flights numbered sequentially in the order flown . The first three flights would not be renumbered , and the names Apollo 2 and Apollo 3 would go unused . 
 The manned flight hiatus allowed work to catch up on the Saturn V and Lunar Module , which were encountering their own delays . Apollo 4 flew in November 1967 . Apollo 1 's ( AS @-@ 204 ) Saturn IB rocket was taken down from Launch Complex 34 , later reassembled at Launch complex 37B and used to launch Apollo 5 , an unmanned Earth orbital test flight of the first Lunar Module LM @-@ 1 , in January 1968 . A second unmanned Saturn V AS @-@ 502 flew as Apollo 6 in April 1968 , and Grissom 's backup crew of Wally Schirra , Don Eisele , and Walter Cunningham , finally flew the orbital test mission as Apollo 7 ( AS @-@ 205 ) , in a Block II CSM in October 1968 . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 Gus Grissom and Roger Chaffee were buried at Arlington National Cemetery . Ed White was buried at West Point Cemetery on the grounds of the United States Military Academy in West Point , New York . Their names are among those of several astronauts and cosmonauts who have died in the line of duty , listed on the Space Mirror Memorial at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex in Merritt Island , Florida . President Jimmy Carter awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor posthumously to Grissom on October 1 , 1978 . President Bill Clinton awarded it to White and Chaffee on December 17 , 1997 . 
 An Apollo 1 mission patch was left on the Moon 's surface after the first manned lunar landing by Apollo 11 crew members Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin . The Apollo 15 mission left on the surface of the Moon a tiny memorial statue , Fallen Astronaut , along with a plaque containing the names of the Apollo 1 astronauts , among others including Soviet cosmonauts , who perished in the pursuit of human space flight . 
 = = = Launch Complex 34 = = = 
 After the Apollo 1 fire , Launch Complex 34 was subsequently used only for the launch of Apollo 7 and later dismantled down to the concrete launch pedestal , which remains at the site ( 28 @.@ <unk> ° N 80 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 28 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ) along with a few other concrete and steel @-@ reinforced structures . The pedestal bears two plaques commemorating the crew . Each year the families of the Apollo 1 crew are invited to the site for a memorial , and the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex includes the site during the tour of the historic Cape Canaveral launch sites . 
 In January 2005 , three granite benches , built by a college classmate of one of the astronauts , were installed at the site on the southern edge of the launch pad . Each bears the name of one of the astronauts and his military service insignia . 
 = = = Stars , landmarks on the Moon and Mars = = = 
 Apollo astronauts frequently aligned their spacecraft inertial navigation platforms and determined their positions relative to the Earth and Moon by sighting sets of stars with optical instruments . As a practical joke , the Apollo 1 crew named three of the stars in the Apollo catalog after themselves and introduced them into NASA documentation . Gamma Cassiopeiae became Navi – Ivan ( Gus Grissom 's middle name ) spelled backwards . Iota Ursae Majoris became <unk> – " Second " spelled backwards , for Edward H. White II . And Gamma Velorum became <unk> – Roger ( Chaffee ) spelled backwards . These names quickly stuck after the Apollo 1 accident and were regularly used by later Apollo crews . 
 Craters on the Moon and hills on Mars are named after the three Apollo 1 astronauts . 
 = = = Civic and other memorials = = = 
 = = Remains of CM @-@ 012 = = 
 The Apollo 1 Command Module has never been on public display . After the accident , the spacecraft was removed and taken to Kennedy Space Center to facilitate the review board 's disassembly in order to investigate the cause of the fire . When the investigation was complete , it was moved to the NASA Langley Research Center in Hampton , Virginia , and placed in a secured storage warehouse . On February 17 , 2007 , the parts of CM @-@ 012 were moved approximately 90 feet ( 27 m ) to a newer , environmentally controlled warehouse . Only a few weeks earlier , Gus Grissom 's brother Lowell publicly suggested CM @-@ 012 be permanently entombed in the concrete remains of Launch Complex 34 . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 The Apollo 1 accident is briefly depicted in the opening scene of the 1995 film Apollo 13 . 
 The Apollo 1 accident and its aftermath are the subject of episode 2 " Apollo One " , of the 1998 HBO miniseries From the Earth to the Moon , starring Mark Rolston as Gus Grissom , Chris Isaak as Ed White and Ben Marley as Roger Chaffee . 
 The Apollo 1 mission and accident are covered in the ABC television series , The Astronaut Wives Club , episodes 8 " Rendezvous " , and 9 " Abort " . 
 The launch pedestal and memorial plaque are briefly depicted in scenes from the 1985 film Chronos and the 1998 feature film Armageddon . 
 The Apollo 1 disaster inspired the song Fire in the Cockpit from the band Public Service Broadcasting 's album , The Race for Space . 
 = Mohawk Airlines Flight 411 = 
 Mohawk Airlines Flight 411 , a Fairchild FH @-@ <unk> twin @-@ engine turboprop , registered <unk> , was a scheduled domestic passenger service operated by Mohawk Airlines , between Albany and Glens Falls , New York . On November 19 , 1969 , it crashed into Pilot Knob Mountain , killing all 14 passengers and crew on board . 
 The National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) concluded that the crash was caused by the captain 's improper execution of an instrument approach , combined with a severe downdraft at a low altitude , which resulted in the aircraft descending uncontrollably into terrain . 
 = = History of flight = = 
 On the evening of November 19 , 1969 , at about 20 : 03 EST , Mohawk Airlines Flight 411 , a twin engine Fairchild FH @-@ <unk> turboprop , departed from Albany International Airport near Albany , New York . It was operating as a scheduled passenger / cargo flight on an instrument flight rules ( IFR ) flight plan to its destination of Warren County Airport in Glens Falls , New York , 37 nautical miles ( 69 km ) northeast , with an estimated flight time of about 15 minutes . 
 At 20 : 07 : 32 EST , just 4 minutes after takeoff , Flight 411 was cleared by air traffic control ( ATC ) for " a VOR approach to runway 19 " . The aircraft overflew the Glens Falls airport and proceeded northbound , subsequently reversing course . Shortly after course reversal , at about 20 : 20 EST , the aircraft hit trees on the northwest slope of the Pilot Knob Mountain , then impacted a rock cliff from which it fell 34 feet ( 10 m ) and became lodged between trees and caught fire . Of the 11 passengers and 3 crew on board , there were no survivors . 
 = = Investigation and final report = = 
 The accident was investigated by the National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) . The Flight Data Recorder was recovered intact from the wreckage , but the Cockpit Voice Recorder had been damaged in the post @-@ crash fire and was unusable . 
 The weather at Glens Falls at the time of the accident was reported as " 2 @,@ 100 ( feet ) overcast , visibility 7 ( miles ) in light rain , wind 180 ( degrees ) at 12 ( knots ) , peak gusts 22 ( knots ) , altimeter <unk> , runway 19 in use " . The surface temperature was 54 degrees Fahrenheit ( 12 degrees Celsius ) . 
 The investigation revealed that ATC cleared the flight to " the VOR approach " , without actually specifying which specific VOR approach procedure was to be used , possibly leaving it to the flight crew 's discretion . According to the radio communication transcript , the flight crew did not inquire as to which specific approach was in effect . There were two published VOR approaches at the time , one from the north and one from the south . The northern approach , called " VOR / DME 19 " , was not legally available to the crew under these circumstances , as Mohawk company policy prohibited reliance on DME as a primary navigational instrument . The other VOR approach , called " VOR 1 " , was the only one legally available to the flight , and would have required descending while approaching the airport from the south during the final approach segment , followed by a " circle to land " maneuver , landing to the south on runway 19 . 
 Despite this , possibly due to their concerns with passenger comfort ( the VOR 1 approach would have required performing the " circle to land " maneuver at a relatively low altitude over the airport to land on runway 19 ) , or possibly by simply being late to set up for the recommended VOR 1 approach ( the flight time was only about 8 minutes from takeoff at Albany to the Glens Falls area , with a significant tailwind component of approximately 50 knots ) , the crew did not execute the VOR 1 approach . Instead , the crew appeared to select an improvised and unauthorized modified version of the VOR / DME 19 approach , which included flying outbound followed by a course reversal at about 10 nautical miles ( 20 km ) north of the airport , over Lake George . As the crew performed what appeared to be an unpublished and unauthorized procedure turn for course reversal on the VOR / DME 19 approach path , they descended prematurely and hit the side of a mountain . It was subsequently determined that a 60 @-@ knot ( 110 km / h ) southerly wind created a downdraft effect which , coupled with the aircraft 's low altitude over the terrain , contributed to the crash . 
 In their final report , issued on June 25 , 1970 , the NTSB determined the following official Probable Cause for the accident : 
 The captain , while conducting an approach , exceeded his clearance limits and , thereafter , flew the aircraft into a severe " lee of the mountain downdraft " at an altitude insufficient for recovery . No evidence was found to explain why this particular approach was attempted . 
 = Postage stamps of Ireland = 
 The postage stamps of Ireland are issued by the postal operator of the independent Irish state . Ireland was part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland when the world 's first postage stamps were issued in 1840 . These stamps , and all subsequent British issues , were used in Ireland until the new Irish Government assumed power in 1922 . Beginning on 17 February 1922 , existing British stamps were overprinted with Irish text to provide some definitives until separate Irish issues became available . Following the overprints , a regular series of definitive stamps was produced by the new Department of Posts and Telegraphs , using domestic designs . These definitives were issued on 6 December 1922 ; the first was a 2d stamp , depicting a map of Ireland ( including Northern Ireland , which remained a part of the United Kingdom ) . Since then new images , and additional values as needed , have produced of eight definitive series of different designs . 
 These were the major stamp productions for everyday use . Commemorative stamps first appeared in 1929 , and these now appear several times a year , celebrating many aspects of Irish life , such as notable events and anniversaries , Irish life and culture , and many famous Irish people . Some definitive and commemorative stamps have been produced in miniature sheet , booklet and coil configurations in addition to the common sheet layout . Postage dues and airmails complete the stamp issues of the two , sequential , Irish stamp @-@ issuing authorities . Two styles of watermark were used though the overprinted issues came with the watermarks of the British stamps provided for overprinting by the British Post Office . 
 <unk> an <unk> , the Irish Post Office , was the section of the Department of Posts and Telegraphs which issued all Irish stamps up to 1984 . After the division of the Department of Posts and Telegraphs into two semi @-@ state organisations in 1984 , An Post took over the responsibility for all Irish postal services including the issuing of postage stamps . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = British stamps used in Ireland = = = 
 To identify postage stamps used in Ireland between 1840 and 1922 , it is necessary to identify the postmark cancelling the stamp as being from an Irish town . Stamps used during this period are referred to as Great Britain used in Ireland . 
 From 1840 to 1844 , the Penny Black , and other stamps issued , were obliterated with the Maltese Cross cancellation . There was no text or numeral to help identify any of these cancels as Irish , but some Maltese Crosses are uniquely identifiable with certain Irish towns , including Belfast , <unk> , Cork , Hollymount , Limerick and Mullingar . From 1844 on , the cancels used included text or numerals that identified the post town . <unk> of both types are easier to identify if the stamp is still affixed to a cover , since this makes the complete postmark visible , but a stamp no longer affixed to a cover may still permit identification of the town of use if enough of the postmark can be seen on the stamp itself . 
 = = = Stamp issuing authorities = = = 
 Between 1922 and 1983 <unk> an <unk> , the Irish Post Office , a section of the Department of Posts and Telegraphs ( P & T ) , issued all postage stamps in the 26 counties of Ireland . During this time they employed some of the following companies to overprint or print the stamps : Dollard , Thom , Irish Government Printers , Waterlow and Sons ( London ) , De La Rue and Co . , Bradbury Wilkinson and Co . , Ltd . , ( London ) , Harrison and Sons Ltd . , ( London ) and Irish Security Stamp Printing Ltd . 
 Since 1984 , An Post has issued all Irish postage stamps . Most have been printed by Irish Security Stamp Printing Ltd . , though a small number were printed by Harrison and Sons Ltd . , ( London ) , <unk> , Walsall Security Printing , <unk> Pty Ltd . , ( Australia ) and SNP <unk> ( <unk> ) ( Australia ) . 
 = = = Forerunners = = = 
 In stamp collecting circles , the word forerunner usually describes a postage stamp used during the time period before a region or territory issues stamps of its own . However , in Irish reference books , such as Handbook of Irish <unk> , the term forerunners usually refers to political and propaganda labels . These often resemble stamps , but few of them were used on Irish mail and they had no legal standing for mail in Ireland . 
 Four values , 1c , 3c , <unk> ( deep @-@ green ) , and <unk> ( mauve @-@ purple ) were produced in New York by the Irish veterans of the US Civil War and are known as the 1865 – 67 Fenian issue . The 1893 colonial design are unofficial essays and are classed as bogus . 
 Between 1907 and 1916 , Sinn Féin , one of the nationalist organisations of the time , issued propaganda labels symbolising Irish nationhood . Their use as stamps was forbidden by Post Office regulations . The first design was a Celtic Cross , similar to one later adopted for two definitive stamps of 1923 , and the second depicts a female figure and harp in an oval frame . In 1912 , labels inscribed " Imperial Union " appeared , with a design of a larger harp and female figure . These labels , expressing unionist sentiments , are believed to have been printed in Manchester as a counter to the Sinn Féin labels . After the Home Rule Bill for Ireland was passed in parliament , an Irish Republican body issued labels in 1916 with the portraits of three nationalist heroes known as The Manchester Martyrs against an Irish tricolour background . Forgeries of these labels are common . Following the Easter Rising of 1916 , American sympathisers printed eight <unk> <unk> labels showing portraits of seven prominent leaders and a harp and shamrock label . The misspelling <unk> for <unk> could have been because of hasty preparation . 
 The Irish Republican Army , that controlled much of the southern part of the country during the Irish civil war , issued a 1d , 2d and 6d label , mainly because of a stamp shortage . These were printed in Cork and were to be put on sale in August 1922 , but in the meantime the Irish Free State army landed near Cork and the IRA set fire to their own barracks before they retreated from Cork , destroying most of the labels . 
 = = = Essays = = = 
 The Postmaster General of the Irish Free State issued an invitation to firms in Dublin and London on 1 February 1922 for the submission of designs for a permanent definitive stamp issue , and by March several designs had been submitted . The following companies and printers provided essays : Dollard Printing House Ltd . , Hely Ltd . , Perkins Bacon & Co . , and O 'Loughlin , Murphy & Boland . 
 = = Postage stamps = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 1922 , as an interim measure before the first specially designed definitives were ready , a series of contemporary stamps of King George V were overprinted . The <unk> stamps were issued and in use in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland between 1912 and 1922 and continued in use in Great Britain and Northern Ireland until 1936 . Three printing firms held overprinting contracts : Dollard Printing House Ltd . , Alex . Thom & Co Ltd . , and Harrison & Sons . In June 1925 the Government Printers , Dublin Castle , obtained the contract and completed all overprinting until 1937 , when the final , high @-@ value stamps were issued . 
 Collecting and identifying the overprints can be an arduous task as there are numerous variations in the overprint settings . Feldman states " the complex details of plating , shading , overprint colours , accurate measurements , to mention a few , often discourage even the most enthusiastic collector " . Three specialised books , or catalogue chapters , ( Freeman & Stubbs , Munk and Meredith ) , issued within five years of issue have concentrated on this topic and Meredith is regarded as unequalled . 
 Two distinct overprints were made , before and after the formal independence of the state on 6 December 1922 . The Provisional Government of Ireland ( Rialtas Sealadach na hÉireann ) overprints were initially issued on 17 February 1922 , with eight low @-@ value and three high @-@ value stamps overprinted by Dollard and four by Thom . This overprint is composed of the four words Rialtas Sealadach na hÉireann and the numeral date 1922 arranged in five lines of seriffed text . The <unk> stamps remained valid for postage in Ireland until 31 March 1922 . 
 The Irish Free State ( Saorstát Éireann ) overprints debuted on 11 December 1922 . This is a three @-@ line overprint using a sans @-@ serif typeface and was done by Thom , Harrison and the Government Printers . The last overprinted stamps were the Waterlow & Sons re @-@ engraved King George V 2 / 6 , 5 / - and 10 / - values that appeared in 1934 and were overprinted in 1937 for use in Ireland . 
 = = = Name of state = = = 
 On stamps , the name of the state has always been written in Irish and rarely also written in English . The overprints were stamped first Rialtas Sealadach na hÉireann ( " Provisional Government of Ireland " ) and later Saorstát Éireann ( " Irish Free State " ) . Subsequent stamps nearly all used the name Éire ( " Ireland " ) , even though this was not the name of the state until the 1937 Constitution took effect . The exceptions were issued in 1949 and 1950 , and used <unk> NA <unk> or <unk> na h @-@ Éireann ( " Republic of Ireland " ) . This phrase is the official description of the state specified in the Republic of Ireland Act , which came into force in April 1949 ; the state 's name was not changed by the Act . Fianna Fáil defeated the outgoing government in the 1951 election and abandoned the use of the description , reverting to the name on stamps and elsewhere . Originally , Éire was written in Gaelic type ; from 1952 to 1979 , many stamps had the name of the state in Roman type , usually in all caps , and often written <unk> rather than <unk> , omitting the <unk> <unk> accent over the initial ' E ' . In 1981 the Department of Posts and Telegraphs recommended the inclusion of the word " Ireland " along with " Éire " on stamps but the Department of the Taoiseach vetoed the idea on the basis it could cause " constitutional and political repercussions " and that " the change could be unwelcome . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Since 1922 , eight Irish definitive stamp series have been released . Besides different designs , there were changes involving the watermark and eventually doing away with watermarked paper , changes in currency were also reflected on the stamps : decimalisation in 1971 , and Euro changeover in 2002 . 
 The first twelve stamps , the low values up to 1 shilling , were issued during 1922 – 1923 , while the three high values , 2 / 6 , 5 / - and 10 / - , did not appear until 8 September 1937 . Designs included : Sword of Light , Map of Ireland , Celtic Cross , Arms of the Four Provinces and St. Patrick . Watermark and extra values were made until new designs , known as the Gerl definitives , using early Irish art motifs , were produced in 1968 . These were the first new designs in 31 years for the high values and 46 years for the low values . The Gerl series was denominated initially in pre @-@ decimal Irish pounds and later in decimal currency ( both watermarked issues ) . It latterly appeared as <unk> stamps . 
 Between 1982 and 1988 a series based on Irish architecture through the ages was released , with line drawings by Michael Craig and graphics by Peter <unk> . It contained twenty @-@ eight stamps , with values ranging from 1p to £ 5 . Stamps based on Irish cultural heritage followed between 1990 and 1995 . Irish birds feature in the 1997 series that span the conversion of currency from the Irish pound , through dual currency to the introduction of the Euro . These were the first definitives where all values were printed in full colour . On 9 September 2004 new stamps , featuring flowers native to the woodlands and hedgerows of Ireland , become available . These were replaced in September 2010 by a seventh series featuring animals and marine life using photographic images . 
 For the centenary of the 1916 Easter Rising an eight series of definitive stamps were issued on 21 January 2016 and will only be on sale for a period of one year . There are sixteen stamps divided into four groups of four categories named as : Leaders and Icons , Participants , Easter Week and The Aftermath . 
 Several Irish definitives have been issued in booklet and coil formats in addition to the normal sheet configuration . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Irish postage stamps have been released to commemorate a wide variety of Irish topics , such as Irish notable events and anniversaries , aspects of Irish life and culture , famous Irish people ( statesmen , religious , literary and cultural figures , athletes , etc . ) , fauna and flora , works of art , and Christmas . Europa postage stamps have been issued since 1960 to celebrate membership of the European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations ( <unk> ) , and international events have also been commemorated . 
 The first commemorative , a set of three Daniel O 'Connell stamps , appeared on 22 June 1929 . Until the mid @-@ 1990s , with only three exceptions in 1943 , 1977 and 1979 for Douglas Hyde , Louis le Brocquy and Pope John Paul II respectively , it was policy to not depict living persons . This policy has been put aside and since 1995 there have been several such issues , mainly depicting athletes ; for instance 30 stamps were issued showing living Irish sportsmen for the Millennium and several golfers are shown on three 2006 Ryder Cup stamps . 
 = = = = Miniature sheets = = = = 
 Some stamps were issued in the form of a miniature sheet comprising from one to sixteen stamps of a single , or multiple , design from one issue printed on the same sheet and sold in that format . The miniature sheets are most often produced in addition to the same designs issued as single stamps . 
 The first miniature sheet of four stamp on stamp postage stamps was issued in 1972 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the first Irish postage stamp . This was followed by a four @-@ stamp sheet to commemorate the bicentenary of the United States Declaration of Independence ; the stamps in this sheet were also available as single stamps . A set of four stamps showing Irish wildlife was issued in sheet form and also as single stamps in 1980 . 
 Since 1983 miniature sheets have been produced with increasing frequency , from at least one per year initially to several sheets more recently . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Seven Irish airmail stamps were issued between 1948 and 1965 in the 1d , 3d , 6d , 8d , 1 / - , 1 / 3 and 1 / 5 values . No specific airmail rate existed for the 1d and 3d stamps though their use was permitted on non @-@ airmail correspondence ; all others paid a contemporaneous rate when first produced . These were the only airmail stamps ever issued but many definitives and commemoratives have been produced in values that paid the postage rate for airmail service . 
 The stamps were designed by R.J. King and recess printed by Waterlow and Sons , London , until 1961 , and thereafter by De La Rue & Co , Dublin . The designs feature the Flight of the Angel Victor – Messenger of St. Patrick – carrying the Voice of the Irish ' Vox <unk> ' over the world flying over four well @-@ known Irish historical landmarks , one from each of the four provinces of Ireland : Lough Derg ( 3d and 8d values ) , Rock of Cashel ( 1d , 1 / 3 and 1 / 5 values ) , Glendalough ( 1 / - value ) and <unk> Patrick ( 6d value ) . These were printed in sheets of 60 stamps with an ' e ' watermark . 
 = = = Postage dues = = = 
 <unk> imposed by the Irish post office on mail bearing insufficient pre @-@ paid postage had the postage due collected by the use of these labels . Since 1925 there have been six series printed , with the design remaining the same until 1980 , though the colour and watermarks have changed . The Irish word <unk> , for penny , is used in both £ <unk> and decimal currency , but because it has the same meaning in each , the value on the label does not indicate whether the label was issued before or after decimalisation . Hence , identifying the issue of a label requires further information : if collectors knows the date of use , the existence of a watermark and if so which type , and the specific colour , identification will be easier . For example , the 3d value was blue between 1940 and 1969 , and stone colour from 1971 until 1980 ; it changed from a watermarked to a non @-@ watermark paper in 1978 . Additionally , the 1 , 5 and 8 pence values are seen in two different colours depending on the issue , while the 1 ⁄ 2d , 1d , 2d and 6d are seen with both watermark varieties . Except for the sixth issue , which has the word Éire in the design , there is no explicit country identity on any of the others . The first four series use only Irish words . 
 = = = = Sterling issues = = = = 
 The first issue consisted of four values released on 20 February 1925 ; 1 ⁄ 2d , 1d , 2d and 6d . <unk> by the Government Printers in Dublin Castle on ' se ' watermarked paper . The sheets were printed in larger sheets of 180 divided into three panes of 60 labels . The second issue had ten values : 1 ⁄ 2d , 1d , 11 ⁄ 2d , 2d , 3d , 5d , 6d , 8d , 10d and 1 / - , and were printed on ' e ' watermarked paper between 1940 and 1969 . Other details are the same . 
 = = = = Decimal issues = = = = 
 A third issue was made up of seven labels and issued in decimal currency in the following values : 1p , 11 ⁄ 2p , 3p , 4p , 5p , 7p and <unk> . In the fourth issue the 3p , 4p and 5p values were reissued in non @-@ watermarked paper on 20 March 1978 . A new design , printed by photogravure , and appeared on 20 June 1980 in ten values : 1p , 2p , 4p , 6p , <unk> , <unk> , 20p , 24p , 30p and 50p made up the fifth issue . The sheet format was two panes of 100 divided by a gutter margin . The sixth issue consisted of ten newly designed labels by Q Design and lithographically printed by <unk> on non @-@ watermarked paper on 6 October 1988 . The values were : 1p , 2p , 3p , 4p , 5p , <unk> , 20p , 24p , 30p , 50p and £ 1 . No Euro currency postage dues have been produced . 
 = = = Booklets = = = 
 Stamp booklets were first put on sale on 21 August 1931 . Booklet construction was a lightweight cardboard cover stitched on the left @-@ hand side with panes of stamps ( usually four panes ) , advertising panes and <unk> bound in . Until 1956 most booklets had half of the front cover devoted to advertising , and until 1963 booklets also had serial numbers on the front cover : two numbers indicated the year of issue and serial number ( in that order on the early issues but with the order reversed for later issues ) , until 1963 when the serial numbers ceased . Since 1983 , most booklets are no longer stitched ; the stamp pane , or panes , are glued into a folded card cover . 
 Until 1988 , when the Dublin Millennium booklet containing commemorative stamps was issued , all booklets contained only definitive stamps . Since then , An Post has issued both commemorative and definitive booklets , with three times as many commemorative booklets issued . In 1990 An Post issued the first booklet mixing definitive and commemorative stamps in one booklet and also on a single pane . 
 Many booklet stamps can be identified by one non @-@ perforated edge , though a few are perforated on all edges . On booklets up to 1977 , the printing plate construction enabled both upright and inverted watermarks in equal quantities owing to a gutter dividing rows 6 and 7 in the sheets of 12 × 10 stamps . The gutter was used for stitching during assembly , requiring rows 4 – 6 and 10 – 12 to be turned through 180 degrees so those panes could be stitched on the left of the booklet . 
 = = = Watermarks = = = 
 The Irish overprinted stamps came , as supplied from the printers in London , with a watermark of the Royal Cypher of George V. The first Irish watermark was a stylised design of the two overlapping letters ' s ' and ' e ' making an ' se ' watermark representing the name of the country Saorstát Éireann . This watermark was discontinued around 1940 when the country 's name changed to Éire ( Ireland ) ; it was replaced with e watermark paper to represent Éire . Stamps of the period may have the watermark in any of several states of inversion and rotation attributable to the way the paper was fed into the printing machines . 
 Around 1971 , the use of watermarks was discontinued by the Irish stamp @-@ issuing authority , and current stamps issued by An Post do not use a watermarked paper . 
 = = Postal stationery = = 
 Postal stationery have been produced in the form of registered envelopes , postal cards , envelopes , letter cards , newspaper wrappers , airletters and telegram forms with different designs of impressed stamp applied to show that postage had been pre @-@ paid . Except for limited early usage of previously issued British postal stationery , which were not overprinted like the postage stamps , all post @-@ paid impressed stamps before 1984 were based on variations of a design showing the country 's name in Irish , Éire , with appropriate values in text and numeral tablets centred around an Irish harp motif . This was initially superseded by a shamrock design that later became loosely based on the logo of wavy lines and the word POST used by An Post from 1984 . An Post has also used some designs based on postage stamps as post @-@ paid impressed stamps on Irish postal stationery . 
 A few early issued items were embossed but generally the post @-@ paid impressed stamps were <unk> . The Revenue Stamping Branch , Dublin Castle , applied the impressed indicia until 1984 , when An Post employed the typographic printing method . 
 = = = Official = = = 
 At independence , a King George V 5 pence registered envelope and 1 shilling telegram form were printed in green for use in Ireland until domestic products became available . Irish telegram forms were only produced in 1 / - and 1 / 6 values . Registered envelopes have appeared in many values and sizes . The printed ( but non @-@ stamped ) registered envelopes were produced by private firms and stored by the Irish post office until needed , so envelopes from former periods , showing out @-@ dated fees in the text , often received an impressed stamp for the current postal rate , creating many subtypes for collectors . Other products have carried post @-@ paid imprint , such as commemorative and special issue postcards , including a series of St. Patrick 's Day cards issued annually since 1984 . 
 Up to 1987 , airletters ( also known as <unk> ) were produced without any fee applied and were available free from post offices upon payment of the appropriate rate in force for the postage stamp purchased to mail the <unk> . Most airletters with a pre @-@ paid indicia have been sold at a small premium over the then @-@ current <unk> postal rate . 
 = = = Stamped @-@ to @-@ order = = = 
 Known as the stamping privilege , companies , associations and individuals were permitted to submit their own designed and pre @-@ printed envelopes , cards , letter sheets , etc . , to the Irish Post Office for impressing with an official post @-@ paid indicia . Window envelopes were popular for printed matter rate mail . The most prolific user was the Electricity Supply Board which used meter reading and appointment cards for over forty years . Stamped @-@ to @-@ order postal stationery users included Blackrock College , <unk> <unk> Éireann , Esso , Great Northern Railway , and John Player & Sons , Dublin . No stamped @-@ to @-@ order registered envelopes are known . Apparently An Post have withdrawn the stamping privilege without any public notice , because stamped @-@ to @-@ order postal stationery has seldom been seen since An Post took control of the Irish Post Office in 1984 , with only five users recorded by Jung . Between 1963 and 2000 a few <unk> influenced items are known produced by six users . 
 = = Collecting Irish stamps = = 
 Newly issued Irish postage stamps are available from the Philatelic Bureau of An Post in the Dublin , General Post Office . Commemorative and special issue stamps are usually available for one year from the date of issue . Until the mid @-@ 1960s the Irish stamp @-@ issuing policy was very conservative , with only a few new ones each year ; up to four or five commemoratives , usually of two values , plus the occasional updated , or new , definitives . During the 1970s and beyond , the quantity produced rose considerably . 
 Some collectors try to acquire a basic collection of the more common stamps from 1922 onwards , though that can be difficult now due to the quantity issued . Many collectors concentrate on one type of stamp , such as definitives or commemoratives , or even one issue , such as Gerl definitives . The First Day covers , especially commemoratives with full sets affixed , are popular though the older issues are harder to find because less than a million of the high value stamps were printed in the early years ( 1929 – 1940s ) for several issues , a far lower number than the 20 @-@ plus millions printed for most of the low values during the same period . 
 The overprints , which proved very popular during their early years , are a complex topic giving an advanced collector a great philatelic challenge . 
 = = = Numbering systems = = = 
 The Irish Post Office has never publicised an official stamp numbering system for the postage stamps they issued , so collectors use a stamp numbering system from one of the most popular stamp catalogues , such as Stanley Gibbons , Scott , MacDonnell Whyte , MDW ( last edition 1991 ) , Hibernian or Michel . There are differences between these numbering systems that result in a varying sequence of stamps in each listing , with some stamps included on some lists but not on others — usually varieties that the publishers think do not belong in a general catalogue . For instance , Ireland 's first postage stamp , the 2d Map of Ireland , issued in 1922 is numbered 68 by Scott , 43 by Michel , D4 by Hibernian and MacDonnell Whyte and 74 by Stanley Gibbons . 
 Collectors tend to use the catalogues produced in their own region and language , so in the United States , Scott is used most often as evidenced by the use of Scott numbers in American stamp auction catalogues . In contrast , SG numbers are used in England and Ireland because Stanley Gibbons ( a British publisher ) produces the catalogue of choice in those countries . Advanced and more specialist collectors have used the David Feldman , later called MacDonnell / Feldman , and later again called <unk> , catalogues between 1978 and 1991 , and Hibernian catalogues ( 1972 , 1976 , 1980 , 1983 , 1985 , 1986 , 2002 and 2009 editions ) . 
 = = = Stamp societies = = = 
 Local societies 
 DSS , Dublin Stamp Society , founded in 1948 . 
 IPS , Irish Philatelic Society , is more than a century old , having started as the Irish Philatelic Club following a meeting in Dublin on 12 February 1901 , of nineteen people who responded to a notice in the Irish Times . 
 International societies 
 <unk> , Éire Philatelic Association , is a US @-@ based Irish philatelic society . 
 IPC , Irish Philatelic Circle , is a British @-@ based Irish philatelic society . 
 FAI , <unk> und <unk> <unk> e.V. , is a German @-@ based Irish philatelic society . 
 = William F. Raynolds = 
 William Franklin Raynolds ( March 17 , 1820 – October 18 , 1894 ) was an explorer , engineer and U.S. army officer who served in the Mexican @-@ American War and American Civil War . He is best known for leading the 1859 – 60 Raynolds Expedition while serving as a member of the U.S. Army Corps of Topographical Engineers . 
 During the 1850s and again after his participation in the American Civil War , Raynolds was the head engineer on numerous lighthouse construction projects . He oversaw riverway and harbor dredging projects intended to improve accessibility and navigation for shipping . As a cartographer , Raynolds surveyed and mapped the islands and shorelines on the Great Lakes and other regions . At least six lighthouses whose construction he oversaw are still standing . Some are still in use and of these , several are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 In 1848 , during the American occupation of Mexico after the Mexican @-@ American War , Raynolds and other U.S. Army personnel were the first confirmed to have reached the summit Pico de Orizaba , the tallest mountain in Mexico , and inadvertently set what may have been a 50 @-@ year American alpine altitude record . In 1859 , Raynolds was placed in charge of the first government @-@ sponsored expedition to venture into the upper Yellowstone region that was later to become Yellowstone National Park . Heavy winter snowpack in the Absaroka Range of Wyoming prevented the expedition from reaching the Yellowstone Plateau , forcing them to divert to the south and cross Union Pass at the northern end of the Wind River Range . After negotiating the pass the expedition entered Jackson Hole and surveyed the Teton Range , now within Grand Teton National Park . 
 During the American Civil War , Raynolds participated in the Battle of Cross Keys during the Valley Campaign of 1862 and a year later was in charge of fortifications in the defense of the military arsenal at Harpers Ferry , West Virginia . On March 13 , 1865 Raynolds was brevetted brigadier general for meritorious service during the Civil War . Raynolds retired from the Corps of Engineers on March 17 , 1884 with the permanent rank of colonel after a 40 @-@ year military career . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Franklin Raynolds was born on March 17 , 1820 in Canton , Ohio , the fourth of six children to William Raynolds ( November 2 , 1789 – September 20 , 1829 ) and Elizabeth Seabury ( née Fisk 1796 – April 13 , 1853 ) . William F. Raynolds 's grandfather was also named William Raynolds ( 1764 – 1814 ) and had been a veteran of the War of 1812 , serving as a company captain from April 12 , 1812 until April 13 , 1813 . During the War of 1812 , the grandfather Raynolds rose to the rank of major while serving under Lewis Cass . 
 William F. Raynolds entered the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York , on July 1 , 1839 after being appointed from Ohio . He graduated fifth out of 39 classmates in his class of 1843 , which included William B. Franklin , Raynolds 's friend Joseph J. Reynolds and future president Ulysses S. Grant . Raynolds married at a young age ; he and his wife had no children . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Initially appointed a brevet second lieutenant in the 5th U.S. Infantry , within a few weeks Raynolds was transferred to the U.S. Army Corps of Topographical Engineers . The Topographical Engineers performed surveys and developed maps for army use until their merger with the Corps of Engineers in 1863 . Raynolds 's first assignments from 1843 to 1844 were as an assistant topographical engineer involved in improving navigation on the Ohio River and surveying the northeastern boundary of the U.S. between 1844 and 1847 . 
 = = = Mexican @-@ American War = = = 
 When war with Mexico seemed imminent , topographic engineers were sent to the border to assist with the army 's preparations . Raynolds served in Winfield Scott 's Mexican @-@ American War campaign which marched overland to Mexico City from the Gulf of Mexico seaport at Veracruz . After the war , the American army occupied Mexico City and the surrounding region . During the occupation , Raynolds and others set out to map and explore nearby mountains . Raynolds 's party is credited with being the first confirmed to climb to the summit of Pico de Orizaba ( 19 ° 01 ′ 48 ″ N 97 ° 16 ′ 12 ″ W ) which at 18 @,@ 620 feet ( 5 @,@ 680 m ) is the tallest mountain in Mexico and third tallest in North America . Over a period of several months , Raynolds and other officers from both the army and navy mapped the best approach route to Pico de Orizaba . To assist them in their climb , the party planned on taking <unk> attached to long ropes and primitive crampons in the form of shoes with projecting points to help ensure they could safely climb up cliffs and across glaciers . Told by local villagers that any attempt to reach the summit would be fruitless because no one had ever done it before , the Americans became even more determined to show the Mexicans it could be climbed . 
 As the expedition left to ascend the mountain , a long pack train of nearly fifty officers , soldiers and native guides departed from the town of Orizaba in early May 1848 . After several days of hiking through dense jungle , the expedition slowly gained altitude and established a base camp at 12 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) . Starting from base camp in the early morning of May 10 nearly two dozen climbers made the final push to the top of the mountain , but only Raynolds and a few others reached the summit . According to mountaineer and author Leigh N. <unk> , this feat may have inadvertently set the American mountaineering altitude record for the next 50 years . Raynolds estimated the summit of Pico de Orizaba to be 17 @,@ 907 ft ( 5 @,@ 458 m ) above sea level , which was slightly greater than previous estimates but below the modern known altitude . As no higher peaks were known in North America at that time , Raynolds believed Pico de Orizaba was the tallest mountain on the continent . The summit crater was covered in snow but estimated to be between 400 to 650 yards ( 370 to 590 m ) in diameter and 300 ft ( 91 m ) deep . The American achievement was disputed by the Mexicans until an 1851 French expedition discovered an American flag on the summit with the year 1848 carved in the flagpole . 
 = = = Lighthouse engineer = = = 
 After returning from Mexico , Raynolds resumed mapping the U.S. – Canada border which he had been surveying before the war , then embarked on a project to develop water resources for the nation 's growing capital of Washington , D.C. Raynolds traveled the Great Lakes for several years surveying and mapping shorelines while identifying potential lighthouse locations . After promotion to first lieutenant and then captain , in 1857 he was assigned to design and supervise the construction of lighthouses along the Jersey Shore and the Delmarva Peninsula <unk> in the late 1850s Raynolds supervised construction of the Fenwick Island Light in Delaware and the Cape May Light in New Jersey . In 1859 , he made alterations to the Jupiter Inlet Light in Jupiter , Florida . 
 = = = Raynolds Expedition = = = 
 In early 1859 , Raynolds was charged with leading an expedition into the Yellowstone region of Montana and Wyoming to determine , " as far as practicable , everything relating to ... the Indians of the country , its agricultural and mineralogical resources ... the navigability of its streams , its topographical features , and the facilities or obstacles which the latter present to the construction of rail or common roads ... " . The expedition was carried out by a handful of technicians , including photographer and topographer James D. Hutton , artist and mapmaker Anton Schönborn , and geologist and naturalist Ferdinand V. Hayden , who led several later expeditions to the Yellowstone region . Raynolds 's second @-@ in @-@ command was lieutenant Henry E. Maynadier . The expedition was supported by a small infantry detachment of 30 and was federally funded with $ 60 @,@ 000 . Experienced mountain man Jim Bridger was hired to guide the expedition . 
 The expedition started in late May 1859 at St. Louis , Missouri , then was transported by two steamboats up the Missouri River to New Fort Pierre , South Dakota . In late June the expedition left New Fort Pierre and headed overland to Fort Sarpy where they encountered the Crow Indians . Raynolds stated that the Crow were a " small band compared to their neighbors , but are famous warriors , and , according to common report , seldom fail to hold their own with any of the tribes unless greatly outnumbered . " Raynolds was impressed with the Crow chief Red Bear , and after assuring him that the expedition meant only to pass through Crow Indian territory and not linger , traded with the Crows for seven horses . 
 Raynolds divided his expedition , sending a smaller detachment under Maynadier to explore the Tongue River , a major tributary of the Yellowstone River . Two of Maynadier 's party , James D. Hutton and Zephyr <unk> , the expedition 's Sioux interpreter , took a side trip to locate and investigate an isolated rock formation that had been seen from great distance by a previous expedition in 1857 . Hutton was the first person of European descent to reach this rock formation in northeastern Wyoming , later known as Devils Tower ; Raynolds never elaborated on this event , mentioning it only in passing . By September 2 , 1859 , Raynolds 's detachment had followed the Yellowstone River to the confluence with the Bighorn River in south @-@ central Montana . The two parties under Raynolds and Maynadier reunited on October 12 , 1859 and wintered at Deer Creek Station , on the Platte River in central Wyoming . 
 The expedition recommenced its explorations in May 1860 . Raynolds led a party north and west up the upstream portion of the Bighorn River , which is today called the Wind River , hoping to cross the mountains at Togwotee Pass in the Absaroka Range , a mountain pass known to expedition guide Jim Bridger . Meanwhile , Maynadier led his party back north to the Bighorn River to explore it and its associated tributary streams more thoroughly . The plan was for the two parties to reunite on June 30 , 1860 at Three Forks , Montana , so they could make observations of a total solar eclipse forecast for July 18 , 1860 . Hampered by towering basaltic cliffs and deep snows , Raynolds attempted for over a week to reconnoiter to the top of Togwotee Pass , but was forced south due to the June 30 deadline for reaching Three Forks . Bridger then led the party south over another pass in the northern Wind River Range that Raynolds named Union Pass , to the west of which lay Jackson Hole and the Teton Range . From there the expedition went southwest , crossing the southern Teton Range at Teton Pass and entering Pierre 's Hole in present @-@ day Idaho . Though Raynolds and his party managed to get to Three Forks by the scheduled date , Maynadier 's party was several days late , which prevented a detachment heading north to observe the solar eclipse . The reunited expedition then headed home , traveling from Fort Benton , Montana , to Fort Union near the Montana @-@ North Dakota border via steamboat . It then journeyed overland to Omaha , Nebraska , where the expedition members were disbanded in October 1860 . 
 Though the Raynolds Expedition was unsuccessful in exploring the region that later became Yellowstone National Park , it was the first federally funded party to enter Jackson Hole and observe the Teton Range . The expedition covered over 2 @,@ 500 miles ( 4 @,@ 000 km ) and explored an area of nearly 250 @,@ 000 square miles ( 650 @,@ 000 km2 ) . In a preliminary report sent east in 1859 , Raynolds stated that the once @-@ abundant bison were being killed for their hides at such an alarming rate that they might soon become extinct . Raynolds 's immediate participation in the American Civil War , followed by a severe illness , delayed him from presenting his report on the expedition until 1868 . Research data and botanical specimens , as well as fossils and geological items that had been collected during the expedition , were sent to the Smithsonian Institution , but were not studied in detail until after the war . Much of the artwork created by Hutton and especially Schönborn was lost , though several of Schönborn 's <unk> appeared in Ferdinand V. Hayden 's 1883 report that was submitted after later expeditions . 
 = = = American Civil War = = = 
 Raynolds returned to Washington at the outbreak of the war , and was made chief topographic engineer of the Department of Virginia in July 1861 . The army lacked adequate maps for military use , so Raynolds and his team of engineers began to survey and draw up maps of Virginia and the region of the western portion of that state that had remained loyal to the Union and would become the new state of West Virginia . In 1862 , Raynolds was engaged with John C. Frémont 's Mountain Department in chasing Stonewall Jackson up the Shenandoah Valley and participated in the Battle of Cross Keys . 
 Raynolds spent two months recovering from illness after the Valley Campaign , then was assigned as chief engineer of Middle Department and VIII Corps in January 1863 . Promoted to major in the Corps of Engineers , he found himself in charge of the defenses of vital Harpers Ferry , West Virginia in March 1863 during Robert E. Lee 's second Confederate invasion of the north during the Gettysburg Campaign . On March 31 , 1863 , the Corps of Topographical Engineers ceased to be an independent branch of the army and was merged into the Corps of Engineers and Raynolds served in that branch of the army for the remainder of his career . Officers from the two corps maintained their ranks based on the time at which they received their promotion . 
 As the end of war approached and hostilities with the Sioux Indians loomed , Raynolds 's knowledge of and experiences in the Great Lakes region became more important to the army than his command of the fortifications of Harpers Ferry . As a result , he returned to the Great Lakes as superintending engineer of surveys and lighthouses in April 1864 , and saw no further combat for the rest of his career . Before the war was over , on March 13 , 1865 Raynolds was brevetted to brigadier general for meritorious service . 
 = = = Postwar career = = = 
 After the Civil War , the Corps of Engineers undertook a program of river and harbor improvements . Raynolds supervised the dredging and improvement of navigation on the Arkansas , Mississippi and Missouri Rivers . He also helped supervise several harbor dredging and construction projects , involving the harbor in Buffalo , New York , the Harbor of Refuge in New Buffalo , Michigan , Erie Harbor in Erie , Pennsylvania , and the river harbors of St. Louis , Missouri and Alton , Illinois . Raynolds sited and oversaw the installation of dozens of lighthouses in the Great Lakes area , where he served as the superintending engineer from 1864 to 1870 . Raynolds was promoted to permanent rank of lieutenant colonel in the Corps of Engineers on March 7 , 1867 . He then supervised lighthouse construction along the Gulf Coast and in New Jersey where he managed the construction of the Hereford Inlet Lighthouse in 1874 . From May 5 to October 7 , 1877 , Reynolds led a procession of American engineers to an engineering conference in Europe . 
 Promoted to the permanent rank of colonel on January 2 , 1881 , Raynolds continued serving with the Corps of Engineers supporting a variety of harbor and river navigational improvements until his retirement in 1884 , after a military career that spanned 40 years . As he approached retirement , Raynolds was elected a trustee of the Presbyterian Church . According to West Point classmate Joseph Reynolds , who saw him at the West Point graduates reunion in 1893 , Raynolds maintained a vigorous and healthy appearance long after his retirement , his brown hair , " then but slightly sprinkled with gray " . Raynolds died on October 18 , 1894 in Detroit , Michigan , leaving his widow a substantial estate for the time , estimated at between US $ 50 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 422 @,@ 200 today ) and $ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 2 @,@ 844 @,@ 400 today ) . After providing for his widow , his will directed that after her death , the entire estate would be donated to the Presbyterian Church . Raynolds was interred in West Lawn Cemetery in Canton , Ohio . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Raynolds 's 1848 expedition to the summit of Pico de Orizaba in Mexico predated what is known as the Golden age of alpinism ( 1854 – 65 ) , when many major mountain peaks in the Alps were first climbed . The effort to summit the mountain was one of the earliest deliberate attempts to climb a major mountain peak , and involved logistics , planning and use of rudimentary climbing equipment , " making it one of the more serious mountaineering expeditions undertaken to that point in history . " Though unable to penetrate into the heart of what later became Yellowstone National Park , the Raynolds Expedition produced maps that were used by subsequent explorers to the greater Yellowstone region . Raynolds also located suitable wagon routes in the Bighorn Basin and was able to help narrow down the most appropriate routes for a future transcontinental railroad . The Raynolds Expedition further determined that few if any rivers in the region would be suitable for steamboats due to numerous rapids and steep gradients . Several lighthouses whose construction was designed or supervised by Raynolds are still in use and several are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 At least two geographical locations are named for William Raynolds . The mountain gap where the Raynolds Expedition crossed the Continental Divide between southwest Montana and northeast Idaho is named Raynolds Pass ( 44 ° 42 ′ 40 ″ N 111 ° 28 ′ 11 ″ W ) and Raynolds Peak ( 43 ° 52 ′ 15 ″ N 110 ° 49 ′ 30 ″ W ) is an isolated peak in the Teton Range that was named after him in 1938 . The fossil remains of the extinct gastropod <unk> <unk> was named by Ferdinand V. Hayden in honor of Raynolds after the specimen was collected in the Powder River Basin during the expedition . 
 = Soundtrack to the Apocalypse = 
 Soundtrack to the Apocalypse is a box set by the American thrash metal band Slayer . Released November 25 , 2003 through American Recordings , the four – disc CD and DVD set features music from previous albums , unreleased material , and live film . A deluxe edition version ( which has the alias " ammo box " ) was released and featured everything from the standard edition , with the addition of 14 live tracks . The box set 's name originated from an alternative title for 2001 's God Hates Us All . After discussing among themselves the idea of the box set , the band informed their record company , who initially disliked but later approved the idea . 
 Many dates were stated by band members as to when it would be released . The official release date was not announced until late October 2003 . The box set has been released into the public domain five times between late 2003 to early 2007 . There were several producers and film directors that were involved with the box set . The set received positive reviews from critics , but was not well received by fans , with the set debuting on no notable charts . 
 = = Conception = = 
 Around the time Slayer thought of the album title for 2001 's God Hates Us All , Soundtrack to the Apocalypse was considered an alternative name . Vocalist Tom Araya then suggested that if they ever opted to issue a box set , Soundtrack to the Apocalypse would be the most appropriate title . This inspired discussion regarding a possible box set release , which continued for several months . The group decided that once the label agreed to a release , they would be given a little more time to compile the material . Slayer approached the record company regarding a box set release , and discussions lasted roughly a year , since the band had to negotiate with the record company concerning plans they had with the box set which were not in their contract . In September 2003 , the record company granted permission to issue the box set and wanted an immediate release for the holiday season . 
 Slayer submitted a range of material for the record company to choose from , instructing them to return a track list of what they felt to be the best items . Following this , Slayer looked at the returned material ; if the recorded track was a “ good ” performance but the band " didn ’ t care for the song " , they asked the record company to select another track . 
 Guitarist Kerry King commented " there 's tons of stuff on there " , citing the amount they had to choose from as a problem . King himself owned five large Tupperware storage boxes full of material amassed over the years . Having every magazine had ever seen the group inside , King also possessed roughly 70 VHS and 8mm videos dating back to 1983 . Nick John of Slayer ’ s management team sifted through every video and transferred them to DVD . 
 = = Production = = 
 Soundtrack to the Apocalypse 's ideal release date was in early November 2003 . However , on September 25 , 2003 , it was announced by employees of MTV that the box set 's release date had been pushed back to November 18 , 2003 . On October 23 , 2003 , employees of MTV announced that the box set 's release date was pushed back to November 25 , 2003 . Since November 25 , 2003 , Slayer has released the box set five different times . The first three times were each released in 2003 , the first being released through Universal Records , and the other two , one being a Deluxe Edition version , were released through American Records . The set 's fourth release , which was packaged with only three discs , was released through American Records in 2006 . The box set 's final release was in 2007 , where it was released through WEA International . It was also released in the United Kingdom on December 8 , 2003 . It was produced with three Compact Discs , one DVD , and a booklet . 
 The packaging was praised by PopMatters , insisting that the box set is " very nicely packaged , in a swanky fold @-@ out digipak with a clear plastic slipcase . The 72 @-@ page accompanying booklet is outstanding , with extensive liner notes , loads of photos , and many memories from the band members . " USA Today related : " [ it is ] a combination of the metal grinders ' best @-@ known tracks , with live and studio rarities plus 17 DVD selections . A deluxe edition ( $ 100 ) adds a live disc and a few souvenir extras . " Soundtrack to the Apocalypse was produced by Matt Hyde , Dino Paredes , Rick Rubin , D. Sardy , and Andy Wallace and was executively produced by Nick John and Rick Sales . The film on the fourth disc was directed by Di Puglia , Gerard . The set includes many Slayer tracks since 1986 with several rarities and b @-@ sides , and includes a remastered DVD of live performances spanning 20 years . A fifth disc was released with fourteen more tracks than the set 's standard edition . The bonus live tracks are were recorded at The Grove In Anaheim , California , on May 2 , 2002 , several months following the return of original drummer Dave Lombardo . The extra tracks are packaged in a " blood pack " sleeve , which is decorated with faux blood and skulls . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although it did not enter any charts , Thom Jurek from AllMusic praised Soundtrack to the Apocalypse , rewarding the box set with four out of five stars . Jurek said it had " a whopping four CDs and one DVD . " Jurek noted that discs one and two " feature tracks from Reign in Blood , and all the albums that proceed from it , and includes bonus cuts previously only released in Japan , and cuts from soundtracks . " He also said that the third disc " is , appropriately , titled ' Shit You Never Heard ' because that 's what it is — sixteen tracks that have been unissued anywhere — from rehearsals , to in @-@ concert recordings , demos , and one ' No Remorse , ' a collaboration with Atari Teenage Riot , from the Spawn soundtrack , " and that the fourth disc are " an electronic press kit video for Diabolus in Musica , and an appearance at the Kerrang magazine awards . " Adrien Begrand from PopMatters favoured the album , lauding the packaging but stating that " like any other CD box set that has come out in recent years , the band seems torn about whom to appeal to , longtime fans , or newcomers . " Begrand noted that the first disc " is especially great , as it captures Slayer at the peak of their career , starting with the classic 1986 album Reign in Blood . " PR Newswire said it was " a Slayer fan 's ultimate experience , " and The Dallas Morning News called it " a fat new audiovisual box set . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Slayer 
 Tom Araya – bass , vocals 
 Jeff Hanneman – guitar 
 Kerry King – guitar 
 Dave Lombardo – drums on disc # 1 tracks 1 – 18 , disc # 2 track 15 , disc # 3 tracks 1 – 7 , 10 – 11 and 16 – 17 , disc # 4 tracks 1 – 10 and 15 – 17 , disc # 5 tracks 1 – 14 
 Paul Bostaph – drums on disc # 2 tracks 1 – 14 and 16 – 22 , disc # 3 tracks 12 and 14 – 15 , disc # 4 track 14 
 Jon Dette – drums on disc # 4 track 11 
 Production 
 = Pah Wongso = 
 Louis Victor Wijnhamer , Jr . ( 11 February 1904 – 13 May 1975 ) , better known as Pah Wongso ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Bó <unk> ) , was an Indo social worker popular within the ethnic Chinese community of what was initially the Dutch East Indies , and subsequently became Indonesia . Educated in Semarang and Surabaya , Pah Wongso began his social work in the early 1930s , using traditional arts such as wayang golek to promote such causes as monogamy and abstinence . By 1938 he had established a school for the poor , and was raising money for the Red Cross to send aid to China . 
 In late 1938 , Pah Wongso used a legal defense fund , which had been raised for him when he was charged with extortion , in order to establish another school ; this was followed by an employment center in 1939 . In 1941 , Star Film released two productions starring him and featuring his name in the title . During the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies , Pah Wongso was held in a series of concentration camps in South @-@ East Asia . He returned to the then @-@ independent Indies by 1948 , and raised funds for the Red Cross and ran an employment office until his death . 
 = = Early life and social work = = 
 Louis Victor Wijnhamer , Jr . , was born on 11 February 1904 in <unk> , Central Java , the Dutch East Indies . One of three siblings , Wijnhamer was born to an ethnic Dutch administrator from Surabaya , Louis Gregorius Wijnhamer , Sr. , and J. F. <unk> ; he was of Indo descent . He studied at the senior high school in Semarang , before spending some time at the <unk> in Surabaya , later arriving in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) . There , between 1927 and 1937 , he worked as an amanuensis at the School tot <unk> van Inlandsche <unk> . 
 By the early 1930s , Wijnhamer , known as Pah Wongso , was recognised in West Java for his promotion of social causes . These included promoting monogamy and faith in western medicine , as well as combating gambling and the use of opium and alcohol . In conveying his messages he often used the Sundanese wayang golek ( a form of shadow puppets ) , as the local people were generally unable to read . He was able to speak Dutch , Malay , and Javanese fluently , and had some command of Chinese and Japanese . This social work was funded predominantly from Pah Wongso 's day job , selling fried peanuts ( <unk> goreng ) . 
 By 1938 Pah Wongso had married and opened a school for poor children , particularly those of mixed Chinese descent , in Gang <unk> ; it was funded by donations . He was also a member of the Indies branch of the Red Cross , and recognized for his humanitarian work . He organised night fairs in various cities in the Indies ( including in Yogyakarta , Semarang , and Surabaya ) , holding auctions and selling drinks and snacks in order to raise money to send aid to China , then fighting against the Japanese . 
 = = Establishment of schools and popularity = = 
 After one of these fairs , in Yogyakarta , Pah Wongso was arrested for writing a threatening letter to Liem Tek Hien , who refused to pay f . 10 for a walking stick he said that he had not purchased , and held at <unk> Prison in Batavia . He was charged with " attempted extortion and unpleasant treatment " . The case was widely followed by ethnic Chinese in the Indies , and the magazine Keng Po established a defense fund for Pah Wongso , which raised more than f . 1 @,@ 300 by mid @-@ June 1938 ; this had reached almost f . 2 @,@ 000 by the end of the month . The case was brought to trial on 24 June 1938 . Although Liem regretted reporting Pah Wongso to the police , the prosecutor called for a two @-@ month sentence , while the defence asked for an acquittal , or time served . 
 Ultimately , on 28 June 1938 the judge gave a sentence of one month – equal to the time Pah Wongso had served – and he was released . Pah Wongso appealed the court sentence , calling for an acquittal ; in August 1938 his sentence was reduced to a 25 @-@ cent fine . The defense fund collected by Keng Po , totaling almost f . 3 @,@ 500 by August , was allocated to the establishment of a school ; on 8 August 1938 the Pah Wongso <unk> school for impoverished youth opened at 20 Blandongan St. in Batavia . By the end of the year Pah Wongso had participated in a march on opium use and been featured in a special issue of Fu Len . 
 In 1939 Pah Wongso expanded his school in Blandongan to include an employment office . Established with f . 1 @,@ 000 , the office was located above the school and by November 1939 was training 22 job seekers . The Pah Wongso <unk> , meanwhile , served more than 200 ethnic Chinese and <unk> students . He continued speaking out against the working conditions in the Indies , giving a lecture to a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ strong audience at the Queens Theatre in Batavia in October 1939 . He remained highly popular with the ethnic Chinese . 
 In 1941 , Star Film made two films starring Pah Wongso to take advantage of his popularity . The first , Pah Wongso Pendekar Boediman ( Pah Wongso the Cultured Warrior ) , depicted him as a nut seller who investigates the murder of a rich hajji . It was released to popular acclaim , although the journalist Saeroen suggest this was predominantly because of Pah Wongso 's existing popularity within the Chinese community . A second film , a comedy titled Pah Wongso Tersangka , depicted Pah Wongso as a suspect in an investigation and was released in December 1941 . Writing in the magazine Pertjatoeran Doenia dan Film , " S. " praised the introduction of comedy to the Indies ' film industry , and expressed hope that the film would " leave audiences rolling with laughter " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In March 1942 , the Empire of Japan occupied the Dutch East Indies . Pah Wongso was captured in Bandung on 8 March , and spent three years in a series of concentration camps in South @-@ East Asia , including in Thailand , Singapore and Malaya . He returned to the Indies , now independent and known as Indonesia , by 1948 , when he established the " <unk> <unk> " ( literally " mutual assistance " ) social office ; he also worked for Bond Motors ' Jakarta branch . In the mid @-@ 1950s he met President Sukarno , and by 1957 a biography of Pah Wongso was for sale . He and his wife Gouw Tan Nio ( also known as <unk> Wijnhamer ) had their fifth child on 3 February 1955 . 
 Pah Wongso continued to raise money for the Red Cross by selling fried peanuts . He also continued to operate his school in Blandongan , as well as the employment office , which trained young men and women for positions such as maids , gardeners , and bellhops , then placed them with employers . Several of Pah Wongso 's students came from islands other than Java . De <unk> gave the story of one young man , from Bengkulu , who had come to Java to study , been robbed of all his possessions while in Jakarta , then been helped by Pah Wongso to find work . 
 Pah Wongso continued operating his school and employment office , under the auspices of the Pah Wongso Foundation , into the 1970s . He touted that the foundation had found positions for 1 @,@ 000 young women and 11 @,@ 000 young men , and advertisements offering to place labourers were issued in Indonesian , English , and Dutch . The institution also provided printing services ; wrote letters on demand in English , Dutch , and Indonesian ; and provided wayang performances with four kinds of puppets . Pah Wongso died in Jakarta on 13 May 1975 . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Operation Totalize = 
 Operation Totalize ( also spelled " Operation <unk> " in some more recent British sources ) was an offensive launched by Allied troops of the First Canadian Army during the later stages of Operation Overlord , from 8 to 13 August 1944 . The intention was to break through the German defences south of Caen on the eastern flank of the Allied positions in Normandy and exploit success by driving south to capture the high ground north of the city of Falaise . The goal was to precipitate the collapse of the entire German front , and cut off the retreat of German forces fighting American and British armies further west . The battle is considered the inaugural operation of the First Canadian Army , which had been formally activated on 23 July . 
 In the early hours of 8 August 1944 , II Canadian Corps launched the attack using mechanized infantry . They broke through the German front lines and captured vital positions deep in the German defences . It was intended that two fresh armoured divisions would continue the attack , but some hesitancy by these two comparatively inexperienced divisions and German armoured counter @-@ attacks slowed the offensive . Having advanced 9 mi ( 14 km ) , the Allies were halted 7 mi ( 11 km ) north of Falaise , and forced to prepare a fresh attack . 
 = = Background = = 
 Caen had been an objective of the British forces assaulting Sword Beach on D @-@ Day . However , the German defences were strongest in this sector , and most of the German reinforcements sent to Normandy were committed to the defence of the city . Positional warfare ensued for the next six weeks . Several attempts by British and Canadian forces to capture Caen were unsuccessful until 9 July , when all of the city , north of the Orne River , was captured during Operation Charnwood . Between 18 July and 20 July , British forces launched Operation Goodwood to outflank the city to the east and south , while Canadian forces mounted Operation Atlantic to cross the Orne River and clear the remaining portions of the city . Although Operation Goodwood was halted with heavy tank losses , the two operations ultimately secured a bridgehead 6 mi ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) wide and 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) deep south of the Orne . 
 The Germans still held the commanding terrain of the Verrières Ridge , 5 mi ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) south of the city . The repeated British and Canadian attacks launched around Caen ( in part to distract the Germans from the western part of the front , where the First United States Army was preparing to break out of the Allied lodgement ) had caused the Germans to defend Verrières ridge with some of their strongest and most determined formations , including elements of three SS Panzer divisions of the I SS Panzer Corps . 
 Within 48 hours of the end of Operation Goodwood , the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division launched an attack against the " formidable " German defences on Verrières Ridge . They suffered over 1 @,@ 300 casualties and territorial gains were minimal . From 25 July to 27 July , another attempt was made to take the ridge as part of Operation Spring . Poor execution resulted in around 1 @,@ 500 Canadian casualties . In total , the Battle of Verrières Ridge had claimed upwards of 2 @,@ 800 Canadian casualties . While the ridge remained in German hands , the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division had gained a foothold on the ridge between the village of Verrières to <unk> @-@ de @-@ Fontenay , which would allow the troops to assemble free of German observation while they prepared to launch Totalize . 
 Also on 25 July the Americans launched their break @-@ out offensive , Operation Cobra , which gained immediate success . By the end of the third day of the operation , American forces had advanced 15 mi ( 24 km ) south of the Cobra start line at several points . On 30 July , American forces captured Avranches , at the base of the Cotentin peninsula . The German left flank was now open and within 24 hours , units of the United States Third Army had entered Brittany and began advancing south and west through open country almost without opposition . Three German Panzer divisions — the 1st SS , 9th SS and 116th — were shifted westward from Verrières Ridge to face this new threat . 
 British General Bernard Montgomery ( commanding the ground forces in Normandy ) now wanted an attack on the eastern flank of the front to capture Falaise , intending that such a move would precipitate a general German collapse . The First Canadian Army , commanded by Lieutenant General Harry Crerar , held this part of the Allied front . It consisted of the British I Corps , responsible for the extreme eastern flank of the Allied lines , and II Canadian Corps south of Caen . Canadian II Corps , which was to launch Operation Totalize , was commanded by Lieutenant General Guy Simonds and consisted of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division , 3rd Canadian Infantry Division , 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division , 51st ( Highland ) Infantry Division , 4th Canadian ( Armoured ) Division , 1st Polish Armoured Division , 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade and the British 33rd Armoured Brigade . 
 = = Offensive plan = = 
 The German defensive positions on Verrières Ridge remained very strong . The forward infantry positions were well dug @-@ in , with wide fields of fire . The main concentration of one hundred 75 mm and 88 mm anti @-@ tank guns was deployed around the villages of Cramesnil and Saint @-@ Aignan @-@ de @-@ Cramesnil 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) behind the forward positions to halt any breakthrough by tanks along the Caen @-@ Falaise road . The front line and defences in depth were held by the 89th Infantry Division , 85th Infantry Division ( recently arrived from Rouen ) and the remnants of the 272nd Grenadier Infantry Division ( severely depleted by the Canadians in Operation Atlantic ) . The 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend with an attached heavy tank battalion , with fifty tanks , was in reserve a further 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) back . Some of the infantry were commanded by the German LXXXVI Korps , but most of the sector ( and the 12th SS Panzer Division ) was under the command of the I SS Panzer Corps , which had arrived during Operation Goodwood . 
 Simonds knew that infantry assaults supported by massed artillery had failed to overcome the German forward lines in Operation Atlantic and Operation Spring . During Operation Goodwood , a bombardment by aircraft of RAF Bomber Command had allowed British tanks to break through the German front but they had then suffered heavy casualties from the intact German defences in depth . Infantry had been unable to follow up quickly enough to support the leading tanks or to secure ground behind them ( so that follow @-@ up units were also slowed ) . To solve the tactical problem presented by the terrain and the deep defences , Simonds proposed a radical solution ; in effect , the world 's first large mechanized infantry attack . 
 Some Canadian and British infantry divisions had been temporarily equipped with M7 Priest self @-@ propelled guns for the D @-@ Day landings , which had been replaced by towed Ordnance QF 25 pounders . Simonds had the Priests converted into Kangaroo Armoured Personnel Carriers , which would allow infantry to follow the tanks closely on any terrain . Permission was first requested from the Americans , from whom the M7s had been borrowed , to convert them into APCs . 
 Simonds made air power an essential component in his plan for breaking through the German tactical zones . The preliminary aerial bombardment called for RAF bombers to saturate the German defences on both flanks of a 4 mi ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) wide corridor along the axis of the Caen – Falaise road during the night of 7 August . During the early hours of 8 August , two attacking forces of tanks and armoured personnel carriers would advance along this corridor . West of the road under the Canadian 2nd Division were the 4th Canadian Infantry Brigade and 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade . East of the road , under the British 51st Division were the 154th ( Highland ) Brigade and the 33rd Armoured Brigade . These two columns would bypass the front @-@ line defenders and capture the main German anti @-@ tank defences around Cramesnil and Saint @-@ Aignan de Cramesnil at dawn . 
 The second phase would follow immediately . While the remaining four infantry brigades of the 2nd Canadian and 51st British divisions cleared up the isolated German forward defences and the 3rd Canadian and British 49th divisions ( from I Corps ) began subsidiary attacks , to widen the base of salient captured in the first phase , the 4th Canadian Armoured Division and 1st Polish Armoured Division would move up the corridor to Cramesnil and prepare to advance further south . To prepare for their attack , bombers of the US Eighth Air Force would bombard the German reserve positions at <unk> . The ultimate objective was the high ground north of Falaise , 15 mi ( 24 km ) beyond the start line . 
 = = Anglo @-@ Canadian assault = = 
 During the evening of 7 August 1944 , the attacking forces formed up in six columns , four vehicles wide , comprising tanks , Kangaroo APCs , half tracks , self @-@ propelled anti @-@ tank guns and Mine flail tanks . At 23 : 00 , Bomber Command commenced the bombardment of German positions along the entire Caen front . At 23 : 30 , the armoured columns began their advance behind a rolling barrage . Movement was slow at first , many APC drivers became disorientated by the dust caused by the vehicles . Several vehicles became stuck in bomb craters . Simonds had arranged several methods for the columns to maintain direction , some vehicles were fitted with radio direction finders , the artillery fired target @-@ marking shells , Bofors 40 mm guns fired bursts of tracer in the direction of advance . In spite of all these measures , there was still confusion . Several vehicles collided or were knocked out . 
 The attack broke through the German defences in several places . By dawn , the attacking columns from the 51st ( Highland ) Division had reached their intended positions . The infantry dismounted from their Kangaroo APCs within 200 yards ( 180 m ) of their objectives , the villages of <unk> and Saint @-@ Aignan de Cramesnil and rapidly overran the defenders . The columns from the 2nd Canadian Division were delayed by fog and unexpected opposition on their right flank but by noon on 8 August , the Allied forces had captured Verrières Ridge . The novel methods used by Simonds ensured that the attackers suffered only a fraction of the loss which would have been incurred in a normal " dismounted " attack . The Allies were poised to move against Cintheaux , 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of their furthest penetration but Simonds ordered a halt to the advance , to allow field artillery and the armoured divisions ( 4th Canadian and 1st Polish ) to move into position for the second phase of the operation . 
 = = German counter @-@ moves = = 
 SS General Kurt Meyer , commander of the 12th SS Panzer Division , had already ordered infantry from various formations shattered by the bombers and by the armoured attack , to occupy Cintheaux . He also moved forward two battlegroups from his division , consisting of assault guns , infantry and Tiger tanks , positioning them across the Canadian front . Shortly after midday , he ordered these two battlegroups to counter @-@ attack the leading Allied troops . 
 At this point , the Allied offensive plan called for additional bombardment by the Eighth Air Force , before the 4th Canadian Armoured Division and the 1st Polish Armoured Division pushed south towards Falaise on either side of the Caen – Falaise Road . The counter @-@ attack by the 12th SS Panzer Division failed but placed Meyer 's tanks north of the target area that the Eighth Air Force bombarded in preparation for the second phase of the Allied attack . <unk> the effects of the bombing , the tanks slowed the advance of the 1st Polish Armoured Division , preventing a breakthrough east of the road . West of the road , the German infantry at Cintheaux held up the Canadian armoured formations . Neither division ( both in combat for the first time ) pressed their attacks as hard as Simonds demanded and " laagered " ( went into a defensive formation while vehicles and troops were supplied and rested ) when darkness fell . 
 To restore the momentum of the attack , Simonds ordered a column from the 4th Canadian Armoured Division to seize Hill 195 , just to the west of the main road , halfway between Cintheaux and Falaise . Worthington Force comprised three companies of the Algonquin Regiment ( B , C and HQ ) supporting 52 tanks from the British Columbia Regiment , bumped into the rear of Halfpenny Force fighting the SS in Bretteville @-@ le @-@ <unk> , went round them and got lost . When dawn broke on 9 August , Worthington Force was 4 @.@ 5 mi ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) to the east of Hill 195 at Hill 140 , half @-@ way between Estrees @-@ la @-@ Campagne and <unk> . They held their ground against German armoured counter @-@ attacks during 9 August but suffered many casualties , including most of their tanks . By 17 @.@ 00 hours what remained of Worthington Force had either been captured or forced to withdraw . 
 Because the column was so far from its intended objective , other units sent to relieve it could not find it . Eventually , another force captured Hill 195 in a model night attack on 10 August but the Germans had been given time to withdraw and reform a defensive line on the Laison River . By 11 August , the Anglo @-@ Canadian offensive had ended . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The early phases of the assault had been a great success , despite many casualties in the two Allied armoured divisions in their attempt to push towards Falaise . Formations of four divisions of the First Canadian Army held positions on Hill 195 , directly north of Falaise . At the same time , Allied forces managed to inflict upwards of 1 @,@ 500 more casualties on the German forces . 
 Major General Rod Keller was removed from his command of the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division , after having been badly wounded , when his headquarters were hit by American bombs . Keller 's poor performance in Totalize lost him the confidence of General Crerar and he received no further command positions for the remainder of the war . Simonds and Crerar mounted a follow @-@ up offensive , Operation Tractable , which took place between 14 and 21 August . On 21 August , the Falaise Pocket was closed when Canadian and Polish units made contact with US troops to the south , ending Commonwealth participation in the Battle of Normandy with a decisive Allied victory . 
 = Rhenium = 
 Rhenium is a chemical element with symbol Re and atomic number 75 . It is a silvery @-@ white , heavy , third @-@ row transition metal in group 7 of the periodic table . With an estimated average concentration of 1 part per billion ( ppb ) , rhenium is one of the rarest elements in the Earth 's crust . The free element has the third @-@ highest melting point and highest boiling point of any element , at 5 @,@ 869 K ( 10 @,@ 105 ° F ) . Rhenium resembles manganese and technetium chemically and is mainly obtained as a by @-@ product of the extraction and refinement of molybdenum and copper ores . Rhenium shows in its compounds a wide variety of oxidation states ranging from − 1 to + 7 . 
 Discovered in 1925 , rhenium was the last stable element to be discovered . It was named after the river Rhine in Europe . 
 Nickel @-@ based superalloys of rhenium are used in the combustion chambers , turbine blades , and exhaust nozzles of jet engines . These alloys contain up to 6 % rhenium , making jet engine construction the largest single use for the element , with the chemical industry 's catalytic uses being next @-@ most important . Because of the low availability relative to demand , rhenium is among the most expensive of metals , with an average price of approximately US $ 2 @,@ 750 per kilogram ( US $ 85 @.@ 53 per troy ounce ) as of April 2015 ; it is also of critical strategic military importance , for its use in high performance military jet and rocket engines . 
 = = History = = 
 Rhenium ( Latin : <unk> meaning : " Rhine " ) was the last @-@ discovered of the elements that have a stable isotope ( other new elements discovered in nature since then , such as francium , are radioactive ) . The existence of a yet @-@ undiscovered element at this position in the periodic table had been first predicted by Dmitri Mendeleev . Other calculated information was obtained by Henry Moseley in 1914 . It is generally considered to have been discovered by Walter Noddack , Ida <unk> , and Otto Berg in Germany . In 1925 they reported that they had detected the element in platinum ore and in the mineral columbite . They also found rhenium in gadolinite and molybdenite . In 1928 they were able to extract 1 g of the element by processing 660 kg of molybdenite . It was estimated in 1968 that 75 % of the rhenium metal in the United States was used for research and the development of refractory metal alloys . It took several years from that point before the superalloys became widely used . 
 In 1908 , Japanese chemist Masataka Ogawa announced that he had discovered the 43rd element and named it <unk> ( Np ) after Japan ( Nippon in Japanese ) . However , later analysis indicated the presence of rhenium ( element 75 ) , not element 43 . The symbol Np was later used for the element neptunium , and the name " nihonium " , also named after Japan , has been proposed for element 113 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Rhenium is a silvery @-@ white metal with one of the highest melting points of all elements , exceeded by only tungsten and carbon . It also has the highest boiling point of all elements . It is also one of the densest , exceeded only by platinum , iridium and osmium . Rhenium has a hexagonal close @-@ packed crystal structure , with lattice parameters a 
 = 276 @.@ 1 pm and c = 
 445 @.@ 6 pm . 
 Its usual commercial form is a powder , but this element can be consolidated by pressing and sintering in a vacuum or hydrogen atmosphere . This procedure yields a compact solid having a density above 90 % of the density of the metal . When annealed this metal is very ductile and can be bent , coiled , or rolled . Rhenium @-@ molybdenum alloys are superconductive at 10 K ; tungsten @-@ rhenium alloys are also superconductive around 4 – 8 K , depending on the alloy . Rhenium metal <unk> at 1 @.@ 697 ± 0 @.@ 006 K. 
 In bulk form and at room temperature and atmospheric pressure , the element resists alkalis , sulfuric acid , hydrochloric acid , dilute ( but not concentrated ) nitric acid , and aqua regia . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Rhenium has one stable isotope , rhenium @-@ 185 , which nevertheless occurs in minority abundance , a situation found only in two other elements ( indium and tellurium ) . Naturally occurring rhenium is only 37 @.@ 4 % <unk> , and 62 @.@ 6 % 187Re , which is unstable but has a very long half @-@ life ( ≈ 1010 years ) . This lifetime can be greatly affected by the charge state of rhenium atom . The beta decay of 187Re is used for rhenium @-@ osmium dating of ores . The available energy for this beta decay ( 2 @.@ 6 keV ) is one of the lowest known among all radionuclides . The isotope rhenium @-@ <unk> is notable as being one of the longest lived metastable isotopes with a half @-@ life of around 200 @,@ 000 years . There are twenty @-@ five other recognized radioactive isotopes of rhenium . 
 = = = Compounds = = = 
 Rhenium compounds are known for all the oxidation states between − 3 and + 7 except − 2 . The oxidation states + 7 , + 6 , + 4 , and + 2 are the most common . Rhenium is most available commercially as salts of perrhenate , including sodium and ammonium <unk> . These are white , water @-@ soluble compounds . 
 = = = = Halides and oxyhalides = = = = 
 The most common rhenium chlorides are <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The structures of these compounds often feature extensive Re @-@ Re bonding , which is characteristic of this metal in oxidation states lower than VII . Salts of [ <unk> ] 2 − feature a quadruple metal @-@ metal bond . Although the highest rhenium chloride features Re ( VI ) , fluorine gives the <unk> Re ( VII ) derivative rhenium heptafluoride . <unk> and iodides of rhenium are also well known . 
 Like tungsten and molybdenum , with which it shares chemical similarities , rhenium forms a variety of oxyhalides . The <unk> are most common , and include <unk> , <unk> . 
 = = = = Oxides and sulfides = = = = 
 The most common oxide is the volatile colourless Re2O7 . Rhenium trioxide <unk> adopts a perovskite @-@ like structure . Other oxides include <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The sulfides are <unk> and <unk> . <unk> salts can be converted to <unk> by the action of ammonium hydrosulfide . 
 = = = = Other compounds = = = = 
 Rhenium diboride ( <unk> ) is a hard compound having the hardness similar to that of tungsten carbide , silicon carbide , titanium diboride or zirconium diboride . 
 = = = = <unk> compounds = = = = 
 <unk> <unk> is the most common entry to <unk> chemistry . Its reduction with sodium amalgam gives Na [ Re ( CO ) 5 ] with rhenium in the formal oxidation state − 1 . <unk> <unk> can be oxidised with bromine to <unk> ( I ) : 
 Re2 ( CO ) 10 + Br2 → 2 Re ( CO ) <unk> 
 Reduction of this pentacarbonyl with zinc and acetic acid gives <unk> : 
 Re ( CO ) <unk> + Zn + <unk> → Re ( CO ) 5H + ZnBr ( OAc ) 
 <unk> trioxide ( " MTO " ) , <unk> is a volatile , colourless solid has been used as a catalyst in some laboratory experiments . It can be prepared by many routes , a typical method is the reaction of Re2O7 and <unk> : 
 Re2O7 + ( CH3 ) <unk> → <unk> + ( CH3 ) <unk> 
 Analogous alkyl and aryl derivatives are known . MTO catalyses for the oxidations with hydrogen peroxide . Terminal alkynes yield the corresponding acid or ester , internal alkynes yield <unk> , and alkenes give epoxides . MTO also catalyses the conversion of aldehydes and <unk> into an alkene . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 A distinctive derivative of rhenium is <unk> , originally thought to be the <unk> anion , Re − , but actually containing the <unk> − 
 9 anion in which the oxidation state of rhenium is + 7 . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 Rhenium is one of the rarest elements in Earth 's crust with an average concentration of 1 ppb ; other sources quote the number of 0 @.@ 5 ppb making it the 77th most abundant element in Earth 's crust . Rhenium is probably not found free in nature ( its possible natural occurrence is uncertain ) , but occurs in amounts up to 0 @.@ 2 % in the mineral molybdenite ( which is primarily molybdenum disulfide ) , the major commercial source , although single molybdenite samples with up to 1 @.@ 88 % have been found . Chile has the world 's largest rhenium reserves , part of the copper ore deposits , and was the leading producer as of 2005 . It was only recently that the first rhenium mineral was found and described ( in 1994 ) , a rhenium sulfide mineral ( <unk> ) condensing from a fumarole on Russia 's <unk> volcano , <unk> island , in the Kuril Islands . <unk> discharges up to 20 – 60 kg rhenium per year mostly in the form of rhenium disulfide . Named <unk> , this rare mineral commands high prices among collectors . 
 = = Production = = 
 Commercial rhenium is extracted from molybdenum roaster @-@ flue gas obtained from copper @-@ sulfide ores . Some molybdenum ores contain 0 @.@ 001 % to 0 @.@ 2 % rhenium . Rhenium ( VII ) oxide and <unk> acid readily dissolve in water ; they are leached from flue dusts and gasses and extracted by precipitating with potassium or ammonium chloride as the perrhenate salts , and purified by recrystallization . Total world production is between 40 and 50 tons / year ; the main producers are in Chile , the United States , Peru , and Poland . Recycling of used Pt @-@ Re catalyst and special alloys allow the recovery of another 10 tons per year . Prices for the metal rose rapidly in early 2008 , from $ 1000 – $ 2000 per kg in 2003 – 2006 to over $ 10 @,@ 000 in February 2008 . The metal form is prepared by reducing ammonium perrhenate with hydrogen at high temperatures : 
 2 <unk> + 7 H2 → 2 Re + 8 H2O + 2 NH3 
 = = Applications = = 
 Rhenium is added to high @-@ temperature superalloys that are used to make jet engine parts , using 70 % of the worldwide rhenium production . Another major application is in platinum – rhenium catalysts , which are primarily used in making lead @-@ free , high @-@ octane gasoline . 
 = = = Alloys = = = 
 The nickel @-@ based superalloys have improved creep strength with the addition of rhenium . The alloys normally contain 3 % or 6 % of rhenium . Second @-@ generation alloys contain 3 % ; these alloys were used in the engines for the F @-@ 15 and F @-@ 16 , whereas the newer single @-@ crystal third @-@ generation alloys contain 6 % of rhenium ; they are used in the F @-@ 22 and F @-@ 35 engines . Rhenium is also used in the superalloys , such as <unk> @-@ 4 ( 2nd gen ) and <unk> @-@ 10 ( 3rd gen ) that are used in industrial gas turbine engines like the GE <unk> . Rhenium can cause superalloys to become <unk> unstable , forming undesirable TCP ( topologically close packed ) phases . In 4th- and 5th @-@ generation superalloys , ruthenium is used to avoid this effect . Among others the new superalloys are EPM @-@ 102 ( with 3 % Ru ) and TMS @-@ 162 ( with 6 % Ru ) , as well as TMS @-@ 138 and TMS @-@ 174 . 
 For 2006 , the consumption is given as 28 % for General Electric , 28 % Rolls @-@ Royce plc and 12 % Pratt & Whitney , all for superalloys , whereas the use for catalysts only accounts for 14 % and the remaining applications use 18 % . In 2006 , 77 % of the rhenium consumption in the United States was in alloys . The rising demand for military jet engines and the constant supply made it necessary to develop superalloys with a lower rhenium content . For example , the newer CFM International CFM56 high @-@ pressure turbine ( HPT ) blades will use Rene <unk> with a rhenium content of 1 @.@ 5 % instead of Rene N5 with 3 % . 
 Rhenium improves the properties of tungsten . Tungsten @-@ rhenium alloys are more ductile at low temperature , allowing them to be more easily machined . The high @-@ temperature stability is also improved . The effect increases with the rhenium concentration , and therefore tungsten alloys are produced with up to 27 % of Re , which is the solubility limit . One application for the tungsten @-@ rhenium alloys is X @-@ ray sources . The high melting point of both compounds , together with the high atomic mass , makes them stable against the prolonged electron impact . Rhenium tungsten alloys are also applied as thermocouples to measure temperatures up to 2200 ° C. 
 The high temperature stability , low vapor pressure , good wear resistance and ability to withstand arc corrosion of rhenium are useful in self @-@ cleaning electrical contacts . In particular , the discharge occurring during the switching oxidizes the contacts . However , rhenium oxide Re2O7 has poor stability ( sublimes at ~ 360 ° C ) and therefore is removed during the discharge . 
 Rhenium has a high melting point and a low vapor pressure similar to tantalum and tungsten . Therefore , rhenium filaments exhibit a higher stability if the filament is operated not in vacuum , but in oxygen @-@ containing atmosphere . Those filaments are widely used in mass spectrometers , in ion gauges and in <unk> lamps in photography . 
 = = = Catalysts = = = 
 Rhenium in the form of rhenium @-@ platinum alloy is used as catalyst for catalytic reforming , which is a chemical process to convert petroleum refinery <unk> with low octane ratings into high @-@ octane liquid products . Worldwide , 30 % of catalysts used for this process contain rhenium . The olefin metathesis is the other reaction for which rhenium is used as catalyst . Normally Re2O7 on alumina is used for this process . Rhenium catalysts are very resistant to chemical poisoning from nitrogen , sulfur and phosphorus , and so are used in certain kinds of hydrogenation reactions . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 The isotopes 188Re and 186Re are radioactive and are used for treatment of liver cancer . They both have similar penetration depth in tissue ( 5 mm for 186Re and 11 mm for 188Re ) , but 186Re has advantage of longer lifetime ( 90 hours vs. 17 hours ) . 
 188Re is also being used experimentally in a novel treatment of pancreatic cancer where it is delivered by means of the bacterium Listeria monocytogenes . 
 Related by periodic trends , rhenium has a similar chemistry to that of technetium ; work done to label rhenium onto target compounds can often be translated to technetium . This is useful for <unk> , where it is difficult to work with technetium – especially the 99m isotope used in medicine – due to its expense and short half @-@ life . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Very little is known about the toxicity of rhenium and its compounds because they are used in very small amounts . Soluble salts , such as the rhenium halides or <unk> , could be hazardous due to elements other than rhenium or due to rhenium itself . Only a few compounds of rhenium have been tested for their acute toxicity ; two examples are potassium perrhenate and rhenium trichloride , which were injected as a solution into rats . The perrhenate had an LD50 value of 2800 mg / kg after seven days ( this is very low toxicity , similar to that of table salt ) and the rhenium trichloride showed LD50 of 280 mg / kg . 
 = New York State Route 380 = 
 New York State Route 380 ( NY 380 ) was a 23 @-@ mile ( 37 km ) north – south state highway in Chautauqua County , New York , in the United States . The southern terminus of the route was at an intersection with NY 60 in the town of Gerry . Its northern terminus was at a junction with NY 5 north of the village of Brocton in the town of Portland . In actuality , most of NY 380 was maintained by Chautauqua County ; the only part that was maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation was from NY 424 in Stockton to the west end of its overlap with U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) in Brocton . 
 NY 380 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . On April 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of NY 380 from NY 424 to the east end of its overlap with US 20 was transferred to Chautauqua County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the county and the state of New York . NY 380 was redesignated as County Route 380 ( CR 380 ) just over four months later on August 7 , 1980 . Unlike its state @-@ numbered predecessor , CR 380 continues south of NY 60 to the town of Busti , where it ends at a junction with Forest Avenue . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 380 began at the modern intersection of NY 60 and CR 44 in the Ellicott community of Kimball Stand . The route proceeded west along modern CR 44 to what is now CR 380 , where it turned north to join the current alignment of CR 380 . NY 380 left the vicinity of Kimball Stand and headed northwest along the base of a valley surrounding Cassadaga Creek to the hamlet of <unk> , where it intersected with CR 59 and CR 48 . After leaving <unk> , Route 380 went northward into the town of Ellery . Here , it intersected CR 52 and CR 66 in Redbird , a community in the extreme northeastern corner of the town . 
 The route continued past Redbird into the town of Stockton , where it left Cassadaga Creek and headed uphill as it curved to the west . In Centralia , NY 380 met CR 54 and CR 57 at a four @-@ way intersection . Here , NY 380 turned back to the north and descended into another valley surrounding the Bear Lake Outlet . The route crossed the outlet and followed the waterway into the hamlet of Stockton , centered on the intersection between NY 380 and NY 424 ( now part of CR 58 ) . 
 NY 380 continued to run along the Bear Lake Outlet to a junction known as Kelly Corners southeast of Bear Lake . At this point , NY 380 turned westward and crossed over the outlet on its way to a more isolated area of the town . It intersected CR 37 before curving back to the north and passing through the town of Portland on its way into the village of Brocton . Here , NY 380 overlapped with US 20 for about 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) before exiting the village . NY 380 crossed over the New York State Thruway ( Interstate 90 ) just before it came to an end at an intersection with NY 5 on the southern shore of Lake Erie . Lake Erie State Park is about a few hundred feet up the road on NY 5 eastbound . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 380 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York and extended from NY 60 north of Jamestown to NY 5 north of Brocton , a routing that remained in place up to and through the 1970s . Although the highway was signed as a state route , most of the route was actually maintained by Chautauqua County . The only section of the route that was maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation was the portion between NY 424 in Stockton and US 20 in Brocton . NY 380 's short overlap with US 20 in Brocton was also state @-@ maintained . 
 On April 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of NY 380 's lone independent , state @-@ maintained portion from NY 424 to the east end of its overlap with US 20 was transferred from the state of New York to Chautauqua County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . The county also assumed maintenance of NY 424 , NY 428 , and two reference routes in Dunkirk and Fredonia in the swap . In exchange , the state received ownership and maintenance of NY 394 between US 20 and NY 5 in the town of Westfield , US 62 from NY 60 to NY 394 east of the city of Jamestown , and Forest Avenue from the Pennsylvania state line in Busti to NY 60 in Jamestown . Forest Avenue became NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 Although the entirety of NY 380 was now maintained by Chautauqua County , save for the portion that overlapped US 20 in Brocton , the NY 380 designation remained in place until August 7 , 1980 , when it was redesignated as CR 380 . Unlike NY 380 , CR 380 continues south from the hamlet of Kimball Stand , intersecting NY 394 in Falconer and passing through the town of Stillwater to the town of Busti , where it ends at Forest Avenue in the hamlet of Busti 15 miles ( 24 km ) south of Kimball Stand . The highways that comprise the " extension " of the 380 designation were already county routes prior to 1980 . A small portion of NY 380 's routing in Kimball Stand is now part of CR 44 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Chautauqua County . 
 = Edgar Towner = 
 Edgar Thomas Towner , VC , MC ( 19 April 1890 – 18 August 1972 ) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . A lieutenant in the Australian Imperial Force during the First World War , Towner was awarded the Victoria Cross in 1918 for his actions during an attack on Mont St. Quentin on the Western Front . 
 Born in Queensland to a farming family , Towner enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force in 1915 . Posted to the transport section of the 25th Battalion , he served in Egypt until his unit was sent to the Western Front . He then transferred to the 2nd Machine Gun Battalion where he was commissioned as a lieutenant and twice mentioned in despatches for his leadership . During June 1918 , Towner led a machine gun section in attack near Morlancourt and assisted the infantry in reaching its objectives under heavy fire , for which he was awarded the Military Cross . In September , again commanding a machine gun section , he was involved in the Allied counteroffensive that broke the German lines at Mont St. Quentin and Péronne . Fighting for thirty hours after being wounded , his " conspicuous bravery , initiative and devotion to duty " earned him the Victoria Cross , which was presented by King George V in April 1919 . 
 Discharged in August , Towner returned to Australia . He was appointed a director of the <unk> Pastoral Company , and briefly re @-@ enlisted during the Second World War , when he was promoted to major . A keen geographer , he was awarded the Dr Thomson Foundation Gold Medal in 1956 for his geographical work . Unmarried , he died in 1972 at the age of 82 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Edgar Towner was born on 19 April 1890 , at Glencoe Station near Blackall , Queensland , to Edgar Thomas Towner , a grazing farmer , and his Irish wife Greta ( née <unk> ) . He was educated at Blackall State School and in Rockhampton , although he also received private instruction from his mother . After leaving school Towner worked on his father 's grazing property until 1912 , when he acquired land of his own . He named the property " Valparaiso " and worked on its development until the outbreak of the First World War . 
 = = First World War = = 
 On 4 January 1915 , Towner enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force . Assigned to the transport section of the 25th Battalion as a private , he embarked aboard HMAT Aeneas from Brisbane on 29 June , bound for Egypt . The troopship arrived in August , and the battalion spent the rest of the month training in the desert before transferring to the Gallipoli Peninsula . Towner , however , remained in Egypt with the army 's transportation elements . 
 Following the Allied evacuation of Gallipoli , the 25th Battalion returned to Egypt in December 1915 , where Towner rejoined its ranks on 10 January 1916 . He was promoted to sergeant on 1 February , before departing with the battalion at Alexandria the following month to join the British Expeditionary Force on the Western Front . Disembarking at Marseilles , the unit was the first Australian battalion to arrive in France . 
 In July 1916 , the 25th Battalion took part in its first major Western Front action at the Battle of Pozières , part of the Somme offensive . The battalion suffered 785 casualties between 25 July and 7 August . It was briefly transferred to a " quieter sector of the front in Belgium " before returning to action on the Somme in October . On 3 November , Towner was transferred to the Australian Machine Gun Corps and was assigned to the 2nd Machine Gun Battalion of the 2nd Australian Division , and was allotted to the 7th Brigade 's Machine Gun Company . He was commissioned as a second lieutenant fifteen days later , and assumed command of the battalion 's transport section . 
 Promoted to lieutenant on 24 February 1917 , Towner 's service with his transport section earned him praise for his " devotion to duty and consistent good work " , and on 9 April he was Mentioned in the Despatches of Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig . Towner was granted leave to the United Kingdom in January 1918 . He received a second Mention in Despatches on 7 April 1918 , the notification of which was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 28 May . 
 On the night of 10 / 11 June 1918 , Towner was in command of a machine gun section during an attack to the south of Morlancourt . One of the first to reach the objective , he deployed his section and got its guns into action " very quickly " . By using captured German machine guns he was able to increase his section 's fire and provide support to the company on his right as it advanced , seized , and consolidated its position . During the morning of 11 June , one of the posts held by the Australian infantry was blown in by German artillery ; braving machine gun and sniper fire , Towner went out in daylight to help reorganise the post . Cited for his " cheerful and untiring attitude " and for " set [ ing ] a conspicuous example " , Towner was awarded the Military Cross for his actions . The announcement of the award and accompanying citation was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 24 September 1918 . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 On 1 September 1918 , Towner was in command of No. 3 Section of the 7th Machine Gun Company during an attack on Mont St. Quentin , near Péronne . Armed with four Vickers machine guns , the section was attached to the right flank of the 24th Australian Infantry Battalion , whose principal objective was to seize the summit of Mont St. Quentin . To accomplish this , the battalion would have to advance through the village of <unk> before moving down to the Péronne road . The Australians began their advance at 06 : 00 behind an artillery screen , with Towner 's section covering a front of 1 @,@ 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 500 yd ) . Visibility was limited by rain , and Australian casualties soon began to mount . Locating a German machine gun that was causing heavy losses among the advancing troops , Towner rushed the position and single @-@ handedly killed the crew with his revolver . Having captured the gun , he then turned it on the Germans . 
 Once <unk> had fallen , the 24th Battalion continued to the Péronne road . However , the Germans had occupied a copse of trees and put up strong resistance , halting the advance . German troops were observed massing for a counter @-@ attack , so Towner moved forward with several of his men , two Vickers guns , and the captured German gun , and brought the assembling Germans under concentrated fire , inflicting many casualties . Attempting to retire , a party of twenty @-@ five German soldiers were cut off by Towner 's guns and taken prisoner . Under heavy incoming fire , Towner then scouted over open terrain to locate advantageous positions from which his guns could offer further support . When he moved his section forward , the machine gunners were able to engage more groups of German soldiers ; their aggressive action enabled the advance to be renewed , and the battalion attained the cover of a sunken section of the Péronne road . However , on rejoining them Towner found that his section was growing short of ammunition , so he made his way back across the fire @-@ swept ground and located a German machine gun , which he brought forward along with several boxes of ammunition . This he brought into action " in full view of the enemy " ; his effective fire forced the Germans to retire further , and allowed one of the stalled Australian flanks to push ahead . 
 German machine gunners had occupied a commanding vantage overlooking the sunken road , and began to rain down heavy fire around Towner 's position . One of the bullets struck his helmet , inflicting a gaping wound to his scalp . Refusing to be evacuated for medical treatment , Towner continued firing his gun as the German pressure increased and the situation grew critical . Eventually the Australian infantry were forced to retire a short distance , but with all its crew having become casualties , one gun was left behind . Alone , Towner dashed out over no man 's land and retrieved the weapon . With this gun he " continued to engage the enemy whenever they appeared " , putting a German machine gun out of action with his accurate fire . 
 Throughout the night , Towner frequented the front lines and " continued to fight and ... inspire his men " . He provided supporting fire for the 21st Australian Infantry Battalion as they assaulted a heavily fortified crater on Mont St. Quentin 's summit , and repeatedly reconnoitred the German position to reported on troop movements . The next morning his section assisted in repulsing a large German counterattack before Towner was finally evacuated with exhaustion — thirty hours after being wounded . Initially admitted to the 41st Casualty Clearing Station , he was transported by train to the 2nd Red Cross Hospital at Rouen . For his actions during the battle , Towner was awarded the Victoria Cross — the third of six Australians to receive the medal during the fighting around Mont St. Quentin and Péronne . 
 The full citation for Towner 's Victoria Cross appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette on 14 December 1918 , reading : 
 War Officer , 14th December , 1918 . 
 His Majesty the KING has been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officers , Warrant Officer , Non @-@ commissioned Officers and Men : — 
 Lt. Edgar Thomas Towner , M.C. , 2nd Bn . , Aus . M.G. Corps . 
