 For most conspicuous bravery , initiative and devotion to duty on 1st September , 1918 , in the attack on Mont St. Quentin , near Peronne , when in charge of four Vickers guns . During the early stages of the advance he located and captured , single @-@ handed , an enemy machine @-@ gun which was causing casualties , and by turning it on the enemy inflicted severe losses . 
 Subsequently , by the skilful , tactical handling of his guns , he cut off and captured twenty @-@ five of the enemy . 
 Later , by fearless reconnaissance under heavy fire , and by the energy , foresight and promptitude with which he brought fire to bear on various enemy groups , he gave valuable support to the infantry advance . 
 Again , when short of ammunition , he secured an enemy machine @-@ gun , which he mounted and fired in full view of the enemy , causing the enemy to retire further , and enabling our infantry to advance . Under intense fire , although wounded , he maintained the fire of this gun at a very critical period . 
 During the following night he steadied and gave valuable support to a small detached post , and by his coolness and cheerfulness <unk> the men in a great degree . 
 Throughout the night he kept close watch by personal reconnaissance on the enemy movements , and was evacuated exhausted thirty hours after being wounded . 
 The valour and resourcefulness of Lt. Towner undoubtedly saved a very critical situation , and contributed largely to the success of the attack . 
 = = = Later war service = = = 
 Following his recuperation , Towner was granted three weeks leave to England from 14 September 1918 . He rejoined his unit on 12 October and , for six days , was attached to the School of Instruction . Following thirteen days leave in France during late November , he returned again to the 2nd Machine Gun Battalion on 12 December . 
 On 10 April 1919 , Towner attended an investiture ceremony in the ballroom of Buckingham Palace , during which he was decorated with his Victoria Cross and Military Cross by King George V. Three weeks later he boarded HT <unk> , bound for Australia . Disembarking at Sydney on 14 June 1919 he made his way to Brisbane , and was discharged from the Australian Imperial Force on 16 August 1919 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Towner resettled on his property , but was forced to sell Valparaiso in 1922 after he was unable to raise sufficient funds to purchase livestock . He spent the next three years working as a jackaroo , until he entered into a partnership on <unk> station , a property located near Longreach , in 1925 . Towner eventually bought out his partner and assumed another partnership with the <unk> Pastoral Company , <unk> . He was later appointed a director of the company . 
 With the Second World War looming , Towner enlisted in the Citizens Military Force on 8 August 1939 and was appointed a captain to the 26th Battalion . After a period as a company commander he was promoted to temporary major and second @-@ in @-@ command of the battalion , under fellow Victoria Cross recipient Lieutenant Colonel Harry Murray . However , Towner retired from the army due to ill health on 21 February 1942 , and returned to his property at <unk> . 
 A keen geographer , Towner would often disappear into the bush for weeks on end , for study or exploration . As a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society of Australia and member of the Royal Historical Society of New South Wales , he took a particular interest in researching the life of the explorer Sir Thomas Mitchell . In 1946 , he successfully lobbied the Australian Government to issue a postage stamp commemorating the centenary of Mitchell 's discoveries in central Queensland . He addressed the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia in Brisbane in 1955 , and was awarded the Dr Thomson Foundation Gold Medal for his geographical work the following year . Towner 's address was published in 1957 , in a booklet entitled Lake Eyre and its Tributaries . 
 Towner never married , and on 18 August 1972 died at Longreach Base Hospital at the age of 82 . His funeral took place three days later , with a large number of Longreach citizens lining the streets to see his coffin pass by atop a gun carriage . Following a service at St Andrew 's Church , he was buried with full military honours at the Longreach Town Cemetery . By the time of his death , Towner had amassed an 80 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 320 km2 ) farm containing 25 @,@ 000 sheep . He remains the highest @-@ decorated serviceman from Queensland . On 24 April 2009 , a statue of Towner crafted by Melbourne sculptor William <unk> was unveiled in his birth town of Blackall . Inspired by an essay written by a local schoolboy , the community raised A $ 80 @,@ 000 to commission a monument in Towner 's memory . 
 = 1959 Mexico hurricane = 
 The 1959 Mexico hurricane is the deadliest eastern Pacific tropical cyclone on record . First observed south of Mexico on October 23 , the cyclone tracked northwest . It intensified into a Category 3 hurricane on October 25 and reached Category 4 intensity the following day . After turning toward the northeast , the hurricane maintained Category 4 status and made landfall near Manzanillo , Mexico . The system continued on that trajectory prior to dissipating the next day . 
 Impact from the hurricane was severe and widespread . Initially forecast to remain offshore , the system curved northeast and moved ashore , becoming one of Mexico 's worst natural disasters at the time . Up to 150 boats were submerged . Countless homes in Colima and Jalisco were damaged or destroyed , large portions of the states were inaccessible by flash flooding , and hundreds of residents were stranded . All coconut plantations were blown down during the storm , leaving thousands without work and instating fear that it would take the economy years to recover . Torrential rainfall across mountain terrain contributed to numerous mudslides that caused hundreds of fatalities . In the aftermath of the cyclone , convoys delivering aid were hindered by the destruction . Residents were vaccinated to prevent the spread of disease . Overall , the hurricane inflicted at least $ 280 million ( 1959 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 22 , a low pressure area was present south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec , having originated out of an area of disturbed weather in the region the day before . That day , two ships reported gale @-@ force winds , suggesting that a tropical storm formed by 12 : 00 UTC . Moving west @-@ northwestward parallel to the southwest coast of Mexico , the system steadily intensified , reaching hurricane status by late on October 23 . The storm continued to intensify , although there were few ships in the path to record the intensity until October 26 . During that time , interpolation of observations suggests that the storm attained major hurricane intensity – a Category 3 on the modern Saffir @-@ Simpson scale – with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) on October 25 . 
 On October 26 , the hurricane turned abruptly to the northeast toward the Mexican coast . At 00 : 00 UTC on October 27 , a nearby ship recorded winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) , confirming the increase in intensity . Six hours later , another ship recorded winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . At around 12 : 00 UTC on October 27 , the hurricane made landfall just northwest of Manzanillo , Colima , with an eye 13 mi ( 20 km ) in diameter . The Mary Barbara – a ship in Manzanillo Harbor – estimated winds of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) , which was the basis for the previous estimated landfall intensity of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) , which was later determined to be an overestimate . The same ship reported a minimum barometric pressure of 958 mbar ( 28 @.@ 3 inHg ) in the southeastern periphery of the eyewall ; this , in conjunction with other nearby readings , suggested a minimum central pressure of 955 mbar ( 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) . A reanalysis in 2016 indicated that the hurricane 's peak intensity at landfall was 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) , based on uncertainties in the wind estimates , the central pressure , as well as the storm 's small size and slow movement . The hurricane rapidly weakened over the mountainous terrain of southwestern Mexico . Within 12 hours of landfall , the system weakened to tropical storm status , and on October 28 the storm dissipated . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Thousands of people were unprepared for the storm . Thus , the system was dubbed " a sneak hurricane " . After passing well offshore from Acapulco , it was forecast to head out to sea . Instead , it recurved east and made landfall . 
 The hurricane had devastating effects on the places it hit . It killed at least 1 @,@ 000 people directly , and a total of 1 @,@ 800 people . At that time , it was Mexico 's worst natural disaster in recent times . Most of the destruction was in Colima and Jalisco . A preliminary estimate of property damage was $ 280 million ( 1959 USD ) . 
 The storm sank three merchant ships , and two other vessels . On one ship , the Sinaloa , 21 of 38 hands went down . On another , the El Caribe , all hands were lost . As many as 150 total boats were sunk . 
 A quarter of the homes in <unk> , Jalisco , were totally destroyed , leaving many homeless . In Manzanillo , Colima , 40 percent of all homes were destroyed , and four ships in the harbor were sunk . Large portions of Colima and Jalisco were isolated by flooding . Hundreds of people were stranded . Minatitlán , Colima , suffered especially , as 800 people out of its population of 1000 were dead or missing , according to a message sent to President Adolfo López Mateos . In Colima , all coconut plantations were blown down and thousands of people were left out of work . That state 's economy was damaged enough that officials thought it would take years to recover . 
 The hurricane also dumped heavy rains along its path . This water @-@ logged the hills near Minatitlán , and contributed to huge mudslide late on October 29 that claimed 800 victims . The slide uncovered hundreds of venomous scorpions and snakes , which killed tens more people in the aftermath . Additional hordes of scorpions were driven from their nests when the adobe walls crumbled away . The Governor of Colima , Rodolfo Chávez Carrillo and his wife issued a plea for venom inoculations afterwards . In some places , the mud was 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) deep . Water supplies were badly polluted , both by debris and dead bodies . 
 = = Aftermath and records = = 
 In the aftermath , air rescue operations were conducted , but the destruction of roads in the area hindered convoys carrying aid . Planes also made supply drops , but rescue operations were hindered by broken roads and rails . Survivors were vaccinated against typhoid and tetanus . Part of Manzanillo was placed under quarantine . 
 The cyclone was the deadliest east Pacific hurricane . Its death totals are higher than any other known Pacific hurricane , including Hurricanes Paul and Liza . 
 = I Wanna Go = 
 " I Wanna Go " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her seventh studio album , Femme Fatale ( 2011 ) . It was written and produced by Max Martin and Shellback , with additional writing by Savan Kotecha . Spears first posted on her Twitter account a link to a clip of the song in February 2011 , a month prior to the album 's release . Following a poll on her official website , " I Wanna Go " was chosen as the third single of the album , and Jive Records released it on June 13 , 2011 . 
 " I Wanna Go " is a dance @-@ pop and Hi @-@ NRG song that features a heavy bassline and drum fills reminiscent of English rock band New Order . The pre @-@ chorus has a whistled hook that received comparisons to the music of Bob Sinclar and Frankie Knuckles . The lyrics of " I Wanna Go " feature Spears singing about losing inhibitions . The song received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Some praised it for being effective and highlighted its hook , while others dismissed the processed vocals . The song was treated with different remixes , including a Bollywood mix with guest vocals by Sonu Nigam and another one by DJ Frank E and Alex Dreamz . 
 After the release of Femme Fatale , " I Wanna Go " charted due to digital sales in the upper end of the US Billboard Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100 , and also topped the South Korean International chart . Following its release as a single , the song reached the top ten in several music markets , including Canada , France , Finland and the United States . However , it became one of her lowest peaking singles in countries such as Australia and New Zealand , and was the first single of her career that failed to chart inside the top 100 in the United Kingdom . In the United States , " I Wanna Go " made Femme Fatale the first album by Spears to have three top ten singles . 
 An accompanying music video for the song , directed by Chris Marrs Piliero , premiered on June 22 , 2011 . It depicts Spears daydreaming at a press conference about a series of events , including being chased by paparazzi cyborgs and being rescued by actor Guillermo Díaz . Piliero described the video as " a ridiculous , exaggerated rumor about her life and career " . The video references the films Half Baked , Crossroads , Terminator 2 : Judgment Day and Michael Jackson 's Thriller . It received positive reviews from critics , who praised its fun spirit . Spears has performed " I Wanna Go " on her Femme Fatale Tour ( 2011 ) and during her Las Vegas residency show Britney : Piece of Me ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Background and artwork = = 
 " I Wanna Go " was written and produced by Max Martin and Shellback , with additional writing by Savan Kotecha . The song was written in 2009 and registered on Broadcast Music Incorporated under the legal title " I I I Wanna Go O O " . On February 22 , 2011 , Spears posted on her Twitter account a link to a 29 @-@ second clip of the song , while calling Martin " amazing " . In an interview with Rolling Stone , Spears stated that the song 's signature whistle gets her " every time [ she ] hears it " , adding that Martin 's melodies are " Incredible ... Who would have thought of that ? There is nobody I feel more comfortable collaborating with in the studio . " Kotecha told Digital Spy in May 2011 that the song was likely a contender for third single due to positive reaction . On May 11 , 2011 , a poll was launched on <unk> in which fans could choose the third single of the album . Two days later , " I Wanna Go " was officially announced as the third single from Femme Fatale by Jive Records through a press release after winning the poll . The cover art was revealed on June 6 , 2011 , and featured Spears on set of the music video , wearing colored hair extensions and a top with a skeletal Mickey Mouse . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " I Wanna Go " is a dance @-@ pop and hi @-@ NRG song , which features a heavy bassline and drum fills ; the latter are reminiscent of English band New Order 's song " Blue Monday " ( 1983 ) . Spears squeals and chuckles throughout the song , and her vocals are processed . In the pre @-@ chorus , she draws out the " e " ' s in lines such as " Shame on me / To need release / <unk> . " The section also has a whistled hook , which was compared by Rich Juzwiak of The Village Voice to the music of French recording artist Bob Sinclar and American recording artist Frankie Knuckles . In the chorus , Spears stutters " I @-@ I @-@ I wanna go @-@ o @-@ o / All the wa @-@ a @-@ ay / Taking out my freak tonight " . Ryan Brockington of the New York Post compared " I Wanna Go " to the music of her fifth studio album Blackout ( 2007 ) . In the lyrics , Spears sings about losing inhibitions , as evident in lines such as " I @-@ I @-@ I wanna sho @-@ o @-@ ow / All the dir @-@ ir @-@ <unk> / I got ( sic ) running through my mind . " , while playfully apologizing for her need for sexual release . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times stated that she sings about " the scrum that surrounds her " in " Lately people got me all tied up / There 's a countdown waiting for me to erupt " . According to the sheet music published by EMI Music Publishing , " I Wanna Go " is written in the key of D minor , with an electropop beat infused metronome of 138 beats per minute . Spears ' vocals range from the low note of D3 to the high note of D5 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " I Wanna Go " received generally positive reviews from music critics . A reviewer for Samesame.com.au called " I Wanna Go " Spears ' best song since " Toxic " , and added that " I ’ d go so far as to say that it is probably the best song that she has ever recorded . [ ... ] How the decision was made that ' Hold It Against Me ' would be a better first single over this is baffling . " Parker Bruce of the Washington Square News stated that the song functions as " a sort of formal declaration and mission statement " for Femme Fatale , saying that " It is not an innovative song , but it is fantastically effective and endlessly enticing with its liberating , toss @-@ your @-@ cares @-@ away , dance @-@ like @-@ a @-@ complete – and @-@ utter @-@ fool cathartic chorus , repeated words and typically saucy Britney lyrics . " The Daily Collegian writer Hannah Rishel said " I Wanna Go " would have been " another good lead single " , while The Washington Times 's Andrew Leahey said that along with " Till the World Ends " , they are " bass @-@ heavy tributes to club culture . " 
 Robert Copsey of Digital Spy called it " anthemic " and noted the song would become a future single . Rich Juzwiak of The Village Voice called " I Wanna Go " the highlight of the album , and said " get ready for [ it ] to score your summer . " However , Juzwiak went on to note that Spears ' vocals are heavily manipulated to maximize the chorus 's potential , even though " the joy she sings about is palpable . " The Chicago Sun @-@ Times journalist Thomas Conner also noted that the singer 's vocals were processed to the point " these songs could be sung by anyone " , exemplifying " ' I Wanna Go ' tweaks her up so high she could be Jackie Evancho . " Andy Gill of The Independent also criticized the singer 's vocals on Femme Fatale , stating that they sounded more programmed than natural , with " even the little whistling hook in ' I Wanna Go ' has a synthetic character about it . " 
 Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine noted that " If not for its infectious pre @-@ chorus whistle , ' I Wanna Go ' would be just another song off the Max Martin assembly line " . The Guardian contributor Alexis Petridis gave the song a negative review , and said that although most of tracks of the album are " genuinely exciting [ ... ] there 's certainly some unremarkable stuff on offer , notably ' Seal It With a Kiss ' and ' I Wanna Go . " Evan Sawdey of PopMatters also noted that " I Wanna Go " is the point of the album in which " things stop being fun and start becoming intensely repetitious " , criticizing specifically " [ the ] utterly stupid set of syllables repeated ad nauseam for no reason whatsoever ? [ .. ] the ' ably ' part of ' uncontrollably ' gets recycled far beyond the point where it just sounds stupid . " In September 2011 , " I Wanna Go " topped Rolling Stone 's reader 's poll of The Best Songs of the Summer . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the chart issue of April 3 , 2011 , " I Wanna Go " debuted at number 73 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , and at number 52 on the Hot Digital Songs component chart due to strong digital sales . The song debuted at number 60 on the Canadian Hot 100 on the chart issue of April 16 , 2011 . It also debuted at number one on South Korea 's <unk> International Chart , and remained on the same position for three consecutive weeks . After its release as a single , the song debuted at number 37 on the Billboard Pop Songs chart on the chart issue of July 2 , 2011 . It also re @-@ entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 89 . The following week , it surged up to number 29 on the Hot 100 due to the premiere of the music video , with sales of 67 @,@ 000 copies ( up 282 % from the previous week ) . " I Wanna Go " became Spears 's 21 top @-@ forty single , the third @-@ highest female total since her first week on the chart on November 21 , 1998 , and only behind Taylor Swift with 27 and Rihanna with 22 . 
 On the chart issue of August 4 , 2011 , the song climbed from number 11 to number nine on the Billboard Hot 100 , making Femme Fatale the first album by Spears to achieve three top ten singles . It became her fifth top ten single in a row , and her twelfth top ten hit overall , the third @-@ highest female total since her first week on the chart , behind Rihanna with eighteen and Beyoncé Knowles with fifteen . " I Wanna Go " peaked at number seven on the Hot 100 on the chart issue of August 24 , 2011 . The song peaked atop the Pop Songs chart on September 24 , 2011 , becoming Spears ' sixth single to top the chart , and setting a record for the longest span of number @-@ one singles by an artist ( 12 years , seven months and four days ) . Spears scored her first number one single on the chart with " ... Baby One More Time " on the chart issue of February 20 , 1999 . She also tied Mariah Carey and Knowles for the third @-@ highest female total of number @-@ one singles . As of March 2015 , " I Wanna Go " has sold 1 @,@ 770 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States . It is her eighth best @-@ selling digital single in the country . 
 In Australia , " I Wanna Go " debuted at number 33 on the ARIA Singles Chart on the chart issue of July 10 , 2011 . It peaked at number 31 three weeks later , on July 31 , 2011 . The song became the third lowest peaking single of Spears ' career in the country , after " Radar " ( 2009 ) at 46 and " From the Bottom of My Broken Heart " ( 1999 ) at 37 . It spent nine weeks on the chart . It has since been certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of 35 @,@ 000 units . In New Zealand , the song debuted at number 25 on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and peaked at number 22 the following week . It became her lowest peaking single since " Radar " , and her sixth single to not enter the top twenty . The song spent 10 weeks on the chart . On July 7 , 2011 , " I Wanna Go " debuted at 41 on the Irish Singles Chart . It became her first single to not chart in the inside the top 100 in the United Kingdom , peaking at number 138 on the chart issue of June 9 , 2011 . Across Europe , the song has peaked at number five on Belgium ( Flanders ) and France ; number 10 in Finland ; the top twenty in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Norway and Denmark ; and the top forty in Czech Republic and Sweden . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The music video for " I Wanna Go " was directed by Chris Marrs Piliero and filmed in Los Angeles , California . Spears first contacted Piliero and asked him to put together a concept for the video . The main idea for Marrs Piliero came from the lyric " be a little inappropriate " , which stood out for him , but he did not want to make a video about sexual inappropriateness . Piliero wrote the opening press conference scene as a tribute to the film Half Baked ( 1998 ) , which he is a fan of . He explained , " That scene resonates with everyone as the epitome of the greatest way to quit your job , and just blow people off . [ ... ] I felt like that would just be such a perfect way for her to tell the reporters to eff off . " Marrs Piliero first asked actor Kellan Lutz to co @-@ star the clip with Spears ; however , Lutz turned down the role , saying that " there were a couple of weird things about the part that didn 't make sense " , including the scene where he was going to pour milk on himself . Piliero then thought of asking one of the stars of Half Baked , Guillermo Díaz , to be part of the video , explaining that it " would make it come full circle . " Piliero watched all of Spears ' videos and wanted to pull what he loved from them , but also give it something fresh . Piliero felt that all of her references to the paparazzi in her previous videos had been more of a statement than an action , and for " I Wanna Go " , he wanted her to have the opportunity to fight back . 
 Piliero had the concept nearly finished by the time he met with Spears . Both wanted to explore fun ways for Spears to be inappropriate in the video , who had several ideas , such as a cop frisking her . Having seen Spears on How I Met Your Mother and Saturday Night Live , Piliero felt that none of her videos had really taken advantage of her comedic timing , saying , " She never had a music video where she could show her acting chops and have fun with comedy while being super badass . That was my goal from day one : I wanted her to be funny , badass and super cool . " . During the first day of the shoot , he requested Spears to " have as much fun as possible over these next two days " . <unk> also stated that the Crossroads ( 2002 ) reference " [ i ] s a fun Easter egg for fans . Plus , Die Hard 2 : Die Harder is the most ridiculously awesome way to title a sequel . It just felt like the right thing to do . When Britney saw it , she loved it . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins at a press conference where Spears , wearing a cropped Mickey Mouse top ( paying homage to her days in The New Mickey Mouse Club ) , is being asked inappropriate questions by news reporters , such as " Is it true you banned junk food , smiles , candy , sunshine and laughter from your Femme Fatale tour ? " Angered by the questions , Spears replies ( albeit censored ) : " Fuck you , fuck you , fuck you , you 're cool , fuck you – I 'm out " , referencing a scene from the film Half Baked . After leaving the press conference , Spears walks out of the building and out into the street , wearing a white leather jacket and a black skirt with matching with studded combat boots . She signs a fan 's copy of Femme Fatale and then blows a kiss to a baby as he whistles the melody of the chorus . As Spears walks along the street , she flashes several men , including a policeman ( played by Adrien Galo ) . As a criminal offence , the policeman searches Spears , feeling up and down her legs , as she is bent over a car . Spears later walks away from the policeman , swinging handcuffs around her finger while he buttons his shirt . 
 She continues walking down the street , where she smashes the camera of a paparazzi photographer who takes pictures of her . More paparazzi appear as she runs away and jumps on top of a taxi . Spears then stands atop of it , wielding the microphone as a weapon against the paparazzi who are <unk> her . Across the street , a marquee of the cinema besides her reads Crossroads 2 : Cross Harder , referencing her film debut Crossroads . After all the paparazzi , revealed to be cyborgs , have been knocked to the floor , they start crawling back with their eyes glowing red and their faces bursting with wires , reminiscent to a scene in Terminator 2 : Judgment Day ( 1991 ) . A car suddenly pulls up near to Spears , and the driver Guillermo Díaz tells her to get inside . In the next scene , Spears dances in the passenger seat in a pink bikini top , as Guillermo drives . He attempts to drink some milk while driving but pours the carton of milk over his face . His chest starts to spark , and Spears pulls open his jacket to reveal that he too is a cyborg . The video then cuts back to the press conference , indicating that Spears was daydreaming , due to being asked monotonous and inappropriate questions . Guillermo steps in and leads Spears out of the room . Then , he turns to the camera with his eyes glowing red , and his laugh is heard , referencing Michael Jackson 's Thriller ( 1983 ) . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 On June 17 , 2011 , Jive Records announced through a press release that an exclusive 30 @-@ second teaser would premiere on June 19 , 2011 , on Bravo 's Watch What Happens : Live and on VEVO simultaneously . The full length video was revealed to premiere on MTV and VEVO on June 22 , 2011 . Following the premiere , the video was played hourly on MTV , during video hours , and on VH1 's Best Morning Buzz Live . Jen McDonnell of Dose said , " damn if [ the video ] doesn 't rock . [ ... ] It all sounds very weird – and it is . But it 's also buckets of fun . " Megan Gibson of Time stated that the video is " random , weird and intended to be funny " and that despite the lack of dancing " Britney seems pleasantly energetic and spunky in ' I Wanna Go ' which is a comforting change from her usual blank @-@ eyed look . " Sarah Anne Hughes of The Washington Post commented that the video " shows a much livelier Britney than the world has seen since the ' Toxic ' years . " 
 Jason Lipshutz of Billboard said that the video continues the visual representation of Spears ' relationship with the paparazzi and her public image , as previously seen in the videos for " Everytime " ( 2004 ) and " Piece of Me " ( 2008 ) , but " the new clip is arguably her most playful yet . " Amos Barshad of New York stated the video " is awe @-@ inspiring in almost exactly the way it intended to be " and that " the spirit of the song , as reflected in the video , is that of free will and dream fulfillment in the face of a repressive society . " Jocelyn Vena of MTV commented that " Britney displays the sass and charm fans fell in love with a decade ago during performance shots , where she flirts with the camera , her eyes as big and wide as her smile . " An editor for VH1 called the video " fan @-@ freakin ' <unk> " and compared it favorably to the music video for Katy Perry 's " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " ( 2011 ) , saying that " they share a silly temperament , a flirty star , and funny cameos . Upon closer examination , though , Britney 's video blows Katy Perry 's out of the water . " 
 Devin Brown of CBS News called it her best video from Femme Fatale , and added that unlike " Piece of Me " , " ' I Wanna Go ' offers a bevy of pop culture references meant to ridicule the rumors about the star – and finally no ' dancing . ' " An editor from Rolling Stone said " The weirdness seems very calculated , but that doesn 't make the video any less delightful . " Another critic from Rolling Stone noted that the press conference " is hysterical because she 's one of the least media @-@ accessible singers in the world . It 's easier to get a sit @-@ down with Bob Dylan than it is with Britney . " Becky Bain of Idolator called the video " delightful " and " flat out funny " , explaining that Spears " focuses her energy on being too darn cute ( and deliciously naughty ) instead of having to worry about dancing , [ she ] is in on the joke and loving it all . " The video was Spears ' first to be VEVO Certified , which means that it was the first of her videos to have received over 100 million views on VEVO . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Though the song has never been performed live as part of a televised performance , " I Wanna Go " was featured on the set list of the Femme Fatale Tour ( 2011 ) . Spears and her dancers bring fans onstage and dance with them throughout the performance . Shirley Halperin of The Hollywood Reporter stated that " [ the ] mid @-@ tempo numbers [ ... ] seemed to stall out quickly , where faster offerings like ' Womanizer , ' ' I Wanna Go ' and ' Toxic ' had the sold out crowd jumping in place and pumping their number twos in the air . " Shaunna Murphy of Entertainment Weekly said , " Of the newer songs , ' How I Roll ' and ' I Wanna Go ' were standouts , the former for its bubblegum fun and the latter for the uproarious fan participation on stage . " 
 Spears also included the song on her current residency show in Las Vegas , Britney : Piece of Me . After a rendition of " Circus " , a performance of " I Wanna Go " followed , where Spears dances with six mirror images of herself . The mirrors , that are moved around by her dancers , are screens showing pre @-@ recorded images of the singer . Keith Caulfield from Billboard considered the performance " cool " . 
 = = Remixes and other versions = = 
 " I Wanna Go " was remixed with guest vocals by Indian singer Sonu Nigam and released on the DesiHits website in June 2011 . In the remix , Sonu mirrors Spears ' vocals in Hindi over Indian instruments . Spears said about the song , " I 'm so excited about having Sonu on I Wanna Go . His vocals add such a different feel , which I love ! Watch out Bollywood – it 's Britney and Sonu ! " . A remix done by DJ Frank E and Alex Dreamz removes the whistled hook and adds an extra beat to the song . The accompanying video for the remix contains footage of the music video for the song with a glowing yellow tint . 
 = = Covers versions = = 
 " I Wanna Go " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Femme Fatale booklet liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio date and release history = = 
 = Kritosaurus = 
 Kritosaurus is an incompletely known genus of hadrosaurid ( duck @-@ billed ) dinosaur . It lived about 74 @.@ 5 @-@ 66 million years ago , in the Late Cretaceous of North America . The name means " separated lizard " ( referring to the arrangement of the cheek bones in an incomplete type skull ) , but is often mistranslated as " noble lizard " in reference to the presumed " Roman nose " ( in the original specimen , the nasal region was fragmented and disarticulated , and was originally restored flat ) . Despite the dearth of material , this herbivore appeared frequently in dinosaur books until the 1990s , although what was usually represented was the much more completely known Gryposaurus , then thought to be a synonym . 
 = = Description = = 
 The type specimen of Kritosaurus navajovius is only represented by a partial skull and lower jaws , and associated postcranial remains . The greater portion of the muzzle and upper beak are missing . The length of the skull is estimated at 87 centimeters ( 34 in ) from the tip of the upper beak to the base of the quadrate that articulates with the lower jaw at the back of the skull . Potential diagnostic characteristics of Kritosaurus include a predentary ( lower beak ) without tooth @-@ like crenulations , a sharp downward bend to the lower jaws near the beak , and a heavy , somewhat rectangular maxilla ( upper tooth @-@ bearing bone ) . 
 Based on the skull originally referred to Anasazisaurus , the form of the complete crest is that of a tab or flange of bone , from the nasals , that rises between and above the eyes and folds back under itself . This unique crest allows it to be distinguished from similar hadrosaurs , like Gryposaurus . The top of the crest is roughened , and the maximum preserved length of the skull is ~ 90 centimeters ( ~ 35 in ) . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Kritosaurus was a hadrosaurine hadrosaurid , a flat @-@ headed or solid @-@ crested duckbill . Though many species and specimens have been referred to the genus in the past , most of them do not show the shared distinguishing characteristics to allow them to be considered part of the genus , or have been synonymized with other genera of hadrosaurs . The closest relative of Kritosaurus navajovius is Anasazisaurus horneri ( or Kritosaurus horneri ) , which , together with close relatives such as Gryposaurus and Secernosaurus , form a clade called the Kritosaurini within the larger clade Saurolophinae . Location and time separate Kritosaurus and the slightly older , primarily Canadian Gryposaurus , along with some cranial details . 
 The following is a cladogram based on the phylogenetic analysis conducted by Prieto @-@ Márquez and Wagner in 2012 , showing the relationships of Kritosaurus among the other Kritosaurini : 
 = = = Distinguishing anatomical features = = = 
 A diagnosis is a statement of the anatomical features of an organism ( or group ) that collectively distinguish it from all other organisms . Some , but not all , of the features in a diagnosis are also autapomorphies . An autapomorphy is a distinctive anatomical feature that is unique to a given organism . 
 According to Prieto @-@ Márquez who re @-@ diagnosed this genus in 2013 , Kritosaurus can be distinguished based on the following characteristics : 
 the length of the dorsolateral margin of the maxilla is extensive 
 the jugal features an orbital constriction that is deeper than the infratemporal one 
 the infratemporal fenestra is greater than the orbit and has a dorsal margin that is greatly elevated above the dorsal orbital margin in adults 
 the frontal bone is participating in the orbital margin 
 the presence of paired caudal <unk> processes of the nasals resting over the frontal bones 
 = = Discovery and history = = 
 In 1904 , Barnum Brown discovered the type specimen ( AMNH <unk> ) of Kritosaurus near the Ojo Alamo Formation , San Juan County , New Mexico , United States , while following up on a previous expedition . He initially could not definitely correlate the stratigraphy , but by 1916 was able to establish it as from what is now known as the late Campanian @-@ age De @-@ na @-@ zin Member of the Kirtland Formation . When discovered , much of the front of the skull had either eroded or fragmented , and Brown reconstructed this portion after what is now called Edmontosaurus , leaving out many fragments . However , he had noticed that something was different about the fragments , but ascribed the differences to crushing . He initially wanted to name it <unk> , but found out that this name was already in use ; Jan <unk> , who had visited Brown before the change , inadvertently leaked the previous choice . He kept the species name , though , leading to the combination K. navajovius . 
 The 1914 publication of the arch @-@ snouted Canadian genus Gryposaurus changed Brown 's mind about the anatomy of his dinosaur 's snout . Going back through the fragments , he revised the previous reconstruction and gave it a Gryposaurus @-@ like arched nasal crest . He also synonymized Gryposaurus with Kritosaurus , a move supported by Charles Gilmore . This synonymy was used through the 1920s ( William Parks 's designation of a Canadian species as Kritosaurus incurvimanus , now considered a synonym of Gryposaurus notabilis ) and became standard after the publication of Richard Swann Lull and Nelda Wright 's 1942 monograph on North American hadrosaurids . From this time until 1990 , Kritosaurus would be composed of at least the type species K. navajovius , K. incurvimanus , and K. notabilis , the former type species of Gryposaurus . The poorly known species Hadrosaurus breviceps ( Marsh , 1889 ) , known from a dentary from the Campanian @-@ age Judith River Formation of Montana , was also assigned to Kritosaurus by Lull and Wright , but this is no longer accepted . 
 By the late 1970s and early 1980s , Hadrosaurus had entered the discussion as a possible synonym of either Kritosaurus , Gryposaurus , or both , particularly in semi @-@ technical " dinosaur dictionaries " . David B. Norman 's The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs , uses Kritosaurus for the Canadian material ( Gryposaurus ) , but identifies the mounted skeleton of K. incurvimanus as Hadrosaurus . One more species was added to Kritosaurus in these years . In 1984 , Argentine paleontologist José Bonaparte and colleagues named Kritosaurus australis for hadrosaur bones from the late Campanian @-@ early Maastrichtian Los Alamitos Formation of Rio Negro , Patagonia , Argentina . This species is now thought to be a synonym of Secernosaurus <unk> . 
 = = = Splitting genera = = = 
 The history of Kritosaurus took another turn in 1990 , when Jack Horner and David B. Weishampel once again separated Gryposaurus , citing the uncertainty associated with the latter 's partial skull . Horner in 1992 described two more skulls from New Mexico that he claimed belonged to Kritosaurus and showed that it was quite different from Gryposaurus , but the following year Adrian Hunt and Spencer G. Lucas put each skull in its own genus , creating Anasazisaurus and Naashoibitosaurus . 
 Adrian Hunt and Spencer G. Lucas , American paleontologists , named Anasazisaurus horneri in 1993 . The name was derived from the Anasazi , an ancient Native American people , and the Greek word sauros ( " lizard " ) . The Anasazi were famous for their cliff @-@ dwellings , such as those in Chaco Canyon , near the location of fossil Anasazisaurus remains . The term " Anasazi " itself is actually a Navajo language word , <unk> ( " enemy ancestors " ) . The species was named in honor of Jack Horner , the American paleontologist who first described the skull in 1992 . The holotype skull ( and only known specimen ) was collected in the late 1970s by a Brigham Young University field party working in San Juan County , and is housed at BYU as BYU <unk> . 
 Horner originally assigned the Anasazisaurus skull to Kritosaurus navajovius , but Hunt and Lucas could not find any diagnostic features in the limited material of Kritosaurus and judged the genus to be a nomen dubium . Since the Anasazisaurus skull did have diagnostic features of its own , and did not appear to them to share any unique features with Kritosaurus , it was given the new name Anasazisaurus horneri , an opinion which was supported by some later authors . Not all authors have agreed with this , Thomas E. Williamson in particular defending Horner 's original interpretation , and several subsequent studies recognized both distinct genera . 
 A comprehensive study of known Kritosaurus material published by Albert Prieto @-@ Márquez in 2013 upheld the status of Naashoibitosaurus as a distinct genus , but found that the type specimens of Kritosaurus and Anasazisaurus were indistinguishable when comparing overlapping elements ( i.e. only those bones preserved in both specimens ) . Prieto @-@ Márquez therefore regarded Anasazisaurus as a synonym of Kritosaurus , but retained it as the distinct species K. horneri . 
 The synonymization of Kritosaurus and Gryposaurus that lasted from the 1910s to 1990 led to a distorted picture of what the original Kritosaurus material represented . Because the Canadian material was much more complete , most representations and discussions of Kritosaurus from the 1920s to 1990 are actually more applicable to Gryposaurus . This includes , for example , James Hopson 's discussion of hadrosaur cranial ornamentation , and the adaptation of this for the public in The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Kritosaurus was discovered in the De @-@ na @-@ zin Member of the Kirtland Formation . This formation dates from the late Campanian stages of the Late Cretaceous Period ( 74 to 70 million years ago ) , and is also the source of several other dinosaurs , like Alamosaurus , a species of Parasaurolophus , Pentaceratops , Nodocephalosaurus , Saurornitholestes , and Bistahieversor . The Kirtland Formation is interpreted as river floodplains appearing after a retreat of the Western Interior Seaway . Conifers were the dominant plants , and chasmosaurine horned dinosaurs appear to have been more common than hadrosaurids . The presence of Parasaurolophus and Kritosaurus in northern latitude fossil sites may represent faunal exchange between otherwise distinct northern and southern biomes in Late Cretaceous North America . Both taxa are uncommon outside of the southern biome , where , along with Pentaceratops , they are predominate members of the fauna . 
 The geographic range of Kritosaurus remains in North America was expanded by the discovery of bones from the late Campanian @-@ age Aguja Formation of Texas , including a skull . Additionally , a partial skull from Coahuila , Mexico has been referred to K. navajovius . A partial skeleton from the Sabinas Basin in Mexico was described as Kritosaurus sp. by Jim Kirkland and colleagues , but considered an indeterminate saurolophine by Prieto @-@ Márquez ( 2013 ) . This skeleton is about 20 % larger than other known specimens , around 11 meters [ 36 ft ] long , and with a distinctively curved ischium , and represents the largest known well @-@ documented North American saurolophine . Unfortunately , the nasal bones are also incomplete in the skull remains from this material . 
 Since the 1930s , Barnum Brown described that an <unk> species of Kritosaurus had inhabited the late Maastrichtian Ojo Alamo Formation , the <unk> Formation in Texas and the El Picacho Formation , which was a flood plain type environment at the time of the Cretaceous . However , it should be noted that these fossils might be of an unknown species of hadrosaur or an undescribed specimen of Kritosaurus . This genus lived alongside numerous species of dinosaurs including the sauropod Alamosaurus , the ceratopsians <unk> , Ojoceratops , Torosaurus and a possible species of <unk> , hadrosaurs which included a possible species of Edmontosaurus annectens , Saurolophus and Gryposaurus and the armored nodosaur Glyptodontopelta . Theropods from this environment which included Tyrannosaurus , smaller theropods like a species of Troodon and Richardoestesia , the oviraptorid <unk> , indeterminate ornithomimids and dromaeosaurs . Non @-@ dinosaur species that had shared the same environment with Kritosaurus included the giant pterosaur Quetzalcoatlus , various species of fishes and rays , amphibians , lizards , turtles like Adocus , and multiple species of mammals like Alphadon and Mesodma . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Diet and feeding = = = 
 As a hadrosaurid , Kritosaurus would have been a large bipedal / quadrupedal herbivore , eating plants with a sophisticated skull that permitted a grinding motion analogous to chewing . Its teeth were continually replacing and packed into dental batteries that contained hundreds of teeth , only a relative handful of which were in use at any time . Plant material would have been cropped by its broad beak , and held in the jaws by a cheek @-@ like organ . Feeding would have been from the ground up to ~ 4 meters ( 13 ft ) above . If it was a separate genus , how it would have partitioned resources with the similar and contemporaneous Naashoibitosaurus is unknown . 
 = = = Nasal crest = = = 
 The nasal crest of Kritosaurus , whatever its true form , may have been used for a variety of social functions , such as identification of sexes or species and social ranking . There may have been inflatable air sacs flanking it for both visual and auditory signaling . 
 = Ballad ( Glee ) = 
 " Ballad " is the tenth episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on November 18 , 2009 , and was written and directed by series creator Brad Falchuk . " Ballad " sees the glee club split into pairs to sing ballads to one another . Rachel ( Lea Michele ) is paired with club director Will ( Matthew Morrison ) and develops a crush on him . Quinn 's ( Dianna Agron ) parents learn that Quinn is pregnant , and she moves in with Finn ( Cory Monteith ) and his mother when her own parents evict her . Gregg Henry and Charlotte Ross guest @-@ star as Quinn 's parents Russell and Judy Fabray , and Sarah Drew appears as Suzy Pepper , a student with a former crush on Will . Romy Rosemont returns as Finn 's mother , Carole Hudson . 
 The episode features covers of seven songs , including a mash @-@ up of " Don 't Stand So Close to Me " by The Police and " Young Girl " by Gary Puckett and The Union Gap . Studio recordings of all songs performed in the episode were released as singles , available for digital download . " Ballad " was watched by 7 @.@ 29 million US viewers and received mixed reviews from critics . Elizabeth Holmes of The Wall Street Journal and Liz Pardue of Zap2it were disappointed that Jane Lynch did not appear as Sue Sylvester , though Mike Hale of the New York Times did not miss her presence . Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle deemed " Ballad " one of the best episodes of Glee to date . Dan Snierson of Entertainment Weekly did not enjoy it as much as the preceding episode " Wheels " but reviewed the episode positively overall , while Eric Zorn of the Chicago Tribune deemed it " deliriously , deliciously bad " . 
 " Ballad " was the episode submission of Dianna Agron for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series , but her nomination failed to make the final cut . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) has the club split up into pairs to sing ballads to one another . As Matt Rutherford ( Dijon Talton ) is absent , Will is forced to take his place and sing with Rachel ( Lea Michele ) , who develops a crush on him . Will is dismayed , remembering Suzy Pepper ( Sarah Drew ) , the last student who had such strong feelings for him . When her feelings were not reciprocated , she was so distraught she ate an extremely hot pepper from Mexico , was hospitalized , and had to have an esophagus transplant . Rachel visits Will 's apartment , where his wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) puts her to work cooking and cleaning . After an encounter with Suzy Pepper , during which Suzy explains that the two of them are similar and that chasing after Will won 't repair Rachel 's self @-@ esteem , Rachel realizes her feelings for Will reflect her concerns about her own self @-@ worth , and apologizes for her behavior . Afterward , Will assures her that she will find the man of her dreams who loves her for who she is . 
 Finn is paired with Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) , who advises him to sing his ballad to his unborn daughter . When Finn 's mother Carole ( Romy Rosemont ) finds him singing to a sonogram video , she deduces that his girlfriend Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) is pregnant . Finn has dinner with Quinn and her parents Russell and Judy ( Gregg Henry and Charlotte Ross ) , and reveals Quinn 's pregnancy to them in song . Russell says he is extremely disappointed in his daughter and evicts Quinn from the family home ; she moves in with Finn and his mother . Kurt feels responsible for encouraging Finn to reveal the truth and apologizes ; when Finn asks him what ballad Kurt was planning to sing to him , Kurt says it is " I Honestly Love You " . Puck ( Mark Salling ) tells his ballad partner Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) that he is the father of Quinn 's baby , and Mercedes advises him to leave Quinn alone . The glee club then comes together to sing " Lean on Me " in support of Finn and Quinn . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Ballad " was written and directed by series creator Brad Falchuk . Recurring characters who appear in the episode are glee club members Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) and Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) . Romy Rosemont plays Finn 's mother Carole Hudson , her first appearance since the series ' second episode , and Gregg Henry and Charlotte Ross guest @-@ star as Quinn 's parents , Russell and Judy Fabray . Sarah Drew is Suzy Pepper , a student with " an insane , absurd , psychotic crush on Mr. Schuester " . Drew described Suzy as " kind of <unk> and creepy " , but ultimately redeemable . 
 The episode features cover versions of " Endless Love " by Diana Ross and Lionel Richie , " I 'll Stand by You " by The Pretenders , " Crush " by Jennifer Paige , " ( You 're ) Having My Baby " by Paul Anka and Odia Coates , " Lean on Me " by Bill Withers , and a mash @-@ up of " Don 't Stand So Close to Me " by The Police and " Young Girl " by Gary Puckett and The Union Gap . Studio recordings of all songs performed in the episode were released as singles , available for digital download , and are also included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 2 . " Endless Love " charted at number 87 in Canada , and 78 in America . " I 'll Stand by You " reached number 65 in Canada and 73 in America , while " Don 't Stand So Close to Me / Young Girl " charted at number 67 in Canada and 64 in America . 
 Monteith and Agron were not allowed to attend rehearsals for the episode 's final musical performance , " Lean on Me " , as Falchuk wanted their reactions to seem real . Both were brought to tears by the performance , with co @-@ star Jenna Ushkowitz commenting : " It 's special to have those kinds of touching moments where you can get real , raw emotions on screen . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Ballad " was watched by 7 @.@ 29 million US viewers and attained a 3 @.@ 2 / 8 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . It was the highest @-@ rated program on the night of broadcast with adults 18 – 34 and teens . In Canada , it was the twentieth most watched show in the week of broadcast , attaining 1 @.@ 74 million viewers . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 149 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 752 million on E4 , and 397 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on E4 and E4 + 1 for the week , and one of the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week , as well as the most @-@ watched episode of the series at the time . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Elizabeth Holmes for The Wall Street Journal was disappointed that cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester did not appear in the episode , though was pleased that the pregnancy plot appeared to be coming to an end . Bobby Hankinson for the Houston Chronicle was also pleased the pregnancy plot moved towards a conclusion , and called " Ballad " one of the best episodes of Glee to date , commenting : " it 's increasingly clear that the episodes without the messy adult drama are the strongest . " Eric Goldman for IGN observed that " Ballad " proved Glee is capable of delivering a " pretty solid " episode without Jane Lynch 's presence , rating the episode 8 / 10 . Zap2it 's Liz Pardue felt the absence of Lynch , but praised Chris Colfer 's performance as Kurt . 
 Mike Hale of the New York Times did not miss Sue 's presence in the episode , and wrote that " Ballad " contained some scenes which were " as honestly emotional as any since this series began , most of them involving Kurt and Finn " . Gerrick D. Kennedy for the Los Angeles Times appreciated the episode for subverting expectations , by having Finn 's mother react supportively to the news of Quinn 's pregnancy , rather than the more affluent and financially capable <unk> . Dan Snierson for Entertainment Weekly opined that " Ballad " was not as good as the preceding episode , " Wheels " , but that overall : " it did offer up a few choice cuts and fun moments while advancing one big story line " . James Poniewozik of Time agreed that " Ballad " was not as good as " Wheels " , commenting : " it 's amazing how Glee can career from excruciating to transcendent within a single episode . " The Chicago Tribune 's Eric Zorn , watching Glee for the first time , deemed the episode " deliriously , deliciously bad " , deriding the casting of young adult actors as teenagers , the " one @-@ dimensional stock characters " and the " kitschy plots " . Zorn questioned : " So do people actually like this show , or just revel in its over @-@ the @-@ top , spectacular and , I admit , compelling badness ? " 
 = National Gallery = 
 The National Gallery is an art museum in Trafalgar Square in the City of Westminster , in Central London . Founded in 1824 , it houses a collection of over 2 @,@ 300 paintings dating from the mid @-@ 13th century to 1900 . The Gallery is an exempt charity , and a non @-@ departmental public body of the Department for Culture , Media and Sport . Its collection belongs to the public of the United Kingdom and entry to the main collection is free of charge . It is among the most visited art museums in the world , after the Musée du Louvre , the British Museum , and the Metropolitan Museum of Art . 
 Unlike comparable museums in continental Europe , the National Gallery was not formed by nationalising an existing royal or princely art collection . It came into being when the British government bought 38 paintings from the heirs of John Julius Angerstein , an insurance broker and patron of the arts , in 1824 . After that initial purchase the Gallery was shaped mainly by its early directors , notably Sir Charles Lock Eastlake , and by private donations , which comprise two @-@ thirds of the collection . The resulting collection is small in size , compared with many European national galleries , but encyclopaedic in scope ; most major developments in Western painting " from Giotto to Cézanne " are represented with important works . It used to be claimed that this was one of the few national galleries that had all its works on permanent exhibition , but this is no longer the case . 
 The present building , the third to house the National Gallery , was designed by William Wilkins from 1832 to 1838 . Only the façade onto Trafalgar Square remains essentially unchanged from this time , as the building has been expanded piecemeal throughout its history . Wilkins 's building was often criticised for the perceived weaknesses of its design and for its lack of space ; the latter problem led to the establishment of the Tate Gallery for British art in 1897 . The Sainsbury Wing , an extension to the west by Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown , is a notable example of Postmodernist architecture in Britain . The current Director of the National Gallery is Gabriele <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The call for a National Gallery = = = 
 The late 18th century saw the nationalisation of royal or princely art collections across mainland Europe . The Bavarian royal collection ( now in the Alte Pinakothek , Munich ) opened to the public in 1779 , that of the Medici in Florence around 1789 ( as the Uffizi Gallery ) , and the Museum Français at the Louvre was formed out of the former French royal collection in 1793 . Great Britain , however , did not emulate the continental model , and the British Royal Collection remains in the sovereign 's possession today . In 1777 the British government had the opportunity to buy an art collection of international stature , when the descendants of Sir Robert Walpole put his collection up for sale . The MP John Wilkes argued for the government to buy this " invaluable treasure " and suggested that it be housed in " a noble gallery ... to be built in the spacious garden of the British Museum " Nothing came of Wilkes 's appeal and 20 years later the collection was bought in its entirety by Catherine the Great ; it is now to be found in the State Hermitage Museum in St Petersburg . 
 A plan to acquire 150 paintings from the Orléans collection , which had been brought to London for sale in 1798 , also failed , despite the interest of both the King and the Prime Minister , Pitt the Younger . The twenty @-@ five paintings from that collection now in the Gallery , including " <unk> " , have arrived by a variety of routes . In 1799 the dealer Noel <unk> offered a ready @-@ made national collection to the British government ; he and his partner Sir Francis Bourgeois had assembled it for the king of Poland , before the Third Partition in 1795 abolished Polish independence . This offer was declined and Bourgeois bequeathed the collection to his old school , Dulwich College , on his death . The collection opened in Britain 's first purpose @-@ built public gallery , the Dulwich Picture Gallery , in 1814 . The Scottish dealer William Buchanan and another collector , Joseph Count Truchsess , both formed art collections expressly as the basis for a future national collection , but their respective offers ( made in the same year , 1803 ) were also declined . 
 Following the Walpole sale many artists , including James Barry and John Flaxman , had made renewed calls for the establishment of a National Gallery , arguing that a British school of painting could only flourish if it had access to the canon of European painting . The British Institution , founded in 1805 by a group of aristocratic connoisseurs , attempted to address this situation . The members lent works to exhibitions that changed annually , while an art school was held in the summer months . However , as the paintings that were lent were often mediocre , some artists resented the Institution and saw it as a racket for the gentry to increase the sale prices of their Old Master paintings . One of the Institution 's founding members , Sir George Beaumont , Bt , would eventually play a major role in the National Gallery 's foundation by offering a gift of 16 paintings . 
 In 1823 another major art collection came on the market , which had been assembled by the recently deceased John Julius Angerstein . Angerstein was a Russian @-@ born émigré banker based in London ; his collection numbered 38 paintings , including works by Raphael and Hogarth 's Marriage à @-@ la @-@ mode series . On 1 July 1823 George Agar Ellis , a Whig politician , proposed to the House of Commons that it purchase the collection . The appeal was given added impetus by Beaumont 's offer , which came with two conditions : that the government buy Angerstein 's collection , and that a suitable building was to be found . The unexpected repayment of a war debt by Austria finally moved the government to buy Angerstein 's collection , for £ 57 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Foundation and early history = = = 
 The National Gallery opened to the public on 10 May 1824 , housed in Angerstein 's former townhouse at No. 100 Pall Mall . Angerstein 's paintings were joined in 1826 by those from Beaumont 's collection , and in 1831 by the Reverend William Holwell Carr 's bequest of 35 paintings . Initially the Keeper of Paintings , William <unk> , bore the burden of managing the Gallery , but in July 1824 some of this responsibility fell to the newly formed board of trustees . 
 The National Gallery at Pall Mall was frequently overcrowded and hot and its diminutive size in comparison with the Louvre in Paris was the cause of national embarrassment . But Agar Ellis , now a trustee of the Gallery , appraised the site for being " in the very gangway of London " ; this was seen as necessary for the Gallery to fulfil its social purpose . Subsidence in No. 100 caused the Gallery to move briefly to No. 105 Pall Mall , which the novelist Anthony Trollope described as a " dingy , dull , narrow house , ill @-@ adapted for the exhibition of the treasures it held " . This in turn had to be demolished for the opening of a road to Carlton House Terrace . 
 In 1832 construction began on a new building by William Wilkins on the site of the King 's Mews in Charing Cross , in an area that had been transformed over the 1820s into Trafalgar Square . The location was a significant one , between the wealthy West End and poorer areas to the east . The argument that the collection could be accessed by people of all social classes outstripped other concerns , such as the pollution of central London or the failings of Wilkins 's building , when the prospect of a move to South Kensington was mooted in the 1850s . According to the Parliamentary Commission of 1857 , " The existence of the pictures is not the end purpose of the collection , but the means only to give the people an ennobling enjoyment " . 
 From 1837 until 1868 the Royal Academy was housed in the east wing of the building . 
 = = = Growth under Eastlake and his successors = = = 
 15th- and 16th @-@ century Italian paintings were at the core of the National Gallery and for the first 30 years of its existence the Trustees ' independent acquisitions were mainly limited to works by High Renaissance masters . Their conservative tastes resulted in several missed opportunities and the management of the Gallery later fell into complete disarray , with no acquisitions being made between 1847 and 1850 . A critical House of Commons Report in 1851 called for the appointment of a director , whose authority would surpass that of the trustees . Many thought the position would go to the German art historian Gustav Friedrich Waagen , whom the Gallery had consulted on previous occasions about the lighting and display of the collections . However , the man preferred for the job by Queen Victoria , Prince Albert and the Prime Minister , Lord Russell , was the Keeper of Paintings at the Gallery , Sir Charles Lock Eastlake , who was President of the Royal Academy , played an essential role in the foundation of the Arundel Society , and knew most of London 's leading art experts . 
 The new director ’ s taste was for the Northern and Early Italian Renaissance masters or " primitives " , who had been neglected by the Gallery ’ s acquisitions policy but were slowly gaining recognition from connoisseurs . Eastlake made annual tours to the continent and to Italy in particular , seeking out appropriate paintings to buy for the Gallery . In all , he bought 148 pictures abroad and 46 in Britain , among the former such seminal works as Paolo Uccello ’ s Battle of San Romano . Eastlake also amassed a private art collection during this period , consisting of paintings that he knew did not interest the trustees . His ultimate aim , however , was for them to enter the National Gallery ; this was duly arranged upon his death by his friend and successor as director , William Boxall , and his widow Lady Eastlake . 
 The Gallery ’ s lack of space remained acute in this period . In 1845 a large bequest of British paintings was made by Robert Vernon ; there was insufficient room in the Wilkins building so these were displayed first in Vernon ’ s town house at No. 50 Pall Mall and then at Marlborough House . The Gallery was even less well equipped for its next major bequest , as J. M. W. Turner was to bequeath the entire contents of his studio , excepting unfinished works , to the nation upon his death in 1851 . The first 20 of these were displayed off @-@ site in Marlborough House in 1856 . The stipulation in Turner 's will that two of his paintings be displayed alongside works by Claude is still honoured in Room 15 of the Gallery , but his bequest has never been adequately displayed in its entirety ; today the works are divided between Trafalgar Square and the Clore Gallery , a small purpose @-@ built extension to the Tate completed in 1985 . 
 The third director , Sir Frederick William Burton , laid the foundations of the collection of 18th @-@ century art and made several outstanding purchases from English private collections . The acquisition in 1885 of two paintings from Blenheim Palace , Raphael 's <unk> Madonna and Van Dyck 's Equestrian Portrait of Charles I , with a record @-@ setting grant of £ 87 @,@ 500 from the Treasury , brought the Gallery 's " golden age of collecting " to an end , as its annual purchase grant was suspended for several years thereafter . When the Gallery purchased Holbein 's Ambassadors from the Earl of Radnor in 1890 , it did so with the aid of private individuals for the first time in its history . In 1897 the formation of the National Gallery of British Art , known unofficially from early in its history as the Tate Gallery , allowed some British works to be moved off @-@ site , following the precedent set by the Vernon collection and the Turner Bequest . Works by artists born after 1790 were moved to the new gallery on Millbank , which allowed Hogarth , Turner and Constable to remain in Trafalgar Square . 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 The agricultural crisis at the turn of the 20th century caused many aristocratic families to sell their paintings , but the British national collections were priced out of the market by American plutocrats . This prompted the foundation of the National Art Collections Fund , a society of subscribers dedicated to stemming the flow of artworks to the United States . Their first acquisition for the National Gallery was Velázquez 's Rokeby Venus in 1906 , followed by Holbein 's Portrait of Christina of Denmark in 1909 . However , despite the crisis in aristocratic fortunes , the following decade was one of several great bequests from private collectors . In 1909 the industrialist Dr Ludwig Mond gave 42 Italian renaissance paintings , including the Mond Crucifixion by Raphael , to the Gallery . Other bequests of note were those of George Salting in 1910 , Austen Henry Layard in 1916 and Sir Hugh Lane in 1917 ; the last of these was one of the Gallery 's more controversial bequests . 
 In a rare example of the political protest for which Trafalgar Square is famous occurring in the National Gallery , the Rokeby Venus was damaged on 10 March 1914 by Mary Richardson , a campaigner for women 's suffrage , in protest against the arrest of Emmeline Pankhurst the previous day . Later that month another suffragette attacked five <unk> , causing the Gallery to close until the start of the First World War , when the Women 's Social and Political Union called for an end to violent acts drawing attention to their plight . 
 The reception of Impressionist art at the Gallery got off to an exceptionally stormy start . In 1906 , Sir Hugh Lane promised 39 paintings , including Renoir 's <unk> , to the National Gallery on his death , unless a suitable building could be built in Dublin . Although eagerly accepted by the director Charles Holroyd , they were received with extreme hostility by the Trustees ; Lord Redesdale wrote that " I would as soon expect to hear of a Mormon service being conducted in St. Paul 's Cathedral as to see the exhibition of the works of the modern French Art @-@ rebels in the sacred precincts of Trafalgar Square " . Perhaps as a result of such attitudes , Lane amended his will with a codicil that the works should only go to Ireland , but crucially this was never witnessed . Lane died on board the RMS Lusitania in 1915 , and a dispute began which was not resolved until 1959 . Part of the collection is now on permanent loan to Dublin City Gallery ( " The Hugh Lane " ) and other works rotate between London and Dublin every few years . 
 A fund for the purchase of modern paintings established by Samuel Courtauld in 1923 bought Seurat 's Bathers at Asnières and other notable modern works for the nation ; in 1934 these transferred to the National Gallery from the Tate . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Shortly before the outbreak of World War II the paintings were evacuated to various locations in Wales , including Penrhyn Castle and the university colleges of Bangor and Aberystwyth . In 1940 , as the Battle of France raged , a more secure home was sought , and there were discussions about moving the paintings to Canada . This idea was firmly rejected by Winston Churchill , who wrote in a telegram to the director Kenneth Clark , “ bury them in caves or in cellars , but not a picture shall leave these islands ” . Instead a slate quarry at Manod , near Blaenau Ffestiniog in North Wales , was requisitioned for the Gallery 's use . In the seclusion afforded by the paintings ' new location , the Keeper ( and future director ) Martin Davies began to compile scholarly catalogues on the collection , helped by the fact that the Gallery 's library was also stored in the quarry . The move to Manod confirmed the importance of storing paintings at a constant temperature and humidity , something the Gallery 's conservators had long suspected but had hitherto been unable to prove . This eventually resulted in the first air @-@ conditioned gallery opening in 1949 . 
 For the course of the war Myra Hess , and other musicians , such as Moura Lympany , gave daily lunch @-@ time recitals in the empty building , to raise public morale at a time when every concert hall in London was closed . A number of art exhibitions were held at the Gallery as a complement to the recitals . The first of these was British Painting since Whistler in 1940 , organised by Lillian Browse , who also mounted the major joint retrospective Exhibition of Paintings by Sir William Nicholson and Jack B. Yeats held from 1 January – 15 March 1942 , which was seen by 10 @,@ 518 visitors . Exhibitions of work by war artists , including Paul Nash , Henry Moore and Stanley Spencer , were also held ; the War Artists ' Advisory Committee had been set up by Clark in order " to keep artists at work on any pretext " . In 1941 a request from an artist to see Rembrandt 's Portrait of Margaretha de Geer ( a new acquisition ) resulted in the " Picture of the Month " scheme , in which a single painting was removed from Manod and exhibited to the general public in the National Gallery each month . The art critic Herbert Read , writing that year , called the National Gallery " a defiant outpost of culture right in the middle of a bombed and shattered metropolis " . The paintings returned to Trafalgar Square in 1945 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war developments = = = 
 In the post @-@ war years , acquisitions have become increasingly difficult for the National Gallery as the prices for Old Masters – and even more so for the Impressionists and Post @-@ impressionists – have risen beyond its means . Some of the Gallery 's most significant purchases in this period would have been impossible without the major public appeals backing them , including The Virgin and Child with St. Anne and St. John the Baptist by Leonardo da Vinci ( bought in 1962 ) and Titian ’ s Death of Actaeon ( 1972 ) . The Gallery 's purchase grant from the government was frozen in 1985 , but later that year it received an endowment of £ 50 million from Sir Paul Getty , enabling many major purchases to be made . In April 1985 Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover and his brothers , the Hon. Simon Sainsbury and Sir Timothy Sainsbury , had made a donation that would enable the construction of the Sainsbury Wing . 
 The directorship of Neil MacGregor saw a major <unk> at the Gallery , dispensing with the classification of paintings by national school that had been introduced by Eastlake . The new chronological hang sought to emphasise the interaction between cultures rather than fixed national characteristics , reflecting the change in art historical values since the 19th century . In other respects , however , Victorian tastes were rehabilitated : the building 's interiors were no longer considered an embarrassment and were restored , and in 1999 the Gallery accepted a bequest of 26 Italian Baroque paintings from Sir Denis Mahon . Earlier in the 20th century many considered the Baroque to be beyond the pale : in 1945 the Gallery 's trustees declined to buy a Guercino from Mahon 's collection for £ 200 . The same painting was valued at £ 4 million in 2003 . Mahon 's bequest was made on the condition that the Gallery would never <unk> any of its paintings or charge for admission . 
 Since 1989 , the gallery has run a scheme that gives a studio to contemporary artists to create work based on the permanent collection . They usually hold the position of associate artist for two years and are given an exhibition in the National Gallery at the end of their tenure . 
 The respective remits of the National and Tate Galleries , which had long been contested by the two institutions , were more clearly defined in 1996 . 1900 was established as the cut @-@ off point for paintings in the National Gallery , and in 1997 more than 60 post @-@ 1900 paintings from the collection were given to the Tate on a long @-@ term loan , in return for works by Gauguin and others . However , future expansion of the National Gallery may yet see the return of 20th @-@ century paintings to its walls . 
 In the 21st century there have been three large fundraising campaigns at the Gallery : in 2004 , to buy Raphael ’ s Madonna of the Pinks , in 2008 , for Titian 's Diana and Actaeon , and in 2012 , Titian 's Diana and Callisto . Both <unk> were bought in tandem with the National Gallery of Scotland for £ 95 m . Both of these major works were sold from the famous collection of the Duke of Sutherland . The National Gallery is now largely priced out of the market for Old Master paintings and can only make such acquisitions with the backing of major public appeals ; the departing director Charles Saumarez Smith expressed his frustration at this situation in 2007 . 
 In 2014 , the National Gallery was the subject of a documentary film by Frederick Wiseman . The film shows the gallery administration and staff at work , the conservation laboratory , docent tours , and the mounting of Leonardo Da Vinci , J. M. W. Turner , and Titian exhibitions in 2011 – 2012 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = William Wilkins ' building = = = 
 The first suggestion for a National Gallery on Trafalgar Square came from John Nash , who envisaged it on the site of the King 's Mews , while a Parthenon @-@ like building for the Royal Academy would occupy the centre of the square . Economic recession prevented this scheme from being built , but a competition for the Mews site was eventually held in 1831 , for which Nash submitted a design with C. R. Cockerell as his co @-@ architect . Nash 's popularity was waning by this time , however , and the commission was awarded to William Wilkins , who was involved in the selection of the site and submitted some drawings at the last moment . Wilkins had hoped to build a " Temple of the Arts , nurturing contemporary art through historical example " , but the commission was blighted by parsimony and compromise , and the resulting building was deemed a failure on almost all counts . 
 The site only allowed for the building to be one room deep , as a workhouse and a barracks lay immediately behind . To exacerbate matters , there was a public right of way through the site to these buildings , which accounts for the access porticoes on the eastern and western sides of the façade . These had to incorporate columns from the demolished Carlton House and their relative shortness result in an elevation that was deemed excessively low , and a far cry from the commanding focal point that was desired for the northern end of the Square . Also recycled are the sculptures on the façade , originally intended for Nash 's Marble Arch but abandoned due to his financial problems . The eastern half of the building housed the Royal Academy until 1868 , which further diminished the space afforded to the Gallery . 
 The building was the object of public ridicule before it had even been completed , as a version of the design had been leaked to the Literary Gazette in 1833 . Two years before completion , its infamous " pepperpot " elevation appeared on the frontispiece of Contrasts ( 1836 ) , an influential tract by the <unk> A. W. N. Pugin , as an example of the degeneracy of the classical style . Even William IV ( in his last recorded utterance ) thought the building a " nasty little pokey hole " , while William Makepeace Thackeray called it " a little gin shop of a building " . The twentieth @-@ century architectural historian Sir John Summerson echoed these early criticisms when he compared the arrangement of a dome and two diminutive turrets on the roofline to " the clock and vases on a mantelpiece , only less useful " . Sir Charles Barry 's landscaping of Trafalgar Square , from 1840 , included a north terrace so that the building would appear to be raised , thus addressing one of the points of complaint . Opinion on the building had mellowed considerably by 1984 , when the Prince of Wales called the Wilkins façade a " much @-@ loved and elegant friend " , in contrast to a proposed extension . ( See below ) 
 = = = Alteration and expansion ( Pennethorne , Barry and Taylor ) = = = 
 The first significant alteration made to the building was the single , long gallery added by Sir James Pennethorne in 1860 – 1 . <unk> decorated in comparison with the rooms by Wilkins , it nonetheless worsened the cramped conditions inside the building as it was built over the original entrance hall . Unsurprisingly , several attempts were made either to completely remodel the National Gallery ( as suggested by Sir Charles Barry in 1853 ) , or to move it to more capacious premises in Kensington , where the air was also cleaner . In 1867 Barry 's son Edward Middleton Barry proposed to replace the Wilkins building with a massive classical building with four domes . The scheme was a failure and contemporary critics denounced the exterior as " a strong plagiarism upon St Paul 's Cathedral " . 
 With the demolition of the workhouse , however , Barry was able to build the Gallery 's first sequence of grand architectural spaces , from 1872 to 1876 . Built to a polychrome Neo @-@ Renaissance design , the Barry Rooms were arranged on a Greek cross @-@ plan around a huge central octagon . Though it compensated for the underwhelming architecture of the Wilkins building , Barry 's new wing was disliked by Gallery staff , who considered its monumental aspect to be in conflict with its function as exhibition space . Also , the decorative programme of the rooms did not take their intended contents into account ; the ceiling of the 15th- and 16th @-@ century Italian gallery , for instance , was inscribed with the names of British artists of the 19th century . But despite these failures , the Barry Rooms provided the Gallery with a strong axial <unk> . This was to be followed by all subsequent additions to the Gallery for a century , resulting in a building of clear symmetry . 
 Pennethorne 's gallery was demolished for the next phase of building , a scheme by Sir John Taylor extending northwards of the main entrance . Its glass @-@ domed entrance vestibule had painted ceiling decorations by the Crace family firm , who had also worked on the Barry Rooms . A fresco intended for the south wall was never realised , and that space is now taken up by Frederic , Lord Leighton ’ s painting of Cimabue 's Celebrated Madonna carried in Procession through the Streets of Florence ( 1853 – 55 ) , lent by the Royal Collection in the 1990s . 
 = = = 20th century : modernisation versus restoration = = = 
 Later additions to the west came more steadily but maintained the coherence of the building by mirroring Barry 's cross @-@ axis plan to the east . The use of dark marble for doorcases was also continued , giving the extensions a degree of internal consistency with the older rooms . The classical style was still in use at the National Gallery in 1929 , when a Beaux @-@ Arts style gallery was built , funded by the art dealer and Trustee Lord Duveen . However , it was not long before the 20th @-@ century reaction against Victorian attitudes became manifest at the Gallery . From 1928 to 1952 the landing floors of Taylor 's entrance hall were relaid with a new series of mosaics by Boris Anrep , who was friendly with the Bloomsbury Group . These mosaics can be read as a satire on 19th @-@ century conventions for the decoration of public buildings , as typified by the Albert Memorial 's Frieze of Parnassus . The central mosaic depicting The Awakening of the Muses includes portraits of Virginia Woolf and Greta Garbo , subverting the high moral tone of its Victorian forebears . In place of Christianity 's seven virtues , Anrep offered his own set of Modern Virtues , including " Humour " and " Open Mind " ; the allegorical figures are again portraits of his contemporaries , including Winston Churchill , Bertrand Russell and T. S. Eliot . 
 In the 20th century the Gallery 's late Victorian interiors fell out of fashion . The Crace ceiling decorations in the entrance hall were not to the taste of the director Charles Holmes , and were obliterated by white paint . The North Galleries , which opened to the public in 1975 , marked the arrival of modernist architecture at the National Gallery . In the older rooms , the original classical details were effaced by partitions , <unk> and suspended roofs , the aim being to create neutral settings which did not distract from contemplation of the paintings . But the Gallery 's commitment to modernism was short @-@ lived : by the 1980s Victorian style was no longer considered anathema , and a restoration programme began to restore the 19th- and early @-@ 20th @-@ century interiors to their purported original appearance . This began with the refurbishment of the Barry Rooms in 1985 – 6 . From 1996 to 1999 even the North Galleries , by then considered to " lack a positive architectural character " were remodelled in a classical style , albeit a simplified one . 
 = = = Sainsbury Wing and later additions = = = 
 The most important addition to the building in recent years has been the Sainsbury Wing , designed by the postmodernist architects Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown to house the collection of Renaissance paintings , and built in 1991 . The building occupies the " Hampton 's site " to the west of the main building , where a department store of the same name had stood until its destruction in the Blitz . The Gallery had long sought expansion into this space and in 1982 a competition was held to find a suitable architect ; the shortlist included a radical high @-@ tech proposal by Richard Rogers , among others . The design that won the most votes was by the firm <unk> , Burton and <unk> , who then modified their proposal to include a tower , similar to that of the Rogers scheme . The proposal was dropped after the Prince of Wales compared the design to a " monstrous carbuncle on the face of a much @-@ loved and elegant friend " , The term " monstrous carbuncle " , for a modern building that clashes with its surroundings , has since become commonplace . 
 One of the conditions of the 1982 competition was that the new wing had to include commercial offices as well as public gallery space . However , in 1985 it became possible to devote the extension entirely to the Gallery 's uses , due to a donation of almost £ 50 million from Lord Sainsbury and his brothers Simon and Sir Tim Sainsbury . A closed competition was held , and the schemes produced were noticeably more restrained than in the earlier competition . 
 In contrast with the rich ornamentation of the main building , the galleries in the Sainsbury Wing are pared @-@ down and intimate , to suit the smaller scale of many of the paintings . The main inspirations for these rooms are Sir John Soane 's <unk> galleries for the Dulwich Picture Gallery and the church interiors of Filippo Brunelleschi ( the stone dressing is in pietra <unk> , the grey stone local to Florence ) . The northernmost galleries align with Barry 's central axis , so that there is a single vista down the whole length of the Gallery . This axis is exaggerated by the use of false perspective , as the columns flanking each opening gradually diminish in size until the visitor reaches the focal point ( as of 2009 ) , an altarpiece by Cima of The <unk> of St Thomas . Venturi 's postmodernist approach to architecture is in full evidence at the Sainsbury Wing , with its stylistic quotations from buildings as disparate as the clubhouses on Pall Mall , the Scala Regia in the Vatican , Victorian warehouses and Ancient Egyptian temples . 
 Following the pedestrianisation of Trafalgar Square , the Gallery is currently engaged in a masterplan to convert the vacated office space on the ground floor into public space . The plan will also fill in disused courtyards and make use of land acquired from the adjoining National Portrait Gallery in St Martin 's Place , which it gave to the National Gallery in exchange for land for its 2000 extension . The first phase , the East Wing Project designed by Jeremy Dixon and Edward Jones , opened to the public in 2004 . This provided a new ground level entrance from Trafalgar Square , named in honour of Sir Paul Getty . The main entrance was also refurbished , and reopened in September 2005 . Possible future projects include a " West Wing Project " roughly symmetrical with the East Wing Project , which would provide a future ground level entrance , and the public opening of some small rooms at the far eastern end of the building acquired as part of the swap with the National Portrait Gallery . This might include a new public staircase in the bow on the eastern façade . No timetable has been announced for these additional projects . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 One of the most persistent criticisms of the National Gallery , apart from those who criticise inadequacies of the building , has been of its conservation policy . The Gallery 's detractors accused it of having had an over @-@ zealous approach to restoration . The first cleaning operation at the National Gallery began in 1844 after Eastlake 's appointment as Keeper , and was the subject of attacks in the press after the first three paintings to receive the treatment – a Rubens , a <unk> and a Velázquez – were unveiled to the public in 1846 . The Gallery 's most virulent critic was J. Morris Moore , who wrote a series of letters to The Times under the pseudonym " <unk> " savaging the institution 's cleanings . While an 1853 Parliamentary Select Committee set up to investigate the matter cleared the Gallery of any wrongdoing , criticism of its methods has been erupting sporadically ever since from some in the art establishment . 
 The last major outcry against the use of radical conservation techniques at the National Gallery was sixty @-@ six years ago in the immediate post @-@ war years , following a restoration campaign by Chief Restorer Helmut Ruhemann while the paintings were in Manod Quarry . When the cleaned pictures were exhibited to the public in 1946 there followed a furore with parallels to that of a century earlier . The principal criticism was that the extensive removal of varnish , which was used in the 19th century to protect the surface of paintings but which darkened and discoloured them with time , may have resulted in the loss of " harmonising " glazes added to the paintings by the artists themselves . The opposition to Ruhemann 's techniques was led by Ernst Gombrich , a professor at the Warburg Institute who in later correspondence with a restorer described being treated with " offensive <unk> " by the National Gallery . A 1947 commission concluded that no damage had been done in the recent cleanings . 
 The National Gallery has also been criticised for <unk> paintings . Kenneth Clark 's decision in 1939 to <unk> a group of paintings by anonymous artists of the Venetian school as works by Giorgione ( a crowd @-@ pulling artist due to the rarity of his paintings ) made him unpopular with his staff . More recently , the attribution of a 17th @-@ century painting of Samson and Delilah ( bought in 1980 ) to Rubens has been contested by a group of art historians , who believe that the National Gallery has not admitted the mistake to avoid embarrassing those who were involved in the purchase , many of whom still work for the Gallery . 
 In February 2014 , Men of the Docks , by U.S. artist George Bellows , was bought by the National Gallery for $ 25 @.@ 5 million ( £ 15 @.@ 6 million ) . It was the first major American painting to be purchased by the Gallery . Director Nicholas Penny termed the painting a new direction for the Gallery – a non @-@ European painting in a European style . Its sale was controversial in the U.S. 
 = = List of Directors of the National Gallery = = 
 = = Collection highlights = = 
 = = Transport connections = = 
 = Interstate 194 ( Michigan ) = 
 Interstate 194 ( I @-@ 194 ) is a 3 @.@ 4 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 5 @.@ 5 km ) , north – south freeway between downtown Battle Creek and I @-@ 94 in the southern portion of the city . The highway has been designated the Sojourner Truth Downtown Parkway by the state after the abolitionist Sojourner Truth , who was active in the Battle Creek area . Locals refer to the freeway by its semi @-@ official nickname , " The Penetrator " . I @-@ 194 is the only three @-@ digit spur or loop route off I @-@ 94 in the state of Michigan and runs concurrently throughout its length with M @-@ 66 , which continues both north and south from the termini of I @-@ 194 . The freeway was initially opened in 1961 and completed in its current form in 1966 . The highway was named in 1976 for Truth in honor of her local connections to the area . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Part of the much longer highway , I @-@ 194 starts when M @-@ 66 widens out to a full freeway just south of I @-@ 94 near Beckley Road . The start of I @-@ 194 is marked by the full cloverleaf interchange . It is numbered as exit 98 along I @-@ 94 and exit 1 using I @-@ 194 's mileage along the I @-@ 194 / M @-@ 66 freeway . The roadway crosses Minges Creek north of the I @-@ 94 interchange . To the west of the freeway are residential subdivisions ; the eastern side is marked by gently @-@ rolling , wooded terrain . This section of I @-@ 194 carries 26 @,@ 300 vehicles on an average day according to annual average daily traffic surveys done by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) in 2007 . Of these vehicles , 1 @,@ 200 trucks were included in the totals . 
 After crossing Golden Avenue , I @-@ 194 curves to the northwest to meet the M @-@ 96 ( Columbia Avenue ) interchange . The freeway runs underneath the Columbia Avenue overpass before running parallel to the west bank of the Kalamazoo River . The freeway crosses the river at the southern end of Lower Mill Pond . Curving back around to the northeast , I @-@ 194 meets Business Loop I @-@ 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 , Dickman Road ) . Here the AADT counts average 24 @,@ 400 vehicles a day . The freeway ends at an at @-@ grade intersection with Hamblin Avenue , and continuing north of the intersection , the highway becomes just M @-@ 66 . BL I @-@ 94 runs east of the freeway end on Hamblin Avenue to connect to Michigan Avenue . All of I @-@ 194 is listed on the National Highway System , a system of strategically important highways , and it is concurrent with M @-@ 66 for the length of the freeway . 
 = = History = = 
 From its initial opening in 1961 until 1964 , I @-@ 194 also carried the BL I @-@ 94 and M @-@ 78 designations . BL I @-@ 94 was rerouted in Battle Creek to Martin Luther King Drive and M @-@ 78 in 1964 , and M @-@ 78 was replaced by M @-@ 66 in 1965 . The last change to the I @-@ 194 routing was the extension of the northern end of the freeway from Columbia Avenue to Michigan Avenue in 1966 . At the time , MDOT 's predecessor , the Michigan State Highway Department , called all auxiliary Interstate Highways " Penetrator " when planning the freeway network in the state ; a name which stuck to I @-@ 194 . 
 Born Isabella Baumfree in 1797 , Sojourner Truth settled in the Battle Creek area in the 1840s . She travelled through the Midwest and New England speaking against slavery and for women 's rights . She lived in the area until her death in 1883 . Her connection to the state of Michigan was honored by the state American Revolution Bicentennial Commission in 1976 which urged the Michigan Legislature to name a highway in her honor . Public Act 93 of 1976 named all of M @-@ 66 in Calhoun County as the Sojourner Truth Memorial Highway . The highway was dedicated to her on May 21 , 1976 . 
 The Cereal City Development Corporation ( <unk> ) asked the Legislature to amend the memorial designation in 1993 . They felt the highway was better known to locals as The Penetrator , and they wished to restore emphasis to Truth , they asked for the " Sojourner Truth Downtown Parkway " name to be applied to " M @-@ 66 between Interstate 94 and Hamblin " . The Legislature passed Public Act 208 of 1993 to affect the change , restoring " the link between Sojourner Truth and the City of Battle Creek , which was once the center of abolitionist sentiment in the state . " 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire highway is in Battle Creek , Calhoun County . 
 = Luminosity — Ignite the Night ! = 
 Luminosity — Ignite the Night ! , often shortened to Luminosity or previously called Luminosity , Powered by Pepsi , is a nighttime show performed nightly at Cedar Point amusement park in Sandusky , Ohio . It replaced American Portrait . The show opened for previews on June 1 , 2012 and held its grand @-@ opening one week later . It ran nightly at 9 : 15 until August 19 . In 2013 , the show will run every night except Tuesdays from May 31 – August 18 . 
 The show is free with admission to the park . During the day , the stage is used for the Peanuts ' Celebration at the Point show . It is also used during HalloWeekends for a show called Skeleton Crew . 
 = = History = = 
 Thoughts of a new way to improve the nighttime environment began in summer 2011 when the new Cedar Fair CEO , Matt Ouimet was in the park one night and thought they should add more lights and excitement . The goal was to create a new show that would energize the main midway with bright lights and music . Matt Ouimet first mentioned the show at a conference in January 2012 . Details of Luminosity were first announced at the <unk> winter tour of Cedar Point on February 25 , 2012 . The 3 @,@ 600 square foot screen used for American Portrait and Hot Summer Lights was taken down on February 28 because it was not needed for the new show . On April 13 , Cedar Point officially announced Luminosity . The show debuted on June 1 for previews and its grand opening was held on June 8 . 
 Cedar Point worked mainly with the Emmy Award @-@ Winning RWS and Associates and Chauvet Professional to build the production . They wanted RWS to bring in " the biggest , grandest and most expensive night show in Cedar Point 's history " . Award @-@ winning choreographer EJ <unk> and Alicia <unk> were responsible for the choreography of the show . Installation took four months and rehearsal occupied three weeks . The park also worked with Chauvet to set up and program the lights , as well as the lights used on Millennium Force and Power Tower . In 2013 , Cedar Point will build the show " in @-@ house " , meaning RWS will not coordinate the show . In addition , the show will be performed every night except Tuesday . 
 = = Overview = = 
 As part of Luminosity , several enhancements to the midway and rides were made . A new LED lighting package , similar to the park 's WindSeeker , was installed on Millennium Force , Power Tower and the Giant Wheel . Towers with LED graphics and a new sound and light system were installed along the main midway from the front gate to Corkscrew . Gobo patterns are projected from the towers onto the midway and buildings . More than one million lights , including the lights on the stage , rides and buildings were added . Chauvet Professional supplied 700 lights for Luminosity . They also added 36 wash lights to the base of Millennium Force and 16 lights to the base and top of Power Tower . 
 The three @-@ story stage runs parallel to the midway . The back of the stage is 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) high and the length is 75 feet ( 23 m ) long . Several screens are located on behind the main stage with two showing close @-@ ups of the performers on the sides of the stage . The stage has video walls made of one @-@ hundred twelve MVP 18 and thirty @-@ seven MVP 37 @.@ 5 modular video panels . Two screens are next to the control booths and bleachers . 
 = = = Celebration Plaza = = = 
 The new show transformed Iron Dragon midway into a new area called Celebration Plaza . The area features curved edges . A new entrance and queueing area was built for Iron Dragon because the new stage occupies the old queue and entrance area . The control booths used for American Portrait were relocated to the side of the midway . On May 2 , 2012 it was announced that WildCat would be removed before opening day to expand Celebration Plaza and bleachers were added in its spot . A new concession area with patio seating was built on the left side of the control booth . During the show , a portion of the patio is blocked off as a V.I.P. seating area known as the Pepsi Fan Zone . In addition , a beer garden was added behind the control booth , to the left of the bleachers . 
 During the day , Luminosity performers do flash mobs , giving visitors a glimpse of the show . The stage for Luminosity is also used for a Peanuts show called Peanuts ' Celebration at the Point . Carly Rae Jepsen held a concert on the Luminosity stage on July 7 , 2012 . It was free with admission and was the first concert on the stage . The stage is also used during HalloWeekends for a show called Skeleton Crew . 
 = = The show = = 
 Luminosity starts at 9 : 00 pm every night and will run for about 25 minutes in 2013 , cut from 40 minutes previously . It features 25 dancers , 2 male and 2 female singers , 3 drummers , 2 cirque dancers and 2 <unk> 's . In the middle of the midway , dancers are raised above the crowd . Iron Dragon is closed during the show . The show is included free with admission . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Several types of new and old music are used in the show . Older songs are given a modern remix with a pop / rock arrangement . Guests are able to send text messages after the show requesting songs from the DJ 's playlist . About 20 songs are used in the show , including On the Floor by Jennifer Lopez , Moves like Jagger by Maroon 5 , The Edge of Glory by Lady Gaga , Sexy and I Know It by LMFAO , and Livin ' on a Prayer by Bon Jovi . The music relates to each segment . For example , Shut Up and Drive by Rihanna , Sweet Dreams by Beyonce Knowles , and Empire State of Mind by Jay @-@ Z are played during " Land Travel " . Come Sail Away by Styx is played during " Sea Travel " and E.T. by Katy Perry is played during " Space Travel " . Top Thrill Dragster 's theme song , Ready to Go by Republica , is also played during " Space Travel " . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 Just prior to the start of the show , a clock counts down from 1 minute to the kick @-@ off . Music , similar to that in the show , is piped in . The stage is covered in fog . An announcement is followed by dancers moving to On the Floor by Jennifer Lopez . 
 = = = Segments = = = 
 The show is divided into three segments , each with lasers , flames and fireworks . Different props are used in each segment . The video content was designed by Bob <unk> from Chauvet . 
 Land Travel 
 The first segment focuses on land and cityscapes . Motorcycles and cars appear on the screens on the stage . Video of Cedar Point 's roller coasters , including Millennium Force are played . The performers use umbrellas during a song in this segment . 
 Sea Travel 
 The second segment focuses on the Seas . Sounds of crashing waves can be heard . Waves and different fish and animals in the ocean can be seen on the screens . Cirque performers dressed as Sea Sirens are on the sides of the stage . Performers use sails at the beginning of this segment . 
 Space Travel 
 The third segment focuses on outer space . The segment starts with a countdown to a Space Shuttle launching . The point of view of astronauts landing on the moon is shown with the sound of mission control being heard . Aliens dancing are also shown on the screens . 
 = = = Finale = = = 
 Before the show ends , the DJ starts to rise from the front @-@ middle of the stage . Before quietly exiting , the performers use water drums . The show concludes with fireworks and pyrotechnics over the stage while " Firework " by Katy Perry , " Raise Your Glass " by P ! nk and " Party Rock Anthem " by LMFAO are played . The DJ then starts playing dance music and people can text shout @-@ outs that appear on the screens . Another DJ works from the balcony of the Ballroom in the Coliseum along the main midway . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Luminosity — Ignite the Night ! has mostly received positive reviews from the general public and enthusiasts . James <unk> from Theme Park Insider described it as " The kind of show that you can watch over and over from different vantage points and see a different show every time . " Jeff Putz , co @-@ <unk> of <unk> and creator of <unk> said " Luminosity succeeds in keeping the energy of the park 's guests very high until the moment they leave . " Putz along with others criticized the show as too long and having inconsistent singers . 
 Amusement Today award RWS the Golden Ticket Award for Supplier of the Year for its role in Luminosity . They were awarded the award for their " high @-@ octane energy and drive that made the vision of Luminosity at Cedar Point a huge show success " . Other parks such as Six Flags Great America and Darien Lake are adding a similar show in 2013 as a result of the popularity of Cedar Point 's Luminosity . Cedar Fair 's CEO , Matt Ouimet , has said that if the show is successful , the chain will look into expanding it to more of their parks . In an interview with Putz in January 2013 , Ouimet labeled the show as an " A " but would give it an " A + " with a few changes in the 2013 season . 
 = Hope Solo = 
 Hope Amelia Solo ( born July 30 , 1981 ) is an American soccer goalkeeper , a two @-@ time Olympic gold medalist and a World Cup gold medalist . She has been goalkeeping for the United States women 's national soccer team since 2000 . After playing at the collegiate level for the University of Washington , she played professionally for the Philadelphia Charge in the Women 's United Soccer Association ( WUSA ) . When the WUSA folded after her first season , she traveled to Europe to play for the top division leagues in Sweden and France . From 2009 to 2011 , she played in the Women 's Professional Soccer ( WPS ) for Saint Louis Athletica , Atlanta Beat and magicJack . After the WPS ceased operations in early 2012 , she played for the Seattle Sounders in the W @-@ League . She currently plays for Seattle Reign FC in the National Women 's Soccer League , the top division of women 's soccer in the United States . 
 Solo is regarded as one of the top female goalkeepers in the world and currently holds the U.S. record for most career clean sheets . She was the starting goalkeeper for the majority of the 2007 FIFA Women 's World Cup and helped lead the U.S. national team to the semifinals having given up only two goals in four games , including three consecutive shutouts . After a controversial move made by head coach Greg Ryan to bench Solo in favor of veteran goalkeeper Briana Scurry for the semifinal , in which the United States was defeated 4 – 0 by Brazil , Solo made headlines with post @-@ game remarks that resulted in many teammates shunning her . She later rebounded to help the United States win gold medals at the 2008 and 2012 Summer Olympics . During the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup , her exceptional skill was highlighted especially during a quarter @-@ final match against Brazil , in which the U.S. defeated Brazil in penalty kicks . Although the team lost to Japan in an intensely close match that ended in penalties , Solo received the Golden Glove award for best goalkeeper as well as the Bronze Ball award for her overall performance at the tournament . 
 Following her performance at the 2011 World Cup , Solo participated in the television show Dancing with the Stars and posed for various magazines , most notably the " Body Issue " of ESPN The Magazine . After the 2012 London Olympics , where she received her second Olympic gold medal , she published her best @-@ selling autobiography Solo : A Memoir of Hope . 
 As the starting goalkeeper at the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup , Solo helped the U.S. win the national team 's third World Cup championship since 1991 . The final was the most @-@ watched televised soccer game ever in the United States . 
 As of July 22 , 2016 , Solo holds several U.S. goalkeeper records including appearances ( 198 ) , starts ( 187 ) , wins ( 151 ) , shutouts ( 100 ) , wins in a season ( 26 ) , consecutive minutes played ( 1 @,@ 256 ) , and longest undefeated streak ( 55 games ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Solo was born in Richland , Washington on July 30 , 1981 to Judy Lynn ( née Shaw ) and Jeffrey Solo . Her father , an Italian @-@ American Vietnam War veteran , who was in and out of her life as a child and teenager , taught her how to play soccer at a young age . When Solo was seven , her father picked her and her brother Marcus up to go to a baseball game in the nearby city of Yakima , but ended up driving over three hours west to Seattle , where they stayed for several days at a hotel . Solo described how it seemed like a vacation at first , but soon realized it was not . Police later found them at a downtown bank and arrested Jeffrey for alleged kidnapping . Although her parents had divorced when she was six and she lived with her mother , Solo maintained a close relationship with her father after re @-@ connecting with him during her college years at the University of Washington . He continued to be a major influence in her life until his death of a heart attack in June 2007 . 
 As a forward at Richland High School , Solo scored 109 goals , leading her team to three consecutive league titles from 1996 to 1998 and a state championship during her senior year . She was twice named a Parade All American . Solo also played club soccer for the Three Rivers Soccer Club in the Tri @-@ Cities . 
 = = = Washington Huskies , 1999 – 2002 = = = 
 After being heavily recruited by several colleges around the country , Solo attended the University of Washington from 1999 to 2002 where she majored in speech communications . With the Huskies , she switched permanently to goalkeeper under the lead of head coach <unk> Gallimore and goalkeeper coach and former national team player , Amy Griffin . Solo described the transition in her memoir , " In high school , I had been the forward who won games . It was a huge mental adjustment to learn that my job was to save games . To anticipate what was needed . Before , I would stand in goal , the ball would come toward me , and I 'd use my athletic ability to make the save . But thanks to Amy 's tutelage and my time with the national team , I was becoming a much better tactical goalkeeper . I learned how to read my opponents ' runs toward goal , how to position my defenders , how to see the angles ... The intellectual side also made goalkeeping so much more interesting . It wasn 't just ninety minutes of waiting for my defense to make a mistake . It was ninety minutes of tactics and strategy . The personality traits that had been shaped by my childhood — resilience and toughness — were assets at the position . " 
 Solo became the top goalkeeper in Pac @-@ 10 history and finished her collegiate career as Washington ’ s all @-@ time leader in shutouts ( 18 ) , saves ( 325 ) and goals against average ( GAA ) ( 1 @.@ 02 ) . She was a four @-@ time All @-@ Pac @-@ 10 selection and was named an NSCAA All @-@ American as a sophomore , junior and senior . During her sophomore year , Solo was named Pac @-@ 10 Player of the Year becoming the first Washingtonian and first goalkeeper ever to receive the award . As a senior , she was the only goalkeeper nominated for the Hermann Trophy . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = WUSA and European professional leagues , 2003 – 05 = = = 
 Following her college career , Solo was selected in the first round ( fourth overall ) of the 2003 WUSA Draft by the Philadelphia Charge . She spent most of her first professional season on the bench playing in eight games . Solo started the last three games of the season and earned her first professional shutout against the Atlanta Beat . She also shut out eventual league champions , the Washington Freedom led by top scorers , Mia Hamm and Abby Wambach . After the WUSA folded following the 2003 season just six days before the 2003 FIFA Women 's World Cup , Solo moved to Göteborg , Sweden in February 2004 to play for <unk> / Göteborg FC in the Swedish Premier Division , the top division of women 's soccer in Sweden . For ten months , she played in two games a week , making 19 appearances in goal for Göteborg in 2004 . In 2005 , she played for Olympique Lyonnais in the French First Division . She made seven appearances for the French club . Solo said of her experience in Europe , " I played in Europe and it was a great experience , not just because of my teammates and the coaches we had , but from the fans and the city itself – I played in Gothenburg and I played in Lyon and soccer was everywhere . At that time in my life , it really jump @-@ started my career and really helped me find myself as a person and player . " 
 = = = The WPS years , 2009 – 11 = = = 
 = = = = Saint Louis Athletica = = = = 
 On September 16 , 2008 , Solo was one of three national team players allocated to the Saint Louis Athletica in the WPS as part of the 2008 WPS Player Allocation , with the new league slated to begin play in April 2009 . Solo let in six goals in the first four games as Athletica got off to a very slow 0 – 2 – 2 start in their first season . She conceded eight goals in her next 13 games and finished the season with eight shutouts , helping lead the Athletica from the bottom of the standings to finish second place and secure a playoff spot . 
 After the 2009 season , Solo was named the WPS Goalkeeper of the Year . She also became the first goalkeeper to be named U.S. Soccer Female Athlete of the Year , the highest honor awarded to a soccer player in the United States . 
 = = = = Atlanta Beat = = = = 
 In May 2010 , the Saint Louis Athletica folded and Solo signed with WPS expansion team , Atlanta Beat , along with her St. Louis teammates , Tina <unk> and <unk> <unk> . As her previous jersey number was taken ( 1 ) , she wore 78 for the Beat . Solo 's comments on social networking website Twitter led to two separate controversies after she accused Boston Breakers supporters of offensive chanting and racist remarks toward a teammate , then questioned the integrity of match officials and the league itself following the Beat 's 1 – 0 defeat to Washington Freedom . The second outburst resulted in a $ 2 @,@ 500 fine and one @-@ game suspension . 
 Solo played in 22 WPS matches in 2010 for both the Athletica and the Beat and was the league @-@ leader in saves with 104 . The two @-@ time WPS All @-@ Star also ranked among the top three in shutouts ( 6 ) , wins ( 6 ) , and goals against average ( 1 @.@ 64 ) . After the end of the 2010 season , Solo underwent surgery on her right shoulder on September 22 . " These next two years are huge for the national team with the World Cup and Olympics on the horizon and I wanted to make sure that I would be giving my team and my country my best on the field , " Solo said of the surgery . " I 've been having some painful issues with the shoulder for a while and for a goalkeeper it 's been difficult physically and mentally to play with this kind of an injury , so it was time to get it taken care of . " 
 = = = = magicJack = = = = 
 Ahead of the 2011 Women 's Professional Soccer season , Solo signed for magicJack , formerly the Washington Freedom under new ownership . Between her shoulder surgery recovery , national team commitments and preparation for the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup , Solo missed a significant part of the season . She made four appearances for the club , tallying a total of 360 minutes . After the season ended , the club lost its franchise on October 25 , 2011 . The league later suspended operations in early 2012 because of legal and financial difficulties . 
 = = = Seattle Sounders Women , 2012 = = = 
 On February 14 , 2012 , it was announced that Solo had signed with the Seattle Sounders Women . Joining the club the same year were national teammates Alex Morgan , Megan Rapinoe , and Sydney Leroux . Sounders Women general manager , Amy Carnell , said of the signing , " Hope is undoubtedly the best women 's keeper in the game today . Her signing represents the caliber player Sounders Women 's fans can expect in 2012 . As the landscape of women 's soccer continues to evolve , we realize the unique opportunity before us . " Because of national team commitments and preparation for the 2012 Summer Olympics , Solo made three appearances for the club , tallying a total of 261 minutes . Her goals against average was 0 @.@ 344 , she made five saves and had one shutout . With the addition of Solo and her national team teammates , the Sounders sold out nine of their ten home matches at Starfire Stadium ( capacity : 4 @,@ 500 ) . The average attendance during league matches was four times higher than the second most attended team in the league . 
 = = = NWSL : a new era , 2013 – present = = = 
 = = = = Seattle Reign FC = = = = 
 On January 19 , 2013 it was announced that Solo was one of three members from the United States national team , along with Megan Rapinoe and Amy Rodriguez , allocated to the Seattle Reign FC for the inaugural season of the National Women 's Soccer League , as part of the NWSL Player Allocation . Two months later , it was reported that she was undergoing wrist surgery and would miss about half the season because of recovery . Joining news that Amy Rodriguez would be out for the season because of pregnancy and Megan Rapinoe would be returning mid @-@ season after a six @-@ month stint for Olympique Lyonnais , the Reign faced a tough first half of the season and went 0 – 9 – 1 in their first ten games . With the return of Solo , Rapinoe , and some additional lineup changes made during the early summer , the Reign turned their regular season record around and finished the season in seventh place with a 5 – 14 – 3 record . Solo started in all 14 matches in which she played with a 1 @.@ 357 goals against average . She made 81 saves and tallied 1 @,@ 260 minutes in goal . 
 In October 2013 Solo was linked with a transfer to English club Manchester City . Despite the relatively high salary reportedly offered by Manchester , Reign FC coach Laura Harvey expected Solo to return to the NWSL for 2014 , to safeguard her place in the national team . 
 Solo returned to the Reign for the 2014 season . The team set a league record unbeaten streak of 16 games during the first part of the season . During the 16 game stretch , the Reign compiled a 13 @-@ 0 @-@ 3 record . The Reign finished first in the regular season clinching the NWSL Shield for the first time . After defeating the Washington Spirit 2 @-@ 1 in the playoff semi @-@ finals , the Reign were defeated 2 @-@ 1 by FC Kansas City during the championship final . Following the regular season , Solo and Reign defenders Lauren Barnes and Stephanie Cox were named to the Second XI team . Solo finished the 2014 season with 65 saves in 20 games played and a .900 goals against average . 
 = = International career = = 
 Solo played for U.S. junior national soccer teams before joining the senior U.S. national team in 2000 . Her senior debut came in an 8 – 0 win over Iceland at Davidson , North Carolina in April 2000 . In 2004 , Solo joined the national team at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens as an alternate behind primary goalkeeper Brianna Scurry and backup Kristin Luckenbill . Solo has been the team 's first choice goalkeeper since 2005 . She holds the national team record for longest undefeated streak as a goalkeeper with 55 games from March 7 , 2002 to July 16 , 2008 . 
 = = = 2007 FIFA Women 's World Cup = = = 
 Solo was the starting goalkeeper for the United States in the 2007 FIFA Women 's World Cup , giving up two goals in four games including consecutive shutouts of Sweden , Nigeria and England . Heading into the semifinal match against Brazil , U.S. coach Greg Ryan benched Solo in favor of 36 @-@ year @-@ old veteran U.S. keeper Briana Scurry , who had a strong history of performance against the Brazilians but had not played a complete game in three months . The U.S. lost to Brazil 4 – 0 , ending a 51 – game ( regulation time ) undefeated streak , while playing much of the match with only 10 players after midfielder Shannon Boxx was sent off after receiving two yellow cards in the first half . 
 = = = = Post @-@ 2007 World Cup fallout = = = = 
 In an impromptu interview following the match , a clearly upset Solo criticized Ryan 's decision . " It was the wrong decision , and I think anybody that knows anything about the game knows that . There 's no doubt in my mind I would have made those saves . And the fact of the matter is it 's not 2004 anymore . It 's not 2004 . And it 's 2007 , and I think you have to live in the present . And you can 't live by big names . You can 't live in the past . It doesn 't matter what somebody did in an Olympic gold medal game in the Olympics three years ago . Now is what matters , and that 's what I think . " Many viewed her comments as being critical of Scurry 's performance , although Solo released an apologetic statement the following day saying that was not her intent . On September 29 , 2007 , coach Greg Ryan announced that Solo would not be with the team and would not play in the third @-@ place match against Norway the following day . Team captain Kristine Lilly stated that the decision on Solo was made by the team as a group . The U.S. went on to win against Norway 4 – 1 . 
 Solo was named to the U.S. women 's national soccer team roster for the post @-@ World Cup tour , but did not attend the first workout ahead of the first game against Mexico . Even though the players ' contract with the federation stipulated that anyone on the World Cup roster had the right to play in the tour , she did not play in any of the three games against Mexico , being replaced by Briana Scurry for the first and third matches , and Nicole Barnhart for the second . The third match against Mexico , on October 20 , 2007 , marked the end of the U.S. women 's national team 's 2007 season . The team regrouped in January 2008 to begin preparations for the 2008 Summer Olympics . Ryan left the team after his contract was not renewed in December 2007 . 
 = = = 2008 Summer Olympics = = = 
 On June 23 , 2008 , it was announced Solo would be the starting goalkeeper for the U.S. team at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . In a reversal of roles from the 2004 Olympics , Briana Scurry did not make the team , though she was an alternate . On August 21 , the U.S. women 's team won the gold medal by defeating Brazil 1 – 0 in extra time , in no small measure due to Solo 's performance as she stopped an energetic Brazilian attack , making save after save . After the team won gold , Solo appeared on NBC Today Show , and she stated in a 2012 article appearing in ESPN The Magazine that she was drunk while on air . " When we were done partying , we got out of our dresses , got back into our stadium coats and , at 7 a.m. with no sleep , went on the Today show drunk . " 
 = = = 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup = = = 
 Despite missing much of the qualifying campaign with a shoulder injury , Solo was named to the U.S. roster for the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup in Germany . After keeping clean sheets in group C wins over North Korea and Colombia , Solo conceded two goals in the 2 – 1 loss to Sweden which consigned the Americans to second place in the group and a quarterfinal meeting with Brazil . 
 The quarterfinal match between the U.S. and Brazil was sent into a penalty shoot @-@ out after U.S. forward Abby Wambach tied the game at 2 – 2 in stoppage time at the end of extra @-@ time . Solo saved the third Brazil penalty kick by <unk> , helping the U.S. secure a semifinal spot against France . After the quarterfinal victory , Solo commented on the performance and spirit of the U.S. players during the match , " Even when we were a player down and a goal behind in extra time , you sensed that something was going to happen " , and added that " [ the ] team kept fighting . You can 't teach that . It 's a feeling – and we play with that feeling . " 
 Solo became the twenty @-@ seventh American woman and second goalkeeper to reach 100 caps with her start in the 3 – 1 semifinal win over France . Talking to the media after the match , Solo reflected upon the tournament so far , " It was a hard @-@ fought road [ ... ] It hasn 't been easy , but this is where we expected to be . We came this far , we better go all the way . " 
 In the final , the U.S. team lost 3 – 1 in a penalty shootout to Japan , after twice taking the lead in an eventual 2 – 2 draw . Solo expressed admiration for the Japanese team and offered her congratulations . Solo won the " Golden Glove " award for best goalkeeper , and the " Bronze Ball " award for her overall performance . She was also featured in the " All @-@ star " team of the tournament . 
 = = = 2012 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Leading up to the Summer Olympics , Solo received a public warning from the U.S. Anti @-@ Doping Agency ( USADA ) after a June 15 urine test concluded the banned substance <unk> had been detected . Solo said in a statement she had been prescribed a pre @-@ menstrual medication and was not aware it contained any banned substances . She cooperated with the USADA and provided them with the necessary information to prove that it was a mistake . Her story checked out and she was cleared with a public warning . The positive test did not require Solo to withdraw from any pre @-@ Olympic matches . 
 In a 4 – 2 defeat of France in the opening match , France took an early 2 – 0 lead in 15 minutes . After Abby Wambach reduced the lead to 2 – 1 with a 19th @-@ minute header off a Megan Rapinoe corner kick , Solo assisted Alex Morgan at the 32nd minute to score and level the match at 2 – 2 ; she took a free @-@ kick sending the ball to Morgan who kicked the ball after a bounce , over goalkeeper Sarah <unk> into the goal . 
 On August 9 , Solo won her second Olympic gold medal with the United States women 's national soccer team . In a 2 – 1 defeat of Japan in the final match , Solo made many saves , including an 82nd minute save of a powerful shot from Mana Iwabuchi , which could have tied the match . 
 Solo kept three clean sheets , two in group @-@ stage against Colombia with 3 – 0 and Korea DPR with 1 – 0 , and a 2 – 0 win against New Zealand in the quarter @-@ final . She conceded 6 goals , 3 in the aforementioned matches against France and Japan . Three goals were conceded to Christine Sinclair in the semi @-@ final , a thrilling and controversial 4 – 3 extra @-@ time last @-@ minute win against Canada . Along with defenders Christie Rampone and Kelley O 'Hara , Solo was one of three players on the United States team who played all 570 minutes during the team 's six matches . 
 = = = 2013 – 2014 = = = 
 In March 2013 , Solo underwent surgery to repair a long @-@ standing injury in her left wrist and did not play for approximately three months . She returned to the national team in June . The team finished 2013 undefeated with a 13 @-@ 0 @-@ 3 record . 
 On June 14 , 2014 , Solo tied the U.S. record for career shutouts with 71 after the team defeated France 1 – 0 during a friendly match in Tampa , Florida . The record was previously set by retired goalkeeper , Brianna Scurry . A few months later on September 13 , she set a new record with her 72nd shutout in a friendly match against Mexico that resulted in a 8 – 0 win for the United States . On January 21 , 2015 , Solo was suspended by the national team for thirty days . 
 = = = 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup = = = 
 In April 2015 , Solo was named to the U.S. roster for the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup in Canada by head coach Jill Ellis . Solo started and played all possible minutes ( 630 ) in all seven of the U.S. ' matches , and the U.S. won the tournament , with record @-@ breaking television viewership that topped 750 million in @-@ home TV viewers . After giving up a goal in the 27th minute of the team 's first group stage match against Australia , Solo made three crucial saves in the same match that kept her team " in the game " . Her performance earned praise from her teammates and coach . She had a 540 – minute shutout streak , the second longest in tournament history , and allowed three goals throughout the tournament . 
 During the semi @-@ final match against top @-@ ranked Germany , she used a stalling tactic that resulted in the tournament 's high scorer , <unk> <unk> , to miss a penalty kick , and keep the game scoreless . This marked the first time a German team , men 's or women 's , missed a penalty in a World Cup . She ended the tournament with 177 international caps and received the Golden Glove trophy as the best goalkeeper . 
 = = = 2016 : 100th shutout and Brazil Olympics = = = 
 On July 9 2016 , Hope Solo earned her 100th international shutout , 150th career win , and 197th cap in a friendly game against South Africa at Soldier Field , Chicago , Illinois . This makes Solo the first ever goalkeeper in history , man or woman , to achieve 100 shutouts in international competition . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 = = = High school = = = 
 Parade Magazine All @-@ American : 1997 , 1998 
 Washington State Championship : 1998 
 = = = College = = = 
 NSCAA All @-@ American : 2000 , 2001 , 2002 
 Pac @-@ 10 Selection : 1999 , 2000 , 2001 , 2002 
 = = = Club = = = 
 WPS Goalkeeper of the Year : 2009 
 = = = International = = = 
 United States 
 Olympic Gold Medal : 2008 , 2012 
 FIFA Women 's World Cup Champion : 2015 
 Runner @-@ up : 2011 
 Algarve Cup : 2005 , 2007 , 2008 , 2010 , 2011 , 2013 , 2015 
 Four Nations Tournament : 2006 , 2007 , 2008 
 CONCACAF Women 's Gold Cup : 2006 , 2014 
 Individual 
 U.S. Soccer Female Athlete of the Year : 2009 
 FIFA Women 's World Cup Golden Glove : 2011 , 2015 
 FIFA Women 's World Cup Bronze ball : 2011 
 FIFA Women 's World Cup All @-@ Star Team : 2011 , 2015 
 CONCACAF Women 's Gold Cup Golden Glove : 2014 
 CONCACAF Women 's Goalkeeper of the Year : 2015 
 <unk> Cup Golden Glove : 2016 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Do Something Award – Athlete : 2012 
 Phoenix Mercury Woman of Inspiration : 2012 
 Hall of Game She 's Got Game Award : 2012 
 Sports Spectacular Female Athlete of the Year : 2013 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Solo is married to former American football player <unk> Stevens . They have been together since mid @-@ August 2012 when Solo returned from the Olympics . On November 12 , 2012 , Stevens was arrested on investigation of assault following an altercation that left Solo injured . The following day , Stevens was released after a judge determined there was not enough evidence to hold him . The pair were wed the next day , November 13 , 2012 . 
 = = = Arrest = = = 
 On June 21 , 2014 , Solo was arrested and charged with two misdemeanor counts of assault in the fourth degree ; one against her half @-@ sister and the other against her nephew . She was booked under her married name of Hope Amelia Stevens . After pleading not guilty , she was released the following day . In August , her trial was scheduled for November 4 , 2014 , but this was later delayed until January 20 , 2015 . On December 30 , 2014 , the judge ordered more depositions from the defendants and delayed a decision on whether charges against Solo would be dropped until January 6 , 2015 . 
 Following her arrest , Solo sat out one game for the Reign and the NWSL allowed her to continue playing soccer through the end of the 2014 season . There was some debate in the media about whether this exemplified a double standard in professional American sports after pro football players Ray Rice and Adrian Peterson were recently suspended by the National Football League after Rice was shown in a previously undisclosed video assaulting his wife in a hotel elevator and Peterson was indicted by a grand jury on a felony charge of child abuse . Senator Richard Blumenthal ( D – Conn . ) sent out a sternly worded letter to U.S. Soccer president Sunil Gulati admonishing the organization for allowing Solo to remain on the World Cup roster following her arrest and accused them of inadequately addressing the charges of domestic violence . 
 On January 13 , 2015 , the judge dismissed the charges against Solo based on a lack of cooperation from both alleged victims . Solo claimed she was defending herself from an attack by her nephew , who is 6 ' 9 " tall . However , prosecutors have filed an appeal with the Superior Court of Washington . Prosecutors are scheduled to file their argument by July 13 , 2015 , with the defense due to respond by August 10 , 2015 . Oral arguments were then scheduled for September 11 , 2015 . 
 The charges were reinstated October 2015 . On June 8 , 2016 , <unk> Seattle reported that the state appeals court denied a discretionary review to dismiss the reinstated domestic violence charges . Solo can appeal the ruling to the Washington state Supreme Court . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 Solo has signed endorsement deals with Seiko , Simple Skincare , Nike , BlackBerry , Ubisoft , Electronic Arts , and Gatorade . In July 2011 , she signed a one @-@ year endorsement deal with Bank of America . In September 2011 , she starred in an EA Sports television commercial along with professional basketball player Steve Nash , promoting FIFA 12 . In the same month , she co @-@ starred with national teammate Alex Morgan in a television commercial promoting ESPN 's SportsCenter . In 2014 , she was featured in a promotional piece for Western Union . Solo signed with LX Ventures , Inc. and <unk> as a " social media <unk> " in March 2014 . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Solo is a representative of the Women 's Sports Foundation , an organization founded by Billie Jean King that is dedicated to " advancing the lives of girls and women through sports and physical activity . " She has donated her time and money to the Boys and Girls Club and made appearances at numerous charity events . In August 2011 , she joined teammates Alex Morgan and Abby Wambach in a Bank of America charitable campaign at the Chicago Marathon . $ 5 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 was donated to Seattle Humane Society on her behalf . In 2012 , Solo was one of 15 professional athletes including Shaun Phillips , Tim Lincecum , Ray Rice , and others who participated in <unk> ' Game Changers program . She made appearances at several charity events and money was donated to a local charity that she selected . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Television and film = = = 
 In 2011 , Solo was a contestant on the 13th season of the Dancing with the Stars television series . Her partner was Maksim Chmerkovskiy and they were eliminated in the semifinal round . 
 She has made appearances on The Late Show with David Letterman , Piers Morgan Tonight , Late Night with Jimmy Fallon , The Ellen DeGeneres Show , Chelsea Lately , and Whitney . Solo was the focus of an ESPN E : 60 episode in 2012 . During her interview by Jeremy Schaap , she told of her experience at the 2007 World Cup as well as her childhood . In 2013 , she was featured in the PBS documentary , Makers : Women Who Make America and ESPN documentary series , Nine for IX . The Nine for IX documentary , Branded , in which Solo appeared focused on the marketing of female professional athletes and the double standard that they often face with more value placed on beauty rather than their athletic excellence . Branded received the highest viewership of all of the documentaries in the series . 
 = = = Magazines = = = 
 Solo has been featured on the covers of Fitness , Sports Illustrated , Newsweek , TV Guide , Seattle Metropolitan Magazine , and Vogue . In 2011 , she appeared nude in The Body Issue of ESPN The Magazine . Of the experience , she said , " I 'm an athlete — that 's all I am . If a sex symbol is now a top female athlete , I think that 's pretty amazing and it shows how far our country has come from the stick @-@ thin models , from what you see in most magazines . " 
 = = = Autobiography = = = 
 On August 14 , 2012 , after the London Olympics , Solo released her autobiography Solo : A Memoir of Hope co @-@ authored with sports columnist and commentator Ann Killion and published by Harper Collins . In her book she provided her accounts of incidents with former U.S. national coach Greg Ryan , and her Dancing with the Stars ' partner Maksim Chmerkovskiy . She recounted her integration into the U.S. team with established players like Mia Hamm , Brandi Chastain , and Julie Foudy . Solo also revealed details of her early life . The autobiography debuted at number three on The New York Times Best Seller list in the hardcover non @-@ fiction category — the highest ever for a book about soccer . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Solo is featured along with her national teammates in the EA Sports ' FIFA video game series starting in FIFA 16 , the first time women players were included in the game . In September 2015 , she was ranked by EA Sports as the # 8 women 's player in the game . 
 = = = Ticker tape parade and White House honor = = = 
 Following the United States ' win at the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup , Solo and her teammates became the first women 's sports team to be honored with a Ticker Tape Parade in New York City . Each player received a key to the city from Mayor Bill de Blasio . In October of the same year , the team was honored by President Barack Obama at the White House . 
 = Los Ángeles Negros = 
 Los Ángeles Negros ( English : The Black Angels ) are a Chilean pop ballad band formed in San Carlos de Chile in 1968 . The band 's best @-@ known line @-@ up consisted of singer Germaín de la Fuente , guitarist Mario Gutiérrez , keyboardist Jorge González , bassist Miguel Ángel " Nano " Concha , and drummer Luis Ortiz . Their music is a blend of boleros , psychedelic funk and rock music , known as Balada rockmántica . 
 The original members of the band included three teenagers and a worker from a local school . After winning a local competition in June 1968 , they recorded and released their first single , " Porque Te Quiero " , which attracted the attention of Chile 's Odeon Records representatives , urging two of the four members of the band to record an album with three other studio musicians . As a result , they recorded Porque Te Quiero in 1969 , and several chart @-@ topping singles across Latin America in the following years . 
 Following De la Fuente 's departure from the group , most of the classic band members also left and established bands with similar names , including Germaín y sus Ángeles Negros and Los Ángeles de Chile . Guitarist Mario Gutiérrez continued to work with other musicians under the name of Los Ángeles Negros . Songs by Los Ángeles Negros have been covered by singers including Celia Cruz , Raphael , and José Luis Rodríguez , while others have been sampled by hip @-@ hop and rap musicians such as <unk> , Damian Marley , the Beastie Boys , and Jay @-@ Z. 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation , radio competition , and the first LP ( 1968 – 1969 ) = = = 
 Cristián Blasser and Mario Gutiérrez , students from the Escuela <unk> de San Carlos ( now Liceo Politécnico de San Carlos ) , and Sergio Rojas , who worked at the school , formed a band in 1968 . Upon hearing an announcement of a bands tournament organized by La <unk> radio station from <unk> , they recruited Germaín de la Fuente , who was well known in the local scene for his vocal abilities . Blasser and Gutiérrez played the guitar , Rojas the bass , and De la Fuente became the keyboardist and lead vocalist . Most of the band members were musically inspired by acts such as The Beatles except De la Fuente , who did not like them at all and wanted to do bolero music . As a result , they created a mixed style known as the Balada rockmántica or Bolero @-@ beat . 
 Sergio Rojas suggested the band to be named Los Ángeles Negros ( The Black Angels ) , in reference to another Chilean band called Pat Henry y Los Diablos <unk> ( Pat Henry and the Blue Devils ) . Although the band was initially reluctant to use a name in Spanish , they adopted Los Ángeles Negros after De la Fuente 's mother said she liked it . 
 In June 1968 Los Ángeles Negros won La <unk> radio station 's competition , in which they competed against a band named Los <unk> , and received the opportunity to record a single in <unk> Indis , an independent label owned by pianist Raúl Lara . They recorded " Porque Te Quiero " / " Día Sin Sol " , which was released by Indis as a single . 
 After recording the songs in Santiago , the band returned to San Carlos and became a quintet when drummer Federico Blasser joined them . In the meantime , their single received high airplay in some Chilean provinces , and because of De la Fuente 's voice , attracted the attention of Jorge Oñate , the director of Chile 's Odeon Records , who asked the band to go to Santiago to record an LP for his record company . However , only De la Fuente and guitarist Mario Gutiérrez eventually went . Oñate quickly contacted three studio musicians — drummer Luis Ortiz , keyboardist Jorge González , and bassist Miguel Ángel " Nano " Concha — with which De la Fuente and Gutiérrez recorded Los Ángeles Negros ' debut LP , Porque Te Quiero , released in 1969 . 
 = = = Latin American success , and departure of Ortíz and De la Fuente ( 1969 – 1974 ) = = = 
 Following the release of Porque Te Quiero , Gutiérrez and De la Fuente suggested the studio musicians to stay permanently in the group , a proposal which they accepted . The new band members used to be part of another Chilean group called Los <unk> , whose music was influenced by the psychedelic funk , which they incorporated in their next recordings with Los Ángeles Negros . Later , in October 1969 , they recorded and released their second album , Y Volveré . The record contained songs which helped the band become popular throughout Chile and Latin America , including " Y Volveré " ( cover version of " <unk> @-@ moi " by Alain <unk> with new lyrics by De la Fuente ) , " Como Quisiera <unk> " , and " Murió la Flor " . 
 Los Ángeles Negros then began a tour in Latin America , visiting countries including Ecuador , Peru , Venezuela , and Argentina . According to Jorge Leiva from the Chilean National Council of Culture and the Arts ' website Música Popular , they performed at " stadiums which were full of people , with an unusual media coverage " . In 1971 , they moved to Mexico , where their LP Y Volveré sold 700 @,@ 000 copies . The band released seven new LPs between 1970 and 1974 : Te Dejo la Ciudad Sin Mí ( 1970 ) , Esta Noche La Paso Contigo ( 1971 ) , La Cita ( 1971 ) , El Tren <unk> El Olvido ( 1972 ) , <unk> Si Estoy Llorando ( 1973 ) , <unk> en Mis Sueños ( 1973 ) , and <unk> Mi Final ( 1973 ) . 
 Their popularity in Chile decreased , however . Besides the fact that the country was taken control by a Government Junta after the 1973 coup d 'état , the musical scene of the time was mostly " folkloric " , with Víctor Jara and Violeta Parra as some prominent figures . The band was also <unk> qualified as " <unk> " ( drama queens ) . The internal relationship of the band was deteriorated , which concluded with the departure of Ortiz from Los Ángeles Negros , following an argument with De la Fuente in early 1973 . De la Fuente lost interest in the band , and subsequently quit the group in March 1974 . 
 = = = Mi Vida Como Un <unk> , continuing success , and return to Chile ( 1974 – 1993 ) = = = 
 After Ortíz and De la Fuente left the band , the remaining members continued to play under the direction of Miguel Ángel " Nano " Concha as Los Ángeles Negros . Ismael Montes replaced De la Fuente as the singer , and Luis Astudillo replaced Ortiz as the drummer . Concha 's Ángeles Negros recorded and released the album Mi Vida Como Un <unk> in 1974 . Meanwhile , De la Fuente along with other Mexican musicians formed the band Germaín y sus Ángeles Negros , and settled in Mexico City . 
 Concha 's Ángeles Negros played during the following years with Mexican singers Oscar <unk> and Enrique Castillo , and Micky Alarcón and Guillermo Lynch from Chile , releasing the albums <unk> , <unk> , an instrumental one ( all three from 1976 ) , Serenata Sin Luna ( 1977 ) , Pasión y Vida ( 1978 ) , Será <unk> , Será Mujer ( 1979 ) , and Tu <unk> ( 1980 ) . Drummer Luis Ortíz returned to the band in 1981 , following Astudillo 's departure in 1980 . They achieved success with songs such as " El <unk> del Amor " , " Volverás " , José Alfredo Jiménez 's " <unk> " , and Los Red Juniors ' " Al Pasar Esa <unk> " . After the successful period in the early 1980s when the band performed live at least 150 times in Mexico in a year , they decided to move to this country in 1983 . 
 However , in 1982 , keyboardist Jorge Gutiérrez left for De la Fuente 's band , although he would occasionally play for Los Ángeles Negros as a " hired musician " . Singer Eddie Martínez joined Los Ángeles Negros , while drummer Luis Astudillo returned to the band for the second time in 1986 , after Ortiz moved to <unk> the previous year . From Ortíz comeback in 1981 until his new departure , the band released Volverás ( 1981 ) , Siempre <unk> ( 1982 ) , <unk> Piano / <unk> Mía ( 1983 ) , Con Alas Nuevas ( 1984 ) , and Prohibido ( 1985 ) . The band did not release new albums until the 1990 comeback album El <unk> <unk> . The next year they released De Aquí En Adelante , an album " inspired by tropical music , which showed the band 's difficulties finding a new musical path " , according to Jorge Leiva . 
 " Nano " Concha decided to return to Chile in 1992 , and established an oldies music store in Santiago . Former members González and De la Fuente also returned to Chile , in 1993 . 
 = = = Gutiérrez 's leadership and the reunion ( 1993 – present ) = = = 
 Guitarist Gutiérrez continued to be part of Los Ángeles Negros as the only original member , and later became its leader . Gutiérrez 's Ángeles Negros recruited another singer in addition to Martínez , the Chilean Antonio Saavedra . The band plays yearly at least 50 times in Mexico , keeping the Ángeles Negros ' most well @-@ known songs in their live repertoire , and they have released two albums since 1993 : Toda Una Vida ( 1996 ) , and Metamorfosis ( 2003 ) . 
 Gutiérrez has been involved in several legal battles against the former members of the band and other unrelated individuals who perform as " Los Ángeles Negros " or similar names , who are for him " <unk> <unk> " ( illegal musicians ) . Those individuals include singer Germaín de la Fuente , who performs since 1974 as Germaín y sus Ángeles Negros , keyboardist Jorge González with singer Micky Alarcón , who created a band called El Sonido de los Ángeles in the late 1990s , and drummer Luis Ortíz and singer Guillermo Lynch , who created the band Los Ángeles de Chile . 
 De la Fuente , González , Concha , and Ortíz announced their reunion in February 2009 to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of Y Volveré , originally released in 1969 . Their label EMI qualified the event as " unprecedented " . Gutiérrez did not want to participate in the Ángeles Negros reunion , fearing eventual criticism . They played together for the first time since 1974 at the Teatro <unk> on 14 February 2010 . The group 's reunion , however , lasted until March of that year , because of " economic issues " just before a performance at Sala <unk> , a concert hall in Santiago . 
 = = Legacy and recognition = = 
 The style of Los Ángeles Negros , Balada rockmántica or Bolero @-@ beat , was immediately imitated by Chilean bands such as Los Golpes , Capablanca , Los <unk> , and the Peruvian band Los <unk> Verdes . They also influenced bands such as Los Bukis from Mexico , and Los Bunkers from Chile . Los Ángeles Negros are regarded as a " classic example of romantic Latin music . " 
 Several songs by Los Ángeles Negros have been covered by bands and artists such as Los Tr3s , Los Bunkers , Sexual Democracia , José José , Raphael , and Celia Cruz , while others have been sampled by hip hop and rap acts such as the Beastie Boys , Jay @-@ Z , Damian Marley , and <unk> . 
 A documentary titled Ángeles Negros directed by Chilean filmmakers <unk> Bustos and Jorge Leiva was premiered at the Hoyts and Arte Alameda cinemas in Santiago on 18 October 2007 . The documentary , which was recorded in Chile , Mexico , and the United States , is a " tribute " to the band , and " reviews their history " . The band was awarded " El <unk> de Oro " ( The Golden Microphone ) by the Asociación Nacional de <unk> de México in 2012 . The band 's 1969 song " El Rey y Yo " was featured in 2013 videogame Grand Theft Auto V , specifically in the game 's radio East Los FM . " [ ' El Rey y Yo ' ] is the gamers ' preferred song " , states a La <unk> article describing the song 's inclusion in the videogame . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 = South West Pacific Area ( command ) = 
 South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) was the name given to the Allied supreme military command in the South West Pacific Theatre of World War II . It was one of four major Allied commands in the Pacific War . SWPA included the Philippines , Borneo , the Dutch East Indies ( excluding Sumatra ) , East Timor , Australia , the Territories of Papua and New Guinea , and the western part of the Solomon Islands . It primarily consisted of United States and Australian forces , although Dutch , Filipino , British and other Allied forces also served in the SWPA . 
 General Douglas MacArthur was appointed as the Supreme Commander , Southwest Pacific Area , on its creation on 18 April 1942 . He created five subordinate commands : Allied Land Forces , Allied Air Forces , Allied Naval Forces , United States Army Forces in Australia ( USAFIA ) , and the United States Army Forces in the Philippines . The last command disappeared when Corregidor surrendered on 6 May 1942 , while USAFIA became the United States Army Services of Supply , Southwest Pacific Area ( USASOS SWPA ) . In 1943 , United States Army Forces in the Far East was reformed and assumed responsibility for administration , leaving USASOS as a purely logistical agency . Both were swept away in a reorganisation in 1945 . The other three commands , Allied Land Forces , Allied Air Forces and Allied Naval Forces , remained until SWPA was abolished on 2 September 1945 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The forerunner of the South West Pacific Area was the short @-@ lived American @-@ British @-@ Dutch @-@ Australian Command ( ABDA ) . In December 1941 and January 1942 , ABDA was referred to as the South West Pacific Area . The rapid Japanese advance through the Dutch East Indies effectively divided the ABDA area in two , and in late February 1942 , ABDA was dissolved at the recommendation of its commander , Field Marshal Sir Archibald Wavell , who — as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief in India — retained responsibility for Allied operations in Burma and Sumatra . 
 Another command , established under emergency conditions when a convoy intended for supply of the Philippines , known as the Pensacola Convoy , was rerouted to Brisbane due to the attack on Pearl Harbor . Brigadier General Julian F. Barnes was ordered to assume command of all troops in the convoy on 12 December 1941 concurrent with their designation as Task Force — South Pacific , and place himself under the command of MacArthur . The next day , by radiogram , the Chief of Staff of the United States Army , General George C. Marshall , ordered Barnes to assume command as Commander , US Troops in Australia and take charge of all troops and supplies . On 22 December 1941 , with the convoy 's arrival in Brisbane , the command was designated as United States Forces in Australia ( <unk> ) . It was renamed U.S. Army Forces in Australia ( USAFIA ) on 5 January 1942 . Its mission was to create a base in Australia for the support of the forces still in the Philippines . 
 The staff , known as the " Remember Pearl Harbor " ( <unk> ) group , selected by the War Department for USAFIA arrived Melbourne 1 February 1942 aboard SS President Coolidge and SS Mariposa in the first large convoy bearing personnel , supplies and munitions intended for transhipment to Java and Philippines as well as Australia . For a brief time , due to the increased isolation of the Philippines and before the fall of Java , <unk> was withdrawn from MacArthur 's command and placed under the ABDA with continued direction to support both Java and the Philippines . 
 What would replace ADBA was the subject of discussions between the Australian and New Zealand chiefs of staff that were held in Melbourne between 26 February and 1 March 1942 . They proposed creating a new theatre of war encompassing Australia and New Zealand , under the command of Wavell 's former deputy , Lieutenant General George Brett , who had assumed command of the US Army Forces in Australia ( USAFIA ) on 25 February . 
 The President of the United States , Franklin Roosevelt , and the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Winston Churchill , discussed the matter of command arrangements in the Pacific in Washington , D.C. , on 9 March . Roosevelt proposed that the world would be divided into British and American areas of responsibility , with the United States having responsibility for the Pacific , where there would be an American supreme commander responsible to the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Churchill responded favourably to the proposal , and the governments of Australia and New Zealand were then consulted . They endorsed the idea of an American supreme commander , but wanted to have some input into matters of strategy . 
 This resulted in the creation of the Pacific War Council , which met for the first time in London on 10 February 1942 . Churchill , Clement Attlee ( Deputy Prime Minister ) and Anthony Eden ( Foreign Secretary ) represented the United Kingdom , and Earle Page represented Australia , along with representatives from the Netherlands , New Zealand , India and China . Page was replaced as the Australian representative by Stanley Bruce in June 1942 . A parallel Pacific War Council was created in Washington , D.C. , that first met on 1 April 1942 . It was chaired by Roosevelt , with Richard Casey and later Owen Dixon representing Australia , and Prime Minister Mackenzie King representing Canada . The Pacific War Council never became an effective body , and had no influence on strategy , but did allow the Dominions to put their concerns before the President . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The obvious choice for a supreme commander in the Pacific was General Douglas MacArthur . He had been ordered to leave the Philippines for Australia to take command of a reconstituted ABDA area on 22 February 1942 , and had therefore been promised the command even before there were discussions on what it should be . MacArthur had solid support from the President , the Army and the American people , but not the Navy . The Commander in Chief , United States Fleet , Admiral Ernest King , saw the Pacific lines of communication primarily as a naval responsibility and would not yield command to an Army officer and proposed a division placing all of the Solomons within the Australian area , but excluding the New Hebrides , New Caledonia , and New Zealand . While the Army planners , led by Brigadier General Dwight Eisenhower , were willing to compromise on a divided command , they objected to placing Australia and New Zealand in separate theatres . The Joint Chiefs of Staff discussed the matter between 9 and 16 March , the result of which was a decision to adopt the Navy 's plan , with only minor amendments . 
 While this was still going on General Marshall , had contacted Brett and asked him to get the Australian government to nominate MacArthur , whose arrival in Australia was now imminent , as its choice for supreme commander . This was done on 17 March when MacArthur arrived at Batchelor , Northern Territory . On 24 March 1942 , the Combined Chiefs of Staff issued a directive formally designating the Pacific theatre an area of American strategic responsibility . On 30 March , the Joint Chiefs of Staff divided the Pacific theatre into three areas : the Pacific Ocean Areas ( POA ) , under Admiral Chester Nimitz ; the Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , under MacArthur ; and the Southeast Pacific Area , which never became an active theatre . The former Anzac Area was divided between SWPA and the POA . 
 An annex defined SWPA 's boundaries : 
 From Cape Kami in the Luichow Peninsula around the coast of the Tonkin Gulf , Indo @-@ China , Thailand , and Malaya to Singapore : from Singapore south to the north coast of Sumatra , thence round the east coast of Sumatra ( leaving the Sunda Strait to the eastward of the line ) to a point on the coast of Sumatra at Longitude 104 ° East , thence south to Latitude 08 ° South , thence southeasterly towards Onslow , Australia , and on reaching Longitude 110 ° East , due south along that meridian . ... The north and east boundaries ... : From Cape Kami ... south to Latitude 20 ° North ; thence east to Longitude 130 ° East ; thence south to the Equator ; thence east to Longitude 165 ° East ; south to Latitude 10 ° South ; southwesterly to Latitude 17 ° South , Longitude 160 ° East ; thence south . 
 On 17 April 1942 the Prime Minister of Australia , John Curtin , directed all Australian defence forces personnel to treat orders from MacArthur " as emanating from the Commonwealth Government " . The Army 's workshops and fixed fortifications , and the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) ' s logistical and training infrastructure , were not placed under SWPA . Having placed its troops at MacArthur 's disposal , the Australian government was adamant that it should be consulted on any alteration to the boundaries or command arrangements in SWPA . The government was particularly concerned that the Supreme Commander should not move troops outside Australia or Australian territory without its consent , as there were legal restrictions on where the Australian Militia could serve . The matter of changes in command first came up when Brett was replaced as Commander of Allied Air Forces by the Joint Chiefs of Staff . MacArthur and Curtin agreed that there would be no change to Blamey 's status , and that the government would be consulted about any other proposed changes . When Vice Admiral Herbert F. Leary was replaced a few months later , Curtin was consulted , and concurred with the change . 
 = = General Headquarters = = 
 MacArthur became the Supreme Commander Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) on 18 April 1942 , although he preferred to use the more conventional title of Commander in Chief . MacArthur 's first General Order created five subordinate commands : Allied Land Forces , Allied Air Forces , Allied Naval Forces , United States Army Forces in Australia ( USAFIA ) , and the United States Army Forces in the Philippines . The last command had a short life . Lieutenant General Jonathan Wainwright 's United States Army Forces in the Philippines disintegrated over the following three weeks , and disappeared entirely when Wainwright surrendered on Corregidor on 6 May . 
 MacArthur announced the composition of his staff , known as General Headquarters ( GHQ ) on 19 April . Major General Richard K. Sutherland became Chief of Staff ; Brigadier General Richard J. Marshall , Deputy Chief of Staff ; Colonel Charles P. Stivers , Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 1 ; Colonel Charles A. Willoughby , Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 2 ; Brigadier General Stephen J. Chamberlin , Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 3 ; Colonel Lester J. Whitlock , Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 4 ; Brigadier General Spencer B. Akin , Signal Officer ; Brigadier General Hugh J. Casey , Engineer Officer ; Brigadier General William F. <unk> , Antiaircraft Officer ; Colonel Burdette M. Fitch , Adjutant General ; and Colonel <unk> A. Diller , Public Relations Officer . 
 Although Marshall had recommended that MacArthur appoint as many Australian and Dutch officers to senior positions as possible , most of his staff was made up of US Army officers who had served under him in the Philippines . The rest , including Whitlock , Fitch and Chamberlain , had been on the staff of USAFIA . MacArthur reported to Marshall that there were no qualified Dutch officers in Australia , and that the Australian Army had a critical shortage of staff officers , which he did not wish to exacerbate . Nevertheless , several Dutch and Australian army officers , as well as some American naval officers , served in junior positions on the staff . 
 In July , MacArthur moved his GHQ north , from Melbourne to Brisbane , where it was located in the AMP Building . The original intention had been to move to Townsville , but this was found to be impractical , as Townsville lacked the communications facilities that GHQ required . The Allied Air Forces and Allied Naval Forces headquarters were co @-@ located with GHQ in the AMP building . The Advanced Headquarters of Allied Land Forces opened at St Lucia , about 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) away . The Advanced GHQ subsequently moved to Hollandia in September 1944 , Leyte in October 1944 , and Manila in May 1945 . 
 There was a major reorganisation in April 1945 for the planned invasion of Japan . All Army forces in the Pacific were placed under MacArthur 's command , including those in Nimitz 's Pacific Ocean Areas . A new command was formed , Army Forces Pacific ( AFPAC ) , with GHQ operating as the headquarters of both AFPAC and SWPA . Units in POA remained under Nimitz 's operational control , and the first major formation , the Tenth United States Army , did not pass to AFPAC control until 31 July 1945 . SWPA , together with the Allied Air Forces , Allied Naval Forces and Allied Land Forces , was abolished on 2 September 1945 , but GHQ remained as GHQ AFPAC . 
 = = Allied Land Forces = = 
 The Australian Army 's Commander in Chief , General Sir Thomas Blamey , was appointed Commander , Allied Land Forces , SWPA . His headquarters was the existing General Headquarters ( Australia ) , and became known as LHQ . An Australian commander was chosen as most of the land forces were Australian . In April 1942 , there were 38 @,@ 000 American ground troops in SWPA and 369 @,@ 000 Australian . LHQ controlled five major commands : Lieutenant General Sir John Lavarack 's First Army , based in Queensland ; Lieutenant General Sir Iven Mackay 's Second Army in Victoria ; Lieutenant General Gordon Bennett 's III Corps in Western Australia ; the Northern Territory Force under Major General Edmund Herring ; and New Guinea Force under Major General Basil Morris . Between them they controlled ten Australian and two American divisions . In August 1944 , the Australian Army had a strength of 463 @,@ 000 men and women , and there were 173 @,@ 000 US Army ground personnel in SWPA . By late 1944 , there were eighteen American divisions in SWPA , while the Australian Army had just seven . 
 When GHQ moved up to Brisbane , LHQ remained behind in Melbourne , but Blamey formed an Advanced LHQ under his Deputy Chief of the General Staff ( DCGS ) , Major General George Alan Vasey , which moved to nearby St Lucia . Major General Frank Berryman replaced Vasey as DCGS in September 1942 , and remained in the post until January 1944 . He resumed the post in July 1944 and remained until December 1945 . When the main body of GHQ moved to Hollandia , Advanced LHQ followed , opening there on 15 December , but when the main GHQ moved to Leyte in February 1945 , Advanced LHQ remained behind . A Forward Echelon LHQ was formed under Berryman that remained co @-@ located with the main body of GHQ , while the main body of LHQ remained at Hollandia until it moved to Morotai for the operations in Borneo in April 1945 . 
 In practice , MacArthur controlled land operations through " task forces " . These reported directly to GHQ , and their commanders could control all Allied land , air , naval and service forces in their area if a Japanese land attack was imminent . The most important of these was New Guinea Force , which was formed in 1942 and was commanded personally by Blamey in September 1942 , and again in September 1943 . In February 1943 , Lieutenant General Walter Krueger 's Sixth Army arrived in SWPA , and its headquarters became that of Alamo Force . Alamo Force reported directly to MacArthur , and as a result Blamey did not command of the majority of American land forces in the theatre after that time , although his post was not abolished . 
 In March 1944 , MacArthur met with Curtin and detailed his plans for the Western New Guinea campaign , explaining that he would assume direct command of land forces when he reached the Philippines , and suggesting that Blamey could either go with him as an army commander , or remain in Australia as Commander in Chief . The new organisation went into effect in September 1944 , with Lieutenant General Walter Krueger 's Sixth US Army , Lieutenant General Robert Eichelberger 's Eighth United States Army , Lieutenant General Vernon Sturdee 's First Australian Army , Lieutenant General Leslie Morshead 's I Australian Corps and Major General Oscar Griswold 's XIV Corps reporting directly to GHQ . Allied Land Forces remained as an important administrative and logistical command , until it was abolished , along with SWPA , on 2 September 1945 . 
 = = Allied Air Forces = = 
 The April 1942 reorganisation that created the Allied Land Forces and Allied Naval Forces also created the Allied Air Forces under Brett . Unlike MacArthur , Brett created a completely integrated headquarters , with a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) officer , Air Vice Marshal William Bostock , as his chief of staff . Each United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) staff officer was paired with a RAAF officer , with the senior staff posts divided evenly between them . A majority of command positions were held by Australians . To make up shortages of USAAF aircrew , RAAF aircrew were assigned to USAAF air groups , serving in every role except aircraft commander . 
 In May 1942 , the Australian government appointed Air Vice Marshal George Jones as Chief of the Air Staff . He became responsible for matters other than operations , such as administration and training . It soon became clear that Jones and Bostock could not get along together , but Kenney preferred to have Bostock in operational command , and although he regarded the antipathy between Jones and Bostock as a nuisance , was happy to leave arrangements the way they were . 
 One of MacArthur 's first orders to Brett was for a bombing mission to the Philippines , an order delivered personally by Sutherland . When Brett protested , Sutherland informed him that MacArthur wanted the mission carried out . The mission was flown by Brigadier General Ralph Royce , but MacArthur personally wrote a reprimand to Brett . Henceforth , communications with Sutherland were handled by Bostock . Further disagreements between MacArthur and Brett followed . Meanwhile , in Washington , General George Marshall and the Chief of Army Air Forces , Lieutenant General Henry Arnold , had become alarmed at Brett 's integration of the USAAF and RAAF , and disturbed by his inability to work with MacArthur . On 6 July 1942 Marshall radioed MacArthur to offer him Major General George Kenney or Brigadier General Jimmy Doolittle as a replacement for Brett ; MacArthur selected Kenney . 
 Kenney sent home Major General Royce , Brigadier Generals Edwin S. Perrin , Albert Sneed and Martin Scanlon , and about forty colonels . In Australia he found two talented , recently arrived brigadier generals , Ennis Whitehead and Kenneth Walker . Kenney reorganised his command in August , appointing Whitehead as commander of the V Fighter Command and Walker as commander of the V Bomber Command . Allied Air Forces was composed of both USAAF and RAAF personnel , and Kenney moved to separate them . Brigadier General Donald Wilson arrived in September and replaced Air Vice Marshal Bostock as Kenney 's chief of staff , while Bostock took over the newly created RAAF Command . Walker was shot down over Rabaul in January 1943 . His successor , Brigadier General Howard Ramey , disappeared in March 1943 . 
 Kenney deviated from the normal structure of an air force by creating the Advanced Echelon ( ADVON ) under Whitehead . The new headquarters had the authority to alter the assignments of aircraft in the forward area , where fast @-@ changing weather and enemy action could invalidate orders drawn up in Australia . He created the 1st , 2nd and 3rd Air Task Forces to control air operations in a forward area for a specific mission , another departure from doctrine . While Kenney was enthusiastic about this innovation , Washington did not like it and , over Kenney 's objections , converted the three air task forces into the 308th , 309th and 310th Bombardment Wings . In June 1944 , Major General St. Clair Streett 's Thirteenth Air Force was added to the Allied Air Forces . Kenney created the Far East Air Forces ( FEAF ) from his Fifth Air Force headquarters , while ADVON became the Fifth Air Force under Whitehead . The RAAF formed the Australian First Tactical Air Force under Air Commodore Harry Cobby in October 1944 , and when MacArthur became commander of all Army forces in the Pacific , the Seventh Air Force was added as well . Major General Paul Wurtsmith replaced Streett in March 1945 , and Air Commodore Frederick Scherger replaced Cobby in May . Allied Air Forces was abolished on 2 September 1945 . 
 = = Allied Naval Forces = = 
 Vice Admiral Leary was appointed Commander , Allied Naval Forces , in April 1942 . On 7 February 1942 , he had become commander of the Anzac Area to the east of Australia extending to include Fiji with headquarters in Melbourne . That command included a naval element , some air forces but without responsibility for land defense . He was answerable directly to Admiral King . The most important force under his command was Rear Admiral John Gregory Crace 's Anzac Squadron . When SWPA and the Allied Naval Forces were formed in April 1942 , Leary also became Commander , Southwest Pacific Force ( <unk> ) , while Crace 's Anzac Squadron became Task Force 44 . In June , Crace was succeeded by another Royal Navy officer , Rear Admiral Victor Crutchley . The former Anzac Area was divided so that the Australian coastal waters were with SWPA and the sea and air lines of communication from Hawaii and North America fell in the Pacific Ocean Areas ( POA ) with a special provision for the South Pacific Area having a designated sub commander under Admiral Chester Nimitz . 
 With the agreement of the Australian government , Leary was succeeded as Commander , Southwest Pacific Force , and Commander , Allied Naval Forces , by Vice Admiral Arthur S. Carpender on 11 September 1942 . Like his predecessor , he reported to King in the former role , and MacArthur in the latter . Also like Leary , Carpender was not the most senior naval officer in the theatre , as the Royal Australian Navy Chief of the Naval Staff ( CNS ) , Admiral Sir Guy Royle , and the Royal Netherlands Navy ′ s Vice Admiral Conrad Helfrich were both senior to him . However , Royle agreed to serve under Carpenter as Commander , South West Pacific Sea Frontier , which was formed on 16 March 1943 . 
 The Southwest Pacific Force was renamed the Seventh Fleet on 15 March 1943 , and its task forces were renumbered to match , so Task Force 44 became Task Force 74 . Another important component was Task Force 76 , the Amphibious Force , Southwest Pacific , which had been formed under Rear Admiral Daniel Barbey on 8 January 1943 . It became the VII Amphibious Force later in the year . A training centre , HMAS Assault was established at Port Stephens , New South Wales , and another at Toorbul Point , Queensland . The VII Amphibious Forces initially consisted of the Australian Landing Ships , Infantry HMAS Manoora , Westralia and Kanimbla and the American attack transport USS Henry T. Allen , but gradually grew in size as more landing craft and landing ships arrived . 
 MacArthur was annoyed at the way that Royle , a Royal Navy officer , communicated directly with the Admiralty ; he was also aware that Royle had been critical of SWPA 's command arrangements , and of some of his decisions . MacArthur proposed that an Australian officer , Captain John Collins , replace Royle as CNS , an appointment that Carpender also supported . Over the Admiralty 's objections , Curtin appointed Collins to replace Crutchley as Commander , Task Force 44 , in June 1944 , at the rank of commodore , with the intention that Collins would replace Royle when his term expired . This did not occur , because Collins was seriously wounded in Leyte Gulf on 21 October 1944 . 
 MacArthur did not get along with Carpender , and twice asked for him to be replaced , only to be embarrassed in November 1943 when King replaced Carpender with Vice Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid without informing MacArthur or seeking the approval of the Australian government . However , a face @-@ saving formula was agreed upon . For the invasion of Leyte , the Seventh Fleet was massively reinforced by ships from the Pacific Fleet . Cover was provided by Admiral William F. Halsey 's Third Fleet , which remained under Nimitz . At the Battle of Leyte Gulf , the divided command brought the Allies to the brink of disaster when misunderstandings arose between Kinkaid and Halsey . Allied Naval Forces was abolished , along with SWPA , on 2 September 1945 . 
 = = U.S. Army Services of Supply = = 
 Under U.S. Army Forces in Australia ( USAFIA ) a series of bases had gradually been built in Australia , initially to support the US forces in the Philippines . Seven base sections were established in Australia to operate under USAFIA : Base Section 1 at <unk> , Northern Territory ; Base Section 2 in Townsville ; Base Section 3 in Brisbane ; Base Section 4 in Melbourne ; Base Section 5 in Adelaide ; Base Section 6 in Perth ; and Base Section 7 in Sydney . On 20 July USAFIA became the United States Army Services of Supply , Southwest Pacific Area ( USASOS SWPA ) , under the command of Brigadier General Richard J. Marshall , and Barnes returned to the United States . 
 When Lieutenant General Krueger 's Sixth United States Army headquarters arrived in Australia in February 1943 , the administrative functions were taken from USASOS and given to a new headquarters , United States Army Forces in the Far East ( USAFFE ) , under MacArthur 's command . This had the same name as MacArthur 's old headquarters in the Philippines , but its function was different . This left USASOS with logistical responsibilities only . The new arrangement was awkward , and required considerable adjustment before it functioned properly . In September 1943 , Marshall was replaced by Brigadier General James L. Frink . 
 The New Guinea Advanced Base was formed in Port Moresby in August 1942 , and sub bases were created at Milne Bay and Oro Bay . These became Advanced Sub Base A and Advanced Sub Base B respectively in April 1943 . Advanced Sub Base C was created on Goodenough Island in April 1943 , but was discontinued when the island was handed over to Sixth Army control in July . Meanwhile , Advanced Sub Base D was formed at Port Moresby in May . The sub bases became bases in August 1943 . Advanced Base E was formed at Lae and Advanced Base F at Finschhafen in November 1943 , followed by Bases G and H at Hollandia and Biak respectively . 
 With a worldwide shipping crisis and SWPA being at the end of a very long supply line , as well as being a region without well developed transportation nets , regional logistics were almost entirely dependent on water transport . No one fleet composed the assets available to the Commander in Chief , SWPA as the U. S. Navy , Royal Navy , Royal Australian Navy , Australian Army , Netherlands East Indies Navy were under his operational command while being maintained under their respective organizations . Those assets were inadequate resulting in the creation of a large Army fleet unique to SWPA , the Permanent Local Fleet , under first <unk> , later USASOS and finally Army Forces , Western Pacific ( <unk> ) , starting with the retention of the USAT Meigs , Admiral Halstead and Coast Farmer from the convoy diverted to Brisbane in December 1941 . 
 That core was augmented by vessels fleeing the Japanese advance , particularly twenty @-@ one Dutch vessels later known as the " KPM vessels " after the Dutch shipping line 's name , Koninklijke <unk> @-@ Maatschappij . As of 28 April 1942 the Army fleet had grown to twenty @-@ eight ships and by 24 January 1945 that fleet of large ships exceeded ninety with a peak of ninety @-@ eight by 1 August 1945 . That number did not count a much larger fleet of small vessels , ranging from landing craft , barges and other floating equipment to seagoing vessels under 1 @,@ 000 tons , including the Small Ships Section of requisitioned and locally constructed ( 2 @,@ 712 craft ) vessels manned largely by Australian civilian employees , 1 @,@ 719 as of June 1945 , of the U.S. Army , and many such vessels and floating equipment delivered from the United States . The permanent fleet of SWPA almost had as many vessels as the Army ’ s general fleet during some periods , though those vessels were often small , obsolete , in poor condition and under unorthodox management in comparison . 
 As the Allied forces advanced , new bases were formed , and the old ones in Australia were closed . Base Sections 5 and 6 were closed in January 1943 , and Base Section 4 in June 1944 . The remaining four became bases , and a Base Section was formed in Brisbane to control them . Bases 1 and 3 were closed in December 1944 , leaving only Bases 2 and 7 . These were deactivated in June 1945 and their functions absorbed by the Australia Base Section , as the Base Section had been renamed in February 1945 . In New Guinea , Base D was closed in July 1945 , and Bases A , B and E in September , leaving Bases F , G and H. Meanwhile , a series of bases were opened in the Philippines : Base K on Leyte , Base M on Luzon , Base R at Batangas , Base S on Cebu and base X at Manila . These came under the Luzon Base Section , which was redesignated the Philippine on 1 April 1945 . On 7 June 1945 , USASOS became <unk> , under the command of Lieutenant General Wilhelm D. Styer , and it absorbed USAFFE . 
 = = Intelligence = = 
 In April 1942 , Brigadier General Spencer Akin and his Australian counterpart at LHQ , Major General Colin Simpson , agreed to pool their resources and establish a combined intelligence organisation , known as the Central Bureau . The Australian , British , and US Armies , as well as the RAAF and the RAN all supplied personnel for this formation , which worked on codebreaking and decrypting Japanese message traffic . This Magic and Ultra intelligence was vitally important to operations in SWPA . 
 To handle other forms of intelligence , Blamey and MacArthur created the Allied Intelligence Bureau ( AIB ) . This included the Services Reconnaissance Department with its Z Special Unit that carried out special operations like Operation <unk> ; Secret Intelligence Australia ; the Coastwatchers , who watched for Japanese aircraft and ships from observation posts behind Japanese lines ; and the propaganda specialists of the Far Eastern Liaison Office ( <unk> ) . Two other important combined organisations , not part of AIB , were the Allied Translator and Interpreter Section ( ATIS ) , which translated Japanese documents , and the Allied Geographical Section , which prepared maps and charts , and drafted appreciations of the terrain . 
 Since quality tended to be more important than quantity in intelligence , this proved to be a fruitful field in which the minor Allies , Australia and the Netherlands , could play a key part . Good intelligence enabled the Allied forces to minimise the risk of failures and maximise the chances of success . Moreover , the organisation built up in Australia proved to be useful after the war as well . David Horner later wrote that " it may prove that present day intelligence cooperation has proved to be the most lasting and important legacy of Australia 's experience of coalition warfare in the Second World War . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Allied command structure in the South West Pacific Area faced the challenges of coalition warfare in several ways , with varying degrees of success . The benefits of the wartime alliances proved to be substantial , but required constant effort to maintain . For Australia and New Zealand , coalition warfare became the norm , and the experience in SWPA proved to be a formative and informative one , with many political and military lessons . Over the following decades , Australian , New Zealand and American forces would fight together again , in the Korean War , Vietnam War and the War on Terror . 
 = German destroyer Z13 Erich Koellner = 
 Z13 Erich Koellner was a Type 1934A @-@ class destroyer built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine in the late 1930s . At the beginning of World War II , the ship was still working up . In early 1940 she made two successful minelaying sorties off the English coast that claimed six merchant ships . During the early stages of the Norwegian Campaign , Erich Koellner fought in both naval Battles of Narvik in mid @-@ April 1940 and was severely damaged by British ships during the Second Battle of Narvik . The ship was scuttled by her crew shortly afterwards . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Erich Koellner had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 171 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 137 long tons ) at standard and 3 @,@ 190 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 140 long tons ) at deep load . The Wagner geared steam turbines were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) which would propel the ship at 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam was provided to the turbines by six high @-@ pressure Benson boilers with superheaters . Erich Koellner carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . The ship 's crew consisted of 10 officers and 315 sailors . 
 Erich Koellner carried five 12 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the rear deckhouse . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 cm C / 30 guns in single mounts . The ship carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Enough depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of 16 charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of 60 mines . ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) passive hydrophones were fitted to detect submarines . 
 = = Career = = 
 The ship was ordered on 10 November 1934 and laid down at Germania , Kiel on 12 October 1935 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 18 March 1937 and completed on 28 August 1939 . Erich Koellner was still on sea trials when World War II began and did not become operational until early January 1940 when she was assigned to the 8th Destroyer Division ( 8 . Zerstörerdivision ) . Led by Commander ( Fregattenkapitän ) Erich Bey , Erich Koellner and her sisters Bruno Heinemann , and Wolfgang Zenker laid a minefield off Cromer during the night of 11 / 12 January that sank three ships totalling 11 @,@ 153 Gross Register Tons ( GRT ) . The same three ships laid 157 mines near the <unk> Sands off Cromer on the night of 9 / 10 February . This minefield sank three ships of 11 @,@ 885 GRT . During Operation Wikinger , an attempt to capture British fishing trawlers operating off the Dogger Bank on 22 February , two German destroyers hit newly laid British mines in the supposedly mine @-@ free channel and sank . Koellner lost one man overboard while attempting to rescue sailors from the two sunken ships and succeeded in rescuing 24 men . 
 Under the command of Alfred Schulze @-@ Hinrichs , the ship was allocated to Group 1 for the Norwegian portion of Operation Weserübung . The group 's task was to transport the 139th Mountain Infantry Regiment ( 139 . Gebirgsjäger Regiment ) and the headquarters of the 3rd Mountain Division ( 3 . Gebirgs @-@ Division ) to seize Narvik . The ships began loading troops on 6 April and sailed the next day . Erich Koellner suffered storm damage en route and lost two men swept overboard . When the destroyers arrived at the Ofotfjord , west of Narvik , on the early morning of 9 April , the three ships of the 4th Flotilla , under the command of Commander Erich Bey , were ordered to land their troops in the Herjangsfjord ( a northern branch of the Ofotfjord ) in order to capture a Norwegian Army armory at Elvegårdsmoen . The troops encountered little resistance , but off @-@ loading them was slow because there was only a single wooden pier available . Later in the day , Koellner moved to Narvik harbor , but was not able to refuel before she was ordered to return to the Herjangsfjord well before dawn together with her sisters Wolfgang Zenker and Erich Giese . 
 Shortly before dawn on 10 April , the five destroyers of the British 2nd Destroyer Flotilla surprised the German ships in Narvik harbor . They torpedoed two destroyers and badly damaged the other three while suffering only minor damage themselves . As they were beginning to withdraw they encountered the three destroyers of the German 4th Flotilla which had been alerted when the British began their attack . The Germans opened fire first , but the gunnery for both sides was not effective due to the mist and the smoke screen laid by the British as they retreated down the Ofotfjord . The German ships had to turn away to avoid a salvo of three torpedoes fired by one of the destroyers in Narvik . Giese and Koellner were very low on fuel and all three were running low on ammunition , so Commander Bey decided not to continue the pursuit of the British ships since they were being engaged by the last two destroyers of Group 1 . 
 Commander Bey was ordered during the afternoon of 10 April to return to Germany with all seaworthy ships that evening , but Koellner needed more time to refuel and make repairs . They were completed the following day and the ship was ordered to patrol the mouth of the Ofotfjord that evening for picket duty . She ran aground shortly before midnight and started to take on water through damaged hull plating . She returned to Narvik on the morning of 12 April . Koellner could not be repaired with the resources available to the Germans so she was ordered to Tårstad , inside the <unk> Narrows at the mouth of the Ofotfjord , to act as a floating battery in case of British attack . The water at Tårstad was too shallow to use torpedoes , so they were off @-@ loaded and transferred to her sisters Bernd von Arnim and Theodor Riedel . Much of her fuel was also transferred to them and 90 men not needed were put ashore . 
 That night he received word to expect an attack the following day by British capital ships escorted by a large number of destroyers and supported by carrier aircraft . The battleship HMS Warspite and nine destroyers duly appeared on 13 April , although earlier than Commander Bey had expected , and caught the Germans by surprise . Koellner had not been able to reach Tårstad and Lieutenant Commander ( Fregattenkapitän ) Alfred Schulze @-@ Hinrichs , the ship 's captain , had decided to anchor near <unk> on the south side of the fjord instead . As the British ships approached , Koellner was spotted by the Supermarine Walrus amphibian from Warspite and the leading British destroyers were fully prepared when they came around the headland behind which Koellner was hiding . The range was so close , 2 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 500 meters ( 8 @,@ 200 – 8 @,@ 200 ft ) , that the three British ships were able to use their light automatic weapons to silence the German ship 's guns and they set her on fire as well as blowing off her bow with a torpedo . The 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) semi @-@ armor @-@ piercing shells from Warspite went through the ship without detonating , but visibly tilted her over each time . Thirty @-@ one crewmen were killed , and 34 wounded , but none of the British ships were even damaged . Erich Koellner was scuttled shortly afterwards by detonating a depth charge in her auxiliary machinery spaces . In the aftermath of the battle , 155 of the ship 's crew , including Schulze @-@ Hinrichs , were taken prisoner by Norwegian forces . The captured crewmen were first incarcerated in <unk> Fortress in Finnmark and later transferred to <unk> prisoner of war camp in Troms until released after the end of the Norwegian Campaign . The wreck was raised and scrapped in 1963 . 
 = Operation Tractable = 
 Operation Tractable was the final offensive conducted by Canadian and Polish troops , supported by one brigade of British tanks , as part of the Battle of Normandy during World War II . The goal of this operation was to capture the strategically important French town of Falaise and then the smaller towns of Trun and Chambois . This operation was undertaken by the 1st Polish Armoured Division and the First Canadian Army against Army Group B of the Wehrmacht as part of the largest encirclement on the Western Front during the Second World War . Despite a slow start and limited gains north of Falaise , novel tactics by the 1st Polish Armoured Division — under the command of Generał <unk> Stanisław Maczek during the drive for Chambois — enabled the Falaise Gap to be partially closed by 19 August 1944 , trapping about 150 @,@ 000 German soldiers in the Falaise Pocket . 
 Although the Falaise Gap was narrowed to a distance of several hundred yards , attacks and counter @-@ attacks by two battle groups of the 1st Polish Armoured Division and the II SS Panzer Corps on Hill 262 ( Mont Ormel ) prevented the quick closing of the gap and thousands of German troops escaped . During two days of nearly continuous fighting , Polish forces using artillery barrages and close @-@ quarter fighting , managed to hold off counter @-@ attacks by seven German divisions . On 21 August , elements of the First Canadian Army relieved the Polish survivors and sealed the Falaise Pocket by linking up with the Third US Army . This led to the surrender and capture of the remaining units of the German 7th Army in the pocket . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following break @-@ out by the US 1st and 3rd Armies from the beachhead during the Battle of Normandy after Operation Cobra on 25 July 1944 , Adolf Hitler ordered an immediate counterattack against Allied forces in the form of Operation Lüttich . Lieutenant General Omar Bradley — the commanding general of the US 12th Army Group — was notified of the counterattack in advance through signals intercepted via Ultra radio intercepts and deciphering and thus prepared his troops and their commanders to defeat this counteroffensive and to encircle as much of the Wehrmacht force as possible . By the afternoon of 7 August , Operation Lüttich had been defeated by concerted , large @-@ scale fighter @-@ bomber air strikes against the German Panzers and trucks . In the process , forces of the German 7th Army became further enveloped by the Allied advance out of Normandy . 
 Following these failed German offensives , the town of Falaise became a major objective of Commonwealth forces , since its capture would cut off virtually all of Generalfeldmarschall Günther von Kluge 's Army Group B. To achieve this , General Harry Crerar , commanding the newly formed Canadian 1st Army and Lieutenant @-@ General Guy Simonds — commanding the Canadian II Corps , planned an Anglo @-@ Canadian offensive with the code name of Operation Totalize . This offensive was designed to break through the defences in the Anglo @-@ Canadian sector of the Normandy front . Operation Totalize would rely on an unusual night attack using heavy bombers and the new Kangaroo armoured personnel carriers to achieve a breakthrough of German defences . Despite initial gains on Verrières Ridge and near Cintheaux , the Canadian Army 's offensive stalled on 9 August , with strong Wehrmacht counterattacks resulting in heavy casualties for the Canadian and Polish armoured and infantry divisions . By 10 August , Canadian troops had reached Hill 195 , north of Falaise . They were unable to advance farther immediately and they had been unable to capture Falaise . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Offensive strategy = = = 
 Operation Tractable incorporated lessons learned from Operation Totalize , notably the effectiveness of mechanized infantry units and tactical bombing raids by heavy bombers . Unlike the previous operation , Tractable was launched in daylight . An initial bombing raid was to weaken German defences and was to be followed by an advance by the Canadian 4th Armoured Division on the western flank of Hill 195 , while the Canadian 3rd Infantry Division attacked on the eastern flank with the Canadian 2nd Armoured Brigade in support . Their advance would be protected by a large smokescreen laid down by Canadian artillery . Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery hoped that Canadian forces would achieve control of Falaise by midnight on August 14 . From there , all three formations would advance towards Trun , 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) east of Falaise , with the additional assistance of the Polish 1st Armoured Division , numbering approximately 10 @,@ 000 men . Once in Trun , a linkup with the American 3rd Army at Chambois could be quickly accomplished . 
 The main opposition to Simonds 's force was the 12th SS Panzer Division , which included the remnants of two infantry divisions . German forces within the Falaise Pocket approached 350 @,@ 000 men . Had surprise been achieved , the Canadians would likely have succeeded in a rapid break @-@ through . However , on the night of 13 / 14 August , a Canadian officer lost his way while moving between divisional headquarters . He drove into German lines and was promptly killed . The Germans discovered a copy of Simonds ' orders on his body . As a result , the 12th SS Panzer Division placed the bulk of its remaining strength — 500 grenadiers and 15 tanks , along with twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm PaK 43 anti @-@ tank guns — along the Allies ' expected line of approach . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Initial drive for Falaise = = = 
 Operation Tractable began at 12 : 00 on 14 August , when 800 Avro Lancaster and Handley Page Halifax heavy bombers of RAF Bomber Command struck German positions along the front . As with Totalize , many of the bombers mistakenly dropped their bombs short of their targets , causing 400 Polish and Canadian casualties . Covered by a smoke screen laid down by their artillery , two Canadian divisions moved forwards . Although their line of sight was reduced , German units still managed to inflict severe casualties on the Canadian 4th Armoured Division , which included its Armoured Brigade commander Brigadier Leslie Booth , as the division moved south toward Falaise . Throughout the day , continual attacks by the Canadian 4th and Polish 1st Armoured Divisions managed to force a crossing of the Laison River . Limited access to the crossing points over the Dives River allowed counterattacks by the German 102nd SS Heavy Panzer Battalion . The town of <unk> fell to Polish forces in the late afternoon . By the end of the first day , elements of the Canadian 3rd and 4th Divisions had reached Point 159 , directly north of Falaise , although they had been unable to break into the town . To bolster his offensive , Simonds ordered the Canadian 2nd Infantry Division to move toward the front , with the hope that this reinforcement would be sufficient to enable his divisions to capture the town . 
 Although the first day 's progress was slower than expected , Operation Tractable resumed on 15 August ; both armoured divisions pushed southeast toward Falaise . The Canadian 2nd and 3rd Infantry Divisions — with the support of the Canadian 2nd Armoured Brigade — continued their drive south towards the town . After harsh fighting , the 4th Armoured Division captured <unk> but the gains made were minimal as strong German resistance prevented a breakthrough to Trun . On 16 August , the Canadian 2nd Infantry Division broke into Falaise , encountering minor opposition from Waffen @-@ SS units and scattered pockets of German infantry . Although it would take two more days to clear all resistance in the town , the first major objective of Operation Tractable had been achieved . Simonds began to reorganize the bulk of his armoured forces for a renewed push towards Trun to close the Falaise Pocket . 
 = = = 16 – 19 August = = = 
 = = = = Drives for Trun and Chambois = = = = 
 The drive for Trun by Polish and Canadian Armoured Divisions began on 16 August , with preliminary attacks in preparation for an assault against Trun and Chambois . On 17 August , both armoured divisions of the Canadian 1st Army advanced . By early afternoon , the Polish 1st Armoured Division had outflanked the 12th SS Panzer Division , enabling several Polish formations to both reach the 4th Armoured Division 's objectives and significantly expand the bridgehead northwest of Trun . Stanisław Maczek — the Polish divisional commander — split his forces into three battlegroups each of an armoured regiment and an infantry battalion . One of these struck southwest , cutting off Trun and establishing itself on the high ground dominating the town and the Dives river valley , allowing for a powerful assault by the Canadian 4th Armoured Division on Trun . The town was liberated on the morning of 18 August . 
 As Canadian and Polish forces liberated Trun , Maczek 's second armoured battlegroup manoeuvred southeast , capturing Champeaux and anchoring future attacks against Chambois across a 6 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) front . At its closest , the front was 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from forces of the US V Corps in the town . By the evening of 18 August , all of Maczek 's battlegroups had established themselves directly north of Chambois ( one outside of the town , one near <unk> and one at the foot of Hill 262 ) . With reinforcements quickly arriving from the 4th Canadian 4th Armoured Division , Maczek was in an ideal position to close the gap the following day . The presence of the Polish Armoured Division also alerted Generalfeldmarshall Walther Model of the need to keep the pocket open . 
 = = = = Closing the Gap = = = = 
 Early on 19 August , <unk> Simonds met with his divisional commanders to finalize plans for closing the gap . The 4th Armoured Division would attack toward Chambois , on the western flank of two battlegroups of the Polish 1st Armoured Division . Two additional Polish battlegroups would strike eastward , securing Hill 262 to cover the eastern flanks of the assault . The 2nd and 3rd Infantry Divisions would continue their grinding offensives against the northern extremities of the Falaise Pocket , inflicting heavy casualties on the exhausted remains of the 12th SS Panzer Division . The assault began almost immediately after the meeting , with one battlegroup of the Polish 1st advancing toward Chambois and " Currie Task Force " of the 4th Armoured Division covering their advance . Simultaneously , two Polish battlegroups moved for Hill 262 . Despite heavy German resistance , Battlegroup <unk> was able to secure Point 137 , directly west of Hill 262 . By early afternoon , Battlegroup Stefanowicz had captured the hill , annihilating a German infantry company in the process . As a result of the fighting , Polish casualties accounted for nearly 50 % of those sustained by the Canadian 1st Army . 
 By late afternoon of 19 August , Canadian and Polish forces had linked with the US 80th Division and 90th Division already stationed in the town . The Falaise Gap had been closed , trapping Model ′ s forces . As the linkup occurred , Model ′ s II SS Panzer Corps had begun its counterattack against Polish forces on Hill 262 , hoping to reopen the pocket . With American and Canadian forces facing German counterattacks in their sectors , the Polish forces would have to defend against two veteran Panzer divisions to keep the gap closed . 
 = = = 20 August = = = 
 = = = = St. Lambert @-@ sur @-@ Dives and Hill 117 = = = = 
 On the morning of 20 August , two German formations — the 2nd and 9th SS Panzer Divisions , attacked Polish positions on Hill 262 . At the same time , the 16th Infantry and 12th SS Panzer Divisions attacked American and Canadian forces from within the pocket , opening small channels through Allied positions . By mid @-@ morning , 2 @,@ 000 survivors of the German 2nd Parachute Division had managed to breach Canadian positions along the Dives River , as well as at Point 117 . At approximately noon , several units of the 10th SS , 12th SS and 116th Panzer Divisions managed to break through these weakened positions . 
 By mid afternoon , reinforcements from an armoured battlegroup under Major David Vivian Currie managed to reach St. Lambert @-@ sur @-@ Dives , denying two German armies evacuation of the pocket . Over the next 36 hours , the battlegroup repulsed almost continual attacks by German forces , destroying seven German tanks , twelve 88 mm ( 3 @.@ 46 in ) anti @-@ tank guns and 40 vehicles . In the brutal fighting around Lambert @-@ sur @-@ Dives , Currie 's battlegroup was able to inflict nearly 2 @,@ 000 casualties on attacking German forces , including 300 killed and 1 @,@ 100 captured . By the evening of 20 August , the Germans had exhausted their attack against St. Lambert @-@ sur @-@ Dives ; the surviving members of the 84th Corps — commanded by General <unk> — surrendered to Canadian and American forces near Chambois . For his actions at St. Lambert @-@ sur @-@ Dives , Currie was awarded the Victoria Cross , the only Canadian so honoured for service in the Normandy Campaign . 
 = = = = Hill 262 ( Mont Ormel ) = = = = 
 While Currie 's force stalled German forces outside of St. Lambert , two battlegroups of Maczek 's Polish 1st Armoured Division were engaged in a protracted battle with two well @-@ trained SS Panzer divisions . Throughout the night of the 19th , Polish forces had entrenched themselves along the south , southwest and northeastern lines of approach to Hill 262 . Directly southwest of Mont Ormel , German units moved along what would later become known as " The Corridor of Death " , as the Polish inflicted heavy casualties on German forces moving towards Mont Ormel with a well @-@ coordinated artillery barrage . The Polish infantry and armour were supported by the guns of the 4th Medium Regiment , 58th Battery , 2nd Canadian Army Group and assisted by the Artillery observer , Pierre Sévigny . [ 1 ] Captain Pierre Sévigny 's assistance was crucial in defending Hill 262 and he later received the Virtuti Militari ( Poland 's highest military decoration ) for his exertions during the battle . [ 2 ] 
 From the northeast , the 2nd SS Panzer Division planned an assault in force against the four infantry battalions and two armoured regiments of the Polish 1st Armoured Division dug in on Hill 262 . The 9th SS Panzer Division would attack from the north , while simultaneously preventing Canadian units from reinforcing the Polish armoured division . Having managed to break out of the Falaise Pocket , the 10th SS , 12th SS and 116th Panzer Divisions would then attack Hill 262 from the southwest . If this major obstacle could be cleared , German units could initiate a full withdrawal from the Falaise Pocket . 
 The first attack against Polish positions was by the " Der Führer " Regiment of the 2nd SS Panzer Division . Although the Podhale Rifles battalion was able to repel the attack , it expended a substantial amount of its ammunition in doing so . The second attack was devastating to the dwindling armoured forces of the Polish battlegroups . A single German tank , positioned on Point 239 ( northeast of Mont Ormel ) , was able to destroy five Sherman medium tanks within two minutes . At this time , the 3rd Parachute Division — along with an armoured regiment of the 1st SS Panzer Division — attacked Mont Ormel from inside the Falaise Pocket . This attack was repulsed by the artillery , which " massacred " German infantry and armour closing in on their positions . 
 As the assault from the southwest ran out of steam , the 2nd SS Panzer Division resumed its attack on the northeast of the ridge . Since Polish units were now concentrated on the southern edges of the position , the 2nd SS was able to force a path through to the 3rd Parachute Division by noon , opening a corridor out of the pocket . By mid @-@ afternoon , close to 10 @,@ 000 German troops had escaped through the corridor . Despite being overwhelmed by strong counterattacks , Polish forces continued to hold the high ground on Mont Ormel , which they referred to as " The Mace " ( <unk> ) , exacting a deadly toll on passing German forces through the use of well @-@ coordinated artillery fire . Irritated by the presence of these units , which were exacting a heavy toll on his men , Generaloberst Paul Hausser — commanding the 7th Army — ordered the positions to be " eliminated " . Although substantial forces , including the 352nd Infantry Division and several battlegroups from the 2nd SS Panzer Division inflicted heavy casualties on the 8th and 9th Battalions of the Polish 1st Armoured Division , the counterattack was ultimately fought off . The battle had cost the Poles almost all of their ammunition , leaving them in a precarious position . 
 At 19 : 00 on 20 August , a 20 @-@ minute ceasefire was arranged to allow German forces to evacuate a large convoy of medical vehicles . Immediately following the passage of these vehicles , the fighting resumed and intensified . Although the Germans were incapable of dislodging the Polish forces , the hill 's defenders had reached the point of exhaustion . With ammunition supplies extremely low , the Poles were forced to watch as the remnants of the XLVII Panzer Corps escaped from the pocket . Despite this , Polish artillery continued to bombard every German unit that entered the evacuation corridor . Stefanowicz — commander of the Polish battlegroups on Hill 262 — was sceptical of his force 's chance of survival : 
 Gentlemen . Everything is lost . I do not believe [ the ] Canadians will manage to help us . We have only 110 men left , with 50 rounds per gun and 5 rounds per tank ... Fight to the end ! To surrender to the SS is senseless , you know it well . Gentlemen ! Good luck – tonight , we will die for Poland and civilization . We will fight to the last platoon , to the last tank , then to the last man . 
 = = = 21 August = = = 
 After the brutality of the combat that had occurred during the day , night was welcomed by both German and Polish forces surrounding Mont Ormel . Fighting was sporadic , as both sides avoided contact with one another . Frequent Polish artillery barrages interrupted German attempts to retreat from the sector . By morning , German attacks on the position had resumed . Although not as coordinated as on the day before , the attack still managed to reach the last of the Polish defenders on Mont Ormel . As the remaining Polish forces repelled the assault , their tanks were forced to use the last of their ammunition . At approximately 12 : 00 , the last SS remnants launched a final assault on the positions of the 9th Battalion . Polish forces defeated them at point @-@ blank range . There would be no further attacks ; the two battlegroups of the Polish 1st Armoured Division had survived the onslaught , despite being surrounded by German forces for three days . Both Reynolds and McGilvray place the Polish losses on the <unk> at 351 killed and wounded and 11 tanks lost , although <unk> gives higher figures of 325 killed , 1 @,@ 002 wounded , and 114 missing — approximately 20 % of the division 's combat strength . Within an hour , The Canadian Grenadier Guards managed to link up with what remained of Stefanowicz 's men . By late afternoon , the remainder of the 2nd and 9th SS Panzer Divisions had begun their retreat to the Seine River . The Falaise Gap had been permanently closed , with a large number of German forces still trapped in the pocket . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By the evening of 21 August 1944 , the vast majority of the German forces remaining in the Falaise Pocket had surrendered . Nearly all of the strong German formations that had caused significant damage to the Canadian 1st Army throughout the Normandy campaign had been destroyed . Two panzer divisions — the Panzer Lehr and 9th SS — now existed in name only . The formidable 12th SS Panzer Division had lost 94 % of its armour , nearly all of its field @-@ guns and 70 % of its vehicles . Several German units , notably the 2nd and the 12th SS Panzer Divisions had managed to escape east toward the Seine River , albeit without most of their motorized equipment . Conservative estimates for the number of German soldiers captured in the Falaise Pocket approach 50 @,@ 000 , although some estimates put total German losses ( killed and captured ) in the Pocket as high as 200 @,@ 000 . 
 By 23 August , the remainder of the Wehrmacht 's Seventh Army had entrenched itself along the Seine River , in preparation for the defence of Paris . Simultaneously , elements of Army Group G — including the German 15th Army and the 5th Panzer Army — moved to engage American forces in the south . In the following week , elements of the Canadian 1st Army repeatedly attacked these German units on the Seine in attempts to break through to the Channel Ports . On the evening of 23 August , French and American Army units entered Paris . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Due to the successive offensives of early August , exact Canadian casualties for Operation Tractable are not known but losses during Totalize and Tractable are put at 5 @,@ 500 men . German casualties during Operation Tractable are also uncertain ; approximate figures can be found for casualties within the Falaise Pocket but not for the Canadian operations during Tractable . After the Falaise Pocket , the German 7th Army was severely depleted , having lost from 50 @,@ 000 – 200 @,@ 000 men , over 200 tanks , 1 @,@ 000 guns and 5 @,@ 000 other vehicles . In the fighting around Hill 262 , the Germans lost 2 @,@ 000 men killed , 5 @,@ 000 taken prisoner , 55 tanks , 44 guns and 152 armoured vehicles . Polish casualties for Operation Tractable ( until 22 August ) are 1 @,@ 441 men , of whom 325 were killed ( including 21 officers ) , 1 @,@ 002 were wounded ( 35 officers ) and 114 missing , which includes 263 men lost before the Chambois and Ormel actions from 14 – 18 August . 
 = = = Battle honours = = = 
 In the British and Commonwealth system of battle honours , participation in Operation Tractable ( included as part of the honour Falaise for service from 7 – 22 August ) was recognized in 1957 , 1958 , and 1959 by the award of the battle honours Laison ( or " The Laison " for Canadian units ) , for service on 14 – 17 August , Chambois from 18 – 22 August and St Lambert @-@ sur @-@ Dives from 19 – 22 August . 
 = First Australian Imperial Force = 
 The First Australian Imperial Force ( 1st AIF ) was the main expeditionary force of the Australian Army during World War I. It was formed on 15 August 1914 , following Britain 's declaration of war on Germany , initially with a strength of one infantry division and one light horse brigade . The infantry division subsequently fought at Gallipoli between April and December 1915 , being reinforced by a second division which was later raised , as well as three light horse brigades . After being evacuated to Egypt the AIF was expanded to five infantry divisions , which were committed to the fighting in France and Belgium along the Western Front in March 1916 . A sixth infantry division was partially raised in 1917 in the United Kingdom , but was broken up and used as reinforcements following heavy casualties on the Western Front . Meanwhile , two mounted divisions remained in the Middle East to fight against Turkish forces in the Sinai and Palestine . 
 An all volunteer force , by the end of the war the AIF had gained a reputation as being a well @-@ trained and highly effective military force , playing a significant role in the final Allied victory . However , this reputation came at a heavy cost with a casualty rate among the highest of any belligerent for the war . The AIF included the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) , which consisted of four combat and four training squadrons that were deployed to the United Kingdom , the Western Front and the Middle East throughout the war . After the war , the AFC evolved into the Royal Australian Air Force ; the remainder of the 1st AIF was disbanded between 1919 and 1921 . After the war the achievements of the AIF and its soldiers , known colloquially as " Diggers " , became central to the national mythology of the " Anzac legend " . Generally known at the time as the AIF , it is today referred to as the 1st AIF to it distinguish from the Second Australian Imperial Force raised during World War II . 
 = = Formation = = 
 At the start of the war , Australia 's military forces were focused upon the part @-@ time Militia . The small number of regular personnel were mostly artillerymen or engineers , and were generally assigned to the task of coastal defence . Due to the provisions of the Defence Act 1903 , which precluded sending conscripts overseas , upon the outbreak of war it was realised that a totally separate , all volunteer force would need to be raised . The Australian government pledged to supply 20 @,@ 000 men organised as one infantry division and one light horse brigade plus supporting units , for service " wherever the British desired " . The Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) subsequently began forming shortly after the outbreak of war and was the brain child of Brigadier General William Throsby Bridges ( later Major General ) and his chief of staff , Major Brudenell White . Officially coming into being on 15 August 1914 , the word ' imperial ' was chosen to reflect the duty of Australians to both nation and empire . The AIF was initially intended for service in Europe . Meanwhile , a separate 2 @,@ 000 @-@ man force — known as the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force ( AN & MEF ) — was formed for the task of capturing German New Guinea . In addition , small military forces were maintained in Australia to defend the country from attack . 
 Upon formation , the AIF consisted of only one infantry division , the 1st Division , and the 1st Light Horse Brigade . The 1st Division was made up of the 1st Infantry Brigade under Colonel Henry MacLaurin , an Australian @-@ born officer with previous part @-@ time military service ; the 2nd , under Colonel James Whiteside McCay , an Irish @-@ born Australian politician and former Minister for Defence ; and the 3rd , under Colonel Ewen Sinclair @-@ Maclagan , a British regular officer seconded to the Australian Army before the war . The 1st Light Horse Brigade was commanded by Colonel Harry Chauvel , an Australian regular , while the divisional artillery was commanded by Colonel Talbot Hobbs . The initial response for recruits was so good that in September 1914 the decision was made to raise the 4th Infantry Brigade and 2nd and 3rd Light Horse Brigades . The 4th Infantry Brigade was commanded by Colonel John Monash , a prominent Melbourne civil engineer and businessman . The AIF continued to grow through the war , eventually numbering five infantry divisions , two mounted divisions and a mixture of other units . As the AIF operated within the British war effort , its units were generally organised along the same lines as comparable British Army formations . However , there were often small differences between the structures of British and Australian units , especially in regards to the AIF infantry divisions ' support units . 
 Hastily deployed , the first contingent of AIF was essentially untrained and suffered from widespread equipment shortages . In early 1915 the AIF was largely an inexperienced force , with only a small percentage of its members having previous combat experience . However , many officers and non @-@ commissioned personnel ( NCOs ) had previously served in the pre @-@ war permanent or part @-@ time forces , and a significant proportion of the enlisted personnel had received some basic military instruction as part of Australia 's compulsory training scheme . Predominantly a fighting force based on infantry battalions and light horse regiments — the high proportion of close combat troops to support personnel ( e.g. medical , administrative , logistic , etc . ) was exceeded only by the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) — this fact at least partially accounted for the high percentage of casualties it later sustained . Nevertheless , the AIF eventually included a large number of logistics and administrative units which were capable of meeting most of the force 's needs , and in some circumstances provided support to nearby allied units . However , the AIF mainly relied on the British Army for medium and heavy artillery support and other weapons systems necessary for combined arms warfare that were developed later in the war , including aircraft and tanks . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 = = = Command = = = 
 When originally formed in 1914 the AIF was commanded by Bridges , who also commanded the 1st Division . After Bridges ' death at Gallipoli in May 1915 , the Australian government appointed Major General James Gordon Legge , a Boer War veteran , to replace Bridges in command of both . However , British Lieutenant General Sir John Maxwell , the commander of British Troops in Egypt , objected to Legge bypassing him and communicating directly with Australia . The Australian government failed to support Legge , who thereafter deferred to Lieutenant General William Birdwood , the commander of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps . When Legge was sent to Egypt to command the 2nd Division , Birdwood made representations to the Australian government that Legge could not act as commander of the AIF , and that the Australian government should transfer Bridges ' authority to him . This was done on a temporary basis on 18 September 1915 . Promoted to major general , Chauvel took over command of the 1st Division in November when Major General Harold Walker was wounded , becoming the first Australian @-@ born officer to command a division . When Birdwood became commander of the Dardanelles Army , command of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps and the AIF passed to another British officer , Lieutenant General Alexander Godley , the commander of the NZEF , but Birdwood resumed command of the AIF when he assumed command of II ANZAC Corps upon its formation in Egypt in early 1916 . I ANZAC Corps and II ANZAC Corps swapped designations on 28 March 1916 . 
 Birdwood was officially confirmed as commander of the AIF on 14 September 1916 , backdated to 18 September 1915 , while also commanding I ANZAC Corps on the Western Front . He retained overall responsibility for the AIF units in the Middle East , but in practice this fell to Godley , and after II ANZAC Corps left Egypt as well , to Chauvel who also commanded the ANZAC Mounted Division . Later promoted to lieutenant general , he subsequently commanded the Desert Mounted Corps of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ; the first Australian to command a corps . Birdwood was later given command of the Australian Corps on its formation in November 1917 . Another Australian , Monash , by then a lieutenant general , took over command of the corps on 31 May 1918 . Despite being promoted to command the British Fifth Army , Birdwood retained command of the AIF . By this time four of the five divisional commanders were Australian officers . The exception was Major General Ewen Sinclair @-@ Maclagan , the commander of the 4th Division , who was a British Army officer seconded to the Australian Army before the war , and who had joined the AIF in Australia in August 1914 . The vast majority of brigade commands were also held by Australian officers . A number of British staff officers were attached to the headquarters of the Australian Corps , and its predecessors , due to a shortage of suitably trained Australian officers . 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 = = = = Infantry divisions = = = = 
 The organisation of the AIF closely followed the British Army divisional structure , and remained relatively unchanged throughout the war . During the war , the following infantry divisions were raised as part of the AIF : 
 1st Division 
 2nd Division 
 3rd Division 
 4th Division 
 5th Division 
 6th Division ( broken up in 1917 before seeing combat ) 
 New Zealand and Australian Division ( 1915 ) 
 Each division comprised three infantry brigades , and each brigade contained four battalions ( later reduced to three in 1918 ) . Australian battalions initially included eight rifle companies ; however , this was reduced to four expanded companies in January 1915 to conform with the organisation of British infantry battalions . A battalion contained about 1 @,@ 000 men . Although the divisional structure evolved over the course of the war , each formation also included a range of combat support and service units , including artillery , machine @-@ gun , mortar , engineer , pioneer , signals , logistic , medical , veterinary and administrative units . By 1918 each brigade also included a light trench mortar battery , while each division included a pioneer battalion , a machine @-@ gun battalion , two field artillery brigades , a divisional trench mortar brigade , four companies of engineers , a divisional signals company , a divisional train consisting of four service corps companies , a salvage company , three field ambulances , a sanitary section and a mobile veterinary section . These changes were reflective of wider organisational adaption , tactical innovation , and the adoption of new weapons and technology that occurred throughout the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) . 
 At the start of the Gallipoli Campaign , the AIF had four infantry brigades with the first three making up the 1st Division . The 4th Brigade was joined with the sole New Zealand infantry brigade to form the New Zealand and Australian Division . The 2nd Division had been formed in Egypt in 1915 and was sent to Gallipoli in August to reinforce the 1st Division , doing so without its artillery and having only partially completed its training . After Gallipoli , the infantry underwent a major expansion . The 3rd Division was formed in Australia and sent to France . The New Zealand and Australian Division was broken up with the New Zealand elements forming the New Zealand Division , while the original Australian infantry brigades ( 1st to 4th ) were split in half to create 16 new battalions to form another four brigades . These new brigades ( 12th to 15th ) were used to form the 4th and 5th Divisions . This ensured the battalions of the two new divisions had a core of experienced soldiers . The 6th Division commenced forming in England in February 1917 , but was never deployed to France and was broken up in September of that year to provide reinforcements to the other five divisions . 
 The Australian infantry did not have regiments in the British sense , only battalions identified by ordinal number ( 1st to 60th ) . Each battalion originated from a geographical region , with men recruited from that area . New South Wales and Victoria , the most populous states , filled their own battalions ( and even whole brigades ) while the " Outer States " — Queensland , South Australia , Western Australia and Tasmania — often combined to assemble a battalion . These regional associations remained throughout the war and each battalion developed its own strong regimental identity . The pioneer battalions ( 1st to 5th , formed from March 1916 ) were also mostly recruited regionally ; however , the machine @-@ gun battalions ( 1st to 5th , formed from March 1918 from the brigade and divisional machine @-@ gun companies ) were made up of personnel from all states . 
 During the manpower crisis following the Third Battle of Ypres , in which the five divisions sustained 38 @,@ 000 casualties , there were plans to follow the British reorganisation and reduce all brigades from four battalions to three . In the British regimental system this was traumatic enough ; however , the regimental identity survived the disbanding of a single battalion . In the Australian system , disbanding a battalion meant the extinction of the unit . In September 1918 , the decision to disband seven battalions — the 19th , 21st , 25th , 37th , 42nd , 54th and 60th — led to a series of " mutinies over disbandment " where the ranks refused to report to their new battalions . In the AIF , mutiny was one of two charges that carried the death penalty , the other being desertion to the enemy . Instead of being charged with mutiny , the instigators were charged as being absent without leave ( AWOL ) and the doomed battalions were eventually permitted to remain together for the forthcoming battle , following which the survivors voluntarily disbanded . These mutinies were motivated mainly by the soldiers ' loyalty to their battalions . 
 The artillery underwent a significant expansion during the war . When the 1st Division embarked in November 1914 it did so with its 18 @-@ pounder field guns , but Australia had not been able to provide the division with the howitzer batteries or the heavy guns that would otherwise have been included on its establishment , due to a lack of equipment . These shortages were unable to be rectified prior to the landing at Gallipoli where the howitzers would have provided the plunging and high @-@ angled fire that was required due to the rough terrain at Anzac Cove . When the 2nd Division was formed in July 1915 it did so without its complement of artillery . Meanwhile , in December 1915 when the government offered to form another division it did so on the basis that its artillery would be provided by Britain . In time though these shortfalls were overcome , with the Australian field artillery expanding from just three field brigades in 1914 to twenty at the end of 1917 . The majority of the heavy artillery units supporting the Australian divisions were British , although two Australian heavy batteries were raised from the regular Australian Garrison Artillery . These were the 54th Siege Battery , which was equipped with 8 @-@ inch <unk> , and the 55th with 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch howitzers . 
 = = = = Mounted divisions = = = = 
 The following mounted divisions were raised as part of the AIF : 
 ANZAC Mounted Division 
 Australian Mounted Division 
 During the Gallipoli Campaign four light horse brigades had been dismounted and fought alongside the infantry divisions . However , in March 1916 the ANZAC Mounted Division was formed in Egypt ( so named because it contained one mounted brigade from New Zealand – the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade ) . Likewise , the Australian Mounted Division — formed in February 1917 — was originally named the Imperial Mounted Division because it contained the British 5th and 6th Mounted Brigades . Each division consisted of three mounted light horse brigades . A light horse brigade consisted of three regiments . Each regiment included three squadrons of four troops and a machine @-@ gun section . The initial strength of a regiment was around 500 men , although its establishment changed throughout the war . In 1916 , the machine @-@ gun sections of each regiment were concentrated as squadrons at brigade @-@ level . Like the infantry , the light horse regiments were raised on a territorial basis by state and were identified numerically ( 1st to 15th ) . 
 = = = = Corps = = = = 
 The following corps @-@ level formations were raised : 
 Australian and New Zealand Army Corps 
 I ANZAC Corps 
 II ANZAC Corps 
 Australian Corps 
 Desert Mounted Corps ( formerly the Desert Column ) 
 The Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZAC ) was formed from the AIF and NZEF in preparation for the Gallipoli Campaign in 1915 and was commanded by Birdwood . Initially the corps consisted of the 1st Australian Division , the New Zealand and Australian Division , and two mounted brigades — the Australian 1st Light Horse Brigade and the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade — although when first deployed to Gallipoli in April , it did so without its mounted formations , as the terrain was considered unsuitable . However , in May , both brigades were dismounted and deployed along with the 2nd and 3rd Light Horse Brigades as reinforcements . Later , as the campaign continued the corps was reinforced further by the 2nd Australian Division , which began arriving from August 1915 . In February 1916 , it was reorganised into I and II ANZAC Corps in Egypt following the evacuation from Gallipoli and the subsequent expansion of the AIF . 
 I ANZAC Corps included the Australian 1st and 2nd Divisions and the New Zealand Division . The New Zealand Division was later transferred to the II ANZAC Corps in July 1916 and was replaced by the Australian 3rd Division in I ANZAC . Initially employed in Egypt as part of the defence of the Suez Canal , it was transferred to the Western Front in March 1916 . II ANZAC Corps included the Australian 4th and 5th Divisions , forming in Egypt it transferred to France in July 1916 . In November 1917 the five Australian divisions of I and II ANZAC Corps merged to become the Australian Corps , while the British and New Zealand elements in each corps became the British XXII Corps . The Australian Corps was the largest corps fielded by the British Empire in France , providing just over 10 percent of the manning of the BEF . At its peak it numbered 109 @,@ 881 men . Corps troops raised included the 13th Light Horse Regiment and three army artillery brigades . Each corps also included a cyclist battalion . 
 Meanwhile , the majority of the Australian Light Horse had remained in the Middle East and subsequently served in Egypt , Sinai , Palestine and Syria with the Desert Column of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force . In August 1917 the column was expanded to become the Desert Mounted Corps , which consisted of the ANZAC Mounted Division , Australian Mounted Division and the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade ( which included a number of Australian , British and New Zealand camel companies ) . In contrast to the static trench warfare that developed in Europe , the troops in the Middle East mostly experienced a more fluid form of warfare involving manoeuvre and combined arms tactics . 
 = = = = Australian Flying Corps = = = = 
 The 1st AIF included the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) . Soon after the outbreak of war in 1914 , two aircraft were sent to assist in capturing German colonies in what is now north @-@ east New Guinea . However , these colonies surrendered quickly , before the planes were even unpacked . The first operational flights did not occur until 27 May 1915 , when the Mesopotamian Half Flight was called upon to assist the Indian Army in protecting British oil interests in what is now Iraq . The corps later saw action in Egypt , Palestine and on the Western Front throughout the remainder of World War I. By the end of the war , four squadrons — Nos. 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 — had seen operational service , while another four training squadrons — Nos. 5 , 6 , 7 and 8 — had also been established . A total of 460 officers and 2 @,@ 234 other ranks served in the AFC . The AFC remained part of the Australian Army until 1919 , when it was disbanded ; later forming the basis of the Royal Australian Air Force . 
 = = = = Specialist units = = = = 
 In addition , a number of specialist units were also raised , including three Australian tunnelling companies . Arriving on the Western Front in May 1916 they undertook mining and counter @-@ mining operations alongside British , Canadian and New Zealand companies , initially operating around Armentieres and at Fromelles . The following year they operated in the Ypres section . In November 1916 , the 1st Australian Tunnelling Company took over from the Canadians around Hill 60 , subsequently playing a key role in the Battle of Messines in June 1917 . During the German offensive in March 1918 the three companies served as infantry , and later supported the Allied advance being used to defuse booby traps and mines . The Australian Electrical Mining and Mechanical Boring Company supplied electric power to units in the British Second Army area . 
 Motor transport units were also formed . Not required at Gallipoli , they were sent on to the Western Front , becoming the first units of the AIF to serve there . The motor transport rejoined I ANZAC Corps when it reached the Western Front in 1916 . Australia also formed six railway operating companies , which served on the Western Front . Specialist ordnance units included ammunition and mobile workshops units formed late in the war , while service units included supply columns , ammunition sub @-@ parks , field bakeries and butcheries , and depot units . Hospitals and other specialist medical and dental units were also formed in Australia and overseas , as were a number of convalescent depots . One small armoured unit was raised , the 1st Armoured Car Section . Formed in Australia , it fought in the Western Desert , and then , re @-@ equipped with T Model Fords , served in Palestine as the 1st Light Car Patrol . Camel companies were raised in Egypt to patrol the Western Desert . They formed part of the Imperial Camel Corps and fought in the Sinai and Palestine . In 1918 they were converted to light horse as the 14th and 15th Light Horse Regiments . 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 Although operationally placed at the disposal of the British , the AIF was administered as a separate national force , with the Australian government reserving the responsibility for the promotion , pay , clothing , equipment and feeding of its personnel . The AIF was administered separately from the home @-@ based army in Australia , and a parallel system was set up to deal with non @-@ operational matters including record @-@ keeping , finance , ordnance , personnel , quartermaster and other issues . The AIF also had separate conditions of service , rules regarding promotion and seniority , and graduation list for officers . This responsibility initially fell to Bridges , in addition to his duties as its commander ; however , an Administrative Headquarters was later set up in Cairo in Egypt . Following the redeployment of the Australian infantry divisions to the Western Front it was relocated to London . Additional responsibilities included liaison with the British War Office as well as the Australian Department of Defence in Melbourne , whilst also being tasked with the command of all Australian troops in Britain . A training headquarters was also established at Salisbury . The AIF Headquarters and its subordinate units were almost entirely independent from the British Army , which allowed the force to be self @-@ sustaining in many fields . The AIF generally followed British administrative policy and procedures , including for the awarding of imperial honours and awards . 
 = = Weaponry and equipment = = 
 The weaponry and equipment of the Australian Army had mostly been standardised on that used by the British Army prior to the outbreak of World War I. During the war the equipment used changed as tactics evolved , and generally followed British developments . The standard issued rifle was the .303 @-@ inch Short Magazine Lee – Enfield Mark III ( SMLE ) . Infantrymen used 1908 @-@ pattern webbing , while light horsemen used leather bandoliers and load carriage equipment . A large pack was issued as part of marching order . In 1915 infantrymen were issued with the SMLE and long sword bayonet , while periscope rifles were also used . From 1916 they also used manufactured hand grenades and <unk> rifle grenades , both of which had been in short supply at Gallipoli ( necessitating the use of improvised " jam @-@ tin " grenades ) . A grenade discharge cup was issued for fitting to the muzzle of a rifle for the projection of the Mills bomb from 1917 . Machine @-@ guns initially included a small number of Maxim or Vickers medium machine @-@ guns , but subsequently also included the Lewis light machine @-@ gun , the latter two of which were issued in greater numbers as the war continued so as to increase the firepower available to the infantry in response to the tactical problems of trench warfare . Light horse units underwent a similar process , although were issued Hotchkiss guns to replace their Lewis guns in early 1917 . 
 From 1916 the Stokes light trench mortar was issued to infantry to replace a range of trench catapults and smaller trench mortars , whilst it was also used in a battery at brigade @-@ level to provide organic indirect fire support . In addition , individual soldiers often used a range of personnel weapons including knives , clubs , knuckle @-@ dusters , revolvers and pistols . Snipers on the Western Front used Pattern 1914 Enfield sniper rifles with telescopic sights . Light horsemen also carried bayonets ( as they were initially considered mounted infantry ) , although the Australian Mounted Division adopted cavalry swords in late 1917 . Artillery included 18 @-@ pounders which equipped the field batteries , 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch howitzers used by the howitzer batteries , and 8 @-@ inch and 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch howitzers which equipped the heavy ( siege ) batteries . The 9 @.@ 45 @-@ inch heavy mortar equipped a heavy trench mortar battery , while medium trench mortar batteries were equipped with the 2 @-@ inch medium mortar , and later the 6 @-@ inch mortar . Light Horse units were supported by British and Indian artillery . The main mount used by the light horse was the Waler , while draught horses were used by the artillery and for wheeled transport . Camels were also used , both as mounts and transport , and donkeys and mules were used as pack animals . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Recruitment = = = 
 Enlisted under the Defence Act 1903 , the AIF was an all volunteer force for the duration of the war . Australia was one of only two belligerents on either side not to introduce conscription during the war ( along with South Africa ) . Although a system of compulsory training had been introduced in 1911 for home service , under Australian law it did not extend to overseas service . In Australia , two plebiscites on using conscription to expand the AIF were defeated in October 1916 and December 1917 , thereby preserving the volunteer status but stretching the AIF 's reserves towards the end of the war . A total of 416 @,@ 809 men enlisted in the Army during the war , representing 38 @.@ 7 percent of the white male population aged between 18 and 44 . Of these , 331 @,@ 781 men were sent overseas to serve as part of the AIF . Approximately 18 percent of those who served in the AIF had been born in the United Kingdom , marginally more than their proportion of the Australian population , although almost all enlistments occurred in Australia , with only 57 people being recruited from overseas . Indigenous Australians were officially barred from the AIF until October 1917 , when the restrictions were altered to allow so @-@ called " half @-@ castes " to join . Estimates of the number of Indigenous Australians who served in the AIF differ considerably , but are believed to be over 500 . More than 2 @,@ 000 women served with the AIF , mainly in the Australian Army Nursing Service . 
 The recruitment process was managed by the various military districts . At the outset it had been planned to recruit half the AIF 's initial commitment of 20 @,@ 000 personnel from Australia 's part @-@ time forces , and volunteers were initially recruited from within designated regimental areas , thus creating a linkage between the units of the AIF and the units of the home service Militia . In the early stages of mobilisation the men of the AIF were selected under some of the toughest criterion of any army in World War I and it is believed that roughly 30 percent of men that applied were rejected on medical grounds . To enlist , men had to be aged between 18 and 35 years of age ( although it is believed that men as old as 70 and as young as 14 managed to enlist ) , and they had to be at least 5 feet 6 inches ( 168 cm ) , with a chest measurement of at least 34 inches ( 86 cm ) . Many of these strict requirements were lifted later in the war , however , as the need for replacements grew . Indeed , casualties among the initial volunteers were so high , that of the 32 @,@ 000 original soldiers of the AIF only 7 @,@ 000 would survive to the end of the war . 
 By the end of 1914 around 53 @,@ 000 volunteers had been accepted , allowing a second contingent to depart in December . Meanwhile , reinforcements were sent at a rate of 3 @,@ 200 men per month . The landing at Anzac Cove subsequently resulted in a significant increase in enlistments , with 36 @,@ 575 men being recruited in July 1915 . Although this level was never again reached , enlistments remained high in late 1915 and early 1916 . From then a gradual decline occurred , and whereas news from Gallipoli had increased recruitment , the fighting at Fromelles and Pozieres did not have a similar effect , with monthly totals dropping from 10 @,@ 656 in May 1916 to around 6 @,@ 000 between June and August . Significant losses in mid @-@ 1916 , coupled with the failure of the volunteer system to provide sufficient replacements , resulted in the first referendum on conscription , which was defeated by a narrow margin . Although there was an increase in enlistments in September ( 9 @,@ 325 ) and October ( 11 @,@ 520 ) , in December they fell to the lowest total of the year ( 2 @,@ 617 ) . <unk> in 1917 never exceeded 4 @,@ 989 ( in March ) . Heavy losses at Passchendaele resulted in a second referendum on conscription , which was defeated by an even greater margin . Recruitment continued to decline , reaching a low in December ( 2 @,@ 247 ) . Monthly intakes fell further in early 1918 , but peaked in May ( 4 @,@ 888 ) and remained relatively steady albeit reduced from previous periods , before slightly increasing in October ( 3 @,@ 619 ) prior to the armistice in November . 
 Ultimately , the voluntary system of recruitment proved unable to sustain the force structure of the AIF , failing to provide sufficient replacements for the heavy casualties it sustained and requiring a number of units to be disbanded towards the end of the war . In mid @-@ 1918 it was decided to allow the men who had enlisted in 1914 to return to Australia for home leave , further exacerbating the manpower shortage experienced by the Australian Corps . Regardless , by the last year of the war the AIF was a long @-@ serving force — even if it was a citizen army and not a professional one like the pre @-@ war British Army — containing 141 @,@ 557 men with more than two @-@ years service , including , despite the heavy casualties suffered at Gallipoli in 1915 and on the Western Front in 1916 and 1917 , 14 @,@ 653 men who had enlisted in 1914 . Battle hardened and experienced as a result , this fact partially explains the important role the AIF subsequently played in the final defeat of the German Army in 1918 . 
 = = = Pay = = = 
 Soldiers of the AIF were among the highest paid of the war . The pay for a private was set at five shillings a day , while an additional shilling was deferred to be paid on discharge . As a result , the AIF earned the sobriquet " six bob a day tourists " . Married men were required to allot two shillings a day for their dependents ; however , a separation allowance was added in 1915 . Reflecting the progressive nature of Australian industrial and social policy of the era , this rate of pay was intended to be equal to that of the average worker ( after including rations and accommodation ) and higher than that of soldiers in the Militia . In contrast , New Zealand soldiers received five shillings , while British infantrymen were initially only paid one shilling , although this was later increased to three . Junior officers in the AIF were also paid at a rate higher than those in the British Army , although senior officers were paid considerably less than their counterparts . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 In the early stages of the AIF 's formation , prior to Gallipoli , training was rudimentary and performed mainly at unit @-@ level . There were no formal schools and volunteers proceeded straight from recruiting stations to their assigned units , which were still in the process of being established . Upon arrival , in makeshift camps the recruits received basic training in drill and musketry from officers and non @-@ commissioned officers , who were not trained instructors and had been appointed mainly because they had previous service in the part @-@ time forces . Camps were established in every state including at Enoggera ( Queensland ) , Liverpool ( New South Wales ) , Broadmeadows ( Victoria ) , Brighton ( Tasmania ) , Morphettville ( South Australia ) and Blackboy Hill ( Western Australia ) . In some units this training took place over a period of six to eight weeks , although others — such as the 5th Battalion — spent as little as one day on live firing before departing for overseas . Following the embarkation of the initial force to the Middle East , further training was undertaken in the desert . This was more organised than the training provided in Australia , but was still quite rushed . Individual training was consolidated but progressed quickly into collective training at battalion and brigade @-@ level . Training exercises , marches , drill and musketry practices followed but the standard of the exercises was limited and they lacked realism , meaning that commanders did not benefit from handling their troops under battlefield conditions . 
 Some soldiers had received training through the compulsory training scheme that had been established in 1911 , while others had served as volunteers in the part @-@ time forces before the war or as members of the British Army , but their numbers were limited and in many cases the quality of the training they had received was also limited . The original intention had been that half the initial intake would consist of soldiers that were currently serving in the Militia , but ultimately this did not come to fruition and while about 8 @,@ 000 of the original intake had some prior military experience , either through compulsory training or as volunteers , over 6 @,@ 000 had none at all . In terms of officers , the situation was better . For example , within the 1st Division , of its initial 631 officers , 607 had had previous military experience . This was largely through service in the pre @-@ war militia , though , where there had been little to no formal officer training . In addition , there was a small cadre of junior officers who had been trained for the permanent force at the Royal Military College , Duntroon , but their numbers were very small and at the outbreak of the war the first class had to be graduated early in order for them to join the AIF , being placed mainly in staff positions . Other than small numbers of Duntroon graduates , from January 1915 the only means to be commissioned into the AIF was from the ranks of enlisted personnel . As a result , by 1918 the majority of company and battalion commanders had risen from the ranks . While the AIF 's initial senior officers had been members of the pre @-@ war military , few had any substantial experience in managing brigade @-@ sized or larger units in the field as training exercises on this scale had been rarely conducted before the outbreak of hostilities . This inexperience contributed to tactical mistakes and avoidable casualties during the Gallipoli campaign . 
 After the AIF was transferred to the European battlefield , the training system was greatly improved . Efforts were made at standardisation , with a formal training organisation and curriculum — consisting of 14 weeks basic training for infantrymen — being established . In Egypt , as the AIF was expanded in early 1916 , each brigade established a training battalion . These formations were later sent to the United Kingdom and were absorbed into a large system of depots that was established on Salisbury Plain by each branch of the AIF including infantry , engineers , artillery , signals , medical and logistics . After completing their initial instruction at depots in Australia and the United Kingdom , soldiers were posted to in @-@ theatre base depots where they received advanced training before being posted as reinforcements to operational units . Like the British Army , the AIF sought to rapidly pass on " lessons learned " as the war progressed , and these were widely transmitted through regularly updated training documents . The experience gained through combat also improved the skills of the surviving officers and men , and by 1918 the AIF was a very well trained and well led force . After coming to terms with the conditions on the Western Front the Australians had played a part in the development of new combined arms tactics for offensive operations that occurred within the BEF , while in defence they employed patrolling , trench raids , and Peaceful Penetration tactics to dominate no man 's land . 
 Following the deployment of the AIF a reinforcement system was used to replace wastage . Reinforcements received training in Australia first at camps around the country before sailing as drafts — consisting of about two officers and between 100 and 150 other ranks — and joining their assigned units at the front . Initially , these drafts were assigned to specific units prior to departure and were recruited from the same area as the unit they were assigned to , but later in the war drafts were sent as " general reinforcements " , which could be assigned to any unit as required . These drafts were despatched even before Gallipoli and continued until late 1917 to early 1918 . Some units had as many as 26 or 27 reinforcement drafts . To provide officer reinforcements , a series of AIF officer schools , such as that at Broadmeadows , were established in Australia before officer training was eventually concentrated at a school near Duntroon . These schools produced a large number of officers , but they were eventually closed in 1917 due to concerns that their graduates were too inexperienced and after this most replacement officers were drawn from the ranks of the AIF 's deployed units , and candidates attended either British officer training units , or in @-@ theatre schools established in France . After February 1916 , the issue of NCO training was also taken more seriously , and several schools were established , with training initially being two weeks in duration before being increased to two months . 
 = = = Discipline = = = 
 During the war the AIF gained a reputation , at least amongst British officers , for indifference to military authority and indiscipline when away from the battlefield on leave . This included a reputation for refusing to salute officers , sloppy dress , lack of respect for military rank and drunkenness on leave . <unk> , misbehaviour , and public drunkenness were reportedly widespread in Egypt in 1914 – 15 , while a number of AIF personnel were also involved in several civil disturbances or riots in the red @-@ light district of Cairo during this period . Australians also appear to have been over @-@ represented among British Empire personnel convicted by court martial of various disciplinary offences on the Western Front from 1916 , especially absence without leave ; however , this may at least be partially explained by the refusal of the Australian government to follow the British Army practice of applying the death penalty to desertion , unlike New Zealand or Canada , as well as to the high proportion of front @-@ line personnel . Instead , Australian soldiers received prison sentences , including hard labour and life imprisonment , for desertion as well as for other serious offences , including manslaughter , assault and theft . More minor offences included drunkenness and defiance of authority . There were also examples of Australian soldiers being involved in looting , while the practice of " scrounging " or " souveniring " was also widespread . The stresses from prolonged combat contributed to a high incidence of indiscipline within AIF units , and especially those in France during the heavy fighting between April and October 1918 . Following the war , the indiscipline within the AIF was often portrayed as harmless <unk> . 
 Australia 's working class culture also influenced that of the AIF . Approximately three @-@ quarters of AIF volunteers were members of the working class , with a high proportion also being trade unionists , and soldiers frequently applied their attitudes to industrial relations to the Army . Throughout the war there were incidents where soldiers refused to undertake tasks that they considered demeaning or protested against actual or perceived mistreatment by their officers . These actions were similar to the strikes many soldiers had taken part in during their pre @-@ enlistment employment , with the men not seeing themselves as mutineers . The protests which occurred in 1918 over the planned disbandment of several battalions also used similar tactics to those employed in industrial disputes . Historian Nathan Wise has judged that the frequent use of industrial action in the AIF led to improved conditions for the soldiers , and contributed to it having a less strict military culture than was common in the British Army . 
 = = Uniforms and insignia = = 
 The pre @-@ war Australian Army uniform formed the basis of that worn by the AIF , which adopted the broad @-@ brimmed slouch hat and rising sun badge . Peak caps were initially also worn by the infantry , while light horsemen often wore a distinctive emu plume in their slouch hats . A standard khaki <unk> was worn by all arms . From 1916 steel helmets and gas masks were issued for use by infantry on the Western Front . A loose @-@ fitting four @-@ pocket service dress jacket was worn , along with baggy knee breeches , <unk> , and tan ankle @-@ boots . A heavy woollen greatcoat was worn during cold weather . The uniform was a drab " pea soup " or khaki colour , while all buttons and badges were oxidised to prevent shine . All personnel wore a shoulder title bearing the word " Australia " . Rank insignia followed the British Army pattern and were worn on the upper arms ( or shoulders for officers ) . Identical hat and collar badges were worn by all units , which were initially only distinguished by small metal numerals and letters on the shoulder straps ( or collars for officers ) . However , in 1915 a system of Unit Colour Patches was adopted , worn on the upper arm of a soldier 's jacket . Wound stripes of gold braid were also authorised to be worn to denote each wound received . Other distinguishing badges included a brass letter " A " which was worn on the colour patch by men and nurses who had served at Gallipoli , blue chevrons representing each year of overseas service , and a red chevron to represent enlistment during the first year of the war . Uniforms worn by the AFC were similar to those of the rest of the AIF , although some officers wore the double @-@ breasted " maternity jacket " which had been worn at the pre @-@ war Central Flying School . AFC " wings " were worn on the left breast , while an AFC colour patch and standard rising sun badges were also worn . 
 = = Operations = = 
 = = = Gallipoli = = = 
 The first contingent of the AIF departed by ship in a single convoy from Albany on 1 November 1914 . Although they were originally bound for England to undergo further training prior to employment on the Western Front , the Australians were subsequently sent to British @-@ controlled Egypt to pre @-@ empt any Turkish attack against the strategically important Suez Canal , and with a view to opening another front against the Central Powers . Aiming to knock Turkey out of the war the British then decided to stage an amphibious lodgement at Gallipoli and following a period of training and reorganisation the Australians were included amongst the British , Indian and French forces committed to the campaign . The combined Australian and New Zealand Army Corps — commanded by British general William Birdwood — subsequently landed at Anzac Cove on the Gallipoli peninsula on 25 April 1915 . Although promising to transform the war if successful , the Gallipoli Campaign was ill @-@ conceived and shortly after the landing a blood stalemate developed . This ultimately lasted eight months before Allied commanders decided to evacuate the troops without having achieved the campaign 's objectives . Australian casualties totalled 26 @,@ 111 , including 8 @,@ 141 killed . 
 = = = Egypt and Palestine = = = 
 After the withdrawal from Gallipoli the Australians returned to Egypt and the AIF underwent a major expansion . In 1916 , the infantry began to move to France while the mounted infantry units remained in the Middle East to fight the Turks . Australian troops of the ANZAC Mounted Division and the Australian Mounted Division saw action in all the major battles of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign , playing a pivotal role in fighting the Turkish troops that were threatening British control of Egypt . The Australians first saw combat during the Senussi uprising in the Libyan Desert and the Nile Valley , during which the combined British forces successfully put down the primitive pro @-@ Turkish Islamic sect with heavy casualties . The ANZAC Mounted Division subsequently saw considerable action in the Battle of Romani between 3 and 5 August 1916 against the Turks who were eventually pushed back . Following this victory the British forces went on the offensive in the Sinai , although the pace of the advance was governed by the speed by which the railway and water pipeline could be constructed from the Suez Canal . Rafa was captured on 9 January 1917 , while the last of the small Turkish garrisons in the Sinai were eliminated in February . 
 The advance entered Palestine and an initial , unsuccessful attempt was made to capture Gaza on 26 March 1917 , while a second and equally unsuccessful attempt was launched on 19 April . A third assault occurred between 31 October and 7 November and this time both the ANZAC Mounted Division and the Australian Mounted Division took part . The battle was a complete success for the British , over @-@ running the Gaza – Beersheba line and capturing 12 @,@ 000 Turkish soldiers . The critical moment was the capture of Beersheba on the first day , after the Australian 4th Light Horse Brigade charged more than 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) . The Turkish trenches were overrun , with the Australians capturing the wells at Beersheba and securing the valuable water they contained along with over 700 prisoners for the loss of 31 killed and 36 wounded . Later , Australian troops assisted in pushing the Turkish forces out of Palestine and took part in actions at Mughar Ridge , Jerusalem and the Megiddo . The Turkish government surrendered on 30 October 1918 . Units of the Light Horse were subsequently used to help put down a nationalist revolt in Egypt in 1919 and did so with efficiency and brutality , although they suffered a number of fatalities in the process . Total Australian battle casualties in the campaign were 4 @,@ 851 , including 1 @,@ 374 dead . 
 = = = Western Front = = = 
 Five infantry divisions of the AIF saw action in France and Belgium , leaving Egypt in March 1916 . I ANZAC Corps subsequently took up positions in a quiet sector south of Armentieres on 7 April 1916 and for the next two and a half years the AIF participated in most of the major battles on the Western Front , earning a formidable reputation . Although spared from the disastrous first day of the Battle of the Somme , within weeks four Australian divisions had been committed . The 5th Division , positioned on the left flank , was the first in action during the Battle of Fromelles on 19 July 1916 , suffering 5 @,@ 533 casualties in a single day . The 1st Division entered the line on 23 July , assaulting Pozieres , and by the time that they were relieved by the 2nd Division on 27 July , they had suffered 5 @,@ 286 casualties . Mouquet Farm was attacked in August , with casualties totalling 6 @,@ 300 men . By the time the AIF was withdrawn from the Somme to reorganise , they had suffered 23 @,@ 000 casualties in just 45 days . 
 In March 1917 , the 2nd and 5th Divisions pursued the Germans back to the Hindenburg Line , capturing the town of Bapaume . On 11 April , the 4th Division assaulted the Hindenburg Line in the disastrous First Battle of Bullecourt , losing over 3 @,@ 000 casualties and 1 @,@ 170 captured . On 15 April , the 1st and 2nd Divisions were counter @-@ attacked near Lagnicourt and were forced to abandon the town , before recapturing it . The 2nd Division then took part in the Second Battle of Bullecourt , beginning on 3 May , and succeeded in taking sections of the Hindenburg Line and holding them until relieved by the 1st Division . Finally , on 7 May the 5th Division relieved the 1st , remaining in the line until the battle ended in mid @-@ May . Combined , these efforts cost 7 @,@ 482 Australian casualties . 
 On 7 June 1917 , II ANZAC Corps — along with two British corps — launched an operation in Flanders to eliminate a salient south of Ypres . The attack commenced with the detonation of a million pounds ( 454 @,@ 545 kg ) of explosives that had been placed underneath the Messines ridge , destroying the German trenches . The advance was virtually unopposed , and despite strong German counterattacks the next day , it succeeded . Australian casualties during the Battle of Messines included nearly 6 @,@ 800 men . I ANZAC Corps then took part in the Third Battle of Ypres in Belgium as part of the campaign to capture the Gheluvelt Plateau , between September and November 1917 . Individual actions took place at Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle and Passchendaele and over the course of eight weeks of fighting the Australians suffered 38 @,@ 000 casualties . 
 On 21 March 1918 , the German Army launched its Spring Offensive in a last @-@ ditched effort to win the war , unleashing 63 divisions over a 70 @-@ mile ( 110 km ) front . As the Allies fell back the 3rd and 4th Divisions were rushed south to Amiens on the Somme . The offensive lasted for the next five months and all five AIF divisions in France were engaged in the attempt to stem the tide . By late May the Germans had pushed to within 50 miles ( 80 km ) of Paris . During this time the Australians fought at Dernacourt , Morlancourt , Villers @-@ Bretonneux , Hangard Wood , Hazebrouck , and Hamel . At Hamel the commander of the Australian Corps , Monash , successfully used combined arms — including aircraft , artillery and armour — in an attack for the first time . 
 The German offensive ground to a halt in mid @-@ July and a brief lull followed , during which the Australians undertook a series of raids , known as Peaceful Penetrations . The Allies soon launched their own offensive — the Hundred Days Offensive — ultimately ending the war . Beginning on 8 August 1918 the offensive included four Australian divisions striking at Amiens . Using the combined arms techniques developed earlier at Hamel , significant gains were made on what became known as the " Black Day " of the German Army . The offensive continued for four months , and during the Second Battle of the Somme the Australian Corps fought actions at Lihons , Etinehem , Proyart , Chuignes , and Mont St Quentin , before their final engagement of the war on 5 October 1918 at Montbrehain . While these actions were successful , the Australian divisions suffered considerable casualties and by September 1918 the average strength of their infantry battalions was between 300 and 400 , which was less than 50 percent of the authorised strength . The AIF was withdrawn for rest and reorganisation following the engagement at Montbrehain , and was subsequently out of the line when the armistice was declared on 11 November 1918 . Although some artillery units continued to support British and American units into November , and the AFC maintained flying operations until the end of the war . Total Australian casualties on the Western Front numbered 181 @,@ 000 , including 46 @,@ 000 of whom died . Another 114 @,@ 000 men were wounded , 16 @,@ 000 gassed , and approximately 3 @,@ 850 were taken prisoners of war . 
 = = = Other theatres = = = 
 Small numbers of AIF personnel also served in other theatres . Australian troops from the 1st Australian Wireless Signal Squadron provided communications for British forces during the Mesopotamian Campaign . They participated in a number of battles , including the Battle of Baghdad in March 1917 and the Battle of Ramadi in September that year . Following the Russian Revolution in 1917 , the Caucasus Front collapsed , leaving Central Asia open to the Turkish Army . A special force , known as Dunsterforce after its commander , Major General Lionel Dunsterville , was formed from hand @-@ picked British officers and NCOs to organise any remaining Russian forces or civilians who were ready to fight the Turkish forces . Some 20 Australian officers served with Dunsterforce in the Caucasus Campaign and one party under Captain Stanley Savige was instrumental in protecting thousands of Assyrian refugees . Australian nurses staffed four British hospitals in Salonika , and another 10 in India . 
 = = Disbandment = = 
 By the end of the war the AIF had gained a reputation as a well @-@ trained and highly effective military force , enduring more than two years of costly fighting on the Western Front before playing a significant role in the final Allied victory in 1918 , albeit as a smaller part of the wider British Empire war effort . Like the other Dominion divisions from Canada and New Zealand , the Australians were viewed as being among the best of the British forces in France , and were often used to spearhead operations . 63 Australians were awarded the Victoria Cross . This reputation came at a heavy cost , with the AIF sustaining approximately 210 @,@ 000 casualties , of which 61 @,@ 519 were killed or died of wounds . This represented a total casualty rate of 64 @.@ 8 percent , which was among the highest of any belligerent for the war . About another 4 @,@ 000 men were captured . The majority of casualties occurred among the infantry ( which sustained a casualty rate of 79 percent ) ; however , the artillery ( 58 percent ) and light horse ( 32 percent ) also incurred significant losses . 
 After the war , all AIF units went into camp and began the process of demobilisation . The AIF 's involvement in the occupation of former German or Turkish territory was limited as Prime Minister William Hughes requested their early repatriation . The exceptions were No. 4 Squadron , AFC and the 3rd Australian Casualty Clearing Station , which participated in the occupation of the Rhineland . The 7th Light Horse Regiment was also sent to occupy the Gallipoli peninsula for six weeks , along with a New Zealand regiment . At the time of the armistice , there were 95 @,@ 951 soldiers in France and a further 58 @,@ 365 in England , 17 @,@ 255 in the Middle East plus nurses in Salonika and India , all to be transported home . Around 120 Australians decided to delay their departure and instead joined the British Army , serving in Northern Russia during the Russian Civil War , although officially the Australian government refused to contribute forces to the campaign . 
 By May 1919 , the last troops were out of France , and 70 @,@ 000 were encamped on Salisbury Plain . The men returned home on a " first come , first go " basis , with the process overseen by Monash in Britain and Chauvel in Cairo . Many of the soldiers undertook government @-@ funded training in civilian occupations while awaiting repatriation to Australia . Only 10 @,@ 000 Australian soldiers remained in England by September . Monash , the senior Australian commander , was repatriated on 26 December 1919 . The last transport organised to repatriate troops was H.T. <unk> , which departed London on 13 April 1920 . The AIF officially ceased to exist on 1 April 1921 , and on 1 July 1921 the military hospitals in Australia passed into civilian hands . As a volunteer force , all units were demobilised at the end of the war . Australia 's part @-@ time military force , the Citizens Force , was subsequently reorganised to replicate the AIF 's divisional structure and the numerical designations of many of its units to perpetuate their identities and battle honours . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 During and after the war , the AIF was often portrayed in glowing terms . As part of the " Anzac legend " , the soldiers were depicted as good humoured and egalitarian men who had little time for the formalities of military life or strict discipline , yet fought fiercely and skilfully in battle . Australian soldiers was also seen as resourceful and self @-@ reliant . The wartime official correspondent and post @-@ war official historian <unk> Bean was central to the development of this stereotype . Bean believed that the character and achievements of the AIF reflected the unique nature of rural Australians , and frequently exaggerated the democratic nature of the force and the proportion of soldiers from rural areas in his journalism and the Official History of Australia in the War of 1914 – 1918 . The perceived qualities of the AIF were seen as being unique , as the product of the harsh Australian environment , the ethos of the bush and egalitarianism . Such notions built on the concept of men from the bush being excellent natural soldiers which was prevalent in Australian culture before the war . The achievements of the AIF , especially during the Gallipoli campaign , were also frequently portrayed by Bean and others as having marked the birth of Australia as a nation . Moreover , the AIF 's performance was often seen as proof that the character of Australians had passed the test of war . 
 The exploits of the AIF at Gallipoli , and then on the Western Front , subsequently became central to the national mythology . In the years that followed much was made of ethos of the AIF , including its volunteer status and the quality of " mateship " . Yet many of the factors which had resulted in the AIF 's success as a military formation were not exclusively Australian , with most modern armies recognising the importance of small @-@ unit identity and group cohesion in maintaining morale . Many of the qualities that arguably defined the Australian soldier were also claimed by New Zealanders and Canadians as having been exhibited by their soldiers , whilst undoubtedly soldiers of the German , British and American armies also exhibited such traits , even if they were known by different terms . Objectively , the foundations of the AIF 's performance were more likely to have been military professionalism based on " discipline , training , leadership , and sound doctrine " . While the volunteer status of the AIF has been seen by some to explain its military performance , it was by no means unique in this regard . The status of their enlistment made little difference against the artillery , machine @-@ gun fire , and wire obstacles of modern industrial warfare at any rate . Equally , individual skill and morale proved to be less important than sound tactics , with effective fire and movement ultimately making the difference in 1918 . The Australians were not alone among the Allied armies in embracing such tactical innovations , while many of the new technologies and integrated weapon systems they relied upon were provided by the British Army . 
 Commemorating and celebrating the AIF became an entrenched tradition following World War I , with Anzac Day forming the centrepiece of remembrance of the war . The soldiers who served in the AIF , known colloquially as " Diggers " , in time became " ... one of the paramount Australian archetypes . " When the Second Australian Imperial Force was raised in 1939 following the outbreak of World War II it was seen as inheriting the name and traditions of its predecessor . Perceptions of the AIF have evolved over time . During the 1950s and 1960s social critics began to associate the " Anzac legend " with complacency and conformism , and popular discontent concerning the Vietnam War and conscription from the mid @-@ 1960s led many people to reject it . Historians also increasingly questioned Bean 's views concerning the AIF , leading to more realistic and nuanced assessments of the force . However , some historians continue to stress the AIF 's achievements , and state that it was representative of Australia . The " Anzac legend " grew in popularity during the 1980s and 1990s when it was adopted as part of a new Australian nationalism , with the AIF often being portrayed as a uniquely Australian force that fought in other people 's wars and was sacrificed by the British military in campaigns which were of little importance to Australia . This depiction is controversial , however , and has been rejected by some historians . The Oxford Companion to Australian Military History judges that while it is unclear how popular perceptions of Australia 's military history will evolve , " it is clear that the Anzac legend will remain an important national myth for some time to come " . 
 = Operation Mascot = 
 Operation Mascot was an unsuccessful British carrier air raid conducted against the German battleship Tirpitz at her anchorage in Kaafjord , Norway , on 17 July 1944 . The attack was one of a series of strikes against the battleship launched from aircraft carriers between April and August 1944 , and was initiated after Allied intelligence determined that the damage inflicted during the Operation Tungsten raid on 3 April had been repaired . 
 A force of 44 British dive bombers and 40 fighters took off from three aircraft carriers in the early hours of 17 July . German radar stations detected these aircraft while they were en route to Kaafjord , and Tirpitz was protected by a smoke screen by the time the strike force arrived . Few of the British airmen were able to spot the battleship , and their attacks did not inflict any significant damage . German losses were limited to a patrol craft , and three British aircraft were destroyed or damaged beyond repair by Kaafjord 's defenders . A group of German submarines attempted to intercept the carrier force as it returned to base , without success . Two U @-@ boats were sunk near the carriers by British patrol aircraft and several others were damaged . 
 Despite the failure of Operation Mascot , the Royal Navy attempted four further carrier raids against Tirpitz during August 1944 . These attacks were also unsuccessful , and the task of sinking the battleship was transferred to the Royal Air Force . 
 = = Background = = 
 From early 1942 Tirpitz posed a significant threat to the Allied convoys transporting supplies through the Norwegian Sea to the Soviet Union . Operating from fjords on the Norwegian coast , the battleship was capable of overwhelming the close @-@ escort forces assigned to the Arctic convoys or breaking out into the North Atlantic . To counter this threat , the Allies were forced to keep a powerful force of warships with the British Home Fleet , and capital ships accompanied most convoys part of the way to the Soviet Union . 
 Several air and naval attacks were launched against Tirpitz in 1942 and 1943 . On 6 March 1942 , torpedo bombers flying from the aircraft carrier HMS Victorious attacked the battleship while she was attempting to intercept Convoy PQ 12 but did not achieve any hits . Land @-@ based bombers from the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and Soviet Air Forces also attempted to strike Tirpitz in her anchorages on several occasions in 1942 and 1943 , but did not inflict any damage . On 23 September 1943 , two British X @-@ class midget submarines penetrated defences around the battleship at her main anchorage at Kaafjord in northern Norway during Operation Source , and placed explosive charges in the water beneath her . This attack caused extensive damage to Tirpitz , putting her out of service for six months . 
 As Tirpitz was still considered a major threat to Allied shipping , the British military sought to damage or destroy the battleship before she could re @-@ enter service . Another midget submarine attack was considered impractical due to improvements to Kaafjord 's defences , and the commander of the RAF 's Bomber Command refused to attempt heavy bomber raids against the battleship as he believed that such operations were unlikely to be successful and would result in heavy casualties . As a result , the Home Fleet 's aircraft carriers were considered the best means of attacking Kaafjord , and the Admiralty directed the fleet to begin planning such a raid in late 1943 . Following several months of preparations the Home Fleet 's first attack on Kaafjord , which was designated Operation Tungsten , was conducted on 3 April 1944 and involved five aircraft carriers . The two strike forces of 20 Fairey Barracuda dive bombers escorted by 40 fighters were not detected during their flights to Kaafjord , and the battleship was hit by 15 bombs . Tirpitz 's crew suffered heavy casualties , but the ship was not badly damaged . Nevertheless , the damage inflicted on Tirpitz 's superstructure , armament and engines was sufficient to put her out of service for several months while repairs were completed . The commander of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine , Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz , placed a priority on returning the battleship to service so that she could continue to tie down Allied naval resources . He and other senior German officers recognised at this time that the threat of further air attacks meant that Tirpitz could no longer operate against Allied convoys . 
 British intelligence assessed that Tirpitz could be repaired within six months , and the Admiralty ordered further carrier @-@ borne strikes against the battleship . First Sea Lord Andrew Cunningham did not believe that Barracudas could carry weapons capable of sinking Tirpitz , but he hoped that further attacks would increase the period the battleship was out of service and harm her crew 's morale . The commander of the Home Fleet , Vice Admiral Bruce Fraser , initially resisted this order on the grounds that further carrier raids on Kaafjord were unlikely to be successful as Tirpitz 's defences would have been reinforced and weather conditions were likely to be worse than those encountered during Operation Tungsten . Following an argument with Cunningham , Fraser eventually agreed to attack Kaafjord again . Despite the decision to make further attacks on Kaafjord , many of the Home Fleet 's airmen were posted to other units following Operation Tungsten . This hindered subsequent operations against German forces in Norway as the new aircrew were less experienced than the men they replaced . 
 Three raids against Tirpitz were cancelled after launch due to unfavourable weather during April and May 1944 . The first of these attacks , Operation Planet , began when the Home Fleet sailed from its base at Scapa Flow in the Orkney Islands on 21 April . This operation involved the same aircraft carriers as had taken part in Operation Tungsten , aside from the substitution of the escort carrier HMS Fencer with her sister ship Striker . The fleet reached the position where its aircraft were to be flown off three days later , but the raid was cancelled when Allied agents near Kaafjord reported bad weather over the target area . The fleet then sailed south , and attacked a German convoy near Bodø , sinking three merchant ships for the loss of six aircraft . The Home Fleet put to sea to attack Tirpitz again in mid @-@ May in what was designated Operation Brawn . A strike force of 27 Barracudas escorted by Vought F4U Corsair and Supermarine Seafire fighters took off from the carriers HMS Furious and Victorious on the afternoon of 15 May , but encountered heavy cloud over Kaafjord and returned without attacking . The next raid , Operation Tiger Claw , was launched in late May . The planned attack on Kaafjord — which would have also involved aircraft flying from Furious and Victorious — had to be cancelled due to bad weather on 28 May . Instead , the carriers sailed south in search of German convoys . In a raid conducted on 1 June , the carriers ' aircraft sank four merchant vessels near Ålesund . No further attacks were attempted during June as the ships of the Home Fleet were needed to support the Normandy landings that month . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Despite the lack of success , the Admiralty and Admiral Sir Henry Moore , who had assumed command of the Home Fleet on 14 June 1944 , remained committed to attempting further carrier raids against Tirpitz . During June , the Admiralty received a series of intelligence reports indicating that repairs to Tirpitz were generally progressing well and the battleship would soon be ready to put to sea . Late that month Allied spies spotted Tirpitz conducting steaming trials in Kaafjord , and reported that she was capable of sailing at up to 20 knots ( 37 km / h ) and could rotate her main gun turrets . As a result , in late June the Admiralty directed that another aircraft carrier raid be conducted against Kaafjord during mid @-@ July . It was intended that this attack would take place before the resumption of the Arctic convoys , which had been suspended since April 1944 to free up ships for the invasion of France . 
 As detected by the British , repairs to Tirpitz following Operation Tungsten progressed quickly . Work on repairing the battleship began in late April , and 157 shipyard workers and special equipment were transported from Kiel in Germany to Kaafjord to accelerate the project . Assisted by the long hours of daylight at Kaafjord 's latitude during summer , three shifts of personnel worked on Tirpitz each day . The battleship was capable of moving under her own power by 2 June , and ready to begin gunnery exercises at the end of that month . The repair works concluded in mid @-@ July , though the battleship 's starboard propeller shaft could only be used to drive her forwards . Captain Wolf Junge assumed command of the battleship in May 1944 , replacing Captain Hans Meyer who had been wounded during Operation Tungsten . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 As Victorious had been redeployed to the Indian Ocean in June , the carriers selected for Operation Mascot were the recently commissioned HMS Indefatigable as well as the veterans Formidable and Furious . The carriers were escorted by the battleship HMS Duke of York , four cruisers and twelve destroyers . Admiral Moore commanded the force from Duke of York , and the carrier group was led by Rear Admiral Rhoderick McGrigor on board Indefatigable . 
 The composition of the striking force was broadly similar to that used in the earlier operations targeting Tirpitz . Formidable embarked No. 8 Torpedo Bomber Reconnaissance Wing , whose 827 and 830 Naval Air Squadrons each operated 12 Barracudas , as well as 1841 Naval Air Squadron , which was equipped with 18 Corsairs . Indefatigable carried No. 9 Torpedo Bomber Reconnaissance Wing , which was also equipped with 24 Barracudas split between 820 and 826 Naval Air Squadrons , as well as the Seafire @-@ equipped 894 Naval Air Squadron and 1770 Naval Air Squadron 's 12 Fairey Firefly fighters . In a change from her role in the previous attacks , Furious did not embark any Barracudas during Operation Mascot , and instead operated 20 Grumman F6F Hellcat fighters from 1840 Naval Air Squadron , three Seafires assigned to 880 Naval Air Squadron and three 842 Flight Fairey Swordfish anti @-@ submarine aircraft . 
 The defences of Kaafjord were improved following Operation Tungsten . Prior to this raid they had comprised eleven batteries of anti @-@ aircraft guns , several anti @-@ aircraft warships and a system of smoke generators capable of hiding Tirpitz from aircraft . After the attack , additional radar stations and observation posts were established and the number of smoke generators located around the battleship was increased . The improved defences in place by the time of Operation Mascot included a cliff @-@ top observation post near Kaafjord , which was capable of directing the battleship 's anti @-@ aircraft guns if necessary . Tirpitz 's air defences were also strengthened during the period she was under repair by fitting additional 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) cannons , modifying the 150 mm guns so they could be used to attack aircraft , and supplying anti @-@ aircraft shells for her 380 @-@ millimetre ( 15 in ) main guns . 
 As well as the German forces located near Kaafjord , a patrol line of twelve submarines designated Group Trutz was also established around the island of Jan Mayen and assigned the task of intercepting any British carrier forces that ventured into the Norwegian Sea . The submarines assigned to this force at the time of Operation Mascot were U @-@ 347 , U @-@ 361 , U @-@ 365 , U @-@ 387 , U @-@ 636 , U @-@ 716 , U @-@ 742 , U @-@ 921 , U @-@ 956 , U @-@ 965 , U @-@ 992 , and U @-@ 995 . The German Luftwaffe ( air force ) had few fighters stationed at bases near Kaafjord , and their operations were constrained by a lack of fuel . 
 = = Attack = = 
 Rear Admiral McGrigor issued an operational memo to the air units selected for Operation Mascot on 4 July , outlining how the attack would be conducted and providing further orders for the raid eight days later . In accordance with these instructions , the flying squadrons assigned to the three carriers undertook training exercises from their ships and shore bases from 4 July onwards . Intelligence gained from decrypting German radio messages during early July , and photos taken by a RAF aircraft on 12 July , provided further evidence that the battleship was once again fully operational and possibly preparing to put to sea . The airmen were informed on 13 July that they would attack Kaafjord in four days time . 
 The British fleet left Scapa Flow as a single group on 14 July . During the voyage north , the airmen received detailed briefings on the attack plans and terrain around Kaafjord and were also issued with escape kits to use if they were shot down over Norway . Maintenance personnel also worked to ensure that as many aircraft as possible would be ready . The twelve German submarines in the Norwegian Sea did not make contact with the British force as it sailed north . The weather for much of the voyage was foggy , but the skies were clear when the fleet reached its flying off position to the north of Kaafjord in the evening of 16 July . 
 The carriers began launching their aircraft shortly after midnight on 17 July . The main striking force comprised 44 Barracudas , with the plan for the raid specifying that No. 8 Torpedo Bomber Reconnaissance Wing 's aircraft would attack before those of No. 9 Torpedo Bomber Reconnaissance Wing . All but two of the dive bombers were armed with powerful 1 @,@ 600 @-@ pound ( 730 kg ) armour @-@ piercing bombs ; the other aircraft each carried three 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) bombs . 1841 Naval Air Squadron 's 18 Corsairs were assigned to provide protection against German fighters , and the 20 Hellcats and 12 Fireflies operated by 1840 and 1770 Naval Air Squadrons respectively were given the task of suppressing anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 After forming up , the bombers and fighters began their flight to Kaafjord at 01 : 35 . The aircraft flew 50 feet ( 15 m ) above the sea to evade German radar until they reached a point ten minutes flying time from the Norwegian coast , at which time the Barracudas climbed to 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) and the fighters to higher altitudes . The weather was fine throughout the flight , but clouds were sighted as the aircraft neared the target area . 
 The British strike force was detected by German radar stations when it reached a point 43 miles ( 69 km ) from Kaafjord at 02 : 00 . It took four minutes to pass a warning to Tirpitz ; her protective smoke generators were in action by 02 : 13 and quickly covered the vessel in an artificial cloud . The battleship and anti @-@ aircraft batteries located on the shore began firing a barrage towards the British aircraft at 02 : 19 . German forces also began jamming the British aircraft 's radios once they came within 10 miles ( 16 km ) of the Norwegian coastline . The smokescreen frustrated the British attack , as the crews of only two of the Barracudas and a pair of fighters managed to spot Tirpitz during the raid . 
 The Hellcats and Fireflies were first to attack , and strafed anti @-@ aircraft positions as well as the destroyer Z33 and small patrol craft Vp <unk> . The patrol craft was forced aground and later declared a total loss . Due to the thick smoke , the fighter pilots were only able to locate targets by aiming at the sources of tracer gunfire . 
 The Barracudas were targeted by heavy , but inaccurate , anti @-@ aircraft gunfire as they arrived over Kaafjord . Aside from the two aircraft whose pilots sighted Tirpitz , the 35 other dive bombers attempting to attack the ship were forced to aim at her gun flashes . These bombing attacks took 25 minutes to complete ; seven near misses were achieved but no damage was inflicted on Tirpitz . One of the other Barracudas attacked an anti @-@ aircraft battery , another attempted to bomb a destroyer and a third scored a near miss on the tanker Nordmark . Three of the remaining four Barracudas did not find any targets and jettisoned their bombs into the sea ; the fourth was unable to drop its bombs due to a faulty release mechanism . 
 Although German gunners fired a heavy anti @-@ aircraft barrage throughout the attack , they achieved little success . Only one British aircraft , a Corsair , was shot down near Kaafjord ; its pilot survived and was taken prisoner . A damaged Barracuda was also forced to ditch near Indefatigable and its crew were rescued by the destroyer HMS Verulam . Several other Barracudas and five Hellcats were damaged during the raid and returned to their carriers . One of the damaged Hellcats was later written off after being judged beyond repair . 
 A second British raid , which had been scheduled to take off from 08 : 00 on 17 July , was cancelled two minutes before the aircraft were to begin launching when fog began to build up near the carriers , and the British fleet turned south to return to Scapa Flow . Swordfish and Seafire aircraft flew protective patrols over the Home Fleet throughout the morning 's operations . 
 = = Submarine actions = = 
 While the attack on Kaafjord was being conducted , the commander of the German submarines in the Norwegian sea ordered Group Trutz to take up new positions to the south @-@ east of Jan Mayen and intercept the British ships as they returned to Scapa Flow . The Admiralty had anticipated this redeployment , and maritime patrol aircraft from No. 18 Group RAF were directed to sweep the Home Fleet 's route back to its base . 
 The British patrol aircraft prevented Group Trutz from attacking the Home Fleet . At 21 : 48 on 17 July , a Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator assigned to No. 86 Squadron detected and sank U @-@ 361 ; none of the submarine 's crew were rescued . Eight minutes later a No. 210 Squadron Consolidated PBY Catalina piloted by Flying Officer John Cruickshank spotted U @-@ 347 on the surface . The submarine 's anti @-@ aircraft guns damaged the Catalina , killing the navigator and wounding Cruickshank as well as three other crewmen , but the pilot continued his attack and sank U @-@ 347 with depth charges . The Catalina managed to return to base , and Cruickshank was awarded the Victoria Cross for this action . That night the Home Fleet sailed through the gap in the German patrol line that had been opened by the sinking of the two submarines . 
 Attacks on the German submarines continued for the next six days . On the morning of 18 July a German reconnaissance aircraft spotted the Home Fleet , but the German Naval Command Norway assessed that it was heading north @-@ east to launch another attack . Accordingly , Group Trutz was ordered to sail north , and four more submarines sortied from Narvik to guard the approaches to Alten and Vest fjords . In the evening U @-@ 968 , one of the four boats that had sailed from Narvik , was attacked twice by Liberators ; she shot down the first attacker but was damaged by the second and had to return to port . U @-@ 716 also suffered severe damage from a Liberator attack at 19 : 15 on 18 July but managed to return to Hammerfest . At about 23 : 00 that day U @-@ 716 was seriously damaged by a Short Sunderland but also survived . Three other submarines were attacked on 20 July but only one suffered any damage . Following these actions the commander of submarines in the Norway area decided to dissolve Group Trutz as it was too vulnerable to air attack ; all but four of the surviving submarines returned to port and the remaining boats were ordered to sail north so that they were out of range of the British aircraft . The final attack on the submarines of the former Group Trutz was made on 23 July when a No. 330 Squadron Sunderland damaged U @-@ 992 near Vestfjord . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the attack on 17 July , the British learned from intercepted German radio transmissions and reports provided by Secret Intelligence Service agents that Tirpitz had not suffered any significant damage . Admiral Moore blamed the failure of Operation Mascot on the inexperience of the aircrew involved in the attack , and criticised the strike leader for not selecting alternative targets after it became clear that Tirpitz could not be accurately bombed . Moore also judged that further attacks on Kaafjord using Barracudas would be futile , as the dive bombers ' slow speed gave the Germans enough time to cover Tirpitz with smoke between the time raids were detected and their arrival over the target area . The Admiralty was hopeful that a strategy of repeatedly striking Kaafjord over a 48 @-@ hour period would wear down the defences , and Moore agreed to attempt another attack . Consideration was also given to flying fast and long @-@ ranged de Havilland Mosquito bombers off the carriers in an attempt to achieve surprise , but none of these land @-@ based aircraft could be spared from supporting the Allied bombing of Germany . 
 The next attack on Kaafjord took place in late August . During Operation Goodwood , aircraft flying from three fleet carriers and two escort carriers conducted four raids between 22 and 29 August . The attackers found Tirpitz covered in smoke on each occasion , and only managed to inflict light damage on the battleship . These unsuccessful attacks cost the British 17 aircraft and 40 airmen killed . The frigate HMS Bickerton was torpedoed and sunk by the submarine U @-@ 354 during the operation ; the same submarine also inflicted heavy damage on the escort carrier Nabob before being destroyed by a British aircraft . 
 The Admiralty accepted that Barracudas were too slow to be effective against the Kaafjord area following the failure of Operation Goodwood . As a result , the task of attacking the battleship was transferred to RAF Bomber Command . The first heavy bomber raid against Kaafjord ( Operation Paravane ) was conducted on 15 September 1944 , with the bombers flying from staging bases in northern Russia . This attack inflicted irreparable damage on Tirpitz , and she was transferred south to the Tromsø area to be used as an immobile coastal defence battery . The battleship was sunk there with heavy loss of life by another Bomber Command raid on 12 November . 
 = Star Trek III : The Search for Spock = 
 Star Trek III : The Search for Spock is a 1984 American science fiction film released by Paramount Pictures . The film is the third feature film of the Star Trek science fiction franchise and is the center of a three @-@ film story arc that begins with Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan and concludes with Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home . After the death of Spock ( Leonard Nimoy ) , the crew of the USS Enterprise returns to Earth . When James T. Kirk ( William Shatner ) learns that Spock 's spirit , or katra , is held in the mind of Dr. Leonard " Bones " McCoy ( DeForest Kelley ) , Kirk and company steal the Enterprise to return Spock 's body to his home planet . The crew must also contend with hostile Klingons , led by Kruge ( Christopher Lloyd ) , bent on stealing the secrets of a powerful terraforming device . 
 Paramount commissioned the film after positive critical and commercial reaction to The Wrath of Khan . Nimoy directed , the first Star Trek cast member to do so . Producer Harve Bennett wrote the script starting from the end and working back , and intended the destruction of the Enterprise to be a shocking development . Bennett and Nimoy collaborated with effects house Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) to develop storyboards and new ship designs ; ILM also handled the film 's many special effects sequences . Aside from a single day of location shooting , all of the film 's scenes were shot on Paramount and ILM soundstages . Composer James Horner returned to expand his themes from the previous film . 
 The Search for Spock opened June 1 , 1984 . In its first week of release , the film grossed over $ 16 million from almost 2 @,@ 000 theaters across North America . It went on to gross $ 76 million at the domestic box office , toward a total of $ 87 million worldwide . Critical reaction to The Search for Spock was positive , but notably less so than the previous film . Reviewers generally praised the cast and characters , while criticism tended to focus on the plot ; the special effects were conflictingly received . Roger Ebert called the film a compromise between the tones of the first and second Star Trek films . The Search for Spock was released on multiple home video formats , including VHS , DVD , and Blu @-@ ray high definition discs . Nimoy went on to direct The Search for Spock 's sequel , Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Federation Starship Enterprise returns to Earth following a battle with the superhuman Khan Noonien Singh , who tried to destroy the Enterprise by detonating an experimental terraforming device known as Genesis . The casualties of the fight include Admiral James T. Kirk 's Vulcan friend , Spock , whose casket was launched into space and eventually landed on the planet created by the Genesis Device . On arriving at Earth Spacedock , Doctor Leonard McCoy begins to act strangely and is detained . Starfleet Admiral Morrow visits the Enterprise and informs the crew the ship is to be decommissioned ; the crew is ordered not to speak about Genesis due to political fallout over the device . 
 David Marcus ( Merritt Butrick ) — Kirk 's son , a key scientist in Genesis 's development — and Lieutenant Saavik ( Robin Curtis ) are investigating the Genesis planet on board the science vessel Grissom . Discovering an unexpected life form on the surface , Marcus and Saavik transport to the planet . They find that the Genesis Device has resurrected Spock in the form of a child , although his mind is not present . Marcus admits that he used unstable " <unk> " in the development of the Genesis Device , causing Spock to age rapidly and meaning the planet will be destroyed within hours . Meanwhile , Kruge ( Christopher Lloyd ) , the commander of a Klingon vessel , intercepts information about Genesis . Believing the device to be potentially useful as a weapon , he takes his cloaked ship to the Genesis planet , destroys the Grissom , and takes hostage Marcus , Saavik , and Spock . 
 Spock 's father , Sarek ( Mark Lenard ) , confronts Kirk about his son 's death . The pair learn that before he died , Spock transferred his katra , or living spirit , to McCoy . Spock 's katra and body are needed to lay him to rest on his homeworld , Vulcan , and without help , McCoy will die from carrying the katra . Disobeying orders , Kirk and his officers spring McCoy from detention , disable the USS Excelsior , and steal the Enterprise from Spacedock to return to the Genesis planet to retrieve Spock 's body . 
 In orbit , the undermanned Enterprise is attacked and disabled by Kruge . In the standoff that follows , Kruge orders that one of the hostages on the surface be executed . David is killed defending Saavik and Spock . Kirk and company feign surrender and activate the Enterprise 's self @-@ destruct sequence , killing the Klingon boarding party while the Enterprise crew transports to the planet 's surface . Promising the secret of Genesis , Kirk lures Kruge to the planet and has him beam his crew to the Klingon vessel . As the Genesis planet disintegrates , Kirk and Kruge engage in a fistfight ; Kirk emerges victorious after kicking Kruge off a cliff into a lava flow . Kirk and his officers take control of the Klingon ship and head to Vulcan . 
 There , Spock 's katra is reunited with his body in a dangerous procedure called fal @-@ tor @-@ pan . The ceremony is successful and Spock is resurrected , alive and well , though his memories are fragmented . At Kirk 's prompting , Spock remembers he called Kirk " Jim " and recognizes the crew . 
 = = Cast = = 
 William Shatner reprises the role of Admiral James T. Kirk , Starfleet officer . Shatner remarked that being directed by Leonard Nimoy , his longtime co @-@ star and friend , was initially awkward , although as the shoot went on , it became easier as Shatner realized how confident Nimoy was . To reduce weight , Shatner <unk> before the start of production , but as filming continued , he tended to " slip " ; the costume department had to make 12 shirts for him . In his book with Chris <unk> , Star Trek Movie Memories : The Inside Story of the Classic Movies , he believes that the scene where he learns of his son 's death is " Kirk 's finest celluloid moment ever " . 
 Nimoy , in addition to his directing duties , appears towards the end of the film as Spock , but only appears in the opening credits as the director . Nimoy found the most difficult scene to direct was one in which Leonard McCoy talks to the unconscious Spock in sickbay , en route to Vulcan . Nimoy recalled that not only was he in the scene , but his eyes are closed , making it difficult to judge the quality of the shot or the actor 's performance : " It drove DeForest Kelley crazy . He swears that I was trying to direct him with the movement and flutter of my eyelids . " Nimoy was thankful the story required him to appear in a minimal number of scenes . The rapidly aging Spock , at the ages of 9 , 13 , 17 , and 25 , was portrayed successively by Carl Steven , <unk> <unk> , Stephen Manley and Joe W. Davis . Frank Welker provided Spock 's screams , and Steve Blalock doubled for Nimoy , so that a total of seven actors contributed to the role . 
 DeForest Kelley is cast again as Leonard McCoy , doctor and the carrier of Spock 's living spirit . Kelley has the majority of the film 's memorable scenes , but admitted to occasional difficulties in acting with and being directed by his longtime co @-@ star . However , he has declared that he had no doubts about Nimoy 's ability to direct the film . Responding to suggestions that Star Trek copied Star Wars , Kelley asserted that the opposite was true . Playing the other crew members are James Doohan , as Montgomery Scott , the chief engineer ; George Takei , as Hikaru Sulu , Enterprise 's helmsman ; Walter Koenig , as Pavel Chekov , navigation and acting science officer ; and Nichelle Nichols , as Uhura , the ship 's communications officer . Nichols had always insisted on wearing a skirt ; although the standard female uniform used slacks , the costume designer created a skirted version specifically for her . Takei was dismayed to hear that his character was called " Tiny " by a guard at McCoy 's cell during the film , and argued with the film 's producer to have the line cut . When Takei saw the first screening of the film , he changed his mind and promptly apologized . He would later admit in his To the Stars : The Autobiography of George Takei that " without that snipe from [ the guard ] , the scene [ where Sulu eventually beats up that same guard ] would not have played even half as heroically for Sulu . " 
 At the age of 87 , and after an acting break of 14 years , Dame Judith Anderson accepted the part of T <unk> — a Vulcan high priestess who restores Spock 's katra to his body — at her nephew 's urging . Nimoy wanted someone with " power and magic " for the ethereal role . Anderson claimed to be 5 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 57 m ) tall , but her true height was closer to 4 feet 8 inches ( 1 @.@ 42 m ) , which presented a problem when the designers needed to make her look appropriately regal . The solution was to dress her with an overlong hem and built @-@ up shoes which , combined with a crown , added 6 inches ( 15 cm ) to her height . Kirstie Alley , who had played Saavik in The Wrath of Khan , did not return to reprise her role because she feared being typecast . Robin Curtis had arrived in Los Angeles in 1982 ; she made friends with the head of Paramount 's casting department , who recommended her for the role . Nimoy met with Curtis , and gave her the assignment the next day . 
 Nimoy had admired Christopher Lloyd 's work in One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest and Taxi , and was impressed by his ability to play powerful villains . Lloyd was given the part of Kruge , a Klingon interested in securing the powerful secrets of Genesis for use as a weapon . Nimoy said that Lloyd brought a welcome element of theatricality to the role . Mark Lenard plays Sarek , Spock 's father and a Vulcan ambassador . Lenard had previously played the role in the television episode " Journey to Babel " . Merritt Butrick appears as David Marcus , Kirk 's son , a scientist who had helped develop the Genesis Device . 
 Other roles include Robert Hooks as Admiral Morrow , the commander of Starfleet ; James Sikking as Captain Styles , the Commanding Officer of the Excelsior ; Miguel Ferrer as the Excelsior 's First Officer and Helmsman ; and Phillip R. Allen as Captain J.T. Esteban , the captain of the ill @-@ fated Grissom . John Larroquette plays Maltz , a member of Kruge 's bridge crew whom Nimoy describes as " the thoughtful Klingon " . Catherine <unk> plays <unk> , Kruge 's doomed lover . Grace Lee Whitney , who played Janice Rand in the Star Trek television show , made a cameo appearance ( wearing a wig ) as " Woman in Cafeteria " . Scott McGinnis plays a young man whom Uhura forces into a closet at gunpoint . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The Wrath of Khan was a critical and commercial success , and Paramount Pictures quickly prepared for a third Star Trek film . The Wrath of Khan 's director , Nicholas Meyer , would not return ; he had disagreed with changes made to his film 's ending without his consent . Upon seeing The Wrath of Khan , Leonard Nimoy became " excited " about playing Spock again . When asked by Paramount Pictures if he wanted to reprise the role for the third feature , Nimoy agreed and told them , " You 're damned right , I want to direct that picture ! " Studio chief Michael Eisner was reluctant to hire Nimoy because he mistakenly believed that the actor hated Star Trek and had demanded in his contract that Spock be killed . Nimoy was given the job after he persuaded Eisner that this was not the case . Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry 's first reaction to the news was that producer Harve Bennett had " hired a director you can 't fire " . 
 Paramount gave Bennett the green light to write Star Trek III the day after The Wrath of Khan opened , the fastest go @-@ ahead the producer had received . He began writing the screenplay , noting that " seventeen other people could have written [ it ] " after the hints at Spock 's resurrection in the previous film . Bennett and Nimoy used the open thread of Spock mind melding with McCoy at the end of The Wrath of Khan as a way to explain Spock 's restoration . The idea and name of the Vulcan " katra " came from Bennett 's discussions with Nimoy . The actor referred the producer to an episode of the television series , " Amok Time " , that suggested to Bennett a high level of " spiritual transference " among the Vulcans . Bennett admitted that the idea of Kirk and company going back to the Genesis planet to recover Kirk 's " noble self " stemmed from a poem he read in a Star Trek fan magazine . The film 's production acknowledged certain expectations from fans — Nimoy remarked that if Spock had not been resurrected and , instead , " Captain Kirk turn [ ed ] to the camera and [ said ] ' Sorry , we didn 't find him , ' people would throw rocks at the screen . " A major issue Bennett wrestled with was how to introduce the story for people who had not seen The Wrath of Khan . Bennett said that his television producer mentality " won out " ; he added a " previously in Star Trek ... " film device , and had Kirk narrate a captain 's log , describing his feelings and sense of loss . Aware of the story 's predictability , Bennett decided to have the USS Enterprise destroyed , and intended this plot element be kept a secret . 
 Nimoy wanted The Search for Spock to be " operatic " in scope ; " I wanted the emotions to be very large , very broad , life and death themes [ ... ] and the [ look of the film ] and everything about it derives everything from sizable characters playing out a large story on a large canvas , " he said . In addition , he wanted the characters to have significant scenes , however small , that made them grounded and real . Bennett started writing the script with the ending , where Spock says , " Your name is ... Jim " , and worked backwards from that point . Elements such as Kruge killing his lover were added to establish context and add drama and intrigue . Originally , the Romulans were the villains , but Nimoy preferred the more " theatrical " Klingons , feeling that their pursuit of Genesis was analogous to the Soviet race for nuclear weaponry . Bennett took the opportunity to flesh out the alien race , who he felt were ill @-@ defined in the television series . The name of the class of the antagonists ' ship , Bird of Prey , remained unchanged . 
 The script was completed in six weeks . The production 's estimated budget of $ 16 million was slightly larger than that of The Wrath of Khan , but still much less than 1979 's Star Trek : The Motion Picture . Since elements such as many sets and uniforms had been established , more money was available for special effects . Assistant producer Ralph Winter described the extra money as a " <unk> " that allowed more leeway and " fun " in planning the scope of the film . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Nimoy and Bennett worked with effects company Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) to produce special effects , models , and live @-@ action scenes . ILM received a two @-@ page story treatment in November 1982 , titled " Return to Genesis " . Production supervisor Warren Franklin said that the script they received in early 1983 was " one of the best scripts we read " out of the submissions that arrived weekly . Although ILM had provided the effects work for The Wrath of Khan , they had only been approached after effects storyboards had been completed . For The Search for Spock , ILM were brought in much earlier , meaning that visual effects supervisor Ken Ralston and his team were involved from the planning stages . Nimoy credited this early involvement with increasing the amount of creative input into the film 's design and execution . 
 It became apparent to ILM that The Search for Spock 's script required more design and model work than had been necessary for The Wrath of Khan . A merchant ship destroyed by Kruge early in the film was a <unk> — a design made of combined model pieces . Effects cameraman Don Dow reasoned that since the ship was destroyed so quickly it did not make sense to spend a large amount of time building it . The USS Grissom was named for astronaut Virgil " Gus " Grissom ; the same model would be used to depict other science vessels in the spinoff television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . 
 The Excelsior was a new design that ILM felt was a better rendition of a United Federation of Planets starship — sleeker and more modern than the Enterprise . The art department created concept sketches to show to Paramount , and at an art director 's urging model maker William George submitted another design , based on what he thought the Enterprise would look like if designed by the Japanese . Nimoy picked George 's angular and simplified take for production . While in the film , the Excelsior is supposed to be larger than its predecessor , the physical model was 12 inches ( 30 cm ) smaller than the Enterprise . 
 The Earth Spacedock was a design intended to expand the scope of Star Trek . After approving a small three @-@ dimensional maquette of the final design , the effects team created an exterior Spacedock model measuring 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall . Rather than painstakingly wiring thousands of small lights , ILM made the model out of clear Plexiglass and painted it ; scratching off the finish created windows , and an inner core of neon lights illuminated the resulting holes . The inside of the dock was simulated by an additional model , 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) long , with a removable center section . The interior illumination was generated by outside fiber optics and 2 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 watt lights . 
