 Art directors Nilo Rodis and Dave Carson designed the Klingon Bird of Prey , while George constructed the model . Nimoy wanted the ship to be reminiscent of an attacking bird , with movable wings that changed depending on whether the ship was in a cruising or attack posture . George took design cues from sketches of bodybuilders and football players , incorporating the starship equivalents of down @-@ stretched , threatening arms and muscular shoulders , together with what looked like shoulder pads and a chin guard on the ship 's outstretched neck . Although the stolen Romulan ship thread was cut from the film , the Bird of Prey design had incorporated elements of Romulan design . " It has some of the basic bird shape , but it 's more ominous " , Ralston said . A graphic bird design was integrated into the ship 's underside . 
 To save money , many sets , particularly interiors , were redresses of existing sets . The Enterprise bridge was reconfigured to stand in for the Grissom , with the chairs reupholstered and the central computer consoles moved to modify the floor plan . An Earth bar and the Klingon medical bay were redresses of the Enterprise sickbay . The Klingon bridge was a set that Nimoy appropriated from another production . Many blinking consoles were rented from a props company rather than being fabricated . The Enterprise bridge itself remained largely unchanged from its appearance in the previous films , though the floor was repainted from black to grey to make it photograph better . The most drastic change was made to Spock 's quarters . Nimoy had felt the previous grey color scheme did not express a Vulcan style , and had it brightened with yellows and oranges . 
 Adding local color to the Klingon bridge was a ragged doglike creature the effects team derisively called " Fifi Rebozo " . Ken Ralston thought that giving the Klingon captain a pet would add atmosphere , and sculpted a reptilian dog worked into the script as Kruge 's mascot . The animal 's hair was made from cheap wig clippings ; creature supervisor David <unk> sprayed the material with adhesive and laid clumps of the distressed fur onto the painted puppet body to make the animal appear " beat @-@ up and moth @-@ eaten " . During filming , <unk> and crew sprinkled the creature with water to make it look more unpleasant . The animal was a hand puppet ; Ralston operated the head and body by placing his arm into an opening on the creature 's side while hidden inside Kruge 's command chair . Three helpers operated cables that opened the animal 's eyes and made it snarl ; the creature 's head was large enough for Ralston to fit his hand inside the spring @-@ loaded jaw to operate it . Many of the animal 's intended movements were minimized ; the crew did not move its ears because it made the supposedly repulsive creature " cute " . For the animal 's demise during the Klingons ' fight with the Enterprise , an additional " dead " puppet was created , but Ralston used the " live " one for the scene instead . 
 Many of the props in The Wrath of Khan had been reused from The Motion Picture , or scrounged from other productions , but for The Search for Spock Winter wanted to design uniquely Star Trek items . George and artist Phil Norwood collaborated on many of the prop designs , creating updated and sleeker versions of the original television series communicators and phasers . Many props were created out of wood and embellished with small pieces from model kits . While the Federation tricorder was created using a model race car body , the Klingon props were intended to look dirtier , with sharp surfaces that looked uncomfortable to carry . George was insistent on using the shapes and materials , rather than blinking lights , to suggest the props were real and manufactured . 
 = = = Costumes and makeup = = = 
 Robert Fletcher , costume designer for the previous Star Trek films , was responsible for The Search for Spock 's wardrobe . Fletcher 's job was to sketch outfits , choose the necessary fabrics , and complete the fittings for principal characters . He collaborated with costumer Jim Linn , who clothed extras and managed the logistics of cleaning , repairing , and tracking costumes . Most of the Starfleet uniforms had already been designed for the previous film , but Fletcher wanted to dress the main characters in civilian clothes . Fletcher developed a mythology behind each outfit ; the stone ornaments on Sarek 's robe , for instance , were intended to be representative of a Vulcan 's level of consciousness . The costumer had the advantage of access to Paramount 's store rooms , which contained literal tons of expensive fabrics . 
 The designer and production staff were satisfied with the feudal Japan @-@ inspired Klingon costumes Fletcher made for The Motion Picture , but they had to make new versions ; of 12 original costumes , half had been destroyed during publicity tours . The remaining six were loaned out for an episode of Mork & Mindy and badly damaged ; Fletcher spent three months salvaging what remained . Additions to established clothing included an officer 's vest for Kruge , and jewelry . 
 In addition to his costume chores , Fletcher designed the Klingon and Vulcan makeup . Makeup artist Thomas R. Burman suggested that Fletcher was asked to help because the studio neglected to contract the work out ; Burman received a contract only three weeks before the start of photography . Burman 's bid of $ 160 @,@ 000 was much higher than Paramount 's $ 50 @,@ 000 budget , but he secured the job when his competitor dropped out close to the start of production . " It didn 't come down to money in the end but to who could do it quickly [ ... ] we had a [ reputation ] for working fast and doing quality work , " Burman explained . Fletcher and Burman agreed that the <unk> foreheads of the Klingons in The Motion Picture were too prominent , obscuring the individuals ' faces . " It was just too cartoonish , and I didn 't want a Star Wars look in [ the ] movie . There had never been a good marriage between the forehead appliance and the actor 's faces . We tried to keep them in character rather than have these obtrusive things on their heads , " Burman said . The resulting Klingon makeup took two hours to apply . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 To guard against leaks that had prefigured Spock 's death during production of The Wrath of Khan , Paramount took precautions to secure the sets . Set designer Cameron Birnie noted that the production 's security was highly unusual ; sets were built out of sequence and the crew given only as many pages as they needed to fabricate each locale . Security guards checked the picture identification cards of production staff . Any mention of the production was removed from stationery and documents , and " Trois " ( three , in French ) was written as a code word . Offices and workshops were bereft of identifying signage , with doors double @-@ locked for extra protection . The Search for Spock 's scripts were chemically treated so that copies could be traced to the original ; as a further canary trap , subtle changes in wording distinguished each copy . Nimoy 's name never appeared on call sheets , and Spock was referred to in the script as " <unk> " ( Vulcan spelled backwards ) . Despite the precautions , word of the Enterprise 's destruction leaked out before the film 's release . 
 Principal photography commenced on August 15 , 1983 . All but two days of production were filmed on Paramount soundstages , by cinematographer Charles Correll . The Search for Spock was one of the first major feature films to use Eastman <unk> , a color high speed negative film stock . The film allowed Correll latitude in choosing a broad range of exposure indexes . Since The Search for Spock was shot with anamorphic lenses and many theatergoers would see widescreen 70 mm prints , Correll needed to produce a crisp depth of field , a difficult task on many sets . For scenes on the bridge , Correll pushed the exposure index above the Eastman recommendation to keep the image crisp at less than 50 foot @-@ candles . 
 Many of The Search for Spock 's dialogue sequences feature tight close @-@ up shots . During Kirk and Sarek 's mind meld , Nimoy chose cuts that focused on accentuating the dialogue ; " Instead of watching people 's faces , all you see is the mouth or the eyes and you have the tendency to hear better , " Correll explained . Correll was unhappy that every scene save one was filmed on a soundstage . Feeling that recreating everything on set resulted in a fake look , the cinematographer suggested that Genesis be filmed on Kauai in Hawaii , and that Red Rock Canyon stand in for Vulcan . The production did not have the money to shoot on location , meaning that Nimoy was preoccupied with making sure the various outdoor settings felt believable . While the various vessel exteriors were handled by ILM , Correll was responsible for the look of the interior sets . He preferred to treat these as actual locations inside the ships ; although the sets ' ceilings were designed to be removed so that lights could be rigged in the rafters , Correll used other lighting methods . In the Bird of Prey , he used fluorescent tubes to pick up the walls ' metallic paints , and kept the set smoky to convey a dirty atmosphere . 
 Before McCoy is arrested by security , he attempts to charter a spaceflight to Genesis in a bar . The scene opens with two officers playing a World War I @-@ era dogfight video game . The wireframe biplanes were created using black lines on clear paper printouts placed on an overlay cell . " It was really just a gag shot " , effects artist Charlie Mullen explained , " the idea that people in the future would be playing an old war game . " To accommodate the effect , Correll had to use a large amount of exposure without making the bar appear overlit . Much of the lighting was provided by tables rigged with fluorescent tubes to provide an effect different from other parts of the film . Correll could not add smoke to the scene to enhance the bar " feel " , because the disturbed atmosphere would have made ILM 's game hard to insert . The scene was intended to end in a barroom brawl when security tried to take McCoy into custody ; Nimoy decided that " it didn 't feel right " and there was not enough time or money to achieve the scene successfully . 
 The Genesis planet was produced via matte paintings and soundstages on Paramount lots under art director John Edward <unk> II . Much of the planet occupied Stage 15 , known as the DeMille stage in honor of the director 's Parting of the Red Sea on the stage during filming of The Ten Commandments ( 1956 ) . The space measured 300 by 100 feet ( 91 by 30 m ) . The perceived boundaries of the scenes were extended via matte paintings created by Chris Evans , Frank Ordaz , and Michael <unk> . Because parts of the set had to literally collapse during the planet 's destruction , the set was built 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) off the ground and featured trapdoors and pyrotechnics in the floor . The hundreds of 10 @,@ 000 watt lights in the rafters were covered in silk for day scenes to soften the light , and fitted with blue filters for night ; dimmers eased the transition between periods . Since the doomed planet was no longer a paradise , the art director , Nimoy , Bennett and Correll considered constant changes to the colors on the scenes , but decided not to get " fancy photographically " . While many of the scenes appeared lit with minimal light sources such as flickering fires , Correll tried to use as much light as possible . To get the fire to reflect on the actor 's faces , Correll used a variety of tricks with normal lights ; using natural fire would not have provided the required intensity . 
 A significant feature of the Genesis planet are the alien worms that rapidly evolve from microbes on Spock 's coffin . The creatures start as small , slimy crawlers , then grow to lengths of 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) . The small worms were created by injecting molten " Hot @-@ Melt " vinyl into epoxy polymer molds that were immediately put into cold water to create a translucent product . The resulting hundred or so creatures were painted and coated with methacyl , a slippery , slimy coating . Each worm was attached to an elevated platform by a piece of fishing line ; the lines were tied to rods underneath the set . Offscreen helpers pushed the rods or pulled fishing line to create motion ; the scene required many takes because the fishing line would periodically flash at the camera . The larger worms proved more problematic , with filming taking place at ILM and Paramount Stage 15 . Similar to The Wrath of Khan 's parasitic Ceti eels , the worms featured cobra @-@ like cowls and a ringed mouth of teeth . ILM built one of the worms with more articulation than the others ; Ralston operated the creature through a hole in the set floor with his hand stuck inside the creature . The other worms were animated using pneumatic bladders that caused air to pass through hoses in sequence , creating an undulating motion . During the scene the worms attack Kruge , who kills one of them . The usual method for achieving the effect of the creature wrapping itself around Kruge would have been to film the sequence in reverse , but this posed problems : the slime coating Kruge would have been out of place with reverse filming , and multiple takes would ruin the Klingon makeup Lloyd wore . ILM 's solution involved rigging the worm with fishing lines that were pulled in a choreographed fashion by multiple off @-@ screen helpers to simulate the wrapping movement . When small pieces of the Klingon uniforms caught or snapped the fishing lines , Ralston resorted to steel cables . 
 The fiery breakup of the Genesis planet involved fire , smoke , and earth upheaval . " The main part of the floor was rigged so that rocks would shoot up out of the ground [ on catapults ] . Trees were rigged to fall and start fires , " Correll explained . Producing the shots required meticulous direction and between 20 and 30 helpers were on hand the day of shooting . Correll shot simultaneously on nine cameras ; the hope was to get as many usable shots as possible in one take , in case all the trapdoors and pyrotechnics had to be reset for another round of filming . This entire sequence was completed in three weeks . 
 The Vulcan stairs were filmed at Occidental College — the production 's only location shooting . To create the orange atmosphere , Correll used a large 15 by 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 by 4 @.@ 6 m ) floodlight , created for the 1983 Peter Hyams film The Star Chamber , placed on the top of a 110 @-@ foot ( 34 m ) crane . The location 's blue @-@ grey sky was replaced with a matte painting that covered the top half of the stairs shot . Many ornamental touches Nimoy wanted for the procession scene ultimately never materialized . The background of the set was simply a painted piece of canvas ; Nimoy had the background out of focus in all the shots as a way to hide the shortcomings of the scenery . Elements removed from the Vulcan sequence included a procession through the " Vulcan Hall of Ancient Thought " , a space dominated by large heads atop columns and a sculpture towering to a height of 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . The scene was cut because the procession dragged on for too long . 
 Production on the film was temporarily shut down after a fire destroyed several soundstages at Paramount Studios , one of which was adjacent to the set for the Genesis planet . Initially , the set 's pyrotechnics were suspected of causing the fire , but the cause was ruled to be arson . Shatner was among the cast members who grabbed fire hoses to stop the flames . Correll hoped the place would burn down so that he would get his chance to film in Hawaii . While most of the set was undamaged , holes in the side of the building had to be covered with heavy black curtains to prevent outside light from leaking in . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 As with previous Star Trek films , time and money were major constraints for special effects . The effects artists were concerned about producing the right look no matter the time involved . While effects cameraman Scott Farrar and his assistants constantly traversed the 400 miles ( 640 km ) separating ILM from Paramount , teams at the effects house organized post @-@ production effects and photography . The constant travel took a toll on Ralston , who began to forget which airlines he was taking and what city he was in . As a pause in work meant wasted time , effects editors Bill <unk> and Jay <unk> produced usable effects shots for the live @-@ action editors at Paramount ; these half @-@ finished , monochromatic composites gave the editors an idea of scene pacing . ILM contributed 120 shots to the film . Like Correll , Ralston used Eastman 94 for all shots that did not require bluescreen and chroma keying . 
 ILM filmed starships using motion control for timed and computer @-@ assisted model movement . The ship models required multiple camera passes because different parts of the ship and its lights were filmed at different exposure levels . The Excelsior required eight passes to supplement the main " beauty pass " , the Enterprise six . ILM could have combined passes with multiple exposures , but not without risk ; " If anything got out of synch , or somehow we dropped a frame , we would have to reshoot — and then you 're stuck . You 've ruined two pieces , two elements , " Farrar said . 
 The Klingon Bird of Prey 's cloaking device required a new effect . The original concept featured the layers of the ship forming up from the inside out , requiring a series of overlaid elements filmed with an Oxberry animation camera . ILM decided the effect appeared too " animated @-@ looking " , and defied common sense : " if there was a fanfare to <unk> , everyone would know the Klingons were coming and blow them out of the sky before they could even finish materializing , " Ralston said . The supervisor decided on subtlety , throwing color separations out of sync to create a blurry ripple effect . While simple , the sequence was more effective than the elaborate planned scene . Effects such as the destruction of the merchant ship were created using projected explosions , a technique perfected during the production of Return of the Jedi . Simulated zero @-@ gravity explosions were filmed and reflected onto a card using the same motion control program used for the models . The result was an explosion that moved with the model . 
 The most laborious effects sequences took place inside Spacedock ; months were spent completing the station 's interior shots . The effects crew tested different looks to make sure the dock interior seemed appropriately vast . " We found the interior demanded some degree of atmospheric haze , even though there probably wouldn 't be any in space , " Farrar said . To create a slightly degraded look , the crew used blue color gels for lights and shot through smoke for fill shots . They switched to diffusion filters for light passes , as using smoke for longer shots would have required time @-@ consuming smoke level monitoring . Due to difference in the scales of the dock and ship models , it was impossible to film the Excelsior and Enterprise inside the set . Opening the dock 's space doors was problematic because the lights illuminating the inside of the dock from the exterior had to be hidden from the camera to prevent lens flares . Massive fans were used to keep equipment cool and prevent the lights from melting or warping the dock 's interior artwork . The realism of the dock scenes was heightened by live action footage of a cafeteria , with windows overlooking the dock interior . The cafeteria was a set built at ILM and filled with 40 extras in front of a bluescreen so that the dock and Enterprise could be composited in later ; matte paintings extended the ceiling of the set . 
 Ralston , who considered the Enterprise ugly and the model hard to shoot , delighted in destroying the ship . Several shots were combined together for the complete destruction sequence ; while Ralston would have preferred to take a mallet to the original $ 150 @,@ 000 model , a variety of cheaper models were used . The first part of the ship to be destroyed was the bridge , a separate miniature with stars added to the background . The shot switches to the Bird of Prey moving away as the top of the saucer burns , where explosions ( filmed upside down to simulate the absence of gravity ) were superimposed over a motion control pass of the ship . The camera cuts to a closeup of the ship 's registration number being eaten away by inner explosions . George created a light Styrofoam model that was dissolved by acetone dripped on the saucer from above . By shooting at less than one frame per second and keeping light off the model , the drips were not visible in the print . Burning steel wool on the inside of the saucer created a glowing ember effect from the ship 's inner decks being destroyed . The saucer explosion was simulated by blowing up a talcum powder @-@ covered plaster dish . Two and four ounce bombs and gasoline were used as pyrotechnics in live action scenes of the bridge being destroyed . <unk> used spring @-@ loaded platforms to launch themselves in the air . 
 For the final destruction of the Genesis planet , footage from the Paramount set had to be carefully matched with ILM effects footage . ILM built scale miniatures cut into sections to portray parts of Genesis ' upheaval ( rock slides , fissures opening in the ground ) that live @-@ action scenes could not easily replicate . One of the largest miniatures , measuring 20 by 16 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 by 4 @.@ 9 m ) , had trick trees and trapdoors that could be reset , propane jets for gusts of fire , and solenoid @-@ triggered rockfalls . For scenes where Kirk and Kruge battle at a precipice over a pit of lava , the shot combined animated lava , clouds ( really cotton daubs on black ) , lightning , and a matte painting . Overhead shots of the lava were created by lighting a piece of clear Plexiglass with colored gels and covering the plate with methacyl , vermiculite and charcoal ; the mixture dripped off the surface and coated the crew underneath . ILM simulated Kruge 's demise , a long plunge into the pool of lava , with the help of a stop @-@ motion puppet . Lloyd fell a few feet onto a black mattress ; during a lighting flash the actor was replaced by the puppet that fell the rest of the distance . Because the shot was filmed on black instead of the traditional bluescreen , the animators had to remove or rotoscope the black background around Lloyd one frame at a time . The transition between the footage of Lloyd and the puppet was hidden by a single @-@ frame flash as a bolt of lightning struck Kruge . The scene of Kirk and Spock beaming away as the ground collapses was another created at ILM , as the level of destruction was simply not possible for the live action crew . 
 Among the other effects ILM had to produce were the transporter beam and the warp speed effect . Mullen noted that the effects ' look changed depending on who was directing the film ; " everyone wants something distinctive , but nobody wants to get far enough away from the TV series to startle the Trekkies . " The effect was produced by cutting out or <unk> the individual to be transported , then making a vertical slot through which a high @-@ intensity light was positioned . A computer @-@ controlled move would cause the light to spread from the center and fade away , then reset its position and repeat the movement on the opposite side . Handmade acetate filters and gels were applied to give the transporter beam color and patterns , followed by small flickering animated highlights called " bugs " which appeared after the character had <unk> . The Klingons ' transporters were given a harsh red look to differentiate them from the smooth blue Federation effect . Whereas many of the multicolored rainbow warp trail shots from The Wrath of Khan were stock footage taken from the first film , the producers of the third film wanted something new . A streak effect , in which a beauty pass of the ship was combined with blurred passes for each light intensity , was tried first . The result was disappointing ; as the Enterprise grew larger the streaks became distorted and out of place . Mullen rejected a straight animation of the warp drive as too bouncy , but the footage was cut in for editing while ILM went through six more approaches to the problem . The final effect , a " vaporous , colorful trail " , came together only weeks before the film 's release . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Composer James Horner returned to score The Search for Spock , fulfilling a promise he had made to Bennett on The Wrath of Khan . While Nimoy considered hiring his friend Leonard Rosenman for the score , he was persuaded that Horner 's return would grant continuity between The Wrath of Khan and the new film . Much like the content of the film , Horner 's music was a direct continuation of the score he wrote for the previous film . When writing music for The Wrath of Khan , Horner was aware he would reuse certain cues for an impending sequel ; two major themes he reworked were for Genesis and Spock . While the Genesis theme supplants the title music Horner wrote for The Wrath of Khan , the end credits were quoted " almost verbatim " . 
 In hours @-@ long discussions with Bennett and Nimoy , Horner agreed with the director that the " romantic and more sensitive " cues were more important than the " bombastic " ones . Horner had written Spock 's theme to give the character more dimension : " By putting a theme over Spock , it warms him and he becomes three @-@ dimensional rather than a collection of <unk> , " he said . The theme was expanded in The Search for Spock to represent the ancient alien mysticism and culture of Spock and Vulcan . 
 Among the new cues Horner wrote was a " percussive and atonal " theme for the Klingons which is represented heavily in the film . Jeff Bond described the cue as a compromise between music from Horner 's earlier film Wolfen , Khan 's motif from The Wrath of Khan , and Jerry Goldsmith 's Klingon music from The Motion Picture . Horner also adapted music from Sergei Prokofiev 's Romeo and Juliet for part of the Enterprise theft sequence and its destruction , while the scoring to Spock 's resurrection on Vulcan was lifted from Horner 's Brainstorm ending . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Nimoy wrote that The Search for Spock 's major theme is that of friendship . " What should a person do to help a friend ? How deeply should a friendship commitment go ? ... And what sacrifices , what obstacles , will these people endure ? That 's the emotion line of the film [ and ] its reason for existence , " he recalled . While Spock 's bodily resurrection was complete , his mind was a blank slate — The Search for Spock , Michele and Duncan Barrett argue , says that the important question is whether an individual 's mind functions , as this is the key to a meaningful existence . 
 Brown University professor Ross S. Kraemer argues that The Search for Spock " became Star Trek 's first and most obvious exploration of Christian themes of sacrificial , salvific death and resurrection " . According to Larry J. Kreitzer , The Wrath of Khan provided " its own versions of Good Friday and a hint of the Easter Sunday to come " , with the hints fulfilled by Spock 's bodily restoration in The Search for Spock . David and Saavik 's discovery of Spock 's empty coffin and burial robes parallels the evidence the Apostles found that pointed to Jesus ' resurrection in the Gospel of Luke , asserts Kraemer . Spock 's resurrection not only proves the Vulcan 's belief in the existence of the katra , but also affirms these are not just a belief system but a certainty . Barrett points to the Star Trek feature films in general and The Search for Spock in particular as a turn away from the irreligious television series . In more practical terms , Jeffery A. Smith pointed to The Search for Spock as one of many Hollywood films culminating in a 1990s trend where death has little permanence ( Ghost , Defending Your Life , What Dreams May Come , Meet Joe Black ) . 
 The Genesis planet became a doomed experiment partly for dramatic reasons ; having a time limit for the characters to save Spock added tension . Nimoy was also interested in scientific ethics — how quickly can science move and what are the dangers of that movement . University of Houston professor Dr. John Hansen notes that while Spock 's sacrifice in The Wrath of Khan is the " archetype of reason and rationality manifesting the archetype of human virtue , " a selfless and freely @-@ made choice , the death of <unk> ( who has learned too much about the Genesis Device ) in The Search for Spock is far different : the Klingon willingly accepts her death for the " common good " as determined by the state , relinquishing her liberty and life . Hansen contends that the issues of personal liberty and the exploitation of technology , in this case Genesis , are " intertwined " . The Genesis Device was intended as a liberating technology , creating life from lifelessness , but in the Klingon view it is a tool for dominion ( contrasting the contemporary views of how technology can promote or constrain liberty ) . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Search for Spock was not heavily marketed . Among the promotional merchandise created for the film 's release were Search for Spock @-@ branded calendars and glasses sold at Taco Bell . A novelization ( ISBN 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ) was also released , and reached second place on The New York Times paperback bestsellers list . President Ronald Reagan screened the film for friends during a weekend away from the White House in 1984 , spent with White House staff chief Mike Deaver and the president 's own close friend Senator Paul <unk> . Reagan wrote of the film : " It wasn 't too good . " 
 The Search for Spock opened June 1 in a record @-@ breaking 1 @,@ 996 theaters across North America ; with competing films Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom , Gremlins , Ghostbusters and Top Secret ! released at the same time , more than half of the nation 's screens were filled by summer blockbusters . The Search for Spock grossed over $ 16 million in its opening weekend . In its second weekend the film 's gross dropped 42 percent . The box office strength of The Search for Spock and Indiana Jones led Paramount to dominate early summer film business . The film made $ 76 @.@ 5 million in North America , for a total of $ 87 million worldwide . 
 James Horner 's soundtrack to the film was released on a 43 @-@ minute LP record by Capitol Records in 1984 , and also contained a 12 " single titled " The Search for Spock , " composed by Horner and performed by Group 87 , a band featuring composer Mark Isham and Missing Persons drummer Terry Bozzio . It was re @-@ released on Compact Disc in 1989 by GNP Crescendo . Film Score Monthly released an expanded two @-@ compact disc score June 1 , 2010 . The Expanded Edition included both the original Capitol Records release from 1984 and an all @-@ new version which featured the complete soundtrack as heard in the film , including alternate versions as well as many cues heard for the first time outside of the film . The soundtrack would be Horner 's final contribution to Star Trek . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Search for Spock received generally positive reviews from critics . Richard Schickel of Time praised the film as " perhaps the first space opera to deserve that term in its grandest sense " . Janet Maslin of The New York Times and Newsweek wrote that while the film felt weighed down by the increasingly aged actors and television tropes , it was leavened by its dedication . Roger Ebert called the film " good , but not great " and a compromise between the special effects @-@ dependent The Motion Picture and the character @-@ driven The Wrath of Khan . Conversely , USA Today praised the film as the best of the three and the closest to the original spirit of the television series . An overwhelmingly negative view of the film was offered by The Globe and Mail 's Susan Ferrier Mackay , who summed the film up as " ba @-@ a @-@ a @-@ d " . In a 2010 retrospective of the film franchise , author Jill Sherwin suggests the aging Enterprise served as a metaphor for the aging Star Trek franchise . The film has received a score of 55 / 100 on Metacritic , indicating mixed to average reviews , while review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes has given it 78 % , indicating positive reviews . 
 Critics praised Nimoy 's direction , to which USA Today attributed the film 's success in capturing the essence of the television show . Newsweek wrote that due to Nimoy the film was the best @-@ paced Trek film , and that his familiarity with these actors enabled him to bring out the best from them . Newsweek , and David Sterritt of the Christian Science Monitor , appreciated how the film slowed the action down to allow moments of reflection , comparing this with the focus of most contemporary action films on effects rather than actors . The Washington Post 's Rita Kempley wrote that Nimoy 's direction was competent , but his background in television showed — " the film feels made @-@ for @-@ TV " , she summarized . Fellow Post critic Gary Arnold concurred with Kempley 's television film assessment , but also wrote that Nimoy was smart to focus on the essentials of each scene ; he " [ concentrates ] on the actors in ways that flatter and enhance their work . " 
 The Search for Spock 's plot solicited comment ; Schickel called the film " overplotted " and filled with " heavy expository burdens " , comparing it to real opera . Sterritt said that the script occasionally veered in " arbitrary " directions and contained missteps , such as how the Grissom and its crew are suddenly lost , but the plot disregards their fate . Arnold wrote that Shatner missed an opportunity to act on par with The Wrath of Khan 's revelation that Kirk was David 's father . The critic considered David 's death an attempt at a similar shock , but felt it was not a success . Harry M. Geduld , writing for The Humanist , criticized the film for what he called " contradictions and implausibilities " , such as Scott 's sabotage of the Excelsior and Spock 's regeneration . 
 The film 's sense of self @-@ seriousness and the camaraderie amongst the characters were generally cited as positive aspects . Maslin wrote that certain tacky elements of the film 's television roots were outweighed by the closeness of the Enterprise crew and " by their seriousness and avidity about what seem to be the silliest minutiae [ ... ] That 's what longtime Trekkies love about the series , and it 's still here — a little the worse for wear , but mostly untarnished . " The Los Angeles Times wrote that despite its spectacle , the film 's " humanity once again outweighs the hardware , and its innocence is downright endearing " . Mackay offered an alternate view , calling the characters ' actions and dialogue " wooden " and saying that the film 's monsters had more life than the acting . Lloyd 's portrayal of Kruge received praise from New York 's David Denby and The Daily News 's Hunter <unk> . 
 The film 's effects were conflictingly appraised . Schickel wrote that the effects were " technically adroit " and occasionally " witty " , and Ebert singled out the Bird of Prey as a " great @-@ looking " ship . Sterritt felt that the settings always felt like they were on soundstages rather than out in space , and Denby wrote that more could have been done with Genesis , and that while it was an interesting concept its special effects execution lacked . Kempley appreciated the sets ' low values , writing that " the <unk> the sets " , the closer the film felt to its television origins . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Search for Spock was released on home video in 1985 . The initial retail offerings included VHS , Betamax , LaserDisc and CED formats with closed captioning . As part of a plan to support its push of 8mm video cassette , Sony partnered with Paramount Home Video to bring titles like The Search for Spock to the platform in 1986 . 
 The film was given a " bare bones " DVD release on May 11 , 2000 , with no extra features — the release was several months earlier than the release of The Wrath of Khan . Two years later , a two disc " Collector 's Edition " was released with supplemental material and the same video transfer as the original DVD release . It featured a text commentary by Michael Okuda and audio commentary from Nimoy , Bennett , Correll , and Curtis . 
 The film was released on high @-@ definition Blu @-@ ray Disc in May 2009 to coincide with the new Star Trek feature , along with the other five films featuring the original crew in Star Trek : Original Motion Picture Collection . The Search for Spock was remastered in 1080p high @-@ definition from the 2000 DVD transfer . All six films in the set have new 7 @.@ 1 Dolby TrueHD audio . The disc features a new commentary track by former Star Trek : The Next Generation , Deep Space Nine , and Voyager television writers Ronald D. Moore and Michael Taylor . 
 The film was briefly removed from Netflix in August 2013 because of inaccurately translated Klingon and Vulcan subtitles . 
 = Vampyr = 
 Vampyr ( German : Vampyr – Der Traum des Allan Grey , " Vampire : the Dream of Allan Grey " ; German pronunciation : [ <unk> ̯ ] ) is a 1932 German – French horror film directed by Danish director Carl Theodor Dreyer . The film was written by Dreyer and Christen Jul based on elements from J. Sheridan Le Fanu 's collection of supernatural stories In a Glass Darkly . Vampyr was funded by Nicolas de Gunzburg who starred in the film under the name of Julian West among a mostly non @-@ professional cast . Gunzburg plays the role of Allan Grey , a student of the occult who enters the village of Courtempierre , which is under the curse of a vampire . 
 Vampyr was challenging for Dreyer to make as it was his first sound film and had to be recorded in three languages . To overcome this , very little dialogue was used in the film and much of the story is told with silent film @-@ styled title cards . The film was shot entirely on location and to enhance the atmospheric content , Dreyer opted for a washed out , soft focus photographic technique . The audio editing was done in Berlin where the character 's voices , sound effects , and score were added to the film . 
 Vampyr had a delayed release in Germany and opened to a generally negative reception from audiences and critics . Dreyer edited the film after its German premiere and it opened to more mixed opinions at its French debut . The film was long considered a low point in Dreyer 's career , but modern critical reception to the film has become much more favorable with critics praising the film 's disorienting visual effects and atmosphere . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On a late evening , Allan Gray arrives at an inn close to the village of Courtempierre and he rents a room to sleep . Gray is awakened suddenly by an old man , who enters the room and leaves a square packet on Gray 's table ; " To be opened upon my death " is written on the wrapping paper . Gray takes the package and walks outside . Shadows guide him to an old castle , where he sees the shadows dancing and wandering on their own . Gray also sees an elderly woman and encounters another old man . Gray leaves the castle and walks to a manor . Looking through one of the windows , Gray sees the man who gave him the package earlier . The man is suddenly murdered by gunshot . Gray is let into the house by servants , who rush to the aid of the fallen man but it is too late to save him . The servants ask Gray to stay the night . Gisèle , the youngest daughter of the Lord of the manor , takes Gray to the library and tells him that her sister , Léone , is gravely ill . Just then they see Léone walking outside . They follow her , and find her unconscious on the ground with fresh bite wounds . They have her carried inside . Gray remembers the parcel and opens it . Inside is a book about horrific demons called <unk> . 
 By reading the book , Gray learns that Léone is a victim of a Vampyr . <unk> can force humans into submission . The village doctor visits Léone at the manor , and Gray recognizes him as the old man he saw in the castle . The doctor tells Gray that a blood transfusion is needed and Gray offers his blood to save Léone . Exhausted from blood loss , Gray sleeps . He wakes sensing danger and rushes to Léone , where he surprises the doctor as he is attempting to poison the girl . The doctor flees the manor , and Gray finds that Gisèle is gone . Gray follows the doctor back to the castle , where Gray has a vision of himself being buried alive . After the vision subsides , he rescues Gisèle but the doctor escapes . The old servant of the manor finds Gray 's Vampyr book and discovers that a Vampyr can be defeated by driving an iron bar through its heart . The servant meets Allan Gray at Marguerite Chopin 's grave behind the village Chapel . They open the grave and find the old woman perfectly preserved . They hammer a large metal bar through her heart , killing her . The village doctor is hiding in an old mill , but finds himself locked in a chamber where flour sacks are filled . The old servant arrives and activates the mill 's machinery , filling the chamber with flour and suffocating the doctor . The curse of the Vampyr is lifted and Léone recovers . Gisèle and Gray cross a foggy river by boat and find themselves in a bright clearing . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Nicolas de Gunzburg as Allan Gray , a young wanderer , who vaguely resembles a young , slightly better @-@ looking H. P. Lovecraft , and whose studies of occult matters have made him a dreamer . Gray 's view of the world in the film is described as a blur of the real and unreal . 
 Rena Mandel as Giséle , Léone 's younger sister and the daughter of the Lord of the Manor . Giséle is kidnapped by the Village Doctor late in the film . 
 Sybille Schmitz as Léone , Giséle 's older sister , who is in thrall to the vampire and finds her strength dwindling day by day . 
 Jan Hieronimko as the Village Doctor , a pawn of the vampire , Marguerite Chopin , who seems to sleep in a coffin , hinting that he too may be a vampire . The village doctor kidnaps Giséle late in the film . 
 Henriette Gérard as Marguerite Chopin , the vampire , an elderly woman whose hold extends beyond her immediate victims . Many villagers , including the village doctor , are her minions . 
 Maurice Schutz as the Lord of the Manor , Giséle and Léone 's father who offers Gray a book about vampirism to help Gray save his daughters . After his murder , he returns briefly as a spirit and takes revenge on the village doctor and a soldier who had helped Marguerite Chopin . 
 Albert Bras as an Old Servant , a servant at the manor house . After the death of his master , he finds Gray 's book on vampirism and , aided by Gray , ends the vampire 's reign of terror . 
 N. <unk> as Seine Frau ( His Wife ) 
 Jane Mora as a Nurse 
 Georges Boidin as the <unk> Soldier 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Director Carl Theodor Dreyer began planning Vampyr in late 1929 , a year after the release of his previous film The Passion of Joan of Arc . The production company behind Dreyer 's previous film had plans for Dreyer to make another film , but the project was dropped which led to Dreyer deciding to go outside the studio system to make his next film . Being Dreyer 's first sound film , it was made under difficult circumstances as the arrival of sound put the European film industry in turmoil . In France , film studios lagged behind technologically with the first French sound films being shot on sound stages in England . Dreyer went to England to study sound film , where he got together with Danish writer Christen Jul who was living in London at the time . Dreyer decided to create a story based on the supernatural and read over thirty mystery stories and found a number of re @-@ occurring elements including doors opening mysteriously and door handles moving with no one knowing why . Dreyer decided that " We can jolly well make this stuff too " . In London and New York , the stage version of Dracula had been a large hit in 1927 . Dreyer and Jul created a story based on vampires which Dreyer considered to be " fashionable things at the time " . Vampyr is based on elements from J. Sheridan Le Fanu 's In a Glass Darkly , a collection of five stories first published in 1872 . Dreyer draws from two of the stories for Vampyr , one being Carmilla , a vampire story with a lesbian subtext and the other being The Room in the Dragon Volant about a live burial . Dreyer found it difficult to decide on a title for the film . It may have initially been titled Destiny and then Shadows of Hell . When the film was presented in the film journal Close Up it was titled The Strange Adventure of David Gray . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Dreyer returned to France to begin casting and location scouting . At the time in France , there was a small movement of artistic independently financed films , including Luis Buñuel 's L 'Âge d 'Or and Jean Cocteau 's The Blood of a Poet which were both released in 1930 . Through Valentine Hugo , Dreyer met Nicolas de Gunzburg , an aristocrat who agreed to finance Dreyer 's next film in return for playing the lead role in it . <unk> had arguments with his family about becoming an actor , so he created the pseudonym Julian West , a name that would be the same in all three languages that the film was going to be shot in . 
 Most of the cast in Vampyr were not professional actors . Jan Hieronimko , who plays the village doctor , was found on a late night metro train in Paris . When approached to act in the film , Hieronimko stared blankly and did not reply . Hieronimko later contacted Dreyer 's crew and agreed to join the film . Many of the other non @-@ professional actors in the film were found in similar fashion in shops and cafes . The only professional actors in the film were Maurice Schutz , who plays the Lord of the Manor , and Sybille Schmitz , who plays his daughter Léone . Many crew members of Vampyr had worked with Dreyer on his previous film The Passion of Joan of Arc . Returning crew members included cinematographer Rudolph Maté and art director Hermann Warm . 
 The entire film was shot on actual locations with many scenes shot in Courtempierre , France . Dreyer and his cinematographer Rudolph Maté took part in scouting for locations for Vampyr . Dreyer left most of his scouting to an assistant , who Dreyer instructed to find " a factory in ruins , a chopped up phantom , worthy of the imagination of Edgar Allan Poe . Somewhere in Paris . We can 't travel far . " In the original script , the village doctor was supposed to flee the village and get trapped in a swamp . On looking for a suitable mire , the crew found a mill where they saw white shadows around the windows and doors . After seeing this place , they changed the film 's ending to take place at this mill where the doctor dies by suffocating under the milled flour . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Vampyr was filmed between 1930 and 1931 . Everything being shot on location , as Dreyer believed it would be beneficial by lending the dream @-@ like ghost world of the film as well as allowing them to save money by not having to rent studio space . Dreyer originally wanted Vampyr to be a silent film , as it uses many elements of the silent era such as title cards to explain the story . Dialogue in the film was kept to a minimum . For the scenes with dialogue , the actors mouthed their lines in French , German and English so their lip movements would correspond to the voices that were going to be recorded in post @-@ production . There is no record of the English version being completed . The scenes in the chateau were shot in April and May 1930 . The chateau also acted as housing for the cast and crew during the filming . Life in the chateau was unpleasant for them as it was cold and infested with rats . The church yard scenes were shot in August 1930 . The church was not an actual church , but a barn with a number of tombstones placed around it . This set was designed by the art director Hermann Warm . 
 Critic and writer Kim Newman described Vampyr 's style as closer to the experimental features such as Un chien <unk> than a " quickie horror film " made after the release of Dracula ( 1931 ) . Dreyer originally was going to film Vampyr in what he described as a " heavy style " but changed direction after cinematographer Maté showed him one shot that came out fuzzy and blurred . This washed out look was an effect Dreyer desired , and he had Maté shoot the film through a piece of gauze held three feet ( .9 m ) away from the camera to re @-@ create this look . For other visuals in the film , Dreyer found inspiration from the fine arts . Actress Rena Mandel , who plays Gisèle , said that Dreyer showed her reproductions of paintings of Francisco Goya during filming . In Denmark , a journalist and friend of Dreyer , Henry <unk> wrote in detail about the film and the artworks it appeared to draw on . When being asked about the intention of the film at the Berlin premiere , Dreyer replied that he " had not any particular intention . I just wanted to make a film different from all other films . I wanted , if you will , to break new ground for the cinema . That is all . And do you think this intention has succeeded ? Yes , I have broken new ground " . The filming of Vampyr was completed the middle of 1931 . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Dreyer shot and edited the film in France and then brought it to Berlin where it was post @-@ synchronized in both German and French . Dreyer did the audio work at Universum Film AG , as they had the best sound equipment available to him at the time . Most of the actors did not dub their own voices . The only voices of the actors that are their own in the film are of Schmitz and Gunzburg . The sounds of dogs , parrots , and other animals in the film were fake and were done by professional imitators . Wolfgang Zeller composed the film 's score and worked with Dreyer to develop the music . 
 There are differences between the German and French releases of the film . The character Allan Grey is named David Gray for the German release , which Dreyer attributed to a mistake . The German censors ordered cuts to the film that still exist today in some prints . The scenes which had to be toned down include the doctor 's death under the milled flour and the vampire 's death from the stake . There are other scenes that were shot and included in the script that do not exist in any current prints of Vampyr . These scenes reveal the vampire in the factory recoiling against a shadow of a Christian cross as well as a ferryman guiding Gray and Gisèle by getting young children to build a fire and sing a hymn to guide them back to the shore . 
 Dreyer had prepared a Danish version of the film which was based on the German version with Danish subtitles and title cards . The distributor could not afford to have the title cards completed in the manner they appear in the German version , which were instead finished with a more simple style . The distributor also wanted to make the pages in the book shown in the film as plain title cards which Dreyer did not allow , saying that " the old book is not an text in the ordinary sense , but an actor . Just as much as the others . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The premiere of Vampyr in Germany was delayed by UFA , as the studio wanted the American films Dracula and Frankenstein to be released first . The Berlin premiere was 6 May 1932 . At this premiere , the audience booed the film which led to Dreyer cutting several scenes out of the film after the first showing . The film was distributed in France by Société Générale de Cinema who also distributed Dreyer 's previous film The Passion of Joan of Arc . The Paris premiere was in September 1932 where Vampyr was the opening attraction of a new cinema on the Boulevard Raspail . At a showing of the film in Vienna , audiences demanded their money back . When this was denied , a riot broke out that led to police having to restore order with night sticks . When the film premiered in Copenhagen , Denmark in March 1933 , Dreyer did not show up . In the USA , the film premiered with English subtitles under the title " Not Against The Flesh " ; an English @-@ dubbed version , edited severely as to both the film continuity and the music track , appeared a few years later on the roadshow circuit as " Castle of Doom " . Dreyer soon had a nervous breakdown and went to a mental hospital in France . The film was a financial failure . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Press in Europe ranged from mixed to negative . The press in Germany did not like the film . At the Berlin premiere , a writer for The New York Times wrote " Whatever you think of the director Charles [ sic ] Theodor Dreyer , there is no denying that he is ' different . ' He does things that make people talk about him . You may find his films ridiculous — but you won 't forget them ... Although in many ways [ Vampyr ] was one of the worst films I have ever attended , there were some scenes in it that gripped with brutal directness " . Press reaction to the film in Paris was mixed . Reporter Herbert Matthews of The New York Times wrote that Vampyr was " a hallucinating film " , that " either held the spectators spellbound as in a long nightmare or else moved them to hysterical laughter " . For many years after Vampyr 's initial release , the film was viewed by critics as one of Dreyer 's weaker works . 
 More modern reception for Vampyr has been more positive . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports that 100 % of critics have given the film positive reviews , based upon a sample of 24 , with an average rating of 8 @.@ 6 / 10 . Todd Kristel of the online film database Allmovie gave the film four and a half stars out of five , stating that " Vampyr isn 't the easiest classic film to enjoy , even if you are a fan of 1930s horror movies ... If you 're patient with the slow pacing and ambiguous story line of Vampyr , you 'll find that this film offers many striking images " and that although the film is " not exciting in terms of pacing , it 's a good choice if you want to see a film that establishes a compelling mood " . Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader wrote the " The greatness of Carl Dreyer 's [ Vampyr ] derives partly from its handling of the vampire theme in terms of sexuality and eroticism and partly from its highly distinctive , dreamy look , but it also has something to do with Dreyer 's radical recasting of narrative form " . J. Hoberman of the Village Voice wrote that " Vampyr is Dreyer 's most radical film — maybe one of my dozen favorite movies by any director " . Anton <unk> of Channel 4 awarded the film four and a half stars out of five , comparing it to the silent vampire film Nosferatu , stating that it is " lesser known ( but in many ways superior ) " and that the film is " a triumph of the irrational , Dreyer 's eerie memento mori never allows either protagonist or viewer fully to wake up from its surreal nightmare " . 
 In the early 2010s , Time Out conducted a poll with several authors , directors , actors and critics who have worked within the horror genre to vote for their top horror films . Vampyr placed at number 50 on their top 100 list . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Vampyr has been released with low quality image and sound as the original German and French sound and film negatives are lost . Prints of the French and German versions of the film exist but most of them are either incomplete or damaged . Vampyr was released in the United States under the titles of The Vampire and Castle of Doom and in the United Kingdom under the title of The Strange Adventures of David Gray . Many of these prints are severely cut , such as the re @-@ dubbed 60 @-@ minute English @-@ language Castle of Doom print . 
 Vampyr was originally released on DVD on 13 May 1998 by Image Entertainment which ran at an abridged 72 @-@ minute running time . Image 's release of Vampyr is a straight port of the Laserdisc that film restorer David Shepard produced in 1991 . The subtitles are large and ingrained due to the source print having Danish subtitles which have been blacked out and covered . This DVD also included the short film The Mascot as a bonus feature . The Criterion Collection released a two @-@ disc edition of Vampyr on 22 July 2008 . This edition of the DVD includes the original German version of the film , along with a book featuring Dreyer and Christen Jul 's original screenplay and Sheridan Le Fanu 's 1872 story " Carmilla " . A Region 2 DVD of the film was released by Eureka Films on 25 August 2008 . The Eureka release contains the same bonus material as the Criterion Collection discs , but also includes a commentary from director Guillermo del Toro . 
 = Stella Gibbons = 
 Stella Dorothea Gibbons ( 5 January 1902 – 19 December 1989 ) was an English author , journalist , and poet . She established her reputation with her first novel , Cold Comfort Farm ( 1932 ) , which won the literary Prix Femina Étranger and has been reprinted many times . Although she was active as a writer for half a century , none of her later 22 novels or other literary works — which included a sequel to Cold Comfort Farm — achieved the same critical or popular success . Much of her work was long out of print before a modest revival in the 21st century . 
 The daughter of a London doctor , Gibbons had a turbulent and often unhappy childhood . After an indifferent school career she trained as a journalist , and worked as a reporter and features writer , mainly for the Evening Standard and The Lady . Her first book , published in 1930 , was a collection of poems which was well received , and through her life she considered herself primarily a poet rather than a novelist . After Cold Comfort Farm , a satire on the genre of rural @-@ themed " loam and lovechild " novels popular in the late 1920s , most of Gibbons 's novels were based within the middle @-@ class suburban world with which she was familiar . 
 Gibbons became a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1950 . Her style has been praised by critics for its charm , barbed humour and descriptive skill , and has led to comparison with Jane Austen . The impact of Cold Comfort Farm dominated her career , and she grew to resent her identification with the book to the exclusion of the rest of her output . Widely regarded as a one @-@ work novelist , she and her works have not been accepted into the canon of English literature — partly , other writers have suggested , because of her detachment from the literary world and her tendency to mock it . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Family background and childhood = = = 
 The Gibbons family originated in Ireland . Stella 's grandfather , Charles Preston Gibbons , was a civil engineer who spent long periods in South Africa building bridges . He and his wife Alice had six children , the second of whom — the eldest of four sons — was born in 1869 and was known by his fourth Christian name of " Telford " . The Gibbons household was a turbulent one , with tensions arising from Charles Gibbons 's frequent <unk> . Telford Gibbons trained as a doctor , and qualified as a physician and surgeon at the London Hospital in 1897 . On 29 September 1900 he married Maude Williams , the daughter of a stockbroker . The couple bought a house in Malden Crescent , Kentish Town , a working @-@ class district of North London , where Telford established the medical practice in which he continued for the remainder of his life . 
 Stella , the couple 's first child , was born on 5 January 1902 ; two brothers , Gerald and Lewis , followed in 1905 and 1909 respectively . The atmosphere in the Kentish Town house echoed that of the elder Gibbons 's household , and was dominated by Telford 's frequent bouts of ill @-@ temper , drinking , womanising and occasional acts of violence . Stella later described her father as " a bad man , but a good doctor " . He was charitable to his poorer patients and imaginative in finding cures , but made life miserable for his family . Initially Stella was his favourite , but by the time she reached puberty he frequently mocked her looks and size . Fortunately , her mother was a calm and stabilising influence . Until Stella reached the age of 13 she was educated at home by a succession of governesses , who never stayed long . The family 's bookshelves provided reading material , and she developed a talent for storytelling with which she amused her young brothers . 
 In 1915 Stella became a pupil at the North London Collegiate School , then situated in Camden Town . The school , founded in 1850 by Frances Buss , was among the first in England to offer girls an academic education , and by 1915 was widely recognised as a model girls ' school . After the haphazard teaching methods of her governesses , Stella initially had difficulty in adjusting to the strict discipline of the school , and found many of its rules and practices oppressive . She shared this attitude with her contemporary Stevie Smith , the future Queen 's Gold Medal for Poetry winner , who joined the school in 1917 . Although a moderate performer in school subjects , Stella found outlets for her talents by writing stories for her fellow @-@ pupils , becoming vice president of the Senior Dramatic Club , and featuring prominently in the school 's Debating Society of which she became the honorary secretary . 
 = = = Student years = = = 
 While at school , Gibbons formed an ambition to be a writer , and on leaving in 1921 began a two @-@ year Diploma in Journalism at University College , London ( UCL ) . The course had been established for ex @-@ servicemen returning from the First World War , but attracted several women , among them the future novelist Elizabeth Bowen . As well as English Literature , the curriculum covered economics , politics , history , science and languages ; practical skills such as shorthand and typing were not included . 
 After the stifling experience of school , Gibbons found university exhilarating and made numerous friendships , particularly with Ida Graves , an aspiring poet who , although on a different course , attended some of the same lectures . The two shared a love of literature and a taste for subversive humour . Graves lived until 1999 , and recalled in an interview late in life that many of the jokes they shared found their way into Cold Comfort Farm , as did some of their common acquaintances . Soon after Gibbons began the course she contributed a poem , " The Marshes of My Soul " , to the December 1921 issue of University College Magazine . This parody , in the newly fashionable <unk> libre style , was her first published literary work . During the next two years she contributed further poems and prose to the magazine , including " The <unk> , a Story in the Russian Manner " , which foreshadows her later novels in both theme and style . Gibbons completed her course in the summer of 1923 , and was awarded her diploma . 
 = = = Journalism and early writings = = = 
 Gibbons 's first job was with the British United Press ( <unk> ) news agency , where she decoded overseas cables which she rewrote in presentable English . During slack periods she practised at writing articles , stories and poems . She made her first trips abroad , travelling to France in 1924 and Switzerland in 1925 . Swiss Alpine scenery inspired several poems , some of which were later published . In 1924 she met Walter Beck , a naturalised German employed by his family 's cosmetics firm . The couple became engaged , and enjoyed regular weekends together , signing hotel registers as a married couple using false names . 
 In May 1926 Gibbons 's mother , Maude , died suddenly at the age of 48 . With little reason to remain with her father in the Kentish Town surgery , Gibbons took lodgings in Willow Road , near Hampstead Heath . Five months later , on 15 October , her father died from heart disease aggravated by heavy drinking . Gibbons was now the family 's principal breadwinner ; her youngest brother Lewis was still at school , while the elder , Gerald , was intermittently employed as an actor . The three set up home in a cottage on the Vale of Health , a small settlement in the middle of Hampstead Heath , with literary connections to Keats ( whom Gibbons revered ) , Leigh Hunt and D. H. Lawrence . Later that year , as a result of an error involving the calculation and reporting of foreign exchange rates , Gibbons was sacked from the <unk> , but quickly found a new position as secretary to the editor of the London Evening Standard . Within a short time she was promoted , and became a reporter and features writer at the then substantial salary of just under £ 500 a year , although she was not given a by @-@ line until 1928 . 
 During her Evening Standard years , Gibbons persevered with poetry , and in September 1927 her poem " The Giraffes " appeared in The Criterion , a literary magazine edited by T. S. Eliot . This work was read and admired by Virginia Woolf , who enquired if Gibbons would write poems for the Woolf publishing house , the Hogarth Press . In January 1928 J. C. Squire , a leading voice in the " Georgian " poetry movement , began to publish Gibbons 's poems in his magazine , The London Mercury . Squire also persuaded Longmans to publish the first collection of Gibbons 's verses , entitled The Mountain Beast , which appeared in 1930 to critical approval . By this time her by @-@ line was appearing with increasing frequency in the Standard . As part of a series on " Unusual Women " she interviewed , among others , the former royal mistress Lillie Langtry . The paper also published several of Gibbons 's short stories . 
 Despite this evident industry , Gibbons was dismissed from the Standard in August 1930 . This was ostensibly an economy measure although Gibbons , in later life , suspected other reasons , particularly the increasing distraction from work that arose from her relationship with Walter Beck . The engagement had ended painfully in 1928 , primarily because Gibbons was looking for a fully committed relationship whereas he wanted something more open . Her biographer and nephew , Reggie Oliver , believes Gibbons never entirely got over Beck , even after 1929 when she met Allan Webb , her future husband . She was not unemployed for long ; she quickly accepted a job offer as an editorial assistant at the women 's magazine , The Lady . Here , according to The Observer writer Rachel Cooke , " she applied her versatility as a writer to every subject under the sun bar cookery , which was the province of a certain Mrs Peel . " At the same time she began work on the novel that would become Cold Comfort Farm ; her colleague and friend Elizabeth Coxhead recorded that Gibbons " neglected her duties disgracefully " to work on this project . 
 = = = Cold Comfort Farm = = = 
 In her time with The Lady , Gibbons established a reputation as a caustic book reviewer , and was particularly critical of the then fashionable " loam and lovechild " rural novels . Novelists such as Mary Webb and Sheila Kaye @-@ Smith had achieved considerable popularity through their depictions of country life ; Webb was a favourite of the British Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin . Gibbons had first become familiar with the genre in 1928 when she provided summaries of Webb 's The Golden Arrow for the Evening Standard 's 1928 serialisation . She found the writing overblown and the plotting ridiculous , and decided that her own first novel would be a comic parody of the genre . By February 1932 she had completed the manuscript and delivered it to her publishers , Longmans . 
 Gibbons 's chosen title for her novel had been " Curse God Farm " , before her friend Elizabeth Coxhead , who had connections in the Hinckley district of Leicestershire , suggested " Cold Comfort " as an alternative , using the name of a farm in the Hinckley area . Gibbons was delighted with the suggestion , and the work was published as Cold Comfort Farm in September 1932 . The plot concerns the efforts of " a rational , bossy London heroine " to bring order and serenity to her rustic relations , the Starkadders , on their run @-@ down Sussex farm . According to the Feminist Companion to Literature in English , Gibbons 's parody " [ demolishes ] ... the stock @-@ in @-@ trade of earthy <unk> such as Thomas Hardy , Mary Webb , Sheila Kaye @-@ Smith and D. H. Lawrence " . The literary scholar Faye Hammill describes the work as " an extremely sophisticated and intricate parody whose meaning is produced through its relationship with the literary culture of its day and with the work of such canonical authors as D. H. Lawrence , Thomas Hardy , and Emily Brontë " . In her history of the 1930s , Juliet Gardiner ascribes a socio @-@ economic dimension to the book : " a picture of rural gloom caused by government lassitude and urban indifference " . 
 The work was an immediate critical and popular success . The satire was heightened by Gibbons 's mockery of purple prose , whereby she marked the most florid and overwritten passages of the book with asterisks , " for the reader 's <unk> and mirth " . One critic found it hard to accept that so well @-@ developed a parody was the work of a scarcely known woman writer , and speculated that " Stella Gibbons " was a pen @-@ name for Evelyn Waugh . Gibbons suddenly found herself in demand in literary circles and from fellow writers , raised to a celebrity status that she found distasteful . She acquired an agent , who advised her that she could confidently expect a regular and comfortable income as a novelist . This assurance prompted her , at the end of 1932 , to resign her position with The Lady and to embark on a full @-@ time writing career . 
 In March 1931 Gibbons had become engaged to Allan Webb , a budding actor and opera singer five years her junior . He was the son of a cricketing parson , and the grandson of Allan Becher Webb , a former Bishop of Bloemfontein who served as Dean of Salisbury Cathedral . On 1 April 1933 the couple were married at St Matthew 's , Bayswater . Later that year she learned that Cold Comfort Farm had been awarded the Prix Étranger , the foreign novel category of the prestigious French literary prize , the Prix Femina . It had won against works by two more experienced writers , Bowen and Rosamond Lehmann . This outcome irritated Virginia Woolf , herself a former Prix Étranger winner , who wrote to Bowen : " I was enraged to see they gave the £ 40 ( the cash value of the prize ) to Gibbons ; still , now you and Rosamond can join in blaming her " . Cooke observes that of all the Prix Étranger winners from the inter @-@ war years , only Cold Comfort Farm and Woolf 's To the Lighthouse are remembered today , and that only the former has bequeathed a phrase that has passed into common usage : " something nasty in the woodshed " . 
 = = = Established author = = = 
 = = = = 1930s = = = = 
 During the remainder of the 1930s Gibbons produced five more novels , as well as two poetry collections , a children 's book , and a number of short stories . From November 1936 the family home was in Oakshott Avenue , on the Holly Lodge Estate off Highgate West Hill , where Gibbons regularly worked in the mornings from ten until lunchtime . Her novels were generally well received by critics and the public , though none earned the accolades or attention that had been given to Cold Comfort Farm ; readers of The Times were specifically warned not to expect Gibbons 's second novel , Bassett ( 1934 ) , to be a repetition of the earlier masterpiece . <unk> Heath ( 1935 ) is a relatively faithful account of her childhood and early adult life with , according to Oliver , " only the thinnest veil of fictional gauze cover [ ing ] raw experience " . Miss Linsey and Pa ( 1936 ) was thought by Nicola Beauman , in her analysis of women writers from 1914 to 1939 , to parody Radclyffe Hall 's 1928 lesbian novel The Well of Loneliness . Gibbons 's final prewar novels were Nightingale Wood ( 1935 ) — " Cinderella brought right up to date " — and My American ( 1939 ) , which Oliver considers her most escapist novel , " a variant of Hans Christian Andersen 's The Snow Queen . " 
 Gibbons always considered herself a serious poet rather than a comic writer . She published two collections of poetry in the 1930s , the latter of which , The Lowland Verses ( 1938 ) contains " The Marriage of the Machine " , an early lament on the effects of industrial pollution : " What oil , what poison lulls / Your wings and webs , my cormorants and gulls ? " Gibbons 's single children 's book was the fairy tale collection The <unk> Gnome , published in 1935 and dedicated to her only child Laura , who was born that year . 
 = = = = War years , 1939 – 45 = = = = 
 The advent of war in September 1939 did not diminish Gibbons 's creative energy . In November she began a series of articles , " A Woman 's Diary of the War " , for St Martin 's Review , the journal of the London church of St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields . The series ran until November 1943 , and includes many of Gibbons 's private reflections on the conflict . In October 1941 she wrote : " [ T ] he war has done me good ... I get a dour satisfaction out of managing the rations , salvaging , fire watching , and feeling that I am trying to work for a better world " . In July 1940 Webb enlisted in the Middlesex Regiment , and the following year was commissioned into the King 's Royal Rifle Corps . He later served overseas , mostly in Cairo . 
 The title story in Gibbons 's 1940 collection , Christmas at Cold Comfort Farm , failed to equal the impact of the original . When the collection was reissued many years later it was described as " oddly comforting and amusing ... and possibly a truer depiction of the times than we might think " . Gibbons published three novels during the war : The Rich House ( 1941 ) , <unk> ( 1942 ) and The Bachelor ( 1944 ) . <unk> , a satire on mid @-@ nineteenth century army life , was Gibbons 's favourite from all her novels , although she acknowledged that hardly anyone liked it . It failed commercially , despite a favourable review in The Times Literary Supplement . Oliver surmises that " the middle of the Second World War was perhaps the wrong time to satirise ... the ridiculous and dangerous rituals that surround the male aggressive instinct " . The Bachelor won critical praise for its revealing account of life in war @-@ torn Britain — as did several of Gibbons 's postwar novels . 
 = = = Postwar years = = = 
 Gibbons 's first postwar novel was Westwood ( 1946 ) . The book incorporates a comic depiction of the novelist Charles Morgan , whose novel The Fountain Gibbons had reviewed before the war and found " offensive as well as wearisome " . In Westwood , Morgan appears in the guise of the novelist " Gerald Challis " , a pompous , humourless bore . Oliver considers this characterisation to be one of Gibbons 's " most enjoyable and vicious " satirical portraits . In her introduction to the book 's 2011 reprint , Lynne Truss describes it as " a rich , mature novel , romantic and wistful , full of rounded characters and terrific dialogue " that deserved more commercial success than it received . The public 's expectations were still prejudiced by Cold Comfort Farm , which by 1949 had sold 28 @,@ 000 copies in hardback and 315 @,@ 000 in paperback . Anticipating that a sequel would be popular , that year Gibbons produced Conference at Cold Comfort Farm , her shortest novel , in which the farm has become a conference centre and tourist attraction . There is much mockery of contemporary and indeed future artistic and intellectual trends , before the male Starkadders return from overseas , wreck the centre and restore the farm to its original primitive state . The book was moderately successful but , Oliver remarks , does not compare with the original . 
 In 1950 Gibbons published her Collected Poems , and in the same year was made a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature . Throughout the 1950s she continued , at roughly two @-@ year intervals , to produce politely received novels , none of which created any particular stir . Among these was Fort of the Bear ( 1953 ) , in which she departed from her familiar London milieu by setting the story largely in the wilder regions of Canada . This was the last of her books handled by Longmans ; thereafter her work was published by Hodder and Stoughton . A journey to Austria and Venice in 1953 provided material for her novel The Shadow of a Sorcerer ( 1955 ) . From 1954 , having accepted an invitation from Malcolm Muggeridge , the editor of Punch , Gibbons provided frequent contributions to the magazine for the following 15 years . Among these was a science fiction story , " Jane in Space " , written in the style of Jane Austen . Gibbons , who wrote the introduction to the 1957 Heritage edition of Sense and Sensibility , was a long @-@ time admirer of Austen , and had described her in a Lady article as " one of the most exquisite " of woman artists . 
 After the war , Allan Webb resumed his stage career with the role of Count <unk> in the 1946 Sadler 's Wells production of The Marriage of Figaro . In 1947 he appeared in the original run of the Vivian Ellis musical Bless the Bride , and made several further stage appearances in the following two years . During this time he had a brief affair with the actress Sydney Malcolm , a misjudgement for which Gibbons quickly forgave him . He left the theatre in 1949 to become a director of a book club specialising in special editions , and later bought a bookshop in the Archway district of London . His health failed in the late 1950s and in 1958 he was diagnosed with cancer of the liver . He died in July 1959 at Oakshott Avenue . 
 = = = Late career = = = 
 After Webb 's death , Gibbons remained at Oakshott Avenue and continued to write novels . From 1961 she rented a summer house at <unk> in Cornwall , which became the setting for her 1962 novel The Weather at <unk> . She returned to literary criticism after many years , when in 1965 she contributed an essay to Light on C.S. Lewis , a review of that writer 's work edited by Jocelyn Gibb . In 1966 she wrote an essay for Punch , " Genesis of a Novel " , in which she mused on the detrimental effect of Cold Comfort Farm on her long term career . She likened the book to " some <unk> old uncle , to whom you have to be grateful because he makes you a handsome allowance , but is often an embarrassment and a bore " . Gibbons made her last overseas trip in 1966 , to Grenoble in France where she visited her old friend Elizabeth Coxhead . This visit provided material for her 1968 novel The Snow Woman in which Gibbons overcame her habitual distaste for emotional excess by opening the book with a melodramatic birth on a sofa . The Woods in Winter ( 1970 ) was her last published novel ; she decided at that point that she was no longer prepared to subject her work to editorial control . In the 1980s she wrote two more novels for private circulation among friends , The Yellow Houses and An Alpha . These books @-@ An Alpha retitled Pure Juliet — were published by Vintage Classics in 2016 , after the manuscripts were released by Gibbons 's family . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 The last two decades of Gibbons 's life were uneventful and lived almost entirely beyond the public eye . She kept her health and looks until almost the end of her life — in a biographical sketch , Jill Neville recorded that " her beauty endured , as did her upright carriage , typical of Edwardian ladies who were forced as girls to walk around with a book balanced on their heads . " As well as her unpublished novels she wrote occasional short stories , two of which were rejected by the BBC , and contributed three new poems to Richard Adams 's 1986 anthology Occasional Poets , a work which included verses from part @-@ time poets such as Iris Murdoch , William Golding , Alan Ayckbourn and Quentin Crisp . These were Gibbons 's last published works . One of Gibbons 's poems in the anthology was " Writ in Water " , inspired by her love for the poetry of Keats . In 2013 the manuscript of this poem was presented to the Keats @-@ Shelley Memorial House museum in Rome . 
 Gibbons maintained a wide circle of friends , who in her later years included Adams , the entertainer Barry Humphries and the novelist John Braine . From the mid @-@ 1970s she established a pattern of monthly literary tea parties in Oakshott Avenue at which , according to Neville , " she was known to expel guests if they were shrill , dramatic , or wrote tragic novels . " As her own productivity dwindled and finally ceased altogether , she kept a commonplace book in which she was recording her thoughts and opinions on literature as late as 1988 . 
 From the mid @-@ 1980s Gibbons experienced recurrent health problems , not helped when she resumed smoking . In her last months she was looked after at home by her grandson and his girlfriend . She died there on 19 December 1989 , after collapsing the previous day , and was buried in Highgate Cemetery , alongside her husband . At her funeral , her nephew and future biographer Reggie Oliver read two of her poems , the latter of which , " Fairford Church " , concludes with the words : " Little is sure . Life is hard . / We love , we suffer and die . / But the beauty of the earth is real / And the Spirit is nigh . " 
 = = Writing = = 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Gibbons 's writing has been praised by critics for its perspicacity , sense of fun , charm , wit and descriptive skill — the last a product of her journalistic training — which she used to convey both atmosphere and character . Although Beauman refers to " malicious wit " , Truss sees no cruelty in the often barbed humour , which reflected Gibbons 's detestation of pomposity and pretence . Truss has described Gibbons as " the Jane Austen of the 20th century " , a parallel which the novelist Malcolm Bradbury thought apt ; Flora Poste in Cold Comfort Farm , with her " higher common sense " , is " a Jane @-@ ite heroine transformed into a clear @-@ eyed modern woman " . Bradbury also observed that many of Gibbons 's novels end in Austen @-@ like nuptials . 
 Truss highlights the importance that Gibbons places on detachment as a necessary adjunct to effective writing : " Like many a good doctor , she seems to have considered sympathy a peculiar and redundant emotion , and a terrible waste of time . " This matter @-@ of @-@ fact quality in her prose might , according to Gibbons 's Guardian obituarist Richard Boston , be a reaction against the turbulent and sometimes violent emotions that she witnessed within her own family who , she said , " were all madly highly @-@ sexed , like the Starkadders " . It is , observed Neville , an irony that the overheated melodrama that Gibbons most disliked was at the heart of her one great success ; Gibbons 's writings on everyday life brought her restrained approval , but no noticeable literary recognition . Nevertheless , her straightforward , style , unadorned except in parody , is admired by Rachel Cooke , who praises her as " a sworn enemy of the flatulent , the pompous and the excessively sentimental . " While short of sentimentality , Gibbons 's writing , in prose or verse , did not lack sensitivity . She had what one analyst described as " a rare ability to enter into the feelings of the uncommunicative and to bring to life the emotions of the unremarkable " . Some of Gibbons 's poetry expressed her love of nature and a prophetic awareness for environmental issues such as sea pollution , decades before such concerns became fashionable . In a critical summary of Gibbons 's poems , <unk> <unk> has described them as " slight lyrics ... [ which ] tend toward classic , even archaic , diction , and only occasionally ... show flashes of the novels ' wit " . 
 = = = Reception and reputation = = = 
 The immediate and enduring success of Cold Comfort Farm dominated the rest of Gibbons 's career . Neville thought that after so singular a success at the start of her career , the rest was something of an anticlimax , despite her considerable industry and undoubted skills . The 1985 edition of The Oxford Companion to English Literature defines Gibbons solely in terms of Cold Comfort Farm ; it mentions none of her other works — while providing her bêtes noires Morgan and Mary Webb with full entries . To Gibbons , Cold Comfort Farm became " That Book " or " You @-@ Know @-@ What " , its title never mentioned . Despite her growing irritation and expressed distaste for it , the book continued to be lauded by successive generations of critics , Boston described it as " one of those rare books of comic genius that imprints itself on the brain and can never afterwards be eradicated " . A more negative view of the book has been expressed by the literary critic Mary Beard , who considers it " a rather controlling victory of modern order , cleanliness , contraception and medicine over these messy , different , rural types ... I found myself screaming for the rights of these poor country folk NOT to fall into the hands of people like Flora " . 
 Although Boston suggested that Gibbons 's rating in the academic English Literature world ought to be high , her literary status is indeterminate . She did not promote herself , and was indifferent to the attractions of public life : " I 'm not shy " , she told Oliver , " I 'm just unsociable " . Truss records that Gibbons had " overtly rejected the literary world ... she didn 't move in literary circles , or even visit literary squares , or love in literary triangles " . Truss posits further reasons why Gibbons did not become a literary canon . Because she was a woman who wrote amusingly , she was classified as " middlebrow " ; furthermore , she was published by Longmans , a non @-@ literary publisher . Her lampooning of the literary establishment in the spoof dedication of Cold Comfort Farm to one " Anthony <unk> " did not amuse that establishment , who were further offended by the book 's mockery of the writing of such canonical figures as Lawrence and Hardy — hence Virginia Woolf 's reaction to the Prix Étranger award . 
 The literary critic John Carey suggests that the abandonment by intellectuals of " the clerks and the suburbs " as subjects of literary interest provided an opening for writers prepared to exploit this underexplored area . He considers John Betjeman and Stevie Smith as two writers who successfully achieved this . Hammill believes that Gibbons should be named alongside these two , since in her writings she rejects the stereotypical view of suburbia as unexciting , conventional and limited . Instead , says Hammill , " Gibbons 's fictional suburbs are socially and architecturally diverse , and her characters — who range from experimental writers to shopkeepers — read and interpret suburban styles and values in varying and incompatible ways " . Hammill adds that Gibbons 's strong identification with her own suburban home , in which she lived for 53 years , may have influenced her preference to stay outside the mainstream of metropolitan literary life , and from time to time mock it . 
 After many years in which almost all of Gibbons 's output has been out of print , in 2011 the publishers Vintage Classics reissued paperback versions of Westwood , Starlight , and Conference at Cold Comfort Farm . They also announced plans to publish 11 of the other novels , on a print @-@ on @-@ demand basis . 
 = = = List of works = = = 
 Publisher information relates to first publication only . Many of the books have been reissued , usually by different publishers . 
 = = = = Novels = = = = 
 = = = = Short stories = = = = 
 Roaring Tower and other stories . London : Longmans . 1937 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Christmas at Cold Comfort Farm and other stories . London : Longmans . 1940 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Beside the Pearly Water . London : Peter Nevill . 1954 . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = = Children 's books = = = = 
 The <unk> Gnome . London : Longmans . 1935 . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = = Poetry = = = = 
 The Mountain Beast . London : Longmans . 1930 . 
 The Priestess and other poems . London : Longmans . 1934 . OCLC <unk> . 
 The Lowland Venus . London : Longmans . 1938 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Collected Poems . London : Longmans . 1950 . OCLC <unk> . 
 = 1804 dollar = 
 The 1804 dollar was a dollar coin struck by the Mint of the United States , of which fifteen specimens are currently known to exist . Though dated 1804 , none were struck in that year ; all were minted in the 1830s or later . They were first created for use in special proof coin sets used as diplomatic gifts during Edmund Roberts ' trips to Siam and Muscat . Some silver dollars were struck in 1804 , though all were dated 1803 . In 1806 , production was suspended by order of James Madison , then Secretary of State , and the denomination was not struck again until the 1804 @-@ dated pieces were minted . 
 Edmund Roberts distributed the coins in 1834 and 1835 . Two additional sets were ordered for government officials in Japan and Cochinchina , but Roberts died in Macau before they could be delivered . Besides those 1804 dollars produced for inclusion in the diplomatic sets , the Mint struck some examples which were used to trade with collectors for pieces desired for the Mint 's coin cabinet . Numismatists first became aware of the 1804 dollar in 1842 , when an illustration of one example appeared in a publication authored by two Mint employees . A collector subsequently acquired one example from the Mint in 1843 . In response to numismatic demand , several examples were surreptitiously produced by Mint officials . Unlike the original coins , these later restrikes lacked the correct edge lettering , although later examples released from the Mint bore the correct lettering . The coins produced for the diplomatic mission , those struck surreptitiously without edge lettering and those with lettering are known collectively as " Class I " , " Class II " and " Class III " dollars , respectively . 
 From their discovery by numismatists , 1804 dollars have commanded high prices . Auction prices reached $ 1 @,@ 000 by 1885 , and in the mid @-@ twentieth century , the coins realized over $ 30 @,@ 000 . In 1999 , a Class I example sold for $ 4 @.@ 14 million , then the highest price paid for any coin . Their high value has caused 1804 dollars to be a frequent target of counterfeiting and other methods of deception . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Coinage Act of 1792 , the legislation which provided for the establishment of the Mint of the United States ( today the United States Mint ) , authorized coinage of multiple denominations of gold , silver and copper coins . According to the act , the dollar , or " unit " , was to " be of the value of a Spanish milled dollar as the same is now current , and to contain three hundred and seventy @-@ one grains and four sixteenth parts of a grain of pure , or four hundred and sixteen grains of standard silver " . The act went on to state that the coin would be struck in an alloy consisting of 89 @.@ 2 percent silver and 10 @.@ 8 percent copper . The purity and weight standards outlined in the Act were based on the mean of several assays conducted on Spanish milled dollars . However , the dollars were mandated by Spanish law to contain 90 @.@ 2 percent silver , and most of the unworn examples in circulation in the United States at the time contained approximately 1 @.@ 75 grains ( 0 @.@ 113 g ) more than the silver dollars authorized by the Act . In 1793 , President George Washington signed into law a bill which declared Spanish milled dollars legal tender , provided that they weighed no less than 415 grains ( 26 @.@ 9 g ) , which meant that at the lowest weight allowed by law , the Spanish dollars would contain approximately 0 @.@ 5 percent less silver than the United States dollar coins . As a result , the United States silver dollars and unworn Spanish dollars were largely forced out of circulation in accordance with Gresham 's law ; the lighter Spanish dollars were shipped in quantity for circulation in the United States , while the heavier pieces would be turned in to the Philadelphia Mint to be recoined into United States coinage to take advantage of the discrepancy in weight . At that time , silver bullion was supplied to the Mint exclusively by private depositors , who , according to the Coinage Act of 1792 , had the right to have their bullion coined free of charge . As large silver coins were a preferred method of commerce throughout the world , especially China , a considerable number of the United States dollars requested by silver depositors were exported to satisfy that demand . 
 The first dollar coins , known as Flowing Hair dollars , were issued by the Mint beginning in 1794 . By 1800 , a majority of depositors requested their bullion be struck as silver dollars , which were then utilizing the Draped Bust design . This contributed to a shortage of small change in circulation , and as a result , the public became increasingly critical of the Mint . Mint Director Elias Boudinot began encouraging depositors to accept fractional coins , and the production of dollars began to decrease in relation to the smaller coins . Dollar coin production ceased in March 1804 , although those pieces bore the date of 1803 . In his 1805 report , Mint Director Robert Patterson stated that " [ t ] he striking of small coins is a measure which has been adopted to accommodate the banks and other depositors , and at their particular request , both with a view of furnishing a supply of small change , and to prevent the exportation of the specie of the United States to foreign countries . " Though none had been struck for over two years , Secretary of State James Madison officially suspended silver dollar coinage on May 1 , 1806 , addressing a letter to Patterson : 
 Sir : In Consequence of a representation from the director of the Bank of the United States that considerable purchases have been made of dollars coined at the mint for the purpose of exporting them , and as it is probable further purchases and <unk> will be made the President directs that all the silver to be coined at the mint shall be of small denominations , so that the value of the largest pieces shall not exceed half a dollar . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Edmund Roberts ' diplomatic mission = = = 
 In 1832 , commercial shipper Edmund Roberts began acting as an envoy to Asia on behalf of the United States government , with the intent of negotiating trade deals in the region . During his mission , he reached deals both with Said bin Sultan , the Sultan of Muscat and Oman , and the Phra <unk> of Siam ( modern Thailand ) , an important financial minister of that nation . Roberts was given items which were to be presented as gifts to the officials with whom he was negotiating , but described them as being of " very mean quality , and of inconsiderable value " . After the treaties were ratified in the United States , Roberts had to return to Siam and Muscat to receive approval from the representatives of those nations . In a letter to the Department of State dated October 8 , 1834 , Roberts decried the gifts of his previous journey as inadequate and insulting to his hosts in the Orient . In addition to several other items , he requested a set of coins as an appropriate offering to Said bin Sultan : 
 I am rather at a loss to know what articles will be most acceptable to the Sultan , but I suppose a complete set of new gold & silver & copper coins of the U.S. neatly arranged in a morocco case & then to have an outward covering would be proper to send not only to the sultan , but to other Asiatics . 
 In a November 11 , 1834 letter sent to Mint Director Samuel Moore , Secretary of State John Forsyth approved Roberts ' suggestion , writing : 
 The President [ Andrew Jackson ] has directed that a complete set of the coins of the United States be sent to the King of Siam , and another to the Sultan of Muscat . You are requested , therefore , to forward to the Department for that purpose , duplicate specimens of each kind now in use , whether of gold , silver , or copper . 
 He also directed Moore to have two Morocco leather boxes made to house the coins . He stated that one should be yellow in color , and the other crimson , and that funds could be drawn from the Treasury for the value of the boxes and coins . Later , in a letter dated December 2 , 1834 , Forsyth directed Moore to include " national emblems " ( including an eagle and stars ) on the exterior of the cases . 
 In their book The Fantastic 1804 Dollar , numismatic historians Eric P. Newman and Kenneth E. Bressett assert that a problem arose at the Mint as to how to interpret Forsyth 's order . As his initial correspondence indicated that the sets were to include coins of every type then in use , Mint officials included both the silver dollar and gold eagle . The moratorium on silver dollar coinage had been lifted in 1831 , but none had been coined since those issued in March 1804 . Two sets of coins , minted in proof finish , were completed and delivered along with their boxes to Roberts shortly prior to his departure on the USS Peacock on April 27 , 1835 . The dollars included the sets bore the Draped Bust design , depicting an allegorical representation of Liberty on the obverse and a heraldic eagle on the reverse . A list of diplomatic gifts was also proposed for missions to Japan and Cochin @-@ China ( today part of Vietnam ) , which included two additional sets of coins . 
 Roberts delivered the first set of coins to Said bin Sultan on October 1 , 1835 . He delivered the next set to King Rama III of Siam the following year , on April 6 . Roberts died in Macau on June 12 , 1836 , before he could initiate contact with any other nations . On June 30 , Edmund P. Kennedy , commodore of the diplomatic fleet , wrote to the State Department that he had " directed that the presents [ which remained <unk> due to Robert 's death ] be forwarded to the United States " . The proof sets meant for Cochin @-@ China and Japan were likely included in the shipment of returned presents . All dollars struck for inclusion in the diplomatic gift sets were likely dated 1804 . It is unknown why that date was chosen for the dollars , but numismatic historian R.W. Julian suggests that it could have been done to prevent angering collectors who would not have been able to acquire the 1834 @-@ dated coin for their collections ; Chief Coiner Adam Eckfeldt , after consulting with Moore , mistakenly determined that 19 @,@ 570 dollars bearing the date 1804 were struck in that year . The dollars minted for the diplomatic gift sets , as well as other examples struck with the same dies , are collectively known as " Class I " 1804 dollars . In total , eight specimens of this type are known today . 
 = = = Later restrikes = = = 
 During the nineteenth century , Mint employees produced unauthorized copies of medals and coins , sometimes backdated . Although coin restrikes were created openly at the Philadelphia Mint from the 1830s , the practice became clandestine by the end of the 1850s . In the decades after the first 1804 dollars were produced , collectors became aware of their existence and desired to obtain them . Several were struck at the Mint in 1858 . Those coins , which became known as " Class II " 1804 dollars , had plain , unlettered edges , as opposed to standard issue Draped Bust dollars and those struck as diplomatic gifts , all of which had edge lettering applied by the Castaing machine . In 1859 , James Ross Snowden unsuccessfully requested permission from the Treasury Secretary to create patterns and restrikes of rare coins for sale to collectors , and in that year , dealers began offering plain edge 1804 dollars to the public . At least three were offered for sale by various dealers in 1859 , and coin dealer Ebenezer Locke Mason claimed that he was offered three by Theodore Eckfeldt , a Mint employee and nephew of Adam Eckfeldt ( who had died in 1852 ) . After the public became aware that Mint officials had permitted restrikes , there was a minor scandal which resulted in a Congressional investigation and the destruction of outdated coinage dies . The controversy prompted William E. DuBois , Mint Assayer , to try , in 1860 , to recall the examples of the 1804 dollar in private hands . According to DuBois , five coins were known to be privately owned , of which four were recovered . He stated that three were destroyed in his presence , and one was added to the Mint 's coin cabinet ( of which he was curator , and which is today the National Numismatic Collection ) , where it remains today . The coin , which is the sole known Class II specimen in existence , was struck over an 1857 Swiss shooting thaler minted for a shooting festival in the Canton of Bern . The fifth coin , alluded to by DuBois , is not currently accounted for , although its edge may have been lettered after its recovery in an attempt to pass it as an original . Coins with added lettering are known as " Class III " 1804 dollars . The obverse coinage die used to strike the Class II and Class III 1804 dollars was deposited in safekeeping in 1860 , and the reverse die was destroyed in that year . The obverse die was defaced in 1869 . 
 Class III dollars are identical to the Class II dollar , except lettering similar to that on the Class I dollars was applied to the edge of the coins . Based on the slightly concave appearance of the Class III dollars , it is likely that all were given edge lettering at some point after striking ; as the Castaing machine was meant to be used prior to striking , its improper use resulted in a deformation of the coin surface . Newman and Bressett assert that they were struck at approximately the same time as the Class II dollars , and that the edges were lettered and the coins concealed by Mint employees until 1869 , when one was offered to a coin collector , who rejected it as a restrike . However , numismatist S. Hudson Chapman believed that some Class III dollars were struck as late as 1876 . In 1875 , several were sold by Philadelphia coin dealer John W. Haseltine . Six specimens of the Class III dollar are known today . 
 = = Numismatic interest = = 
 Collectors first became aware of the existence of the 1804 dollar in 1842 , when a pantograph reproduction of one specimen was featured in A Manual of Gold and Silver Coins of All Nations , a work authored by Mint employees Jacob R. Eckfeldt and William DuBois . The first private collector to obtain an example was Matthew A. Stickney , who acquired the coin from the Mint on May 9 , 1843 , by trading certain rare coins from his collection , including a unique early United States Immune Columbia coin struck in gold . Interest in coin collecting and the 1804 dollars began increasing , and by 1860 , the dollars saw extensive coverage by numismatists . In 1885 , auctioneer W.E. Woodward described the 1804 dollar as " the king of coins " , a moniker which it maintains today . Numismatic historian Q. David Bowers asserts that the 1804 dollar has attracted more attention than any other coin . All fifteen extant specimens are acknowledged and studied by numismatists . They are identified by nicknames based on prominent owners , or the first individuals known to have possessed the coins . 
 At the 1962 American Numismatic Association convention , British numismatist David B. Spink announced that he was in possession of a theretofore unknown 1804 dollar specimen . The coin was housed in a yellow leather case embossed with an eagle and other ornamentation , conforming to the description of that made for the King of Siam . The set consisted of a half cent , cent , dime , quarter , half dollar , dollar , quarter eagle , half eagle and eagle . As all of the coins in the set were dated 1834 with the exception of the dollar and eagle , it provided the first definitive proof that an 1804 dollar was included in the diplomatic presentation sets . According to Spink , the set was offered to him by two women whom he believed were descendants of Anna Leonowens , tutor of the children of Rama IV ( half @-@ brother and heir of Rama III ) and fictionalized protagonist of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical The King and I. 
 = = = Years of production = = = 
 The fact that no 1804 dollars were struck in 1804 was not widely accepted by numismatists until the early twentieth century . Before such time , the actual year in which they were struck remained contentious among numismatists . Early on , collectors assumed that the 1804 dollars were struck in 1804 , and their rarity was explained by various theories . The bulk of the mintage was variously rumored to have been paid to Barbary pirates as ransom , lost at sea en route to China , and melted before leaving the Philadelphia Mint . In 1867 , numismatist W. Elliot Woodward acknowledged that 1804 dollars were struck as diplomatic gifts in 1834 , but he also believed that others were struck in 1804 . Numismatists Lyman H. Low and William T. R. Marvin , writing for the American Journal of Numismatics in 1899 , stated that " the journal confidently asserts that there is no dollar dated 1804 which was struck in that year by the U.S. Mint . " In 1891 , numismatist John A. <unk> wrote that the Class I 1804 dollars were " without doubt coined in 1804 " . In 1905 , he recanted his earlier assertions , stating that " no one now believes that they were coined in 1804 . " 
 According to Newman and Bressett , the manner in which the 1804 dollars were produced is proof that none were struck in 1804 . They note that the Castaing machine 's edging dies utilized an ' H ' that was undersized in relation to the other letters , the same as those used on Draped Bust dollars throughout the regular production of those coins . However , the edge lettering on all Class I 1804 dollars is deformed and partially obliterated , meaning that they were not struck in an open @-@ collared coinage press as was used in 1804 , but one which used a steel collar that was not introduced to the Mint until 1833 . The deformation of the edge lettering was caused by pressure pushing the coinage metal against the steel collar containing the coin blank . Additionally , many 1804 dollars were struck in proof finish , a technique which was first employed at the Mint in 1817 . 
 = = = Sale prices = = = 
 From the time numismatists became aware of 1804 dollars , they have commanded high prices , both in relation to their face value and the numismatic value of other silver dollars . Some early examples were maintained in the Mint 's coin cabinet for use in trades , and in 1859 , dealers began offering Class II dollars priced at $ 75 , while Theodore Eckfeldt reportedly offered a Philadelphia coin dealer three coins for $ 70 each . In 1883 , a Class III dollar was reportedly purchased in Vienna for $ 740 , and a Class I specimen was auctioned for $ 1 @,@ 000 in 1885 by Henry and Samuel H. Chapman . In 1903 , an example sold for $ 1 @,@ 800 , and the same coin reportedly sold for $ 4 @,@ 250 in 1941 . In 1960 , a Class III dollar fetched $ 28 @,@ 000 at an auction conducted by Stack 's , a coin firm , and the same coin reached $ 36 @,@ 000 at another Stack 's sale in 1963 . A Class I specimen brought $ 77 @,@ 500 at a 1970 Stack 's , and during a 1980 rise in coin prices , a Class III example sold for $ 400 @,@ 000 by Bowers and Ruddy Galleries . A Class I example reached $ 990 @,@ 000 at a Superior Galleries auction in 1990 , and an example once owned by coin collector Louis Eliasberg became the first 1804 dollar to surpass $ 1 million at auction , selling for $ 1 @,@ 815 @,@ 000 at a sale conducted by Bowers and <unk> , Inc . , in 1997 . 
 The price reached an all @-@ time high in 1999 , when the finest known specimen , graded Proof @-@ 68 by the Professional Coin Grading Service , which is believed to have been the example presented to Said bin Sultan , was auctioned by Bowers and <unk> for $ 4 @,@ 140 @,@ 000 . At the time of the sale , this was the highest price paid for any coin . In 2008 , a Class I example was sold by Heritage Auctions for $ 3 @,@ 737 @,@ 500 , and a Class III was sold by the same firm for $ 2 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 in 2009 . 
 = = = <unk> and reproductions = = = 
 <unk> and spurious reproductions of the 1804 dollar have been created since numismatists became aware of the coins ' high value . James A. Bolen , a medallist and coin collector who created copies of valuable coins between 1862 and 1869 , fabricated an 1804 dollar by altering the last digit in the date of a genuine 1803 example . Although Bolen added his name to the edge of the coin , other forgers created altered date coins with the intent to deceive . Nineteenth @-@ century stage actor John T. Raymond purchased a specimen of the coin , which was later revealed to be a forgery , for $ 300 . All silver dollars dated between 1800 and 1803 were subject to alteration to 1804 dollars , but 1801 was the date most commonly used for that purpose . 
 In addition to altered dates , electrotypes of the 1804 dollar were created , both for the purposes of study and fraud . One such coin in the collection of the San Francisco Mint was described by them as genuine from 1887 to 1927 . <unk> were also created by Mint employees , and one was used as the basis for the pantograph reproductions which appeared in Eckfeldt and DuBois ' 1842 A Manual of Gold and Silver Coins of All Nations . 
 More modern replicas , known as " Saigon copies " , were commonly offered as original at low prices to American soldiers during the Vietnam War . In Saigon and other South Vietnamese cities , as well in nearby Thailand , military personnel were offered the copies by vendors who sometimes claimed that they were family heirlooms . In 2012 , Professional Coin Grading Service founder David Hall stated that counterfeit 1804 dollars had been available in Hong Kong for decades . 
 = = Known specimens = = 
 = Hawaii Sesquicentennial half dollar = 
 The Hawaii Sesquicentennial half dollar was struck in 1928 by the United States Bureau of the Mint in honor of the 150th anniversary of Captain James Cook 's landing in Hawaii , the first European to reach there . The coin depicts Captain Cook on the obverse and a Hawaiian chieftain on the reverse . Only 10 @,@ 000 were struck for the public , making it rare and valuable . 
 In 1927 , the legislature of the Territory of Hawaii passed a resolution calling on the U.S. government to produce a commemorative coin for the 150th anniversary of Cook 's arrival in Hawaii . Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon thought the occasion important enough that , unusually for him , he did not oppose such an issue . The bill for the Hawaii half dollar passed through Congress without opposition or amendment , and became the Act of March 7 , 1928 with the signature of President Calvin Coolidge . 
 Sculptor Chester Beach made the plaster models for the coins from sketches by Juliette May Fraser . Beach had some trouble gaining approval for his designs , as there were issues raised by the Mint and by Victor Stewart <unk> Houston , Hawaii Territory 's delegate to Congress . These concerns were eventually addressed , and the coin went into production . Although the issue price , at $ 2 , was the highest for a commemorative half dollar to that point , the coins sold out quickly and have risen in value to over a thousand dollars . 
 = = Inception = = 
 The Hawaii Sesquicentennial half dollar was proposed because of the observances there for the 150th anniversary of Captain James Cook becoming the first European to reach the Hawaiian Islands , or , as it was termed then , its discovery . Planners decided on a date for the celebrations as August 1928 , as midway between the sesquicentennial of Cook 's landing in January 1778 and of his death in the islands in February 1779 . A resolution was passed by the legislature of the Territory of Hawaii to give the celebrations official status , and to ask the federal government to have the armed forces participate . The resolution requested that Washington invite the United Kingdom ( Cook 's allegiance ) and other nations . It also asked the federal government to issue a half dollar and postage stamps in honor of the anniversary . At the time , commemoratives were not sold by the government — Congress , in authorizing legislation , designated an organization which had the exclusive right to purchase the coins at face value and vend them to the public at a premium . In the case of the Hawaii half dollar , the Cook Sesquicentennial Commission of Hawaii was the designated group . 
 Bruce Cartwright , Jr . , was in charge of choosing a coin design for the Cook commission . Mrs. <unk> Castle , a civic @-@ minded person , arranged for him to meet Juliette May Fraser , a local artist . Cartwright had prepared cartoon @-@ style drawings , with the portrait of Cook based on a Wedgwood plaque that had been owned by Queen Emma , showing the explorer facing right . Within two days , Fraser had produced sketches . On November 2 , Charles Moore , chairman of the Commission of Fine Arts wrote to Assistant Director of the Mint Mary M. O 'Reilly that Juliette Fraser 's sketches were excellent and would translate well into a coin . 
 The Commission of Fine Arts met , and , at the suggestion of sculptor @-@ member Lorado Taft , decided to ask Buffalo nickel designer James Earle Fraser ( no relation ) who would be most suitable to turn the sketches into plaster models , from which the Mint could make coinage dies and hubs . James Fraser suggested Peace dollar designer Anthony de Francisci , but sculptor Chester Beach was engaged instead . 
 = = Legislation = = 
 Numismatic historian Don Taxay thought it likely that members of the House Committee on Coinage , Weights and Measures had agreed to support a Hawaii half dollar prior to a bill being submitted , as preparations had already begun . Legislation for such was introduced into the House of Representatives by the territory 's delegate to Congress , Victor Stewart <unk> Houston , on December 5 , 1927 . It was referred to the coinage committee , of which New Jersey Congressman Randolph Perkins was the chair , and which held hearings on the bill on January 23 , 1928 . Delegate Houston appeared in support of his bill , and to the surprise of committee members , had gotten a statement from Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon , stating that Mellon did not oppose the bill . Usually , when a commemorative coin was proposed , Mellon argued that a medal should be issued instead . This had been the case for the Norse @-@ American medal three years previously ; its sponsor , committee member Ole J. Kvale of Minnesota , had scuttled plans for a coin because of Treasury Department opposition . Congressman Kvale was " very much interested in learning what powers of persuasion have been exercised by the gentleman from Hawaii to bring out such a favorable report " . Kvale , a Norse @-@ American , asked , " why this discrimination against two and a half million people in the United States has come about in favor of about 35 @,@ 000 whites in that Territory ? " 
 Houston stated he had not lobbied the Treasury for the coin , and Perkins , before promising to find out more information , speculated that perhaps it was because the coins were to be issued far from the continental United States . Houston told the committee that the coin was " something that may be kept by those who attend the celebration as a memorial of it and will be available to foreigners who come there , as well as our own people who celebrate the occasion " . Kvale stated he would vote for the bill . Mississippi 's Bill G. Lowrey noted that as he had said before , he would not vote for any coin bill ; Perkins agreed that Lowrey had made his position clear . Perkins issued a report on February 1 , 1928 , recounting the history behind the proposed coin and indicating his committee 's support . 
 The bill was passed without objection by the House of Representatives on February 20 , 1928 . The bill was received by the Senate the following day and was referred to the Committee on Banking and Currency . On February 27 , South Dakota 's Peter Norbeck reported the bill back to the Senate without amendment , and included in the report a letter from Secretary Mellon to Perkins dated February 13 , in which Mellon expanded on his reasons for not opposing the Hawaii coin legislation . Mellon stated that only a token number of pieces would be issued , and that the celebration , sponsored by the territorial government , was of national significance . The bill was passed by the Senate on March 2 , 1928 without recorded opposition and was enacted on March 7 , 1928 with the signature of President Calvin Coolidge . It provided for the issuance of up to 10 @,@ 000 half dollars in honor of the sesquicentennial , with the commission 's profits from the coin to be used toward establishing a Captain James Cook collection in the territorial archives . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Once Beach accepted the commission on March 12 , 1928 , Juliette Fraser 's sketches were forwarded to him . On April 7 , he sent completed models to the Mint and photographs to the Fine Arts Commission . Both the Mint and Houston responded with criticism , the former that the relief of the coin was high and difficult to reduce to coin @-@ sized hubs . On April 19 , Mint Chief Engraver John R. Sinnock wrote in a memorandum that the coin would be very hard to produce because the area of greatest relief on each side was in the same part of the design . Beach agreed to lower any high points that might cause the Mint difficulty . 
 Delegate Houston had a long list of quibbles about the coin 's design . For example , Beach had placed an anklet on the chief 's leg ; Houston felt such an item would not have been worn . Beach defended some of his choices , such as the anklet ( which was removed when Houston insisted ) , and promised to comply with the remainder . This did not satisfy Houston , who was also unhappy about the shape of the palm tree on the coin , and Beach modified the design again . Beach forwarded final models , indicating that he would only consider making changes if the Mint requested it . He wrote to Moore , " I think the proper thing for Mr. Houston to do would be to take the sculptor and family to Hawaii and let us live in the <unk> [ sic ] trees for a while and absorb the atmosphere of that paradise . " 
 The coin was endorsed by the Commission of Fine Arts ; on May 9 , O 'Reilly wrote to Beach that the design had received Secretary Mellon 's approval . 
 = = Design = = 
 The obverse depicts Captain James Cook . He faces towards a compass needle and the words <unk> . JAMES <unk> <unk> OF <unk> ; thus , his gaze is westward . IN GOD WE TRUST is to the right , the name of the country above , and the denomination below . The words HALF DOLLAR are flanked by eight triangles , four on each side . These represent the eight largest volcanic islands of Hawaii : Oahu , Maui , Kauai , the " Big Island " of Hawaii , Niihau , Lanai , Kahoolawe , and Molokai . The designer 's initials , CB , are found to the right of the base of the bust . 
 The reverse is based on a statue of King Kamehameha I of Hawaii , designed by Thomas R. Gould , and intended " to symbolize the past and future glory of the Kingdom [ of Hawaii ] " . The sculpture that stands in downtown Honolulu ( 1883 ) is a replacement for one that sank while being transported from Germany ; the original ( 1880 ) was later salvaged and stands at Kohala on the island of Hawaii . The coin features a Hawaiian chieftain in ceremonial dress surmounting the top of a hill , with his arm extended in greeting . He represents Hawaii rising from obscurity . The palm tree that rises above him is intended to signify romance . A Hawaiian village at Waikiki Beach with Diamond Head nearby are seen behind him , representing history and antiquity . The design is almost free of lettering , with only " E PLURIBUS UNUM " ( " Out of many , one " ) and 1778 1928 to be seen . Ferns are visible under that Latin motto : Houston wanted the plants removed , but Beach insisted on retaining them to balance the design . Juliette Fraser had made a number of sketches , all with the same basic design elements , but with the chieftain in various poses and with Diamond Head in different positions . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule , in his volume on U.S. coins and medals , wrote that the obverse " is too crowded , despite the large , flat , clothed bust " and that the various elements of the reverse design " are all too much for one small coin " . He deemed " the coin honoring Hawaii in 1928 ... no more a credit to Chester Beach than was the Lexington Concord coin [ of 1925 ] " . 
 = = Production , distribution , and collecting = = 
 The Philadelphia Mint coined 10 @,@ 008 Hawaii Sesquicentennial half dollars in June 1928 , with the eight pieces above the authorized mintage reserved for inspection and testing at the 1929 meeting of the annual Assay Commission . Fifty of the ten thousand were specially finished as sandblast proof pieces , to be presented to various individuals and institutions , such as members of the Cook commission , President Coolidge , and the British Admiralty . Of the remainder , half were to be sold on the Hawaiian Islands , half reserved for orders from elsewhere . The Bank of Hawaii took charge of distribution on behalf of the Cook commission . The price was $ 2 per coin , the highest for a half dollar commemorative to that point . 
 Sales began October 8 , 1928 ; supplies were quickly exhausted . Numismatists Anthony Swiatek and Walter Breen , in their book on commemoratives , write that while " there was never any scandal about these coins " , there were unconfirmed rumors of hordes of coins , totaling as many as 1 @,@ 500 , taken from the allocation for Hawaiians and kept off the market . One such grouping , of 137 pieces , comprised coins from an allotment for the Bank of Hawaii for sale to its employees . When the coin the bank put on display was stolen , the bank president took the others off sale , and they remained in the vaults until 1986 , when they were sold at auction . Many Hawaii Sesquicentennial half dollars were purchased by non @-@ collectors and display the effects of poor handling . 
 The Captain Cook Memorial Collection , purchased in part with funds raised from the coins , is now in the Bishop Museum in Honolulu . The Hawaii Sesquicentennial coin is the <unk> commemorative half dollar by design ; according to R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins published in 2015 , it lists for between $ 1 @,@ 850 and $ 11 @,@ 000 depending on condition . The sandblast proofs are listed for up to $ 50 @,@ 000 but none has recently been sold at auction — an exceptional specimen of the regular type went under the hammer for $ 25 @,@ 850 in 2013 . At least three different counterfeits are known . 
 = Roger de Pont L 'Évêque = 
 Roger de Pont L 'Évêque ( or Robert of Bishop 's Bridge ; c . 1115 – 1181 ) was a contemporary of Thomas Becket and later Archbishop of York . Born in Normandy , he preceded Becket as Archdeacon of Canterbury , and together with Becket served Theobald of Bec while Theobald was Archbishop of Canterbury . While in Theobald 's service , Roger was alleged to have committed a crime which Becket helped to cover up . Roger succeeded William FitzHerbert as archbishop in 1154 , and while at York rebuilt York Minster , which had been damaged by fire . 
 Roger did not become deeply involved in the dispute between King Henry II of England and Becket until 1170 , when the King had Roger preside at the coronation of the king 's son Henry the Young King , a function that would normally have been performed by the Archbishop of Canterbury . In retaliation Becket excommunicated Roger in late 1170 , and some have seen this excommunication as one reason for King Henry 's anger at Becket which led to Becket 's martyrdom . After being suspended from office by the pope for his supposed role in Becket 's death , Roger was eventually restored to office in late 1171 , and died in 1181 . The see of York remained vacant after his death until 1189 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Roger was probably born around 1115 and was a native of Pont @-@ l 'Évêque in Normandy . His only known relative was a nephew , Geoffrey , to whom Roger gave the offices of provost of Beverley Minster and archdeacon of York . Roger was a clerk of Archbishop Theobald 's before being named Archdeacon of Canterbury , some time after March 1148 . When Becket joined Theobald 's household , their contemporary William <unk> recorded that Roger disliked the new clerk , and twice drove Thomas away before the archbishop 's brother Walter arranged Thomas ' return . 
 According to John of Salisbury , who first reported this story in 1172 after the death of Thomas Becket , as a young clerk Roger was involved in a scandal involving a homosexual relationship with a boy named Walter . After Walter made the relationship public , Roger reacted by embroiling Walter in judicial case that ended with Walter 's eyes being gouged out . When Walter then accused Roger of this crime , Roger persuaded a judge to condemn Walter to death by hanging . Becket supposedly was involved in the cover @-@ up afterwards , by arranging with Hilary of Chichester and John of Coutances for Roger to swear an oath that he was innocent . According to John of Salisbury , Roger then went to Rome in 1152 and was cleared of involvement by Pope Eugene III . John of Salisbury further alleges that it was only after bribery that the pope cleared Roger . Frank Barlow , a medieval historian and Becket 's biographer , points out in his biography of Becket that while Roger was accused of these crimes , and may even have been guilty of some sort of criminal homosexuality , John of Salisbury 's motives for bringing up this story in 1172 were almost certainly to defame Roger . Such a story would naturally have put Roger in the worst possible light . 
 It was while Roger was Theobald 's clerk that he made lasting friendships with Gilbert Foliot and Hugh de Puiset . Roger attended the Council of Reims in 1148 with Theobald , John of Salisbury , and possibly Thomas Becket . This council condemned some of Gilbert de la Porrée 's teachings , and consecrated Foliot as Bishop of Hereford . While it was later recalled that Roger and Becket did not get along , there is no evidence of hatred between the two before the Becket crisis happened . 
 = = Archbishop = = 
 Roger was consecrated Archbishop of York on 10 October 1154 . When he went north to York , the legal scholar Vacarius , who had been part of Theobald 's household , followed Roger and spent the next 50 years in the north . Vacarius was responsible for introducing Roman civil law into England , and did so under the patronage of Roger . He wrote a standard textbook on the civil law , the Liber pauperum , and was an important advisor for Roger . 
 Roger attended the Council of Tours in 1163 , along with a number of other English bishops . Pope Alexander III named Roger a papal legate in February 1164 , but his powers did not include the city of Canterbury or anything to do with Archbishop Becket . They did , however , include Scotland . 
 In late 1164 Roger led a deputation from Henry II that visited the papal court , or curia , to try to persuade Alexander III that any decision on the deposition of Becket should take place in England under a papal legate , rather than in Rome . While Becket was in exile , Roger also managed to secure papal permission for archbishops of York to carry their cross in front of them anywhere in England , a right that had long been a bone of contention between Canterbury and York . Later , the pope rescinded the permission , but consistently refused to give primacy to either Canterbury or York in their struggles . 
 Roger did not like monks , and William of Newburgh said that he often referred to the foundation of Fountains Abbey as the worst mistake of Archbishop Thurstan 's episcopate . Roger also was accused of avarice , and of making unworthy clerical appointments . However , he also started the rebuilding of York Minster , which had been damaged by fire in 1137 , and helped with the building of a church at Ripon . He also endowed the school at York with an annual income of 100 shillings . 
 = = Controversy with Becket = = 
 Roger got drawn into the controversy with Becket because Henry II wanted to have his eldest living son crowned as king during Henry 's lifetime . ( Traditionally , the ceremony is performed by the Archbishop of Canterbury ) This was a new practice for England , but was a custom of the Capetian kings of France , which Henry decided to imitate . Henry II insisted that his son , Henry be crowned at Westminster Abbey on 14 June 1170 by Archbishop Roger of York . Also present at the coronation were the bishops of London , Salisbury , Exeter , Chester , Rochester , St <unk> , Llandaff , Durham , Bayeux , Évreux and Sées . The only English bishops absent seem to have been Winchester , Norwich , Worcester , and of course Thomas Becket , Archbishop of Canterbury , who was in exile . The remaining English sees were vacant . This overstepped a long tradition which reserved coronations to the Archbishop of Canterbury , a reservation confirmed as recently as 1166 by Pope Alexander III . In 1170 , however , Henry II received papal permission to have Roger crown the younger Henry , a permission which Alexander later revoked . 
 Before Becket returned to England , on 1 December 1170 , he excommunicated Roger , as well as Gilbert Foliot the Bishop of Lincoln and Josceline de Bohon the Bishop of Salisbury . After Becket landed in England the three excommunicates went to Becket and asked for absolution , but while Becket was willing to absolve Gilbert and Josceline , he insisted that only the pope could absolve an archbishop . Roger persuaded the others that they should stick together , and all three went to King Henry in Normandy , to secure the king 's permission for their appeals to Rome . 
 Roger 's and his fellow @-@ bishops ' stories to Henry are often cited as the spark that touched off the king 's anger at Becket and led to his martyrdom . However , it was more probably the stories of Becket 's behaviour upon arrival in England that caused Henry 's anger , and which indirectly led to the death of Becket . Roger was suspended by Pope Alexander III because he was implicated in Becket 's death , but was restored to office on 16 December 1171 . 
 = = Death and afterwards = = 
 Roger died on 26 November 1181 and was buried at Durham . Other sources give the date of death as 22 November or 20 November . After Roger 's death , the king declared his will invalid and confiscated most of his wealth . Henry 's excuse was that bishops ' wills made after the bishop became ill , that bequeathed most of their property to charity , were invalid . 
 Roger had one son , named William , at some point in his career . Some verses in hexameter written by Roger to Maurice of Kirkham , the prior of Kirkham Priory , are extant and have been published as part of Maurice 's works . York remained vacant from Roger 's death in 1181 until 1189 . 
 = Rhodesian mission in Lisbon = 
 The Rhodesian mission in Lisbon ( Portuguese : <unk> da <unk> em Lisboa ) , the capital of Portugal , operated from September 1965 to May 1975 . It was a diplomatic mission representing Rhodesia ( or Southern Rhodesia ) , initially as a self @-@ governing colony of Britain and , after the Unilateral Declaration of Independence in November 1965 , as an unrecognised state . Rhodesia informed Britain of its intent to open a Lisbon mission headed by an accredited representative , independent from the Britain Embassy in the city , in June 1965 . Whitehall refused to endorse the idea but Rhodesia continued nonetheless , and later that month appointed Harry Reedman to head the mission . The British government attempted unsuccessfully to block this unilateral act — Rhodesia 's first — for some months afterwards . 
 The affair came amid the larger dispute between Whitehall and Salisbury regarding the terms under which Rhodesia could be granted sovereign independence . Rhodesia 's mostly white government insisted that statehood should come under the constitution introduced with Britain 's approval in 1961 , while Whitehall insisted that a set timetable for the introduction of black majority rule would have to be in place before the country could be fully independent . The Rhodesian government 's stance on this matter caused it to become isolated within the Commonwealth , which from 1964 excluded it from most of its internal bodies , while the Rhodesian military became unofficially embargoed by its established British and American suppliers . 
 Rhodesia had run itself as a self @-@ governing colony since 1923 , but ultimate responsibility for foreign affairs remained with Britain . Rhodesia 's staunch opposition to immediate black rule and its disillusionment regarding Britain propelled it towards Portugal , which governed Angola and Mozambique , territories respectively to the west and east of Rhodesia . In their attempt to prove that an independent Lisbon mission was legal , the Rhodesians presented an argument based on British legislation conferring on the colonial government the right to appoint its own " diplomatic agents , or consular or trade representatives , in countries which are willing to receive them " . The British countered that ultimate purview over Rhodesian foreign affairs still lay with Whitehall . They proposed that Reedman be integrated into the British Embassy in Lisbon as a Rhodesian consul , but Rhodesia refused to accept a lesser post for Reedman than those enjoyed by the independent Rhodesian representatives in South Africa and Mozambique . 
 Following months of abortive Anglo @-@ Rhodesian talks and unsuccessful attempts by Britain to deter Portugal diplomatically , Reedman travelled to Lisbon in September 1965 to take up his post at the head of an independent Rhodesian mission . The Portuguese Ministry of Foreign Affairs , which insisted it was neutral regarding Rhodesia , outraged Whitehall by accepting Reedman 's letter of accreditation — though Lisbon was careful to avoid provoking Britain , omitting the word " diplomatic " from the titles given to both Reedman and his mission . The Rhodesians still regarded themselves as victorious , saying they had set out to gain an independent diplomatic representative in Lisbon , and now had one . The historian J R T Wood would call this " Rhodesia 's first independent and indeed unilateral act — the veritable straw in the wind . " On 11 November 1965 , less than two months after Reedman 's investiture , Rhodesia went one further and unilaterally declared its independence from Britain . The mission in Lisbon operated until 1975 , when it was closed following the Carnation Revolution in Portugal the previous year . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Responsible government , Federation and the Wind of Change = = = 
 Having been governed and developed by the British South Africa Company since the 1890s , Southern Rhodesia became a self @-@ governing colony within the British Empire in 1923 , when it was granted responsible government by Whitehall . The Southern Rhodesian capital , Salisbury , was henceforth empowered to run its own affairs in almost all matters , including defence . Foreign affairs was one of the few areas reserved by the British government . As the Empire 's lone self @-@ governing colony , Southern Rhodesia was considered a sui generis case , almost on a par with a dominion . Starting in 1932 , Imperial Conferences included the Southern Rhodesian Prime Minister alongside those from the dominions , a unique situation which continued after Imperial Conferences were superseded by Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conferences in 1944 . 
 As most of the Southern Rhodesian politicians saw it , they were as good as independent ; if full autonomy were granted in the form of dominionship , the only practical difference would be a rise in expenses for foreign representation , as Salisbury would have to maintain its own embassies abroad . Believing full dominion status to be effectively symbolic and " there for the asking " , Prime Minister Godfrey Huggins ( in office from 1933 to 1953 ) regarded independence as a non @-@ issue . He twice refused British overtures hinting at dominion status , and instead pursued an initially semi @-@ independent Federation with the directly administered British colonies of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland . 
 Mandated by the results of the 1953 referendum , Federation began later that year with Southern Rhodesia , the most developed of the three territories , at its head . Salisbury doubled as Federal capital . The Federation was granted several privileges by Britain during its earlier years ; for example , a 1957 British Act of Parliament empowered it to appoint its own " diplomatic agents , or consular or trade representatives , in countries which are willing to receive them " so long as it informed Britain when it was doing so . The most prominent of these appointments was made in 1961 , when the Union of South Africa split from the Commonwealth of Nations and became a republic . An accredited representative of Salisbury was set up in Pretoria soon after , independent of Britain 's embassy there . An independent office representing the Federation was also set up in Lourenço Marques , the capital of Portuguese Mozambique , while further afield , Federal officials were set up within the British embassies in West Germany , Japan and the United States . 
 The Federation ultimately failed because of the shifting international attitudes and rising black nationalist ambitions of the late 1950s and early 1960s , often collectively called the Wind of Change . The idea of " no independence before majority rule " gained considerable ground in British political circles as the UK , France and Belgium vastly accelerated their withdrawal from the continent . Amid a flurry of bloody civil wars , military coups and other disasters , most of the new African countries became autocratic one @-@ party states within a few years . Already wary of black nationalism on racial grounds , Salisbury became increasingly antipathetic towards it as a result of these developments , particularly when the brutal Congo Crisis caused thousands of Congolese whites to become refugees in Northern and Southern Rhodesia . In 1962 , with the Federation in its constitutional death throes amid Nyasaland 's <unk> for secession and immediate black rule , Federal Prime Minister Roy Welensky was horrified and outraged to be told by Britain 's Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations , Duncan Sandys , that " we British have lost the will to govern . " " But we haven 't , " retorted Julian Greenfield , Welensky 's law minister . 
 = = = Federal dissolution ; Salisbury pushes for independence = = = 
 The Southern Rhodesians presumed that in the event of Federal dissolution , they would be first in line for independence , and would receive it without major adjustments to their 1961 constitution . Indeed , intergovernmental correspondence during early 1963 did much to confirm Salisbury 's belief that this was the case . While Federal break @-@ up talks progressed , Sandys issued a letter of intent in which he said that powers conferred on the Federal government by British legislation would transfer to Southern Rhodesia at the end of Federation . It was agreed that Salisbury would keep the Federal overseas missions in Pretoria and Lourenço Marques , as well as the British Embassy desks in Bonn , Tokyo and Washington . Arrangements for Federal dissolution concluded in mid @-@ 1963 , and the Federation formally ended on 31 December that year . Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland became independent during 1964 , respectively renamed Zambia and Malawi , under black majority governments . Southern Rhodesia was denied the same on the grounds that whites held too dominant a position , prompting indignation and fury from the governing Rhodesian Front ( RF ) and its supporters . Prime Minister Winston Field 's failure to secure independence from Britain during early 1964 led to his forced resignation and replacement by his deputy , Ian Smith , in April that year . 
 Two months into his premiership , Smith was deeply offended when Whitehall informed him that , for the first time since 1932 , Southern Rhodesia would not be represented at the year 's Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conference as the decision had been taken to only include fully independent states in future . The quarrel over the terms for independence caused the Southern Rhodesian military 's traditional British and American suppliers to impose an informal embargo , and motivated Britain to cut off financial aid to Salisbury around the same time . The United States promptly followed suit . Political violence between the rival black nationalist movements in Rhodesia intensified during mid @-@ 1964 , leading to jail terms or preventive restriction for several prominent nationalists , and concurrent bans for their respective parties . When Northern Rhodesia became Zambia in October 1964 , Southern Rhodesia dropped " Southern " from its name , and initiated legislation to this effect , but Britain refused assent , saying that the colony could not legally rename itself . Salisbury continued using the shortened name anyway . 
 The Rhodesian government was ardently anti @-@ communist , and opposed immediate black rule , which Smith said would cause " the destruction of our country " , pointing to ongoing events such as the Congo Crisis as evidence . Parliament remained mostly white , but Salisbury contended it had close to unanimous support from all races in pursuing independence under the 1961 constitution , citing various tests of opinion it conducted in late 1964 . The Prime Minister stood <unk> against any constitutional change he believed was too radical , regarding this as a matter of national and regional security . According to his memoirs , he worked to prevent a " mad rush into one man , one vote with all the resultant corruption , nepotism , chaos and economic disaster which we had witnessed in all the countries around us . " The Labour Cabinet of British Prime Minister Harold Wilson , which replaced the previous Conservative administration in October 1964 , did not give credence to the Rhodesian tests of opinion , and insisted on majority rule as a condition for independence . The Commonwealth repeatedly urged Britain to intervene directly should Rhodesian defiance continue , while British liberals worried that if left unchecked Salisbury might drift towards South African @-@ style apartheid . 
 = = = Britain , Portugal and Rhodesia = = = 
 British policy @-@ makers regarded Portugal as a traditional friend — the Anglo @-@ Portuguese Alliance dated back to 1386 , and both countries were in the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) and the European Free Trade Association — but the combined strength of the communist bloc and the Afro @-@ Asian lobby in the United Nations forced the British to peel back their support for the <unk> Estado Novo ( " New State " ) during the early 1960s . Portugal 's Colonial War , starting in Angola in 1961 , pitted it against a number of guerrilla factions in its African territories , most of which subscribed to communist political thinking . Britain opposed communist encroachment into southern Africa , but knew it would become an international pariah if it publicly opposed general consensus at the UN , which roundly condemned colonialism in all forms and supported communist @-@ backed insurgencies across the region , regarding them as racial liberation movements . It therefore attempted an awkward balancing act whereby it would appear to oppose Portugal without meaningfully doing so . 
 Britain 's stance towards Rhodesia was influenced in a similar way , with Whitehall unable to back down on the policy of no independence before majority rule without causing international uproar . Also contributory was the disproportionate sway over Britain 's African policy held by Julius Nyerere , the President of Tanzania , who was a fervent proponent for majority rule across Africa without delay , implemented by military force if need be . British politicians deferred to Nyerere on almost every proposal they made regarding Rhodesia during the 1960s and 1970s . In the immediate post @-@ Federal period , Britain forlornly tried to stifle Rhodesia 's further alignment with South Africa and Portugal , realising that British influence in the region was severely limited while the three remained so closely linked . A 1965 British government memorandum described the trio as " a defiant and mutually sustaining bloc " . 
 Great personal rapport developed between Smith and his Portuguese counterpart , António de Oliveira Salazar . On first meeting in Portugal in September 1964 , the two Prime Ministers found they shared many common views regarding race relations in their respective countries , Britain 's handling of the Commonwealth , and what Smith called the " complacency of the major powers of the free world " in the face of what the pair saw as inexorable communist expansionism . After hearing Smith 's argument in favour of Rhodesian independence , Salazar privately pledged Portugal 's complete support . The RF called a new general election for May 1965 and , campaigning on an election promise of independence , won a clean sweep of all 50 " A " -roll seats . A week later , Wilson met with Portuguese Foreign Minister Alberto Franco Nogueira , whom he pressed on Portugal 's secret dealings with Rhodesia . Nogueira categorically denied anything of the sort . 
 = = Rhodesia seeks British endorsement for a Lisbon mission = = 
 = = = Gibbs ' speech on 9 June = = = 
 Following the Rhodesian Front 's decisive May 1965 election victory , parliament was opened by the British @-@ appointed Governor , Sir Humphrey Gibbs , on 9 June . For the first time , Rhodesia had an official Leader of the Opposition who was black : Josiah Gondo , leader of the United People 's Party , now sat opposite Smith and the all @-@ white RF in the House of Assembly . Though Gibbs represented the British Crown in Rhodesia , he had been a local resident most of his life , and had feet in both camps , regarding himself as loyal both to Rhodesia and to the faraway monarch . While opening parliament , he told the House of Assembly that the RF 's strengthened majority amounted to " a mandate to lead the country to its full independence " — later in the speech he referred to this as " our independence " . 
 Gibbs then said that Rhodesia wished to have the best possible relations with its neighbours , and startled British observers by saying the government had informed him that it would follow recommendations made by Portugal during recent talks , and would open its own diplomatic mission in the Portuguese capital Lisbon as soon as was practical . Evan Campbell , Rhodesia 's High Commissioner in London , asked Whitehall the same day to endorse the appointment of Harry Reedman as Rhodesia 's " accredited representative " to Portugal , reasoning that the 1957 act allowing the Federation to do so still covered Rhodesia under the principle of national succession . The 1963 letter of intent from Sandys confirmed this in Rhodesia 's eyes . Historian J R T Wood calls this " Rhodesia 's first independent and indeed unilateral act — the veritable straw in the wind . " 
 = = = Rhodesian motivations = = = 
 Aside from reinforcing Luso @-@ Rhodesian relations , the Lisbon appointment was designed to secure the African nation a diplomatic foothold in Europe outside of Britain 's reach and to help Salisbury find new trading partners and diplomatic allies on the continent . Among other things , the Rhodesians intended to make up the shortfalls in military equipment caused by the undeclared Anglo @-@ American arms embargo . Reedman , the former minister for immigration and tourism , was also a retired officer of the British Royal Air Force ( where he had been involved in bomber research ) , and an experienced engineer and businessman : all the right ingredients , the government thought , for someone in the position to source European aircraft , weapons and other equipment , while also representing Rhodesian interests in mainland Europe . 
 Lord Brockway , head of the Movement for Colonial Freedom , believed that Rhodesia was attempting to assert de facto independence in the eyes of the international community by deliberately defying Britain over the Lisbon issue . " If Salisbury is permitted to claim diplomatic rights in foreign capitals , its assertion of sovereignty is accepted , " he wrote in an article for the British democratic socialist weekly Tribune . 
 = = = Britain refuses = = = 
 Britain was caught unprepared by Campbell 's request , and issued no response for over a week . In the meantime Campbell , whose retirement was due , was relieved by the Rhodesian government on 10 June . His replacement , Brigadier Andrew <unk> , took over Campbell 's London office at Rhodesia House , 429 Strand six days later . 
 Bent on securing Reedman 's investiture quickly , the Rhodesian government made it publicly known on 19 June that , pursuant to British and Portuguese approval , Reedman would be appointed within seven days . Whitehall still took no action . Wilson and his Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations , Arthur Bottomley , were occupied at Chequers , the official country residence of the British Prime Minister , where they were entertaining the Commonwealth heads of state . 
 In Bottomley 's absence , his office explored the issue and resolved that Rhodesia could retain its representative in South Africa , but should not be allowed to appoint another in Lisbon ; a consul was acceptable , they concluded , but only as part of the British Embassy staff . Bottomley remained unaware of this progress until a call from his office on 25 June , whereupon he still did nothing . Unwilling to wait , Rhodesia confirmed Reedman 's appointment the next day , much to Wilson 's fury . Only now was Bottomley finally jolted into action ; he informed Salisbury of his ministry 's findings on 29 June , offering them the consul within the embassy , but refusing to sanction an independent office . 
 = = Early negotiations = = 
 = = = Rhodesian disillusionment ; Britain adopts delaying tactics = = = 
 Independence talks between Britain and Rhodesia continued for a fortnight without major reference to the Reedman appointment , with Britain more concerned with discussing a possible Rhodesian unilateral declaration of independence ( UDI ) . Smith delivered an openly defiant speech to his parliament on 30 June , attacking Britain for its handling of the Commonwealth 's newer members , which he said were unduly influencing British policy in Africa . Britain was desperate to avoid the international humiliation that would accompany the organisation 's break @-@ up , he claimed , and was therefore attempting to hold it together by appeasing the less prominent members . While making clear his disdain , the Prime Minister pledged to go on with negotiations , saying that he did not believe Britain truly endorsed its professed line . 
 In dealing with the immovable Smith , Wilson 's ministers adopted a programme of deliberate frustration and delay : Britain would interminably stonewall the Rhodesian Prime Minister , maintaining the facade of continued negotiation by very occasionally repeating their stance , in the hope that either Smith would back down , or his Cabinet would eventually lose faith in his negotiating prowess and replace him with somebody more malleable . Wood writes that Wilson , Bottomley and their Labour contemporaries were " distracted by their own political agendas " , and did not understand the extent of Rhodesia 's considerable disillusionment with Britain by this time . Effectively " kicked ... out of the Commonwealth " , as Huggins later commented , a fortress mentality was developing in Salisbury , propelling it towards unilateral action . Wood concludes that Britain 's maintenance of this stonewalling tactic was misjudged , and only exacerbated the Rhodesian government 's feeling of alienation . 
 In the British House of Lords on 26 July , Brockway pressed Lord Taylor , the Under @-@ Secretary of State for the Colonies , on Rhodesia 's claims , arguing that failure to block the Lisbon appointment would amount to conceding de facto recognition to Rhodesia as an independent state . Taylor 's response was that Britain remained committed to upholding its ultimate purview over Rhodesian overseas relations . Brockway then asked how Rhodesia had attained its independent office in Pretoria ; surely , he said , this provided " a precedent which was rather dangerous ? " Taylor replied that Pretoria and Salisbury had exchanged High Commissioners before South Africa left the Commonwealth in 1961 , and that Britain had granted Rhodesia special dispensation to retain the Pretoria mission thereafter . He stressed that in Britain 's eyes this was no precedent for Lisbon . 
 = = = Britain despatches Cledwyn Hughes to Rhodesia , 22 – 27 July = = = 
 The British decided to despatch one of their Commonwealth ministers to Rhodesia for talks during early July , but debated for a while over whether it should be Bottomley or his deputy , Cledwyn Hughes , who should be sent . Wilson considered this a matter of urgency as he had heard a rumour that Rhodesia might declare independence on its main national holiday , Rhodes ' Day ( that year 12 July ) , but this proved false . On 15 July , Britain 's High Commissioner to Rhodesia , John Baines Johnston , was instructed to propose a week @-@ long round of talks between Smith and Hughes in Salisbury . Johnston was given permission to cave if the Rhodesian Prime Minister insisted on meeting with Bottomley , but this did not prove necessary : Smith cabled back on the 18th accepting Hughes ' visit . The British delegation arrived in Salisbury four days later . 
 Discussions proceeded rapidly during the week , but did not touch on the issue of Lisbon until the fifth day , 26 July , when Hughes and Johnston met with Smith , Deputy Prime Minister Clifford Dupont , and Trade and Industry Minister George <unk> . Dupont opened the discussion by referring to Sandys ' statement from 1963 , which said the Rhodesian government would retain any rights previously granted to the Federation , which Dupont reasoned surely included the ability given in 1957 to appoint its own overseas agents if it informed Britain . As Portugal had indicated its willingness to accept a Rhodesian diplomat , Dupont said , the Rhodesian government was acting perfectly within its rights . 
 Hughes countered that he did not believe the wording of the 1957 document gave Rhodesia the right to devise its own representation overseas without first gaining assent from Britain . The Reedman appointment would probably be seen internationally as a major rise in Rhodesian diplomatic profile , he said , and might damage Britain 's reputation , which would in turn make the ongoing negotiations for independence more difficult for both sides . He repeated Bottomley 's previous offer of a consul on the British Embassy staff , adding that the official would not have to be physically located within the embassy , and could set up his own office elsewhere so long as he remained nominally affiliated to it . 
 Smith replied that in his interpretation Rhodesia was required to keep Whitehall informed , but prior British concurrence was not necessary ; if Britain contested this , the Prime Minister said , then surely the 1957 entrustment had never meant anything . Dupont then spoke again , rejecting the idea that the Rhodesian mission should be a mere subsidiary consulate of the British Embassy . Hughes replied firmly that the 1957 despatch did not give the Rhodesians free rein over external matters , and warned them to be more flexible if they intended to find common ground . Eager to avoid open confrontation , Smith told Dupont to reconsider his tone , and changed the subject . 
 Hughes met with several other Rhodesian figures before leaving late on 27 July , but Lisbon remained off the programme most of the time . Just before Hughes departed , Dupont released a statement saying that Reedman would take office in Lisbon on 1 August , and would be " warmly welcomed " by the Portuguese government . Hughes decried this in a brief telephone call to Smith , but could do little more before leaving Rhodesia that evening . On 29 July , Smith fielded questions from the press , commenting on both Lisbon and the independence talks in general . He expressed the belief that Rhodesia had made more progress towards independence talking with Hughes than it ever had before , but qualified this by saying only Wilson 's reply to the proposals given to Hughes would show if this were indeed true . He said that although he thought Whitehall was keen to resolve the independence issue , he did not believe their line had changed . He declared that he and the RF would not change their stance in any way . Moving to the subject of Lisbon , Smith stressed that this was separate from the independence dispute , then overruled Dupont 's announcement of two days before : Reedman 's appointment would remain provisional until further notice , he said . 
 = = Anglo @-@ Rhodesian animosity deepens = = 
 = = = Bottomley tours West Africa , arousing Rhodesian suspicion = = = 
 Bottomley toured West Africa during early August , and , in Ghana and Nigeria , gave several speeches reassuring his hosts that immediate majority rule was an unconditional requirement for Rhodesian independence . He ruled out the use of military force in the event of a Rhodesian UDI , and pledged to instead end such a rebellion through economic sanctions . Bottomley 's dismissal of the use of force drew damning criticism from Joshua Nkomo , the imprisoned leader of the Marxist – Leninist Zimbabwe African People 's Union , who said this showed Britain was not serious about <unk> Rhodesia as it had its other African possessions . Meanwhile , Bottomley 's comments increased anti @-@ British sentiment . In his memoirs , Smith describes the mood in forthright terms , accusing Britain of " resorting to politics of convenience and appeasement " . " We waited and waited ... [ but ] the British were not prepared to make a clear decision , " he writes ; " they were consulting the bankrupt and communist dictatorships before replying to us . " Becoming exasperated by the lack of progress , even the more hesitant members of the Rhodesian government began to see the road leading towards UDI as the only one viable for them . Lisbon , however , remained the immediate bone of contention , and on this issue the Rhodesians became yet more determined not to give an inch . 
 = = = Meeting between Johnston and Smith on 18 August = = = 
 Smith organised a meeting with Johnston , starting at 09 : 00 on 18 August , where he informed the British High Commissioner that he had considered the Lisbon appointment extensively , with the help of Dupont , several legal advisers , and a judge of the Rhodesian High Court . The judge had examined the relevant documents , and had come to the conclusion that Dupont 's interpretation of them was correct . Smith therefore felt certain that Reedman 's appointment was legitimate so long as Portugal agreed . A long argument ensued , with neither man willing to budge . Smith said that he had always tried to be flexible and civil , but that he and his government felt they had to make a stand . By making clear to Lisbon the exact nature of their proposed representative , and informing Britain of their intent , Smith said the Rhodesians had filled every legal obligation . 
 Johnston dismissed Smith 's argument , asserting that neither the Federation nor Rhodesia had ever made such an appointment ( this was actually false ; the Federal government had opened independent diplomatic missions in South Africa and Portuguese Mozambique , and Rhodesia retained them both ) . Johnston concluded that Rhodesia was trying to prematurely advance its international standing . The previous <unk> , he said , had been made to allow Britain and Rhodesia to cooperate subject to Whitehall 's ultimate authority , and did not entitle Rhodesia to do as it liked in the field of external affairs , especially if its chosen line ran counter to Britain 's . In an attempt to intimidate Smith , Johnston sternly asked why the Rhodesian Prime Minister would risk causing a major international incident by deliberately defying Britain ; Smith replied that following Britain 's several slights against Rhodesia over the previous year and a half , Salisbury would not accept another . The conversation continued in this manner for some time afterwards . Smith proposed that the relevant documents be examined jointly by two judges , one British and one Rhodesian , but Johnston refused this . The meeting ended without agreement . 
 = = = Bottomley returns to Britain = = = 
 The Rhodesian press reported extensively on the Lisbon controversy during the second half of August , generally predicting that neither Britain , Portugal nor Rhodesia would back down . While most reporters believed that Whitehall would take a strong line , few could see any way it could actually stop Reedman from taking office . On 20 August , Bottomley spoke at his final conference in Lagos , and repeated all he had previously said regarding Britain 's stance on Rhodesia . Back in London three days later , he reaffirmed his previous stance regarding Lisbon , saying that he would be pleased to have a Rhodesian on the staff of the British Embassy there , but would allow no more . In the same interview , he expressed the belief that Wilson had averted a Rhodesian UDI in October the previous year by warning Salisbury of the economic consequences . Speaking in Gwelo on 27 August , Smith derided this statement , calling it " incredible " . His administration had not even considered a declaration of independence then , he said , but it was contemplated now , and he believed Anglo @-@ Rhodesian relations were at their all @-@ time lowest ebb . He urged Britain to return to the bargaining table quickly . 
 = = Britain attempts to block the appointment = = 
 = = = Wilson resolves to challenge Portugal = = = 
 The British continued their policy of stalling Smith . At the end of August 1965 , they did not consider a Rhodesian UDI an immediate threat , and therefore focussed on the colony 's maintained defiance of the mother country regarding Reedman and Lisbon . On 30 August , Johnston summarised Britain 's stand on the issue for Bottomley 's Commonwealth Relations Office . According to his understanding , he said , Rhodesia had been told just before Federal dissolution that it would retain the Federation 's former powers regarding external affairs , but that this entrustment was subject to British discretion , and could not be exercised without extensive prior consultation and conformity to Britain 's line . 
 Johnston rued bitterly that the Rhodesians had apparently made practical arrangements for an independent office in Lisbon anyway , even going to the trouble of renting the prospective mission premises . He repeated the claim he had made in the meeting with Smith on 18 August , saying once more that the Federal government had not made appointments off its own bat . He accepted that there was an independent Rhodesian envoy in Pretoria , but argued that this was the result of South Africa 's enforced withdrawal from the Commonwealth . He did not mention the Rhodesian ( formerly Federal ) office in Lourenço Marques , which Wood comments could be considered " precedent for Portugal " . 
 On 5 September , the Salisbury Sunday Mail reported that Smith was standing firm on Reedman 's absolute independence in Lisbon , and that Portugal had accepted the envoy . British Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart reacted with alarm , convening an urgent meeting the same day with Hughes and Sir Archibald Ross , Britain 's ambassador to Portugal . Here Hughes proposed hauling Portugal over the coals , insisting that the Lisbon mission represented " creeping independence " for Rhodesia , and therefore had to be stopped . 
 Ross disagreed , reasoning this would only damage relations between Britain and Portugal , an undesirable prospect given the countries ' common membership in NATO , the European Free Trade Association and more . There was much at stake ; Britain enjoyed an annual £ 48 million trade surplus with Portugal , and Portuguese Railways was in the process of buying 50 diesel locomotives from English Electric . In the Azores archipelago , Portugal provided NATO with a strategically key air base , which was unprotected by treaty ; given the inclination , Lisbon might close it . 
 Hughes insisted that there was nothing more they could do to deter Rhodesia directly ; they had already threatened to expel Rhodesia 's representative from the British Embassy in Washington , with no effect . The only open course therefore had to be to take a firmer line with Portugal . Two days later , on 7 September , Wilson discussed the matter with Hughes and Stewart , and agreed with their conclusions , telling them to proceed . 
 = = = Meeting between Johnston and Smith on 8 September ; the appointment is confirmed = = = 
 The same day , Bottomley wrote to Smith , saying that he and Wilson were disheartened by the lack of progress regarding both independence and the Lisbon appointment . He was willing to visit Rhodesia personally , but could not come until October because he had to be in Blackpool to attend the Labour Party Conference , due to commence on 26 September . The next morning , on 8 September , Johnston told Smith that if Reedman proceeded to Portugal in open disregard for Britain 's wishes , it would negatively affect future independence negotiations . Rhodesia 's delay in justifying the appointment was also having a detrimental affect , Johnston asserted . Finally , he threatened to evict the Rhodesian envoys from Washington , Bonn and Tokyo if Rhodesia did not desist . Smith was yet again unmoved . Any procrastination regarding Lisbon was Britain 's fault , he insisted . He told Johnston to wait for the afternoon session in Rhodesia 's Legislative Assembly to hear Dupont 's official announcement of Reedman 's appointment , as well as the full Rhodesian explanation behind it . 
 Smith said he understood this would irk the British , but insisted that he and his government were no longer willing to wait . He had repeatedly offered to respect the judgement of an impartial arbitration team , he reminded Johnston , but the British had shot this idea down each time . He therefore felt compelled to follow the advice given by his own legal team , which was that the appointment was legitimate . His government would not accept a lesser appointment in Lisbon than in Pretoria and Lourenço Marques . He dismissed Johnston 's threat to expel the Rhodesian representatives in West Germany , Japan and America ; relations with Portugal and South Africa were far more important , he said , as they were Rhodesia 's two closest neighbours geographically . 
 Johnston protested that the British government could not take part in the kind of judicial enquiry Smith described , as its sovereignty could not be subject to any outside judgement and there was nothing to arbitrate anyway . Smith was again resolute : why , he queried , was Whitehall so adamant to avoid legal arbitration if its ministers were so sure they were right ? He promised to drop the matter if such a panel ruled against him , but to no avail . Johnston said only that he would telegraph Whitehall to inform them that Reedman 's appointment was imminent . Dupont confirmed it that afternoon , telling the Rhodesian Legislative Assembly that the mission had been accepted by Portugal . 
 = = = Britain <unk> NATO support against Portugal ; Lisbon insists it is neutral = = = 
 Meanwhile , Stewart and Ross argued with Nogueira and the Portuguese chargé d 'affaires in London , José Manuel de Villas @-@ Boas de Vasconcellos Faria . On 8 September , Nogueira said the Portuguese were accepting Reedman as a Rhodesian representative , but were not defining his status as they wished to remain neutral in what they regarded as an exclusively Anglo @-@ Rhodesian problem . So far as he could see , Nogueira said , Portugal had done no harm to British interests . Stewart firmly told Nogueira that Britain expected Portugal to make a statement within 24 hours saying that it would not deal with Reedman while he remained off the British Embassy staff . Nogueira replied that his government was not going to accord official diplomatic recognition to Reedman , and that Dupont understood this . Ross now threatened to involve NATO if Portugal did not thoroughly explain its conduct . Unmoved , Nogueira said this surprised him ; if the British were so keen to have Reedman on the staff at their embassy , he answered , that was down to them . Portugal was totally neutral in the affair , he insisted . 
 Britain vigorously rallied other NATO countries to take a stand against Portugal over Reedman . France warned that NATO pressure was unlikely to yield results in his matter , but Belgium 's NATO representative , André de <unk> , agreed to challenge Salazar on 11 September . At his meeting with de <unk> , Salazar denied that Portugal was giving Rhodesia its own diplomatic representation , and said there had been some misunderstanding . Portugal would not obstruct Reedman 's entry should he arrive , Salazar said , as he was travelling on a ( Rhodesian @-@ issued ) British passport . On 14 September , Nogueira 's ministry released a statement saying that if Britain challenged Portugal over Rhodesia at NATO , Lisbon would " use the greatest firmness to repel any attempt to attribute particular responsibilities or to make criticism of Portugal 's position " . 
 Britain raised the issue formally in the North Atlantic Council , NATO 's most senior political governing body , the same day . Here Portugal 's delegate , Vasco da Cunha , argued that given the standing existence of independent Rhodesian offices in Lourenço Marques , Pretoria and London , the matter was between Britain and Rhodesia , and not Portugal 's business . Rhodesia had simply asked to have Reedman head a representative office in Lisbon , and he would not present a letter of accreditation . If Rhodesia had exaggerated this , da Cunha said , that was not Portugal 's concern . The Italian , Belgian , Danish , French and U.S. delegates in turn sided with Britain , and collectively asked da Cunha to tell his government to publicly declare its non @-@ acceptance of Reedman while he lacked British approval . Da Cunha refused , saying this would only irritate his compatriots " because of the neglect by their allies of their interests in the past " . The meeting broke up without agreement . Whitehall was pleased with the pro @-@ British sentiment displayed therein , while Lisbon remained unmoved . 
 = = Appointment = = 
 = = = Reedman arrives in Lisbon and receives Portuguese approval = = = 
 Having spent the previous week in London , Reedman flew into Lisbon Portela Airport on 15 September 1965 . He was met there by the Portuguese Foreign Ministry 's assistant chief of protocol , Luis <unk> Bastos , and three Rhodesian officials , who had arrived a fortnight before . Nobody from the British Embassy was present . Bastos told a reporter that he was at the airport on Nogueira 's behalf to accord Reedman " the classic welcome for the arrival of heads of mission " . Speaking the next day , Reedman appeared genial and optimistic . " We [ Portugal and Rhodesia ] have everything in common , " he said , " including the will for survival , an awareness of the true situation overseas , and a greater feeling towards what we are doing . " 
 Two days later , Dupont announced that he had issued a letter of accreditation to Reedman for presentation to Nogueira . The envoy would not present credentials , Dupont explained , as he was representing the Rhodesian government , and not its head of state , Queen Elizabeth II . The Deputy Prime Minister expressed confusion regarding the appointment 's discussion at NATO , saying that Rhodesia was far outside the organisation 's geographical area of responsibility . He said that the letter of accreditation would confer on Reedman the title of " Accredited Diplomatic Representative " , and that Reedman would thereafter head the " Rhodesian Diplomatic Mission " in Lisbon , which would operate on the same level as the Rhodesian office in Pretoria . The Portuguese Foreign Ministry quickly issued a statement correcting Dupont 's wording , saying that Reedman would lead the " Rhodesian Mission " , with no reference to diplomatic status . 
 To Britain 's alarm and indignation , the Portuguese government announced on 21 September that Nogueira had accepted " a letter of introduction " from Reedman , conferring upon him the title " Chief of the Rhodesian Mission " , with powers to deal with the Portuguese Foreign Ministry in Luso @-@ Rhodesian matters without British interference . This followed the precedent set by Reedman 's counterpart in South Africa , the statement said . Speaking publicly in Salisbury the same evening , Dupont told reporters that there had never been any intention to claim ambassadorial status for Reedman , and that Rhodesia had constantly kept Britain informed of what was happening regarding the appointment . So far as he was concerned , he said , the Rhodesian government had achieved its objective of attaining an independent diplomatic representative in Portugal , and had not exceeded its mandate in any way while doing so . Britain protested strenuously , saying Portugal was going back on its word . Portugal insisted that its reception of Reedman and his Lisbon mission did not prejudice Britain 's responsibility over Rhodesia , and was justified because of the long @-@ standing ties between Portugal and Rhodesia , as well as their common involvement in many southern African issues . 
 = = = Rhodesia initiates clandestine arms purchases = = = 
 Reedman carried instructions from Salisbury to spend up to £ 3 million on European weapons , aircraft and equipment as soon as he could . The Rhodesian government now believed that it would almost certainly declare independence unilaterally and , knowing the purchase of materiel would be more difficult following this , wished to have the Rhodesian Security Forces ' necessary ammunition , weapons , spare parts and other equipment in place beforehand . Soon after arriving in Portugal , Reedman contacted the Lisbon @-@ based <unk> brothers , José , Luiz and Jean , who had recently supplied the Portuguese Armed Forces in Angola with British @-@ made weapons in direct contravention of NATO 's embargo against arming Portugal 's African @-@ based troops . The Zoios were interested in stocking Rhodesia 's arsenal , and promptly agreed to arrange an order of weapons from a third party on Reedman 's behalf in exchange for a letter of credit from the Rhodesian government . 
 Pretending their client was the government of Pakistan , the <unk> brothers contacted a licensed arms dealer from England , Major W R L Turp MBE of Bexley , Kent , who quickly agreed in principle , requesting a letter of credit from a Geneva bank and appropriate end @-@ user certificates for the weapons . Meanwhile , Reedman 's military attaché , Wing Commander John Mussell , travelled to Belgium to buy starter cartridges for the Rolls @-@ Royce Avon 109 jet engines used by the Royal Rhodesian Air Force 's English Electric Canberra bombers , as well as engines for Rhodesia 's Hawker Hunter jet fighters , which were produced in Belgium under licence from Britain . 
 = = = Reedman speaks on Portuguese state radio , 24 September = = = 
 On 24 September , Reedman appeared on Portugal 's state @-@ owned national radio station , <unk> Nacional de <unk> , addressing the Portuguese nation as " head of the Rhodesian diplomatic mission to Portugal " . He spoke along lines reminiscent of Smith 's speech to parliament on 30 June , saying the Afro @-@ Asian element " made a mockery of the Commonwealth " and enabled Chinese @-@ initiated communist encroachment into Africa . More than one Commonwealth member state hosted training facilities for black communist guerrillas , he said , which threatened all " civilised states in Africa " . He dismissed one man , one vote as false " trash democracy " , and said that in the present geopolitical climate countries run by black Africans inevitably destroyed themselves . " This your Rhodesian neighbour will not in any circumstances allow , " he pledged . " We [ Portugal and Rhodesia ] stand together in a common cause because of civilisation . " 
 Ross rebuked Nogueira for allowing the broadcast , saying its content was insidious and goading . Nogueira agreed that Reedman 's words were provocative , but said Portugal could not be blamed as it did not censor public broadcasts . Britain considered withdrawing Ross in protest , but its Foreign Office ruled this out , saying Britain could not afford to be without an ambassador in Lisbon to influence Portugal 's actions in the event of UDI . British Cabinet Secretary Burke Trend rejected this view , pointing to Lisbon 's conduct regarding Reedman , which he said showed the Portuguese " ha [ d ] very clearly made up their minds " to support a Rhodesian UDI . The British ambassador would not be able to affect matters , he surmised , and British interests would be better served by immediately taking a firm hand against Portugal , in the hope that this would send a strong message to Rhodesia . Ross then protested to the Portuguese about Reedman 's calling himself " head of the Rhodesian diplomatic mission " on the radio ; Lisbon replied impassively that this was a private expression of views by Reedman , and not Portugal 's responsibility . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Final steps to UDI = = = 
 While the British remained firmly against separate Rhodesian representation in Lisbon , there was little they could do to stop it . Ross was nominally put on extended leave , but not withdrawn . Deciding that he could no longer wait for Bottomley to fulfil his promise to visit Rhodesia during October , Smith resolved to instead meet with Wilson personally in London , and arranged to travel on 3 October , arriving the next day . While Smith prepared to travel , Britain continued its frantic efforts to curry international anti @-@ Rhodesian sentiment , among other things urging each NATO member government not to deal with Reedman . In London , Britons who sympathised with Smith came out to support him in large numbers , surprising both the British and the Rhodesians . The two Prime Ministers ' talks were largely unproductive , and little common ground was found before Smith flew home on 12 October . 
 Two weeks later , Wilson travelled to Salisbury to continue the talks . The British Prime Minister proposed that future black representation in the Rhodesian parliament might be safeguarded by the revocation of some of Salisbury 's self @-@ governing powers , held since 1923 . This was a horrific prospect in the eyes of his Rhodesian opponents , and proved the final straw for Smith 's government . The Unilateral Declaration of Independence was signed by the Rhodesian Cabinet on 11 November 1965 , to almost unanimous international acrimony . The next day the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 216 , which condemned the declaration as an illegal one " made by a racist minority " , and called on all member states to withhold diplomatic recognition . 
 = = = Portugal 's role in Rhodesian sanction @-@ busting = = = 
 Smith was confident that the British military would never agree to engage in what he said would be a " fratricidal war " against Rhodesia ; he was proven correct when a British Ministry of Defence council , convened by Wilson and headed by Denis Healey , determined such intervention " impossible " , citing various logistical problems , the danger of provoking a pre @-@ emptive Rhodesian attack on Zambia , and the psychological issues that would surely accompany any confrontation between British and Rhodesian troops . Wilson therefore put all his eggs in the sanctions basket , predicting in January 1966 that the embargo would bring Rhodesia to its knees " within a matter of weeks rather than months " . The UN embargo proved ineffective , largely because both Portugal and South Africa refused to participate . Both declared themselves neutral in the Rhodesian affair , and continued to supply Rhodesia with vital resources such as oil , both at a governmental level and privately . Portugal provided the seaports of Mozambique and the oil refinery at Lourenço Marques . Car stickers marked " <unk> <unk> " — " Thank You Mozambique " — quickly became popular with white Rhodesian motorists . 
 Clandestine trade with other nations continued , initially at a reduced level ; among other things , Portugal illicitly labelled unsold Rhodesian tobacco as Mozambican product , then sold it on Salisbury 's behalf in Europe and Asia . Through this and a series of similar sanction @-@ busting operations Rhodesia avoided the economic cataclysm predicted by Wilson , and , with the help of South Africa and Portugal , gradually became more self @-@ sufficient . Aiming to directly cut off the main supply lines of oil to Rhodesia , namely the Portuguese Mozambican ports at Beira and Lourenço Marques , Wilson set up the Beira Patrol , a Royal Navy squadron based in the Mozambique Channel , in March 1966 . This blockade was endorsed the following month by UN Security Council Resolution 221 . Too small to cover both Beira and Lourenço Marques , and unable to legally fire on tankers once they were in Portuguese waters , the patrol met with little success , but it endured regardless for nearly a decade . 
 The Zoios ' clandestine transaction with Turp initially progressed well , but fell apart in March 1966 , when Turp discovered he would actually be arming Rhodesia rather than Pakistan , reacted with alarm and informed the British government . The British Board of Trade tightened its control over arms transactions , and encouraged its NATO counterparts to do the same , while the Zoios turned their attention to Belgian , Italian and West German arms dealers . In October 1966 , a huge consignment of army and air force equipment arrived in Rhodesia from the seaports of Mozambique , with many of the containers bearing metropolitan Portuguese markings . Prominent among the European weapons were FN FAL battle rifles from Belgium , which allowed an unofficial Rhodesian trade delegation to operate quietly in spite of the sanctions . 
 = = = Carnation Revolution ends Luso @-@ Rhodesian cooperation = = = 
 Rhodesia 's Lisbon mission remained open throughout the late 1960s and early 1970s , providing a key link between the Rhodesian and Portuguese governments , which remained close . When Rhodesia adopted a republican constitution in 1970 , Portugal bowed to British diplomatic pressure and withdrew its consul @-@ general , João de Freitas Cruz , from Salisbury , but the Rhodesian office in Lisbon remained open . With the Carnation Revolution of 1974 , Portugal 's African policy was suddenly reversed . By contrast to the former authoritarian government , which had been committed to a <unk> Portugal , fighting costly wars against independence movements in its African territories to maintain it , the new leftist administration rapidly initiated moves to withdraw from Africa as quickly as possible . Following hurried negotiations between Portugal and the nationalist guerrillas in each territory , both Mozambique and Angola became independent under communist governments in 1975 . Lisbon 's stance on Rhodesia altered accordingly . The Portuguese government ordered the closure of the Rhodesian mission in April 1975 , and simultaneously withdrew its own remaining officials from Rhodesia . The Rhodesian mission in Lisbon formally closed on 1 May 1975 . 
 = Mortimer Wheeler = 
 Sir Robert Eric Mortimer Wheeler CH , CIE , MC , TD , FSA , FRS , FBA ( 10 September 1890 – 22 July 1976 ) was a British archaeologist and officer in the British Army . Over the course of his career , he served as Director of both the National Museum of Wales and London Museum , Director @-@ General of the Archaeological Survey of India , and the founder and Honorary Director of the Institute of Archaeology in London , further writing twenty @-@ four books on archaeological subjects . 
 Born in Glasgow to a middle @-@ class family , Wheeler was raised largely in Yorkshire before relocating to London in his teenage years . After studying Classics at University College London ( UCL ) , he began working professionally in archaeology , specializing in the Romano @-@ British period . During World War I he volunteered for service in the Royal Artillery , being stationed on the Western Front , where he rose to the rank of major and was awarded the Military Cross . Returning to Britain , he obtained his doctorate from UCL before taking on a position at the National Museum of Wales , first as Keeper of Archaeology and then as Director , during which time he oversaw excavation at the Roman forts of Segontium , Y Gaer , and Isca Augusta with the aid of his first wife , Tessa Wheeler . Influenced by the archaeologist Augustus Pitt Rivers , Wheeler argued that excavation and the recording of stratigraphic context required an increasingly scientific and methodical approach , developing the " Wheeler Method " . In 1926 , he was appointed Keeper of the London Museum ; there , he oversaw a reorganisation of the collection , successfully lobbied for increased funding , and began lecturing at UCL . 
 In 1934 , he established the Institute of Archaeology as part of the federal University of London , adopting the position of Honorary Director . In this period , he oversaw excavations of the Roman sites at Lydney Park and Verulamium and the Iron Age hill fort of Maidan Castle . During World War II , he re @-@ joined the Armed Forces and rose to the rank of brigadier , serving in the North African Campaign and then the Allied invasion of Italy . In 1944 he was appointed Director @-@ General of the Archaeological Survey of India , through which he oversaw excavations of sites at Harappa , Arikamedu , and Brahmagiri , and implemented reforms to the subcontinent 's archaeological establishment . Returning to Britain in 1948 , he divided his time between lecturing for the Institute of Archaeology and acting as archaeological adviser to Pakistan 's government . In later life , his popular books , cruise ship lectures , and appearances on radio and television , particularly the BBC series Animal , Vegetable , Mineral ? , helped to bring archaeology to a mass audience . Appointed Honorary Secretary of the British Academy , he raised large sums of money for archaeological projects , and was appointed British representative for several UNESCO projects . 
 Wheeler is recognised as one of the most important British archaeologists of the twentieth century , responsible for successfully encouraging British public interest in the discipline and advancing methodologies of excavation and recording . Further , he is widely acclaimed as a major figure in the establishment of South Asian archaeology . However , many of his specific interpretations of archaeological sites have been discredited or reinterpreted , and he was often criticised for bullying colleagues and sexually harassing young women . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood : 1890 – 1907 = = = 
 Mortimer Wheeler was born on 10 September 1890 in the city of Glasgow , Scotland . He was the first child of the journalist Robert Mortimer Wheeler and his second wife Emily Wheeler ( née Baynes ) . The son of a tea merchant based in Bristol , in youth Robert had considered becoming a Baptist minister , but instead became a staunch freethinker while studying at the University of Edinburgh . Initially working as a lecturer in English literature , Robert turned to journalism after his first wife died in childbirth . His second wife , Emily , shared her husband 's interest in English literature , and was the niece of Thomas Spencer Baynes , a Shakespearean scholar at St. Andrews University . Their marriage was emotionally strained , a situation exacerbated by their financial insecurity . Within two years of their son 's birth , the family moved to Edinburgh , where a daughter named Amy was born . The couple gave their two children nicknames , with Mortimer being " <unk> " and Amy being " <unk> " . 
 When Wheeler was four , his father was appointed chief leader writer for the Bradford Observer . The family relocated to Saltaire , a village northwest of Bradford , a cosmopolitan city in Yorkshire , northeast England , which was then in the midst of the wool trade boom . Wheeler was inspired by the moors surrounding Saltaire and fascinated by the area 's archaeology . He later wrote about discovering a late prehistoric cup @-@ marked stone , searching for lithics on Ilkley Moor , and digging into a barrow on <unk> Moor . Although suffering from ill health , Emily Wheeler taught her two children with the help of a maid up to the age of seven or eight . Mortimer remained emotionally distant from his mother , instead being far closer to his father , whose company he favoured over that of other children . His father had a keen interest in natural history and a love of fishing and shooting , rural pursuits in which he encouraged Mortimer to take part . Robert acquired many books for his son , particularly on the subject of art history , with Wheeler loving to both read and paint . 
 In 1899 , Wheeler joined Bradford Grammar School shortly before his ninth birthday , where he proceeded straight to the second form . In 1902 Robert and Emily had a second daughter , whom they named Betty ; Mortimer showed little interest in this younger sister . In 1905 , Robert agreed to take over as head of the London office of his newspaper , by then renamed the Yorkshire Daily Observer , and so the family relocated to the southeast of the city in December , settling into a house named Carlton Lodge on South Croydon Road , West Dulwich . In 1908 they moved to 14 <unk> Avenue in nearby Herne Hill . Rather than being sent for a conventional education , when he was 15 Wheeler was instructed to educate himself by spending time in London , where he frequented The National Gallery and the Victoria and Albert Museum . 
 = = = University and early career : 1907 – 14 = = = 
 After passing the entrance exam on his second attempt , in 1907 Wheeler was awarded a scholarship to read classical studies at University College London ( UCL ) , commuting daily from his parental home to the university campus in Bloomsbury , central London . At UCL , he was taught by the prominent classicist A. E. Housman . During his undergraduate studies , he became editor of the Union Magazine , for which he produced a number of illustrated cartoons . Increasingly interested in art , he decided to switch from classical studies to a course at UCL 's art school , the Slade School of Fine Art ; he returned to his previous subject after coming to the opinion that – in his words – he never became more than " a conventionally accomplished picture maker " . This interlude had adversely affected his classical studies , and he received a second class BA on graduating . 
 Wheeler began studying for a Master of Arts degree in classical studies , which he attained in 1912 . During this period , he also gained employment as the personal secretary of the UCL Provost Gregory Foster , although he later criticised Foster for transforming the university from " a college in the truly academic sense [ into ] a hypertrophied monstrosity as little like a college as a plesiosaurus is like a man " . It was also at this time of life that he met and began a relationship with Tessa Verney , a student then studying history at UCL , when they were both serving on the committee of the University College Literary Society . 
 During his studies , Wheeler had developed his love of archaeology , having joined an excavation of Viroconium Cornoviorum , a Romano @-@ British settlement in Wroxeter , in 1913 . Considering a profession in the discipline , he won a studentship that had been established jointly by the University of London and the Society of Antiquaries in memory of Augustus Wollaston Franks . The prominent archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans doubled the amount of money that went with the studentship . Wheeler 's proposed project had been to analyse Romano @-@ Rhenish pottery , and with the grant he funded a trip to the Rhineland in Germany , there studying the Roman pottery housed in local museums ; his research into this subject was never published . 
 At this period , there were very few jobs available within British archaeology ; as the later archaeologist Stuart Piggott related , " the young Wheeler was looking for a professional job where the profession had yet to be created . " In 1913 Wheeler secured a position as junior investigator for the English Royal Commission on Historical Monuments , who were embarking on a project to assess the state of all structures in the nation that pre @-@ dated 1714 . As part of this , he was first sent to Stebbing in Essex to assess Late Medieval buildings , although once that was accomplished he focused on studying the Romano @-@ British remains of that county . In summer 1914 he married Tessa in a low @-@ key , secular wedding ceremony , before they moved into Wheeler 's parental home in Herne Hill . 
 = = = First World War : 1914 – 18 = = = 
 After the United Kingdom 's entry into World War I in 1914 , Wheeler volunteered for the armed forces . Although preferring solitary to group activities , Wheeler found that he greatly enjoyed soldiering . For the next seven months , he was posted as an instructor in the University of London Officer Training Corps . It was during this period , in January 1915 , that a son was born to the Wheelers , and named Michael . Michael was their only child , something that was a social anomaly at the time , although it is unknown if this was by choice or not . In May 1915 , Wheeler transferred to the Royal Field Artillery ( Territorial Force ) and shortly thereafter was appointed captain . In this position he was stationed at various bases across Britain , often bringing his wife and child with him ; his responsibility was as a battery commander , initially of field guns and later of howitzers . 
 In October 1917 Wheeler was posted to the 76th Army Field Artillery Brigade , one of the Royal Field Artillery brigades under the direct control of the General Officer Commanding , Third Army . The brigade was then stationed in Belgium , where it had been engaged in the Battle of Passchendaele against German troops along the Western Front . There , he was immediately placed in command of an artillery battery , replacing a major who had been poisoned by mustard gas . Being promoted to the rank of acting major , he was part of the Left Group of artillery covering the advancing Allied infantry in the battle . Throughout , he maintained correspondences with his wife , his sister Amy , and his parents . After the Allied victory in the battle , the brigade was transferred to Italy . 
 Wheeler and the brigade arrived in Italy on 20 November , and proceeded through the Italian Riviera to reach Caporetto , where it had been sent to bolster the Italian troops against a German and Austro @-@ Hungarian advance . As the Russian Republic removed itself from the war , the German Army refocused its efforts on the Western Front , and so in March 1918 Wheeler 's brigade was ordered to leave Italy , getting a train from Castelfranco to Vieux Rouen in France . Back on the Western Front , the brigade was assigned to the 2nd Division , again part of Julian Byng 's Third Army , reaching a stable area of the front in April . Here , Wheeler was engaged in artillery fire for several months , before the British went on the offensive in August . On 24 August , in between the ruined villages of Achiet and <unk> , he led an expedition which captured two German field guns while under heavy fire from a castle mound ; he was later awarded the Military Cross for this action . Wheeler continued as part of the British forces pushing westward until the German surrender in November 1918 . He was not demobilised for several months , instead being stationed at <unk> in Germany until March ; during this time he wrote up his earlier research on Romano @-@ Rhenish pottery , making use of access to local museums , before returning to London in July 1919 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = National Museum of Wales : 1919 – 26 = = = 
 On returning to London , Wheeler moved into a top @-@ floor flat near Gordon Square with his wife and child . He returned to working for the Royal Commission , examining and cataloguing the historic structures of Essex . In doing so , he produced his first publication , an academic paper on Colchester 's Roman <unk> Gate which was published in the Transactions of the Essex Archaeological Society in 1920 . He soon followed this with two papers in the Journal of Roman Studies ; the first offered a wider analysis of Roman Colchester , while the latter outlined his discovery of the vaulting for the city 's Temple of Claudius which was destroyed by Boudica 's revolt . In doing so , he developed a reputation as a Roman archaeologist in Britain . He then submitted his research on Romano @-@ Rhenish pots to the University of London , on the basis of which he was awarded his Doctorate of Letters ; thenceforth until his knighthood he styled himself as Dr Wheeler . He was unsatisfied with his job in the Commission , unhappy that he was receiving less pay and a lower status than he had had in the army , and so began to seek out alternative employment . 
 He obtained a post as the Keeper of Archaeology at the National Museum of Wales , a job that also entailed becoming a lecturer in archaeology at the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire . Taking up this position , he moved to Cardiff with his family in August 1920 , although he initially disliked the city . The museum was in disarray ; prior to the war , construction had begun on a new purpose @-@ built building to house the collections . This had ceased during the conflict and the edifice was left abandoned during Cardiff 's post @-@ war economic slump . Wheeler recognised that Wales was very divided regionally , with many Welsh people having little loyalty to Cardiff ; thus , he made a point of touring the country , lecturing to local societies about archaeology . According to the later archaeologist Lydia C. Carr , the Wheelers ' work for the cause of the museum was part of a wider " cultural @-@ nationalist movement " linked to growing Welsh nationalism during this period ; for instance , the Welsh nationalist party Plaid Cymru was founded in 1925 . 
 Wheeler was impatient to start excavations , and in July 1921 started a six @-@ week project to excavate at the Roman fort of Segontium ; accompanied by his wife , he used up his holiday to oversee the project . A second season of excavation at the site followed in 1922 . Greatly influenced by the writings of the archaeologist Augustus Pitt @-@ Rivers , Wheeler emphasised the need for a strong , developed methodology when undertaking an archaeological excavation , believing in the need for strategic planning , or what he termed " controlled discovery " , with clear objectives in mind for a project . Further emphasising the importance of prompt publication of research results , he wrote full seasonal reports for Archaeologia Cambrensis before publishing a full report , Segontium and the Roman Occupation of Wales . Wheeler was keen on training new generations of archaeologists , and two of the most prominent students to excavate with him at Segontium were Victor Nash @-@ Williams and Ian Richmond . 
 Over the field seasons of 1924 and 1925 , Wheeler ran excavations of the Roman fort of Y Gaer near Brecon , a project aided by his wife and two archaeological students , Nowell Myres and Christopher Hawkes . During this project , he was visited by the prominent Egyptologist Sir Flinders Petrie and his wife Hilda Petrie ; Wheeler greatly admired Petrie 's emphasis on strong archaeological methodologies . Wheeler published the results of his excavation in The Roman Fort Near Brecon . He then began excavations at Isca Augusta , a Roman site in Caerleon , where he focused on revealing the Roman amphitheatre . Intent on attracting press attention to both raise public awareness of archaeology and attract new sources of funding , he contacted the press and organised a sponsorship of the excavation by the middle @-@ market newspaper the Daily Mail . In doing so , he emphasised the folkloric and legendary associations that the site had with King Arthur . In 1925 , Oxford University Press published Wheeler 's first book for a general audience , Prehistoric and Roman Wales ; he later expressed the opinion that it was not a good book . 
 In 1924 , the Director of the National Museum of Wales , William Evans Hoyle , resigned amid ill health . Wheeler applied to take on the role of his replacement , providing supportive testimonials from Charles Reed Peers , Robert Bosanquet , and H. J. Fleure . Although he had no prior museum experience , he was successful in his application and was appointed Director . He then employed a close friend , Cyril Fox , to take on the vacated position of Keeper of Archaeology . Wheeler 's proposed reforms included extending the institution 's reach and influence throughout Wales by building affiliations with regional museums , and focusing on fundraising to finance the completion of the new museum premises . He obtained a £ 21 @,@ 367 donation from the wealthy shipowner William Reardon Smith and appointed Smith to be the museum 's treasurer , and also travelled to Whitehall , London , where he successfully urged the British Treasury to provide further funding for the museum . As a result , construction on the museum 's new building was able to continue , and it was officially opened by King George V in 1927 . 
 = = = London Museum : 1926 – 33 = = = 
 Upon the retirement of the Keeper of the London Museum , Harmon Oates , Wheeler was invited to fill the vacancy . He had been considering a return to London for some time and eagerly agreed , taking on the post , which was based at Lancaster House in the St James 's area , in July 1926 . In Wales , many felt that Wheeler had simply taken the directorship of the National Museum to advance his own career prospects , and that he had abandoned them when a better offer came along . Wheeler himself disagreed , believing that he had left Fox at the Museum as his obvious successor , and that the reforms he had implemented would therefore continue . The position initially provided Wheeler with an annual salary of £ 600 , which resulted in a decline in living standards for his family , who moved into a flat near to Victoria Station . 
 Tessa 's biographer L.C. Carr later commented that together , the Wheelers " professionalized the London Museum " . Wheeler expressed his opinion that the museum " had to be cleaned , expurgated , and catalogued ; in general , turned from a junk shop into a tolerably rational institution " . Focusing on reorganising the exhibits and developing a more efficient method of cataloguing the artefacts , he also authored A Short Guide to the Collections , before using the items in the museum to write three books : London and the Vikings , London and the Saxons , and London and the Romans . Upon his arrival , the Treasury allocated the museum an annual budget of £ 5 @,@ 000 , which Wheeler deemed insufficient for its needs . In 1930 , Wheeler persuaded them to increase that budget , as he highlighted increasing visitor numbers , publications , and acquisitions , as well as a rise in the number of educational projects . With this additional funding , he was able to employ more staff and increase his own annual salary to £ 900 . 
 Soon after joining the museum , Wheeler was elected to the council of the Society of Antiquaries . Through the Society , he became involved in the debate as to who should finance archaeological supervision of building projects in Greater London ; his argument was that the City of London Corporation should provide the funding , although in 1926 it was agreed that the Society itself would employ a director of excavation based in Lancaster House to take on the position . Also involved in the largely moribund Royal Archaeological Institute , Wheeler organised its relocation to Lancaster House . In 1927 , Wheeler took on an unpaid lectureship at University College London , where he established a graduate diploma course on archaeology ; one of the first to enroll was Stuart Piggott . In 1928 , Wheeler curated an exhibit at UCL on " Recent Work in British Archaeology " , for which he attracted much press attention . 
 Wheeler was keen to continue archaeological fieldwork outside London , undertaking excavations every year from 1926 to 1939 . After completing his excavation of the <unk> amphitheatre in 1928 , he began fieldwork at the Roman settlement and temple in Lydney Park , Gloucestershire , having been invited to do so by the aristocratic landowner , Charles Bathurst . It was during these investigations that Wheeler personally discovered the Lydney Hoard of coinage . Wheeler and his wife jointly published their excavation report in 1932 as Report on the Excavation of the Prehistoric , Roman and Post @-@ Roman Site in Lydney Park , Gloucestershire , which Piggott noted had " set the pattern " for all Wheeler 's future excavation reports . 
 From there , Wheeler was invited to direct a Society of Antiquaries excavation at the Roman settlement of Verulamium , which existed on land recently acquired by the Corporation of St Albans . He took on this role for four seasons from 1930 to 1933 , before leaving a fifth season of excavation under the control of the archaeologist Kathleen Kenyon and the architect A. W. G. Lowther . Wheeler enjoyed the opportunity to excavate at a civilian as opposed to military site , and also liked its proximity to his home in London . He was particularly interested in searching for a pre @-@ Roman Iron Age oppidum at the site , noting that the existence of a nearby Catuvellauni settlement was attested to in both classical texts and numismatic evidence . With Wheeler focusing his attention on potential Iron Age evidence , Tessa concentrated on excavating the inside of the city walls ; Wheeler had affairs with at least three assistants during the project . After Tessa wrote two interim reports , the final excavation report was finally published in 1936 as Verulamium : A Belgic and Two Roman Cities , jointly written by Wheeler and his wife . The report resulted in the first major published criticism of Wheeler , produced by the young archaeologist Nowell Myres in a review for Antiquity ; although stating that there was much to praise about the work , he critiqued Wheeler 's selective excavation , dubious dating , and guesswork . Wheeler responded with a piece in which he defended his work and launched a personal attack on both Myres and Myres 's employer , Christ Church , Oxford . 
 = = = Institute of Archaeology : 1934 – 39 = = = 
 Wheeler had long desired to establish an academic institution devoted to archaeology that could be based in London . He hoped that it could become a centre in which to establish the professionalisation of archaeology as a discipline , with systematic training of students in methodological techniques of excavation and conservation and recognised professional standards ; in his words , he hoped " to convert archaeology into a discipline worthy of that name in all senses " . He further described his intention that the Institute should become " a laboratory : a laboratory of archaeological science " . Many archaeologists shared his hopes , and to this end Petrie had donated much of his collection of Near Eastern artefacts to Wheeler , in the hope that it would be included in such an institution . Wheeler was later able to persuade the University of London , a federation of institutions across the capital , to support the venture , and both he and Tessa began raising funds from wealthy backers . In 1934 , the Institute of Archaeology was officially opened , albeit at this point without premises or academic staff ; the first students to enroll were Rachel Clay and Barbara Parker , who went on to have careers in the discipline . While Wheeler – who was still Keeper of the London Museum – took on the role of Honorary Director of the Institute , he installed the archaeologist Kathleen Kenyon as secretary of the Management Committee , describing her as " a level @-@ headed person , with useful experience " . 
 After ending his work at Verulamium , Wheeler turned his attention to the late Iron Age hill @-@ fort of Maidan Castle near to Dorchester , Dorset , where he excavated for four seasons from 1934 to 1937 . Co @-@ directed by Wheeler , Tessa , and the Curator of Dorset County Museum , Charles Drew , the project was carried out under the joint auspices of the Society of Antiquaries and the Dorset Field Club . With around 100 assistants each season , the dig constituted the largest excavation that had been conducted in Britain up to that point , with Wheeler organising weekly meetings with the press to inform them about any discoveries . His excavation report was published in 1943 as Maidan Castle , Dorset . The report 's publication allowed further criticism to be voiced of Wheeler 's approach and interpretations ; in his review of the book , the archaeologist W. F. Grimes criticised the highly selective nature of the excavation , noting that Wheeler had not asked questions regarding the socio @-@ economic issues of the community at Maidan Castle , aspects of past societies that had come to be of increasing interest to British archaeology . Over coming decades , as further excavations were carried out at the site and archaeologists developed a greater knowledge of Iron Age Britain , much of Wheeler 's interpretation of the site and its development was shown to be wrong , in particular by the work of the archaeologist Niall Sharples . 
 In 1936 , Wheeler embarked on a visit to the Near East , sailing from Marseilles to Port Said , where he visited the Old Kingdom tombs of Sakkara . From there he went via Sinai to Palestine , Lebanon , and Syria . During this trip , he visited various archaeological projects , but was dismayed by the quality of their excavations ; in particular , he noted that the American @-@ run excavation at Tel Megiddo was adopting standards that had been rejected in Britain twenty @-@ five years previously . He was away for six weeks , and upon his return to Europe discovered that his wife Tessa had died of a pulmonary embolism after a minor operation on her toe . According to Tessa 's biographer , for Wheeler this discovery was " the peak of mental misery , and marked the end of his ability to feel a certain kind of love " . That winter , his father also died . By the summer of 1937 , he had embarked on a new romance , with a young woman named Mavis de Vere Cole , who had first met Wheeler when visiting the Maidan Castle excavations with her then @-@ lover , the painter Augustus John . After she eventually agreed to his repeated requests for marriage , the two were wedded early in 1939 in a ceremony held at Caxton Hall , with a reception at Shelley House . They proceeded on a honeymoon to the Middle East . 
 After a search that had taken several years , Wheeler was able to secure a premises for the Institute of Archaeology : St. John 's Lodge in Regent 's Park , central London . Left empty since its use as a hospital during the First World War , the building was owned by the Crown and was controlled by the First Commissioner of Works , William Ormsby @-@ Gore ; he was very sympathetic to archaeology , and leased the building to the Institute at a low rent . The St. John 's Lodge premises were officially opened on 29 April 1937 . During his speech at the ceremony , the University of London 's Vice @-@ Chancellor Charles Reed Peers made it clear that the building was only intended as a temporary home for the Institute , which it was hoped would be able to move to Bloomsbury , the city 's academic hub . In his speech , the university 's Chancellor , Alexander Cambridge , 1st Earl of Athlone , compared the new institution to both the Institute of Historical Research and the Courtauld Institute of Art . 
 Wheeler had also become President of the Museums Association , and in a presidential address given in Belfast talked on the topic of preserving museum collections in war time , believing that Britain 's involvement in a second European conflict was imminent . In anticipation of this event , in August 1939 he arranged for the London Museum to place many of its most important collections into safe keeping . He was also awarded an honorary doctorate from Bristol University , and at the award ceremony met the Conservative Party politician Winston Churchill , who was then engaged in writing his multi @-@ volume A History of the English @-@ Speaking Peoples ; Churchill asked Wheeler to aid him in writing about late prehistoric and early medieval Britain , to which the latter agreed . 
 After Maidan Castle , Wheeler turned his attention to France , where the archaeological investigation of Iron Age sites had lagged behind developments in Britain . There , he oversaw a series of surveys and excavations with the aid of Leslie Scott , beginning with a survey tour of Brittany in the winter of 1936 – 37 . After this , Wheeler decided to excavate the oppidum at Camp d <unk> , near <unk> , Finistère . In addition to bringing many British archaeologists to work on the site , he hired six local Breton workmen to assist the project , coming to the belief that the oppidum had been erected by local Iron Age tribes to defend themselves from the Roman invasion led by Julius Caesar . Meanwhile , Scott had been placed in charge of an excavation at the smaller nearby hill fort of <unk> , near Quimper . In July 1939 , the project focused its attention on Normandy , with excavations beginning at the Iron Age hill forts of Camp de Canada and <unk> . They were brought to an abrupt halt in September 1939 as the Second World War broke out in Europe , and the team evacuated back to Britain . Wheeler 's excavation report , co @-@ written with Katherine Richardson , was eventually published as Hill @-@ forts of Northern France in 1957 . 
 = = = Second World War : 1939 – 45 = = = 
 Wheeler had been expecting and openly hoping for war with Nazi Germany for a year prior to the outbreak of hostilities ; he believed that the United Kingdom 's involvement in the conflict would remedy the shame that he thought had been brought upon the country by its signing of the Munich Agreement in September 1938 . Volunteering for the armed services , he was assigned to assemble the 48th Light Anti @-@ Aircraft Battery at Enfield , where he set about recruiting volunteers , including his son . As the 48th swelled in size , it was converted into the 42nd Mobile Light Anti @-@ Aircraft Regiment in the Royal Artillery , which consisted of four batteries and was led by Wheeler – now promoted to the rank of colonel – as Commanding Officer . Given the nickname of " Flash Alf " by those serving under him , he was recognised by colleagues as a ruthless disciplinarian and was blamed by many for the death of one of his soldiers from influenza during training . Having been appointed secretary of the Society of Antiquaries in 1939 and then director in 1940 , he travelled to London to deal with society affairs on various occasions . In 1941 Wheeler was awarded a Fellowship of the British Academy . Cole had meanwhile entered into an affair with a man named Clive Entwistle , who lambasted Wheeler as " that whiskered baboon " . When Wheeler discovered Entwistle in bed with his wife , he initiated divorce proceedings that were finalised in March 1942 . 
 In the summer of 1941 , Wheeler and three of his batteries were assigned to fight against German and Italian forces in the North African Campaign . In September , they set sail from Glasgow aboard the RMS Empress of Russia ; because the Mediterranean was controlled largely by enemy naval forces , they were forced to travel via the Cape of Good Hope , before taking shore leave in Durban . There , Wheeler visited the local kraals to compare them with the settlements of Iron Age Britain . The ship docked in Aden , where Wheeler and his men again took shore leave . They soon reached the British @-@ controlled Suez , where they disembarked and were stationed on the shores of the Great Bitter Lake . There , Wheeler took a brief leave of absence to travel to Jerusalem , where he visited Petrie on his hospital deathbed . Back in Egypt , he gained permission to fly as a front gunner in a Wellington bomber on a bombing raid against Axis forces , to better understand what it was like for aircrew to be fired on by an anti @-@ aircraft battery . 
 Serving with the Eighth Army , Wheeler was present in North Africa when the Axis armies pushed the Allies back to El Alamein . He was also part of the Allied counter @-@ push , taking part in the Second Battle of El Alamein and the advance on Axis @-@ held Tripoli . On the way he became concerned that the archaeological sites of North Africa were being threatened both by the fighting and the occupying forces . After the British secured control of Libya , Wheeler visited Tripoli and Leptis Magna , where he found that Roman remains had been damaged and vandalised by British troops ; he brought about reforms to prevent this , lecturing to the troops on the importance of preserving archaeology , making many monuments out @-@ of @-@ bounds , and ensuring that the Royal Air Force changed its plans to construct a radar station in the midst of a Roman settlement . Aware that the British were planning to invade and occupy the Italian island of Sicily , he insisted that measures be introduced to preserve the historic and archaeological monuments on the island . 
 Promoted to the rank of brigadier , after the German surrender in North Africa , Wheeler was sent to Algiers where he was part of the staff committee planning the invasion of Italy . There , he learned that the India Office had requested that the army relieve him of his duties to permit him to be appointed Director General of Archaeology in India . Although he had never been to the country , he agreed that he would take the job on the condition that he be permitted to take part in the invasion of Italy first . As intended , Wheeler and his 12th Anti @-@ Aircraft Brigade then took part in the invasion of Sicily and then mainland Italy , where they were ordered to use their anti @-@ aircraft guns to protect the British 10th Corps . As the Allies advanced north through Italy , Wheeler spent time in Naples and then Capri , where he met various aristocrats who had anti @-@ fascist sympathies . 
 Wheeler left Italy in November 1943 and returned to London . There , he resigned as the director of the London Museum and focused on organising the Institute of Archaeology , preparing it for its adoption of a new director , V. Gordon Childe , after the war . He also resigned as director of the Society of Antiquaries , but was appointed the group 's representative to the newly formed Council for British Archaeology . He developed a relationship with a woman named Kim Collingridge , and asked her to marry him . As she was a devout Roman Catholic , he officially converted to the religion , something which shocked many of his friends , who believed that he was being dishonest because he did not genuinely believe in the doctrines of the faith . He then set sail for Bombay aboard a transport ship , the City of Exeter , in February 1944 . 
 = = = Archaeological Survey of India : 1944 – 48 = = = 
 Wheeler arrived in Bombay in the spring of 1944 . There , he was welcomed by the city 's governor , John Colville , before heading by train to Delhi and then Simla , where the headquarters of the Archaeological Survey of India were located . Wheeler had been suggested for the job by Archibald Wavell , the Viceroy of India , who had been acting on the recommendations of the archaeologist Leonard Woolley , who had authored a report lamenting the state of the archaeological establishment in the British @-@ controlled subcontinent . Wheeler recognised this state of affairs , in a letter to a friend complaining about the lack of finances and equipment , commenting that " We 're back in 1850 " . He initially found much to dislike in India , and in his letters to friends in Britain expressed derogatory and racist sentiments toward Indians : he stated that " they feed wrongly and think wrongly and live wrongly ... I already find myself regarding them as ill @-@ made clockwork toys rather than as human beings , and I find myself bullying them most brutally . " He expelled those staff members whom he deemed too idle , and physically beat others in an attempt to motivate them . 
 From the beginning of his tenure , he sought to distance himself from previous Director @-@ Generals and their administrations by criticising them in print and attempting to introduce new staff who had no loyalty to his predecessors . Assigned with a four @-@ year contract , Wheeler attempted to recruit two archaeologists from Britain , Glyn Daniel and Stuart Piggott , to aid him in reforming the Archaeological Survey , although they declined the offer . He then toured the subcontinent , seeking to meet all of the Survey 's staff members . He had drawn up a prospectus containing research questions that he wanted the Survey to focus on ; these included understanding the period between the Bronze Age Indus Valley Civilization and the Achaemenid Empire , discerning the socio @-@ cultural background to the Vedas , dating the Aryan invasion , and establishing a dating system for southern India prior to the sixth century CE . During his time in office he also achieved a 25 per cent budget increase for the Archaeological Survey , and convinced the government to agree to the construction of a National Museum of Archaeology , to be built in New Delhi . 
 In October 1944 , he opened his six @-@ month archaeological field school in Taxila , where he instructed various students from across India in the methodologies of the discipline . Wheeler became very fond of his students , with one of them , B. B. Lal , later commenting that " behind the gruff exterior , Sir Mortimer had a very kind and sympathetic heart " . Throughout his period in India , his students were some of the only individuals to whom Wheeler warmed ; more widely , he was annoyed by what he saw as the idleness , incompetence and corruption of Indian society . Initially focusing on the northwest of the subcontinent , Wheeler was particularly fascinated by the Bronze Age Indus Valley Civilization . On his initial inspection of the Indus Valley sites of Mohenjo @-@ daro and Harappa , he organised a very brief excavation which revealed fortifications around both settlements . He later led a more detailed excavation at Harappa , where he exposed further fortifications and established a stratigraphy for the settlement . 
 Turning his attention to southern India , Wheeler discovered remnants of a Roman amphora in a museum , and began excavations at Arikamedu , revealing a port from the first century CE which had traded in goods from the Roman Empire . The excavation had been plagued by severe rains and tropical heat , although it was during the excavation that World War II ended ; in celebration , Wheeler gave all his workers an extra rupee for the day . It has since been alleged that while Wheeler took credit for discovering the significance of this site , it had previously been established by A. <unk> , the Superintendent of the Government Museum in Madras , and the French archaeologist Jouveau Dubreuil , with Wheeler intentionally ignoring their contribution . He later undertook excavations of six megalithic tombs in Brahmagiri , Mysore , which enabled him to gain a chronology for the archaeology of much of southern India . 
 Wheeler established a new archaeological journal , Ancient India , planning for it to be published twice a year . He had trouble securing printing paper and faced various delays ; the first issue was released in January 1946 , and he would release three further volumes during his stay . Wheeler married Kim Collingridge in Simla , before he and his wife took part in an Indian Cultural Mission to Iran . The Indian government had deemed Wheeler ideal to lead the group , which departed via train to <unk> before visiting Persepolis , Tehran , Isfahan , Shiraz , Pasargadae , and Kashan . Wheeler enjoyed the trip , and was envious of Tehran 's archaeological museum and library , which was far in advance of anything then found in India . Crossing into Iraq , in Baghdad the team caught a flight back to Delhi . In 1946 , he was involved in a second cultural mission , this time to Afghanistan , where he expressed a particular interest in the kingdom of ancient Bactria and visited the archaeology of Balkh . 
 Wheeler was present during the 1947 Partition of India into the Dominion of Pakistan and the Union of India and the accompanying ethnic violence between Hindu and Muslim communities . He was unhappy with how these events had affected the Archaeological Survey , complaining that some of his finest students and staff were now citizens of Pakistan and no longer able to work for him . He was based in New Delhi when the city was rocked by sectarian violence , and attempted to help many of his Muslim staff members escape from the Hindu @-@ majority city unharmed . He further helped smuggle Muslim families out of the city hospital , where they had taken refuge from a violent Hindu mob . As India neared independence from the British Empire , the political situation had changed significantly ; by October 1947 he was one of the last British individuals in a high @-@ up position within the country 's governing establishment , and recognised that many Indian nationalists wanted him to also leave . 
 As their relationship had become increasingly strained , his wife had left and returned to Britain . Although hoping to leave his post in India several months early , he was concerned for his economic prospects , and desperately searched for a new job position . Through friends in the British archaeological community , he was offered a job as the Secretary of the Royal Commission on Ancient Monuments for Wales , although he was upset that this would mean a drop in his professional status and income and decided to turn it down . Instead , he agreed to take up a chair in the Archaeology of the Roman Provinces at the Institute of Archaeology . In addition , the Pakistani Minister of Education invited him to become the Archaeological Adviser to the Pakistani government ; he agreed to also take up this position , on the condition that he would only spend several months in the country each year over the next three . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Between Britain and Pakistan : 1948 – 52 = = = 
 Returning to London , Wheeler moved into the Hallam Street flat where his son and daughter @-@ in @-@ law were living . Wheeler and the latter disliked each other , and so in summer 1950 he moved out and began renting an apartment in Mount Street . A year later he moved into his wife 's house in Mallord Street , in an unsuccessful hope of reigniting their relationship . Taking up his part @-@ time professorship at the Institute of Archaeology , he began to lecture to students almost every day . There , he found that he developed a relationship of mutual respect with the director , Childe , despite their strong personal and professional differences . In April 1949 , after the retirement of Cyril Fox , Wheeler was nominated for the Presidency of the Society of Antiquaries , but lost to James Mann ; many archaeologists , including Childe and O. G. S. Crawford , resigned from the Society in protest , deeming Wheeler to have been a far more appropriate candidate for the position . Wheeler was nevertheless elected director of the Society . In 1950 he was awarded the Petrie Medal , and in 1952 was knighted . That same year he was invited to give the Norton lectures for the Archaeological Institute of America , and while in the United States was also awarded the Lucy Wharton Drexel medal at Pennsylvania . He nevertheless disliked the country , and in later life exhibited anti @-@ Americanism . 
 Wheeler spent three months in Pakistan during early 1949 , where he was engaged in organising the fledgling Pakistani Archaeological Department with the aid of former members of the Archaeological Survey and new students whom he recruited . The Minister of Education , Fazlur Rahman , was sympathetic to Wheeler 's plans , and the government agreed to establish a National Museum of Pakistan in Karachi , which opened in April 1950 . Wheeler himself was appointed the first President of the Pakistani Museums Association , and found himself as a mediator in the arguments between India and Pakistan over the redistribution of archaeological and historic artefacts following the partition . He also wrote a work of archaeological propaganda for the newly formed state , Five Thousand Years of Pakistan ( 1950 ) . 
 To instruct new Pakistani students in the methods of archaeology , in early 1950 Wheeler ran a training excavation at Mohenjo @-@ daro ; there , he was joined by the British student Leslie Alcock , who spoke both Punjabi and Urdu and who was appointed a site supervisor by Wheeler . This excavation proved to be the only one for which Wheeler would not write and publish a full excavation report . Instead , he made reference to its findings in his book The Indus Civilization , published as part of the series The Cambridge History of India . His relationship with the Pakistani government had become strained , and so he declined to return to work for them for a third year . 
 Wheeler had been keen to return to excavation in Britain . Based on the one he had organised in India , Wheeler developed an archaeological training course , which he ran at Verulamium in the summer of 1949 to instruct British students in the methodologies of excavation . In summer 1950 , he was invited by the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments to direct a trial excavation at Bindon Hill in Dorset . It was a leisurely project which he treated as a seaside holiday . He was invited by the Ancient Monuments Department of the Ministry of Works to excavate the Stanwick Iron Age Fortifications in North Riding , Yorkshire , which he proceeded to do over the summers of 1951 and 1952 . Aided by many old friends and colleagues from within the British archaeological scene , he was joined by Alcock and Alcock 's wife , among others . Wheeler published his report on the site in 1954 . 
 In 1949 Wheeler was appointed Honorary Secretary of the British Academy after Frederic G. Kenyon stepped down from the position . According to Piggott , the institution had " unhappily drifted into senility without the excuse of being venerable " , and Wheeler devoted much time attempting to revitalise the organisation and ensured that Charles Webster was appointed President . Together , Wheeler and Webster sought to increase the number of younger members of the Academy , increasing the number of Fellows who were permitted to join and proposing that those over 75 years of age not be permitted to serve on the organisation 's council ; this latter measure was highly controversial , and though defeated in 1951 , Wheeler and Webster were able to push it through in 1952 . In doing so , Piggott stated , Wheeler helped rid the society of its " self @-@ perpetuating gerontocracy " . To aid him in these projects , Wheeler employed a personal assistant , Molly Myers , who remained with him for the rest of his life . 
 = = = Popular fame : 1952 – 69 = = = 
 In 1956 , Wheeler retired from his part @-@ time professorship at the Institute of Archaeology . Childe was also retiring from his position of director that year , and Wheeler involved himself in the arguments surrounding who should replace him . Wheeler vocally opposed the nomination of W.F. Grimes , deeming his career undistinguished ; instead , he championed Glyn Daniel as a candidate , although ultimately Grimes was selected . That year , Wheeler 's marriage broke down , and he moved from his wife 's house to a former brothel at 27 Whitcomb Street in central London . From 1954 to 1959 , he served as the President of the Society of Antiquaries , and after resigning supported Ian Richmond as his replacement ; however , Joan Evans was selected . From 1964 to 1966 he served as Chairman of the Ancient Monuments Board , stepping down when he concluded that he was too old for the role . In December 1963 , Wheeler underwent a prostate operation that went wrong , and was hospitalised for over a month . In November 1967 , Wheeler became a Companion of Honour , and in 1968 he became a Fellow of the Royal Society . 
 = = = = Media fame and public archaeology = = = = 
 Wheeler became famous in Britain as " the embodiment of popular archaeology through the medium of television " . In 1952 , Wheeler was invited to be a panelist on the new BBC television series , Animal , Vegetable , Mineral ? . Based on the American quiz programme What in the World ? , the show was hosted by Glyn Daniel and featured three experts in archaeology , anthropology , and natural history being asked to identify artefacts which had been selected from various museums . However , Wheeler is alleged to have prepared for the show by checking beforehand which objects had been temporarily removed from display . The show proved popular with British audiences , and would air for six more years . It brought Wheeler to public attention , resulting in a Television Personality of the Year award for him in 1954 . He also appeared in an episode of Buried Treasure , an archaeology show also hosted by Daniel , in which the pair travelled to Denmark to discuss Tollund Man . In 1957 , he appeared in a second episode of Buried Treasure , for which he travelled to Pakistan to discuss that nation 's archaeology , and in 1958 again appeared in an episode , this time on the site of Great Zimbabwe in Southern Rhodesia . In 1959 he presented his own three @-@ part series on The Grandeur That Was Rome , for which he travelled to Hadrian 's Wall , Pompeii , and Leptis Magna ; the show failed to secure high ratings , and was Wheeler 's last major foray into television . Meanwhile , he also made appearances on BBC radio , initially featuring on the John Irving series The Archaeologist , but later presenting his own eight @-@ part series on Roman Britain and also appearing on the series Asian Club , which was aimed primarily at newly arrived migrants from the Indian subcontinent . 
 From 1954 onward , Wheeler began to devote an increasing amount of his time to encouraging greater public interest in archaeology , and it was in that year that he obtained an agent . Oxford University Press also published two of his books in 1954 . The first was a book on archaeological methodologies , Archaeology from the Earth , which was translated into various languages . The second was Rome Beyond the Imperial Frontier , discussing evidence for Roman activity at sites like Arikamedu and Segontium . In 1955 Wheeler released his episodic autobiography , Still Digging , which had sold over 70 @,@ 000 copies by the end of the year . In 1959 , Wheeler wrote Early India and Pakistan , which was published as part as Daniel 's " Ancient Peoples and Places " series for Thames and Hudson ; as with many earlier books , he was criticised for rushing to conclusions . 
 He authored the section entitled " Ancient India " for Piggott 's edited volume The Dawn of Civilisation , which was published by Thames and Hudson in 1961 , before writing an introduction for Roger Wood 's photography book Roman Africa in Colour , which was also published by Thames and Hudson . He then agreed to edit a series for the publisher , known as " New Aspects of Antiquity " , through which they released a variety of archaeological works . The rival publisher Weidenfeld & Nicolson had also persuaded Wheeler to work for them , securing him to write many sections of their book , <unk> of the East . They also published his 1968 book Flames Over Persopolis , in which Wheeler discussed Persopolis and the Persian Empire in the year that it was conquered by Alexander the Great . 
 In 1954 , the tour company R.K. Swan invited Wheeler to provide lectures on the archaeology of ancient Greece aboard their Hellenic cruise line , which he did in 1955 . In 1957 , he then gave a guided tour of the archaeology of the Indian subcontinent for the rival tour company Fairways and Swinford . After Swans appointed him to the position of chairman of their Hellenic Cruise division , he made two fortnight tours a year , in spring and summer . In late 1969 he conducted the Swans tour to the Indian subcontinent , visiting the south and east of the republic as well as Ceylon . During this period , Wheeler had kept in contact with many of his friends and colleagues in India and Pakistan , helping to secure them work and funding where possible . 
 Wheeler had continued his archaeological investigations , and in 1954 led an expedition to the Somme and Pas de Calais where he sought to obtain more information on the French Iron Age to supplement that gathered in the late 1930s . Pakistan 's Ministry of Education invited Wheeler to return to their country in October 1956 . Here , he undertook test excavations at <unk> to determine a chronology of the site . In 1965 , he agreed to take on the position of President of the Camelot Research Committee , which had been established to promote the findings of excavations at Cadbury Castle in Somerset run by his friends Ralegh Radford and Alcock ; the project ended in 1970 . He also agreed to sit as Chairman of the Archaeological Committee overseeing excavations at York Minster , work which occupied him into the 1970s . Wheeler had also continued his work with museums , campaigning for greater state funding for them . While he had become a trustee of the institution in 1963 , he achieved publicity for vocally criticising the British Museum as " a mountainous corpse " , lambasting it as being poorly managed and overcrowded with artefacts . The BBC staged a public debate with the museum director Frank Francis . 
 = = = = British Academy and UNESCO = = = = 
 As Honorary Secretary of the British Academy , Wheeler focused on increasing the organisation 's revenues , thus enabling it to expand its remit . He developed personal relationships with various employees at the British Treasury , and offered the Academy 's services as an intermediary in dealing with the Egypt Exploration Society , the British School at Athens , the British School at Rome , the British School at Ankara , the British School in Iraq , and the British School at Jerusalem , all of which were then directly funded independently by the Treasury . Accepting this offer , the Treasury agreed to double its funding of the Academy to £ 5 @,@ 000 a year . Approaching various charitable foundations , from 1955 Wheeler also secured funding from both the Pilgrim Trust and the Nuffield Foundation , and in 1957 then secured additional funding from the Rockefeller Foundation . 
 With this additional money , the Academy was able to organise a survey of the state of the humanities and social sciences in the United Kingdom , authoring a report that was published by Oxford University Press in 1961 as Research in the Humanities and the Social Sciences . On the basis of this report , Wheeler was able to secure a dramatic rise in funding from the British Treasury ; they increased their annual grant to £ 25 @,@ 000 , and promised that this would increase to £ 50 @,@ 000 shortly after . According to his later biographer Jacquetta Hawkes , in doing so Wheeler raised the position of the Academy to that of " the main source of official patronage for the humanities " within the United Kingdom , while Piggott stated that he set the organisation upon its " modern course " . 
 To improve Britain 's cultural influence abroad , Wheeler had been urging the establishment of a British Institute of History and Archaeology in East Africa , touring East Africa itself in August 1955 . In 1956 the Academy requested £ 6 @,@ 000 from the Treasury to fund this new institution , to which they eventually agreed in 1959 . The Institute was initially established in Dar es Salaam in 1961 , although later relocated to Nairobi . Meanwhile , Wheeler had also been campaigning for the establishment of a British Institute of Persian Studies , a project which was supported by the British Embassy in Tehran ; they hoped that it would rival the successful French Institute in the city . In 1960 , the Treasury agreed , with the new institution being housed on the premises of the University of Tehran . He further campaigned for the establishment of a British Institute in Japan , although these ideas were scrapped amid the British financial crisis of 1967 . 
 Wheeler retained an active interest in the running of these British institutions abroad ; in 1967 he visited the British School in Jerusalem amid the Six @-@ Day War between Israel and its Arab neighbours , and in January 1968 visited the Persian institute with the archaeologist Max Mallowan and Mallowan 's wife Agatha Christie , there inspecting the excavations at Siraf . In 1969 he proceeded to the Italian city of Rome to inspect the British School there . That year , he resigned as Honorary Secretary of the Academy . The position became a salaried , professional one , with the numismatist Derek Allen taking on the position . 
 Recognising his stature within the archaeological establishment , the government appointed Wheeler as the British representative on a UNESCO project to undertake a programme of rescue archaeology in the Nile Valley ahead of the construction of the Aswan Dam , which was going to flood large areas of Egypt and Sudan . Personally securing UK funding for the project , he deemed it an issue of national and personal shame when he was unable to persuade the British government to supply additional funding for the relocation of the Abu Simbel temples . In October 1968 , he took part in a UNESCO visit to Pakistan to assess the state of Mohenjo @-@ daro , writing the project 's report on how the archaeological site could best be preserved . His involvement with UNESCO continued for the rest of his life , and in March 1973 he was invited to the organisation 's conference in Paris . 
 = = = Final years : 1970 – 76 = = = 
 During his final years , Wheeler remained involved in various activities , for instance sitting on the advisory panel of the Antiquity journal and the Management Committee of the Royal Archaeological Institute . In March 1971 , the archaeologist Barry Cunliffe and a number of his undergraduate students at the University of Southampton organised a conference on the subject of " The Iron Age and its Hillforts " to celebrate Wheeler 's eightieth birthday . Wheeler attended the event , whose conference proceedings were published as a festschrift for the octogenarian . In spring 1973 , Wheeler returned to BBC television for two episodes of the archaeology @-@ themed series Chronicle in which he discussed his life and career . The episodes were well received , and Wheeler became a close friend of the show 's producer , David Collison . 
 In the 1970s , Wheeler became increasingly forgetful and came to rely largely on his assistant , Molly Myres , to organise his affairs . Amid increasing ill health , in September 1973 he moved full @-@ time into Myres 's house in Leatherhead , Surrey , although he continued to use his central London flat during day @-@ trips to the city . There , he authored a final book , My Archaeological Mission to India and Pakistan , although much of the text was culled from his previous publications ; it was published by Thames and Hudson in 1976 . After suffering a stroke , Wheeler died at Myers ' home on 22 July 1976 . In memoriam , the British Academy , Royal Academy , and Royal Society flew their flags at half @-@ mast . Wheeler 's funeral was held with military trappings at a local crematorium , while a larger memorial service was held in St James 's Church , Piccadilly in November . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Wheeler was known as " Rik " among friends . He divided opinion among those who knew him , with some loving and others despising him , and during his lifetime he was often criticised on both scholarly and moral grounds . The archaeologist Max Mallowan asserted that he " was a delightful , light @-@ hearted and amusing companion , but those close to him knew that he could be a dangerous opponent if threatened with frustration " . His charm offensives were often condemned as being insincere . During excavations , he was known as an authoritarian leader , but favoured those whom he thought exhibited bravery by standing up to his authority . Hence , he has been termed " a benevolent dictator " . He was meticulous in his writings , and would repeatedly revise and rewrite both pieces for publication and personal letters . Throughout his life , he was a heavy smoker . 
 Wheeler expressed the view that he was " the least political of mortals " . Despite not taking a strong interest in politics , Wheeler was described by his biographer as " a natural conservative " ; for instance , during his youth he was strongly critical of the Suffragettes and their cause of greater legal rights for women . Nevertheless , he was " usually happy to advance young women professionally " , something that may have been based largely on his sexual attraction toward them . He expressed little interest in his relatives ; in later life he saw no reason to have a social relationship with people purely on the basis of family ties . 
 Wheeler was married three times . In May 1914 , Wheeler married Tessa Verney . Tessa became an accomplished archaeologist , and they collaborated until she died in 1936 . Their only child , a son Michael , was born in January 1915 ; he became a barrister . Following Tessa 's death , in 1939 , Wheeler married Mavis de Vere Cole , although their relationship was strained ; Cole 's diaries revealed that Wheeler physically hit her when she annoyed him . In 1945 Mortimer Wheeler married his third wife , Margaret " Kim " Collingridge , although they became estranged in 1956 ; they never divorced as a result of her devout Catholicism . Meanwhile , Wheeler was well known for his conspicuous promiscuity , favouring young women for one night stands , many of whom were his students . He was further known for having casual sex in public places . This behaviour led to much emotional suffering among his various wives and mistresses , of which he was aware . As a result of this behaviour , later archaeologist Gabriel Moshenska informed a reporter from the Daily Mail that Wheeler had developed a reputation as " a bit of a groper and a sex pest and an incredible bully as well " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Wheeler has been termed " the most famous British archaeologist of the twentieth century " by archaeologists Gabriel Moshenska and Tim Schadla @-@ Hall . Highlighting his key role in encouraging interest in archaeology throughout British society , they stated that his " mastery of public archaeology was founded on his keen eye for value and a showman 's willingness to package and sell the past " . This was an issue about which Wheeler felt very strongly ; writing his obituary for the Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society , the English archaeologist Stuart Piggott noted that Wheeler placed " great importance to the archaeologist 's obligation to the public , on whose support the prosecution of his subject ultimately depended . " 
 Piggott believed that Wheeler 's greatest impact was as " the great innovator in field techniques " , comparing him in this respect to Pitt @-@ Rivers . Piggott stated that the " importance of Wheeler 's contribution to archaeological technique , enormous and far @-@ reaching , lies in the fact that in the early 1920s he not only appreciated and understood what Pitt @-@ Rivers had done , but saw that his work could be used as a basis for adaptation , development and improvement . " L. C. Carr stated that it was for his methodological developments , oft termed " the Wheeler Method " , that Wheeler was best known ; in this she contrasted him with those archaeologists who were best known for their associations with a specific archaeological site , such as Arthur Evans and Knossos or Leonard Woolley and Ur . 
 Wheeler was well known for his publications on archaeological matters ; Carr stated that both Wheeler and his first wife emphasised " technical rigour and a full presentation of materials unearthed , as well as a literary discussion of their meaning calculated to appeal to a larger audience . " Focusing on Wheeler 's publications regarding South Asian archaeology , Sudeshna Guha noted that he " produced an assemblage of image @-@ objects that embodied the precision he demanded from excavation photography . " Mallowan noted that " Immediate and swift presentation of results was more important to him than profound scholarship , although his critical sense made him conscious that it was necessary to maintain high standards and he would approve of nothing that was slipshod . " Jacquetta Hawkes commented that he made errors in his interpretation of the archaeological evidence because he was " sometimes too sure of being right , too ready to accept his own authority " . She asserted that while Wheeler was not an original thinker , he had " a vision of human history that enabled him to see each discovery of its traces , however small , in its widest significance . " 
 Piggott claimed that Wheeler 's appointment as Director @-@ General of the Archaeological Survey of India represented " the most remarkable archaeological achievement of his career , an enormous challenge accepted and surmounted in the autocratic and authoritarian terms within which he could best deploy his powers as administrator and excavator . No other archaeologist of the time , it seems fair to remark , could have come near to attaining his command of incisive strategy and often ruthless tactics which won him the bewildered admiration and touching devotion of his Indian staff . " The Indian archaeologist Dilip K. Chakrabarti later stated that Wheeler 's accomplishments while in India were " considerable " , particularly given the socio @-@ political turmoil of independence and partition . Chakrabarti stated that Wheeler had contributed to South Asian archaeology in various ways : by establishing a " total view " of the region 's development from the Palaeolithic onward , by introducing new archaeological techniques and methodologies to the subcontinent , and by encouraging Indian universities to begin archaeological research . Ultimately , Chakrabarti was of the opinion that Wheeler had " prepared the archaeology of the subcontinent for its transition to modernity in the post @-@ Partition period . " Similarly , Peter Johansen praised Wheeler for systematising and professionalising Indian archaeology and for " instituting a clearly defined body of techniques and methods for field and laboratory work and training . " 
 On Wheeler 's death , H.D. <unk> of Deccan College , Pune , described him as " well known among Old World archaeologists in the United States " , particularly for his book Archaeology from the Earth and his studies of the Indus Valley Civilisation . In its 2013 obituary of the English archaeologist Mick Aston , British Archaeology magazine – the publication of the Council for British Archaeology – described Aston as " the Mortimer Wheeler of our times " because despite the strong differences between their personalities , both had done much to bring archaeology to the British public . However , writing in 2011 , Moshenska and Schadla @-@ Hall asserted that Wheeler 's reputation has not undergone significant revision among archaeologists , but that instead he had come to be remembered as " a cartoonish and slightly eccentric figure " whom they termed " Naughty Morty " . Carr described the Institute of Archaeology as " one of the [ Wheeler ] couple 's most permanent memorials . " 
 = = = Biographies and studies = = = 
 In 1960 , Ronald William Clark published a biography titled Sir Mortimer Wheeler . FitzRoy Somerset , 4th Baron Raglan reviewed the volume for the journal Man , describing " this very readable little book " as being " adulatory " in tone , " but hardly more so than its subject deserves . " In 1982 , the archaeologist Jacquetta Hawkes published a second biography , Mortimer Wheeler : Adventurer in Archaeology . Hawkes admitted she had developed " a very great liking " for Wheeler , having first met him when she was an archaeology student at the University of Cambridge . She believed that he had " a daemonic energy " , with his accomplishments in India being " almost superhuman " . Ultimately , she thought of him as being " an epic hero in an anti @-@ heroic age " in which growing social egalitarianism had stifled and condemned aspects of his greatness . 
 In the 2000 film Hey Ram , the lead character , Saket Ram ( played by Kamal Haasan ) and his friend , Amjad Khan ( played by Shah Rukh Khan ) are shown as employees of Wheeler , who was portrayed by Lewis K. <unk> , before the 1947 Hindu @-@ Muslim riots . In a 2003 volume of the South Asian Studies journal , Sudeshna Gusha published a research article examining Wheeler 's use of photography in his excavations and publications in the Indian subcontinent . In 2011 , the academic journal Public Archaeology published a research paper by Moshenska and Schadla @-@ Hall that analysed Wheeler 's role in presenting archaeology to the British public . Two years later , the Papers from the Institute of Archaeology issued a short comic strip by Moshenska and Alex <unk> depicting Wheeler 's activities in studying the archaeology of Libya during World War II . 
 = The One with All the Thanksgivings = 
 " The One with All the Thanksgivings " ( also known as " The One with the Thanksgiving Flashbacks " ) is the eighth episode of the fifth season of Friends . It first aired on the NBC network in the United States on November 19 , 1998 . In the episode , the main characters spend Thanksgiving at Monica 's ( Courteney Cox ) apartment and begin telling stories about their worst Thanksgivings : Chandler ( Matthew Perry ) learning of his parent 's divorce , Phoebe ( Lisa Kudrow ) losing arms in past lives and Joey ( Matt LeBlanc ) having his head stuck in a turkey . Rachel ( Jennifer Aniston ) reveals Monica 's worst Thanksgiving — accidentally cutting off Chandler 's toe after he called her " fat " in their first encounter . When Monica begs Chandler to forgive her , he accidentally reveals that he loves her . 
 The episode was directed by Kevin S. Bright and written by Gregory S. Malins . It guest stars Elliott Gould and Christina Pickles as Jack and Judy Geller , with a cameo appearance by Morgan Fairchild as Nora Tyler Bing . The idea was conceived by the writers , who suggested short stories about the " worst Thanksgivings ever " . A flashback approach was incorporated as the producers realized the audience responded well to it , despite concern the episode might be confused for a clip show . 
 In its original broadcast the episode reached a 16 @.@ 0 Nielsen rating and finished the week ranked second . The episode earned Debra McGuire a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Costume Design for a Series . Since airing , it frequently ranks high in polls about the series ' best episode . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Ross 's ( David Schwimmer ) complaint that his divorce and eviction means he is having the worst Thanksgiving ever prompts the others to tell their stories . Chandler ( Matthew Perry ) reminds everyone of when his parents told him they were divorcing . Phoebe ( Lisa Kudrow ) then tells of story from a past life when she was a nurse and lost an arm , though Ross objects , with the demand of only tales of present lives . Rachel ( Jennifer Aniston ) says she knows Monica 's ( Courteney Cox ) story , but Phoebe interrupts with a story about the time Joey ( Matt LeBlanc ) had a turkey stuck on his head . Monica tells of Thanksgiving 1987 . Monica and Rachel are eighteen years old and seniors in high school , and an overweight Monica spends time comforting Rachel , after Chip ended their relationship . When Ross learns of Rachel 's breakup , he asks Chandler to stay overnight in the hope of getting a date , but Chandler refuses , claiming that he doesn 't want to be stuck with " your fat sister " Monica . Overhearing the conversation from behind the door , Monica breaks down in tears and storms out . 
 Back in the present , Chandler apologizes to Monica . Rachel reveals that 's not the story she was referring to . The flashbacks continue to 1988 ; Ross and Chandler arrive for dinner to find that Monica has slimmed down , and Chandler now finds her attractive . Monica tells Rachel that she wants to humiliate Chandler for calling her fat , so Rachel suggests tricking him into taking off his clothes . Monica tries to seduce Chandler by rubbing various objects , including a knife , against her skin . She drops the knife and severs his toe . He is rushed to hospital to have it reattached but , in the commotion , Monica mixes up the digit with a carrot . In the present , Chandler becomes upset after learning that he had lost his toe because he called Monica fat , and angrily leaves . When Monica comes by his apartment seeking his forgiveness by putting a turkey on her head , he inadvertently tells her he loves her for the first time in their relationship . A tag scene shows another of Phoebe 's past life memories as she serves in a World War I field hospital and again lost an arm . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The One with All the Thanksgivings " was written by Gregory S. Malins and directed by Kevin S. Bright . It is the fifth Thanksgiving special in the Friends series . The producers knew from past recordings that the audience responded well to seeing " the Friends as they were " and decided to incorporate a flashback episode into a Thanksgiving special . Show creator David Crane considered the Thanksgiving @-@ themed episode as the " hallmark show " in each season . Marta Kauffman added dialogue centering on six characters being together in a room made the holiday special work . When discussing story ideas , the writers decided to create " a bunch of little pieces " , until someone suggested " what if it 's the worst Thanksgivings ? " , later used as the hook . Working on a flashback meant the episode needed " to have meaning " as the story continues in the present . It was difficult to keep the characters , particularly Chandler , spontaneously mad for something that happened " years ago " . The comedic content was bigger than usual , because Phoebe 's arm was blown off and Joey 's head stuck in a turkey . 
 Many scenes were shot in advance . The producers disliked filming beforehand as they preferred " the audience to tell us what 's good and what 's bad . " They also were concerned that a flashback episode would be mistaken for a clip show , but felt it would be believable because they were " flashing so far back into the past . " According to Kauffman , certain scenes filmed in the apartment were shot in advance because " it was all over the place " ; the cast were tired and full and their energy levels were low . Special effects and costume changes meant " three or four scenes " were also pre @-@ shot to ensure the dialogue was happening in front of the audience . This was completed in two days . 
 Elliott Gould and Christina Pickles reprised their roles as Jack and Judy Geller . The set for the Geller house was used previously in " The One Where Joey Moves Out " , for Jack 's birthday party and in the season seven episode " The One Where Rosita Dies " , when Ross and Monica visit their parent 's garage . The flashback in Thanksgiving 1987 was Monica and Chandler 's first meeting along with Rachel and Chandler . Bright commented that the show tries not to contradict itself ; " once we establish something , we try not to undo it . " In " The Pilot " it appears Rachel meets Chandler for the first time . She also meets him in a later flashback episode , " The One Where The Stripper Cries " . To excuse the continuity error , Bright adds they do not remember each other meeting because they look different . 
 A special rubber and foam turkey was created for Joey and Monica to place on their heads for sanitary and insurance reasons . A weaving , invisible to the audience , was placed in the middle of the turkey to allow the character to see . Chandler 's " flock of seagulls " hairstyle , mentioned in a previous episode , was based on the 1980s time period . For safety , the scene where Monica severed Chandler 's toe was pre @-@ shot . Originally the sound of a knife slashing through Chandler 's shoe was placed , but according to Crane it " got a little too graphic " . Dramatic music was dubbed over instead . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The inspiration for Phoebe 's character spurting blood was Dan Aykroyd 's Bass @-@ O @-@ Matic commercial on Saturday Night Live . In the sketch , Aykroyd plays a pitchman who sells a blender specifically designed to liquefy fish . He accidentally gets his hand stuck in the funnel , which causes it to be chopped off while blood sprays everywhere . The turkey stuck on Joey 's head is a reference to Act 4 in " Merry Christmas Mr. Bean " from Mr. Bean . Ross and Chandler 's costumes in 1988 were inspired by Miami Vice , which was popular at the time . The music used in Chandler 's accident was " The Murder " from Alfred Hitchcock 's Psycho . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing , the show finished second in ratings for the week of November 16 – 22 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 16 @.@ 0 , equivalent to approximately 15 @.@ 5 million households . It was the network 's second highest @-@ rated show that week , after ER , which aired on the same night . The episode premiered in the United Kingdom on Sky1 on February 25 , 1999 and reached 1 @.@ 88 million viewers which made it the most watched show that week . It aired on Channel 4 on August 27 , 1999 and was watched by 4 @.@ 40 million viewers making Friends the channel 's third @-@ highest rated program for the week ending August 29 , 1999 . 
 Entertainment Weekly rated the episode " B + " and called the " pre @-@ nose job " Rachel and " Fat Monica " great sight gags . It cited Joey 's line " It 's not so much an <unk> as it is a feat of engineering " ( in reference to a thong ) as the best of the episode . The authors of Friends Like Us : The Unofficial Guide to Friends wrote " This unusual episode is one of the series ' best ever , with the non @-@ stop comedy roller @-@ coaster suddenly throwing a brilliant surprise ending at you " . 
 Debra McGuire was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Costume Design for a Series , while the mixers were nominated for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy Series or a Special . The popularity of this episode placed it on one of the first Region 1 " best of " DVD releases . It was also released as part of Friends : The Complete Fifth Season in Regions 1 , 2 , and 4 . 
 In 2004 , " The One with All the Thanksgivings " was ranked fifth in a list of the top 10 Friends episodes by the Daily Herald and in 2010 , was identified as one of the five best Thanksgiving @-@ themed episodes by Contra Costa Times . 
 = Body piercing = 
 Body piercing , a form of body modification , is the practice of puncturing or cutting a part of the human body , creating an opening in which jewellery may be worn . The word piercing can refer to the act or practice of body piercing , or to an opening in the body created by this act or practice . Although the history of body piercing is obscured by popular misinformation and by a lack of scholarly reference , ample evidence exists to document that it has been practiced in various forms by both sexes since ancient times throughout the world . 
 Ear piercing and nose piercing have been particularly widespread and are well represented in historical records and among grave goods . The oldest mummified remains ever discovered were sporting earrings , attesting to the existence of the practice more than 5 @,@ 000 years ago . Nose piercing is documented as far back as 1500 BC . <unk> of these types have been documented globally , while lip and tongue piercings were historically found in African and American tribal cultures . Nipple and genital piercing have also been practiced by various cultures , with nipple piercing dating back at least to Ancient Rome while genital piercing is described in Ancient India c . 320 to 550 CE . The history of navel piercing is less clear . The practice of body piercing has waxed and waned in Western culture , but it has experienced an increase of popularity since World War II , with sites other than the ears gaining subcultural popularity in the 1970s and spreading to mainstream in the 1990s . 
 The reasons for piercing or not piercing are varied . Some people pierce for religious or spiritual reasons , while others pierce for self @-@ expression , for aesthetic value , for sexual pleasure , to conform to their culture or to rebel against it . Some forms of piercing remain controversial , particularly when applied to youth . The display or placement of piercings have been restricted by schools , employers and religious groups . In spite of the controversy , some people have practiced extreme forms of body piercing , with Guinness bestowing World Records on individuals with hundreds and even thousands of permanent and temporary piercings . 
 Contemporary body piercing practices emphasize the use of safe body piercing materials , frequently utilizing specialized tools developed for the purpose . Body piercing is an invasive procedure with some risks , including allergic reaction , infection , excessive scarring and unanticipated physical injuries , but such precautions as sanitary piercing procedures and careful aftercare are emphasized to minimize the likelihood of encountering serious problems . The healing time required for a body piercing may vary widely according to placement , from as little as a month for some genital piercings to as much as two full years for the navel . 
 = = History = = 
 Body adornment has only recently become a subject of serious scholarly research by archaeologists , who have been hampered in studying body piercing by a sparsity of primary sources . Early records rarely discussed the use of piercings or their meaning , and while jewellery is common among grave goods , the deterioration of the flesh that it once adorned makes it difficult to discern how the jewellery may have been used . Also , the modern record has been vitiated with the 20th @-@ century inventions of piercing enthusiast Doug Malloy . In the 1960s and 1970s , Malloy marketed contemporary body piercing by giving it the patina of history . His pamphlet Body & Genital Piercing in Brief included such commonly reproduced urban legends as the notion that Prince Albert invented the piercing that shares his name in order to diminish the appearance of his large penis in tight trousers , and that Roman centurions attached their capes to nipple piercings . Some of Malloy 's myths are reprinted as fact in subsequently published histories of piercing . 
 = = = Ear piercing = = = 
 Ear piercing has been practiced all over the world since ancient times . There is considerable written and archaeological evidence of the practice . <unk> bodies with pierced ears have been discovered , including the oldest mummified body discovered to date , the 5 @,@ 300 @-@ year @-@ old Ötzi the Iceman , which was found in a glacier in Austria . This mummy had an ear piercing 7 – 11 mm diameter . The oldest earrings found in a grave date to 2500 BCE . These were located in the Sumerian city of Ur , home of the Biblical patriarch Abraham . Earrings are mentioned in the Bible . In Genesis 35 : 4 , Jacob buries the earrings worn by members of his household along with their idols . In Exodus 32 , Aaron makes the golden calf from melted earrings . Deuteronomy 15 : 12 – 17 dictates ear piercing for a slave who chooses not to be freed . Earrings are also referenced in connection to the Hindu goddess Lakshmi in the Vedas . Earrings for pierced ears were found in a grave in the <unk> region between Russia and China dated between 400 and 300 BCE . 
 Among the Tlingit of the Pacific Northwest of America , earrings were a sign of nobility and wealth , as the placement of each earring on a child had to be purchased at an expensive <unk> . Earrings were common in the Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt ( 1550 – 1292 BCE ) , generally taking the form of a dangling , gold hoop . Gem @-@ studded , golden earrings shaped like <unk> seem to have been reserved for nobility . The ancient Greeks wore paste pendant earrings shaped like sacred birds or demigods , while the women of ancient Rome wore precious gemstones in their ears . 
 In Europe , earrings for women fell from fashion generally between the 4th and 16th centuries , as styles in clothing and hair tended to obscure the ears , but they gradually thereafter came back into vogue in Italy , Spain , England and France — spreading as well to North America — until after World War I when piercing fell from favor and the newly invented Clip @-@ on earring became fashionable . According to The <unk> of Abuses by Philip Stubbs , earrings were even more common among men of the 16th century than women , while Raphael Holinshed in 1577 confirms the practice among " lusty courtiers " and " gentlemen of courage . " Evidently originating in Spain , the practice of ear piercing among European men spread to the court of Henry III of France and then to Elizabethan era England , where earrings ( typically worn in one ear only ) were sported by such notables as Robert Carr , 1st Earl of Somerset , Shakespeare , Sir Walter Raleigh and Charles I of England . Common men wore earrings as well . From the European Middle Ages , a superstitious belief that piercing one ear improved long @-@ distance vision led to the practice among sailors and explorers . Sailors also pierced their ears in the belief that their earrings could pay for a Christian burial if their bodies washed up on shore . 
 = = = Nose piercing = = = 
 Nose piercing also has a long <unk> c . 1500 BCE , the Vedas refer to Lakshmi 's nose piercings , but modern practice in India is believed to have spread from the Middle Eastern nomadic tribes by route of the Mughal emperors in the 16th century . It remains customary for Indian Hindu women of childbearing age to wear a nose stud , usually in the left nostril , due to the nostril 's association with the female reproductive organs in Ayurvedic medicine . This piercing is sometimes done the night before the woman marries . 
 In Genesis 24 : 22 , Abraham 's servant gave Rebecca a nose ring . Nose piercing has been practiced by the Bedouin tribes of the Middle East and the Berber and Beja peoples of Africa , as well as Australian Aborigines . Many Native American and Alaskan tribes practiced septum piercing . It was popular among the Aztecs , the Mayans and the tribes of New Guinea , who adorned their pierced noses with bones and feathers to symbolize wealth and ( among men ) virility . The name of the Nez Perce tribe was derived from the practice , though nose piercing was not common within the tribe . The Aztecs , Mayans and Incas wore gold septum rings for adornment , with the practice continued to this day by the Kuna of Panama . Nose piercing also remains popular in Pakistan and Bangladesh and is practiced in a number of Middle Eastern and Arab countries . 
 = = = <unk> of the lip and tongue = = = 
 Lip piercing and lip stretching were historically found in African and American tribal cultures . Pierced adornments of the lip , or labrets , were sported by the Tlingit as well as peoples of Papua New Guinea and Amazonia . Aztecs and Mayans also wore labrets , while the Dogon people of Mali and the Nuba of Ethiopia wore rings . The practice of stretching the lips by piercing them and inserting plates or plugs was found throughout Pre @-@ Columbian Mesoamerica and South America as well as among some of the tribes of the Pacific Northwest and Africa . In some parts of Malawi , it was quite common for women to adorn their lips with a lip disc called a " <unk> " that by means of gradual enlargement from childhood could reach several inches of diameter and would eventually alter the occlusion of the jaw . Such lip stretching is still practiced in some places . Women of the <unk> of Ethiopia wear lip rings on occasion that may reach 15 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter . 
 In some Pre @-@ Columbian and North American cultures , labrets were seen as a status symbol . They were the oldest form of high status symbol among the Haida women , though the practice of wearing them died out due to Western influence . 
 Tongue piercing was practiced by the Aztec , Olmec and Mayan cultures as a ritual symbol . Wall paintings highlight a ritual of the Mayans during which nobility would pierce their tongues with thorns , collecting the blood on bark which would be burned in honor of the Mayan gods . It was also practiced by the Haida , Kwakiutl and Tlingit , as well as the <unk> and Sufis of the Middle East . 
 = = = Nipple , navel and genital piercing = = = 
 The history of nipple piercing , navel piercing , and genital piercing has been particularly misrepresented by printed works continuing to repeat myths that were originally promulgated by Malloy in the pamphlet Body & Genital Piercing in Brief . For example , according to Malloy 's colleague Jim Ward , Malloy claimed navel piercing was popular among ancient Egyptian aristocrats and was depicted in Egyptian statuary , a claim that is widely repeated . Other sources say there are no records to support a historical practice for navel piercing . 
 However , records do exist that refer to practices of nipple and genital piercing in various cultures prior to the 20th century . Kama Sutra , dated to the Gupta Empire of Ancient India , describes genital piercing to permit sexual enhancement by inserting pins and other objects into the foreskin of the penis . The Dayak tribesmen of Borneo passed a shard of bone through their glans for the opposite reason , to diminish their sexual activity . In the Talmud ( Tractate Shabbat <unk> ) , there may be mention of a genital piercing in the <unk> against the <unk> , which medieval French Talmudic commenter Rashi interpreted as a chastity piercing for women . Other interpreters have , however , suggested that the <unk> was rather a pendant shaped like a vulva or a girdle . 
 Nipple piercing may have been a sign of masculinity for the soldiers of Rome . Nipple piercing has also been connected to rites of passage for both British and American sailors who had traveled beyond a significant latitude and longitude . Western women of the 14th century sometimes sported pierced as well as <unk> nipples left visible by the low @-@ cut dresses fashionable in the day . It is widely reported that in the 1890s , nipple rings called " bosom rings " resurfaced as a fashion statement among women of the West , who would wear them on one or both sides , but if such a trend existed , it was short @-@ lived . 
 = = = Growing popularity in the West = = = 
 By the early part of the 20th century , piercing of any body part had become uncommon in the West . After World War II , it began increasing in popularity among the gay male subculture . Even ear piercing for a time was culturally unacceptable for women , but that relatively common form of piercing began growing in popularity from the 1960s . In the 1970s , piercing began to expand , as the punk movement embraced it , featuring nontraditional adornment such as safety pins ; and Fakir Musafar began popularizing it as a form of Modern Primitivism , which incorporated piercing elements from other cultures , such as stretching . 
 Body piercing was also heavily popularized in the United States by a group of Californians including Malloy and Ward , who is regarded as " the founding father of modern body piercing " . In 1975 , Ward opened a home @-@ based piercing business in West Hollywood , which was followed in 1978 by the opening of Gauntlet Enterprises , " the first professional body piercing specialty studio in America . " From it , Ward distributed the pamphlet which Malloy had written and Ward illustrated , disseminating much misinformation but stimulating interest in more exotic piercings . As word of body piercing spread to the wider community , Ward , Malloy and Musafar collaborated on launching the first publication dedicated to the subject , <unk> . 
 A significant development in body piercing in England occurred in 1987 , when during Operation Spanner , a group of homosexuals — including well known body piercer Alan <unk> — were convicted of assault for their involvement in consensual sadomasochism over a 10 @-@ year period , including acts of body piercing . The courts declared that decorative body piercing was not illegal , but that erotic body piercing was . Subsequently , the group Countdown on Spanner formed in 1992 in protest . The group appealed the decision before the High Court of Justice , the House of Lords and finally the European Commission of Human Rights , attempting to overturn the verdict which ruled consent immaterial in acts of sadomasochism , without success . In spite of their repeated failures , the situation publicized the issue , with The Times editorializing the court 's decision as " illiberal nonsense " in 1993 . 
 Body modification in general became more popular in the United States in the 1990s , as piercing also became more widespread , with growing availability and access to piercings of the navel , nose , eyebrows , lips , tongue , nipples and genitals . In 1993 , a navel piercing was depicted in MTV Video Music Awards ' " Music Video of the Year " , " Cryin ' " , which inspired a plethora of young female fans to follow suit . According to 2009 's The Piercing Bible , it was this consumer drive that " essentially inspired the creation of body @-@ piercing as a full @-@ fledged industry . " Body piercing was given another media @-@ related boost in 2004 , when during a Half @-@ time performance at Super Bowl XXXVIII singer Janet Jackson experienced a " wardrobe malfunction " that left exposed Jackson 's pierced nipple . Some professional body piercers reported considerable increases in business following the heavily publicized event . 
 Alongside traditional piercing techniques , modern body adornment includes variant techniques such as pocketing and flesh stapling , although as of 2007 these were still not widely made available by piercers . In the first of these , a scalpel opens the skin or mucous membranes , into which the larger end of a piece of jewellery or — if using a bar — two ends are inserted . These kinds of piercings may be difficult to remove , as fibrous tissue can form around the end or ends of the jewellery or the implanted tube into which the jewellery is placed . When a bar is used , pocketing looks quite similar to flesh stapling . The latter technique is frequently done in the form of a ladder . Modern body piercing practices also include dermal anchoring or dermal piercing , which combines piercing and implantation to create a single point of opening in the body ( whereas pocketing creates two ) to permit one end of the jewellery to show above the surface of the skin . While this technique can be performed almost anywhere on the body , as of 2007 it was popularly done between the eyes , on the chest , or on the finger , to simulate a ring . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 The practice of body piercing is subject to trends and fashions . Belly button and eyebrow piercings were popular during the 1990s when the piercing trend entered the mainstream . In recent years , the septum piercing and nipple piercing are considered highly fashionable . Additionally , the practice of ear lobe gauging or stretching has become popular with the turn of the century . 
 A 2005 survey of 10 @,@ 503 people in England over the age of 16 found that approximately 10 % ( 1 @,@ 049 ) had body piercings in sites other than the earlobe , with a heavy representation of women aged 16 – 24 ( 46 @.@ 2 % piercing in that demographic ) . Among the most common body sites , the navel was top at 33 % , with the nose and ear ( other than lobe ) following at 19 % and 13 % . The tongue and nipple tied at 9 % . The eyebrow , lip and genitals were 8 % , 4 % and 2 % , respectively . Preference among women followed closely on that ranking , though eyebrow piercings were more common than nipple piercings . Among male responders , the order was significantly different , descending in popularity from nipple , eyebrow , ear , tongue , nose , lip and genitals . 
 A cross @-@ cultural study published in 2011 found that individuals with piercings were likely to be involved in other forms of countercultural expression as well . 
 = = Reasons for piercing = = 
 Reasons for piercing vary greatly . A 2001 survey in Clinical Nursing Research , an international publication , found that 62 % of people who have had piercings have done so in an effort " to express their individuality . " People also pierce to commemorate landmark events or to overcome traumatic ones . According to the assistant director of the Frankfurt University Teaching Hospital for <unk> Medicine and Psychotherapy , some sexual abuse survivors choose body piercing as a means of " reclaiming body parts from memories of abuse " . Piercing can also be chosen for simple aesthetic value , to highlight particular areas of the body , as a navel piercing may reflect a woman 's satisfaction with the shape and condition of her stomach . Some people pierce , permanently or temporarily , to enhance sexual pleasure . Genital and nipple piercings may increase sexual satisfaction . Some people participate in a form of body play known as play piercing , in which piercings may be done temporarily on the genitals or elsewhere on the body for sexual gratification . 
 Piercing combined with suspension was historically important in the religious ceremonies of some Native Americans , featuring in many variants of the Sun Dance ceremony , including that practiced by the Crow Nation . During the Crow ceremony , men who wished to obtain visions were pierced in the shoulders or chest by men who had undergone the ceremony in the past and then suspended by these piercings from poles in or outside of the Sun Dance Lodge . Some contemporary Southeast Asian rituals also practice body piercing , as a form of spiritual self @-@ mortification . Generally , the subject attempts to enter an analgesic trance prior to the piercing . 
 Bridging the gap between self @-@ expressive piercing and spiritual piercing , modern primitives use piercing and other forms of body modification as a way of ritually reconnecting with themselves and society , which according to Musafar once used piercing as a culturally binding ritual . But at the same time that piercing can be culturally binding , it may also be a means of rebellion , particularly for adolescents in Western cultures . 
 A fifteen @-@ year analysis published in 2011 , Body Piercing and Identity Construction found that public piercing served as a mechanism of both accelerated camaraderie and political communication , while private piercings served to enhance sexuality and contest heteronormativity . 
 = = Piercing prohibitions and taboos = = 
 While body piercing has grown more widespread , it can remain controversial , particularly in youth . Some countries impose age of consent laws requiring parental permission for minors to receive body piercings . Scotland requires parental consent for youths below 16 , while in 2011 Wales began considering a similar law . In addition to imposing parental consent requirements , Western Australia prohibits piercing private areas of minors , including genitals and nipples , on penalty of fine and imprisonment for the piercer . Many states in the US also require parental consent to pierce minors , with some also requiring the physical presence of the parents during the act . The state of Idaho has imposed a minimum age for body piercing at 14 . 
 In 2004 , controversy erupted in <unk> , Indiana when a local high school featured a spread on " Body Decorations " in its yearbook that featured tattoos and body piercings of teachers and students . That same year , in Henry County , Georgia , a 15 @-@ year @-@ old boy remained in in @-@ school suspension for a full month for violating school policy by wearing eyebrow , nose , <unk> and tongue piercings to school before his mother decided to homeschool him . 
 According to 2006 's Tattoos and Body Piercing , corporate dress codes can also strictly limit piercing displays . At that time , Starbucks limited piercings to two per ear and jewellery to small , matched earrings . Employees of Walt Disney Parks and Resorts were not permitted to display piercings at all . 
 Body piercing in some religions is held to be destructive to the body . Some passages of the Bible , including Leviticus 19 : 28 , have been interpreted as prohibiting body modification because the body is held to be the property of God . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints has taken an official position against most piercings unless for medical reasons , although they accept piercings for women as long as there is only one set of piercings in the lower lobe of the ears and no other place on the body . Wearing of very large nose rings on Shabbat is forbidden by the Talmud . 
 = = World records = = 
 Officially titled " Most Pierced Woman " , Elaine Davidson of Scotland holds the Guinness World Record for most permanent piercings , first setting this record in 2000 upon verification by Guinness judges of 462 body piercings , with 192 at the time being around her head and face . As of 8 June 2006 , her Guinness @-@ certified piercings numbered 4 @,@ 225 . In February 2009 , The Daily Telegraph reported that she had 6 @,@ 005 . The " Most Pierced Man " as of 2009 was Luis Antonio Agüero , who had 230 permanent piercings , with 175 rings adorning his face alone . 
 In January 2003 , Canadian Brent Moffat set the World Record for most body piercings in one session ( 700 piercings with <unk> surgical needles in 1 session of 7 hours , using play piercing where the skin is pierced and sometimes jewellery is inserted , which is worn temporarily ) . In December of the same year , Moffat had 900 piercings in 4 ½ hours . On 4 March 2006 , the record was overturned by Kam Ma , who had 1 @,@ 015 temporary metal rings inserted in 7 hours and 55 minutes . The record for most body piercings with surgical needles was set on 29 May 2008 , when Robert Jesus Rubio allowed 900 18 @-@ gauge , 0 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) -long surgical needles to be inserted into his body . 
 = = Contemporary piercing practices = = 
 = = = Contemporary body piercing jewellery = = = 
 Body piercing jewellery should be hypoallergenic . A number of materials are used , with varying strengths and weaknesses . Surgical stainless steel , niobium and titanium are commonly used metals , with titanium the least likely to cause allergic reaction of the three . Platinum and palladium are also safe alternatives , even in fresh piercings . Initial piercings should never be done with gold of any grade , as gold is mixed with other metals , and sterling silver is not a good alternative in a piercing , as it may cause allergies in initial piercings and will tarnish in piercings of any age . An additional risk for allergic reaction may arise when the stud or clasp of jewellery is made from a different metal than the primary piece . 
 Body piercing jewellery is measured by thickness and diameter / length . Most countries use millimeters . In the USA , the Brown & Sharpe AWG gauging system is used , which assigns lower numbers to thicker middles . 00 gauge is 9 @.@ 246 millimetres ( 0 @.@ <unk> in ) , while 20 gauge is 0 @.@ 813 millimetres ( 0 @.@ <unk> in ) . 
 = = = Piercing tools = = = 
 Permanent body piercings are performed by creating an opening in the body using a sharp object through the area to be pierced . This can either be done by puncturing an opening using a needle ( usually a hollow medical needle ) or scalpel or by removing tissue , either with a dermal punch or through <unk> . 
 Tools used in body piercing include : 
 The piercing needle 
 The standard method in the United States involves making an opening using a beveled @-@ tip hollow medical needle , which is available in different lengths , gauges and even shapes . While straight needles are useful for many body parts , curved needles are manufactured for areas where straight needles are not ideal . The needle selected is typically the same gauge ( or sometimes larger as with cartilage piercings ) as the initial jewellery to be worn , with higher gauges indicating thinner needles . The needle is inserted into the body part being pierced , frequently by hand but sometimes with the aid of a needle holder or pusher . While the needle is still in the body , the initial jewellery to be worn in the piercing is pushed through the opening , following the back of the needle . Jewellery is often inserted into the hollow end of a needle , so that as the needle pulls through the jewellery is left behind . 
 The indwelling cannula 
 Outside of the United States , many piercers use a needle containing a cannula ( or catheter ) , a hollow plastic tube placed at the end of the needle . In some countries , the piercing needle favoured in the United States is regarded as a medical device and is illegal for body piercers . The procedure is similar to the piercing needle method , but the initial jewellery is inserted into the back of the cannula and the cannula and the jewellery are then pulled through the piercing . More bleeding may follow , as the piercing is larger than the jewellery . 
 The dermal punch 
 A dermal punch is used to remove a circular area of tissue , into which jewellery is placed , and may be useful for larger cartilage piercings . They are popular for use in ears , though not legal for use by nonmedical personnel in some parts of the United States . 
 The piercing gun 
 The vast majority of women in the west have their ears pierced with a piercing gun . The safety of piercing guns , which were originally developed for tagging livestock , has been disputed . The Department of Health of Western Australia does not recommend their use for piercing body parts other than the lobes of ears , and the Association of Professional Piercers recommends that piercing guns not be used for any piercing , requiring members to agree not to use piercing guns in their practice . 
 Cork 
 Cork may be placed on the opposite side of the body part being pierced to receive the needle . 
 Forceps 
 Forceps , or clamps , may be used to hold and stabilize the tissue to be pierced . Most piercings that are stabilized with forceps use the triangular @-@ headed " Pennington " <unk> , while tongues are usually stabilized with an oval @-@ headed <unk> . Most forceps have large enough openings in their jaws to permit the needle and jewellery to pass directly through , though some slotted forceps are designed with a removable segment instead for removal after the piercing . Forceps are not used in the freehand method , in which the piercer supports the tissue by hand . 
 Needle receiving tubes 
 A hollow tube made of metal , shatter @-@ resistant glass or plastic , needle receiving tubes , like forceps , are used to support the tissue at the piercing site and are common in septum and some cartilage piercings . Not only are these tubes intended to support the tissue , but they also receive the needle once it has passed through the tissue , offering protection from the sharp point . Needle receiving tubes are not used in the freehand piercing method . 
 <unk> 
 <unk> is supplied by some piercers , particularly in the United Kingdom and Europe . The anaesthesia may be topical or injected . Piercers and other non @-@ medical personnel are not legally permitted to administer anaesthetics in the United States . 
 = = Risks associated with body piercing = = 
 Body piercing is an invasive procedure with risks . In a 2005 survey of 10 @,@ 503 persons over the age of 16 in England , complications were reported in 31 % of piercings , with professional help being necessary in 15 @.@ 2 % . 0 @.@ 9 % had complications serious enough to require hospitalization . 
 Some risks of note include : 
 Allergic reaction to the metal in the piercing jewellery , particularly nickel . This risk can be minimized by using high quality jewellery manufactured from titanium or niobium or similar inert metals . 
 Infection , bacterial or viral , particularly from Staphylococcus aureus , group A streptococcus and Pseudomonas spp . Reports at the 16th European Congress of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases in 2006 indicated that bacterial infections are seldom serious , but that ten to twenty percent of piercings result in local benign bacterial infection . The Mayo Clinic estimates 30 % . Risk of infection is greatest among those with congenital heart disease , who have a much higher chance of developing life @-@ threatening infective endocarditis , hemophiliacs and diabetics , as well as those taking corticosteroids . In 2006 , a diabetic woman in Indiana lost a breast due to an infection from a nipple piercing . Viral infections may include hepatitis B , hepatitis C and , potentially , HIV , although as of 2009 there had been no documented cases of HIV caused by piercing . While rare , infection due to piercing of the tongue can be fatal . Higher prevalence of colonization of Candida albicans was reported in young individuals with tongue piercing , in comparison to non @-@ tongue @-@ pierced matched individuals . 
 Excess scar tissue , including hypertrophic scar and <unk> formation . While piercings can be removed , they may leave a hole , mark or scar . 
 Physical trauma including tearing , friction or bumping of the piercing site , which may cause edema and delay healing . The risks can be minimized by wearing properly sized jewellery and not changing it unnecessarily , by not touching the piercing more than required for aftercare , and by being conscious of environmental factors ( such as clothing ) that may impact the piercing . 
 Oral trauma , including recession of gingival tissue and dental fracture and wear . Recession of gingival tissue affects 19 % to 68 % of subjects with lip and / or intra @-@ oral ornaments . In some cases , the alveolar tooth @-@ bearing bone is also involved , jeopardizing the stability and durability of the teeth in place and requiring a periodontal regeneration surgery . Dental fracture and wear affects 14 % to 41 % of subjects with lip and / or intra @-@ oral ornaments . 
 Contemporary body piercing studios generally take numerous precautions to protect the health of the person being pierced and the piercer . Piercers are expected to sanitize the location to be pierced as well as their hands , even though they will often wear gloves during the procedure ( and in some areas must , as it is prescribed by law ) . Quite frequently , these gloves will be changed multiple times , often one pair for each step of setup to avoid cross contamination . For example , after a piercer has cleaned the area to be pierced on a client , the piercer may change gloves to avoid <unk> the area with the gloves he / she used to clean it . Wearing sterile gloves is required by law for professional piercing procedures in some areas , such as the states of Florida and South Carolina . Tools and jewellery should be sterilized in <unk> , and non @-@ <unk> surfaces should be cleaned with disinfectant agents on a regular basis and between clients . 
 In addition , the Association of Professional Piercers recommends classes in First Aid in blood @-@ borne pathogens as part of professional training . 
 = = = The healing process and body piercing aftercare = = = 
 The aftercare process for body piercing has evolved gradually through practice , and many myths and harmful recommendations persist . A reputable piercing studio should provide clients with written and verbal aftercare instructions , as is in some areas mandated by law . 
 The healing process of piercings is broken down into three stages : 
 The inflammatory phase , during which the wound is open and bleeding , inflammation and tenderness are all to be expected ; 
 The growth or proliferative phase , during which the body produces cells and protein to heal the puncture and the edges contract around the piercing , forming a tunnel of scar tissue called a fistula . This phase may last weeks , months , or longer than a year . 
 The maturation or remodeling phase , as the cells lining the piercing strengthen and stabilize . This stage takes months or years to complete . 
 It is normal for a white or slightly yellow discharge to be noticeable on the jewellery , as the sebaceous glands produce an oily substance meant to protect and <unk> the wound . While these sebum deposits may be expected for some time , only a small amount of pus , which is a sign of inflammation or infection , should be expected , and only within the initial phase . While sometimes difficult to distinguish , sebum is " more solid and <unk> and has a distinctive rotten odor " , according to The Piercing Bible . 
 The amount of time it typically takes a piercing to heal varies widely according to the placement of the piercing . Genital piercings can be among the quicker to heal , with piercings of the clitoral hood and Prince Albert piercings healing in as little as a month , though some may take longer . Navel piercings can be the slowest to heal , with one source reporting a range of six months to two full years . The prolonged healing of navel piercings may be connected to clothing friction . 
 = = = Related media = = = 
 A chart comparing wire gauges likely to be encountered when making jewellery 
 A chart comparing O @-@ ring sizes ( Aerospace Specification series numbering ) to American gauge jewellery 
 = Eve Russell = 
 Eve Russell is a fictional character on the American soap opera Passions , which aired on NBC from 1999 to 2007 and on DirecTV in 2007 – 08 . Passions followed the romantic and supernatural adventures in the fictional New England coastal town of Harmony . Created by the soap 's head writer , James E. Reilly , Eve was played by Tracey Ross for the series ' entire run . In 2003 , Amanda Maiden and Kimberly Kevon Williams played Eve in flashbacks . 
 Eve , part of Passions ' Russell family , is introduced as the perfect wife of T. C. Russell and mother of Whitney and Simone . Eve 's desperation to conceal all evidence of her past relationship — and child — with Julian Crane leads to the breakup of her marriage and family , especially when her adoptive sister Liz Sanbourne arrives in Harmony and ruins Eve 's life for abandoning her first family . Later storylines focus on her on @-@ again , off @-@ again relationship with Julian and her search for their son , who is revealed as Vincent Clarkson despite long speculation by the show 's characters and media outlets that he was Chad Harris @-@ Crane . Ross and Johnson made cameo appearances as Eve and T. C. in the series finale of the NBC primetime drama Providence . At the end of the show , several props and costumes related to Eve were sold in an auction , along with other items from the show . 
 Ross 's performance was praised by fans and critics , while the character 's later storylines were negatively received by the cast . Eve and Julian , known by fans as " Evian " , were called " the Odd Couple of Passions " by Soap Opera Weekly and the actors ' chemistry was positively received by critics . Ross received eight nominations for the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Daytime Drama Series , winning at the 38th NAACP Image Awards . She has cited Eve as expanding the TV representation of African @-@ Americans and interracial relationships . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Ross was originally hesitant to audition for another soap opera after her stint on Ryan ’ s Hope as Diana Douglas from 1985 to 1987 , which she compared to " working in a morgue " because the show was constantly threatened with cancellation . Although NBC repeatedly contacted the actress about the character of Eve Russell over several months before her agent convinced her to audition for the role , she described Passions as " my kind of show " because of the supernatural and fantasy elements in the first week 's scripts . According to Ross , she did not realize that Passions was supposed to be " wacky " until the character Grace Bennett floated out her bedroom window . 
 Sheraton Kalouria , senior vice president of NBC ’ s daytime programming , said that the show ’ s racially diverse ensemble is represented by " the African American Russells and the Hispanic Lopez @-@ Fitzgeralds ... It ’ s truly color @-@ blind storytelling " . According to Ross , Eve was not defined by African @-@ American identity during her creation and casting : " If they wanted to make my character any other ethnicity they wouldn 't have to change a thing about her . I don 't know what else I could ask for . She 's just a person . " The actress cited the show 's racial diversity as a primary reason for her attraction to the role . Ross " felt tremendous support from NBC and Passions that the black characters and / or Hispanic characters are all essential parts of the story " . 
 Ross described Eve 's relationship with Julian Crane as an authentic representation of an interracial couple . She felt that Eve was not a " walking , living philosophical statement " about race relations , but instead was written as a fully realized person with her own story . Ross credited " the people who laid the groundwork for [ her ] " and allowed characters to be played other than " in a minstrel @-@ like way " ( similar to Ellen DeGeneres paving the way for Will & Grace ) for allowing a character like Eve to be created , and equated playing Julian and Eve 's love story to " playing Romeo and Juliet " . Passions was Ross ' first singing role ; the show primarily used " My Baby 's Gone " to symbolize Eve 's relationship with Julian . Eve and Julian 's relationship was seen positively by fans , who referred to the couple as " Evian . " TV Guide listed Eve and Julian as one of the best soap @-@ opera supercouples , praising the chemistry between Ross and Masters . Soap Opera Weekly referred to the pairing as " the Odd Couple of Passions " . Ross initially felt intimidated by playing a part of a supercouple , saying " [ i ] t means so much to me that I want to do it justice " . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Ross characterized Eve as " a contradiction inside an enigma " . She initially saw the character as easy to play ( " everyone 's best friend , and the town doctor , and a great mother " ) . The actress had a more difficult time when Eve began behaving in morally questionable ways to protect secrets about her past . She described that playing Eve was " as if somebody came and told you that your closest friend is doing abominable things " . However , Ross appreciated Eve 's characterization as a human being who " is neither all good nor all bad , [ who ] has strengths and weaknesses " . 
 Early in the show , the actress based her understanding of Eve on the character 's relationships with Grace and Ivy Winthrop ( Kim Johnston Ulrich ) . Ross described Eve 's love for Grace as " my rock in the sea " when the " difficult to play " Eve took extreme , illegal measures to hide her past . Following Ulrich 's interpretation of Ivy as valuing Eve as a confidant , Ross characterized Eve as respecting Ivy 's " ability to take charge " instead of " always tiptoeing around and walking on eggshells " . She viewed Ivy 's schemes to blackmail Eve as an attempt at a deeper connection ; as " the closest thing to a friend that Ivy had " , Eve interpreted their relationship as a desire for friendship . 
 In an interview with The Atlas Society , Ross discussed that her approach to Eve was inspired by Ayn Rand 's objectivism and called Eve 's willingness to " take any sacrifices you might be willing to make " a good example of Rand 's ideology . She compared Eve to Catherine Halsey in Rand 's 1943 novel , The Fountainhead , with Eve most resembling Catherine " at the midpoint of the novel , before she was completely destroyed " . Ross said that her portrayal of Eve was also influenced by Eve White , a character with dissociative identity disorder played by Joanne Woodward in the 1957 film The Three Faces of Eve . According to Ross , she researched books on sociopaths and psychopaths to better understand Eve 's desire to hide her past at any cost . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = 2001 : Hidden Passions : Secrets from the Diaries of Tabitha Lenox = = = 
 The 2001 novel Hidden Passions : Secrets from the Diaries of Tabitha Lenox identifies Eve Russell as the only child of " too @-@ busy Harvard history Professor Warren Johnson and journalist Tanya Lincoln Johnson " . The series changed Eve 's family , identifying her parents as Warren Johnson and Ruby Lincoln ( a poor couple from the American South ) and introducing Mr. Sanbourne as her stepfather and Liz Sanbourne as her adoptive sister . Despite the book 's billing as canonical when it was published , the show contradicts much of its information . As a teenager , Eve runs away to Boston to pursue a career as a jazz singer ; she becomes involved with she is involved with alcohol , drugs and prostitution . In Boston , Eve meets Julian Crane , who introduced her to alcohol and drugs , and she becomes close friends with fellow jazz singer Crystal Harris . During this time , she accidentally hits future husband T. C. Russell while driving under the influence , ruining his tennis career . T. C. , unaware that Eve is responsible for the accident , believes that Julian was driving . Eve and Julian separate after she learns that she is pregnant ; Julian 's marriage to the daughter of former Governor Harrison Winthrop , Ivy , is arranged by his father Alistair . Crystal , the only person Eve tells about her pregnancy , helps deliver her son . 
 Although Eve initially believes that her baby died , she learns that he survived when she discovers Vincent Clarkson in 2007 . Hidden Passions identifies Vincent as born on Christmas . The book states Alistair arranged for Vincent 's death , but the hitman Jack placed the baby into social services without Alistair 's knowledge . The series changed Alistair 's involvement in Vincent 's life ; Alistair abuses and manipulates Vincent as a tool for his plans to maintain power over Harmony . For most of the series , Eve and Julian 's child is believed to be Chad Harris @-@ Crane , who is later shown to be Liz 's child from her rape by Alistair . After the apparent death of her child , Eve leaves Boston and gives up music to attend medical school . Alistair sends her money ( which she uses to pay her tuition ) to keep quiet about her relationship — and child — with Julian . Eve eventually moves to Harmony and becomes a respected physician at Harmony Hospital . She marries T. C. and has two children , Whitney and Simone . 
 = = = 1999 – 2008 : Passions = = = 
 Eve 's early storylines focus on her attempt to keep her past hidden from her family and her neighbors in Harmony . Ivy Winthrop unearths proof of Eve 's relationship with Julian to blackmail her into breaking up Grace Bennett 's marriage to Sam Bennett . In 2003 , Liz arrives Harmony to seek revenge on her sister , who left her in an abusive household , but Eve keeps Liz 's identity as her adoptive sister a secret from her family and the town . In a 2002 – 2004 storyline , Eve relies more on Julian as Liz attempted to expose her and seduce her husband . Eve works with Julian to find their child . Overwhelmed by Liz 's desire for vengeance and the search for her child , Eve is unaware of Whitney 's relationship with Chad . The storyline culminates in July 2004 , when Liz brings Eve 's aunt Irma Johnson to tell T. C. the truth about her relationship with Julian and their child . Whitney turns against her mother , incorrectly assuming that her child with Julian is Chad ( making her relationship with him incestuous ) . T. C. divorces Eve , unable to forgive her lies about her past with Julian and her pregnancy , and begins a romantic relationship with Liz . Eve and Julian renew their relationship , despite his wife Rebecca Hotchkiss ' refusal to grant him a divorce . 
 In 2005 , Liz drinks poisoned punch which Rebecca had intended for Eve . Liz accuses Eve of deliberately giving her the punch , and Eve is arrested for attempted murder . During the arrest and trial , Eve and Julian grow closer together and T. C. ends his relationship with Liz to reconcile with his ex @-@ wife . Julian makes a deal with Rebecca that he would give her anything she wants in exchange for her testimony that she saw Liz with the vial of poison ; the judge declares a mistrial . The plot then focuses on Eve 's love triangle with T. C. and Julian as she is torn between taking care of T. C. after his stroke and accepting Julian 's proposal of marriage . Eve discovers Julian 's affair with Valerie Davis , an employee of Crane Industries , leading to her decision to nurse T. C. back to health and renew their relationship to reunite their family . Julian later explains Eve that he was paying Valerie to search for their son ; Eve forgives Valerie , and she and Julian continue their search . In 2007 , Eve and Julian discover that Vincent Clarkson ( a blackmailer who raped and murdered several people ) is their son , and try to support him despite his criminal past . However , Eve cannot accept her son 's criminality and incestuous , adulterous affair with Chad Harris @-@ Crane ( Vincent 's uncle , adoptive cousin and brother @-@ in @-@ law ) and begins abusing drugs and alcohol . Her career and reputation suffer , and she has a breakdown after Vincent 's apparent death on August 30 , 2007 . In the show 's final NBC episode on September 7 , 2007 , Vincent is revealed as intersex ; he separates his identity into Vincent and Valerie , an indication of dissociative identity disorder . 
 After the show 's transition from NBC to DirecTV , Eve 's storylines emphasize her romance with Julian and difficult relationship with Vincent . Believed dead , Vincent reveals himself , his gender identity and his pregnancy to Eve after seducing Julian ( his father ) and threatens to kill her if she tells anyone . In late 2007 , he begins tormenting Eve out of revenge for her failure to prevent his abduction when he was born . Julian checks Eve into rehab after she relapses , abusing drugs and alcohol to cope with Vincent 's frequent appearances . Vincent arranges for Eve 's release from rehab to help him prepare for the impending birth . Vincent 's psychopathic accomplice , Viki Chatsworth , later repeatedly stabs Julian in the groin and severs his penis . Vincent plies Eve with drugs and alcohol so she botches her attempt to surgically reattach Julian 's penis ; she reattaches it upside @-@ down , and an erection might kill him . In May 2008 , Eve and Julian assist Vincent with the birth of his son on the Russells ' kitchen table , when Eve explains everything about Vincent and Valerie to Julian . Eve plans to form a relationship again with Vincent ( believing that motherhood has mellowed him ) , and convinces Julian not to turn him in to the police . During the rehearsal for the joint weddings of Luis Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald and Fancy Crane , Noah Bennett and Paloma Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald , Miguel Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald and Kay Bennett , and Edna Wallace and Norma Bates , Eve assures Julian that they love each other emotionally and intellectually ; Julian vows that the Crane family will take more responsibility for their actions now that Alistair is dead . At the rehearsal dinner , Eve and the other dinner guests eat Vincent and Vicki 's poisoned mushroom sauce . She dies , but is resurrected when witch Tabitha Lenox renounces magic and becomes a born @-@ again Christian . In the series finale , Kay uses her magic to heal Julian 's penis . Since T. C. , Whitney , and Simone moved to New Orleans in 2007 , Eve and Vincent are the only two Russells in the final episode . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Tracey Ross and Rodney Van Johnson made cameo appearances as Eve and T. C. Russell in the series finale of the NBC primetime drama , Providence , one of the first daytime @-@ primetime crossovers . After DirecTV 's decision to cancel the show , Passions joined Premiere Props in a public , two @-@ day estate sale of props and costumes from the series . The auction gave fans " an opportunity to own a piece of their favorite show " . Several Eve @-@ related items were offered for sale , including a medical coat splattered with blood from her botched surgery on Julian and a framed copy of her medical degree . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Cast response = = = 
 Eve 's character and storylines received a mixed response from Passions ' cast members . Johnson praised the show for its use of its African @-@ American characters like Eve . He appreciated the show ’ s representation of " a full African @-@ American family " on daytime television with serious storylines , not " just a flash in the pan " . According to Johnson , the Russell family received an impressive response from African @-@ American viewers . Johnson said the chance to work with Tracey Ross , who he called the it girl for the African @-@ American community following her appearance on Star Search , influenced his acceptance of the role . 
 Cast members were more critical of Eve 's later appearances on the show . Ross reacted negatively to Eve 's involvement in Vincent 's storylines . She said that Vincent giving birth to his father 's child made her " physically nauseous " and she could only complete the birth scenes after the show 's acting coach , Maria O 'Brien , convinced her of " [ their ] comedic possibilities " . Eve 's incorrect reattachment of Julian 's penis was criticized by co @-@ star McKenzie Westmore ( " This has got to be the worst storyline ever done , what are they doing ? " ) , who cited it as a reason for the show 's cancellation . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critics praised Ross ' performances as Eve for broadening the representation of African @-@ American characters on television . An article in Jet described each member of the Russells ( including Eve ) as being an " integral part of the show " rather than token characters . Ross 's portrayal of the character was also warmly received by viewers , who frequently rated her their favorite Passions actress in Soap Opera Digest polls . 
 For the role of Eve , Ross received eight nominations for the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Daytime Drama Series and won at the 38th NAACP Image Awards . Despite Passions ' focus on African @-@ American female characters like Eve , Lynette Rice of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the show failed to attract the " hard @-@ to @-@ reach audience [ of ] African @-@ American women " ; according to Kalouria , " Quite frankly , many of them aren 't aware Passions is even on . " 
 = Dave Karofsky = 
 David " Dave " Karofsky , often referred to as Karofsky , is a recurring fictional character from the Fox musical comedy @-@ drama series Glee . The character is portrayed by actor Max Adler , and has appeared in Glee since its first season episode " Mash @-@ Up " , first broadcast on October 21 , 2009 . Initially known only by his surname , Karofsky was introduced as a bully and a member of the McKinley High hockey team who slushies football captain Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , and who teams with fellow athlete and bully Azimio ( James Earl ) to torment various fellow students , usually members of the school glee club , New Directions . Later in the season , he is identified as a member of the football team , and is a football player in the second season . Karofsky is revealed to be a closeted homosexual early in that season , and is still closeted at the end of the season , though he has stopped being a bully , and has won the election for Junior Prom King . He transfers to another school for his senior year , but is outed there and after being bullied by his classmates he attempts suicide , though he is saved by his father . 
 Karofsky was initially used as an ordinary jock bully , but Adler 's acting impressed show co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy ; he expanded Karofsky 's role in the show 's second season by having him especially target gay glee club member Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) , only to turn out to be gay himself , though closeted . That revelation sparked a wave of reaction from people who thought it was important for Glee to show " the confusion and the torture one person can put themselves through being closeted " . Reviewers have been impressed with Adler 's portrayal of Karofsky , including Michael Slezak of TVLine , who in the second season characterized it as " surprisingly nuanced " and with a " terrific amount of depth " , and Billboard 's Rae Votta , who wrote in the third season , " As always , Kurt and Karofsky 's scenes shine as the strongest in whichever episode they 're featured . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 In the first season of Glee , Karofsky appears in five episodes . He is a jock and a bully , initially a member of the McKinley High hockey team . He is first seen in the episode " Mash @-@ Up " , where he slushies football captain Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) . He reappears in " Mattress " , teamed with football player Azimio ( James Earl ) , and writes on Finn 's face with black markers to demonstrate how they will deface the glee club 's yearbook photo , which Karofsky does at the end of the episode . By " Theatricality " he is on the football team with Azimio , and they shove Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) and Tina Cohen @-@ Chang ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) against lockers for wearing Lady Gaga costumes — part of a glee club assignment — around school . 
 Karofsky is featured in the first eleven episodes of the second season continuing his bullying ways ; in the sixth , " Never Been Kissed " , he especially targets Kurt , who is gay . After he slams Kurt into a locker , Kurt chases after and confronts him , and an increasingly agitated Karofsky abruptly grabs Kurt and kisses him . Before Karofsky can initiate a second kiss , a stunned Kurt shoves him away , and Karofsky leaves . Kurt and his new gay friend Blaine Anderson ( Darren Criss ) later try to talk to him about being gay and closeted , but he denies that the kiss happened and soon resumes his bullying . He even threatens to kill Kurt if he tells anyone else about the kiss . Kurt 's father Burt ( Mike O 'Malley ) finds out about the threat , but not the kiss , and Karofsky is soon expelled , but is allowed to return by the school board because no physical violence to Kurt had been witnessed ; Kurt transfers to Dalton Academy to get away from him . 
 The football team has clinched a spot in the championship game , but animosity is running high between glee and non @-@ glee members and harming the team 's performance ; in " The Sue Sylvester Shuffle " , Coach Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) and glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) force the entire football team to join the glee club for a week to settle their differences and dispel their prejudices . Karofsky is praised by Will as a good performer and dancer , but when the hockey team attacks the football team for their low @-@ status glee club activities , Karofsky leads a walkout from the joint rehearsals by all the non @-@ glee members , and Beiste kicks them off the team . On championship night , the team members — except for Karofsky — relent just before the half @-@ time show , which the team and glee club perform together . Karofsky joins in when he sees the crowd 's positive reaction to the start of the half @-@ time show , a mashup of " Thriller " and " Heads Will Roll " ; the full team ultimately wins the game . Later , in school , Finn approaches Karofsky about joining the glee club and apologizing to Kurt , but Karofsky rejects his suggestion out of hand , since the championship victory has him back on top of the social ladder . 
 Karofsky appears in three additional episodes later in the second season . Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) decides in the episode " Born This Way " that she wants to become prom queen ; she sees Karofsky and realizes he would be a credible prom king partner moments before she sees him checking out a male student 's butt and also realizes he is as closeted as she is . She then blackmails him into teaming up with her as a pretend couple — beards — and starting an anti @-@ bullying club , with the purpose of getting Kurt to return to McKinley and New Directions . Karofsky apologizes to Kurt for his bullying in a meeting with Will , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , and their respective fathers Paul ( Daniel Roebuck ) and Burt ; Kurt is happy to be able to transfer back . In " Prom Queen " , with the prom less than a week away , Karofsky and Santana arrange to guard Kurt at school when they learn he will be bringing Blaine as his prom date ; Karofsky tells Kurt , tearfully , that he is sorry for what he did to him . At the prom , Karofsky is voted prom king but Santana is not elected prom queen ; instead , an appalled Kurt is written in and wins . As they take the floor for the traditional prom king and queen dance , Kurt suggests that this is Karofsky 's chance to come out and " make a difference " , but Karofsky is not ready to do so , and walks away . 
 He next appears in the third season episode " The First Time " . He has transferred to another high school from McKinley for his senior year , fearing that he might be outed if he stayed ; he sees Kurt in a gay bar , and tells Kurt he has become a regular there and feels accepted . He is Kurt 's secret admirer for Valentine 's Day in the episode " Heart " , and after Kurt gently turns him down , he is recognized by a classmate , who later spreads the word to others in the school that Karofsky is gay . In " On My Way " , he is taunted and bullied by his athletic teammates and by others , at school and using online media , so severely that he attempts to hang himself , but is saved by his father , who finds him in time . Kurt visits Karofsky in the hospital where Karofsky tells Kurt his best friend never wants to see him again and how his mother thinks he has a disease and can be " cured " . Karofsky , in tears the whole time , again apologizes to Kurt saying he made Kurt 's life hell but he couldn 't handle it himself , and the two agree to become friends . 
 In the sixth season , Karofsky is dating Blaine , but when he finds out that Blaine still loves Kurt they break up on good terms . 
 = = Development = = 
 Dave Karofsky is played by actor Max Adler , who first appeared in the first season episode " Mash @-@ Up " , initially as a member of the William McKinley High School hockey team . Karofsky began as a background character who tormented members of the glee club , and was known only by his surname . So far as Adler knew , his role was for a single episode only , but he returned once more before the first half of the first season ended , and then three times in the nine episodes of the second half of that season . The last of these , " Theatricality " , written and directed by series co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy , proved to be pivotal : Murphy was impressed with his acting and wanted to write more for him . 
 Although Karofsky begins the second season as an ordinary jock bully , Murphy hinted to Adler that there would be more in store for the character . According to Adler , Murphy approached him at the second season premiere and said , " ' we just wrote some really good stuff for you for episode six ' . " The actor recalls , " I had no idea what that meant , until I read it ! " Adler had long wondered why his character behaved the way he did : " I thought there 's got to be a reason why he 's so angry , why he 's such a bully , why he 's going out of his way to make other people 's lives a living hell " . Although he had considered various ideas for Karofsky — " maybe he was jealous of the glee club , maybe he was gay , maybe a million different things " — when he got the script for that episode he " was just as shocked as anybody else " when his character kissed Kurt , though he " thought it was so awesome that they would allow this character to go there . " 
 There was a strong reaction from the show 's viewers . Adler said , " I 've heard from a lot of fans how important this character is for them because it 's important to watch the internal struggle , the confusion and the torture one person can put themselves through being closeted . " He wants Karofsky to " accept himself and come out because [ he thinks ] it would be a beacon of hope for everyone else who 's struggling " , and noted , " people do get hope from Glee . " He also said , " I think [ Ryan Murphy ] trusts me to do what I 'm doing with the character , which is one heck of a compliment from him . " Murphy has indicated a preference for positive future developments , and said in early January 2011 , " This show is by nature optimistic and I think a character like Karofsky could turn to booze or pills or alcohol and kill themselves or do something dark . But I also love Max and I love that character and I sorta want that character to have a happy ending . " At one point in the bullying storyline , Karofsky threatens to kill Kurt , a scene that Adler characterized as " very powerful . Chilling , terrifying , horrifying , yet , at the same time , heartbreaking . … Because there are kids who have messaged me since that episode saying they used to hear that line spoken to them day in and day out at school " , and they dreaded school because of it . 
 In addition to Karofsky 's newly revealed sexual orientation , other aspects of his personality have been explored . In " The Sue Sylvester Shuffle " , when the football team is forced to spend a week working with the glee club that Karofsky and other members have been bullying , the " softer side " of his personality is seen , especially when he 's performing with the club . After the club 's director surprises him with a compliment on his performing , Karofsky is the one who suggests that the team perform an extra musical number for the halftime show they are preparing for , though he comes up with a rationale that makes it sound like a necessity to keep up their social status rather than something he particularly wants to do . Adler said , " I feel like that it did make him happy and , obviously , he has some natural abilities that Mr. Schuester was able to spot . I don 't think he 's ever allowed himself to do that ever in his life , to dance or learn a song , especially to do that in public . ... Doing that was such an obstacle to overcome . " In " Furt " and " Born This Way " , it is revealed that he had been kind , a cub scout , and an " A " student . However , his behavior had changed for the worse in the former episode before returning to the good in the latter . Although the anti @-@ bullying club formed by Karofsky and Santana in " Born This Way " is created with ulterior motives in mind , Karofsky subsequently makes a tearful apology to Kurt in " Prom Queen " , and then insists that Kurt wait for his safety escort after the next class period . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The first time Karofsky received significant notice from critics was for the second season 's sixth episode , " Never Been Kissed " . Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times commented that it was testament to the writers and cast that Karofsky 's kiss startled the audience as much as it did Kurt , and commended the transitioning of Karofsky from a faceless jock into " a nuanced character with a back story and hidden motives of his own . " MTV 's Aly Semigran wrote that , should the episode inspire a single teenager to have courage in the face of discrimination , or re @-@ consider bullying , it would be an impressive accomplishment . Linda Holmes of National Public Radio dismissed " Never Been Kissed " as " one of the most facile and emotionally inauthentic episodes the show has ever produced " , and felt that Karofsky 's swift transition from bullying to kissing Kurt was absurd and " emotionally unsound " . His appearances over the next few episodes drew only oblique commentary , such as The Atlantic 's Kevin Fallon 's characterization in his review on " Furt " of the bullying storyline as a " very important arc that 's been well @-@ acted by all parties involved " . In " The Sue Sylvester Shuffle " , The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff wrote , " I thought giving Kurt 's bully , Karofsky ( ... ) , a miniature story arc that resolved itself only partially was a smart move . Up until now , he 's been kind of a walking cliché , and now he gets to be someone who 's not all repressed sexuality and monstrous tendencies . " Reiter commented , " And best of all , we got to watch Karofsky 's character develop a bit more . It was nice to see him let loose a little and dance , but all his back @-@ and @-@ <unk> about glee was a little confusing . " 
 Michael Slezak of TVLine complimented " Max Adler 's surprisingly nuanced performance " as Karofsky in " Born This Way " : " The complex play of emotions in Karofsky 's eyes when Santana simultaneously came out to him , threatened to out him , predicted his sad future as a closeted state senator or deacon , and offered him a quick @-@ fix solution by pretending to be his beard , was tremendous . " He added , " Adler is bringing a terrific amount of depth to Karofsky . " VanDerWerff referred to Karofsky 's parallel journey with Santana , who is also closeted , in his comments about the episode and the next one where the character appears , " Prom Queen " . He said in his review of the latter , " the characters I 'm most interested in at this point are Karofsky and Santana . They 're both people trying to do the right thing , but they 're also both people who are defeated by their own weakest impulses . ... They 're both hemmed in by the decisions they 've made and their inability to be true to themselves " . Meghan Brown of The Atlantic praised Karofsky 's " tearful apology to Kurt " in that episode as being " painful and poignant " , and Slezak went further : 
 Whatever awards Chris Colfer and Max Adler get nominated for in the next six months , they earned ' em during this conversation , where Kurt wondered if maybe , just maybe , he wasn 't getting bullied because kids were indifferent to him being gay , not because Karofsky was serving as his security detail . ... [ Y ] ou could see in Kurt 's eyes the decision to start treating Karofsky not as a former tormentor , but as a terrified kid struggling with his sexual orientation . And Karofsky 's break — his first true apology for bullying Kurt , and his first tentative step toward admitting the root cause of his anger — had me reaching for the Kleenex . Tell me I 'm not the only one hoping Glee will keep journeying down Karofsky 's difficult road toward self @-@ acceptance . 
 Karofsky 's reappearance and interaction with Kurt in the third season episode " The First Time " received very positive reviews . Anthony Benigno of The Faster Times characterized the scene with Kurt and Karofsky as " subtle " and " a home run " , and Entertainment Weekly 's Abby West called it a " perfect little nuanced scene " , while Michael Ausiello of TVLine said it was his " favorite scene of the episode " . His next appearance in " Heart " , again with Kurt , was described by Slezak as " electric , with Kurt tenderly giving the ' just friends ' speech to Dave " . Entertainment Weekly 's Joseph Brannigan Lynch thought the plot of having Karofsky be Kurt 's secret admirer was " vaguely stalker @-@ ish on Karofsky 's part , and contrived on the part of the show " , and Robert Canning of IGN predicted that after Karofsky had been seen by his classmate , it would " just be an episode or two before Karofsky gets bullied into thinking about suicide , if not actually taking his own life " . When he reviewed the next episode , " On My Way " , which featured Karofsky 's suicide attempt , Canning stated that his " cynicism [ in the " Heart " review ] was won over by a powerfully acted and directed story " . He also said , " the initial locker room scene was heartbreaking " and " Max Adler 's subtle facial expressions were brilliant " . 
 VanDerWerff wrote , " The sequence in which Karofsky prepared himself for death was , unquestionably , one of the best things Glee has ever done " , and Slezak called it " as devastating as anything I ’ ve seen on TV this year " . HuffPost TV 's Crystal Bell applauded Adler " for doing such an amazing job " on the suicide scene . She stated , " I would have preferred if Karofsky 's story line would have been the focus of the entire episode . " VanDerWerff commented that " as the show got the little details of Karofsky 's desperate act just right , the whole thing took on a weight " , and singled out the scene " where the teachers talked about what had happened and the smash cut to Karofsky 's father screaming at him to get up " as " heart @-@ wrenching " . Bell declared that the " best scene in the entire episode is when Kurt visits Karofsky in the hospital " . Lynch called it " one of the most touching scenes of this season " and " guileless , well @-@ acted and eye @-@ watering " . Rae Votta of Billboard wrote , " As always , Kurt and Karofsky 's scenes shine as the strongest in whichever episode they 're featured . " 
 = Heart ( Glee ) = 
 " Heart " ( stylized as " ♥ " in Fox 's video preview materials ) is the thirteenth episode of the third season of the American musical television series Glee , and the fifty @-@ seventh overall . Written by Ali Adler and directed by co @-@ creator Brad Falchuk , the episode aired on Fox in the United States on February 14 , 2012 , and features Valentine 's Day love songs performed by the McKinley High glee club . It also features the debuts of special guest stars Jeff Goldblum and Brian Stokes Mitchell as Rachel 's two fathers and The Glee Project winner Samuel Larsen as transfer student Joe Hart . 
 Whitney Houston 's version of Dolly Parton 's " I Will Always Love You " is performed by Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) in the episode , and the completed episode had been delivered to the network and was scheduled to run in three days when Houston died unexpectedly on February 11 , 2012 ; a dedication to her was added in the episode 's end credits . Reviewers gave Riley 's rendition a very positive reception , the best of those given to the ten songs that were heard in the episode , though the performances in general were well received . It was one of two songs from the episode to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100 , along with " Stereo Hearts " , while the other six singles did not chart . 
 Reviews of the episode varied widely , but there was more positive reaction than not . The greatest enthusiasm was for Rachel 's fathers , though Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) was complimented on his brief scenes , and the scene with Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) and Karofsky ( Max Adler ) was also praised . The episode was also significant because it featured an on @-@ screen kiss by Santana ( Naya Rivera ) and Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , which was the show 's first lesbian kiss . 
 Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 6 @.@ 99 million American viewers and received a 2 @.@ 8 / 8 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , the lowest rating of the third season to date . The total viewership was down over 11 % from the previous episode , " The Spanish Teacher " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Will ( Matthew Morrison ) assigns the members of New Directions to perform the best love songs for Valentine 's Day . Sugar ( Vanessa Lengies ) takes the opportunity to announce a Valentine 's Day party , for which everyone must have a date , including herself . Artie ( Kevin McHale ) and Rory ( Damian McGinty ) both set out to woo Sugar with gifts , and she <unk> between them , so they move to song : Artie sings " Let Me Love You " and Rory , after he says he has been informed that his visa for a second year at McKinley has been denied , performs " Home " . Sugar chooses Rory as her date . 
 Santana ( Naya Rivera ) and Brittany ( Heather Morris ) are about to kiss in the hall when Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) stops them . He tells them that he has received complaints about their public displays of affection , which Santana decries as a double @-@ standard , citing the much longer public kisses of Finn ( Cory Monteith ) and Rachel ( Lea Michele ) . 
 Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) , Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) and Sam ( Chord Overstreet ) are members of a Christian club called the God Squad and decide to raise money by performing singing telegrams for Valentine 's Day ; their newest member is the previously home @-@ schooled Joe Hart ( Samuel Larsen ) . The group serenades Rachel with " Stereo Hearts " at Finn 's behest . Santana then hires them to sing for Brittany , which sparks a discussion among squad members on the morality of homosexuality ; Joe must decide whether he is comfortable delivering a singing telegram for a gay couple . 
 Mercedes breaks up with Shane ( LaMarcus Tinker ) , but she will not date Sam because she feels guilty for hurting Shane and wants to be sure of her own feelings . She performs " I Will Always Love You " as her song , and Sam leaves in tears . 
 Finn and Rachel reveal their marriage plans to New Directions , most of whom are less than enthused . Rachel 's two fathers Hiram and LeRoy Berry ( Jeff Goldblum and Brian Stokes Mitchell ) , along with Finn 's mother Carole ( Romy Rosemont ) and his step @-@ father Burt Hummel ( Mike O 'Malley ) , act very supportive and arrange for the couple to spend the night together in Rachel 's room , expecting that the reality of having to live together will encourage the teens to postpone their wedding . The ruse backfires , and the engaged pair announce that they will be getting married even sooner than planned . 
 Kurt has been receiving valentines and gifts all week from a secret admirer that he believes to be Blaine ( Darren Criss ) , who is still home recovering from eye surgery . He arrives at Sugar 's party early to discover his admirer is actually former bully Karofsky ( Max Adler ) , who declares his love for Kurt . Kurt lets him down gently , but their parting words are overheard by a classmate of Karofsky 's , and Karofsky flees . 
 Once the party is underway , the God Squad delivers their singing telegram , a " Cherish / Cherish " mash @-@ up , to Brittany on Santana ’ s behalf , and the couple kisses . Sugar and Rory dance , but he is confused by her saying that she will miss him when he has to leave . Blaine arrives , having finally recovered , to lead the group in singing " Love Shack " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Heart " is the second episode to be written by co @-@ executive producer Ali Adler , and it was directed by co @-@ creator Brad Falchuk . It commenced filming on January 13 , 2012 , the same day that the eleventh episode , the Michael Jackson tribute episode , completed its final musical number , and while the twelfth episode was being filmed , which had begun on January 5 , 2012 . The episode completed its filming with two musical numbers on January 31 , 2012 . 
 On December 8 , 2011 , it was reported that the show had begun casting Rachel 's two fathers . It was not until January 17 , 2012 , that the actors playing Hiram and LeRoy Berry were identified as Jeff Goldblum and Brian Stokes Mitchell , respectively . Two days later they were on the set , shooting their first scenes with Lea Michele , who tweeted a picture of the three of them . 
 The appearance was long in coming , and Goldblum and Stokes Mitchell were not the first actors cast in those roles , though they are the first to appear on screen . A scene had been written in 2009 for the second episode , " Showmance " , that featured Rachel 's fathers , but it was subsequently cut from the script even though the actors had already been cast and reported for work . Shortly before the final nine episodes of the first season were to begin airing , co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy , when asked at PaleyFest in March 2010 whether her fathers would be appearing , replied : " Not this season . We 've never met them ; I think that 's a great surprise . I think you want to hold that a little bit . " Between the second and third seasons , co @-@ creator Ian Brennan said , " It 's tricky with parents " , referenced the scene cut from " Showmance " , and noted , " we 've talked about it forever , about different sets of parents " , but " when you 're in high school , your parents stop being the major influence in your life " . He then added , " I think soon we 'll probably reveal more and more " . 
 The second of the two winners of The Glee Project 's seven @-@ episode arc , Samuel Larsen , debuts in this episode as a new transfer student to McKinley named Joe Hart . Larsen had arrived on the set by January 17 , 2012 , according to Cory Monteith , who described Larsen 's role as one that " ties into a lot of preexisting storylines " , and " a smart way to bring him into the show " . Larsen 's first day of filming with the glee club was January 25 , 2012 , and a number of his fellow actors tweeted of his arrival , including Lea Michele , Dianna Agron , and fellow Glee Project winner Damian McGinty . 
 Although it was originally thought that Darren Criss would be missing " one and a half episodes " , and therefore might return in time to appear in this episode after missing the twelfth one , co @-@ star Chris Colfer initially stated that Criss would not be appearing : " You 'll find out how [ Blaine ] leaves for a little bit and then comes back , but it ’ s nothing too bad or serious " . He later said that Blaine " is in the episode , it 's not in the way you might think " ; Criss did return in time to appear in the musical finale . Recurring guest stars who are appearing in the episode include glee club members Sam Evans ( Overstreet ) , Rory Flanagan ( McGinty ) and Sugar Motta ( Lengies ) , Principal Figgins ( Theba ) , Finn 's mother Carole Hudson @-@ Hummel ( Rosemont ) and stepfather Burt Hummel ( O 'Malley ) , former McKinley student Dave Karofsky ( Adler ) and McKinley football player Shane Tinsley ( Tinker ) . 
 The episode features cover versions of ten songs , nine of which have been released as eight singles available for downloading , with the two @-@ song mash @-@ up released as one single , but no release of " Chapel of Love " , which was heard in only a brief snippet on the show . Performances include Nat King Cole 's " L @-@ O @-@ V @-@ E " sung by Jenna Ushkowitz and Harry Shum , Jr . ; Dolly Parton 's " I Will Always Love You " in the style of the Whitney Houston cover version sung by Riley ; " Stereo Hearts " by Gym Class Heroes featuring Adam Levine sung by Larsen , Overstreet and Riley ; and Mario 's " Let Me Love You " sung by McHale . Other songs that are featured include Cole Porter 's " You 're the Top " from the musical Anything Goes , " Love Shack " by The B @-@ 52 's , Michael Bublé 's " Home " , and a mash @-@ up of two songs entitled " Cherish " : The Association song and the Madonna song . Whitney Houston died unexpectedly on February 11 , 2012 , three days before the episode was scheduled to air and the day after the finished episode was delivered to the network . The producers subsequently announced that they would pay tribute to Houston with a dedication to her in the end credits . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Heart " was first broadcast on February 14 , 2012 in the United States on Fox . It received a 2 @.@ 8 / 8 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and attracted 6 @.@ 99 million American viewers during its initial airing , a significant decrease from the 3 @.@ 3 / 9 rating / share and 7 @.@ 81 million viewers of the previous episode , which was broadcast on February 7 , 2012 , and the lowest rating of the third season to date . In Canada , however , viewership increased , and 1 @.@ 72 million viewers watched the episode on the same day as its American premiere . It was the thirteenth most @-@ viewed show of the week , up two slots and over 9 % from the 1 @.@ 57 million viewers who watched " The Spanish Teacher " the previous week . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Heart " first aired on March 22 , 2012 , and was watched on Sky 1 by 792 @,@ 000 viewers . Viewership was up slightly from " The Spanish Teacher " , which attracted 771 @,@ 000 viewers when it aired the week before . In Australia , " Heart " was broadcast on March 9 , 2012 . It was watched by 563 @,@ 000 viewers , which made Glee the fourteenth most @-@ watched program of the night , down from twelfth the week before . Despite the drop , actual viewership was almost unchanged from the previous episode , " The Spanish Teacher " , which was seen by 564 @,@ 000 viewers . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Heart " received a wide range of opinion from reviewers , though the balance was clearly on the positive side . Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone , wrote that it was " thoroughly enjoyable from start to finish " , and HuffPost TV 's Crystal Bell called it " a standout episode of the season " . Bobby Hankinson of The Houston Chronicle characterized it as " sort of terrible " and " unfunny " , and IGN 's Robert Canning gave it an " okay " grade of 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 , but Canning also acclaimed " the introduction of Rachel 's two dads played by Jeff Goldblum and Broadway vet Brian Stokes Mitchell " ; he said they were " fantastic " and their schemes regarding the engagement " delightful " . Bell called theirs " the most surprising pleasant performances of the night " and added " I absolutely adored these two " . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal summed up their appearance as " annoyingly perfect " , and TV Guide 's Kate Stanhope devoted an entire article to the pair , wrote , " What 's not to like ? Seamless chemistry , witty back @-@ and @-@ forth " , and noted that their appearance filled out Rachel 's backstory . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club was another who pointed out that you could see , from their characterization , " how Rachel got to be the way she was " . Billboard 's Rae Votta approved of the episode as a whole and of the Berry parents : " For a pair that have been noticeably absent from the show for two and a half seasons , they cram a ton of character moments into a single scene " . VanDerWerff wrote that the scheme by the Berry fathers " to get the two to break off their marriage plans by talking earnestly about teenage lovemaking " was " very , very creepy and just a little unsound , but I sort of like that it suggests to me that , yeah , this is who these guys are . " He characterized Hiram and LeRoy as " goofy sitcom characters " , unlike Burt or Carole . 
 Kevin Sullivan of MTV stated that Principal Figgins " stole the show with his outburst and the passing reference to <unk> " , and VanDerWerff said his was " a very funny moment in the episode " , and also complimented the sequence for having alluded to " how it ’ s still much harder to have a same @-@ sex kiss on a broadcast network than it is to have Rachel and Finn neck disgustingly " . The God Squad , however , was not well received : Canning described it as " conveniently arriving for the sake of one storyline in this episode " and debating " a forced issue that we all knew would result in acceptance " , and VanDerWerff pointed out that as " we already know how the other three kids are going to shake out " , it was " surprisingly undramatic " and its sole purpose to " watch a new character decide if he 's okay with gay people " . Futterman , on the other hand , felt that the sequence " tastefully incorporated religion 's views into the show 's ongoing look at gay relationships " . 
 While the sequence featuring Mercedes singing " I Will Always Love You " was very well received , Entertainment Weekly 's Joseph Brannigan Lynch was not happy about the state of Mercedes and Sam 's relationship : " If these two don 't get together soon , I 'm voting we just call the whole thing off , because I 'm tired of these false starts . " VanDerWerff , referring to the third member of that romantic triangle , wrote that one of the two " tertiary characters " he responded to most was " Shane , who didn ’ t say anything but gave good cry @-@ face " . VanDerWerff 's other character was Karofsky , and Michael Slezak of TVLine characterized his scene with Kurt as " electric , with Kurt tenderly giving the ' just friends ' speech to Dave " . Lynch thought the plot of having Karofsky be Kurt 's secret admirer was " vaguely stalker @-@ ish on Karofsky 's part , and contrived on the part of the show " , and Canning accurately predicted that after Karofsky had been seen by his classmate , it would " just be an episode or two before Karofsky gets bullied into thinking about suicide , if not actually taking his own life " . 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The theme of the episode — love songs — inspired VanDerWerff to note that such songs " are great for musicals because they pretty much do all of the work necessary in terms of expressing inner emotions and moving the plot forward " . He said that " every song in this episode had a clear emotional and plot purpose " except for the " Love Shack " finale . Futterman wrote that the glee club succeeded in finding and performing " the world 's greatest love songs " , and the reactions from other reviewers were generally favorable as well . 
 With the death of Whitney Houston three days before the episode aired , a great deal of attention was given to Amber Riley 's performance of Houston 's hit during the episode , " I Will Always Love You " , and its unexpected function as a tribute to the singer . Reviews were glowing : Amy Reiter of The Los Angeles Times called it a " gorgeous , lush take " that was " definitely an episode highlight " , and Bell described is as " a beautiful cover " , " the perfect song for Mercedes to sing to Sam " and a " haunting performance " . Flandez wrote that it was a " heart @-@ rending love song that becomes a homage of the 48 @-@ year @-@ old fallen star " , and " brought goosebumps " ; the shot near the end , " of Mercedes dressed in a sweetheart gown , standing alone , reaching for the stars , was memorable " . The Washington Post 's Jen Chaney said that " Riley deserves a standing ovation " , and that she sang the song with " a power motivated by genuine emotions that tied in directly to her storyline " ; the " heartbreaking context of Houston 's death ... immediately elevated this moment to the very best one of Glee 's entire third season . " In December 2012 , TV Guide listed the rendition as one of Glee 's best performances . 
 Chaney characterized Tina and Mike 's duet of " L @-@ O @-@ V @-@ E " as " cute and buoyant " and gave it an " A − " , and Bell called it " absolute perfection " . While Slezak praised their " sweet vocals " , he wondered why their " rare moment in the spotlight had to serve as a backdrop to the Artie @-@ Sugar @-@ Rory triangle " and gave the performance a " B " . Chaney thought the " quick edits actually gave the song a nice energy , but also prevented us from seeing more of Tina and Mike dancing " , which she said " was a shame " . Flandez and Lynch both praised Mike 's singing ; Lynch said his " voice sounded great " , and Flandez declared that " Mike has really come into his own as a singer " . For " Let Me Love You " , Lynch wrote that " Artie busted out some serious sex appeal " and gave the " spot @-@ on smooth " performance a " B + " . He also described Artie as " effortlessly convincing " on the song . Slezak bestowed an " A − " and said , " Artie finally finds an R & B jam that lets him get his swag on and fits his voice to a tee ! " Votta made mention of " Kurt , Sam , Puck and Mike doing an impressive job as boyband style backup " , but Chaney called the performance , including the choreography , " underwhelming " and gave it a " C " grade . 
 Futterman noted that " Rory 's a natural to sing Bublé " on " Home " and Chaney said he " sang it nicely enough " , but neither expressed much enthusiasm about the rendition , and Chaney gave it a " C " grade . Slezak and Lynch were slightly more generous with their matching grades of " C + " , but were also unimpressed : Lynch declared it " too schmaltzy for my tastes " , and Slezak admitted he doesn 't " get " McGinty . The two songs sung by Hiram and LeRoy Berry received little comment , in part due to their brevity . Chaney was disappointed that " Chapel of Love " was so brief , while Lynch called it " acceptably fun " , and similarly approved of " You 're the Top " , which he called " goofy , lighthearted family fun " . Futterman characterized the latter song as " appropriately over @-@ the @-@ top " , though Slezak maintained that " no gay dads in the world would perform this song with their teenage daughter " . 
 The pair of performances by the McKinley High God Squad , however , received rather more attention . The first , " Stereo Hearts " , received a trio of " B − " grades from reviewers : Chaney said it was " a bit much " but " semi @-@ enjoyable " , Slezak described it as a " somewhat bland rendition " , and Lynch wrote that " Joe Hart 's vocal debut on Glee proper was fine , but Sam 's rapping was not " . Bell said " Mercedes was flawless " and then called the song 's rapping " one major flaw " , but Futterman wrote that " Sam wins for most surprising Glee vocalist by convincingly taking on Travie McCoy 's rap " . Flandez said that the " voices melded well together " . The " Cherish " mash @-@ up was better received , and garnered grades from " B " up to " A − " , the highest from Slezak , who deemed it a " delicious " dessert . Lynch said " Quinn sounded great " with his " B " grade , and Chaney 's " peppy , sweet number " was attached to a " B + " . Flandez called it a " cute mashup " , and VanDerWerff said the rendition was " nice and understated " . 
 Hankinson , despite his criticism of the episode , liked " Love Shack " so much it was his favorite song of the episode , and Futterman called it a " well @-@ executed note " on which to end the show . Both Lynch and Slezak said that Blaine failed to project the campiness the song required , and that they were glad Kurt took over from him . Their grades were quite different : Slezak gave a " C − " , while Lynch , who complimented Mercedes as well as Kurt , bestowed a " B + " . Chaney was more enthusiastic than both and gave the " rousing " cover an " A " : she was enthusiastic about Criss " <unk> all over the place " , and also noted that " the most entertaining all @-@ company performances on Glee are the ones where it 's clear how much fun everyone had during filming " . 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Two of the episode 's eight released singles debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 : " I Will Always Love You " debuted at number eighty @-@ seven on sales of 36 @,@ 000 downloads , and " Stereo Hearts " debuted at number ninety . The same two songs also debuted on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 , but in the reverse order : " Stereo Hearts " was at number seventy @-@ four , and " I Will Always Love You " was at number ninety @-@ two . 
 = Jack Crawford ( cricketer ) = 
 John Neville " Jack " Crawford ( 1 December 1886 – 2 May 1963 ) was an English first @-@ class cricketer who played mainly for Surrey and South Australia . An amateur , he played as an all @-@ rounder . As a right @-@ handed batsman , Crawford had a reputation for scoring quickly and hitting powerful shots . He bowled medium @-@ paced off spin and was noted for his accuracy and his ability to make the ball turn sharply from the pitch . Unusually for a first @-@ class cricketer , Crawford wore spectacles while playing . 
 Crawford established a reputation as an outstanding cricketer while still a schoolboy . He played Test cricket for England before he was 21 years old , and successfully toured Australia with the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) in 1907 – 08 . He played only 12 matches for England , although critics believed he had a great future in the sport and was a potential future England captain . In two successive English seasons , he completed the double of 1 @,@ 000 runs and 100 wickets in first @-@ class games . 
 A dispute over the composition of a Surrey side chosen to play a high @-@ profile game in 1909 , after several professional players were omitted for disciplinary reasons , led to an increasingly bitter argument between Crawford and the Surrey authorities . Crawford was told he had no future with the club , and moved to Australia . There , he worked as a teacher and continued his cricket career with South Australia . This arrangement had a controversial end , when he clashed with the South Australian Cricket Association over money and moved to New Zealand to play for Otago . 
 That relationship also ended badly , and he left Otago before being conscripted into the New Zealand armed forces near the end of the First World War . When he was demobilised , he returned to England and made his peace with Surrey . He played a handful of games between 1919 and 1921 but faded out of first @-@ class cricket to pursue a career in industry . In all first @-@ class cricket , Crawford scored 9 @,@ 488 runs at an average of 32 @.@ 60 and took 815 wickets at an average of 20 @.@ 66 . Although he continued to play cricket at a lower level , the remainder of Crawford 's life passed in relative obscurity . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Jack Crawford was born on 1 December 1886 at Cane Hill , Coulsdon , Surrey , the youngest of three sons to the Rev John Charles Crawford and his wife Alice ; the couple also had three daughters . Crawford senior was the chaplain at the recently opened Cane Hill Asylum , in the grounds of which Crawford was born . He grew up in a cricketing environment . His father and uncle , Frank Crawford , played first @-@ class cricket for Kent ; his brothers Vivian and Reginald were also first @-@ class cricketers . The whole family played cricket and encouraged Crawford from a young age , and from the age of eleven he regularly played with adults . 
 After attending <unk> School in Eastbourne , Crawford went to St Winifred 's School in Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames where , in his two years in the cricket team , he scored 2 @,@ 093 runs and took 366 wickets . In 1902 , Crawford moved to Repton School . Reaching the cricket team in his first year , he remained in the eleven until he left the school in 1905 . His impact was considerable . A 1906 report in Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack rated him as one of the best three schoolboy cricketers in the previous 40 years , only matched by A. G. Steel and Stanley Jackson . Cricket historians similarly praised his cricket at Repton . Benny Green notes that his prolific achievements " created ... chaos among schoolboy cricketers . " Gerald Brodribb describes him as " probably the best ever " schoolboy cricketer . 
 By 1904 , Crawford dominated the Repton team . He scored 759 runs and his 75 wickets were more than the combined total of all the other bowlers in the team . He was particularly effective in the school 's most important fixtures . The report in Wisden described him as possibly the best amateur bowler in England that year : he bowled medium @-@ paced off spin , although he varied the speed of his delivery from slow to fast . Surrey County Cricket Club took an interest in Crawford almost immediately , calling him to a trial in 1903 . Following his achievements in 1904 , he was invite to play for the county . The county club was in the midst of a spell of uncertainty ; several men captained the team , but only for a handful of matches each . The composition of the side continually changed , and the team performed poorly , causing unrest among supporters accustomed to success . Crawford was just one of many players brought in as an experiment , albeit one of the most successful . He made his first @-@ class debut against Kent . Taking three wickets and top @-@ scoring in Surrey 's first innings with 54 , Crawford did well enough to retain his place for another seven games , and was praised in the press for his performances . Against Gloucestershire , he took seven wickets for 43 runs in the second innings , and a total of ten wickets in the match . In the season as a whole he took 44 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 16 @.@ 93 to top the county 's bowling averages , and scored 229 runs at an average of 16 @.@ 35 . 
 Although hampered by injuries during the 1905 season for Repton , his last at the school , Crawford scored 766 runs with a batting average of 85 . In the five matches in which he was fit to bowl he took 55 wickets at an average under 13 . In the August holidays , he returned to play for Surrey . In his second game , he took seven for 90 against Yorkshire and in his third , he scored his maiden first @-@ class century — 119 not out against Derbyshire — to become the youngest centurion for the county , a record that was not broken until 2013 . Later , he took eight for 24 against Northamptonshire and scored 142 not out against Leicestershire . At the end of the season , he played in the Hastings Festival , appearing in several representative games for teams representing the South of England and played for the Rest of England against the County Champions Yorkshire . Crawford finished second in Surrey 's batting averages for 1905 ; in all first @-@ class games he scored 543 runs at an average of 33 @.@ 93 and took 47 wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 46 . As the season ended , he was invited by the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) to join their tour of South Africa that winter . 
 = = International cricketer = = 
 = = = Tour to South Africa = = = 
 Having finished his school career , Crawford joined the first MCC tour of South Africa in the 1905 – 06 season . The team was not particularly strong — before the tour , critics judged it to possess the equivalent strength of a moderate county side . The MCC was criticised by the press in both England and South Africa for omitting many of the strongest players . As the youngest member of the team , Crawford was given the traditional role of writing press reports to be sent back home during the tour . When the team played in Worcester during the tour , the local press carried a report that Crawford planned to remain in South Africa . The 1906 Wisden carried the same story ; in a comment on his success in 1905 , it suggested that it was uncertain for how long he would play , and questioned whether , if he played Test cricket , he would do so for England or South Africa . The cricket historian Nigel Hart queries why Wisden mentioned South Africa ; Crawford 's only known connection came through his uncle , who had left South Africa five years before . 
 In all first @-@ class matches on the tour , Crawford scored 531 runs at an average of 31 @.@ 23 , coming third in the tour batting averages , and took 34 wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 44 , placing him fifth among the regular bowlers in the team . In the early tour matches , Crawford recorded two five wicket hauls and scored 98 . He made his Test match debut for England against South Africa in the first Test at the age of 19 years and 32 days to become England 's youngest Test cricketer , a record he held until Brian Close made his debut in 1949 . Batting at number six , Crawford scored 44 runs in the first innings and 43 in the second ; he took a wicket with his first delivery , bowling Bert Vogler . He was wicketless in the second innings , and bowled inaccurately as the home side recorded a one @-@ wicket win . Wisden noted that Crawford batted well in both innings . After a month of cricket in between the Tests , during which Crawford scored 212 in a minor game , the English team were suffering from fatigue when the remaining matches were played . In the second Test , Crawford was promoted to open the batting , a position he retained for most of the series . In the final match , he scored 74 , his first Test fifty and the highest score of his Test career . His best bowling also came in the final match , where he took three for 69 . 
 In the Test series , Crawford scored 281 runs at an average of 31 @.@ 22 and took nine wickets at 35 @.@ 77 . England lost the series 4 – 1 , finding it difficult to bat against the South African googly bowlers . Wisden 's tour report described Crawford 's batting as one of the few positives for his side . Writing home during the tour , the MCC captain Pelham Warner frequently praised Crawford and the extent of his ability at a young age . The English press even parodied what Crawford 's biographer , Michael Burns , describes as Warner 's " near @-@ obsession " with Crawford . Other critics believed that Crawford should have been more successful as a bowler but was distracted by the matting surfaces used in South Africa ; because he was able to make the ball bounce and turn extravagantly from the surface , he tried to spin the ball too much and lost accuracy as a result . 
 = = = Surrey cricketer = = = 
 Returning to England for the 1906 season , Crawford completed the double of 1 @,@ 000 runs and 100 wickets in first @-@ class cricket , the youngest player at the time to accomplish this feat . Against Gloucestershire , he scored 148 and then took seven for 85 and four for 63 with the ball ; he also took ten wickets in his next game . In total , he compiled 1 @,@ 174 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 10 , and took 118 wickets at an average of 20 @.@ 28 . These performances earned him selection for the representative Gentlemen versus Players matches at both Lord 's and The Oval , in which he played for the amateur Gentlemen . At the end of the season , he was chosen as one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year . The citation said : " Few cricketers have won equal fame at so early an age " , and noted the unusual ease with which he had moved into first @-@ class cricket . Crawford 's powerful batting and straight hitting were praised , as was his accurate bowling . The report also stated : " That he should have done all this is the more astonishing from the fact that he invariably plays in glasses . No one handicapped in this way has ever been so consistently successful both as batsman and bowler . " 
 Crawford had a reputation by this stage as a batsman who favoured aggressive , powerful shots and his performances drew in crowds . In 1907 , in the space of a few days , he hit deliveries in two different matches through the windows of both the home and the visitors ' dressing rooms at The Oval . Towards the end of the season , he scored 103 runs in 90 minutes against Kent , his only century that year , hitting several deliveries into the crowd ; The Times described the ball in this innings as " soaring away like a bird " . Crawford 's overall batting record was similar to the previous season : he scored 1 @,@ 158 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 47 . With the ball , he took 124 wickets at 16 @.@ 95 , completing his second double . Once again , he was selected in both Gentlemen v Players matches , taking six for 54 in the second , and was chosen to play two of the three Test matches against South Africa . These were his only Test matches in England ; he scored 26 runs in three innings and was wicketless after bowling 29 overs . He missed England 's victory in the second match , the only match in the series not to be a draw , but Wisden 's correspondent believed that the pitch conditions for that game made it a mistake to leave Crawford out . Despite his lack of success in the Tests , Crawford was invited to tour Australia that winter even before the South African series was complete ; he suggested to the press that he might remain in Australia after the tour . 
 = = = Tour to Australia = = = 
 The MCC team which toured Australia in 1907 — 08 , like that which toured South Africa , faced questions about its strength . Because at least four first @-@ choice players chose not to tour , and another was not selected despite strong claims , the team was less representative than usual for an Ashes series . The tourists lost the Tests 4 – 1 , although Wisden suggested that the series was more competitive than suggested by the results . 
 Crawford began the tour well , taking seven wickets in the opening first @-@ class match against Western Australia . In the second game , he scored 114 runs in 58 minutes against South Australia , the fastest first @-@ class century scored in Australia until then , followed by bowling figures of five for 40 in the second innings . Crawford contributed little more with bat or ball in the lead @-@ up to the Test series ; in England , the cricketer Gilbert Jessop wrote an article suggesting that Crawford had become an " unsound " batsman . He scarcely bowled in the first Test , won by Australia , and both the English and Australian press were critical of his bowling . Frederick Fane , the acting @-@ captain of England , seemed to share this view in the second Test , withholding Crawford from the attack for some time . However , Crawford took five for 79 in the first innings helped to restrict Australia on a good batting pitch and took eight wickets in the match as England levelled the series . 
 Australia won the remaining games to win the series . In the third match , Crawford scored his only half @-@ century of the series , hitting 62 out of England 's 363 to help his team build up a first innings lead . However , Australia scored 506 at the second attempt , during which Crawford bowled nearly 46 overs to take three for 113 . The series was settled in the fourth Test ; Australia recorded a big victory after rain affected the pitch and created difficult batting conditions during England 's first innings . On the first day , Crawford took five for 48 , his best Test figures , as Australia were bowled out for 214 on a very good pitch . Wisden noted Crawford " [ mixed ] up his pace with remarkable skill " . By this stage of the tour , the press looked on him much more favourably , and he received praise for his performances . However , his heavy workload with the ball affected his health ; he lost a stone in weight during the tour , and before the final Test a Melbourne doctor diagnosed that he had " strained the right side of his heart " and advised that he see a specialist . Crawford played in that game , won by Australia , despite his ill health , with several other players unfit , and the tour manager later wrote that he looked poorly throughout and should not have played . Nevertheless , he bowled 54 overs and took eight wickets in the match . 
 Wisden considered Crawford 's bowling to be one of the most successful features of the tour and praised his ability to spin the ball , reporting : " It was said of Crawford that even on the most perfect wickets he could at times make the ball break back . " He led the English Test bowling averages with 30 wickets at an average of 24 @.@ 73 . His batting was less productive than expected ; in five Tests , he scored 162 runs at an average of 18 @.@ 00 , batting usually at number eight . In all first @-@ class matches on the tour , he scored 610 runs at 26 @.@ 52 and took 66 wickets at 25 @.@ 19 . Crawford 's contributions enhanced his growing reputation and critics expected his cricket to go from strength to strength . Australian batsman Clem Hill commented : " There are grand cricketers in this game , and then there is Jack Crawford . " The final game in the series turned out to be Crawford 's last Test . In 12 Test matches , he had scored 469 runs at an average of 22 @.@ 33 and took 39 wickets at 29 @.@ 48 . 
 As the tour neared its completion , the Australian press reported that Crawford planned to remain in Australia , that he had attracted the attention of several " society " women , and had become engaged . Even so , he returned to England when the tour ended . In May 1909 , he published a book about the tour , JN Crawford 's Trip to " Kangaroo " land . 
 = = Dispute with Surrey = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 During the 1908 season , Crawford narrowly failed to complete his third double . He scored 1 @,@ 371 runs at an average of 37 @.@ 05 and took 98 wickets at 21 @.@ 48 . His season began with a probable dispute over the Surrey captaincy . H. D. G. Leveson Gower had been appointed captain for 1908 but the combination of an injury and his marriage left him unavailable for four matches near the beginning of the season . Crawford also missed the beginning of the season ; a newspaper article by Albert Trott , a former Australian Test all @-@ rounder now playing for Middlesex , suggested that Crawford withdrew from the team because he was not appointed captain in Leveson Gower 's absence . Instead Harry Bush , who had not played first @-@ class cricket for five years , led the team . Trott was sympathetic to Crawford , stating that the Surrey committee went out of their way " to inflict a most undeserved slight " on Crawford . 
 In the remainder of the season , Crawford scored 232 against Somerset , his highest first @-@ class score , as well as centuries against Derbyshire and Hampshire . The increased strength and variety of Surrey 's bowling attack restricted his opportunities ; he was used less as a strike bowler and bowled fewer overs than in the previous season . Contemporary reports suggested that his performances tailed off as the season progressed , possibly through tiredness from having played too much cricket , and that he became a less accurate bowler through trying too hard to spin the ball . The Surrey captaincy remained unsettled ; Crawford led the team on several occasions , including Surrey 's final game of the season , when his brother Vivian captained Leicestershire , their opponents . 
 Crawford , who played as an amateur but was not independently wealthy , received an increased expenses allowance during 1908 , but other financial dealings with the committee were less successful : they paid his laundry bills in 1905 , but refused to do so afterwards ; additionally , they refused his request in 1907 to have part of his expenses paid for matches that he missed , as happened with the wages of professionals . His financial problems were compounded by his inability to find a suitable job , and the Surrey committee threatened that he " ought not to be played on the same terms " unless he " [ commenced ] to earn his livelihood " . 
 Crawford 's performances in the 1909 season were less effective than in previous years . He began well , but was later hampered by an injury which prevented him from bowling . His batting average also fell . Surrey experienced disciplinary problems with several of their professional players during the season . The club president , Lord Alverstone , favoured amateurs , arguing that a losing amateur team was preferable to a professional side that won ; several professionals were left out in favour of amateurs . Apart from adversely affecting some players ' careers , this preference had destabilised the team over several seasons . Crawford disagreed with Alverstone , but nevertheless frequently assumed the leadership in the absence of the regular captain Leveson Gower for much of the season . He captained Surrey to a win over the touring Australian team early in 1909 after a strong performance by the professional bowler Tom Rushby . However , his captaincy was strongly criticised in the press , particularly over his management of the bowling . Around this time , Crawford 's form declined . With the bat , he was often dismissed attempting aggressive shots , and he lost his effectiveness as a bowler . As a result , he was not chosen for the Gentlemen and missed selection in the Ashes series . The press continued to criticise his captaincy , despite Surrey 's good results under his leadership . Burns notes : " For a young man with no experience of prolonged failure on the cricket field , this was almost certainly a traumatic time . " 
 Surrey had other problems at this time . When the team arrived in Chesterfield to play Derbyshire , eight of the professionals were arrested following an incident in the street ; the matter was cleared up and the press suggested that the police had been over @-@ eager . The county subsequently defeated Derbyshire by an innings in early July ; Rushby and his fellow professionals Walter Lees and W. C. Smith were very successful with the ball . Shortly after this , Rushby and Lees were involved in an incident of some kind — the exact details are unknown . Leveson Gower suspended them , making them unavailable for Surrey 's second match against the Australians . Crawford was asked to lead the team for that game , but with Rushby and Lees omitted , another bowler missing and himself unable to bowl owing to a shoulder injury , he considered the attack too weak . Consequently , he refused the captaincy , and apologised to the Australians for the selection of what he thought a substandard side . In Crawford 's absence , Surrey were led by the professional Tom Hayward ; the match , affected by rain , was drawn . 
 = = = Correspondence and split = = = 
 The cricket press noticed the absence of Crawford and the professionals from Surrey 's team over the following games , and noted that Crawford was now playing club cricket . Meanwhile , Alverstone wrote to Crawford that the Surrey committee fully supported Leveson Gower 's decision to omit Rushby and Lees , and told him that Surrey would not select him again unless he apologised to Leveson Gower . Crawford refused , writing to Alverstone : " I do not know who was responsible for the selection of the second eleven sort of team furnished up for such an important match ... There seems to be some impression amongst a few of the Surrey committee that I am some young professional instead of being a young fellow who has had an experience of cricket that has seldom fallen to the lot of anyone , and my request for an alteration of the team should have had some weight " . In his History of Cricket , Benny Green describes the letter as evidence of a " literate and quietly self @-@ confident young man who will not easily be manipulated . " 
 Alverstone replied that he " regretted " Crawford 's views ; the committee respected Crawford as a " brilliant amateur with great experience " , but Crawford had not supported his captain — a prime duty for an amateur . Crawford replied that he had been unaware of the reason for the suspensions of Rushby and Lees — which Alverstone and the committee disputed — and would have supported Leveson Gower , but suggested it was unfair to ask him to captain a weak bowling team and then demand he apologise for preferring not to . He also observed that the players omitted from the team against the Australians had since been restored to the county side , making their exclusion harder to understand in the first place . 
 At this point Leveson Gower withdrew his invitation for Crawford to appear at the Scarborough Festival ; Leveson Gower also prevented Crawford 's selection for the MCC winter tour of South Africa . Crawford 's father wrote to the Surrey committee in support of his son . By the beginning of August 1909 , two weeks after the match against the Australians , the Surrey committee severed their connection with Crawford ; Leveson Gower felt that he had shown the " deepest ingratitude " . Wisden reported : " The committee were much incensed and passed a resolution that Crawford be not again asked to play for the county . " Informed of his expulsion by letter , Crawford replied to the committee a final time : " I fail to see why I should practically be branded as a criminal because , as acting captain , I declined the responsibility of skippering a team which did not include three essential players , an independence which I trust will remain in spite of the awful example made of me to every amateur in the United Kingdom . " 
 The Surrey committee initially attempted to keep the dispute private , but Crawford sent copies of the letters to the newspapers , explaining in a letter that he wished to end speculation about his absence from the Surrey team . Burns notes that this " [ generated ] a strong response from the public , mainly unsympathetic to the young amateur " in the letters pages of many newspapers . Many commentators felt that the argument could have been resolved easily had either side made concessions . Green comments that the committee probably either expected Crawford to back down , or were happy to sacrifice him to establish their authority . Another of the players involved , Rushby , left Surrey at the end of the season to play league cricket , but later returned to the team . Crawford 's father made a further attempt to end the dispute between Surrey and his son in 1910 , asking the committee to reverse their decision . Wisden reported that Alverstone declined on the grounds that it would suggest a lack of confidence in the committee , but that if Crawford " came forward in a sportsmanlike way [ Alverstone ] would be proud to give his personal support to the step proposed . This of course meant that an apology was expected . " 
 In his History of Cricket , Green contended that the " Surrey committee must be held accountable for a degree of idiocy rarely met with even in the realms of cricket administration " for the way they dealt with Crawford , " one of the world 's most prodigious all @-@ rounders . " Hart observes that Crawford was challenging figures high up in the cricket establishment on the Surrey committee ; he also suggests that Crawford 's actions in his later career , and the complaints made against him by other cricket authorities , reveal a stubbornness in his character and suggest he was not merely a victim of the Surrey committee . The Times speculated that factors other than the dispute may have contributed to Surrey 's decision . Burns believes that Crawford was feeling pressure from several directions : his inability to secure a job , possible frustration at the controlling influence of his father , a desire to be independent , his poor run of form and criticism of his captaincy . Even though , according to Burns , it was an " unwinnable battle " , he suggests simply : " Young Jack was in the mood for a fight . " 
 At the end of the season , Crawford played his last matches in England for 10 years , appearing for an " England XI " against the Australians and for the Gentlemen of the South . He had previously discussed emigrating to Australia with the Australian Test player Victor Trumper , who had asked Clem Hill to investigate a potential teaching post at St Peter 's College , Adelaide . Originally , assuming that he would be part of the MCC tour to South Africa , he planned to take take up his position in March 1910 . When the dispute arose , Crawford sent a telegram to inform the college he would take up the post of " Resident Master " early in 1910 , for a salary of £ 160 per year . Burns suggests that this knowledge that he had the offer of work may have prompted him to take a stand against the Surrey committee . In October 1910 he was offered the position of " Ordinary Master " at the college , and £ 50 towards his travel expenses if he departed immediately . He left England by boat two days later , seen off by his family . No cricket figures saw his departure , but there was considerable interest from the press . 
 = = Later career = = 
 = = = Cricket in South Australia = = = 
 At St Peter 's School , Crawford combined his teaching role with supervision of sports , including acting as coach for the cricket team . On several occasions , he had to request leave from the headmaster to play first @-@ class cricket . After arriving in Australia in December 1909 , he was playing district cricket for East Torrens within a week , and played in South Australia 's last three matches in the Sheffield Shield competition ; the team went on to win the trophy for the first time since 1893 – 94 . Crawford played a large part in this success . There was some controversy over his eligibility to play ; New South Wales initially protested , but there was a precedent for ignoring the requirement of a three @-@ month qualification period , and the New South Wales Cricket Association ( NSWCA ) Executive Committee accepted this in the case of Crawford , to the displeasure of the full NSWCA . Over four seasons , Crawford played 22 matches for South Australia , scoring 1 @,@ 512 runs at an average of 40 @.@ 86 and taking 120 wickets at 23 @.@ 86 . Green suggests that such a performance would have earned him Test selection if he had been Australian , and Wisden noted that his record in Australia was impressive . 
 In the 1910 – 11 Australian season , Crawford scored a half @-@ century in every first @-@ class game he played but was less successful with the ball . His success against the touring South Africans , perhaps helped by his experience facing their googly bowlers on previous occasions , brought him close to selection for the Australian Test team that year . The Australian Board of Control eventually decided that , as he had already appeared for England , they could not choose him ; instead they picked Charlie Kelleway as the all @-@ rounder . Crawford resigned from his position as St Peter 's in March 1911 , suggesting to the press that he might move into farming . He may have considered leaving South Australia , but the Cricket Association appointed him as a clerk at the Adelaide Oval , a position which earned £ 200 per annum , with additional responsibility for coaching and youth scouting . Meanwhile , in England , after unsuccessful attempts by his father to change the mind of the Surrey committee , including a failed bid to secure his own election to the committee , Crawford sent a written apology to Surrey at some time in 1910 . Consequently , the committee passed a motion in March 1911 which ended the ban on Crawford playing for the county . 
 Press rumours over the following 12 months cast doubt on Crawford 's future , suggestions including a return to England for the 1912 season . Instead , he remained with South Australia in the 1911 – 12 season . Although less successful generally , he played for a non @-@ representative Australian XI against the MCC touring team which contested the Ashes that season and scored 110 in as many minutes against bowlers including Sydney Barnes , at the time regarded as the greatest bowler in the world . The following season , in which South Australia again won the Shield , Crawford took seven for 31 against Western Australia , including a hat @-@ trick , and scored 163 in 177 minutes against Victoria before taking eight for 66 in their first innings . 
 In 1913 , Crawford was included in an Australian team which toured North America . The team was organised by Edgar Mayne , a South Australian batsman who tried to secure backing from the Australian Board of Control to make it an official representative team , but the Board refused to do so . In all matches , Crawford scored over 1 @,@ 000 runs and took over 200 wickets , and he was particularly effective as a bowler in the matches designated first @-@ class . He later stated that this was the best tour he had been on ; more press rumours suggested that he would return to England at the conclusion of the tour , but he returned to Australia with the rest of the team . 
 = = = Further controversy = = = 
 In December 1913 , Crawford wrote to the South Australian Cricket Association ( SACA ) asking for a six @-@ month leave of absence and a guaranteed renewal of his contract . The SACA described his letter as " arrogant " before eventually granting his request and offering him a three @-@ year contract worth around £ 300 per year , including coaching fees . In effect , he wanted to double his salary or leave to seek a position in New Zealand . Describing these events , Hart comments : " Crawford 's financial dealings with the SACA reveal him both as mercenary and as an awkward ' cuss ' . The latter aspect of his personality needs to be taken into account lest he be considered merely an establishment victim in his parting with Surrey " . On the field , Crawford was successful in 1913 – 14 . He took 34 wickets , and against New South Wales he hit 91 in 89 minutes before taking 10 wickets ; against Victoria he took eleven wickets . This latter match was his last for South Australia . Later in 1914 , Crawford toured New Zealand with an Australian team — assembled without the approval of the Australian Board of Control — which contained many leading players , under the captaincy of the former Canterbury batsman Arthur Sims . In first @-@ class games on this tour Crawford took 21 wickets and scored a century , but his most notable innings came in a minor match . Against the " XV of South Canterbury " , he scored 354 in five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter hours , striking 14 sixes and 45 fours . He and Victor Trumper shared a partnership of 298 in 69 minutes , and Monty Noble helped him to score 50 runs in 9 minutes as the Australian team scored 922 for nine . 
 In March 1914 , the Otago Cricket Association ( OCA ) offered Crawford a three @-@ year contract worth £ 350 per year , and a share in the management of a sports store , to play for them . Briefly returning to Adelaide after the tour , he resigned from his South Australia contract before moving to Dunedin in June 1914 . The South Australian Cricket Association were widely criticised for failing to retain Crawford ; in their defence , the committee publicly stated that Crawford had been offered an increased deal and had promised to turn down any offers made to him in New Zealand , but went back on his word . Later historians — Nigel Hart in his biography of Crawford , and Chris Harte in his A History of Australian Cricket ( 1993 ) — condemned Crawford as arrogant and mercenary for his behaviour towards South Australia . Harte also suggests that Crawford left Australia with many debts . Burns , however , suggests that Crawford may have wanted to maximise his earnings to support his upcoming marriage , and notes that his South Australian team @-@ mates held no grudges and even organised a farewell presentation . Once in his new position , Crawford immediately organised a Colts team which produced several future Otago players . While qualifying to play for Otago , he played club cricket in Dunedin , scoring 559 runs and taking 88 wickets . During the 1914 – 15 season he appeared in four first @-@ class games for Otago , in which he scored 337 runs and took 30 wickets . He briefly returned to Australia in 1915 to marry Anita Schmidt in Melbourne in April . Schmidt — from Adelaide and described in the society press as a " beauty " — and Crawford met in 1912 when the former was 18 years old and became well @-@ known as a couple at fashionable events in Adelaide . Burns suggests that the wedding took place in Melbourne rather than Adelaide because Crawford may have been avoiding his creditors . Two days after the wedding , the couple returned to New Zealand . 
 Crawford 's wages caused the OCA some financial difficulty and were the cause of extended negotiations in 1915 . Part of the settlement involved Crawford receiving a lower salary in return for freedom to offer his services to other clubs on a freelance basis . As a consequence , he represented different teams throughout the season in local cricket . He was also paid to coach at Otago Boys High School . There were other difficulties ; the association complained about the lateness of Crawford 's report on the Otago team , and were unhappy that he also coached golf . Crawford in turn told the association that several Otago players were late for practice . After further complaints about Crawford 's coaching in 1916 , the OCA decided to terminate his contract . Crawford initially offered to continue for less money — £ 245 . The OCA bargained , suggesting a payment of £ 200 , whereupon Crawford insisted that he should be paid £ 300 . The OCA then proposed to terminate his contract immediately for a payment of £ 150 but he refused . He was eventually paid £ 200 in June to leave Otago . That November , with the First World War into its third year , New Zealand brought in conscription . Crawford was called up in July 1917 , and was posted to a training camp near Wellington in late 1917 . During this time , he played twice for Wellington 's cricket team in first @-@ class matches during early 1918 . When given weekend passes , he visited his wife who was left alone in Dunedin . He travelled to England prior to a posting to the Western Front , although he arrived too late to join the fighting . He was part of the New Zealand Rifle Brigade but it is unclear what his rank was . The Repton School War Register states that he was a rifleman but New Zealand press accounts named him as a quartermaster sergeant . According to a 1992 article in Wisden Cricket Monthly by Jim Sullivan , Crawford was demoted while he was in the army . The reasons are unknown , but Burns speculates that his " independent and obstinate nature " made it difficult for him to accept military discipline . While Crawford was in the army , his wife moved to Adelaide . According to Anita , the marriage became unhappy in 1916 and Crawford left her in November of that year . She claimed that he had not supported her financially from that point . When the war ended , she returned to live in Australia with her parents . Her subsequent career as a dress designer and fashion buyer necessitated a move to London , where Crawford was living , in 1921 but the couple never reconciled . They were divorced , with some publicity in Australia , in 1923 ; in court , she gave evidence that he had an affair with a " third party " . She went on to remarry and to have a successful career as a designer and orchestral conductor . 
 = = = Return to England = = = 
 After the First World War , Crawford returned to live in England , and was demobilised from the New Zealand Army in April 1919 . Looking for work , he wrote to Surrey offering to play for them if they found him some employment in turn , but the committee , while writing that they would be pleased if he played for the county again , could not " see [ their ] way to find him employment " . Crawford may have been contemplating playing professional cricket — unheard of for a former Public School cricketer — but instead found work at Repton , his old school . It is unclear what his position at Repton was at this time ; he seems to have had no official cricketing role and it is possible he worked as a teacher simply to maintain his amateur status . In any case , Crawford only remained at Repton until the end of the academic year ; his short stay may have been the result of poor results by the cricket team . However , Burns suggests : " Another indication that the school was not entirely happy to be associated with the Surrey rebel , whose baggage also included an indifferent war record , was that when the Old Boys cricket team , the Repton Pilgrims , was formed in 1921 , Crawford was alone among the school 's former distinguished players not to be made a member . He was not invited to join the club until 1952 . " 
 Having settled his disagreement with Surrey , Crawford resumed his English first @-@ class cricket career in 1919 . After appearing for the Gentlemen against the Players , Crawford returned to play for Surrey against the Australian Imperial Forces . He scored 144 not out , which was later described by Wisden as the innings of his life . Surrey were 26 for five in reply to the tourists ' innings of 436 when Crawford came in to bat . Neville Cardus reported : " [ Crawford ] fell upon the advancing Australian attack , and by driving seldom equalled , threw it back . " He more than doubled his score after the ninth wicket had fallen , hitting 73 out of the last 80 runs scored in 35 minutes to take Surrey past the target required to avoid the follow @-@ on . Among his other successes , he scored 92 against Yorkshire . Playing against Kent , he hit 48 not out as Jack Hobbs and he scored 96 in 32 minutes ; this partnership took Surrey to victory as they chased an apparently impossible chase in the short time remaining in the match . 
 In total , Crawford played in eight games in 1919 , scoring 488 runs and taking 20 wickets . Wisden commented that his batting was as good as it had ever been , but his bowling lacked spin and accuracy . He played only four more times in first @-@ class cricket . Part of the explanation was that he joined Dunlop Rubber as a manager at one of its mills in Rochdale . He played as an amateur for Rochdale Cricket Club in 1920 , but by 1921 he had left the club — the Manchester Guardian speculated that he had returned to Surrey . He returned to live with his family in Merton Park , and played for the local cricket club . Of his first @-@ class matches , one was for Surrey against the Australian touring team of 1921 and the others were for teams representing the Gentlemen . In his entire first @-@ class career , Crawford scored 9 @,@ 488 runs at an average of 32 @.@ 60 and took 815 wickets at 20 @.@ 66 . 
 From the mid @-@ 1920s until his retirement in 1952 , Crawford worked for the importers Elders and <unk> . He played cricket and hockey for the firm until the Second World War , but kept a far lower profile than in his earlier cricketing life . He married his second wife , Hilda May Beman , in December 1925 , but he never had children . He maintained a loose connection with cricket ; he appeared at a birthday dinner for Pelham Warner , at a centenary celebration for the Free Foresters Cricket Club and in a radio broadcast for Jack Hobbs 's 80th birthday . Crawford had a stroke in early 1962 and remained ill for the rest of the year ; he died , aged 76 , in a Surrey hospital on 2 May 1963 . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
