 Prior to the initial events of Rewrite , Kotarou had been a low @-@ ranking member of Guardian posted in Kazamatsuri , where he encounters Kagari . In one timeline , Kotarou is badly injured by Kagari , though he is healed into a half @-@ familiar existence by a young Kotori with a piece of Kagari 's ribbon . Kotarou 's aging is also slowed as a consequence . Kotarou falls into a coma , and he is administered an amnesiac drug to forget about Gaia and Guardian . By the time he wakes up , Kotori is in junior high school , and Kotarou later graduates junior high with Kotori . He goes on to spend time in high school with the occult research society as shown before . In a different timeline when he encounters Kagari , Kotarou lets her go . 
 Kotarou becomes disillusioned with Guardian 's tactics and returns to Kazamatsuri where he meets Kagari again . She tells him she must initiate re @-@ evolution , but since this would lead to a dead world , Kagari must find good memories brought out through the betterment of life on Earth , as opposed to bad memories caused by war and conflict . Kotarou agrees to help her and he acts as a double agent , demolishing Gaia 's and Guardian 's infrastructure in Kazamatsuri and killing those on either side . Kazamatsuri is partly destroyed when Gaia attempts to force Kagari to initiate re @-@ evolution , but Kotarou manages to stop this from occurring . As a result , Kagari praises Kotarou and shows gratitude for showing her satisfactory memories . Kotarou unwillingly stabs Kagari , and after a kiss , they evolve into an orb of light inside a tree . 
 Humanity survives in the aftermath , but the world experiences an ice age outside of Kazamatsuri . In the city , a huge tree grows 500 meters tall in three years , which contains the orb of light from Kotarou and Kagari . The five heroines , now in high school , investigate the tree as members of the occult research society and transform Kotarou into a familiar , but he refuses to do what they demand . Kotarou takes the girls to the Moon where they are shown circled around a seedling ( as the embodiment of the Moon 's Kagari ) sprouting on the otherwise barren regolith . 
 = = Development = = 
 Rewrite is Key 's ninth game , and is the first of Key 's visual novels to feature a 16 : 9 image aspect ratio instead of the previously @-@ used 4 : 3 aspect ratio . Rewrite is also the first Key game to be developed on VisualArt 's ' game engine <unk> . The project 's planning was headed by Itaru Hinoue , who is also the art director and character designer for Rewrite . During the time when Key was developing their fifth game Tomoyo After : It 's a Wonderful Life in 2005 , Hinoue had more free time since she was just helping Fumio with the character design , and that is when Hinoue got the initial idea for Rewrite . Hinoue wrote a proposal for the basis of Rewrite 's premise and passed it on to Takahiro Baba , the president of VisualArt 's . 
 After the project was accepted , Hinoue consulted Key 's former main scenario writer Jun Maeda on various game scenario writers to employ for Rewrite . However , the one writer Hinoue wanted on the project was Romeo Tanaka , who she had become a fan of after she played <unk> 's 2003 visual novel Cross Channel , written by Tanaka . While he did not initially accept the offer , Tanaka decided to take the project when he was given the time he needed to do the job . When he accepted it , Tanaka was still unaware that Maeda had stepped down as Key 's main scenario writer , and he became more interested when he was told that he would write Rewrite 's overall story . 
 At the time , the only other scenario writer on the project was Yūto Tonokawa of Key , who previously contributed on Key 's sixth game Little Busters ! . Tanaka was tasked with drawing up the entire scenario framework , and during this time , Takahiro Baba suggested that one more heroine route be added to the story to bring the total to six , but to do that they had to hire another writer . Ryukishi07 of 07th Expansion , the creators of the Higurashi no Naku Koro ni and <unk> no Naku Koro ni game franchises , was brought in as the third scenario writer after Baba suggested in late 2007 that Key ask him to join the staff for Rewrite . Ultimately , Tanaka wrote the story leading up to the heroine 's routes , Kotori 's and Akane 's <unk> , the Moon and Terra routes , and the bonus Oppai route . Tonokawa wrote Chihaya 's and Sizuru 's routes , and Ryukishi07 wrote Lucia 's story . Tanaka initially planned on the length of Rewrite 's story to be on about the same scale as Key 's second game Air , but as it increased in size , he later attempted to keep it close to the scale of Little Busters ! . 
 Rewrite marked the first time since Key 's third game Clannad that Itaru Hinoue was staffed as the sole art director and character designer in a Key visual novel . The school uniforms for the heroines in the game are old designs that Hinoue created and used before in dōjinshi ( self @-@ published work ) . In particular , Hinoue spent much time on drawing the character art in Rewrite due in part to the design of the school uniforms , the fact that most of the female characters have long hair , and because of the increased aspect ratio . Six more graphic artists worked on Rewrite : Torino headed the background art , Ryou <unk> designed and illustrated the monsters , and the computer graphics in the game were done by Na @-@ Ga , Shinory , Mochisuke , and Minimo Tayama . The game 's soundtrack was composed by Key 's signature composers Jun Maeda and Shinji Orito , in addition to Maiko Iuchi of I 've Sound , Sōshi Hosoi , and Ryō Mizutsuki . Maeda also contributed on the quality control for the game . 
 = = = Marketing and release = = = 
 Rewrite was announced on April 1 , 2008 , which led to some speculation whether it was an April Fool 's joke or an actual announcement of Key 's new game . It was announced the following day on Key 's blog that production on Rewrite had begun . On April 1 , 2010 , Rewrite 's official website was updated with the announcement that the game would be an adult game , but this turned out to be an April Fool 's joke the following day . It was later reported by Key in February 2011 that an adult version of Rewrite would definitely not be produced . On April 1 , 2011 , Key released an anime video featuring the song " Rewrite " by Psychic Lover . The video was animated by White Fox , and directed by Motoki Tanaka . Again there was some speculation on its validity , but Key confirmed the following day that the video and song would be used in Rewrite as the game 's second opening theme song . 
 Key hosted a promotional event on May 8 , 2011 called Rewrite <unk> in Akihabara . Displayed in the event hall were various large illustrations of Rewrite characters by Hinoue , as well as illustrations of the characters by various artists that were originally posted on Rewrite 's official website . The event featured live performances by NanosizeMir and Psychic Lover , as well as on @-@ stage discussions of Rewrite development staff members and voice actors featured in the game . The staff members included Tonokawa and Ryukishi07 who discussed the game 's scenario , and Orito and Hoshi who talked about Rewrite 's music . Orito also performed at the event on an electric guitar decorated with images of Rewrite including character images and the title logo . The guitar was later sold on Yahoo ! Auctions in July 2011 for 405 @,@ 000 yen . Promotional items that could be purchased at the event included a Rewrite introduction pamphlet , a Rewrite stationary set , a remix album titled Deejay Busters ! featuring remixes of music from Little Busters ! and Key 's eighth game Kud Wafter , and a Kanon light novel titled <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> , The Girls ' Opinions ) written by Mariko Shimizu and illustrated by Zen . 
 A lengthy game demo of Rewrite came bundled with the limited edition version of Kud Wafter released on June 25 , 2010 . Another slightly longer version of the demo , ver . 2 @.@ 00 , was released on Rewrite 's official website on March 26 , 2011 . A free benchmark program titled Chihaya Rolling became available for download at Key 's official website on August 20 , 2010 . The program , which also came with the previously released demo , features Chihaya rolling down a hill and hitting boulders and Kotori 's pet dog Chibi @-@ Moth . The purpose of the program is to test whether a given Windows computer will be able to play Rewrite or other games using the <unk> game engine . If a rank of D and above is shown , gameplay of Rewrite will be normal , but if E is shown , gameplay will be fairly normal other than a few exceptions . Between April 21 and May 9 , 2011 , VisualArt 's accepted orders for a " Rewrite Note PC " laptop in two versions : a normal version and an AKN version with higher specifications ; AKN refers to Akane . The AKN version has one random signature from either Hinoue , Orito or Tonokawa , though VisualArt 's also sold the AKN version without the signature . The AKN version also contained 16 Rewrite wallpaper images , with the normal version having nine . The laptops feature five separate themes of system sounds , which use dialogue of the voice actresses of five Rewrite heroines : Kotori , Chihaya , Akane , Sizuru and Lucia . 
 While Rewrite was originally planned to be released on April 28 , 2011 , the game was later released on June 24 , 2011 as a limited edition version , playable as a 2 @-@ disc DVD set on a Windows PC . The limited edition came bundled with an approximately 80 @-@ page official guide book titled Rewrite of the Life , a remix album titled Soil , a CD containing recordings of the Internet radio show Radio Rewrite , three original cards from the Weiß Schwarz trading card game , an original card from the Lycèe Trading Card Game , three extra DVD case covers , and a mobile phone strap . Over two dozen stores in Akihabara and online offered special promotional items if the limited edition version of the game was bought at their store . These items included telephone cards , gift cards , mobile phone straps , pin buttons , desk mats , posters , cushion covers , tote bags , tapestries , and bed sheets . The regular edition of Rewrite was released on September 30 , 2011 . Prototype released a PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) port of Rewrite on April 17 , 2014 ; those who pre @-@ ordered the game also received an exclusive drama CD . Prototype also released a PlayStation Vita ( PS Vita ) version on August 28 , 2014 , and the drama CD bundled with the PSP version was also bundled with the PS Vita version for a limited time only . Prototype released a PlayStation 3 version on February 11 , 2015 . 
 = = = Fan disc and Rewrite + = = = 
 In interviews before the release of Rewrite , Tonokawa expressed interest in expanding on the story if the game was well received . Shortly after Rewrite 's release , Tonokawa approached Takahiro Baba with the proposal , who gave his approval for the production of a fan disc . Titled Rewrite Harvest festa ! , the fan disc was produced by the same staff as Rewrite , and was released on July 27 , 2012 , playable on a Windows PC . It came bundled with the fan disc 's original soundtrack titled Feast , a CD containing recordings of Radio Rewrite , an original booklet , two mobile phone straps , and one promotional card each from the trading card games Weiß Schwarz , Lycèe and Phantasmagoria . 
 The scenario consists of spin @-@ off stories which expand on Rewrite 's story , the harvest festival from Rewrite 's story is expanded on in Harvest festa ! , and minigames are included during the course of gameplay , as in Rewrite . The size of the scenario in Harvest festa ! is roughly comparable in size to Tomoyo After . The fan disc also features official character art of Inoue , a supporting character who was not illustrated in Rewrite . Unlike Rewrite , Kotarou is fully voiced in the fan disc . The five system sound themes included with the Rewrite laptops were released with the fan disc , with the addition of dialogue of Kagari by Kana Hanazawa . 
 To advertise Harvest festa ! , Good Smile Racing produced an <unk> ( a car featuring illustrations of anime @-@ styled characters ) of a 2008 <unk> <unk> Cargo decorated with images from the game , and drove it around Japan between May 30 and July 26 , 2012 . The car was put onto the Japanese Yahoo ! Auction website on September 3 , 2012 and sold for 1 @,@ 806 @,@ 000 yen after starting the auction at 1 yen . Like the previously held Rewrite Fes . , Key hosted a promotional event on June 10 , 2012 called Rewrite Harvest festa ! <unk> in Akihabara . The event featured live performances by NanosizeMir and Aoi Tada , as well as on @-@ stage discussions of development staff members Tonokawa and Orito , and voice actors featured in the game . 
 Key will released an updated version of Rewrite titled Rewrite + on July 29 , 2016 for Windows . It includes various improvements and revisions to the scenario led by Romeo Tanaka , and additional illustrations not in the original game . Rewrite + contains the additional content featured in the consumer ports , including fully voicing over 500 characters , and the official character art of Inoue . Rewrite + will come bundled with Rewrite Harvest festa ! , a remix album titled Selene featuring music from both Rewrite and Harvest festa ! , a CD containing recordings of the Internet radio show Radio Rewrite , and an original card from the Weiß Schwarz trading card game . An English version of Rewrite + has been announced . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Print media = = = 
 A manga adaptation , illustrated by <unk> Tōjō and titled Rewrite : Side @-@ B , began serialization in the October 2010 issue of ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki G 's Magazine . The manga ended serialization in the magazine 's May 2014 issue and continued serialization in Dengeki G 's Comic between the June 2014 and July 2015 issues . Eight tankōbon volumes for Side @-@ B were released between April 27 , 2011 and July 27 , 2015 . A second manga , illustrated by Shūichi Kawakami and titled Rewrite : Side @-@ R , was serialized between the April 2011 and September 2013 issues of ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki Daioh . Five volumes of Side @-@ R were released between June 27 , 2011 and October 26 , 2013 . Side @-@ B and Side @-@ R are meant to be read together as a pair . A third , four @-@ panel comic strip manga , illustrated by <unk> Yano and titled Rewrite : Okaken e <unk> ! ! ( Rewrite <unk> ! ! ) , was serialized between the June 2011 and April 2014 issues of Ichijinsha 's Manga 4 @-@ koma Palette . Two volumes of Okaken e <unk> ! ! were released : the first on July 21 , 2012 and the second on August 22 , 2014 . A fourth manga , illustrated by Yayoi Hazuki and titled Rewrite : Okaken Blog ( Rewrite ‒ <unk> ☆ <unk> <unk> ‒ ) , was serialized between volumes 20 and 29 of ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki G 's Festival ! Comic sold between October 26 , 2011 and April 26 , 2013 . Two volumes of Okaken Blog were released : the first on July 27 , 2012 , and the second on July 27 , 2013 . 
 There have also been several sets of manga anthologies produced by different companies and drawn by a multitude of different artists . An anthology published by <unk> and illustrated by Zen titled Earth Star Comics Rewrite was published in September 2011 . Two volumes of an anthology series released by Ichijinsha under the title Rewrite Comic Anthology were released between September and November 2011 . Enterbrain released two volumes of a collection of four @-@ panel comic strips under the title Magi @-@ Cu 4 @-@ koma Rewrite between December 2011 and March 2012 . A manga anthology titled Rewrite Comic A La Carte : Okaken Katsudō <unk> ( Rewrite コミックアラカルト <unk> ) appeared in Kadokawa Shoten 's Comp Ace and a single volume was released in October 2011 . 
 A series of seven short stories titled Official Another Story Rewrite : Ha <unk> <unk> <unk> de ( Official Another Story Rewrite <unk> ) , written by the scenario writers of Rewrite and illustrated by Zen , were serialized between the September 2011 and March 2012 issues of Dengeki G 's Magazine . Self @-@ described as an official illustrated story for Rewrite , the short stories were collected into a single volume released on July 27 , 2012 . Three volumes of a short story compilation series by several authors titled Rewrite SSS were published by Harvest between October 2011 and January 2012 . Four volumes of a light novel anthology published by Paradigm under their VA Bunko imprint titled Rewrite Novel Anthology were released between November 2011 and February 2012 . A 224 @-@ page art book titled Rewrite Perfect Visual Book ( Rewrite パーフェクトビジュアルブック ) was released on November 30 , 2011 by ASCII Media Works . The art book contains story summaries of the game 's scenarios , information on the cast of characters , interviews from the production staff , and illustrations featuring art from the game . 
 = = = Internet radio show = = = 
 An Internet radio show to promote Rewrite called Radio Rewrite : <unk> Tera Kazamatsuri Gakuin <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ・ <unk> , Radio Rewrite : Terra Monthly Magazine - Kazamatsuri Academy Branch ) broadcast 70 episodes between May 27 , 2011 and September 28 , 2012 . The show was streamed online every Friday , and was produced by the Japanese Internet radio stations Hibiki and Onsen . The show was hosted by Masakazu Morita and <unk> Saitō , who voice Kotarou Tennouji and Kotori Kanbe from the game , respectively . Seven CD compilation volumes containing all 70 episodes were released between September 30 , 2011 and August 28 , 2013 . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 A 13 @-@ episode anime television series adaptation , directed by <unk> and produced by 8 @-@ Bit , premiered on July 2 , 2016 . The series is also being streamed by Crunchyroll with English subtitles . The screenplay is written by Takashi <unk> and Tatsuya Takahashi with Romeo Tanaka and Kai credited with collaborating on the composition and scripts . The series features character design by Masayuki Nonaka who based the designs on Itaru Hinoue 's original concepts . The series will be released on seven DVD and Blu @-@ ray compilation volumes between September 28 , 2016 and March 22 , 2017 by Aniplex . The fourth DVD and Blu @-@ ray volume will include a video game for Windows written by Ryukishi07 . 
 The opening theme is " Philosophyz ( TV animation ver . ) " sung by Runa Mizutani of NanosizeMir and the ending theme is " Sasayaka na Hajimari ( TV animation ver . ) " ( <unk> 〜 TV animation ver . 〜 ) performed by NanosizeMir . Both songs are remixes of theme songs featured in the original Rewrite and Rewrite Harvest festa ! visual novels . The rest of the soundtrack for the anime series is sampled from the Rewrite Original Soundtrack . 
 = = Music = = 
 Rewrite has seven pieces of theme music : two opening themes and five ending themes . The first opening theme is " Philosophyz " by Runa Mizutani of the dōjin music group NanosizeMir . The second opening theme is " Rewrite " by Psychic Lover . The first ending theme is " Yami no Kanata e " ( <unk> , Beyond the Darkness ) by NanosizeMir , and it is used for Kotori 's , Chihaya 's and Lucia 's scenarios . The next two ending themes are " Koibumi " ( <unk> , Love Letter ) and " Itsuwaranai Kimi e " ( <unk> ) , both sung by Nagi Yanagi . " Koibumi " is used for Sizuru 's route , and " Itsuwaranai Kimi e " is used for Akane 's story . " Itsuwaranai Kimi e " is also used as an insert song during Lucia 's route . The last two ending themes are " Watari no Uta " ( <unk> ) used in the Moon route , and " Canoe " used in the Terra route , both sung by Aoi Tada . 
 In Rewrite Harvest festa ! , the opening theme is " Harvest " by Tada , and the ending theme is " Sasayaka na Hajimari " ( <unk> ) by NanosizeMir . " Philosophyz " , " Itsuwaranai Kimi e " , and " Watari no Uta " are used in the fan disc as insert songs . Eight of the main characters from Rewrite have background music leitmotifs — the six heroines , Haruhiko Yoshino and Sakuya Ohtori . Kagari 's theme is " <unk> " ( <unk> , Daisy ) ; Kotori 's theme is " <unk> " ( <unk> , Soft <unk> ) ; Chihaya 's theme is " <unk> " ( <unk> , Morning Glory ) ; Akane 's theme is " <unk> " ( <unk> , <unk> ) ; Sizuru 's theme is " Carnation " ( <unk> , <unk> ) ; Lucia 's theme is " <unk> " ( <unk> , <unk> ) ; Yoshino 's theme is " DIS is a Pain " ; lastly , Sakuya 's theme is " Sanka " ( <unk> ) . 
 The single for " Philosophyz " was released on January 28 , 2011 . The single contained " Philosophyz " and " Yami no Kanata e " in original , short and instrumental versions . A single for " Rewrite " was released on May 27 , 2011 . As with Key 's previous works ( excluding Planetarian : The Reverie of a Little Planet ) , a music album came bundled with the limited edition release of the game ; the album , released on June 24 , 2011 , is titled Soil and contains arranged versions of ten tracks of the game 's music . Rewrite 's original soundtrack was first released on August 12 , 2011 at Comiket 80 containing 63 tracks ; it was later released for general sale on October 28 , 2011 . A remix album titled Branch was released on December 29 , 2011 at Comiket 81 . The original soundtrack for Rewrite Harvest festa ! , titled Feast , was released bundled with the fan disc on July 27 , 2012 . A remix album titled Dye Mixture featuring tracks from both Rewrite and Harvest festa ! was released on December 29 , 2012 at Comiket 83 . Another remix album titled <unk> Mor featuring tracks from Rewrite was released on December 29 , 2015 at Comiket 89 . A single performed by Runa Mizutani and NanosizeMir will be released in July 2016 for the anime series titled " Philosophyz / Sasayaka na Hajimari " , which contains the anime 's opening and ending themes in original , short , and instrumental versions . A remix album titled Selene featuring tracks from both Rewrite and Harvest festa ! will be released on July 29 , 2016 bundled with Rewrite + . Each of the singles and albums released were on Key 's record label Key Sounds Label . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2011 , Rewrite ranked five times in the top ten in national PC game pre @-@ orders in Japan . The rankings were at No. 9 in January , No. 4 in February , No. 3 in March , and twice at No. 1 in April and May . Rewrite ranked first in terms of national sales of PC games in Japan in June 2011 . Rewrite would rank twice more in the top 50 highest selling PC games in Japan , at No. 14 in July and at No. 29 in August 2011 . According to public sales information published at Gamasutra , taken from the Japanese Amazon website , Rewrite was the number one top seller of PC games in Japan the day of its release . Rewrite premiered as the No. 1 game sold on Getchu.com , a major redistributor of visual novel and domestic anime products , during the month of its release , and at No. 30 in July . The game would go on to be the No. 8 game sold for the first half of 2011 , and at No. 11 for the whole year . In 2012 , Rewrite Harvest festa ! ranked three times in the top ten in national PC game pre @-@ orders in Japan . The rankings were at No. 6 in April , No. 3 in May , and No. 1 in June . Harvest festa ! ranked first in terms of national sales of PC games in Japan in July 2012 . 
 On the day of its release , two video game retailers in Akihabara opened two hours early for advance sales of Rewrite . The main Gamers store opened at 7 a.m. to a line of about 200 people . The Sofmap Amusement store opened at 9 a.m. and used two floors in the eight @-@ story building for sales of Rewrite : the fifth floor was used for general sale and advance orders of the game , while the eighth floor was used solely for those who had reserved their copy . The PSP port in 2014 was reviewed by the Japanese video game magazine Famitsu , which gave it an overall score of 30 / 40 ( out of the four individual review scores of 7 , 8 , 8 and 7 ) . 
 Key held a character popularity poll between December 15 – 31 , 2011 for every character from the game , even very minor ones . The top three winners would each get a downloadable wallpaper , and first place would get original artwork for the wallpaper . A voter could vote one time for up to three characters per day . While Sizuru led at first , Akane surged ahead near the end . The top three winners were Akane with 18 @,@ 042 votes , Sizuru with 16 @,@ 839 votes , and Lucia with 15 @,@ 047 votes . 
 = Abby Cunningham = 
 Abby Fairgate ( formerly Cunningham , Ewing and Sumner ) is a fictional character from the CBS soap opera Knots Landing , a long @-@ running serial about middle class life on the fictional cul @-@ de @-@ sac known as Seaview Circle in Los Angeles , California . She was played by actress Donna Mills between 1980 and 1989 . Abby was created by producer David Jacobs as one of Knots Landing 's earliest characters . She debuted in the first episode of the second season . Mills remained a principal actor in the series until she left in its tenth season . She returned for the two @-@ part series finale to provide closure for the fans . The character made her last television appearance in 1997 , when she appeared in the Knots Landing reunion series Knots Landing : Back to the Cul @-@ de @-@ Sac , and was reunited with former cast members . 
 Prior to being cast on Knots Landing , Mills was predominantly known for playing " damsel in distress " roles , which is why the producers didn 't initially consider her . Abby 's storylines focused on business dealings , affairs and family troubles . Introduced as the sister of Sid Fairgate , she was initially portrayed as a friendly , warm @-@ hearted woman with great love for her children . In due time , she evolved into the series ' main antagonist , constantly causing mayhem in others ' lives . According to series creator David Jacobs , the producers always intended Abby to be a J.R. Ewing @-@ esque character . Jacobs said , " When we were casting the role of Abby , we were looking for a homey type , someone whom the other women characters would trust . It was our intention to have this nice person gain the trust of the other women and then cause trouble for them . We didn 't want the other characters and the audience to know that there was a scheming person under this nice facade . We wanted her to come on as a good person and then evolve into a vixen . " 
 The character became known for her manipulative behavior and was often labeled a " soap vixen " . She was praised by television critics , with Carolyn McGuire of The Chicago Tribune saying : " Whoever shows up as the next villain , chances are his or her work won 't be easy . That 's because at least one resident — Abby Ewing — knows how to dish nasty with the best of them . " When asked which character he wished he had created , Mike Kelly , the creator of ABC 's popular primetime @-@ soap opera Revenge , said : " Abby Ewing . Donna Mills , you rocked my world . " John Mapes of The Biography Channel said , " Any great soap opera needs a great villain . While viewers may identify more with the protagonist , the villains in a serial drama always spice things up , cause trouble , and make it more fun to watch . " 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Mills portrayed Abby from 1980 – 1989 . Prior to being cast in Knots Landing , Mills was primarily known for playing the " damsel in distress " archetype in both film and television media . The actress became somewhat famous for playing these roles , often leading to unwanted typecasting . In an interview with Jerry Buck for the Toledo Blade , Mills said : " I got tired of playing the victim . It 's a more active role . Abby keeps things stirred up , and I like that . " According to Jacobs , Abby was not planned when the show began . He knew that he wanted a female J.R. Ewing @-@ esque character . However , he had a different sense of the character and who would wind up in the role . With Mills ' reputation of playing the victim , he initially didn 't choose her for the part . 
 In the early planning stages of season two , CBS executive Tony <unk> suggested Mills for the role of Abby Cunningham . The character was initially conceived as the sister of Sid Fairgate ( Don Murray ) , one of the central characters on the show , who was killed off in the next season . Casting agent Barbara Miller @-@ <unk> introduced Mills and Jacobs . After meeting with Miller @-@ <unk> , Jacobs decided to have Mills test for the role , which was unusual for an established actress . She auditioned shortly after and convinced the producers that she was the right person for the part . Jacobs said , " She came back that afternoon and she read and she was great , and it meant reshaping the role a little bit , but , um , not that much . You know , she still came in , she drove up in the Volvo station wagon . She had the kids in the back . It was very middle class . " 
 In 1989 , Mills announced her intention to leave the long @-@ running nighttime soap after nine years as Abby . According to Mills , she wanted to take a break from acting for a while , and from Abby as well . In an interview with The <unk> Standard , Mills explained : " I 'm tired of the show . It 's been too long . I 'm not particularly happy with the way they 've been writing Abby lately . She 's too soft . I 'd like Abby to get back to her old self . " Mills returned for the series finale and the subsequent reunion specials ( Knots Landing : Back to the Cul @-@ de @-@ Sac and Knots Landing Reunion : Together Again ) . Virginia Heffernan of The New York Times praised her scenes with fellow actor William Devane , saying : " The Jean <unk> @-@ scented banter between the actors Donna Mills and William Devane is both the <unk> and the most enlightening part of the reunion special . " 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 The producers always intended Abby to be the " pot <unk> " . Devane , who played Greg Sumner , said that the show was looking for a woman " in high heels with the throat of the guy – that 's what they wanted " . He added , " It was your character that influenced all these unhappy women today who have jobs and are out there working hard , trying to raise kids by themselves , going crazy . " Mark Harris of Entertainment Weekly said , " Michelle Phillips is the last of prime @-@ time 's great schemers , an essential element of the show since the departure of Donna Mills , whose Abby Cunningham was Knots ' resident harpy for years . " 
 In an interview with Greg Hernandez , Mills explained : " I knew that she was going to be a trouble maker but actually knowing the writers and the producers , I knew that the character would be rounded and have dimension and that was really fun for me to play . It wasn ’ t one @-@ note all the time , it was a lot of different colors . " Television personality Julie Chen said , " The women of Knots , Michele Lee , Joan Van Ark , and Donna Mills have been compared to earth , wind , and fire , with Donna Mills bringing the heat as Abby , the conniving vixen that everybody loved to hate . " According to Mills , many people were wary of meeting her in person because they assumed she would be like Abby . She said , " They were very <unk> about what I was going to do . " Mike <unk> of NBC said that her character was " the archetypal predatory female " , while Meredith Vieira said " even the bad girl could show a tender side every once in a while " , in reference to her daughter 's on @-@ screen drug addiction . It was this very storyline that showed Abby at her most vulnerable and human , a story which audiences recall as perhaps one of her most desperate and motherly of moments . In addition to that , Abby also helped Val get her kidnapped babies back , even though she was blamed she said she " could never do a thing like that to anyone " . When Karen and Mack began to have some problems in their marriage and Karen distanced herself from Mack , Abby confronted Karen aggressively and told her she was wrong for doing so to him . 
 Mills became known for wearing a lot of eye makeup in her scenes , to the point where it became a major character trait for her fictional personality . Carole Glinez of Star magazine said , " Mills was so famous for her dramatic eye makeup on the show that she produced her own beauty video called The Eyes Have It . " Eddie Shapiro of Out magazine said that " Abby 's eye makeup was legendary ! " Glinez also referred to her as Knots " Fox " , saying : " Mills was one of the queens of the nighttime soap . Abby Cunningham Ewing was the conniving , bed hopping blonde beauty on the Dallas spin @-@ off Knots Landing . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Abby was always intended to be the show 's promiscuous seductress . In an interview with Carolyn McGuire of The Chicago Tribune , Jacobs said : " When we were casting the role of Abby , we were looking for a homey type , someone whom the other women characters would trust . It was our intention to have this nice person gain the trust of the other women and then cause trouble for them . We didn 't want the other characters and the audience to know that there was a scheming person under this nice facade . We wanted her to come on as a good person and then evolve into a vixen . " Author June L. May of Monsters and Critics said , " In season two of Knots Landing , a catalyst moves into the neighborhood in the form of Sid ’ s sister , the drop dead gorgeous Abby Cunningham . Whether Abby is directly involved , or simply in the neighborhood , she has a detrimental affect on the harmony of couples . " Almost immediately , Abby sank her claws into Richard Avery ( John <unk> ) , one of the neighborhood husbands . Though the affair was brief , it set the stage for what was to come . 
 In season three , Abby sets her sights on the wealthy Gary Ewing , the husband of her good friend Valene Ewing . While Gary initially thwarted her attempts , he eventually gave in and had a full @-@ fledged affair with her . Actress Joan Van Ark , who played Val , said : " I went in way early , whenever Donna Mills came on the show , and told David Jacobs that it made total sense that Gary would fall for Abby . Because they were celebrating Donna Mills and she became the center I can ’ t believe I did that but it really provided us with some great stories . And it was the longest running story on the show . " Dan Lewis of the Sarasota Journal said , " In a recent episode , Abby lures Gary Ewing into an affair , and sets it up so that his wife will discover it . After she completed the scene , Miss Mills recalls , the crew hissing at her – jokingly , of course . " The character was known for her numerous rivalries with other female characters , such as Paige and Karen . Carole Glinez said , " Mills ' character faced her rival Paige , played by future Desperate Housewives sexpot Nicollette Sheridan . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Before her first appearance , Abby meets and marries Jeff Cunningham . They move to San Luis Obispo , California , and have two children , Olivia and Brian . When she and Jeff divorce , Abby moves to San Diego . On the way she stops to visit her brother , Sid , and decides to stay in Knots Landing . She rents a house on Seaview Circle , and has an affair with Richard Avery . Abby soon sets her eyes on neighbor Gary Ewing , which becomes obvious after she starts working as a bookkeeper for Knots Landing Motors . She and Gary get the company involved with the mob , which results in her brother Sid 's death . At the same time , Jeff kidnaps her children . She eventually gets them back . Abby and Gary go into a methanol business together and start an affair . Valene finds out and kicks Gary out , so he moves in with Abby . Gary soon inherits millions from his father Jock Ewing 's death . Abby uses the money to manipulate those around her , and Gary starts drinking again . Gary <unk> up and buys a ranch , similar to Southfork , the ranch his family owns . They move there and marry . 
 Abby begins running Gary 's company , and uses his money to fund her own corporation , <unk> , which she uses to develop Lotus Point . She becomes involved with politician Greg Sumner and the <unk> group . When Gary finds out about her illegal dealings , he leaves her . After Abby is kidnapped , he takes her back , and makes Karen a partner in Lotus Point . Abby soon finds out that Val is pregnant with Gary 's twins . She expresses her displeasure to employee Scott Easton , who has Val 's twins kidnapped at birth . Abby works to find out where the twins are , and brings Val to them . Abby <unk> her way to become a part of the " real " Empire Valley . After Gary blows it up , he leaves Abby again . She attempts to get him back , but instead they divorce . Abby soon starts an affair with Peter Hollister as a way to get information on Greg . Then Charles Scott , her first love , returns . He is married , but he divorces his wife and asks Abby to marry him . 
 Abby is in love again , but then finds out that Charles is the front for a group of thugs wanting to build a marina at Lotus Point for drug trafficking . Abby pretends to go along with the marriage and accepts a two million dollar wedding gift from Charles . After the ceremony she has the marriage annulled , but keeps the money . After this , Abby marries Greg Sumner . It isn 't love , but rather a political marriage . Abby forms another company , <unk> , in order to buy Lotus Point . When her former partners find out and threaten to have her arrested for fraud , she donates Lotus Point to the government as a wildlife preserve . Abby goes after a political appointment that Greg wants , and leaves Knots Landing to be a trade representative in Japan . Abby later forms another illegal company with Nigel Treadwell , and tries to take over the Sumner Group , but her plan fails . She moves back into her old house on the cul @-@ de @-@ sac . 
 In the 1997 reunion mini @-@ series , Abby sells her house and prepares to leave the cul @-@ de @-@ sac and move to Malibu . However , the IRS freezes her assets for non @-@ payment of back taxes , and she temporarily moves in with Karen and Mack , and gets a job from Gary at the construction company he runs with Karen . However , Abby 's motives are to obtain a legal document from their company in order to help Greg Sumner , who is being sued . Should she obtain the document , Greg will pay her the $ 1 million she needs . Greg then informs her he no longer needs the document . Abby tries to infiltrate his other business dealings to her advantage . Instead of paying her off , Greg offers her a job overseeing one of his business operations in Thailand , which will make her rich again . Before departing , Abby learns that Brian 's girlfriend ( Kate Whittaker ) is expecting their first child , thus making her a grandmother . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Abby was well received by television critics . Carolyn McGuire of The Chicago Tribune commented , " Whoever shows up as the next villain , chances are his or her work won 't be easy . That 's because at least one resident — Abby Ewing — knows how to dish nasty with the best of them . Only Alexis Carrington Colby Dexter , played by Joan Collins on Dynasty , and Angela Channing , portrayed by Jane Wyman on Falcon Crest , rival Abby Ewing , played by Donna Mills , for best prime @-@ time female villain . " When asked which character he wished he had created , Mike Kelly , the creator of ABC 's popular primetime @-@ soap Revenge , said : " Abby Ewing . Donna Mills , you rocked my world . " Jamey Giddens of Zap2it said , " While I readily admit Alexis will go down in soap history as the most famous of the 80 's primetime soap vixens , she was never truly my cup of detergent . I much preferred the more subdued , methodical villainy of characters like Abby Fairgate ( Donna Mills ) , who slept her way through Seaview Circle , and to the top of Corporate California on Knots Landing . God I miss that damn Cul @-@ de @-@ Sac ! " 
 Josh Mapes of The Biography Channel listed her in the category " 10 Primetime Stars We Love to Hate " . He said , " Any great soap opera needs a great villain . While viewers may identify more with the protagonist , the villains in a serial drama always spice things up , cause trouble , and make it more fun to watch . From tongue lashings to catfights , underhanded tricks to boldface lies , the characters we love to hate have each brought a fair share of great moments to primetime soaps . While Larry Hagman played the bad guy on Dallas , Donna Mills played bad girl on its spin @-@ off , Knots Landing . <unk> going after what she wanted , Mills ' character engaged in affairs with two of the husbands on the Knots Landing cul @-@ de @-@ sac . But , like most vixens on primetime soaps , she was only out for money , not love . " Steve <unk> of the Quincy Newspapers listed Abby as the third @-@ most memorable TV character in an article he wrote for the Quincy Herald @-@ Whig . He said , " No one , absolutely no one , rocked eye shadow and the messy @-@ hair look like Abby Ewing , who was this marvelous combination of vixen and corporate sleuth . As her character developed , life on the cul @-@ de @-@ sac made Knots Landing destination TV every Thursday night for more than a decade . " 
 Marta <unk> of Technorati Media said : " The biggest news of season two , though , is the appearance of Donna Mills as Abby Cunningham , the blonde bombshell who wreaks havoc all through the neighborhood . With the appearance of Abby , things really started to heat up and get interesting . No marriage is off limits when Abby sets her eyes on it . Played to perfection by Donna Mills , Abby is wicked , vicious , bitchy , and heartless enough to keep us loving and hating her for years . Abby 's clashes with Karen MacKenzie and Val were legendary , and season two gets things rolling . After a fairly peaceful start to the season , we start to see the beginnings of the rivalry that defines the show for years : Karen vs. Abby . It 's fun watching their early friendship evolve into a bitter rivalry . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = HMS Boadicea ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Boadicea was a B @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy ( RN ) around 1930 . Initially assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet , she was transferred to the Home Fleet in 1936 . Before her departure , the ship evacuated civilians from Spain during the beginning of the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 . Boadicea later spent considerable time in Spanish waters , enforcing the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides of the conflict . During World War II , the ship spent the bulk of the war on convoy escort duty in British waters and participated in the Battle of the Atlantic , Operation Torch , the Russian Convoys , and in the Normandy landings . Badly damaged by German dive bombers in 1940 , she was sunk almost exactly four years later by aerial torpedoes . 
 = = Description = = 
 Boadicea displaced 1 @,@ 360 long tons ( 1 @,@ 380 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 790 long tons ( 1 @,@ 820 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 32 feet 3 inches ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 3 inches ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . Boadicea carried a maximum of 390 long tons ( 400 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 134 officers and enlisted men , although it increased to 142 during wartime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Boadicea had two 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk II AA guns mounted on a platform between her funnels . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . The ship was fitted with a Type 119 ASDIC set to detect submarines by reflections from sound waves beamed into the water . 
 By October 1940 , the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft armament was increased when the rear set of torpedo tubes was replaced by a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 @.@ 2 mm ) ( 12 @-@ pounder ) AA gun . The ' Y ' gun was later removed to compensate for the additional depth charges added . When Boadicea was converted into an escort destroyer at the end of 1943 , her ' A ' gun was replaced by a Hedgehog anti @-@ submarine spigot mortar and additional depth charge stowage replaced the 12 @-@ pounder high @-@ angle gun . In addition , two QF 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns were added to deal with surfaced submarines at close range and the 2 @-@ pounder guns were replaced by 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon autocannon and four additional Oerlikon guns were also added . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 The ship was ordered on 4 March 1929 from Hawthorn Leslie , under the 1928 Naval Programme . She was laid down at Hebburn @-@ on @-@ Tyne on 11 July 1929 , and launched on 23 September 1930 , as the fifth RN ship to carry this name . Boadicea was completed on 9 April 1931 at a cost of £ 225 @,@ 325 , excluding items supplied by the Admiralty such as guns , ammunition and communications equipment . After her commissioning , she was assigned to the 4th Destroyer Flotilla with the Mediterranean Fleet until 1936 . She was damaged whilst refuelling at sea with the battleship Revenge on 15 March 1935 ; her repairs lasted until 18 April . Later that year she was deployed to Famagusta , Cyprus , and Haifa , Palestine to assist British forces in putting down riots from December 1935 – January 1936 . Boadicea had to return to Haifa in June to help put down the beginnings of the Arab Revolt . Afterwards the ship was deployed to Cartagena and Valencia to evacuate civilians at the start of the Spanish Civil War before beginning a refit at Portsmouth that lasted until 26 September . She remained with the 4th Flotilla until January 1939 and made multiple deployments off the coast of Spain enforcing the embargo until April 1938 when she was again refitted . After leaving the 4th Flotilla , Boadicea served as the plane guard for the aircraft carriers of the Mediterranean Fleet for a few months until she became the emergency destroyer at the Nore . She was attached to the Reserve Fleet at Portland for the Fleet Review in August 1939 . 
 On 29 August , Boadicea was assigned to the 19th Destroyer Flotilla based at Dover where she escorted the troopships of the British Expeditionary Force through October . The ship was then transferred to the 22nd Destroyer Flotilla at Harwich for two months before rejoining the 19th Flotilla where she escorted convoys through the English Channel . On 4 March 1940 , she towed the oil tanker Charles F. Meyer to Southampton Water after that ship struck a mine . Boadicea began a refit at Chatham Dockyard on 2 May and was not operational until she sailed for Le Havre , France on 9 June to assist in the evacuation of British troops before advancing German troops . The next afternoon , she was severely damaged by Junkers Ju 87 " Stuka " dive bombers that knocked out her engines and boilers . After all depth charges and torpedoes were jettisoned to reduce her topweight and temporary repairs made to the holes in her hull , Boadicea was towed by the destroyer Ambuscade and the tugboat <unk> to Dover . 
 Repairs at Portsmouth lasted until 14 February 1941 and included the installation of a Type 286 short @-@ range surface search radar . Upon completions , the ship was assigned to Home Fleet and participated in the search for the German battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau which had broken out into the North Atlantic . In March , Boadicea was transferred to the 4th Escort Group at Greenock for convoy escort duties and remained with them until February 1942 when the group was disbanded . She was then assigned to the Western Approaches Command until July . The ship was detached to escort Convoys PQ 15 and Convoy QP 12 to and from Murmansk in April – May . Boadicea was refitted between August and October , after which she escorted a convoy to Gibraltar as part of the preparations for Operation Torch , the invasion of French North Africa . She escorted British ships to Oran during the invasion and was struck by a shell from a French L <unk> @-@ class destroyer on 8 November that did little damage . Three days later , the ship was escorting the empty ocean liner RMS Viceroy of India when the latter ship was torpedoed . The destroyer attempted to take the troopship under tow , but was unable to save the ship . Boadicea rescued 449 passengers and crew and delivered them to Gibraltar . Upon her return home , the ship was assigned to the 20th Escort Group where she escorted Convoys JW 51A , JW 53 and RA 53 to and from Russia . She was badly damaged by sea ice during the latter convoy in March and required repairs that lasted until May . 
 Upon their completion , Boadicea was transferred to Freetown , Sierra Leone where she served as a local escort . On 19 July , she rescued 220 survivors from the torpedoed ocean liner MV <unk> . The ship returned to the Home Fleet in September and briefly assigned to the 8th Escort Group before she started her conversion into an escort destroyer in November . This included the addition of Type 271 target indication radar and the replacement of the Type 286 radar by a Type 290 . After this was completed in January 1944 , Boadicea rejoined the 8th Escort Group and escorted Convoys JW 57 , RA 58 and RA 59 to Russia from February through April . In preparation for Operation Overlord , the invasion of Normandy , she was transferred to Portsmouth where she escorted convoys arriving in England as well as the convoys across the Channel . Boadicea was sunk on 13 June off Portland Bill by two torpedoes dropped by Junkers Ju 88 medium bombers while escorting a convoy of merchant ships to France . The torpedoes caused a magazine explosion and Boadicea sank quickly , with only 12 of her crew of 182 surviving . 
 The ship is included on the Chatham Naval Memorial ; her wreck is 16 miles ( 26 km ) southwest of the Isle of Portland at 50 ° 28 ′ 12 ″ N 02 ° 29 ′ 30 ″ W in 53 metres ( 174 ft ) of water . Her bow is blown off forward of the engine rooms . Her stern section is upright and reasonably intact . The wreck site is designated as a protected place under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 . 
 = Apex Hides the Hurt = 
 Apex Hides the Hurt is a 2006 novel by American author Colson Whitehead . The novel follows an unnamed nomenclature consultant who is asked to visit the town of Winthrop , which , rather conveniently for the nomenclature consultant , is considering changing its name . During his visit , the main character is introduced to several citizens attempting to persuade him in favor of their preferred name for the town . 
 The novel has received mostly positive reviews from critics , with few negative comments . In a positive review for American magazine Entertainment Weekly , Jennifer Reese called the book " a blurry satire of American commercialism , " adding that " it may not mark the apex of Colson Whitehead 's career , but it brims with the author 's spiky humor and intelligence . " The book was featured among the 100 Most Notable Books of The Year for 2006 , as published by The New York Times . 
 = = About the author = = 
 Colson Whitehead ( born 1969 ) is an American author . Whitehead was born and raised in Brooklyn , New York and wrote for The Village Voice for two years during his early career , and has since authored three other novels : The <unk> , John Henry Days and The Colossus of New York . Since Whitehead began writing , he has had his books and writing reviewed and mentioned in The New York Times , New York Magazine , Harper 's Magazine and has been a recipient of the MacArthur and Whiting Award . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The book is set in the fictional town of Winthrop . The protagonist of the book is an unnamed African @-@ American " nomenclature consultant " who has had recent success in branding and selling Apex bandages , which come in multiple colors to better match a broad array of skin tones . The novel begins with the main character being contacted by his former employer , which he had left after losing a toe . He travels to the town of Winthrop after requests from the town council , which has proposed that the town be renamed . However , three key citizens disagree what the name should be : Albie Winthrop , descendant of the town 's namesake ( who 'd made his fortune in barbed wire ) ; Regina Goode , the mayor ( descendant of one of the town 's two founders ) ; and Lucky Aberdeen , a software magnate who 's leading the drive to rename the town . Winthrop wants to keep the name ; Goode wants the town to revert to the name it bore at its founding as a town of free blacks , Freedom ; while Aberdeen wants to call it " New Prospera . " 
 As the consultant talks with the residents of the town and investigates its history , the backstory of his injury is gradually revealed . After repeatedly <unk> his toe and covering it up with Apex bandages , the consultant accidentally stepped into pig feces during a company team retreat . Because of the colored bandage , he never discovered how his toe was badly infected , and fainted on the sidewalk after fleeing from an awards party . This led to the amputation of his toe , his departure from the nomenclature firm , and the beginning of his hermetic lifestyle . 
 After much deliberation , the consultant decides on the name " Struggle , " the original idea of the other of the two original founders , Field . Following this , the consultant promptly returns home , where his foot injury continues to bother him even more than before . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In an interview with Alma Books , Whitehead states that the concept of the book originated from an article about the naming process for new pharmaceuticals such as Prozac . The article made Whitehead question how a similar process is used to assert a certain control over one 's environment ( his example is a boulevard named after a particular person ) , and <unk> the two concepts was the beginning of the ideas that led to his composition of the novel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Overall , the novel was critically well received . It was highlighted among The New York Times ' 100 Most Notable Books of the Year , and also highlighted among 100 noteworthy books from 2006 , as published by The Charleston Gazette . In a review in The Boston Globe , Saul Austerlitz called it a " wickedly funny new novel . " USA Today noted that " no novelist writing today is more engaging and entertaining when it comes to questions of race , class and commercial culture than Colson Whitehead , " concluding that the novel " gets to the heart of the thing , but in a delightfully roundabout way . " The San Francisco Chronicle gave the novel a mixed review , commenting that " It 's pure joy to read writing like this , but watching Whitehead sketch out a minor character 's essence with one stroke , while breathtaking , makes one wish the same treatment was afforded the people who ostensibly inhabit the novel 's complex ideas . " American trade news magazine Publishers Weekly reacted negatively to the book , writing that " Whitehead disappoints in this intriguingly conceived but static tale of a small town with an identity crisis . " 
 Erin Aubry Kaplan of the Los Angeles Times noted that " too often , [ Whitehead ] can 't resist the temptation of irony , and his big ideas are sometimes overwhelmed by one wink @-@ wink or metaphor too many . " Kirkus Reviews praised the book , writing that " while making no attempt at depth of characterization , Whitehead audaciously blurs the line between social realism and fabulist satire . " The Library Journal praised the book , noting that " In spare and evocative prose , Whitehead does Shakespeare one better : What 's in a name , and how does our identity relate to our own sense of who we are ? " The New York Observer was critical of the book but noted that " readers not looking for direct emotional access to the characters may find it gratifying to solve the intellectual puzzle set here by Colson Whitehead . " 
 Scott Esposito of webzine PopMatters gave the novel mixed comments , writing that " it is no surprise that Apex Hides the Hurt , Whitehead 's third novel , is packed with a number of allegorical elements blended into a multi @-@ layered structure . What 's unfortunate , however , is that all this technical artistry is in the service of unremarkable themes and ideas . Entertainment newspaper The A.V. Club complimented the book , writing that " perhaps taking his cues from his protagonist 's profession , Whitehead keeps his prose as streamlined as it comes , and he uses it to craft a satiric novel in tune with a moment where marketing overshadows content and even the lowliest blogger thinks in branding terms . " Michael McGirr of The Sydney Morning Herald called it " a book of abundant irony . " 
 = = Honors = = 
 PEN Oakland / Josephine Miles Literary Award 
 = 1 + 1 ( song ) = 
 " 1 + 1 " is a song recorded by American recording artist Beyoncé for her fourth studio album , 4 ( 2011 ) . It was released by Columbia Records in the United States on May 25 , 2011 , as a promotional single . Serving as the opening track on 4 , it was written and produced by Beyoncé , The @-@ Dream and Tricky Stewart . " 1 + 1 " was originally titled " Nothing But Love " and The @-@ Dream had initially planned to include it on his second studio album , Love vs. Money ( 2009 ) . A down @-@ tempo contemporary R & B and soul music power ballad , " 1 + 1 " Beyoncé expressing her endless love to her soul mate ; the lyrics make strong statements about the power of the relationship . 
 " 1 + 1 " garnered acclaim from music critics , who noted its resemblance to the work of American singers Prince and Sam Cooke . It was also complimented for its subtle instrumentation , which provides emphasis on Beyoncé 's vocals . " 1 + 1 " peaked at number 82 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart and at number 57 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . Its accompanying music video was directed by Beyoncé herself , alongside Lauren Briet and Ed Burke , and it premiered on August 26 , 2011 . The video was a " different " direction in the sense that it does not incorporate the heavy dance routines Beyoncé is known for , and that it experiments with psychedelic visual effects as well as innovative lighting , which give the clip a cinematic feel . The clip met with generally positive reception from music critics , who praised its aesthetic and sexual theme and claimed that it will be remembered as one of Beyoncé 's most iconic visual work . 
 Soon after Beyoncé 's performance on American Idol , a video that surfaced online received considerable coverage from different media . It was filmed by Jay @-@ Z with a camera phone and shows Beyoncé rehearsing " 1 + 1 " backstage at American Idol . The ballad was included on Beyoncé 's set list for a free concert as part of Good Morning America 's Summer Concert Series , the ITV special A Night With Beyoncé , and her revue , 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé , held at the Roseland Ballroom in New York City . Beyoncé 's live performances of " 1 + 1 " have received positive reception ; a writer from The Huffington Post described her live performance at the American Idol as " an epic , emotionally @-@ charged [ one ] . " American singers <unk> and Tiffany Evans have performed covers of the ballad , with lyrical modifications . 
 = = Conception and release = = 
 " 1 + 1 " was initially written and titled " Nothing but Love " by Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash , who intended to include it on his second studio album , Love King ( 2010 ) . He later gave it to Beyoncé Knowles for her fourth studio album 4 , where she and Christopher " Tricky " Stewart did some additional writing . The song was produced by the trio at the Studio at the Palms in Paradise , Nevada and Triangle Sound Studio in Atlanta , Georgia , where Beyoncé recorded the song . The @-@ Dream and Stewart did the musical arrangements and Beyoncé worked on arranged the vocals . Lee <unk> , Nikki <unk> and Pete Wolford played the instruments , while Brian Thomas alongside Pat Thrall assisted in recording the music . Jordan Young then recorded Beyoncé 's vocals . Tony Maserati mixed the track with assistance from Val Brathwaite , and Jason Sherwood , Mark Gray , Steven Dennis and Wolford all assisted in the audio engineering . 
 Shortly after " 1 + 1 " was released online , Beyoncé debuted the ballad by performing a piano version on the finale of the tenth season of American Idol on May 25 , 2011 . " 1 + 1 " was made available for download only a few hours after her performance ; its cover art was photographed by Anthony Duran . The song was released through the iTunes Store as a promotional single from 4 in the United States . People who pre @-@ ordered 4 at the iTunes Store received a free download of " 1 + 1 " . The song was not sent for airplay in the US as " Best Thing I Never Had " was favored as the second single , following the release of the lead single " Run the World ( Girls ) " . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " 1 + 1 " is a downtempo R & B and soul music power ballad with influences of indie rock music . The song features " a soft , almost non @-@ existent " backing beat and makes use of a guitar and a piano as its foundation , while wind chimes , sprinkling strings , synthesizers , funk @-@ influenced bass and a pipe organ are also present . " 1 + 1 " is set in 12 / 8 time with a slow tempo of 50 beats per minute and was written in the key of G ♭ major . Beyoncé 's voice spans from the low note of F # 3 to the high note of C6 . " 1 + 1 " essentially demonstrates her " urgent " and " raw " vocals ; in an interview with Ray Rogers of Billboard magazine , Beyoncé stated that she wanted to use her album 4 to showcase this side of her vocal abilities : " I used a lot of the brassiness and grittiness in my voice that people hear in my live performances , but not necessarily on my records . " Nadine Cheung wrote that the subtle instrumentation allows Beyoncé 'ss voice to emphasise the emotional lyrics Amos Barshad of New York magazine and Tim Finney of Pitchfork Media described the vocals as similar to those of Whitney Houston 's work . 
 Several critics including Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone noted that " 1 + 1 " is comparable to Sam Cooke 's 1960 song " Wonderful World " and Prince 's 1984 song " Purple Rain " . Brandon Soderberg of Pitchfork Media explained that " Wonderful World " ' s line , " don 't know much about algebra " , was retained during the conception of " 1 + 1 " by its producers , who however accentuated its " love song sentiment " . Soderberg further wrote that " 1 + 1 " bears resemblance to " Purple Rain " as they both have similar " delicate guitars , melodramatic piano , and [ Beyoncé affects Prince 's ] high @-@ register whimper a few times " . Jillian Mapes of Billboard magazine wrote that the guitar solo is similar to the ones in Bon Jovi 's power ballads . 
 " 1 + 1 " begins with a low fidelity indie rock arrangement which is brought about by distorted guitar arpeggios and a discreet pipe organ . Beyoncé sings a meandering melody as she alternately references the pleasures of love and sex . Using simple arithmetic to describe her undying love for her partner , she begins the first verse as she affirms to her romantic interest that the only thing she is sure about is her feelings for him , " I don 't know much about algebra , but I know that one plus one equals two ... If I ain 't got something , I don 't give a damn / ' Cause I got it with you " . In the pre @-@ chorus lines , Beyoncé expresses her reliance on her man without whom she believes to be incomplete as she sings , " And it 's me and you , that 's all we 'll have when the world is through / Because baby we ain 't got nothing without love / Darling , you got enough love for the both of us " . 
 Brandon Soderberg of Pitchfork Media commented that Beyoncé mixes " vulnerability and confidence " while singing the chorus lines , where she repeatedly pleads her romantic interest , " Make love to me when my days look low / Pull me in close and don 't let me go / Make love to me when the world 's at war / That our love will heal us all " , while the music stays steady and soft with only a few piano chords and a baseline plucked guitar riff . As she continues to chant about making love in apocalyptic circumstances , " So when the world 's at war / Let our love heal us all " , she projects a universal " all you need is love " feeling , as noted by Jillian Mapes . In the second verse , Beyoncé sings , " Hey ! I don 't know much about guns but I ... I 've been shot by you " , as she pushes the final word " you " up at a full octave . She then continues : " Hey ! And I don 't know when I 'm gonna die , but I hope that I 'm gonna die by you / Hey ! And I don 't know much about fighting , but I , I know I will fight for you / Hey ! Just when I ball up my fist , I realize that I 'm laying right next to you " . According to Thomas Conner of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , these lines are intended to show that love conquers all . The song ends with an intense electric guitar solo . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " 1 + 1 " garnered acclaim from music critics , who complimented the effective display of Beyoncé 'ss emotive vocals due to the use of light instrumentation , and approved that the ballad was the opening song on 4 . AOL Music 's Contessa Gayles called it " an <unk> , screechy ballad – in the best way possible " and Nadine Cheung from AOL Radio noted that the minimal instrumentation highlights the song 's lyrics , and effectively show Beyoncé 's " powerful voice and impressive control " , further writing , " The professions are so intense that there 's no need for a complicated bridge or dramatic key change . " Brandon Soderberg from Pitchfork Media wrote , " she really digs in and sells the song 's knotty qualities , and when that over @-@ the @-@ top guitar break appears exactly when it should , it 's cathartic . At that precise moment , this passionate pastiche of timeless pop becomes a classic all its own . " Ryan Dombal , writing for the same music webzine , commented that Adele 's ' Someone Like You ' is the only recent pop ballad which comes close to " the power " of " 1 + 1 " . Michael Cragg of The Guardian called the song a " loved up ballad " and praised Beyoncé for showcasing her raw vocals . Describing " 1 + 1 " as " [ having ] no interest in [ Beyoncé 'ss ] typical pursuit of forward @-@ thinking , energetic fare , preferring to throw the emphasis on her radio @-@ destroying vocal chords " , David Amidon of PopMatters wrote that the song " is the best result of this , finally providing Beyoncé a song that can compete with the favorites of this generation 's parents . " 
 Jocelyn Vena of MTV News wrote , " Beyoncé may not know a thing about algebra , but when it comes to the math of power ballads , she totally gets it . " Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone wrote that " the album [ 4 ] opens with its most tender ballad , a slow @-@ burning number that calls back to both Sam Cooke 's ' Wonderful World ' and Prince 's ' Purple Rain ' without sounding like a retread of either tune [ ... ] it sounds best in the context of the album , where its slow , steady build to a cathartic guitar break is the perfect introduction to a set of mostly low @-@ key tracks about love and heartbreak . " Similarly considering " 1 + 1 " to be " the perfect opener " of 4 , Joanne Dorken of MTV UK wrote that it exposes a more vulnerable side of Beyoncé and that it will remain " a classic stripped @-@ back slow jam from the diva . " Praising Beyoncé 's vocals , Jon Caramainca of The New York Times stated that " [ ' 1 + 1 ' ] requires a vocal muscle few singers possess , and even fewer would care to deploy . " Writing for The Baltimore Sun , Wesley Case included " 1 + 1 " in his list of Five Great Songs and praised song 's concept , writing that he began crying when he heard the album version and called it " gut @-@ wrenching " and " gorgeous " . Case appreciated Beyoncé 's sensitivity and concluded that it " fades to black like an ellipsis and it 's so damn beautiful . " 
 Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun wrote that " 1 + 1 " is an " amazing [ and ] arguably the most honest and tender Beyoncé has sounded , singing ' help me let my guard down , make love to me ' " . Similarly , Claire Suddath of Time magazine commented that " 1 + 1 " is probably the finest ballad Beyoncé has delivered in years . Amos Barshad of New York magazine described " 1 + 1 " as " a big grand love ballad " . Andy Kellman of Allmusic picked " 1 + 1 " as one of the album 's top songs , describing it as " a sparse and placid vocal showcase , [ which ] fades in with a somber guitar line , throws up occasional and brief spikes in energy , and slowly recedes . " Chris Coplan of Consequence of Sound commented that in contrast to the geometry taught at school , there is something interesting in " 1 + 1 " ; he further wrote that ballad focuses on Beyoncé 's " amazing vocal range " as it is not upbeat like most of her previous offerings . Leah Collins of Canada 's Dose described the song as a " melodramatic soul ballad " . A reporter from The Huffington Post stated that " 1 + 1 " is a departure from " Run the World ( Girls ) " , noting that Beyoncé " <unk> [ es ] the defiance of [ ' Run the World ( Girls ) ' ] with devotion " [ in ' 1 + 1 ' ] " . He added that it is one of the first representations that " Beyoncé is keeping her promise that a whole new array of sounds will make their way into 4 . " Similarly , Rap @-@ Up favored the track stating that " If ' Run the World ( Girls ) ' wasn 't your thing , this should do the trick . " By contrast , Katy Hasty from HitFix criticized the song 's lyrics and wrote that it " seem [ s ] the lyrics to ' 1 + 1 ' were penned by a second @-@ grader . " 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 The Guardian 's critic Sean Michaels ranked " 1 + 1 " at number one on his list of The 10 Best Tracks of 2011 . The song was also ranked on The Guardian 's writers ' year @-@ end list of Best Songs of 2011 at number 30 . Allison Stewart of The Washington Post placed the ballad at number one on her list of the Special Year @-@ End Best @-@ of Edition , writing that Beyoncé " just kills this otherwise unremarkable ballad . Her obvious pride in her abilities , in her Beyonce @-@ ness , informs every note , but it doesn 't seem <unk> @-@ y . It 's just sweet . " On The Village Voice 's 2011 year @-@ end Pazz & Jop singles list , " 1 + 1 " was ranked at number 77 . The staff members of Pitchfork Media placed the " 1 + 1 " at number 26 on their list of The Top 100 Tracks of 2011 , writing : 
 Following Beyoncé 's work on " 1 + 1 " is like a journey to the center of her craft , a stripping away of every distraction until all that 's left is her voice . Without it , " 1 + 1 " would be a muted ballad : Its simple guitar line and stardust @-@ sprinkled strings serve no purpose other than to evoke a sense of familiar romantic intimacy , and then to elegantly step aside while Beyoncé delivers one of her most wonderfully impassioned performances ever . " 1 + 1 " possesses that slightly scary intensity that has been R & B 's worst @-@ kept secret weapon since Whitney Houston 's " I Have Nothing " , but it also demonstrates perfectly how Beyoncé stands apart from every other big @-@ chested diva getting her Whitney on . She lets the song sing through her with a clarity that is never clinical , a strength that never sabotages , and an expressiveness that is precisely as sentimental as its subject matter requires . Beyoncé is R & B 's field marshal , demanding of her listeners and herself an absolute fidelity to the music 's emotional possibilities , with a perfectly modulated vehemence that is as captivating as it is tyrannical . 
 Writing for The New Yorker , Jody Rosen credited the jarring timbral and tonal variations on the song for giving a new musical sound that didn 't exist in the world before Beyoncé . He further wrote , " If they sound ' normal ' now , it 's because Beyoncé , and her many followers , have retrained our ears . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " 1 + 1 " entered the US Hot Digital Songs chart at number 33 on June 11 , 2011 , having sold 57 @,@ 000 downloads in the previous week . As a result , the song also appeared at number 57 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . The following week , it fell to number 89 on the Hot 100 chart . Overall , it charted for only two weeks . For the week ending June 11 , 2011 , the song charted on the US Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles at number 5 . That same week , " 1 + 1 " entered the Canadian Hot 100 chart at number 82 . Following the release of 4 and based solely on digital downloads , " 1 + 1 " appeared on the UK Singles Chart at number 67 and on the UK R & B Chart at number 23 in the July 9 , 2011 issue . After the release of its music video , " 1 + 1 " moved from number 125 to number 71 on the UK Singles Chart on September 11 , 2011 . The following week , it reached a high point of number 21 on the R & B chart . Selling 18 @,@ 263 downloads , the song opened at number 25 on the South Korea Gaon International Singles Chart for the week ending July 2 , 2011 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 It was reported in early August 2011 that Beyoncé was recording new music videos for several songs from 4 , including " 1 + 1 " which was shot by August 3 , 2011 . The video premiered on August 26 , 2011 on E ! News at 7 : 00 pm EST / PST and it was posted on Beyoncé 's website one hour later . It was directed by Beyoncé herself , alongside Lauren Briet and Ed Burke . The video was described by her official website as " the story of love at its best . It 's about commitment and fulfillment and it 's Beyoncé at her most beautiful . The video experiments with psychedelic visual effects and innovative lighting that gives the clip a cinematic feel . " The music video for the song is four and a half minutes long . The director 's cut of " 1 + 1 " was released on November 1 , 2011 . It features slightly different scenes to the original . 
 The song 's video features close @-@ up shots of Beyoncé and incorporates psychedelic light effects and symmetrical filming photography . As the acoustic guitar begins playing , Beyoncé 's face comes into view . She stands with her blond hair draped just below her exposed shoulders . As she intently stares into the camera , her skin glistens as though it has been coated with a honey @-@ like and glittery substance . Turning her head from right to left , with her eyes fixed off @-@ camera , Beyoncé starts belting out the first verse . As the chorus is reached , scenes of Beyoncé in a darkened room are shown . Additionally , she places her face delicately against dripping water , gently brushing it with her lips and palms . The scenery changes and Beyoncé is back in the darkened chamber , where she removes her dress . 
 A quick shot of the " IV " tattoo inked on Beyoncé 's left ring finger is shown ( a reference to her album 's title , 4 ) , before she bathes in a tub of flowers as well as berries and blows billows of smoke . As she continues to caress her upper @-@ body , an array of light imagery is projected behind her , serving as a backdrop . During the second verse , the video begins to use symmetrical visual arts . Beyoncé appears standing in front of a purple background , draped by large and billowing garments . As the song progresses , her emotions are heightened ; zoomed shots of tears trickling down her cheeks are shown . A man appears behind Beyoncé and begins closely embracing her in endearment . The man is nondescript , and his muscular arms grip Beyoncé 's body before taking her through a series of dips and bends , while he remains mostly in the background . With tears still rolling down her cheeks , Beyoncé chants to her love interest to make love to her on the song 's vocal finale . As the guitar melodies close the song , Beyoncé is seen engulfed by the colorful light and special effects . The video ends with the camera returning to a glistening Beyoncé with blackened scenery in the background . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Jennifer Cady of E ! News found the video " sexy " and " pretty stripped down " , further writing : " There are no catchy choreographed dances or freakum dresses , just Queen Bey looking gorgeous in lingerie and belting out her love and devotion to her man . " Cady added that that the video was entertaining because of Beyoncé " seriously magical hair " and her skin , which was sparkling like Edward Cullen . Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly concluded that although the video was different from the previous " heavily produced spectacles " Beyoncé has made , " it 's hard to take your eyes off it " . Spencer Kornhaber of The Atlantic criticized the sex appeal which was used in the videos for Lady Gaga 's " You and I " ( 2011 ) and Katy Perry 's " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " ( 2011 ) but felt that " Beyonce 's game is unique in its reliance on pure visual magnetism " . He wrote that even when Beyoncé is " inhabiting apocalyptic warzones or Mad Men @-@ era domestic scenes " , she is always classical . Kornhaber concluded that the video for " 1 + 1 " is " catchy , fun dance , pretty face , pretty body " , which according to him , is what " Beyonce [ has ] always been about " . Melinda Newman from the website HitFix found " some lovely kaleidoscopic shots and billowing sheets " . She added that " we never see her ' + 1 ' other than an arm and back shot , but that works to the video 's advantage " . 
 Similarly , Willa Paskin of New York magazine praised the final minute of the video in which " we are treated to what is supposed to be the instrumental equivalent of an orgasm " , illustrated by split @-@ screen kaleidoscope effects and capped off by Beyoncé staring into the camera " in <unk> contentment " . Mawuse Ziegbe of The Boston Globe noted that Beyoncé 'ss sex appeal was at its maximum in the video for " 1 + 1 " . She compared the kaleidoscope effects with Lady Gaga 's " Born This Way " ( 2011 ) and finished her review by writing , " ultimately , the clip shows the diva doesn 't need the elaborate costumes , club @-@ anthem rhythms and booty @-@ quivering grooves to bring the heat . But a lustrous , fling @-@ ready mane is always handy . " Similarly , a writer for MTV UK praised the video 's " light effects and symmetrical camera tricks " which " [ sell ] sex as art " . Leah Collins of the Canadian magazine Dose commented that Beyoncé was " gifted with seemingly supernatural powers of hotness " in the video . A writer for Rolling Stone found the video for " 1 + 1 " to be " the <unk> music video ever made " , adding that it " perfectly matches the sultry , romantic tone of the song " . Maura Johnston of The Village Voice found a " ' What D 'Angelo 's ' Untitled ( How Does It Feel ) ' Feels Like For A Girl ' vibe " in the video for " 1 + 1 " and compared it to the one for " Sweet Dreams " ( 2009 ) . 
 Rob Markman of MTV News wrote that the choreography is very different from the Beyoncé 's standard dance routines , which feature high @-@ powered steps , swaying hips and " her patented bootylicious shake " . He commented , " Instead , Beyoncé settles for ballet @-@ style steps , moving in a leotard and long , flowing cape . " Markman added that the video will most likely remain " under the radar " in comparison to the highlights in her high @-@ budgeted reel , which includes clips like " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ( 2008 ) and " Crazy in Love " ( 2003 ) . He concluded that " much like the song , the visuals for ' 1 + 1 ' shouldn 't be measured in terms of size , but rather in emotive presentation and subdued sexiness " . A writer for The Huffington Post wrote that the music video for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " was Beyoncé 'ss most iconic visual work , but added that after the premiere of the video for " 1 + 1 " , " it may now have company " . David Malitz of The Washington Post stated that Beyoncé looks like Hurricane Irene at the beginning of the video , but added that she looks like " any number of chillwave videos " at the end . A more mixed review was given by OK ! magazine , which described the video as cheesy . L Magazine 's Mike Conklin was unsatisfied with the video , writing that since Beyoncé is rightfully considered to be among " the absolute best [ artists ] " , she can do better . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé first performed " 1 + 1 " live on American Idol on May 25 , 2011 . Wearing a purple gown , she sang the song surrounded by smoke and red lighting , declaring , " This is my favorite song " . Towards the end of the performance , she fell to her knees and shook the hands of audience members . The performance earned her a standing ovation from the judges and members of the crowd . A writer from The Huffington Post called it " an epic , emotionally @-@ charged performance " and praised the fact that Beyoncé " channel [ led ] every particle of the room 's energy into her lung @-@ bursting calls and cries . " Jillian Mapes of Billboard magazine noted , " The sheer force of the ballad literally brought [ Beyoncé ] to her knees during the performance . " Shortly after Beyoncé 's performance on American Idol , a video that surfaced online received considerable coverage from music critics . It became an instant viral video as soon as it hit the web . The clip was filmed using a camera phone and it shows Beyoncé rehearsing " 1 + 1 " backstage at American Idol with no microphone and simple keyboard accompaniment . The video was filmed by Beyoncé 'ss husband , Jay @-@ Z. In an introduction to the video on his Life + Times website he wrote : " Sometimes you need perspective . You 've been right in front of greatness so often that you need to step back and see it again for the first time . " In 2013 , John Boone and Jennifer Cady of E ! Online placed the video at number eight on their list of Beyoncé 's ten best videos , writing that she sounds " perfect " . While reviewing 4 , Pitchfork Media 's Ryan Dombal complimented the video , writing : 
 One of the year 's best music videos was directed by Jay @-@ Z and cost about zero dollars to make . The video has a similar impromptu charm to the many intimate , one @-@ shot performance clips popularized by Vincent Moon 's Take @-@ Away Shows , its appeal compounded by the shock of seeing such a notoriously manicured superstar without embellishment . It 's all quite endearing and personal – two words one might not often associate with this superhumanly talented and famous couple . 
 On July 1 , 2011 , Beyoncé performed a free concert as part of Good Morning America 's Summer Concert Series . She sang " 1 + 1 " while kneeling on top of a white grand piano . Beyoncé also performed the song live on the TV show , The View . She sang " 1 + 1 " live on August 14 , 2011 during 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé , held in Roseland Ballroom , New York City . Wearing a gold dress , she performed the song in front of 3 @,@ 500 people while her band and orchestra were watching on . During the performance , Beyoncé climbed on top of a piano and sang on her knees . Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine wrote that Beyoncé performed " 1 + 1 " , " wrapped up in smoke and red hued lights , reminiscent of her live performance on the American Idol finale . " Ramirez stated that Beyoncé sang the ballad with " <unk> . " Mike Wass of Idolator praised how Beyoncé " wrung every ounce of emotion from the lyrics of ' 1 + 1 ' and hit each note perfectly " , concluding that it was " an impressive display . " Entertainment Weekly 's Brad Wete wrote that Beyoncé 's voice " rang soulfully , only breaking to let the crowd fill in gaps for a sing @-@ along feel . " <unk> Vena of MTV News commented that on " 1 + 1 " , Beyoncé 's vocal abilities " outshined it all . " On September 14 , 2011 , Beyoncé stopped at Target perform at the managers meeting . Wearing a red dress , she sung " 1 + 1 " accompanied by three backup singers and a pianist . During the ITV special A Night With Beyoncé which aired on December 4 in the United Kingdom , Beyoncé performed " 1 + 1 " to a selected crowd of fans . 
 In May , 2012 , Beyoncé performed " 1 + 1 " during her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue in Atlantic City , New Jersey , United States ' entertainment resort , hotel , casino and spa , Revel . She performed the song while kneeling on the piano . Jim Farber of Daily News commented that the song was sung with " precision and sweep , she tipped the balance decidedly softer , giving her power grounding " . According to Chuck Darrow of The Philadelphia Inquirer , the acoustic performance of the ballad , " proved a nice respite from the relentless thump @-@ thump @-@ thump of the many dance @-@ pop numbers " . Tris McCall of New Jersey On @-@ Line complimented the " magnificent run through the slow @-@ burning " song . Ben Ratliff of The New York Times mentioned " 1 + 1 " in the " almost continuous high point " of the concert . Brad Wete of Complex magazine wrote that " B [ eyoncé ] ' s voice was stellar " during the performance of the song on the revue . 
 = = Other versions and usage in media = = 
 The @-@ Dream 's demo of " 1 + 1 " , originally titled as " Nothing but Love " , leaked onto the Internet in late May 2011 . Michael Cragg of The Guardian found it to be " Prince @-@ esque " . In late June 2011 , American recording artist <unk> posted a video of herself , singing " 1 + 1 " while seated in front her computer . On July 12 , 2011 , Rap @-@ Up reported that the American singer , Tiffany Evans , who had previously covered " Speechless " from Beyoncé 'ss first studio album , Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) , had also covered " 1 + 1 " , with some lyrical modifications . Miss Murphy covered the song during the second series of The Voice ( Australia ) on May 20 , 2013 . Murphy 's version peaked at number 49 on the Australian Singles Chart . 
 Beyoncé appeared on Entertainment Tonight on June 16 , 2011 to promote the exclusive @-@ to @-@ Target deluxe edition of 4 and gave fans a sneak preview of its television commercial . The 30 @-@ second commercial , which features " 1 + 1 " and " Countdown " playing in the background , began airing in the United States on June 24 , 2011 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from 4 liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Thayer School of Engineering = 
 Thayer School of Engineering offers graduate and undergraduate education in engineering sciences at Dartmouth College , Hanover , New Hampshire , United States . The school was established in 1867 with funds from Brig. Gen. Sylvanus Thayer , known for his work in establishing an engineering curriculum at the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York . Located in a two @-@ building complex along the Connecticut River on the Dartmouth campus , the Thayer School today offers undergraduate , master 's , and doctoral degrees , as well as dual @-@ degree programs with other local institutions . Over 500 students are currently enrolled at Thayer , overseen by a faculty of 56 and preceded by over 4 @,@ 500 living alumni of the school . In 2016 Thayer became the first US national research university with a graduating class of engineering undergraduates that was over 50 % female . 
 = = History = = 
 Thayer School is named for Sylvanus Thayer , an alumnus of Dartmouth in the class of 1807 . Thayer was known as " the father of West Point " for his sixteen @-@ year <unk> of the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York , where he developed an extensive engineering curriculum unlike any other in the United States at the time . After thirty years of professional service in the Army Corps of Engineers , Thayer endowed Dartmouth College with $ 40 @,@ 000 in 1867 ( and increased the gift to $ 70 @,@ 000 by 1871 ) for the establishment of a school of engineering initially called the Thayer School of Civil Engineering . 
 The school opened four years later , in 1871 , with six students . The curriculum borrowed heavily from the model which Thayer himself had developed at West Point ; graduates of the two @-@ year program were awarded a degree in civil engineering ( C.E. ) . Though Robert Fletcher , the first director and dean of the school , was also its only instructor for several years , the enrollment , funding , and faculty of the School increased markedly throughout the late 19th and early 20th centuries . 
 Under the administration of Frank Warren Garran ( dean of the School from 1933 to 1945 ) , Thayer experienced extensive expansion and modernization . Thayer 's curriculum expanded to incorporate mechanical engineering and electrical engineering , as well as a dual business / engineering administration degree from the Tuck School of Business . Garran also oversaw the establishment of Cummings Hall , the Thayer School 's first dedicated physical plant , and the institution of the school 's first major research program , which was in <unk> . Dean William P. Kimball ( 1945 – 61 ) continued the school 's growing emphasis on research and established the first master 's degrees for students wishing to earn more than a Bachelor of Engineering . 
 In 1961 , Myron Tribus became dean of the School , placing a heavy emphasis on the practical , problem @-@ solving aspects of engineering as well as the traditional , theoretical base of the discipline . Tribus developed an integrated curriculum and introduced design courses to the school to provide Thayer students with real @-@ life experience in creative applications of engineering . Under Tribus , the Thayer School offered its first doctorates in engineering . 
 From the 1970s to the first decade of the 21st century , the Thayer School saw expansion into new fields such as nanotechnology and biochemical engineering , as well as collaboration with such nearby institutions as Dartmouth Medical School , the Dartmouth @-@ Hitchcock Medical Center , and the Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory . In the early first decade of the 21st century , the core curriculum for undergraduates was revamped under Dean Lewis Duncan ( 1998 – 2004 ) , making the school 's offerings more accessible to non @-@ major Dartmouth students . The MacLean Engineering Sciences Center ( ESC ) , completed in 2006 , was a $ 21 million project to expand the school 's classrooms and research centers . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The Thayer School is located on the campus of Dartmouth College , which is situated in the rural , Upper Valley New England town of Hanover , New Hampshire . The campus of the Thayer School sits in a complex on the west side Dartmouth 's campus near the Connecticut River . When classes first began in 1871 , Sylvanus Thayer 's endowment had not provided for a physical plant . Consequently , the school was an itinerant institution for many years , occupying parts of various College buildings and , at one point , a former structure of the New Hampshire College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts . 
 In 1938 , Dartmouth president Ernest Martin Hopkins successfully lobbied the Board of Trustees to construct an independent facility for the school . $ 200 @,@ 000 were spent to build Horace Cummings Memorial Hall , which with several major additions ( built in 1945 @-@ 46 and 1989 ) served as Thayer 's only facility for nearly 70 years . In 2004 , construction began on the MacLean Engineering Sciences Center ( ESC ) , which was completed in 2006 . At the cost of nearly $ 21 million , the new center adds both classroom and research space to the Thayer School . 
 The Thayer School shares the Murdough Center ( containing the Feldberg Business & Engineering Library ) with the adjacent Tuck School of Business . 
 = = Academics = = 
 The Thayer School serves as both Dartmouth College 's undergraduate department of engineering , as well as a graduate school offering advanced degrees . Undergraduate majors can receive their Bachelor of Arts degree in engineering at the school , and may choose to continue on to earn a Bachelor of Engineering ( B.E. ) degree in an additional year or less . Thayer also offers a dual @-@ degree program for undergraduates at other colleges who wish to earn their bachelor 's degree at their home institution and their B.E. at Thayer . As a College academic department , the school 's undergraduate offerings are open to any Dartmouth student , including non @-@ majors . 
 Thayer offers several graduate degree programs , including a Master of Engineering ( <unk> ) in Biomedical Engineering , Master of Science ( M.S. ) , and Doctor of Philosophy ( Ph.D ) in engineering . The school also offers a Master of Engineering Management ( <unk> ) degree in conjunction with the adjacent Tuck School of Business , and a combination Ph.D / Doctor of Medicine ( M.D. ) from Dartmouth Medical School . The school also has the United States ' first engineering Ph.D. Innovation Program . 
 = = = Research and entrepreneurship = = = 
 The Thayer School emphasizes the cross @-@ disciplinary nature of its research topics . In 2007 , sponsored research at the school amounted to $ 16 @.@ 2 million . Research at Thayer is divided into three general " focus areas " : engineering in medicine , energy technologies , and complex systems . Projects within each focus area are divided by three " research categories " : biomedical , biochemical , chemical & environmental engineering ( <unk> ) , electrical & computer engineering , & engineering physics ( <unk> ) , and materials & mechanical systems engineering ( MMSE ) . 
 The Thayer School promotes its connections to engineering entrepreneurship . The Cook Engineering Design Center , founded in 1978 , acts to solicit industry @-@ sponsored projects for degree candidates to work on . The school also offers a variety of conferences , programs , and internships to foster student connections to the professional world . Companies and products that have emerged from the Thayer School include emeritus professor Robert Dean 's <unk> , Inc. and Dartmouth music professor Jon Appleton 's work on the Synclavier synthesizer . The school maintains a list of startup companies established by its current faculty . 
 = = = Rankings and admissions = = = 
 In 2007 , the Thayer School was ranked 47th by U.S. News & World Report among American engineering schools . It was also included in BusinessWeek 's unranked list of 60 " Best Design Schools in the World " . 
 Admissions for undergraduate students are handled by Dartmouth College 's Office of Undergraduate Admissions . Admission to graduate programs , including the B.E. degree , requires an undergraduate background in engineering and mathematics or science . In the fall of 2006 , Thayer accepted 14 @.@ 5 % of applicants overall . Average Graduate Record Examination ( GRE ) test scores of applicants in verbal , quantitative , and analytical sections were 601 , 778 , and 695 , respectively . 
 = = People = = 
 = = = Student profile and student life = = = 
 As of the 2007 – 2008 academic year , the Thayer School has an enrollment of 354 students : 107 undergraduates , 62 doctoral candidates , 27 B.E. students , 76 <unk> students , 20 M.S. students , and 13 student pursuing special studies . The school offers a number of professional and community service student groups , as well as social life governance councils for the student body . 
 = = = Faculty = = = 
 The Thayer School currently claims 74 active instructors , including 29 tenured or tenure @-@ track faculty , 16 research or instructional faculty , 22 adjunct faculty members , and seven lecturers . Notable former faculty include Arthur Kantrowitz , emeritus professor of engineering , and Myron Tribus , the dean of the Thayer School for most of the 1960s . 
 = = = Alumni = = = 
 As of 2007 , Thayer has 4 @,@ 046 engineering alumni in all 50 U.S. states and over 50 countries . Nearly 3 @,@ 000 of the graduates received a B.E. or a graduate degree , with the remaining 1 @,@ 000 earning only the undergraduate A.B. degree . 
 = Run @-@ Away ( Super Furry Animals song ) = 
 " Run @-@ Away " is a song by Super Furry Animals and the second single taken from their 2007 album , Hey Venus ! . The song is an homage to the ' Wall of Sound ' production made famous by Phil Spector , particularly in his work with 1960 's girl groups . 
 " Run @-@ Away " received many positive reviews from critics who variously described it as " absolutely timeless stuff " , " outstanding " and " up there with the most finely polished weapons in the SFA armoury " . The track 's Phil Spector @-@ leanings were also commented on by numerous journalists . A " spooky " , " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " video was produced for the song directed by Richard Ayoade and starring his Garth Marenghi 's Darkplace and The Mighty Boosh co @-@ star Matt Berry . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 In an interview with Tiny Mix Tapes in January 2008 Gruff Rhys admitted that " Run @-@ Away " owed much to Phil Spector @-@ type ' Wall of Sound ' production : " The drumbeat is definitely a nod to that . We started collecting a lot of old 7 @-@ inch singles recently . Cian got heavy into doo @-@ wop music and I was getting into late 60s girl groups . " Run @-@ Away " came out of listening to " Be My Baby " too many times " . Guto Pryce echoed this sentiment in an interview with Washington , D.C. website <unk> stating that " on " Run Away " that was exactly what we were after , a fuzzy Phil Spector type thing . A dirty , grimy ' 60s pop song " . The track was recorded at Miraval Studios , France along with the rest of Hey Venus ! 
 = = Musical structure = = 
 " Run @-@ Away " is 2 minutes 53 seconds long and is in the key of B major . The " hook laden " song begins with a spoken word introduction from Gruff ( " This song is based on a true story ... which would be fine if it wasn 't autobiographical " ) over a B chord playing on the " familiar " dum @-@ de @-@ dum @-@ dum " Phil Spector drum beat " provided by drummer Dafydd Ieuan . 
 Lead guitar embellishments accompany the first verse before the track builds up to its first " falsetto laden " chorus at 34 seconds . Another verse follows , with additional percussion backing , during which Rhys mourns " we may have fought with teeth and nails , I still recall your banking details " . A short breakdown middle 8 leads to a double chorus ( the second of which features a key change to C @-@ sharp major ) before the song breaks down again and ends with Rhys singing " There 's nothing that I could have said but cry , a little , lie , a little , die , just a little " over sparse musical backing . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Run @-@ Away " received much praise from reviewers with the Manchester Evening News claiming the track to be " absolutely timeless stuff " , likening it to Gruff Rhys " swaggering up to the karaoke and picking out his favourite Roy Orbison ballad " and the NME stating that , " with a chorus as big as guitarist Huw Bunford 's new serial @-@ killer beard , it 's up there with the most finely polished weapons in the SFA armoury " . Website Culture Deluxe claimed the track showed the band at " their pop @-@ best " and proved they " could do no wrong " while the Independent on Sunday called " Run @-@ Away " " outstanding " . 
 The Spector @-@ like nature of the track was commented on in several reviews with British television station Channel 4 describing " Run @-@ Away " as " Spector pop " , BBC Wales describing the song as " a homage to gun @-@ wielding production oddball Phil Spector " , and Yahoo ! Music in the UK and Ireland stating that the single " welds a killer falsetto chorus to a latterday incarnation of the ' Wall of Sound ' " . 
 Tiny Mix Tapes thought the " rousing and pleasant " song could have " found a home anywhere in or between Fuzzy Logic and 2005 's Love Kraft " while Pitchfork Media thought the track 's " ostensible real @-@ life origins " would " render " Run @-@ Away " one of the most heart @-@ on @-@ sleeve entries in a catalogue better known for left field classics like " Ice Hockey Hair " and " The Man Don 't Give a Fuck " " . B @-@ sides , the " Beach Boys @-@ influenced " " These Bones " and the " pulsating " " That 's What I 'm Talking About " , were also singled out for praise by the Manchester Evening News . The Chronicle however , criticised " Run @-@ Away " and previous single " Show Your Hand " for sounding " more like the generic pop songs one would find on the radio than those of a historically experimental band " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Music video = = 
 The " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " , video for " Run @-@ Away " was directed by Richard Ayoade and features his Garth Marenghi 's Darkplace and The Mighty Boosh co @-@ star Matt Berry . The video begins with close @-@ ups of Berry driving a vintage car on a moonlit night intercut with shots of a woman in a white dress running through sparse woodland . After 54 seconds Berry abruptly stops his car and the shot changes to show the woman in white laid on the road in front of his vehicle . Berry leaves his car and walks over to the woman who appears dazed . The next shot features the woman resting her head on Berry 's shoulder while he drives . 
 Towards the middle of the video we find the pair sat together at a house party while Berry discusses the woman with his friends . Part of this conversation features subtitles , with Berry stating " She can 't remember a thing " . Immediately afterwards a man in a brown suit and bow tie enters , rubbing the back of his head and looking confused . He focuses on the woman in the white dress and says " Maria ? " to which Berry counters " Who the heck are you ? " while ' Maria ' bites her lip and looks on guiltily . When the man in the suit states " That 's my wife ! " Berry gets to his feet and the man promptly punches him in the face . We then cut to shots of Berry running through the same woodland as ' Maria ' earlier in the video . After around 20 seconds he looks to his left and is blinded by a light . The next shot shows him laid on the road in front of a car as its driver , a woman in a red coat , rushes to check on him . As the song comes to an end we see the women in red driving her car with Berry resting his head on her shoulder . 
 Music website Stereogum described the video as a " cheeky , soft @-@ focused bit of ' 80s fun " , while British alternative music radio station Xfm included it in their top ten videos of 2007 , calling it " spooky , very tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek and utterly hilarious " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals . 
 CD ( <unk> ) 
 " Run @-@ Away " – 2 : 53 
 " These Bones " – 3 : 23 
 " That 's What I 'm Talking About " – 5 : 41 
 7 " picture disc ( <unk> ) 
 " Run @-@ Away " – 2 : 53 
 " These Bones " – 3 : 23 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Gruff Rhys : Vocals 
 Huw Bunford : Guitar 
 Guto Pryce : Bass guitar 
 Cian Ciaran : keyboards 
 Dafydd Ieuan : Drums 
 Kris Jenkins : Percussion 
 = = Singles chart positions = = 
 = Lisa 's Date with Density = 
 " Lisa 's Date with Density " is the seventh episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 15 , 1996 . It was written by Mike Scully , and directed by Susie Dietter . It sees Lisa develop a crush on Nelson Muntz , which eventually leads to Lisa and Nelson dating . It also was among the first episodes to feature Milhouse 's crush on Lisa , an element of the series ( along with Lisa 's vegetarianism ) to have spun off from " Lisa 's Wedding " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At Springfield Elementary School , Superintendent Chalmers visits Principal Skinner to show off his newly purchased 1979 Honda Accord . However , he becomes distraught when he discovers the car 's hood ornament missing . Principal Skinner orders a search of every student 's locker , and it is discovered that Nelson Muntz is the culprit . As punishment , Nelson is forced to return all stolen items to their owners and help Groundskeeper Willie with his jobs around the school . 
 Mr. Largo catches Lisa looking outside at Nelson during a music lesson , and as a result is given detention . After school , she continues to watch Nelson and develops a crush on the bully . 
 Lisa tries to let Nelson know how she feels about him by getting Milhouse to pass a love note to him in class . However , the plan backfires , with Nelson seriously injuring Milhouse ( this is not seen , but Milhouse is seen being loaded into an ambulance ) , thinking the note came from him . Lisa admits that she wrote the letter and although Nelson seems indifferent about the matter he begins by visiting her house . Lisa is resolved to turn Nelson from a trouble maker into a sweet , sensitive young man . She changes his appearance by giving him new clothes and hairstyle . Later , Lisa and Nelson share their first kiss during their date at the Springfield Observatory . 
 However , the influence of Nelson 's friends Jimbo , Dolph and Kearney proves to win out when they convince him to come along with them and throw rancid coleslaw at Principal Skinner 's house . Skinner immediately phones the police , and the four flee . Nelson takes refuge with Lisa , proclaiming his innocence . Lisa believes him , until Nelson unwittingly lets the truth slip . Lisa realizes that Nelson is always going to be who he is and ends their relationship , much to the relief of an overjoyed Milhouse . 
 Meanwhile , Chief Wiggum arrests a scam artist for telemarketing fraud . Homer witnesses the arrest and sees the discarded autodialer in a nearby trash bin . Homer takes the autodialer home to use for tele @-@ panhandling . 
 Homer ends up annoying all of Springfield with his " Happy Dude " scam , and soon enough Chief Wiggum catches him . Instead of confiscating the autodialer and taking Homer into custody , he shoots it then gives Homer a citation and asks him to bring the autodialer with him ( although full of lead ) to his court hearing , otherwise there would be no case and Homer would be let off the hook . In the closing credits , however , Homer has recorded a new message telling everyone he scammed he is sorry and that if they can forgive him to send more money . 
 = = Production = = 
 The idea of Lisa dating Nelson had been around for a while , with several different versions being pitched . The writers wanted a " silly " Homer story to balance the episode out , and the idea of using the telemarketing scam for this had also been around for a while . By this time , the show had begun to have episodes revolving around secondary characters . This was the first episode to revolve around Nelson , and was done to partly explain why Nelson acts the way he does . The words to Nelson 's song were contributed by Mike Scully 's daughters . The scene in which Milhouse passes Lisa 's note to Nelson was written by Bill Oakley , with the line " He can 't hear you , we had to pack his ears with gauze " being George Meyer 's line . There was a debate as to how injured Milhouse could look without it looking disturbing , and the drop of blood coming from his nose was decided to be enough . Milhouse liking Vaseline on toast was based on a child from Josh Weinstein 's school days who everyday would get on to the bus with a piece of toast , which had Vaseline on it . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 A majority of the story is a reference to the film Rebel Without a Cause . Lisa remarks Nelson is " like a riddle wrapped in an enigma wrapped in a vest , " a reference to " a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma " ; this was Winston Churchill 's opinion of Russia at the outbreak of the World War II . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Lisa 's Date with Density " finished 63rd in ratings for the week of December 9 – 15 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 4 , equivalent to approximately 7 @.@ 2 million viewing households . It was the fifth @-@ highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Melrose Place , Beverly Hills , 90210 and Party of Five . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " impressive " how " even after Nelson has beaten him [ Milhouse ] up for apparently making a pass , [ Milhouse ] will still do anything for uncaring Lisa . " Josh Weinstein called it one of the most " real " episodes , commenting that every character in the episode , from Superintendent Chalmers to Lisa , acts like a real person throughout . The medic 's line " He can 't hear you , we had to pack his ears with gauze " is one of Matt Groening 's favorites . Marge 's line " When I first met your father , he was loud , crude and piggish . But I worked hard on him , and now he 's a whole new person , " is one of Susie Dietter 's favorites , as it explains why Marge is still married to Homer despite his actions . 
 This is also one of several episodes that has been performed live by the cast in front of an audience . 
 = Lord of the Universe = 
 Lord of the Universe is a 1974 American documentary film about Prem Rawat ( at the time known as Guru Maharaj Ji ) at an event in November 1973 at the Houston Astrodome called " Millennium ' 73 " . Lord of the Universe was first broadcast on PBS on February 2 , 1974 , and released in VHS format on November 1 , 1991 . The documentary chronicles Maharaj Ji , his followers and anti @-@ Vietnam War activist Rennie Davis who was a spokesperson of the Divine Light Mission at the time . A counterpoint is presented by Abbie Hoffman , who appears as a commentator . It includes interviews with several individuals , including followers , ex @-@ followers , a <unk> , a born @-@ again Christian , and a follower of Hare Krishna . 
 The production team of Top Value Television produced the documentary , using <unk> video cameras . The TVTV team followed Maharaj Ji across the United States over a period of six weeks , and edited a large amount of tape down to the fifty @-@ eight @-@ minute piece . It was the first documentary made on 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 13 mm ) video tape broadcast nationally , and also the first independent video documentary shown on national public television . 
 The documentary was generally well @-@ received , and garnered its TVTV production team the 1974 Alfred I. du Pont / Columbia University Award in Broadcast Journalism . The documentary received a negative review in the New York Post , and positive reviews in The New York Times , The Boston Globe , the Los Angeles Times , and the Chicago Sun @-@ Times . The San Francisco Bay Guardian wrote that the TVTV team had improved since their previous work but wanted them to move on to more challenging subjects . 
 = = Content = = 
 The documentary chronicles Guru Maharaj Ji , the Divine Light Mission , his followers and anti @-@ Vietnam War activist Rennie Davis at " Millennium ' 73 " , an event held at the Houston Astrodome in November 1973 . Rennie Davis , a follower of Guru Maharaj Ji , was one of the spokespersons and speakers at the " Millennium ' 73 " event . His speech is featured in the documentary . 
 Abbie Hoffman appears as a commentator in the documentary and addresses some points raised in Davis 's speech , stating : " It 's rather arrogant of Rennie to say that he has found God and has his Telex number in his wallet . " The TVTV crew interviewed different " premies " , or followers of Prem Rawat , throughout the film , and one teenage boy is shown stating : " Before I came to the Guru I was a freak , smoking dope and dropping out – and my parents were happier then than they are with this . " In a later part of the film , a loudspeaker voice announces : " Those premies who came in private cars can leave now . Those who came in rented buses can stay and meditate until further notice . " Adherents of other belief systems also appear in the documentary , including a born @-@ again Christian who criticizes devotees for " following the devil " , and a Hare Krishna follower . 
 A separate storyline is seen concurrently through the coverage of the " Millennium ' 73 " event , involving a man named Michael who has come to Houston , Texas , to receive " Knowledge " from Maharaj Ji . Once Michael has received the " Knowledge " , he defends the secrecy behind the rituals . Michael 's experiences are contrasted in the documentary with interviews with " ex @-@ premies " or former followers of Maharaj Ji , recounting their initiation and later disillusionment with Maharaj Ji 's teachings . One of them says that after receiving " Knowledge " from Maharaj Ji , he was told that this free gift required lifetime devotion and donations of " worldly goods " . 
 Maharaj Ji is shown in a scene in the Astrodome relating a <unk> to the attendants . He is seen dressed in gold @-@ colored clothing and a crown , and sits on a platform throne . The story he relates to the crowd involves a young boy who comes to Houston , while searching for a Superman comic book . While seated on the platform , Maharaj Ji is surrounded by flashing moon signs and women wearing decorative garlands , while a band called " Blue Aquarius " plays his theme song . The stage is decorated with glitter and neon lights , and Maharaj Ji 's brother performs rock music songs . Abbie Hoffman gives a final comment in the documentary , stating : " If this guy is God , this is the God the United States of America deserves . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The documentary was produced by Top Value Television ( TVTV ) in association with TV Lab , and was primarily directed by Michael <unk> . TVTV had received initial funding for the documentary through a small grant from the Stern Foundation , and an additional promise from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting . David Loxton arranged a post @-@ production budget of USD $ 4 @,@ 000 , and the total production costs for the documentary amounted to $ 36 @,@ 000 – about forty @-@ five percent of the average costs for a PBS film production at the time . Several camera crews used 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 13 mm ) black and white <unk> and followed Maharaj Ji and his group across the United States for six weeks . The TVTV production team debated whether to include the secret techniques of Maharaj Ji in the documentary and finally decided that it was vital to disclose these practices in the piece . They chose to have an ex @-@ <unk> divulge these practices rather than use a narration , but they were fearful of potential repercussions , which never came . TVTV member Tom Weinberg found a man who demonstrated meditation techniques in the documentary , which he described as being the " Knowledge " . Producer Megan Williams stated that TVTV crew members empathized with the experiences of Maharaj Ji 's followers , because there was very little age difference between them and the TVTV production team . Nevertheless , many in the crew of TVTV felt superior to these " lost souls " describing the followers as " <unk> " . 
 At the end of filming , eighty @-@ two hours of tape were edited to the final fifty @-@ eight @-@ minute documentary piece . TVTV 's team utilized graphics , live music , and wide angle lens shots . Stop @-@ action sequences where quotations flash on the screen were also used for effect . The production was the first <unk> video documentary made for national television , and the " first program originally made on 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 13 mm ) video tape to be broadcast nationally " . Lord of the Universe was also : " The first independent video documentary made for national broadcast on public television . " The trailer was originally broadcast on WNET Channel Thirteen television . Lord of the Universe was shown to a national audience in the United States on February 2 , 1974 , broadcast on 240 stations of the Public Broadcasting Service . It aired a second time on July 12 , 1974 . Later TVTV productions broadcast on public television included Gerald Ford 's America , and a 1975 program on Cajuns The Good Times Are Killing Me . 
 In 1989 , the documentary was included in an exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art on video art called " Image World : Art and Media Culture " . The documentary was re @-@ released to VHS on November 1 , 1991 , by Subtle Communications . On the packaging it is claimed that Guru Maharaj Ji " promised to levitate the Astrodome " . Sources including <unk> , the library of the University of California , Santa Cruz , and Art Journal repeat this statement in varying forms . The documentary was screened in August 2006 at The Centre for Contemporary Arts in Glasgow , Scotland , as part of the <unk> Guerilla cinema programme . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Ron Powers of the Chicago Sun Times called the documentary " highly recommended viewing " , and described it as : " ... both as an example of skeptical , unimpressed ( but never vicious ) journalism , and as a peek into the future of television ... a clever , ironic and eventually devastating documentary " . Electronic Arts <unk> described Lord of the Universe as " a forceful expose on the sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Guru Maharaj Ji and the national gathering of his followers at the Houston Astrodome " . Michael Blowen of The Boston Globe wrote that the documentary " captures the absurdity of Millennium ' 73 " , and that " The desperation of flower people alienated from politics is both touching and hilarious as they offer hope for eternal life to other converts . " 
 Dick Adler of the Los Angeles Times gave the documentary a positive review , writing : " ' The Lord of the Universe ' doesn 't really take sides , which doesn 't mean it 's a bland hour trying to please everybody . Its considerable bite comes first from the material TVTV so carefully gathered and there from the artfully wise frame in which it chose to present it . " Deirdre Boyle wrote in Art Journal that the piece was " the zenith of TVTV 's guerrilla @-@ TV style " . According to Boyle 's Subject to Change : Guerrilla Television Revisited , as in all TVTV tapes , everyone in the documentary comes across as foolish , describing the production 's sarcasm as the " ultimate <unk> " using equal irony " both with the mighty and the lowly " . 
 Katy Butler wrote in the San Francisco Bay Guardian that the TVTV style had improved since their previous work : " This show has fewer interjections from TVTV personnel , fewer moments that drag , more technological razzle @-@ dazzle ( color footage , slow motion , stop motion , tight and rapid cutting ) . " However , she described Guru Maharaj Ji and his entourage as " an easy target " and wrote that " anybody can look like a fool when a smartass wide angle lens distorts their face , and teenage ex @-@ dopers who think a fat boy is God don 't stand a chance " . Butler wished that TVTV would move on to more challenging subjects for their future work . Bob Williams of the New York Post called the documentary a " deplorable film " and " flat , pointless , television " . He wrote : " The hour @-@ long program was remiss in not providing some small examination of the available box @-@ office take of the goofy kid guru , much less telling prospective contributors how it got involved in spending how much of its foundation grants and viewer subscription money in such a questionable venture without more inquisitive journalistic endeavor , or ignoring gurus . " 
 A review in The Oakland Tribune described the film as " a fascinating hour documentary on the guru 's three @-@ day happening at the Houston Astrodome " , and commented that the event was " deftly captured by the mobile video cameras of TVTV , a group of talented young <unk> " . John J. O 'Connor of The New York Times described TVTV 's work as " a terrific documentary " and complimented the team on the visual results of the piece : " After TVTV superbly dissected the guru , his ' holy family ' and his followers , more objective viewers might have chosen to laugh , cry , or throw up . " In a later piece by O 'Connor in 1975 , he wrote that TVTV " gained a respectable measure of national success with ' The Lord of the Universe ' " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The documentary received the 1974 " Alfred I. du Pont / Columbia University Award in Broadcast Journalism " ( DuPont Award ) . The jurors from the 1974 DuPont @-@ Columbia awards stated that the documentary was : " hectic , hilarious and not a little disquieting . With a heavier and less sure hand , the subject would have been squashed beneath the reporters ’ irony or contempt . As it was , cult religion was handed to us , live and quivering , to make of it what we would . " The group 's work impressed WNET president John Jay Iselin , and he raised additional funds that helped TVTV to produce five more programs , including Gerald Ford 's America . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = Local marketing agreement = 
 In U.S. and Canadian broadcasting , a local marketing agreement ( or local management agreement , abbreviated as an LMA ) is a contract in which one company agrees to operate a radio or television station owned by another party . In essence , it is a sort of lease or time @-@ buy . 
 Under Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) regulations , a local marketing agreement must give the company operating the station ( the " senior " partner ) under the agreement control over the entire facilities of the station , including the finances , personnel and programming of the station . Its original licensee ( the " junior " partner ) still remains legally responsible for the station and its operations , such as compliance with relevant regulations regarding content . Occasionally , a " local marketing agreement " may refer to the sharing or contracting of only certain functions , in particular advertising sales . This may also be referred to as a local sales agreement ( LSA ) , management services agreement ( MSA ) , or most commonly , a joint sales agreement ( JSA ) or shared services agreement ( SSA ) . JSAs are counted toward ownership caps for television and radio stations . In Canada , local marketing agreements between domestic stations require the consent of the Canadian Radio @-@ television and Telecommunications Commission ( CRTC ) , although Rogers Media has used a similar arrangement to control a U.S.-based radio station in a border market . 
 The increased use of sharing agreements by media companies to form consolidated , " virtual " duopolies became controversial between 2009 and 2014 , especially arrangements where a company buys a television station 's facilities and assets , but sells the license to an affiliated third @-@ party " shell " corporation , who then enters into agreements with the owner of the facilities to operate the station on their behalf . Activists have argued that broadcasters were using these agreements as a loophole for the FCC 's ownership regulations , that they reduce the number of local media outlets in a market through the aggregation or outright consolidation of news programming , and allow station owners to have increased leverage in the negotiation of retransmission consent with local subscription television providers . Station owners have contended that these sharing agreements allow streamlined , cost @-@ effective operations that may be beneficial to the continued operation of lower @-@ rated and / or financially weaker stations , especially in smaller markets . 
 In 2014 under chairman Tom Wheeler , the FCC began to increase its scrutiny regarding the use of such agreements — particularly joint sales — to evade its policies . On March 31 , 2014 , the commission voted to make joint sales agreements count as ownership if the senior partner sells 15 % or more of advertising time for its partner , and to ban coordinated retransmission consent negotiations between two of the top four stations in a market . Wheeler indicated that he planned to address local marketing and shared services agreements in the future . The change in stance also prompted changes to then @-@ proposed acquisitions by Gray Television and Sinclair Broadcast Group , who , rather than use sharing agreements to control them , moved their existing programming and network affiliations to digital subchannels of existing company @-@ owned stations in the market , and then relinquished control over them by selling the stations to minority @-@ owned broadcasters intending to operate them independently . 
 = = History and background = = 
 Due to the FCC 's limits on station ownership at the time ( which prevented the common ownership of multiple radio stations ) , local marketing agreements in radio , in which a smaller station would sell its entire airtime to a third @-@ party in time @-@ buy , were widespread between the 1970s and early 1990s . These alliances gave larger broadcasters a way to expand their reach , and smaller broadcasters a means of obtaining a stable stream of revenue . In 1992 , the FCC began allowing broadcasting companies to own multiple radio stations in a single market . Following these changes , local marketing agreements largely fell out of favor for radio , as it was now possible for broadcasters to simply buy another station outright rather than lease it – consequentially triggering a wave of mass consolidation in the radio industry . However , broadcasters still used local marketing agreements to help transition acquired stations to their new owners . 
 The first local marketing agreement in North American television was formed in 1991 , when the Sinclair Broadcast Group purchased Fox affiliate <unk> @-@ TV in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . As Sinclair had already owned independent station <unk> ( now MyNetworkTV affiliate <unk> ) in that market , which would have violated FCC rules which at the time had prohibited television station duopolies , Sinclair decided to sell the lower @-@ rated <unk> to the station 's manager Eddie Edwards , but continued to operate the station through an LMA ( Sinclair eventually repurchased the station – then assigned the call letters <unk> – outright in 2000 , after the Federal Communications Commission began permitting common ownership of two television stations in the same market , creating a legal duopoly ) . 
 Sinclair 's use of local marketing agreements would lead to legal issues in 1999 , when Glencairn , Ltd . ( since restructured as Cunningham Broadcasting ) announced that it would acquire Fox affiliate KOKH @-@ TV in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma from Sullivan Broadcasting ; Glencairn subsequently announced plans to sell five of its 11 existing stations that were operated by Sinclair under LMAs to that company outright . As the family of Sinclair Broadcast Group founder Julian Smith controlled 97 % of Glencairn 's stock assets ( which remains the case under its Cunningham structure ) and the company was to be paid with Sinclair stock in turn for the purchases , KOKH and Sinclair @-@ owned WB affiliate <unk> ( now a CW affiliate ) would effectively constitute a duopoly in violation of FCC rules . The Rainbow / PUSH coalition ( headed by Jesse Jackson ) filed challenges against the sale with the FCC , citing concerns over a single company holding two broadcast licenses in a single market and argued that Glencairn was masquerading as a separate minority @-@ owned company ( Edwards , who served as Glencairn 's president , is African American ) when it was really an arm of Sinclair that the company used to gain control of the stations through LMAs . After the FCC updated its media ownership rules to allow a single company to own two television stations in the same market in August 1999 , Sinclair restructured the deal to acquire KOKH outright . In 2001 , the FCC issued a $ 40 @,@ 000 fine against Sinclair for illegally controlling Glencairn . 
 In 1999 , the FCC modified its media ownership rules to count LMAs formed after November 5 , 1996 that cover more than 15 % of the broadcast day toward the ownership limits for the brokering station 's owner . Even still , the related joint sales and shared services agreement structures became increasingly common during the 2000s ; these outsourcing agreements proliferated between 2011 and 2013 , when station owners such as Sinclair and the Nexstar Broadcasting Group began expanding their portfolios by acquiring additional stations in an effort to drive scale as well as to gain leverage in retransmission consent negotiations with cable and satellite television providers . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 The most common use of an LMA in television broadcasting is to create a " virtual duopoly " , where the stations operated under the agreement are consolidated into a single entity . The operations of the stations can be streamlined for cost @-@ effectiveness through the sharing of resources , such as facilities , advertising sales , personnel and programming . Many broadcasters that engage in the practice believe that such agreements are beneficial to the survival of television stations – especially in smaller markets , where the overall audience reach is considerably less than that of markets that are centered upon densely populated metropolitan areas , and the cost savings achieved through the consolidation of resources and staff may be necessary to fund a station 's continued operation . 
 Sharing agreements may also be used as a loophole to control television stations in situations where it is legally impossible to own them outright . For instance , FCC regulations only allow a single company to own more than one full @-@ powered television station in a given market if there are at least eight distinct station owners , and also prohibits the ownership of two or more of the four highest @-@ rated stations ( based on total day viewership ) in a market . An LMA or similar agreement does not affect the ownership of the station 's license , meaning that they do not require the approval of the FCC to establish , and the two stations are still legally considered separate operations from a licensing standpoint . Both Tribune Media and the Gannett Company were required to use shared services agreements as a similar loophole to take control of certain stations in their respective 2013 purchases of Local TV and Belo , as they did not have exemptions to the FCC 's newspaper cross @-@ ownership restrictions in the affected markets . Both companies have since spun out their publishing arms as independent companies ; the Tribune Publishing Company and Gannett Company . Tegna , who holds the former Gannett 's broadcasting and digital media properties , re @-@ acquired the licenses for most of the affected stations following the split . 
 Broadcasters could also collect carriage fees for the stations they operate under sharing agreements on behalf of their owner , often bundling its carriage agreements with those of stations they own outright . This could , especially in LMAs between two stations affiliated with the " major " networks , allow the broadcaster to charge higher fees for retransmission consent to television providers for carrying the stations , which could result in smaller cable companies not being able to afford the higher fees imposed . Cable television providers advocated barring sharing agreements between television stations for this particular reason . In the United States , the FCC no longer allows broadcasters to collude with one another in negotiating retransmission consent fees . 
 = = = Operation on behalf of a third @-@ party owner = = = 
 Although the majority of LMAs involve the outsourcing of one television station 's operations to another , occasionally , a company may operate a station under an LMA , JSA or SSA even if it does not already own a station in that market . One example occurred in December 2013 , when the Louisiana Media Company ( owned by New Orleans Saints and New Orleans Hornets owner Tom Benson ) entered into a shared services agreement with Raycom Media to run the former company 's Fox affiliate in New Orleans , Louisiana , WVUE @-@ DT ; while Louisiana Media Company retained the station 's ownership and license , other assets were assumed by Raycom , which owns stations in markets adjacent to New Orleans ( including Baton Rouge , Jackson , Biloxi , Lake Charles and Shreveport ) but not within New Orleans itself . Benson had received offers from Raycom and others to buy the station , but was not prepared to sell WVUE outright . 
 = = = Foreign control of broadcast outlets = = = 
 LMAs can also allow companies to control foreign stations from outside of their respective country ; Canadian media company Rogers Media uses a joint sales agreement to operate Cape Vincent , New York radio station <unk> as a station targeting the nearby Canadian market of Kingston , Ontario , where it owns <unk> @-@ FM and <unk> @-@ FM . Rogers owns a 47 % stake in <unk> 's licensee , Border International Broadcasting . 
 Similarly , <unk> Communications Corporation controls XHDTV @-@ TDT , a Tijuana , Mexico @-@ based station owned by <unk> Alco , which operates as an English @-@ language station serving the border market of San Diego . 
 = = Effects of LMAs = = 
 Public interest organizations have disapproved of the use of LMAs for virtual duopolies that circumvent the FCC 's rules due to their effects on the broadcasting industry , particularly the results of consolidation through the irregular use of LMAs . In markets where duopolies are not legally possible , a company may elect to form one by purchasing a station 's " non @-@ license " assets ( such as their physical facilities , programming rights , and other intellectual property ) , and selling the license itself to a third @-@ party " sidecar " company ( which is often affiliated with the purchaser ) , which in turn , enters into an LMA or a similar agreement with the senior partner . The FCC only recognizes ownership of television stations by the ownership of their license and facility ID , and not by the ownership of these " non @-@ license " assets ; this means that the senior partner becomes the de facto owner and operator of the station , but the sidecar is still the legal owner . Although the FCC determines a sidecar firm to be an independent entity from the company using it to outsource station operations for licensing purposes , the Securities and Exchange Commission does not make such a designation , requiring reports on sidecars to be included in a broadcaster 's financial statements . 
 Both Sinclair Broadcast Group and Nexstar Broadcasting Group became infamous for their frequent use of sidecars as part of their expansion and consolidation tactics , partnering with companies like Cunningham Broadcasting , Deerfield Media , Mission Broadcasting , and even each other in the case of a virtual duopoly in Harrisburg , Pennsylvania between Sinclair @-@ owned CBS affiliate WHP @-@ TV and Nexstar @-@ owned CW affiliate <unk> @-@ TV , and a former virtual duopoly in Rochester , New York between Nexstar @-@ owned CBS affiliate <unk> @-@ TV and Sinclair @-@ owned Fox affiliate <unk> ( in the wake of Sinclair and Deerfield 's purchase of ABC affiliate <unk> @-@ TV , this particular arrangement ended in January 2014 ) . 
 While not to the same , wide extent as Sinclair and Nexstar , some broadcasters have similar business relationships with specific sidecar companies as partners for these agreements : 
 Raycom Media has a similar business relationship with American Spirit Media in markets such as Toledo , Ohio ( where American Spirit Media purchased Fox affiliate <unk> from <unk> Media in 2012 , with that station 's operations being taken over by CBS affiliate <unk> ) , On the other hand , two Raycom @-@ owned Fox stations , <unk> in West Palm Beach and <unk> @-@ TV in Boise , are managed by E.W. Scripps Company stations <unk> and <unk> @-@ TV . 
 Gray Television is affiliated with the sidecar Excalibur Broadcasting – owned by former Gray executive Don Ray , 
 Granite Broadcasting operated virtual duopolies in Fort Wayne , Indiana and Duluth , Minnesota with the sidecar Malara Broadcast Group . The stations have since been respectively sold to Quincy Newspapers and SagamoreHill Broadcasting , with Quincy operating SagamoreHill 's stations under an SSA – although in Fort Wayne , Quincy acquired the previous junior partner , Malara 's ABC affiliate WPTA , with SagamoreHill taking NBC affiliate WISE @-@ TV instead . 
 News @-@ Press and Gazette Company is affiliated with the sidecar <unk> Media for stations such as <unk> ( which was previously taken over by NPG under Fisher Communications ownership ) and <unk> @-@ TV ( under Cowles Publishing Company ownership ) . Both companies are based in St. Joseph , Missouri . 
 = = = Effects on programming = = = 
 The stations partnered through a sharing agreement may also consolidate their programming operations : local newscasts on the junior partner in the LMA , if it operated a separate news department before the LMA 's formation , may be rescheduled or scaled back to prevent direct competition with newscasts airing on the station acting as the senior partner ( the latter aspect is less common with LMAs involving only stations affiliated with one of the three largest broadcast television networks ) . The stations may share news @-@ gathering resources , but maintain separate news telecasts that are differentiated by their on @-@ air presentation , anchors , and overall format , with varying degrees of autonomy ; in these cases , a seemingly separate newscast on the brokered station in the duopoly may ultimately consist of repackaged news content from the other station . Alternatively , the stations may consolidate their news programming under a single joint brand . 
 Redundant staff members are often laid off as part of the consolidation process , and the sharing of news content reduces the number of unique editorial voices in the market . This in particular is one of the caveats of pushes to ban outsourcing agreements by media consolidation critics , who also suggest that LMAs result in a decreased amount of local news coverage on the brokered station . 
 Depending on how the outsourcing agreement is structured , as well as how the brokered station is programmed , how the stations are consolidated and the amount of news programming featured on the brokered station may vary , for example : 
 In October 2008 , Tribune Broadcasting and Local TV LLC consolidated the operations of their respective CW and Fox affiliates in Denver and St. Louis , resulting from a <unk> management agreement between both companies . In Denver , CW affiliate KWGN @-@ TV moved into Fox affiliate KDVR 's facilities in the Speer neighborhood ; while in St. Louis , Fox affiliate KTVI – despite being the senior partner in the LMA with CW affiliate KPLR – moved into the latter station 's Maryland Heights studios . Both cities were ( and still are ) top @-@ 25 markets , making Denver and St. Louis the largest where any English @-@ language stations were involved in an LMA ; however , both cities had enough stations to allow a legal duopoly ( this was not possible with KPLR and KTVI as both were among the four highest @-@ rated stations in St. Louis at the time , placing ahead of ratings @-@ challenged ABC affiliate <unk> @-@ TV ) , and were large enough to support at least four television news operations ( Denver had five and St. Louis had four news @-@ producing stations prior to the formation of the LMA ) . 
 KWGN and KPLR moved The CW 's primetime lineup one hour later ( to 8 : 00 p.m. ) than the network @-@ recommended timeslot , and shifted their evening newscasts to 7 : 00 p.m. ( weekend editions of the evening newscasts were discontinued with the move ; KPLR has since expanded its 7 : 00 p.m. newscast to Saturday and Sunday evenings ) to avoid competing with KDVR and KTVI 's 9 : 00 p.m. newscasts ; KWGN retained its weekday morning newscast ( which competes directly with KDVR 's morning newscast ) , but canceled its 5 : 30 p.m. – and later , 11 : 00 a.m. – newscasts . In contrast , KPLR ( which had run a primetime newscast for much of its history ) eventually added hour @-@ long midday and late afternoon newscasts . The two LMA arrangements became legal duopolies in December 2013 , once Tribune finalized its acquisition of Local TV . 
 In 2009 , Raycom Media ( owner of Honolulu @-@ based NBC and MyNetworkTV affiliates , <unk> and KFVE ) announced it would take over the operations of local CBS affiliate <unk> ( then owned by MCG Capital Corporation ) , giving it control of three of the television stations in Hawaii . The deal was a complex arrangement which involved trading the non @-@ license assets of KFVE ( such as its call sign , programming , and network affiliation ) for those of <unk> ( effectively placing the station under Raycom ownership , but using KFVE 's license , signal , and virtual channel 5 ) , and taking over KFVE ( which moved to the channel 9 license owned by MCG Capital ) under a shared services agreement . Due to its nature , the swap was not a transaction that would require the intervention of the FCC , aside from the changing of call signs . The three stations were then folded into a shared news operation branded as Hawaii News Now . An estimated 68 positions from a total of 198 from the three stations would be eliminated as part of the agreement . On November 20 , 2013 , MCG Capital filed to sell KFVE to the aforementioned American Spirit Media . 
 In 2010 , the operations of Schurz Communications @-@ owned NBC affiliate WAGT in Augusta , Georgia were taken over by Media General @-@ owned ABC affiliate WJBF @-@ TV . Both stations were consolidated into new , high @-@ definition capable facilities constructed on the site of a former Barnes & Noble store , with separate studios for each station , and a third , shared studio . Despite the consolidation , the two stations aimed to maintain some autonomy from each other : both WAGT and WJBF maintain their own on @-@ air identities , <unk> , and sales departments within the facility . While the newscasts on both stations do share some " factual " video content , they are otherwise produced independently of each other . However , upon the consolidation , most of WAGT 's managerial staff were dismissed and other employees were reassigned to different positions . The agreement was unwound after Gray Television 's purchase of the station , but briefly reinstated following legal action by Media General . After the injunction was struck down , Gray re @-@ assumed control of WAGT on March 28 , 2016 , adding 5 : 30 p.m. and 7 : 00 p.m. newscasts exclusive to the station , with the remainder simulcast from WRDW . 
 In 2010 , Nexstar announced a new joint news operation for its consolidated cluster in Utica / Rome , New York , which consists of Nexstar @-@ owned Fox and MyNetworkTV affiliates WFXV and WPNY @-@ LP , and Mission @-@ owned ABC affiliate WUTR . Unlike the other examples , neither station had a pre @-@ existing newscast at the time ; WUTR 's original news department was closed in 2003 by previous owner Clear Channel Communications as a cost @-@ saving measure , and WFXV had never aired local news programming at all . Its slate included early and late evening newscasts on WUTR , an encore of WUTR 's evening newscast on WPNY , and a 10 : 00 p.m. newscast on WFXV with a faster , younger @-@ skewing format . The station 's executive vice president , Steve <unk> ( who had come from NBC affiliate <unk> , which had the sole television news operation in the market prior to the formation of Nexstar 's Eyewitness News operation ) believed that it " [ was ] important that the community has another source of news . We have one newspaper and one news station and the community could benefit from another voice . " 
 In Evansville , Indiana , Mission Broadcasting acquired then @-@ independent station WTVW ( now a CW affiliate ) in 2011 with its former owner Nexstar Broadcasting retaining operational duties under an SSA . WTVW consolidated news operations with ABC affiliate WEHT , for which Nexstar traded WTVW to Mission in exchange for acquiring WEHT from Gilmore Broadcasting Corporation , and had its newscast output reduced through the reductions of its weekday morning newscast from four hours to two and its 6 : 00 p.m. newscast – except on Sundays , where it remained one hour – from one hour to 30 minutes ( leaving only a two @-@ hour morning newscast , half @-@ hour noon and 6 : 30 p.m. newscasts and an hour @-@ long newscast at 9 : 00 p.m. ) . Both stations were then folded into a shared news operation branded as Eyewitness News . 
 In November 2011 , in the Tucson , Arizona , market , Belo relinquished the operations of its Fox and MyNetworkTV duopoly KMSB and <unk> to Raycom Media . Operations of the two stations , along with production of KMSB 's 9 : 00 p.m. newscast , were assumed by Raycom 's CBS station KOLD @-@ TV . Belo Media Operations president Peter L. Diaz touted that the consolidation would result in " better produced , increased news programming for the Tucson market , " citing Raycom 's addition of a locally produced morning newscast to KMSB , and the upgrade of KMSB 's news programming to high definition as part of the transition . Although ruling out the need to do so in other markets , Diaz noted that the agreements " [ allowed ] us to increase our news product that we couldn 't afford to do otherwise . " The consolidation resulted in layoffs for almost all of the two stations ' employees , aside from advertising sales staff , which remained employed by Belo but worked from KOLD 's facilities . The acquisition of Belo by Gannett in 2013 had few effects on the virtual triopoly ; although the stations ' licenses were sold to third @-@ parties to satisfy newspaper cross @-@ ownership restrictions , Raycom still operates the stations , but their sales departments remained operated by Gannett . The licenses were , in turn , sold to Tegna — the spin @-@ out of Gannett 's broadcasting division , in December 2015 . 
 The 2012 sale of Newport Television led to the formation of two full @-@ power virtual <unk> . In Little Rock , Arkansas , Nexstar and Mission Broadcasting formed a virtual <unk> consisting of two duopolies ; NBC station <unk> @-@ TV and MyNetworkTV station <unk> @-@ TV ( owned by Nexstar ) , along with Fox station <unk> @-@ TV and CW station <unk> ( owned by Mission , operated by Nexstar under a local marketing agreement ) . All four stations were consolidated into <unk> 's facilities ; 30 employees were laid off as part of the consolidation . As a result , <unk> reduced its weeknight 5 : 00 p.m. newscast from one hour to 30 minutes ( limiting it to the 5 : 30 half @-@ hour ) and dropped its 10 : 00 p.m. newscast , while adding a two @-@ hour weekday morning newscast and retaining its existing hour @-@ long newscast at 9 : 00 p.m. 
 Sinclair formed a similar arrangement in Mobile , Alabama between its existing Pensacola duopoly of ABC affiliate WEAR @-@ TV and MyNetworkTV affiliate <unk> , and the newly acquired Mobile duopoly of NBC affiliate WPMI and independent station <unk> ( owned by Deerfield Media ) . However , the stations were not consolidated , and maintain their own studio facilities , news departments and staff . WEAR and WPMI also produce competing 9 : 00 p.m. newscasts for their respective duopoly partners . 
 = = Reaction and government action = = 
 In February 2001 , Clear Channel Communications subsidiary <unk> was fined $ 25 @,@ 000 for its use of time brokerage agreements and litigation for unlawfully controlling Youngstown , Ohio area radio station <unk> ( 101 @.@ 9 FM , now <unk> ) ; the company had also been the target of complaints for using <unk> ( FM ) to rebroadcast <unk> after it had nominally sold <unk> to minority @-@ owned interests . 
 In 2009 , the Media Council of Hawaii complained to the FCC about Raycom 's Hawaii News Now operation , stating that it would " directly reduce the diversity of local voices in a community by replacing independent newscasts on the brokered station with those of the brokering station . " In response , the FCC stated it would begin to investigate into the matter . 
 In 2011 , after temporarily losing its Fox affiliation for WFFT @-@ TV to a subchannel of WISE @-@ TV due to a reverse compensation dispute , Nexstar Broadcasting Group ( ironically , given its use of similar practices in other markets ) filed an antitrust lawsuit against the station 's managing partner , Granite Broadcasting , arguing that it had built a monopoly on local advertising sales by having effective control of the outlets for five major networks ( ABC and MyNetworkTV on WPTA , and NBC , Fox , and The CW on WISE @-@ TV ; owned by Malara Broadcast Group and operated under agreements by Granite ) . The lawsuit was settled in February 2013 via mutual agreement , after which the Fox affiliation was given back to WFFT . 
 = = = Gannett acquisition of Belo = = = 
 Gannett Company 's 2013 acquisition of Belo was opposed by organizations such as the American Cable Association and Free Press , due to Gannett 's plans to use LMAs and two shell companies owned by former Belo and Fisher Communications executives ( respectively , Sander Media and Tucker Operating Co . ) to dodge FCC newspaper cross @-@ ownership restrictions in Louisville , Phoenix , Portland , Oregon and Tucson . Although Gannett contended that the arrangements were legal , Free Press president Craig Aaron stated that " the FCC shouldn 't let Gannett break the rules . Media consolidation results in fewer journalists in the newsroom and fewer opinions on the airwaves . Concentrating media outlets in the hands of just a few companies benefits only the companies themselves . " The deal would have given Gannett a virtual triopoly in Phoenix , consisting of its NBC station <unk> , independent station KTVK and CW affiliate KASW . In Tucson , Fox affiliate KMSB and MyNetworkTV affiliate <unk> were already operated by Raycom Media 's CBS affiliate KOLD @-@ TV under a shared services agreement established under Belo ownership , but Gannett would still handle advertising sales for the stations . 
 In December 2013 , the U.S. Department of Justice blocked Gannett from using an agreement with Sander Media to operate CBS affiliate KMOV in St. Louis alongside its own NBC station <unk> , and ordered Gannett to sell KMOV . Even though Gannett planned to operate KMOV separately from <unk> , the Department ruled the agreement to be a violation of antitrust law , as it would reduce competition for advertising sales . Following the closure of the Belo purchase , Meredith Corporation announced a deal to purchase KMOV , along with KTVK and KASW . As Meredith would have a duopoly between KTVK and its Phoenix CBS affiliate KPHO @-@ TV , KASW was to be sold to SagamoreHill Broadcasting and operated by Meredith under an LMA . As a result of the FCC 's scrutiny on any new station sharing agreements , on October 23 , 2014 , Meredith would backtrack on this plan and instead sell KASW to the Nexstar Broadcasting Group , which would operate the station independently of KTVK and KPHO . 
 Following Gannett 's split into independent broadcasting and publishing companies , Tegna , Inc . — the owner of Gannett 's stations following the split , bought back the licenses to the Sander Media stations , placing them back under its full control . 
 = = = Sinclair acquisition of Allbritton = = = 
 As part of its planned acquisition of Allbritton Communications , Sinclair originally planned to sell its existing stations in three markets – Charleston , South Carolina , Birmingham , Alabama and Harrisburg , Pennsylvania – where Allbritton already owned stations , but continue to operate them under local marketing agreements . WABM and <unk> in Birmingham and WHP @-@ TV in Harrisburg were to be sold to Deerfield Media , and WMMP in Charleston was to be sold to Howard Stirk Holdings – a broadcasting company owned by conservative pundit Armstrong Williams . Howard Stirk Holdings was also used as a sidecar for two conflicting stations in Sinclair 's earlier acquisition of Barrington Broadcasting . 
 In December 2013 , FCC Video Division Chief Barbara <unk> sent a letter demanding information from the Sinclair Broadcast Group on the financial aspects of its " sidecar " operations , and warned that in the three aforementioned markets , " the proposed transactions would result in the elimination of the grandfathered status of certain local marketing agreements and thus cause the transactions to violate our local TV ownership rules . " It was asserted that the deal might only be legal if the affected stations were operated under shared services agreements . Sinclair restructured the deal in March 2014 , choosing to sell WHP @-@ TV , WMMP and WABM , and terminate an SSA with the Cunningham @-@ owned Fox affiliate <unk> in Charleston to acquire the Allbritton @-@ owned stations in those markets ( WCIV , WHTM @-@ TV and WBMA @-@ LD , while also creating a new duopoly between the ABC and CW affiliates in Birmingham ) , as well as foregoing any operational or financial agreements with the buyers of the stations being sold to other parties . 
 In May 2014 , Sinclair disclosed in an FCC filling that it was unable to find buyers for the three affected stations , requiring changes to its transaction . In Harrisburg , Sinclair chose to retain WHP @-@ TV , and divest WHTM to Media General . However , in Charleston and Birmingham , the company proposed to shut down stations entirely ( rather than selling them to other buyers that would also handle their operational responsibilities ) so it could maintain legal duopolies ; surrendering the licenses for WCIV and the full @-@ powered repeaters of WBMA @-@ LD ( WJSU and WCFT ) , and moving their ABC programming to Sinclair 's existing stations WMMP and WABM respectively – which would shift their existing MyNetworkTV programming to digital subchannels . After nearly a year of delays , Sinclair 's deal to acquire Allbritton was approved by the FCC on July 24 , 2014 . 
 = = = FCC limits on joint sales agreements for television stations = = = 
 In response to criticism of the virtual duopolies and sharing agreements , the FCC began to consider potential changes to address these loopholes . In March 2013 , the Commission first tabled a proposal that would make joint sales agreements count the same as ownership . 
 In January 2014 town hall meeting , FCC chairman Tom Wheeler disclosed that he planned to place more scrutiny on the use of LMA @-@ style agreements and shell companies , stating that " there were a couple of references in a couple of recent decisions in which we 've said that we 're going to do things differently going forward on what were called these shell corporations . " Later that month , it was reported that the FCC had placed all pending acquisitions involving the use of shell companies on hold , so the Commission could discuss changes to its policies . Among the deals affected by this decision included the aforementioned Sinclair / Allbritton purchase . 
 On March 6 , 2014 , the FCC announced that it would hold a vote on March 31 on a proposal to ban joint sales agreements involving television stations outright , making them attributable to FCC ownership limits if the senior partner sells 15 % or more of advertising time of a competing junior partner station in the JSA ; the ban applies to both existing sharing agreements under such a structure as well as pending station transactions that include a JSA . Station owners would be given a two @-@ year grace period to unwind or modify joint sales agreements in violation of the policy ; coordinated retransmission consent negotiations between two of the four highest @-@ rated stations in a single market would also be barred under the proposal . Wheeler also proposed an expedited process to review joint sales agreements on a case @-@ by @-@ case basis , granting a waiver of the rules if a broadcaster can prove a particular joint sales agreement arrangement serves the public interest . 
 On March 12 , 2014 , the FCC Media Bureau released a notice that it would further analyze television station transactions that include sharing agreements , particularly those that include a purchase option that " may counter any incentive the licensee has to increase the value of the station , since the licensee may be unlikely to realize that increased value . " Under the new provisions , broadcasters must demonstrate in their transaction applications as to how such deals would serve the public interest . The National Association of Broadcasters ( NAB ) – which , along with station groups such as Sinclair Broadcast Group , have disapproved of the proposal to ban JSAs – presented a compromise proposal , in which the brokered licensee in a sharing agreement would retain control over at least 85 percent of the station 's programming , maintain at least 70 percent of ad sales revenue and " maintain at least 20 percent of station value in the license itself " . FCC commissioner Ajit Pai , and Gordon Smith , president of the NAB , were also opposed to the new rules on joint sales agreements , believing that they would discourage the ownership of television stations by minority @-@ owned companies . Tom Wheeler , however , proposed the restrictions in the hopes of encouraging more women and minorities to own stations , due to the ongoing consolidation in the television industry through company mergers and sharing agreements . 
 On March 31 , 2014 , the FCC voted 3 – 2 to approve the proposed ban on joint sales agreements and voted 5 – 0 to approve the proposed ban on coordinated retransmission consent negotiations between two of the four highest @-@ rated stations within a given market ; the JSA ban went into effect on June 19 , 2014 . Under the restrictions , the FCC would rule on waivers to maintain select existing JSAs within 90 days of the application 's filing . The FCC also began a request for comment on policies to address other agreements , such as shared services agreements . The prohibition on television JSAs had been proposed as early as 2004 , a year after the FCC voted to treat JSAs between radio stations as duopolies . Despite this fact , broadcasting companies criticized the ban , accusing the Commission of using it as a move to encourage participation in a spectrum incentive auction then set to occur in 2015 , and stating that the ban would place them at a disadvantage during retransmission consent negotiations with pay television providers . 
 On December 19 , 2015 , as a rider to the federal budget , the grace period for unwinding or modifying existing JSAs was extended to 10 years . On May 25 , 2016 , the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit struck down the restrictions on joint sales agreements , ruling that the FCC cannot manipulate its ownership rules without " [ in ] the previous four years , [ <unk> ] its obligation to review [ the ] rule and determine whether it is in the public interest " . 
 = = = Shutdown and spin @-@ offs of stations = = = 
 The increased scrutiny being imposed by the FCC regarding local marketing , shared services , and joint sales agreements have led to more drastic measures by broadcasting companies attempting to use them in acquisitions ; in 2014 , two broadcasting companies declared intents to shut acquired stations down entirely and consolidate their programming onto existing stations through <unk> , rather than attempting to use sidecars and sharing agreements or selling them to other parties that would assume full responsibility of their day @-@ to @-@ day operations . 
 In May 2014 , Sinclair informed the FCC that it was unable to find buyers for WABM or WMMP – the company 's MyNetworkTV stations in Birmingham , Alabama and Charleston , South Carolina that it planned to sell in its purchase of Allbritton Communications . In Birmingham , the company proposed surrendering the licenses of WCFT @-@ TV and WJSU @-@ TV – the two full @-@ powered satellites of ABC affiliate WBMA @-@ LD , converting WABM into a full @-@ powered satellite of WBMA @-@ LD – and moving its existing MyNetworkTV programming to a digital subchannel of WABM ( although the WBMA @-@ LD simulcast was placed on WABM 's subchannel instead while MyNetworkTV programming was retained on its main channel ) . Similarly , in Charleston , Sinclair planned to surrender WCIV 's license and move its ABC affiliation and programming to WMMP . In both cases , Sinclair believed that its own stations had superior technical facilities than those of the stations it intends to surrender . Sinclair was able to retain WBMA @-@ LD in any event as the FCC does not impose any ownership limits on low @-@ power stations . 
 On June 13 , 2014 , Gray Television announced that it would shutter six stations and consolidate existing programming onto subchannels of Gray @-@ owned stations in their respective market . Unlike Sinclair , however , Gray stated that it would sell the licenses of the shuttered stations to minority @-@ owned broadcasters in collaboration with the Minority Media and Telecommunications Council – under the condition that they would operate them independently from other stations in the market , and without the use of any sharing agreements . All six of the stations were owned by companies other than Gray , but their non @-@ license assets are either owned by Gray , or were operated by stations now owned by Gray under agreements . Gray would operate the affected stations under LMAs until the sales and consolidation are complete . Aside from one , most of the stations involved in these changes were related to Gray 's acquisition of stations from Hoak Media . Three of these stations were immediately shut down the same day , while the remainder remained operated by Gray until the sales were completed . Gray announced buyers for the stations on August 27 , 2014 . 
 The six stations affected by Gray 's move included : 
 <unk> @-@ TV ( Hastings / Lincoln , Nebraska ) , previously owned by Hoak . On June 13 , 2014 , <unk> @-@ TV was shut down and its NBC programming was moved to the primary channel of KSNB @-@ TV ( channel 4 ) . Gray had bought KSNB under a failing station waiver to form a duopoly with CBS station <unk> / <unk> , and operated the station as a MyNetworkTV / <unk> affiliate with local programming focused on central Nebraska ; this existing programming was moved to KSNB @-@ DT2 upon the transition . On August 27 , 2014 , the station was sold to Legacy Broadcasting . 
 <unk> / <unk> ( Bismarck / Minot , North Dakota ) , owned by Prime Cities Broadcasting , which asked the FCC to dismiss the sale of the stations to Excalibur Broadcasting ( a sidecar owned by former Gray executive Don Ray ) , which would have made them sisters to the NBC North Dakota chain being acquired from Hoak by Gray . Gray acquired the stations ' non @-@ license assets on May 1 , 2014 ; both stations were then taken off the air on June 13 , 2014 , with Fox programming being moved to subchannels of the NBC North Dakota stations ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ TV and <unk> @-@ TV ) . On August 27 , 2014 , the stations were sold to Legacy Broadcasting . 
 <unk> @-@ TV and <unk> ( Fargo , North Dakota and Columbia / Monroe , Louisiana – El Dorado , Arkansas ) , both owned by Parker Broadcasting and operated by Hoak ( now Gray ) stations . Both were originally to be sold to Excalibur Broadcasting . On August 27 , 2014 , <unk> @-@ TV was sold to Major Market Broadcasting , and <unk> to Legacy Broadcasting . 
 <unk> ( Grand Junction , Colorado ) , acquired by Excalibur in August 2013 from News @-@ Press & Gazette Company , and taken over by Gray @-@ owned <unk> following the acquisition . On August 27 , 2014 , the station was sold to Chang Media Group , and was later re @-@ launched as Cozi TV station <unk> . 
 Following the approval of Sinclair 's purchase of Allbritton , commissioner Ajit Pai further criticized the FCC 's new policies and its endorsement of Sinclair 's proposal to shut down stations to comply with them . Describing the three Allbritton stations as being " victims " of the " crackdown " against joint sales agreements , he stated regarding WCIV that " apparently the Commission believes that it is better for that station to go out of business than for Howard Stirk Holdings to own the station and participate in a joint sales agreement with Sinclair . I strongly disagree . And so too , I 'll bet , would consumers in Charleston . " In September 2014 , Sinclair backtracked on its original plans , and reached deals to sell WCIV , WCFT and WJSU 's license assets to Howard Stirk Holdings for $ 50 @,@ 000 each and lease them studio space , pending FCC approval . Unlike Howard Stirk Holdings ' other stations , they are operated and programmed independently , and Sinclair did not enter into any agreements to operate the stations on <unk> 's behalf . 
 In Quincy Newspapers ' acquisition of Granite Broadcasting 's remaining stations , the acquisition was briefly re @-@ structured to have Malara Broadcast Group — which served as a virtual duopoly partner for stations WISE @-@ TV ( NBC ) Fort Wayne and <unk> @-@ TV Duluth ( CBS ) , retain the stations and their current agreements with WPTA and <unk> @-@ TV in lieu of having them sold to SagamoreHill Broadcasting . The acquisition was restructured in July 2015 to , again , have SagamoreHill Broadcasting acquire the two stations , but have their current <unk> wound down within nine months . Following the end of the SSA , the two stations will retain The CW as independently @-@ run stations , with their remaining affiliations moved to subchannels of <unk> and WPTA . 
 = = = WAGT dispute = = = 
 In February 2016 , Gray Television acquired Schurz Communications ' stations , including Augusta , Georgia 's WAGT . As Gray could not own both WAGT and its existing CBS affiliate WRDW @-@ TV as a legal duopoly , Gray proposed the sale of WAGT 's broadcast spectrum during the incentive auction , and for WAGT to go silent upon completion of the deal so the company would not be running more than one of the top four stations in the market . Gray also requested special temporary authority for WAGT 's signal to be replaced on its existing technical facilities and UHF channel 30 by the co @-@ owned low @-@ power station , WRDW @-@ CD ( as previously mentioned , low @-@ power stations are not subject to the rules regarding duopolies ) . 
 The FCC , however , required that Gray continue to operate WAGT as a separate station through the end of the auction , and not enter into any joint sales agreements . Upon the closure of the sale , Gray unwound the shared services and joint sales agreements that Schurz had established with WJBF @-@ TV and Media General , and replaced its previous news programs with simulcasts from WRDW . Gray also accused WJBF of " [ refusing ] to agree to a smooth transition of personnel [ from WAGT ] " , as WAGT 's employees fall under the employment of Media General due to the SSA . 
 On February 26 , 2016 , Media General obtained a preliminary injunction against Gray for violating the SSA and JSA , which required that Gray return control of WAGT to Media General , and forbids Gray from selling WAGT in the spectrum incentive auction . The company accused Gray of using the spectrum auction and sale of the station to exit the agreements illegitimately , as they were to last through 2020 , and apply to any future owner of WAGT . Gray attempted to block the injunction by arguing that its actions were required in order to comply with the FCC 's prohibition of joint sales agreements , but was denied . Media General took back control of WAGT on March 7 , 2016 . 
 On March 10 , 2016 , FCC Deputy General Counsel David Gossett announced that the Commission would investigate Media General 's actions as possibly being in violation of Section 310 ( d ) of the Communications Act . Gossett argued that by legally blocking Gray 's participation in the spectrum auction , Media General had " [ sought ] injunctive relief that interferes with a licensee 's ultimate control of a station " . He also stated that the FCC may consider a license revocation hearing against Media General under Section 312 of the Communications Act . On March 23 , 2016 , the Supreme Court of Georgia struck down the injunction without addressing the litigation , and Gray took back control of WAGT . 
 = = Internationally = = 
 In a 2005 Canadian dispute , Rogers Media and <unk> Broadcasting maintained a joint sales agreement pertaining to <unk> @-@ FM in Sudbury , Ontario , but community interests and the lobby group Friends of Canadian Broadcasting presented substantial evidence to the Canadian Radio @-@ television and Telecommunications Commission that in practice , the agreement was a de facto LMA , going significantly beyond advertising sales into program production and news @-@ gathering . LMAs in Canada cannot be implemented without the CRTC 's approval , and in early 2005 , the CRTC ordered the agreement to cease . 
 In 2008 , the Filipino Associated Broadcasting Company leased its airtime to the Malaysian broadcaster Media Prima ( through the local subsidiary MPB Primedia , Inc ) similar to an LMA – with MPB Primedia providing entertainment programming , and ABC handling news programming and operations . Soon afterward , ABC and Media Prima were sued by rival media company GMA Network , Inc. for attempting to use the partnership to skirt laws requiring domestic ownership of broadcasters . In response , ABC 's media relations head Pat Marcelo @-@ <unk> reiterated that the subsidiary was a Filipino company which was self @-@ registered and Filipino @-@ run . The concerns became moot in 2010 , when Media Prima announced it would divest its ownership in the network to the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company 's broadcasting subsidiary <unk> Holdings . 
 = Ground Combat Vehicle = 
 The Ground Combat Vehicle ( GCV ) was the US Army 's replacement program for armored fighting vehicles in Armored and Stryker brigade combat teams . The GCV was organized under the Follow On Incremental Capabilities Package of the BCT Modernization program . The first variant of the vehicle was to be prototyped in 2015 and fielded by 2017 . It replaced the canceled Future Combat Systems , manned ground vehicles program . The Ground Combat Vehicle program was cancelled in February 2014 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Specific design elements of the GCV were contracted out , though the Army designed the architecture and retained overall responsibility for synchronization . This contrasted with the former FCS manned ground vehicles program where contractors had more control over the design . The GCV was to be networked and offer improved survivability , while using the state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art mobility and power management functions . The military released classified details of the FCS Manned Ground Vehicles program to interested contractors to be utilized in design proposals for the GCV . The GCV family was to be built around a common chassis . 
 = = = Network = = = 
 The GCV was to be operable with the current battle command control and communications suite but would gradually use a more state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art networked integration system known as the BCT Network . It would provide exportable electrical power , and a battery charging capability for external hardware including vehicles and electronics from the BCT Soldier subsystems . The system would be capable of integration with unmanned systems and dismounted soldiers . 
 = = = Mobility = = = 
 The GCV must have been transportable by cargo aircraft , rail , and ship . The Army required it to meet the availability rates of the current Stryker . The Army did not limit the vehicle by the dimensions of the C @-@ 130 Hercules , which , in the past , constrained many designs . Air mobility would be provided by the more spacious C @-@ 17 Globemaster III . The GCV was to have good cross @-@ country mobility , with a baseline requirement of 30 mph off @-@ road speed . The GCV should have delivered higher sustainability levels and consume less fuel than the Bradley or other vehicles of similar weight and power . The military was accepting both tracked and wheeled designs . The operational maintenance cost requirement of the GCV was up to $ 200 per mile , compared to $ 168 per mile for the M2 Bradley . 
 = = = Offensive capabilities = = = 
 The type and caliber of the weapons were classified or open to interpretation by the industry . The IFV variant was notable for having a non @-@ lethal weapon requirement . 
 = = = Countermeasures = = = 
 The Army wanted the GCV to have a passive blast protection level equal to the MRAP and would utilize hit avoidance systems . The Army wanted to install an active protection system on the Ground Combat Vehicle . BAE tested the Artis LLC Iron Curtain and General Dynamics demonstrated a version of the Israeli Trophy system . By incorporating an APS , the GCV would only need 18 tons of ballistic armor protection , compared to 52 tons of armor required without it . Developers were considering modular armor technology , with the ability to add @-@ on and remove armor plates depending on threat levels and mission requirements . 
 = = Development = = 
 In June 2009 , a blue @-@ ribbon panel met in Washington , D.C. , to discuss requirements for the Ground Combat Vehicle . In October and November 2009 , more than 100 defense contractors turned up for two U.S. Army @-@ organized industry day events in Michigan to express interest in bidding on the vehicle . A review required for continuation was held and passed in February 2010 in Washington D.C. A request for proposals ( RFP ) was issued on February 25 , 2010 to which companies had 60 days to respond , but was extended an additional 25 days . A committee examined the schedule for the GCV to " shave a little time off " . For fiscal year 2011 , the U.S. Army wished to spend $ 934 million of the $ 2 @.@ 5 billion allocated for BCT Modernization to develop the GCV . 
 Up to three competitive contracts were to be awarded by early fall . A prototype development contract decision would have followed by 2013 . The Technology Development Phase ( or Milestone A ) would begin in the fourth quarter of Fiscal Year 2010 with the award of up to three vehicle contracts . This was to be followed by an Engineering & Manufacturing Development ( EMD ) phase and Low Rate Initial Production ( <unk> ) phase before full production could start . 
 Nine vehicles were evaluated in the Analysis of Alternatives ( AOA ) . The four primary vehicles included in the AOA were the M2A3 Bradley II , a modernized Stryker , an M2A3 Bradley variant used in Iraq , and a <unk> Caiman Plus MRAP . The five secondary vehicles included two unnamed foreign @-@ made platforms , the <unk> Stryker Infantry Fighting Vehicle , the M1A2 SEP TUSK Abrams , and a modernized M1 Abrams . Vehicles included the AOA were determined to be inferior to the planned GCV . 
 On 25 August 2010 , the U.S. Army canceled the original RFP to revise the requirements . A new RFP was to be issued 60 days later . When Peter Chiarelli was asked if the Army was developing an alternative to the GCV , Chiarelli replied " We 're totally committed to GCV . " The National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform suggested deferring development of the GCV until after 2015 . 
 In August 2011 , technology development contracts were awarded to BAE Systems Land & Armaments for $ 449 @.@ 9 million and General Dynamics Land Systems for $ <unk> 
 = = = Budget concerns and proposed cuts = = = 
 In December 2012 , it was reported that the Army may need to cut $ 150 million from the GCV program in 2014 , with deeper cuts between $ 600 <unk> $ 700 million between 2014 and 2018 . This put the program , one of the Army 's highest priorities , at serious risk . With the drawdown of the War in Afghanistan and budgetary concerns , the expensive development of a new combat vehicle was not seen as feasible . BAE Systems and General Dynamics were each awarded engineering and manufacturing development ( EMD ) phase contracts in August 2011 . The EMD phase was to last 48 months for both contractors , but there were arguments for only one to proceed as a cost @-@ saving measure . This would present the problem of selecting a vehicle based on design outlines , rather than on real prototypes . Another suggestion was to lengthen the EMD period to allow for smaller contract awards over time . This might delay the operational deadline beyond the planned 2018 date . The underlying concern is the fact that the Army plans to spend 80 percent of its ground combat vehicle budget on GCV development from 2013 @-@ 2018 . With 1 @,@ 847 GCV Infantry Fighting Vehicles expected to be acquired , they would make up only 10 percent of the Army combat vehicle fleet . <unk> funds could be shifted to modernization efforts for the combat @-@ proven Stryker , M1 Abrams , and Bradley families of vehicles . 
 = = = Revision = = = 
 The GCV acquisition strategy was revised on 17 January 2013 to further reduce risk and maintain affordability of the program . The revision extended the technology development phase by six months to give industry more time to refine vehicle designs . Milestone B would occur in 2014 , with the selection of a single vendor for the engineering and manufacturing development ( EMD ) and production phases of the program . This would initiate critical design and testing activities in anticipation of vehicle production . Budgetary pressures caused the reduction of number of vendors to be selected from two to one . 
 = = = CBO report = = = 
 On 2 April 2013 , the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) issued a report on the progress of the GCV program . The report questioned the program , estimated to cost $ 28 billion from 2014 – 2030 , with the possibility of alternate vehicle options . While none met overall Army goals desired in the GCV , they offer advantages in being less costly and delayed . Planned GCV prototypes were heavy , weighing up to 84 tons , to be better protected and seat a 9 @-@ man squad . Officials said that a vehicle of that size would not be well suited to operations faced in Iraq or Afghanistan . Alternate vehicles would be cheaper and more maneuverable in urban settings . The CBO report analyzed four alternative options : 
 Purchase the <unk> APC – Seats 9 soldiers with combat survival rates expected slightly higher than the GCV , and costs $ 9 billion less . The <unk> has less ability to destroy other enemy vehicles and is less mobile . Production would be conducted in part domestically , but fielding would require collaboration with foreign companies and governments . 
 Upgrade the Bradley IFV – An upgraded Bradley would be more lethal than the GCV against enemy forces and would probably survive combat at about the same rates as would the GCV , saving $ 19 @.@ 8 billion . Upgrading the Bradley would make it " significantly more capable " than the GCV . The Bradley still only carries a 7 @-@ man squad and has less mobility . 
 Purchase the Puma ( IFV ) – More lethal than the GCV , combat survival and protection at better rates , and just as mobile . Purchasing the Puma would save $ 14 @.@ 8 billion and was considered the most capable of the vehicles . Puma <unk> only carry six infantrymen , which would require five vehicles to replace every four Bradleys . Development and production would require collaboration with foreign companies and governments . 
 Cancel the Ground Combat Vehicle – If the Army reconditioned its current Bradley instead of replacing them , the current capability of the IFV fleet could be maintained through 2030 . The Army could continue to investigate ways to improve the current Bradleys , but it would not field any new or improved vehicles . The $ 24 billion saved in funding could be used on other programs . 
 General Dynamics and BAE Systems , who received contracts in the Ground Combat Vehicle program , criticized the CBO report , saying they used the wrong vehicle in its analysis . Officials from both companies said they used the wrong notional model of the GCV that did not account for the change in requirements made by the Army or the advancements made in the technology development phase of the program . They also criticized the comparisons of the other vehicles . The report factored cost , survivability , mobility , and lethality , ranking the GCV 's capabilities as lower than all others . The Army 's response was that none of the vehicles meet the requirements to replace the Bradley . An Army test of currently fielded vehicles in 2012 revealed that some met critical GCV requirements , but none met enough without needing significant redesign . They also note that lethality was judged with a 25 mm cannon for analysis , before the Army planned to mount a 30 mm cannon . The CBO report did give credit to cost , assuming the Army 's goal of $ 13 million per vehicle . However , Pentagon cost assessments estimated the price at $ 16 – $ 17 million per vehicle . 
 = = = Funding cut and prioritization = = = 
 On 29 July 2013 , Army Chief of Staff General Ray Odierno warned that the Ground Combat Vehicle program might be delayed or possibly even cancelled because of the sequestration budget cuts . Although he specifically said it could be delayed , he did not rule out the possibility of cancellation . The GCV was high @-@ priority for the Army to give better protection than the M2 Bradley , but because of the sequester cuts everything was being considered . On 1 August 2013 , Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel outlined two basic results if the effects of sequestration continued : modernization programs like the GCV would be cut to maintain troop levels , or high @-@ end capability efforts like the GCV would be preserved to continue modernization and keep equipment technologically advanced with troop levels being cut . Odierno was committed to balancing soldiers , readiness , and modernization , and was intent on the need for the Ground Combat Vehicle . Suggested alternative options , such as further upgrading the Bradley and buying currently available infantry fighting vehicles like the German Puma , were recommended as cost @-@ saving measures . Army leaders said the Puma 's low troop @-@ carrying capacity would require buying five vehicles to replace every four Bradleys , and that upgrading the Bradley would essentially be engineering a new vehicle . While these options would offer no improvement over the fleet 's current capability , not pursuing the GCV would allow the money to be spent elsewhere . 
 Some reports suggested that the Armored Multi @-@ Purpose Vehicle program to replace the M113 family of vehicles was being favored over the GCV program . While procurement of the AMPV fleet would cost over $ 5 billion , the Government Accountability Office estimated the GCV fleet would cost $ 37 billion . In April 2013 , the Congressional Budget Office said the AMPV would be a better buy because analysts had asserted that the vehicles the GCV was slated to replace should not be first . The GCV would replace 61 M2 Bradley <unk> per armored combat brigade , making up 18 percent of the 346 armored combat vehicles in each armored brigade . A 24 September 2013 Congressional Research Service report suggested that given budgetary constraints , the GCV program may be unrealistic , and that one potential discussion could focus on a decision by the Army to replace the GCV with the AMPV as their number one ground combat vehicle acquisition priority . 
 Army leaders say having a large ground army is still necessary for deterrence and " regime change " operations . They also realize that their equipment will be mostly modernized versions of current equipment for the rest of the decade . Technologies from the GCV program are being explored , although development and procurement of a vehicle is not . By mid @-@ November 2013 , both BAE and General Dynamics designs had passed Preliminary Design Reviews ( PDR ) , but neither company had commenced building prototypes . The Army was increasingly willing to slow down the GCV program or push it back from EMD to research and development . While the Army had said previously that it was their highest priority acquisition program , they had since shifted their main modernization priority to an integrated electronic command network . Short @-@ term incremental upgrades will be applied to existing weapons systems to keep them from becoming obsolete , and advanced technologies available in the future will be used to build entirely new systems when funding is restored . 
 On 15 January 2014 , a spending bill passed by the House appropriated $ 100 million for the GCV program , even though the Army had requested $ 592 million for the program for FY 2014 . The Army planned to spend 80 percent of its ground vehicle modernization budget on the GCV over the next 5 years , with costs ranging from $ <unk> $ 34 billion depending on overruns and setbacks . Several options were being considered to make the program more affordable , including reducing the squad size from their optimum goal of nine men and using new emerging , and undeveloped , technologies to reduce the weight of the vehicle to 30 tons for operations in urban environments . The two contractors were to run out of money for development of their prototype vehicles by June 2014 unless the Army funded the rest of the technology development phase . The Pentagon and Army tried to find ways to continue the program , without actually starting vehicle production , through new technologies like advanced fire control systems and hybrid engines . <unk> ending the GCV program before the start of the EMD phase to select one vendor would result in owing money to the contractors for cancelling the contract . The Army could complete the technology development phase and conduct the milestone decision in June , then say they wouldn 't move on to the next phase of the program . Although the Army wanted 1 @,@ 894 Ground Combat Vehicles with a target price of $ 9 – 10 @.@ 5 million per unit , the Pentagon 's Office of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation estimated a unit cost of up to $ 17 million . The 83 @-@ percent cut in funding essentially scaled back the GCV program to a research effort . The program had declined in support over the past months with the Army determining that the desired vehicle was no longer feasible in the near term due to budget reductions , suspicion from the contractors that the program would not move past technology development , and Congress 's believing it would not succeed . The Army could have tried to save the GCV by delaying it , or could reset its modernization priorities with more emphasis on the AMPV program to replace the outdated M113 . 
 In a speech on 23 January 2014 , General Ray Odierno confirmed that the Ground Combat Vehicle program was being put on hold due to budget difficulties . He said that the Army needed a new IFV but that they could not afford one at the time . Odierno said that he was pleased with the requirements for the vehicle and that progress and development with the contractors was good . " Leap @-@ ahead technologies " that make the vehicle light and mobile while still being protected against RPGs and roadside bombs are still desired . In the past decade , mobility was traded for protection , but Army war games have caused the service to decide it will need small , mobile formations to be deployed quickly in the future . Recent conflicts have shown the need for expeditionary forces to be transported quickly to remote areas in small packages with as little support as possible . Weight estimates of 70 tons for the GCV IFV did not make it easily deployable . The Army may direct some funds for technology development so it can start another program within " three to four years . " Science and technology investments are to be made to address the size and weight of armored ground vehicles . The Army reviewed the components of the GCV IFV to find areas to save weight . Reducing the weight of the vehicle would allow it to fit into the Army 's expeditionary view by making it easier and cheaper to transport greater numbers of them across the world . 
 = = Termination = = 
 The Pentagon FY 2015 budget proposal unveiled on 24 February 2014 cancelled the GCV program . Army acquisition executive Heidi <unk> said that criticism of the program was " unfortunate " and cancelling it had nothing to do with vehicle performance . She said the program had been doing " remarkably well " and wasn 't having technical issues , and that the contracts were being executed well . The decision to cancel development was based entirely on budget calculations , with no possible way to come up with funds no matter how many other areas were reduced . Money will be redistributed to engineering change proposals ( ECP ) on existing platforms until budget difficulties pass to allow investment in next @-@ generation capabilities in about seven years . 
 The decision had to be made to either exclusively fund the GCV or <unk> , so upgrades were chosen for the Bradley , Abrams , Stryker , and M109 Paladin fleets to have them more combat @-@ capable in the near @-@ term , should they be needed for an international situation . Vehicles like the Bradley and Abrams have been upgraded since the 1980s with new armor , sensors , and other gear that have maxed out the platforms for further horsepower and electrical advances , so the requirement for an entirely new ground combat vehicle built from the outset from lessons learned in combat from the previous decade remains . The Army 's own budget proposal unveiled on March 4 discontinued the program , and instead funds were shifted to the AMPV program as the main vehicle priority and to improving the Bradley IFV in the interim until more resources become available . Incremental improvements will be made to current vehicle fleets to improve protection and networking abilities . $ 131 million will be directed into science and technology to look at the feasibility of future combat vehicle technologies , and Secretary Hagel has directed the Army , as well as the Marine Corps , to deliver " realistic " visions for vehicle modernization by the end of FY 2014 . 
 The cancellation of the GCV is the second time in 15 years an Army program to replace the Bradley has failed . FCS ran from 1999 to 2009 , with the Manned Ground Vehicles portion for replacing several armored vehicle classes costing " hundreds of millions " of dollars out of $ 20 billion total . From 2010 to 2014 , the Army spent over $ 1 billion on the GCV . Although there was criticism that vehicle weight could not be kept at a reasonable level while meeting its size , weight , and power requirements , the Army maintains the official reason for the cancellation was budgetary pressures . BAE Systems and General Dynamics will each receive $ 50 million in FY 2015 to continue technology development . The next follow @-@ up IFV development program is currently named the Future Fighting Vehicle ( FFV ) . 
 = = = Continued technology development = = = 
 On 18 July 2014 , BAE and General Dynamics were awarded $ 7 @.@ 9 million study contracts for technical , cost , and risk assessments to salvage subsystems and other technologies created under the GCV for use in the FFV system . General Dynamics will utilize the GCV integrated propulsion and mobility subsystems Automotive Test Rig ( ATR ) , and the conventional drive integrated propulsion subsystem , while BAE will utilize the GCV TD phase integrated hybrid @-@ electric propulsion and mobility subsystems ATR and the hybrid @-@ electric integrated propulsion subsystem ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Variants = = 
 The Army was using an incremental approach to combat vehicle modernization , centered on the Ground Combat Vehicle . The deployment was to be synchronized with upgrades , reset , and divestiture of existing vehicles . Vehicles displaced by the IFV may then replace selected M113 family of vehicles such as command and control , medical evacuation , and mortar carrier , allowing the Army to begin divestiture of the M113 family of vehicles . Upgrades to existing Bradley and Stryker vehicles may have been considered as risk mitigation based on the rate at which the GCV was introduced . Although upgraded , the Bradley and Stryker would also be replaced in the midterm . 
 = = = Infantry Fighting Vehicle = = = 
 The Infantry Fighting Vehicle superseded the previous infantry carrier replacement effort , the <unk> Infantry Carrier Vehicle of the FCS <unk> program . It was the U.S. Army 's intention that the IFV replace the M113 APC by 2018 , the M2 Bradley later , and the Stryker <unk> in the midterm . The IFV was to hold a crew of three and a squad of nine . 
 = Charon 's obol = 
 Charon 's obol is an allusive term for the coin placed in or on the mouth of a dead person before burial . Greek and Latin literary sources specify the coin as an obol , and explain it as a payment or bribe for Charon , the ferryman who conveyed souls across the river that divided the world of the living from the world of the dead . Archaeological examples of these coins , of various denominations in practice , have been called " the most famous grave goods from antiquity . " 
 The custom is primarily associated with the ancient Greeks and Romans , though it is also found in the ancient Near East . In Western Europe , a similar usage of coins in burials occurs in regions inhabited by Celts of the Gallo @-@ Roman , Hispano @-@ Roman and Romano @-@ British cultures , and among the Germanic peoples of late antiquity and the early Christian era , with sporadic examples into the early 20th century . 
 Although archaeology shows that the myth reflects an actual custom , the placement of coins with the dead was neither pervasive nor confined to a single coin in the deceased 's mouth . In many burials , inscribed metal @-@ leaf tablets or <unk> take the place of the coin , or gold @-@ foil crosses in the early Christian era . The presence of coins or a coin @-@ hoard in Germanic ship @-@ burials suggests an analogous concept . 
 The phrase " Charon ’ s obol " as used by archaeologists sometimes can be understood as referring to a particular religious rite , but often serves as a kind of shorthand for coinage as grave goods presumed to further the deceased 's passage into the afterlife . In Latin , Charon 's obol sometimes is called a viaticum , or " sustenance for the journey " ; the placement of the coin on the mouth has been explained also as a seal to protect the deceased 's soul or to prevent it from returning . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 The coin for Charon is conventionally referred to in Greek literature as an <unk> ( Greek <unk> ) , one of the basic denominations of ancient Greek coinage , worth one @-@ sixth of a drachma . Among the Greeks , coins in actual burials are sometimes also a danakē ( <unk> ) or other relatively small @-@ denomination gold , silver , bronze or copper coin in local use . In Roman literary sources the coin is usually bronze or copper . From the 6th to the 4th centuries BC in the Black Sea region , low @-@ value coins depicting arrowheads or dolphins were in use mainly for the purpose of " local exchange and to serve as ‘ Charon ’ s obol . ‘ " The payment is sometimes specified with a term for " boat fare " ( in Greek <unk> , <unk> , Latin <unk> ) ; " fee for ferrying " ( <unk> , <unk> or <unk> ) ; or " waterway toll " ( Latin <unk> ) . 
 The word <unk> ( <unk> ) is defined by the Christian @-@ era lexicographer Hesychius of Alexandria as the coin put into the mouth of the dead ; one of the meanings of danakē ( <unk> ) is given as " the obol for the dead " . The Suda defines danakē as a coin traditionally buried with the dead for paying the ferryman to cross the river Acheron , and explicates the definition of <unk> ( <unk> ) as a ferryman ’ s fee with a quotation from the poet Callimachus , who notes the custom of carrying the <unk> in the " parched mouths of the dead . " 
 = = = Charon 's obol as viaticum = = = 
 In Latin , Charon ’ s obol is sometimes called a viaticum , which in everyday usage means " provision for a journey " ( from via , " way , road , journey " ) , encompassing food , money and other supplies . The same word can refer to the living allowance granted to those stripped of their property and condemned to exile , and by metaphorical extension to preparing for death at the end of life ’ s journey . Cicero , in his philosophical dialogue On Old Age ( 44 BC ) , has the interlocutor Cato the Elder combine two metaphors — nearing the end of a journey , and ripening fruit — in speaking of the approach to death : 
 Drawing on this metaphorical sense of " provision for the journey into death , " ecclesiastical Latin borrowed the term viaticum for the form of Eucharist that is placed in the mouth of a person who is dying as provision for the soul ’ s passage to eternal life . The earliest literary evidence of this Christian usage for viaticum appears in Paulinus ’ s account of the death of Saint Ambrose in 397 AD . The 7th @-@ century <unk> <unk> offers an etymological explanation : " This word ‘ viaticum ’ is the name of communion , that is to say , ‘ the guardianship of the way , ’ for it guards the soul until it shall stand before the judgment @-@ seat of Christ . " Thomas Aquinas explained the term as " a prefiguration of the fruit of God , which will be in the promised land . And because of this it is called the viaticum , since it provides us with the way of getting there " ; the idea of Christians as " travelers in search of salvation " finds early expression in the Confessions of St. Augustine . 
 An equivalent word in Greek is <unk> ( <unk> ) ; like viaticum , the word is used in antiquity to mean " provision for a journey " ( literally , " something for the road , " from the prefix <unk> , " on " + <unk> , " road , way " ) and later in Greek patristic literature for the Eucharist administered on the point of death . 
 = = In literature = = 
 Greek and Roman literary sources from the 5th century BC through the 2nd century AD are consistent in attributing four characteristics to Charon ’ s obol : 
 it is a single , low @-@ denomination coin ; 
 it is placed in the mouth ; 
 the placement occurs at the time of death ; 
 it represents a boat fare . 
 Greek epigrams that were literary versions of epitaphs refer to " the obol that pays the passage of the departed , " with some epigrams referring to the belief by mocking or debunking it . The satirist Lucian has Charon himself , in a dialogue of the same name , declare that he collects " an obol from everyone who makes the downward journey . " In an elegy of consolation spoken in the person of the dead woman , the Augustan poet Propertius expresses the finality of death by her payment of the bronze coin to the infernal toll collector ( <unk> ) . Several other authors mention the fee . Often , an author uses the low value of the coin to emphasize that death makes no distinction between rich and poor ; all must pay the same because all must die , and a rich person can take no greater amount into death : 
 The incongruity of paying what is , in effect , admission to Hell encouraged a comic or satiric treatment , and Charon as a ferryman who must be persuaded , threatened , or bribed to do his job appears to be a literary construct that is not reflected in early classical art . Christiane <unk> @-@ Inwood has shown that in 5th @-@ century BC depictions of Charon , as on the funerary vases called lekythoi , he is a non @-@ threatening , even reassuring presence who guides women , adolescents , and children to the afterlife . Humor , as in Aristophanes ’ s comic catabasis The Frogs , " makes the journey to Hades less frightening by articulating it explicitly and trivializing it . " Aristophanes makes jokes about the fee , and a character complains that Theseus must have introduced it , characterizing the Athenian hero in his role of city organizer as a bureaucrat . 
 Lucian satirizes the obol in his essay " On Funerals " : 
 In another satirical work of Lucian , the " <unk> of the dead " , a character called Menippus has just died and Charon is asking for an obol in order to convey him across the river to the underworld , Menippus refuses to pay the obol , and consequently to enter the world of the dead claiming that : 
 Literally , " You can 't get [ any obols ] from one who doesn 't have any . " 
 = = Archaeological evidence = = 
 The use of coins as grave goods shows a variety of practice that casts doubt on the accuracy of the term " Charon ’ s obol " as an interpretational category . The phrase continues to be used , however , to suggest the ritual or religious significance of coinage in a funerary context . 
 Coins are found in Greek burials by the 5th century BC , as soon as Greece was monetized , and appear throughout the Roman Empire into the 5th century AD , with examples conforming to the Charon ’ s obol type as far west as the Iberian Peninsula , north into Britain , and east to the Vistula river in Poland . The jawbones of skulls found in certain burials in Roman Britain are stained greenish from contact with a copper coin ; Roman coins are found later in Anglo @-@ Saxon graves , but often pierced for wearing as a necklace or amulet . Among the ancient Greeks , only about 5 to 10 percent of known burials contain any coins at all ; in some Roman cremation cemeteries , however , as many as half the graves yield coins . Many if not most of these occurrences conform to the myth of Charon ’ s obol in neither the number of coins nor their positioning . Variety of placement and number , including but not limited to a single coin in the mouth , is characteristic of all periods and places . 
 = = = Hellenized world = = = 
 Some of the oldest coins from Mediterranean tombs have been found on Cyprus . In 2001 <unk> @-@ Georgiades , a specialist in Achaemenid numismatics , said that investigations of 33 tombs had yielded 77 coins . Although denomination varies , as does the number in any given burial , small coins predominate . Coins started to be placed in tombs almost as soon as they came into circulation on the island in the 6th century , and some predate both the first issue of the obol and any literary reference to Charon ’ s fee . 
 Although only a small percentage of Greek burials contain coins , among these there are widespread examples of a single coin positioned in the mouth of a skull or with cremation remains . In cremation urns , the coin sometimes adheres to the jawbone of the skull . At Olynthus , 136 coins ( mostly bronze , but some silver ) , were found with burials ; in 1932 , archaeologists reported that 20 graves had each contained four bronze coins , which they believed were intended for placement in the mouth . A few tombs at Olynthus have contained two coins , but more often a single bronze coin was positioned in the mouth or within the head of the skeleton . In Hellenistic @-@ era tombs at one cemetery in Athens , coins , usually bronze , were found most often in the dead person ’ s mouth , though sometimes in the hand , loose in the grave , or in a vessel . At Chania , an originally Minoan settlement on Crete , a tomb dating from the second half of the 3rd century BC held a rich variety of grave goods , including fine gold jewelry , a gold tray with the image of a bird , a clay vessel , a bronze mirror , a bronze strigil , and a bronze " Charon coin " depicting Zeus . In excavations of 91 tombs at a cemetery in Amphipolis during the mid- to late 1990s , a majority of the dead were found to have a coin in the mouth . The burials dated from the 4th to the late 2nd century BC . 
 A notable use of a danake occurred in the burial of a woman in 4th @-@ century BC Thessaly , a likely initiate into the Orphic or Dionysiac mysteries . Her religious paraphernalia included gold tablets inscribed with instructions for the afterlife and a terracotta figure of a <unk> worshipper . Upon her lips was placed a gold danake stamped with the Gorgon ’ s head . Coins begin to appear with greater frequency in graves during the 3rd century BC , along with gold wreaths and plain <unk> ( small bottles for oil ) in place of the earlier lekythoi . Black @-@ figure lekythoi had often depicted Dionysiac scenes ; the later white @-@ ground vessels often show Charon , usually with his pole , but rarely ( or dubiously ) accepting the coin . 
 The Black Sea region has also produced examples of Charon ’ s obol . At Apollonia Pontica , the custom had been practiced from the mid @-@ 4th century BC ; in one cemetery , for instance , 17 percent of graves contained small bronze local coins in the mouth or hand of the deceased . During 1998 excavations of <unk> , on the coast of present @-@ day Georgia , a single coin was found in seven burials , and a pair of coins in two . The coins , silver <unk> of the local <unk> currency , were located near the mouth , with the exception of one that was near the hand . It is unclear whether the dead were <unk> or Greeks . The investigating archaeologists did not regard the practice as typical of the region , but speculate that the local geography lent itself to adapting the Greek myth , as bodies of the dead in actuality had to be ferried across a river from the town to the cemetery . 
 = = = Near East = = = 
 Charon ’ s obol is usually regarded as Hellenic , and a single coin in burials is often taken as a mark of Hellenization , but the practice may be independent of Greek influence in some regions . The placing of a coin in the mouth of the deceased is found also during Parthian and Sasanian times in what is now Iran . Curiously , the coin was not the danake of Persian origin , as it was sometimes among the Greeks , but usually a Greek drachma . In the <unk> region , objects consecrated in graves may include a coin or piece of silver ; the custom is thought to be perhaps as old as the Seleucid era and may be a form of Charon ’ s obol . 
 Discoveries of a single coin near the skull in tombs of the Levant suggest a similar practice among Phoenicians in the Persian period . Jewish ossuaries sometimes contain a single coin ; for example , in an ossuary bearing the inscriptional name " Miriam , daughter of Simeon , " a coin minted during the reign of Herod Agrippa I , dated 42 / 43 AD , was found in the skull ’ s mouth . Although the placement of a coin within the skull is uncommon in Jewish antiquity and was potentially an act of idolatry , rabbinic literature preserves an allusion to Charon in a lament for the dead " tumbling aboard the ferry and having to borrow his fare . " Boats are sometimes depicted on ossuaries or the walls of Jewish crypts , and one of the coins found within a skull may have been chosen because it depicted a ship . 
 = = = Western Europe = = = 
 Cemeteries in the Western Roman Empire vary widely : in a 1st @-@ century BC community in Cisalpine Gaul , coins were included in more than 40 percent of graves , but none was placed in the mouth of the deceased ; the figure is only 10 percent for cremations at <unk> in Spain and York in Britain . On the Iberian Peninsula , evidence interpreted as Charon 's obol has been found at Tarragona . In Belgic Gaul , varying deposits of coins are found with the dead for the 1st through 3rd centuries , but are most frequent in the late 4th and early 5th centuries . Thirty Gallo @-@ Roman burials near the Pont de <unk> , Soissons , each contained a coin for Charon . Germanic burials show a preference for gold coins , but even within a single cemetery and a narrow time period , their disposition varies . 
 In one Merovingian cemetery of <unk> , Normandy , which was in use for four centuries after Christ , coins are found in a minority of the graves . At one time , the cemetery was regarded as exhibiting two distinct phases : an earlier Gallo @-@ Roman period when the dead were buried with vessels , notably of glass , and Charon ’ s obol ; and later , when they were given funerary dress and goods according to Frankish custom . This neat division , however , has been shown to be misleading . In the <unk> to 4th @-@ century area of the cemetery , coins were placed near the skulls or hands , sometimes protected by a pouch or vessel , or were found in the grave @-@ fill as if tossed in . Bronze coins usually numbered one or two per grave , as would be expected from the custom of Charon ’ s obol , but one burial contained 23 bronze coins , and another held a gold solidus and a <unk> . The latter examples indicate that coins might have represented relative social status . In the newer part of the cemetery , which remained in use through the 6th century , the deposition patterns for coinage were similar , but the coins themselves were not contemporaneous with the burials , and some were pierced for wearing . The use of older coins may reflect a shortage of new currency , or may indicate that the old coins held a traditional symbolic meaning apart from their denominational value . " The varied placement of coins of different values … demonstrates at least partial if not complete loss of understanding of the original religious function of Charon ’ s obol , " remarks Bonnie <unk> , a specialist in Merovingian burial customs . " These factors make it difficult to determine the rite ’ s significance . " 
 Although the rite of Charon ’ s obol was practiced no more uniformly in Northern Europe than in Greece , there are examples of individual burials or small groups conforming to the pattern . At Broadstairs in Kent , a young man had been buried with a Merovingian gold <unk> ( ca . 575 ) in his mouth . A gold @-@ plated coin was found in the mouth of a young man buried on the Isle of Wight in the mid @-@ 6th century ; his other grave goods included vessels , a drinking horn , a knife , and gaming @-@ counters of ivory with one cobalt @-@ blue glass piece . 
 Scandinavian and Germanic gold bracteates found in burials of the 5th and 6th centuries , particularly those in Britain , have also been interpreted in light of Charon ’ s obol . These gold disks , similar to coins though generally single @-@ sided , were influenced by late Roman imperial coins and medallions but feature iconography from Norse myth and runic inscriptions . The stamping process created an extended rim that forms a frame with a loop for threading ; the bracteates often appear in burials as a woman ’ s necklace . A function comparable to that of Charon ’ s obol is suggested by examples such as a man ’ s burial at Monkton in Kent and a group of several male graves on Gotland , Sweden , for which the bracteate was deposited in a pouch beside the body . In the Gotland burials , the bracteates lack rim and loop , and show no traces of wear , suggesting that they had not been intended for everyday use . 
 According to one interpretation , the purse @-@ hoard in the Sutton Hoo ship burial ( Suffolk , East Anglia ) , which contained a variety of Merovingian gold coins , unites the traditional Germanic voyage to the afterlife with " an unusually splendid form of Charon ’ s obol . " The burial yielded 37 gold <unk> dating from the late 6th and early 7th century , three <unk> coin blanks , and two small gold ingots . It has been conjectured that the coins were to pay the oarsmen who would row the ship into the next world , while the ingots were meant for the steersmen . Although Charon is usually a lone figure in depictions from both antiquity and the modern era , there is some slight evidence that his ship might be furnished with oarsmen . A fragment of 6th century BC pottery has been interpreted as Charon sitting in the stern as steersman of a boat fitted with ten pairs of oars and rowed by <unk> ( <unk> ) , shades of the dead . A reference in Lucian seems also to imply that the shades might row the boat . 
 In Scandinavia , scattered examples of Charon ’ s obol have been documented from the Roman Iron Age and the Migration Period ; in the Viking age eastern Sweden produces the best evidence , Denmark rarely , and Norway and Finland inconclusively . In the 13th and 14th centuries , Charon ’ s obol appears in graves in Sweden , Scania , and Norway . Swedish folklore documents the custom from the 18th into the 20th century . 
 = = = Among Christians = = = 
 The custom of Charon ’ s obol not only continued into the Christian era , but was adopted by Christians , as a single coin was sometimes placed in the mouth for Christian burials . At Arcy @-@ Sainte @-@ <unk> in Picardy , a Merovingian grave yielded a coin of Constantine I , the first Christian emperor , used as Charon ’ s obol . In Britain , the practice was just as frequent , if not more so , among Christians and persisted even to the end of the 19th century . A folklorist writing in 1914 was able to document a witness in Britain who had seen a penny placed in the mouth of an old man as he lay in his coffin . In 1878 , Pope Pius IX was entombed with a coin . The practice was widely documented around the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries in Greece , where the coin was sometimes accompanied by a key . 
 = = = ' Ghost ' coins and crosses = = = 
 See also <unk> . 
 So @-@ called " ghost coins " also appear with the dead . These are impressions of an actual coin or numismatic icon struck into a small piece of gold foil . In a 5th- or 4th @-@ century BC grave at Syracuse , Sicily , a small rectangular gold leaf stamped with a dual @-@ faced figure , possibly Demeter / Kore , was found in the skeleton ’ s mouth . In a marble cremation box from the mid @-@ 2nd century BC , the " Charon 's piece " took the form of a bit of gold foil stamped with an owl ; in addition to the charred bone fragments , the box also contained gold leaves from a wreath of the type sometimes associated with the mystery religions . Within an Athenian family burial plot of the 2nd century BC , a thin gold disk similarly stamped with the owl of Athens had been placed in the mouth of each male . 
 These examples of the " Charon 's piece " resemble in material and size the tiny inscribed tablet or funerary amulet called a lamella ( Latin for a metal @-@ foil sheet ) or a Totenpass , a " passport for the dead " with instructions on navigating the afterlife , conventionally regarded as a form of Orphic or Dionysiac devotional . Several of these prayer sheets have been found in positions that indicate placement in or on the deceased 's mouth . A functional equivalence with the Charon 's piece is further suggested by the evidence of flattened coins used as mouth coverings ( <unk> ) from graves in Crete . A gold <unk> with a damaged inscription invoking the syncretic god Sarapis was found within the skull in a burial from the late 1st century AD in southern Rome . The gold tablet may have served both as a protective amulet during the deceased ’ s lifetime and then , with its insertion into the mouth , possibly on the model of Charon ’ s obol , as a Totenpass . 
 In a late Roman @-@ era burial in Douris , near Baalbek , Lebanon , the forehead , nose , and mouth of the deceased — a woman , in so far as skeletal remains can indicate — were covered with sheets of gold @-@ leaf . She wore a wreath made from gold oak leaves , and her clothing had been sewn with gold @-@ leaf ovals decorated with female faces . Several glass vessels were arranged at her feet , and her discoverers interpreted the bronze coin close to her head as an example of Charon ’ s obol . 
 Textual evidence also exists for covering portions of the deceased ’ s body with gold foil . One of the accusations of heresy against the Phrygian Christian movement known as the <unk> was that they sealed the mouths of their dead with plates of gold like initiates into the mysteries ; factual or not , the charge indicates an anxiety that Christian practice be distinguished from that of other religions , and again suggests that Charon ’ s obol and the " Orphic " gold tablets could fulfill a similar purpose . The early Christian poet Prudentius seems to be referring either to these inscribed gold @-@ leaf tablets or to the larger gold @-@ foil coverings in one of his condemnations of the mystery religions . Prudentius says that <unk> <unk> ( " sheets of gold " ) were placed on the bodies of initiates as part of funeral rites . This practice may or may not be distinct from the funerary use of gold leaf inscribed with figures and placed on the eyes , mouths , and chests of warriors in Macedonian burials during the late Archaic period ( 580 – 460 BC ) ; in September 2008 , archaeologists working near Pella in northern Greece publicized the discovery of twenty warrior graves in which the deceased wore bronze helmets and were supplied with iron swords and knives along with these gold @-@ leaf coverings . 
 = = = = Goldblattkreuze = = = = 
 In Gaul and in Alemannic territory , Christian graves of the Merovingian period reveal an analogous Christianized practice in the form of gold or gold @-@ alloy leaf shaped like a cross , imprinted with designs , and deposited possibly as votives or amulets for the deceased . These paper @-@ thin , fragile gold crosses are sometimes referred to by scholars with the German term Goldblattkreuze . They appear to have been sown onto the deceased ’ s garment just before burial , not worn during life , and in this practice are comparable to the pierced Roman coins found in Anglo @-@ Saxon graves that were attached to clothing instead of or in addition to being threaded onto a necklace . 
 The crosses are characteristic of Lombardic Italy ( Cisalpine Gaul of the Roman imperial era ) , where they were fastened to veils and placed over the deceased 's mouth in a continuation of Byzantine practice . Throughout the Lombardic realm and north into Germanic territory , the crosses gradually replaced bracteates during the 7th century . The transition is signalled by Scandinavian bracteates found in Kent that are stamped with cross motifs resembling the Lombardic crosses . Two plain gold @-@ foil crosses of Latin form , found in the burial of a 7th @-@ century East Saxon king , are the first known examples from England , announced in 2004 . The king ’ s other grave goods included glass vessels made in England and two different Merovingian gold coins , each of which had a cross on the reverse . Coins of the period were adapted with Christian iconography in part to facilitate their use as an alternative to amulets of traditional religions . 
 = = = = Scandinavian gullgubber = = = = 
 Scandinavia also produced small and fragile gold @-@ foil pieces , called gullgubber , that were worked in repoussé with human figures . These begin to appear in the late Iron Age and continue into the Viking Age . In form they resemble the gold @-@ foil pieces such as those found at Douris , but the gullgubber were not fashioned with a fastening element and are not associated with burials . They occur in the archaeological record sometimes singly , but most often in large numbers . Some scholars have speculated that they are a form of " temple money " or votive offering , but Sharon <unk> has suggested that they might represent good wishes for travelers , perhaps as a metaphor for the dead on their journey to the otherworld , especially those depicting " wraiths . " 
 = = Religious significance = = 
 Ships often appear in Greek and Roman funerary art representing a voyage to the Isles of the Blessed , and a 2nd @-@ century sarcophagus found in Velletri , near Rome , included Charon ’ s boat among its subject matter . In modern @-@ era Greek folkloric survivals of Charon ( as <unk> the death demon ) , sea voyage and river crossing are conflated , and in one later tale , the soul is held hostage by pirates , perhaps representing the oarsmen , who require a ransom for release . The <unk> of the passage to the afterlife as a voyage or crossing is not unique to Greco @-@ Roman belief nor to Indo @-@ European culture as a whole , as it occurs also in ancient Egyptian religion and other belief systems that are culturally unrelated . The boatman of the dead himself appears in diverse cultures with no special relation to Greece or to each other . A Sumerian model for Charon has been proposed , and the figure has possible antecedents among the Egyptians ; scholars are divided as to whether these influenced the tradition of Charon , but the 1st @-@ century BC historian Diodorus Siculus thought so and mentions the fee . It might go without saying that only when coinage comes into common use is the idea of payment introduced , but coins were placed in graves before the appearance of the Charon myth in literature . 
 Because of the diversity of religious beliefs in the Greco @-@ Roman world , and because the mystery religions that were most concerned with the afterlife and soteriology placed a high value on secrecy and arcane knowledge , no single theology has been reconstructed that would account for Charon ’ s obol . Franz Cumont regarded the numerous examples found in Roman tombs as " evidence of no more than a traditional rite which men performed without attaching a definite meaning to it . " The use of a coin for the rite seems to depend not just on the myth of Charon , but also on other religious and mythic traditions associating wealth and the underworld . 
 = = = Death and Wealth = = = 
 In cultures that practiced the rite of Charon ’ s obol , the infernal ferryman who requires payment is one of a number of underworld deities associated with wealth . For the Greeks , Pluto ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the ruler of the dead and the consort of Persephone , became conflated with Plutus ( <unk> , <unk> ) , wealth personified ; Plato points out the meaningful ambiguity of this etymological play in his dialogue <unk> . Hermes is a god of boundaries , travel , and liminality , and thus conveys souls across the border that separates the living from the dead , acting as a psychopomp , but he was also a god of exchange , commerce , and profit . The name of his Roman counterpart Mercury was thought in antiquity to share its derivation with the Latin word <unk> , " goods , merchandise . " 
 The numerous chthonic deities among the Romans were also frequently associated with wealth . In his treatise On the Nature of the Gods , Cicero identifies the Roman god Dis Pater with the Greek Pluton , explaining that riches are hidden in and arise from the earth . Dis Pater is sometimes regarded as a chthonic Saturn , ruler of the Golden Age , whose consort Ops was a goddess of abundance . The obscure goddess <unk> , whose iconography depicted silence and secrecy , and whose festival followed that of Ops , seems to have regulated communications between the realm of the living and the underworld ; she may have been a guardian of both arcane knowledge and stored , secret wealth . When a Roman died , the treasury at the Temple of Venus in the sacred grove of the funeral goddess <unk> collected a coin as a " death tax " . 
 The Republican poet <unk> locates the " treasuries of Death " across the Acheron . Romans threw an annual offering of coins into the Lacus Curtius , a pit or chasm in the middle of the Roman forum that was regarded as a mundus or " port of communication " with the underworld . 
 Chthonic wealth is sometimes attributed to the Celtic horned god of the Cernunnos type , one of the deities proposed as the divine progenitor of the Gauls that Julius Caesar identified with Dis Pater . On a relief from the Gallic civitas of the Remi , the god holds in his lap a sack or purse , the contents of which — identified by scholars variably as coins or food ( grain , small fruits , or nuts ) — may be intentionally ambiguous in expressing desired abundance . The antler @-@ horned god appears on coins from Gaul and Britain , in explicit association with wealth . In his best @-@ known representation , on the problematic <unk> Cauldron , he is surrounded by animals with <unk> @-@ religious significance ; taken in the context of an accompanying scene of initiation , the horned god can be interpreted as presiding over the process of metempsychosis , the cycle of death and rebirth , regarded by ancient literary sources as one of the most important tenets of Celtic religion and characteristic also of <unk> and the Orphic or Dionysiac mysteries . 
 From its 7th @-@ century BC beginnings in western Anatolia , ancient coinage was viewed not as distinctly secular , but as a form of communal trust bound up in the ties expressed by religion . The earliest known coin @-@ hoard from antiquity was found buried in a pot within the foundations of the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus , dating to the mid @-@ 6th century BC . The iconography of gods and various divine beings appeared regularly on coins issued by Greek cities and later by Rome . The effect of monetization on religious practice is indicated by notations in Greek calendars of sacrifices pertaining to fees for priests and prices for offerings and victims . One fragmentary text seems to refer to a single obol to be paid by each initiate of the Eleusinian Mysteries to the priestess of Demeter , the symbolic value of which is perhaps to be interpreted in light of Charon ’ s obol as the initiate ’ s gaining access to knowledge required for successful passage to the afterlife . 
 Erwin Rohde argued , on the basis of later folk customs , that the obol was originally a payment to the dead person himself , as a way of compensating him for the loss of property that passed to the living , or as a token substitute for the more ancient practice of consigning his property to the grave with him . In Rohde 's view , the obol was later attached to the myth of the ferryman as an ex post facto explanation . 
 In the view of Richard Seaford , the introduction of coinage to Greece and the theorizing about value it provoked was concomitant with and even contributed to the creation of Greek metaphysics . Plato criticizes common currency as " polluting " , but also says that the guardians of his ideal republic should have divine gold and silver money from the gods always present in their souls . This Platonic " money in the soul " holds the promise of " divinity , homogeneity , unchanging permanence , self @-@ sufficiency , invisibility . " 
 = = = The coin as food or seal = = = 
 Attempts to explain the symbolism of the rite also must negotiate the illogical placement of the coin in the mouth . The Latin term viaticum makes sense of Charon ’ s obol as " sustenance for the journey , " and it has been suggested that coins replaced offerings of food for the dead in Roman tradition . 
 This dichotomy of food for the living and gold for the dead is a theme in the myth of King Midas , versions of which draw on elements of the Dionysian mysteries . The Phrygian king 's famous " golden touch " was a divine gift from Dionysus , but its acceptance separated him from the human world of nourishment and reproduction : both his food and his daughter were transformed by contact with him into immutable , <unk> gold . In some versions of the myth , Midas 's hard @-@ won insight into the meaning of life and the limitations of earthly wealth is accompanied by conversion to the cult of Dionysus . Having learned his lessons as an initiate into the mysteries , and after ritual immersion in the river Pactolus , Midas forsakes the " bogus eternity " of gold for spiritual rebirth . 
 John Cuthbert Lawson , an early 20th @-@ century folklorist whose approach was influenced by the Cambridge <unk> , argued that both the food metaphor and the coin as payment for the ferryman were later rationalizations of the original ritual . Although single coins from inhumations appear most often inside or in the vicinity of the skull , they are also found in the hand or a pouch , a more logical place to carry a payment . Lawson viewed the coin as originally a seal , used as potsherds sometimes were on the lips of the dead to block the return of the soul , believed to pass from the body with the last breath . One of the first steps in preparing a corpse was to seal the lips , sometimes with linen or gold bands , to prevent the soul ’ s return . The stopping of the mouth by Charon 's obol has been used to illuminate burial practices intended , for instance , to prevent vampires or other revenants from returning . 
 The placement of the coin on the mouth can be compared to practices pertaining to the disposition of the dead in the Near East . An Egyptian custom is indicated by a burial at Abydos , dating from the 22nd Dynasty ( 945 – 720 BC ) or later , for which the deceased woman 's mouth was covered with a faience <unk> , or protective eye amulet . Oval mouth coverings , perforated for fastening , are found in burials throughout the Near East from the 1st century BC through the 1st century AD , providing evidence of an analogous practice for sealing the mouths of the dead in regions not under Roman Imperial control . Bahraini excavations at the necropolis of Al @-@ Hajjar produced examples of these coverings in gold leaf , one of which retained labial imprints . 
 A coin may make a superior seal because of its iconography ; in the Thessalian burial of an initiate described above , for instance , the coin on the lips depicted the apotropaic device of the Gorgon ’ s head . The seal may also serve to regulate the speech of the dead , which was sometimes sought through rituals for its prophetic powers , but also highly regulated as dangerous ; mystery religions that offered arcane knowledge of the afterlife prescribed ritual silence . A golden key ( <unk> <unk> ) was laid on the tongue of initiates as a symbol of the revelation they were obligated to keep secret . " Charon 's obol " is often found in burials with objects or inscriptions indicative of mystery cult , and the coin figures in a Latin prose narrative that alludes to initiation ritual , the " Cupid and Psyche " story from the Metamorphoses of Apuleius . 
 = = = The catabasis of Psyche = = = 
 See Cupid and Psyche for a synopsis of Apuleius 's narrative . 
 In the 2nd @-@ century " Cupid and Psyche " narrative by Apuleius , Psyche , whose name is a Greek word for " soul , " is sent on an underworld quest to retrieve the box containing Proserpina ’ s secret beauty , in order to restore the love of Cupid . The tale lends itself to multiple interpretational approaches , and it has frequently been analyzed as an allegory of Platonism as well as of religious initiation , iterating on a smaller scale the plot of the Metamorphoses as a whole , which concerns the protagonist Lucius ’ s journey towards salvation through the cult of Isis . Ritual elements were associated with the story even before Apuleius ’ s version , as indicated in visual representations ; for instance , a 1st @-@ century BC sardonyx cameo depicting the wedding of Cupid and Psyche shows an attendant elevating a <unk> ( basket ) used in Dionysiac initiation . C. <unk> saw the Metamorphoses as moving away from the Platonism of Apuleius ’ s earlier Apology toward a vision of mystic salvation . 
 Before embarking on her descent , Psyche receives instructions for navigating the underworld : 
 The two coins serve the plot by providing Psyche with fare for the return ; allegorically , this return trip suggests the soul ’ s rebirth , perhaps a Platonic reincarnation or the divine form implied by the so @-@ called Orphic gold tablets . The myth of Charon has rarely been interpreted in light of mystery religions , despite the association in Apuleius and archaeological evidence of burials that incorporate both Charon ’ s obol and cultic paraphernalia . And yet " the image of the ferry , " Helen King notes , " hints that death is not final , but can be reversed , because the ferryman could carry his passengers either way . " A funeral rite is itself a kind of initiation , or the transition of the soul into another stage of " life . " 
 = = = Coins on the eyes ? = = = 
 Contrary to popular aetiology there is little evidence to connect the myth of Charon to the custom of placing a pair of coins on the eyes of the deceased , though the larger gold @-@ foil coverings discussed above might include pieces shaped for the eyes . Pairs of coins are sometimes found in burials , including cremation urns ; among the collections of the British Museum is an urn from Athens , ca . 300 BC , that contained cremated remains , two obols , and a terracotta figure of a mourning siren . Ancient Greek and Latin literary sources , however , mention a pair of coins only when a return trip is anticipated , as in the case of Psyche ’ s catabasis , and never in regard to sealing the eyes . 
 Only rarely does the placement of a pair of coins suggest they might have covered the eyes . In Judea , a pair of silver denarii were found in the eye sockets of a skull ; the burial dated to the 2nd century A.D. occurs within a Jewish community , but the religious affiliation of the deceased is unclear . Jewish ritual in antiquity did not require that the eye be sealed by an object , and it is debatable whether the custom of placing coins on the eyes of the dead was practiced among Jews prior to the modern era . During the 1980s , the issue became embroiled with the controversies regarding the Shroud of Turin when it was argued that the eye area revealed the outlines of coins ; since the placement of coins on the eyes for burial is not securely attested in antiquity , apart from the one example from Judea cited above , this interpretation of evidence obtained through digital image processing cannot be claimed as firm support for the shroud 's authenticity . 
 = = = Coins at the feet = = = 
 Coins are found also at the deceased ’ s feet , although the purpose of this positioning is uncertain . John Chrysostom mentions and disparages the use of coins depicting Alexander the Great as amulets attached by the living to the head or feet , and offers the Christian cross as a more powerful alternative for both salvation and healing : 
 = = Christian transformation = = 
 With instructions that recall those received by Psyche for her heroic descent , or the inscribed Totenpass for initiates , the Christian protagonist of a 14th @-@ century French pilgrimage narrative is advised : 
 Anglo @-@ Saxon and early – medieval Irish missionaries took the idea of a viaticum literally , carrying the Eucharistic bread and oil with them everywhere . 
 The need for a viaticum figures in a myth @-@ tinged account of the death of King William II of England , told by the Anglo @-@ Norman chronicler Geoffrey Gaimar : dying from a battle wound and delirious , the desperate king kept calling out for the corpus domini ( Lord ’ s body ) until a huntsman acted as priest and gave him flowering herbs as his viaticum . In the dominant tradition of William 's death , he is killed while hunting on the second day of red stag season , which began August 1 , the date of both <unk> and the Feast of St. Peter 's Chains . 
 The hunt is also associated with the administering of a herbal viaticum in the medieval chansons de geste , in which traditional heroic culture and Christian values interpenetrate . The chansons offer multiple examples of grass or foliage substituted as a viaticum when a warrior or knight meets his violent end outside the Christian community . Sarah Kay views this substitute rite as communion with the <unk> " primitive sacred , " speculating that " pagan " beliefs lurk beneath a Christian veneer . In the Raoul de Cambrai , the dying Bernier receives three blades of grass in place of the corpus Domini . Two other chansons place this desire for communion within the <unk> of the sacrificial boar hunt . In <unk> et <unk> , Bove is murdered next to the boar he just killed ; he asks his own killer to grant him communion " with a leaf , " and when he is denied , he then asks that his enemy eat his heart instead . This request is granted ; the killer partakes of the victim ’ s body as an alternative sacrament . In Garin le <unk> , <unk> is similarly assassinated next to the corpse of a boar , and takes communion with three blades of grass . 
 Kay ’ s conjecture that a pre @-@ Christian tradition accounts for the use of leaves as the viaticum is supported by evidence from Hellenistic magico @-@ religious practice , the continuance of which is documented in Gaul and among Germanic peoples . Spells from the Greek Magical Papyri often require the insertion of a leaf — an actual leaf , a papyrus scrap , the representation of a leaf in metal foil , or an inscribed rectangular lamella ( as described above ) — into the mouth of a corpse or skull , as a means of conveying messages to and from the realms of the living and the dead . In one spell attributed to <unk> the Thessalian , the practitioner is instructed to inscribe a flax leaf with magic words and to insert it into the mouth of a dead person . 
 The insertion of herbs into the mouth of the dead , with a promise of resurrection , occurs also in the Irish tale " The Kern in the Narrow Stripes , " the earliest written version of which dates to the 1800s but is thought to preserve an oral tradition of early Irish myth . The <unk> of the title is an otherworldly trickster figure who performs a series of miracles ; after inducing twenty armed men to kill each other , he produces herbs from his bag and instructs his host 's gatekeeper to place them within the jaws of each dead man to bring him back to life . At the end of the tale , the mysterious visitor is revealed as Manannán mac Lir , the Irish god known in other stories for his herd of pigs that offer eternal feasting from their self @-@ renewing flesh . 
 = = = Sacrament and superstition = = = 
 Scholars have frequently suggested that the use of a viaticum in the Christian rite for the dying reflected preexisting religious practice , with Charon ’ s obol replaced by a more acceptably Christian sacrament . In one miraculous story , recounted by Pope Innocent III in a letter dated 1213 , the coins in a <unk> were said literally to have been transformed into communion wafers . Because of the viaticum ’ s presumed pre @-@ Christian origin , an anti @-@ Catholic historian of religion at the turn of the 18th – 19th centuries propagandized the practice , stating that " it was from the heathens [ that ] the papists borrowed it . " Contemporary scholars are more likely to explain the borrowing in light of the deep @-@ seated conservatism of burial practices or as a form of religious syncretism motivated by a psychological need for continuity . 
 Among Christians , the practice of burying a corpse with a coin in its mouth was never widespread enough to warrant condemnation from the Church , but the substitute rite came under official scrutiny ; the viaticum should not be , but often was , placed in the mouth after death , apparently out of a superstitious desire for its magical protection . By the time Augustine wrote his Confessions , " African bishops had forbidden the celebration of the eucharist in the presence of the corpse . This was necessary to stop the occasional practice of placing the eucharistic bread in the mouth of the dead , a viaticum which replaced the coin needed to pay Charon ’ s fare . " Pope Gregory I , in his biography of Benedict of Nursia , tells the story of a monk whose body was twice ejected from his tomb ; Benedict advised the family to restore the dead man to his resting place with the viaticum placed on his chest . The placement suggests a functional equivalence with the Goldblattkreuze and the Orphic gold tablets ; its purpose — to assure the deceased ’ s successful passage to the afterlife — is analogous to that of Charon ’ s obol and the <unk> of mystery initiates , and in this case it acts also as a seal to block the dead from returning to the world of the living . 
 Ideally , the journey into death would begin immediately after taking the sacrament . Eusebius offers an example of an elderly Christian who managed to hold off death until his grandson placed a portion of the Eucharist in his mouth . In a general audience October 24 , 2007 , Pope Benedict XVI quoted Paulinus ’ s account of the death of St. Ambrose , who received and swallowed the corpus Domini and immediately " gave up his spirit , taking the good Viaticum with him . His soul , thus refreshed by the virtue of that food , now enjoys the company of Angels . " A perhaps apocryphal story from a Cistercian chronicle circa 1200 indicates that the viaticum was regarded as an apotropaic seal against demons ( ad <unk> <unk> ) , who nevertheless induced a woman to attempt to snatch the Host ( viaticum ) from the mouth of Pope Urban III ’ s corpse . Like Charon 's obol , the viaticum can serve as both sustenance for the journey and seal . 
 In the 19th century , the German scholar Georg Heinrici proposed that Greek and Roman practices pertaining to the care of the dead , specifically including Charon ’ s obol , shed light on vicarious baptism , or baptism for the dead , to which St. Paul refers in a letter to the Corinthians . A century after Heinrici , James Downey examined the funerary practices of Christian Corinthians in historical context and argued that they intended vicarious baptism to protect the deceased ’ s soul against interference on the journey to the afterlife . Both vicarious baptism and the placement of a viaticum in the mouth of a person already dead reflect Christian responses to , rather than outright rejection of , ancient religious traditions pertaining to the cult of the dead . 
 = = Art of the modern era = = 
 Although Charon has been a popular subject of art , particularly in the 19th century , the act of payment is less often depicted . An exception is the Charon and Psyche of John Roddam Spencer Stanhope , exhibited ca . 1883 . The story of Cupid and Psyche found several expressions among the Pre @-@ Raphaelite artists and their literary peers , and Stanhope , while mourning the death of his only child , produced a number of works dealing with the afterlife . His Psyche paintings were most likely based on the narrative poem of William Morris that was a retelling of the version by Apuleius . In Stanhope ’ s vision , the ferryman is a calm and patriarchal figure more in keeping with the Charon of the archaic Greek lekythoi than the fearsome antagonist often found in Christian @-@ era art and literature . 
 The contemporary artist Bradley Platz extends the theme of Charon ’ s obol as a <unk> food in his oil @-@ on @-@ canvas work Charon and the Shades ( 2007 ) . In this depiction , Charon is a hooded , faceless figure of Death ; the transported soul regurgitates a stream of gold coins while the penniless struggle and beg on the shores . The painting was created for a show in which artists were to bring together a mythological figure and a pop @-@ culture icon , chosen randomly . The " soul " in Platz ’ s reinterpretation is the " celebutante " Nicole Richie " as a general symbol for the modern celebrity and wealth , " notes the artist : " She is represented dry and emaciated , having little physical beauty left but a wealth of gold " which she purges from her mouth . 
 = = Modern poetry = = 
 Poets of the modern era have continued to make use of Charon 's obol as a living allusion . In " Don Juan aux enfers " ( " Don Juan in Hell " ) , the French <unk> poet Charles Baudelaire marks the eponymous hero 's entry to the underworld with his payment of the obol to Charon . Irish Nobel laureate Seamus Heaney makes a less direct allusion with a simile — " words imposing on my tongue like obols " — in the " <unk> " section of his long poem Singing School : 
 = Darin Ruf = 
 Darin Cortland Ruf ( born July 28 , 1986 ) is an American professional baseball first baseman and outfielder for the Philadelphia Phillies of Major League Baseball . He was born in Omaha , Nebraska , and played at Westside High School . Subsequently , he attended Creighton University , and excelled playing baseball there before the Phillies drafted him in 2009 . In the minor leagues , he initially hit for a high batting average , but in 2011 combined that with power numbers to become one of the Phillies ' top prospects . He made his major league debut in September 2012 , after having hit 38 home runs to lead the Eastern League . In 2013 , he split time between Triple @-@ A and the major league Phillies , and was among the league 's top rookies during the season . He was embroiled in a roster battle for a bench spot entering 2014 , but hurt his oblique , and landed on the disabled list prior to the season . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Ruf was born on July 28 , 1986 to parents Bill and Mary Ruf in Omaha , Nebraska ; he has four siblings ( one of which is older , the rest younger ) . He attended Westside High School , where he helped the team win a Nebraska state championship his sophomore season and finish as the runner @-@ up his senior year . He also played football and basketball , and was the captain of the baseball and football teams – during his senior season , he achieved all @-@ state honors in both football and basketball . After his senior season , he committed to play baseball at Creighton for its " combination of athletics and academics " ; there , he was a " standout " over his four seasons , serving as the squad 's first baseman . 
 Even in Ruf 's freshman season ( 2006 ) , he started all 52 games . His sophomore season ( 2007 ) drew him significant accolade – he was named the Missouri Valley Conference ( MVC ) Player of the Year , a member of both the first @-@ team all conference squad , and a first @-@ team all @-@ conference scholar athlete . He also was named an all @-@ star for his performance in summer collegiate baseball , for which he was a member of the Wisconsin <unk> of the Northwoods League . His strong performance continued during his junior season ( 2008 ) , during which he compiled a 15 @-@ game hitting streak that contributed to his .347 season batting average . His collegiate career culminated in 2009 , when he was named to the second @-@ team all @-@ MVC team and a third @-@ team academic @-@ all American by ESPN . Overall , he is " all over the <unk> record books , finishing second in RBI with 201 , third in total bases with 423 and in hits with 275 , sixth in walks with 135 , seventh in doubles with 57 and tied for 10th in home runs with 27 ... ( he ) started all 227 games in his career . " While at Creighton , he earned a degree in finance , compiled a 3 @.@ 51 grade point average ( GPA ) , and aspired to be a successful businessman . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues ( 2009 – 11 ) = = = 
 Ruf was drafted by the Philadelphia Phillies in the 20th round of the 2009 Major League Baseball draft . After the Phillies drafted him , scouting director Marti <unk> asserted that Ruf " is an outstanding defensive first baseman with a chance to hit and has tremendous makeup . " After converting to play predominantly in the outfield , however , Ruf 's fielding has been characterized as either " serviceable " or " weak " , and Phillies general manager Rubén Amaro , Jr. commented that he did not have the defensive skills to play every day . 
 His first professional assignment was the GCL Phillies in 2009 ; after performing well there , he was promoted to the Williamsport Crosscutters of short season A. With both squads , he held a batting average of over .300 . He also participated in the Florida Instructional League . In 2010 , he began the season with the Lakewood BlueClaws , also of Class A , but spent only 32 games there . The Phillies promoted him to the Class A @-@ Advanced Clearwater Threshers , and was the Phillies ' minor league player of the week in late May . In total , he amassed nine home runs and 67 runs batted in ( RBIs ) while posting a .290 amalgamated batting average . His power emergence began in 2011 when he hit a Florida State League @-@ leading 43 doubles , as well as 17 home runs and 82 RBIs and a .308 batting average . Defensively , he played first base , third base , and left field , and even pitched two innings of relief during a 23 @-@ inning game . After the season , he played in the Arizona Fall League for the Scottsdale Scorpions . 
 = = = Philadelphia Phillies ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 Ruf enjoyed great success playing for the Reading Phillies ( since renamed the Reading Fightin Phils ) in 2012 , earning Eastern League most valuable player ( MVP ) honors , as well as the Paul Owens Award , which is given to the best player in the Phillies ' minor league system . During the season , the Fightin Phils sold T @-@ shirts that said " Babe Ruf " , a reference to Babe Ruth . He led the Eastern League with 38 home runs and 104 RBIs , and tied for the league lead by playing in 139 games and 11 sacrifice flies , all en route to earning a September callup and making his major league debut on September 14 ( skipping the Triple @-@ A level entirely ) . He recorded his first major league hit on September 25 , a home run off the Washington Nationals ' Ross Detwiler . Ruf totaled three home runs and 10 RBIs in his 12 @-@ game " cup of coffee " at the end of the season . An article on Phillies Nation summarized his season and journey through the minor league system : 
 Darin Ruf slugged his way onto the scene about midway through the 2012 season with the Reading Phillies ; it wasn ’ t as though Ruf was some highly @-@ touted prospect everyone knew about . Really , he was an afterthought at 26 years old ; a guy who was just kind of there . That all changed . 
 Ruf started the 2013 season in Triple @-@ A with the Lehigh Valley IronPigs , but was recalled by the Phillies on July 6 when Ryan Howard was placed on the disabled list . At the major league level , he finished fifth among rookies with 14 home runs , nine of which were in August , the most among any major league player during that stretch . Of his 70 starts at the major league level , 28 were at first base , 27 in right field , and 16 in left field , while of his 78 starts in Triple @-@ A , 59 came in left field and 19 came at first base . Ruf struggled to find a spot on the Phillies roster at which he could contribute , despite strong performance : " Even after proving he can be a productive offensive contributor and showing his defensive versatility , Ruf 's spot in the Phils ’ lineup may not be locked in for next season . " one columnist wrote . 
 Entering the 2014 season , he was set to compete for a spot on the bench , as Amaro declared that he was not good enough , particularly defensively , to play everyday . However , the Phillies placed him on the disabled list ( DL ) due to a strained oblique ; his estimated recovery time was around the end of April or the beginning of May . When Ruf returned , he played for the IronPigs , but suffered another injury on June 3 , fracturing his left wrist when sliding into the wall while playing left field . He returned to the major league Phillies on July 22 when John Mayberry , Jr. landed on the disabled list , but struggled in his first several games ; in his first 17 at @-@ bats , he had just two hits . Nevertheless , the Phillies toyed with platooning him with Ryan Howard , who was also struggling , at first base , and Ruf also played two innings at third base . Overall , Ruf amassed only 117 major league plate appearances , and was significantly hindered by injuries . 
 As 2015 began , Ruf once again had to fight for playing time ; there was no clear opening for him on the Phillies ' roster , notwithstanding the fact that he was one of the few players on the roster with the ability to hit for power . 
 On May 13 , 2016 , Ruf was optioned to Triple @-@ A in exchange for Tommy Joseph . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Eric <unk> , a baseball analyst for Crashburn Alley , asserts that Ruf 's ceiling is a platoon player at first base , but that his superior intangibles have allowed him to overachieve in terms of his potential . He wrote , 
 For him to be anything more than that would be positively historic . We ’ ve never seen a player of this age with a similar skill set ( a fringe average hitter with a huge hole in his swing and plus raw power who is a 20 runner with pretty much unknown arm strength ) do anything sustainable of note at the major league level . Ruf turns 28 halfway through next year and possesses both a skillset and body that typically don ’ t age well . It 's a very weird situation but it 's a triumph of the Phillies player development system and of Ruf 's effort that he ever put on a Major League uniform at all . 
 = = = Offense = = = 
 Ruf is a strong power hitter who , according to one talent evaluator quoted in Lindy 's Sports 2014 baseball preview magazine , possesses " raw country strength " at the plate . He has an uppercut swing , and struggles to hit outside pitches because of poor balance at the plate , but consequently , is able to hit fly balls and drive mistake pitches out of the park . He is a patient hitter , but is the opposite of many hitters , in that as a right @-@ handed hitter , he hits left @-@ handed pitchers better than right @-@ handed pitchers . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 Ruf has played first base as well as both of the corner outfield spots during his career , and focused on the outfield during the latter stages of his development because of Ryan Howard 's perceived preeminence at first base . In the outfield , Ruf is a " liability " , and he is " pretty shaky " at first base , further underscoring his " man without a position " persona within the Phillies ' organization . This has led some to suggest he would be better suited as a designated hitter in the American League . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ruf 's wife is Libby <unk> , whom Ruf married in December 2011 . His hobbies include golfing and traveling . During the offseason , he resides in his hometown of Omaha , Nebraska . Christa Ruf , Ruf 's sister , also attended Creighton ; she played softball there for four seasons . 
 = The X @-@ Files ( season 3 ) = 
 The third season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files commenced airing on Fox in the United States on September 22 , 1995 , concluded on the same channel on May 17 , 1996 , and contained 24 episodes . The season continues to follow the cases of FBI special agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully , portrayed by David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson respectively , who investigate paranormal or supernatural cases , known as X @-@ Files by the FBI . 
 The season features the conclusion of several plot @-@ lines introduced in season two , while also introducing several new plot elements . Major plot arcs include an elaborate conspiracy being discovered when a fake alien autopsy video is acquired by Mulder , Scully 's search for the killer of her sister , and the mystery surrounding X ( Steven Williams ) . Pivotal characters such as the First Elder ( Don S. Williams ) and the alien virus black oil were first introduced in this season . In addition , the season features a wide variety of " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " episodes , which feature stand @-@ alone stories not of influence to the wider mythology of the series . 
 The season attained higher ratings than season two , receiving the highest viewing audience the series had yet achieved . Season premiere " The Blessing Way " debuted with a Nielsen household rating of 19 @.@ 94 , which more than doubled the premiere of the last season . The ratings consistently stayed above 15 @.@ 0 , making it one of the most watched series of the 1995 – 96 television line @-@ up . The season received generally positive reviews from television critics , winning five Primetime Emmy Awards . Many of the episodes written by writer Darin Morgan received critical acclaim , including the episodes " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " and " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " which are often cited as some of the best of the series . Morgan left the series following this season , due to an inability to keep up with the fast paced nature of the show . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is later found in the desert following the events of the second season finale and nursed back to health by Albert Hosteen ( Floyd Red Crow Westerman ) . Meanwhile , Scully investigates the possible involvement of the smallpox eradication program in human genetic experimentation , discovering that a Nazi scientist who defected during Operation Paperclip has been conducting human experimentation to create alien @-@ human hybrids . Her sister Melissa ( Melinda McGraw ) , however , is shot by assassins who mistake her for Dana , and dies in hospital that night . 
 Investigating evidence of an alien autopsy , Mulder infiltrates a secretive government train carriage carrying an alien @-@ human hybrid . Mulder is almost killed by a Syndicate operative guarding the hybrid , but is saved by his informant X ( Steven Williams ) . X had been tipped off about Mulder 's activities by the agent 's partner Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . Scully , meanwhile , meets a group of women with abduction experiences similar to her own , and meets another member of the Syndicate known as the First Elder ( Don S. Williams ) , who claims during her abduction she was placed on a similar train car and experimented upon by the Japanese scientists . 
 The crew of a French salvage ship trying to raise a World War II @-@ era submarine from the sea floor are stricken with massive radiation burns — except for one , who has been infected with a parasitic black oil discovered on the submarine . The oil is controlling the crewman 's body , and after passing through several hosts , has overtaken Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) , whom Mulder has been pursuing . Scully finds that the submarine had been involved in discovering the oil on the sea floor during World War II , under the guise of finding a sunken fighter plane . The infected Krycek makes his way to a missile silo used to hide a UFO , and the oil escapes his body to board the craft . Meanwhile , Scully has tracked down Luis Cardinal , the man responsible for killing her sister . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Development of the first episode of the season , " The Blessing Way " , began with the second season finale " Anasazi " . Both of those episodes , along with " Paper Clip " , form a three part trilogy of episodes that began the third season . " Anasazi " was directed by R. W. Goodwin , who later directed the season finale " Talitha Cumi " , and " Paper Clip " was directed by Rob Bowman . Bowman directed a total of eight episodes for the season , followed by Kim Manners who directed seven . Series creator Chris Carter also served as executive producer and showrunner and wrote eight episodes , directing one . 
 Darin Morgan had a small involvement in the second season , and was asked to contribute more content for the third . He first appeared in " The Host " as the Flukeman , and was brought on by his brother Glen Morgan to help write the episode " Blood " . Morgan 's first sole credit as a writer came in the episode " Humbug " , which received a positive reception by the staff . David Duchovny expressed an enjoyment for working with Morgan , commenting " what I loved about his scripts was that he seemed to be trying to destroy the show . " Morgan wrote a total of three episodes , but later left the series because he could not keep up with the fast paced nature of network television . He also expressed a negative opinion of the way his teleplays were handled , despite a positive reception by both critics and the crew of his work . He also contributed to the script for the episode " Quagmire " . After writing one episode the previous season , Vince Gilligan returned to write another solo episode for the season , now credited as a creative consultant . Cast member David Duchovny collaborated with Howard Gordon and Chris Carter for two episodes receiving story credit . 
 New writers in the third season included story editor Jeffrey Vlaming who wrote two episodes , supervising producer Charles Grant Craig who wrote a single episode , Kim Newtown who wrote two episodes , and staff writer John Shiban who wrote two episodes . All new writers except Shiban did not return after this season . Series visual effects producer Mat Beck also wrote an episode . Other producers included production manager and producer Joseph Patrick Finn and co @-@ producer Paul Rabwin . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " Nisei " and " 731 " , show a darker side to the series , exploring the public 's distrust in the government . Other episodes dealing with the wider mythology of the series — " Talitha Cumi " , " Piper Maru " and " Apocrypha " — explore similar concepts , showcasing the shadow government plot line of the series . Episodes like " 2Shy " and " Pusher " feature sadistic villains , containing human beings capable of highly immoral acts despite their seemingly mundane appearances . Another episode with a serial killer antagonist , " Grotesque " , revolves around the way that evil can change and influence people . " Oubliette " offers a sentimental and emotional plot driven by the kidnapping of a young girl . The episode features parallels to the real life Polly Klaas case and provides commentary on both <unk> syndrome and trauma . 
 Aliens and serial killers are not the only antagonists in the season ; several episodes revolve around more traditional , B @-@ movie inspired monsters , taking influence from horror films . These episodes include " War of the Coprophages " and " Quagmire " , about killer cockroaches and a lake monster . Several episodes have satirical elements , including " D.P.O. " , " Syzygy " and " War of the Coprophages " , with the latter two showcasing how the public can create panic out of need . Both " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " and " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " play against tropes and the established formula of the series , subverting themes the series usually followed . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 David Duchovny as Special Agent Fox Mulder ( 24 episodes ) 
 Gillian Anderson as Special Agent Dana Scully ( 24 episodes ) 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = = = Also starring = = = = 
 Mitch Pileggi as Deputy Director Walter Skinner ( 10 episodes ) 
 = = = = Guest starring = = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Episodes marked with a double dagger ( ) are episodes in the series ' Alien Mythology arc . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The third season of The X @-@ Files debuted with " The Blessing Way " on September 22 , 1995 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 12 @.@ 3 , with a 22 share , meaning that roughly 12 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 22 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode was viewed by 19 @.@ 94 million viewers . " The Blessing Way " was , at the time , the highest @-@ rated episode of The X @-@ Files to air ; the previous record belonged to the season two entry " Fresh Bones " , which only scored an 11 @.@ 3 rating with a 19 share . As the season continued , however , ratings dropped slightly and stabilized . After the season premiere , the highest @-@ rated episode the season was the finale , " Talitha Cumi " , which was viewed by 17 @.@ 86 million viewers . The season hit a low with the twenty @-@ third and penultimate episode of the season , " Wetwired " , which was viewed by only 14 @.@ 48 million viewers . 
 The series was ranked as number 55 during the 1995 – 96 television season , and was viewed by an average of 15 @.@ 40 million viewers , an increase in almost seven percent when compared to the second season , which was viewed by 14 @.@ 50 . In its third season , The X @-@ Files became Fox 's top @-@ rated program in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . The third season of the show was the last to be aired on Friday nights ; for its fourth season , the show was moved to Sunday . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club called the third season The X @-@ Files ' " best season and maybe one of the greatest TV seasons of all time " , noting it was consistent and " [ swung ] from strength to strength " between mythology and stand @-@ alone episodes . However , he thought it " starts out kind of terribly " with " The Blessing Way " . Zack Handlen , VanDerWerff 's colleague , wrote that the third season was " one of the show 's strongest , with the conspiracy arc still keeping tension high instead of just vamping for time . By this point , the sometimes awkward effects work of the early years is gone , and the overall direction is highly polished , giving even the season 's weakest entries a cinematic feel " . He also stated that Morgan 's " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " and " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " were " The X @-@ Files 's two greatest hours " . The writing credits provided by Morgan was widely cited as a highlight of the season . " War of the Coprophages " written by him received positive reviews , and Entertainment Weekly gave " War of the Coprophages " an A – , who praised the absurdity and entertainment value of the episode . Another episode , " Quagmire " containing some writing credits by Morgan received positive reviews , with the 10 @-@ minute dialogue sequence featuring Mulder and Scully receiving highly positive reviews . 
 Gilligan 's episode " Pusher " was also cited as one of the best episodes of the series by both IGN and Den of Geek , and Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files , named the episode the third best episode of The X @-@ Files and called it the " best MOTW [ " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " ] in the series history " Duchovny considers his performance in " Oubliette " as his favorite of the season , an episode that also received mostly positive reviews . Writing for DVD Talk , Earl Cressey rated the season overall four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , finding that the series ' increased budget meant that its production values and the quality of its guest appearances were better than previous seasons . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The third season earned the series eight Primetime Emmy Award nominations . It received its second consecutive nomination for Outstanding Drama Series , Gillian Anderson received her first nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series , and the episode " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " was nominated for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Art Direction for a Series . The series won five awards , including Outstanding Individual Achievement in Writing for a Drama Series , for the episode " Clyde Bruckman 's Final Repose " written by Darin Morgan ; Peter Boyle won for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series for his performance in that same episode . The episode " Nisei " won for both Outstanding Individual Achievement in Sound Editing for a Series and Outstanding Individual Achievement in Sound Mixing for a Drama Series . John S. Bartley won for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Cinematography for a Series due to the episode " Grotesque " . Duchovny and Anderson were each nominated for a Golden Globe Award for their performances . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 = Made in America ( Jay @-@ Z and Kanye West song ) = 
 " Made in America " is a song by American hip hop artists Kanye West and Jay @-@ Z , from their first collaborative album Watch the Throne . It is the 11th track on the album and features vocals from OFWGKTA singer Frank Ocean . Lyrically , the song explores themes of family life and the American Dream . It expresses the hardships of youth and coming of age . The track received positive reviews from music critics who praised Ocean 's vocal hook , and the subject matter of the verses . The song has been compared to " inspirational ballads of late @-@ period Michael Jackson . " The song charted on South Korea Gaon International Chart at position 178 . Jay @-@ Z and West performed the song at their 2011 Watch the Throne Tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jay @-@ Z and Kanye West are both American rappers who have collaborated on several tracks together . In 2010 , they began production and recording on a collaborative record Watch the Throne . Frank Ocean is an R & B recording artist who released his debut mixtape Nostalgia , Ultra in early 2011 to critical acclaim . The release of the mixtape interested West , who was reported to be a big fan . West invited Ocean to write and sing on two songs off of the record . Frank wrote and provided vocals on tracks " No Church in the Wild " and " Made in America " and the songs were recorded in New York . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song has been described as an " understated soft @-@ pop " track with influence from Michael Jackson and his 1985 charity single " We Are the World " . Ocean 's hook " pays tribute to Martin Luther King , Jr . , Coretta Scott King , Malcolm X , Betty Shabazz and , of course , the sweet baby Jesus on the album 's most serene track . " Rob Harvilla of Spin stated that " PBR & B prince Frank Ocean " sings on the " subdued but triumphant " Made in America " ( wherein Jay wistfully recalls his grandma 's banana pudding and Kanye complains about South Park ) . The song " invokes heroes of the civil rights movement " and reflects on how West and Jay have " seized what might be an American Dream . " 
 Jay @-@ Z muses on his drug @-@ dealing past with lines like " our apple pie was supplied by Arm & Hammer " , utilizing " his skill at baking double- and triple @-@ meanings into a line " . West 's verse describes his " original hustle in terms of blogging and web traffic " and his conflict with fame , " tinged with a political or socio @-@ economic hue . " West offers a verse that " starts off humble , but by the end he 's bragging about his power and slamming his critics " over a " weirdly magnetic synthetic beat and dots of pretty piano clusters crafted by producer Sak Pace of the <unk> . " Popdust reported that " this is Jay at his most vulnerable , revealing things he may be thinking but not regularly willing to share with others . While the song ’ s chorus seems to honor all of those “ Made In America , ” the track is really a look at the history these two have shared and perhaps their differing futures . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Made in America " received mostly positive reviews from most music critics . Pitchfork Media 's Tom Breihan commented that the track reminded him of " the inspirational ballads of late @-@ period Michael Jackson " , and said that while the song was " silly " , it " succeeds on pure orchestral excess . " Rolling Stone stated that " both rappers deliver sentimental verses , but Ocean carries most of the emotional weight here . " Steve Jones of USA Today commented " on the equally potent Made in America , the two talk about their rises to fame , while acknowledging those who helped and inspired them . " Sputnikmusic 's Tyler Fisher noted that " Frank Ocean asks , “ What ’ s a god to a <unk> ? ” on “ No Church in the Wild ” , but later invokes “ sweet baby Jesus ” on “ Made in America ” , pandering to each track without a thought to the coherence of the album . " 
 Los Angeles Times writer Randall Roberts stated " the album 's highlight , and an instant classic , is “ Made in America , ” a solid , slow @-@ paced Frank Ocean @-@ teamed jam about the American dream that reveals the main difference between West and Jay @-@ Z : humility . " Popdust writer Emily Exton that while " Frank Ocean ’ s “ Sweet Baby Jesus ” might be stuck in your head for the rest of the day " , the <unk> is " Kanye who manages to both appreciatively give thanks to his rise to fame as well as generate more than one eye roll with his bravado . " Rolling Stone 's Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson mused " Frank Ocean 's second appearance on the album is another keeper . Hip @-@ hop heads will be singing his honey @-@ voiced , religiously @-@ themed hook all fall . Jay @-@ Z and Kanye keep the thoughtful mood going with verses that revisit their respective rises to fame . " BBC Music 's Marcus J. Moore perceived that " Made in America fails to resonate because of a contrived chorus that pays homage to West 's Sweet Baby Jesus , among others . " Andy Gill of The Independent found it to be a stand @-@ out track , " featuring assured vocal refrains from Frank Ocean , while the two rappers muse over familiar themes of loyalty , sexuality and maternal solidarity . " The track briefly charted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart for one week . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The track was performed by West and Jay @-@ Z on their Watch the Throne tour . Ocean performed his hook of the song at some of the performances during his 2011 concert series through the US and Europe . The name was adopted for Jay @-@ Z 's first annual " Budweiser Made in America " festival at Fairmount Park in Philadelphia in September 2012 . Jay @-@ Z will be the curator and the headliner for the festival . 
 = Education in the Faroe Islands = 
 The levels of education in the Faroe Islands are primary , secondary and higher education . Most institutions are funded by the state ; there are few private schools in the country . Education is compulsory for 9 years between the ages of 7 and 16 . 
 In the twelfth century education in the Faroe Islands was provided by the Catholic Church . The Church of Denmark took over education after the Protestant Reformation . Modern educational institutions started operating in the last quarter of the nineteenth century and developed throughout the twentieth century . The status of the Faroese language in education was a significant issue for decades , until it was accepted as a language of instruction in 1938 . Initially education was administered and regulated by Denmark . In 1979 responsibilities on educational issues started transferring to the Faroese authorities , a procedure which was completed in 2002 . 
 Compulsory education consists of seven years of primary education , and two years of lower secondary education ; it is public , free of charge , provided by the respective municipalities , and is called the Fólkaskúli in Faroese . The Fólkaskúli also provides optional preschool education as well as the tenth year of education that is a prerequisite to get admitted to upper secondary education . Students that complete compulsory education are allowed to continue education in a vocational school , where they can have job @-@ specific training and education . Since fishing industry is an important part of country 's economy , maritime schools are an important part of Faroese education . Upon completion of the tenth year of Fólkaskúli , students can continue to upper secondary education which consists of several different types of schools . Higher education is offered at the University of the Faroe Islands ; a part of Faroese youth moves abroad to pursue higher education , mainly in Denmark . Other forms of education comprise adult education and music schools . The structure of the Faroese educational system bears resemblances with its Danish counterpart . 
 The main language of instruction up to the lower secondary school is Faroese , while Danish is the main language of instruction in upper secondary schools . Education in the Faroe Islands is administered and regulated by the Ministry of Education , Research and Culture ( Faroese : <unk> ) , with <unk> Dam being the minister since 15 September 2015 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Ministry of Education , Research and Culture has the jurisdiction of educational responsibility in the Faroe Islands . Since the Faroe Islands is a constituent country of the Danish Realm , education in the Faroe Islands is influenced and has similarities with the Danish educational system ; there is an agreement on educational cooperation between the Faroe Islands and Denmark . In 2012 the public spending on education was 8 @.@ 1 % of GDP . The municipalities are responsible for the school buildings for children 's education in Fólkaskúlin from age 1st grade to 9th or 10th grade ( age 7 to 16 ) . In November 2013 1 @,@ 615 people , or 6 @.@ 8 % of the total number of employees , were employed in the education sector . Of the 31 @,@ 270 people aged 25 and above 1 @,@ 717 ( 5 @.@ 5 % ) have gained at least a Master 's degree or a Ph.D. , 8 @,@ 428 ( 27 % ) have gained a B.Sc. or a Diploma , 11 @,@ 706 ( 37 @.@ 4 % ) have finished upper secondary education while 9 @,@ 419 ( 30 @.@ 1 % ) has only finished primary school and have no other education . There is no data on literacy in the Faroe Islands , but the CIA Factbook states that it is probably as high as in Denmark proper , i.e. 99 % . 
 The majority of students in upper secondary schools are women , although men represent the majority in higher education institutions . In addition , most young Faroese people who relocate to other countries to study are women . Out of 8 @,@ 535 holders of bachelor degrees , 4 @,@ 796 ( 56 @.@ 2 % ) have had their education in the Faroe Islands , 2 @,@ 724 ( 31 @.@ 9 % ) in Denmark , 543 in both the Faroe Islands and Denmark , 94 ( 1 @.@ 1 % ) in Norway 80 in the United Kingdom and the rest in other countries . Out of 1 @,@ 719 holders of master 's degrees or PhDs , 1 @,@ 249 ( 72 @.@ 7 % have had their education in Denmark , 87 ( 5 @.@ 1 % ) in the United Kingdom , 86 ( 5 % ) in both the Faroe Islands and Denmark , 64 ( 3 @.@ 7 % ) in the Faroe Islands , 60 ( 3 @.@ 5 % ) in Norway and the rest in other countries ( mostly EU and Nordic ) . Since there is no medical school in the Faroe Islands , all medical students have to study abroad ; as of 2013 , out of a total of 96 medical students , 76 studied in Denmark , 19 in Poland and 1 in Hungary . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Although the Faroese language is designated as the country 's principal language , the Home Rule Act of the Faroe Islands states that the Danish language " is to be learnt well and carefully " . Up to ninth grade , most school material is in Faroese ; there are Danish classes since third grade . In upper secondary education this pattern is reversed ; courses are taught in Danish , except the Faroese language courses . The Faroese language is taught 64 hours per week , overall , throughout compulsory education , while Danish is taught 29 hours per week ; exams in both languages are equal in length . English language courses start from 4th grade and they are taught for 60 hours annually at that grade , 90 hours in 5th grade , 120 hours in 6th , 7th , 8th and 9th grade ; pupils who chose to take the 10th grade have the option to get another 120 hours of English lessons . 
 = = History = = 
 In the Middle Ages there was education in <unk> offered by the Catholic Church . According to the <unk> saga , Sverre of Norway received schooling by Roe the bishop of Faroe Islands ; later speeches of his , show that he was taught Latin , a feature revealed by his knowledge of the Decretum Gratiani . The school in <unk> continued until the Protestant Reformation . After the reformation Latin Schools were established in the Danish kingdom , extending over today 's Denmark , Iceland , Greenland , Faroe Islands , Skåneland and Gotland in Sweden , and <unk> ( now Saaremaa ) in Estonia . The Latin School in the Faroe Islands is first mentioned in 1547 , in a letter to Thomas Koppen who got the Faroe Islands as a fief . 
 In 1870 the Faroese Teachers School ( Faroese : Føroya <unk> ) was established to offer training and qualification for teachers . The first maritime schools were founded as private institutions in Tórshavn in 1893 . The first Evening School was founded in 1904 , with joint financing by the <unk> and Denmark . In 1912 a Danish Royal decree established compulsory primary education , with the provision that teaching was in Danish . That decision led to tensions in education as Faroese teachers Louis <unk> and <unk> Dahl continued teaching in Faroese and were persecuted for doing so ; the issue was resolved in 1938 when Faroese was recognized as equal to Danish in Faroese schools . In 1927 the Danish government , upon the request of the Faroese parliament , established a public navigational school in Tórshavn , followed by a marine engineers school in 1929 . 
 The Faroese Nursing School was established in 1960 by the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs ; it traces its roots back in 1910 when nurses were trained in the hospital of Tórshavn . The University of the Faroe Islands , was established in 1965 ; Klaus H. Jacobsen , a Dane , was appointed as the first lecturer in 1970 to teach courses for the examen <unk> , a prerequisite at the time to pursue higher education in Denmark . After Denmark abandoned the examen <unk> in 1971 , on the initiative of Jacobsen and Kjartan <unk> the university accepted its first full @-@ time science students in the autumn of 1972 . Education in the Faroe Islands was administered by Denmark under the Home Rule Act , until in the late 1990s its administration was transferred to the Faroese government as a matter of local interest . 
 In 1979 responsibility on educational matters started transferring from Denmark to the Faroese authorities , with the Faroese government getting full economic responsibility of education in 1988 . By 1996 education became the responsibility of the Faroese government ; this procedure was completed in 2002 , preceded by the establishment of the Ministry of Education , Research and Culture . The administration of the Nursing School was passed to the Ministry of Education , Research and Culture in 2000 and the degree was recognized as a bachelor 's degree in 2003 . In 2005 the marine schools of navigation and engineering merged to form the Centre of Maritime Studies and Engineering . On 1 August 2008 the Faroese School of Education and the Faroese School of Nursing where incorporated into the University becoming its departments . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Primary and lower secondary education = = = 
 Compulsory education in the Faroe Islands is provided for nine years from the age of 7 to 16 . Primary education in the Faroe Islands commences at the beginning of the school year in the calendar year in which the child has reached the age of seven years . It is part of the compulsory education , and it lasts at least seven years , Primary education is provided by 51 Fólkaskúli and 3 Free Schools ; some of these Fólkaskúli also provide optional preschool education . In 2014 there were 5 @,@ 205 students attending primary education in the Faroe Islands . 
 Upon completion of the first seven years of primary education , students can continue their studies in lower secondary education in the 8th and 9th grade and if they wish to , they can also take the 10th year of Fólkaskúli . Two thirds of the pupils from the 9th grade chose to take the 10th grade of Fólkaskúlin also . Lower secondary education lasts two to three years and , as with primary education , it is provided by Fólkaskúli and is free of charge . The first two years are part of the compulsory education , while the third year is optional , though a prerequisite to continue to the upper high school . In 2014 there were 1 @,@ 932 students in lower secondary education . 
 The final examination from the Fólkaskúli gives access to upper secondary education like " Studentaskúlin " , " <unk> " or other similar secondary schools which takes three years or ( Higher Preparatory Examination ( HF ) ) which takes two years . It also gives access to the one year FHS <unk> from Føroya Handilsskúli ( Faroese business college ) or the 3 @-@ year secondary education <unk> ( Economy secondary school ) from Føroya Handilsskúli . 
 = = = Upper secondary education = = = 
 Upper secondary education is offered by eight schools that offer five different type of courses . The Studentaskúli is an academically oriented three @-@ year @-@ long school . Upon completion students can apply for admission in higher education institutions . This type of education is offered at three schools : Føroya Studentaskúli og HF @-@ <unk> in Tórshavn , Studentaskúlin og HF @-@ <unk> í <unk> in Kambsdalur and <unk> í Suðuroy in Suðuroy . Another type of upper secondary education is HF , which is a 2 @-@ year academically oriented course for adults , that is offered at Føroya Studentaskúli og HF @-@ <unk> and Studentaskúlin og HF @-@ <unk> í <unk> . The Business College ( Faroese : Føroya Handilsskúli ) , also called FHS , offers a three @-@ year <unk> and its completion allows its alumni to continue to higher education . It is also possible to take a one @-@ year education from the Business College . There are two Business Colleges , one in Tórshavn and one Kambsdalur . The Technical college ( Faroese : <unk> <unk> ) offers courses on several technical fields along with apprenticeship . It is offered in two schools , one in Tórshavn and one in Klaksvík . Its alumni can pursuit higher education in technical sciences or take higher education courses of the Technical College . The Fisheries College ( Faroese : <unk> ) in Vestmanna . It focuses in the fishing industry and food science and upon its completion students can continue in higher education studies related to the fishing industry . 
 = = = Vocational education = = = 
 = = = = Maritime education = = = = 
 There are two vocational maritime schools in the Faroe Islands : The Centre of Maritime Studies and Engineering ( Faroese : Vinnuháskúlin ) in Tórshavn and the <unk> Maritime School ( Faroese : <unk> ) in Klaksvík . 
 Vinnuháskúlin offers three @-@ year studies to become a shipmaster or a marine engineer , in addition to shorter versions of these , while it also offers a one and a half @-@ year studies to become a captain and individual marine courses . In 2010 100 % of the graduates for skipper , shipmaster , machinist and marine engineer were men . All graduates from Vinnuháskúlin in June 2015 were men . 
 <unk> in Klaksvík offers a 1 ½ year shipmaster education , which qualifies its alumni to be either First Officer or Captain on merchant ships up to 3000 gross tonnage . In order to get access to the education , the applicants must fulfill the terms according to Ship Master Law ( <unk> um <unk> ) number 107 of 20 September 2005 , i.e. the applicants must have experience from working on board a ship which is at least 20 gross tonnage for at least 36 month , of which at least 18 months should be from a lager vessel of at least 200 gross tonnage . They should also have finished the nine years of compulsory primary and lower secondary school with at least " passed " results in Faroese , Danish , English , physics , chemistry and math . 
 <unk> also offers a shorter maritime education of six months . It is a ship assistant education ( Faroese : <unk> ) which provides the students to be able to perform all kinds of work on deck and in the engine room on board a ship . The applicants must be at least 17 and a half years old and must have completed the 9 years of Fólkaskúlin . The applicants must also have a health certificate for seamen . This education together with 9 months which are required for becoming an able @-@ bodied seaman , qualifies the alumni for the 1 ½ year long shipmaster education . 
 = = = = Public Health School = = = = 
 The Public Faroese Health School ( Faroese : <unk> Føroya ) in Suðuroy is a vocational school offering two types of education . The health care assistant education ( <unk> ) takes fifteen months . Following graduation , pupils can choose to leave the school and work in home care and retirement homes . Alternatively they can continue with another 22 months and become an assistant nurse ( <unk> ) . The assistant nurse can work in various places , mostly in retirement homes or hospitals . The graduates from the Health School are mainly women . In 2012 almost 90 % of the School 's graduates were women . 
 = = = Other schools = = = 
 The Faroe Music School ( Faroese : <unk> ) runs fourteen institutions around the islands that are responsible for teaching music in the Faroe Islands . The pupils pay between 1 @,@ 200 and 1 @,@ 600 DKK each year in order to get lessons , the price depends on which municipality the pupil lives in . In Tórshavn there are classes , called <unk> , for children up to 6 years costing 600 DKK for a year ; it also offers a three @-@ year musical education program in Tórshavn , which is a middle @-@ range training for Faroese people aged 14 to 25 , costing 2 @,@ 400 DKK annually and admitting up to 8 pupils a year . 
 The Evening School ( Faroese : <unk> or <unk> ) , offers a variety of courses for everyone and Faroese language lessons for foreigners . Courses range from handicraft , music lessons , foreign languages to swimming . The courses are offered by the municipalities , with 50 % of the teachers ' wages paid by them and the rest paid by the Ministry of Culture and Education ; the Ministry of Culture pays 100 % of the wages in cases of disabled people . 
 Additionally there are the School of Home Economics ( Faroese : <unk> Føroya ) and the Folk High School ( Faroese : Føroya <unk> ) offering half @-@ year courses in food and diet , hygiene , sowing , embroidering and humanities , arts and creative subjects respectively . 
 = = = Higher education = = = 
 Higher education in the Faroe Islands is mainly undertaken by the University of the Faroe Islands , a public research university granting academic degrees . Individual higher education courses are offered by The Business School . Many Faroese pursue higher education out of the islands , mainly in Denmark ; in August 2015 a report showed 1 @,@ 345 Faroese students in Denmark , 904 in the Faroe Islands and 182 in other countries . <unk> , the Faroese Student Grant Fund , provides student grants and loans to Faroese students , to study either in the Faroe Islands or abroad . 
 = = = = University of the Faroe Islands = = = = 
 Higher education is offered by the , Tórshavn based , University of the Faroe Islands ( Faroese : <unk> Føroya ) . It was founded in 1965 , as Academia <unk> , by members of the Faroese Academy of Sciences . The university is divided in two faculties : the Faculty of Humanities , Social Sciences and Education and the Faculty of Natural and Health Sciences , offering several B.Sc. degrees , M.Sc. degrees and <unk> It is publicly funded and in 2010 it received approximately 68 million DKK . Admission requirements include taking the upper secondary school leaving examination . Specific departments could place additional requirements , e.g. in 2015 the Software Engineering department required a grade of 6 / 13 in mathematics . 
 = = = = Higher education from the Business School = = = = 
 It is possible to take individual higher education courses in Commerce from the Business School in Kambsdalur and in Tórshavn . The alumni can work at the same time and take one course each semester . After three years they will have achieved 60 <unk> which is the same as the first part of the HD education . They can also take the second part of the HD education from the Business College , and they can also combine it with courses from the Aarhus University via distant education . If they wish to study further for at MBA they must take it from a university in Denmark , i.e. the Aarhus University . 
 = = = = Research = = = = 
 Research in the Faroe Islands is administered by the Faroese Research Council ( Faroese : <unk> ) . Each year the Parliament of the Faroe Islands allocates money to the Faroese Research Foundation , and it is the Faroese Research Council that decides its recipients . From 2002 to 2012 the Research Foundation had received over 70 million DKK . Research is conducted by several governmental institutions ( i.e. museums , laboratories , hospitals , marine institutes ) and the University of the Faroe Islands . 
 = Battle of Waterloo = 
 The Battle of Waterloo was fought on Sunday , 18 June 1815 , near Waterloo in present @-@ day Belgium , then part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands . A French army under the command of Napoleon Bonaparte was defeated by two of the armies of the Seventh Coalition : an Anglo @-@ led Allied army under the command of the Duke of Wellington , and a Prussian army under the command of Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher , Prince of <unk> . The battle resulted in the end of Bonaparte 's reign and of the First French Empire , and set a chronological milestone between serial European wars and decades of relative peace . 
 Upon Napoleon 's return to power in March 1815 , many states that had opposed him formed the Seventh Coalition and began to mobilize armies . Wellington and Blücher 's armies were <unk> close to the north @-@ eastern border of France . Napoleon chose to attack them in the hope of destroying them before they could join in a coordinated invasion of France with other members of the coalition . Waterloo was the decisive engagement of the Waterloo Campaign and Napoleon 's last . According to Wellington , the battle was " the nearest @-@ run thing you ever saw in your life " . The defeat at Waterloo ended Napoleon 's rule as Emperor of the French , and marked the end of his Hundred Days return from exile . Napoleon abdicated 4 days later , and on 7 July coalition forces entered Paris . 
 After the Battle of Quatre Bras , Wellington withdrew from Quatre Bras to Waterloo . After the simultaneous Battle of Ligny the Prussians withdrew parallel to Wellington , drawing a third part of Napoleon 's forces away from Waterloo to the separate and simultaneous Battle of Wavre . Upon learning that the Prussian army was able to support him , Wellington decided to offer battle on the Mont @-@ Saint @-@ Jean escarpment , across the Brussels road . Here he withstood repeated attacks by the French throughout the afternoon , aided by the progressively arriving Prussians . In the evening Napoleon committed his last reserves to a desperate final attack , which was narrowly beaten back . With the Prussians breaking through on the French right flank Wellington 's Anglo @-@ allied army counter @-@ attacked in the centre , and the French army was routed . 
 The battlefield is located in the municipalities of Braine @-@ l 'Alleud and <unk> , about 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) south of Brussels , and about 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from the town of Waterloo . The site of the battlefield today is dominated by a large monument , the Lion 's Mound . As this mound was constructed from earth taken from the battlefield itself , the contemporary topography of the battlefield near the mound has not been preserved . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 On 13 March 1815 , six days before Napoleon reached Paris , the powers at the Congress of Vienna declared him an outlaw . Four days later , the United Kingdom , Russia , Austria , and Prussia mobilised armies to defeat Napoleon . Critically outnumbered , Napoleon knew that once his attempts at dissuading one or more of the Seventh Coalition allies from invading France had failed , his only chance of remaining in power was to attack before the coalition mobilised . 
 Had Napoleon succeeded in destroying the existing coalition forces south of Brussels before they were reinforced , he might have been able to drive the British back to the sea , knock the Prussians out of the war , and then turn his armies towards the Austrians and Russians . An additional consideration was that there were many French @-@ speaking sympathisers in Belgium and a French victory might trigger a friendly revolution there . Also , the British troops in Belgium were largely second @-@ line troops ; most of the veterans of the Peninsular War had been sent to North America to fight in the War of 1812 . 
 Wellington 's initial dispositions were intended to counter the threat of Napoleon enveloping the Coalition armies by moving through Mons to the south @-@ west of Brussels . This would have cut Wellington 's communications with his base at Ostend , but would have pushed his army closer to Blücher 's . Napoleon manipulated Wellington 's fear of this loss of his supply chain from the channel ports with false intelligence . 
 By June , Napoleon had raised a total army strength of about 300 @,@ 000 men . The force at his disposal at Waterloo was less than one third that size , but they were nearly all loyal and experienced soldiers . He divided his army into a left wing commanded by Marshal Ney , a right wing commanded by Marshal Grouchy and a reserve under his command ( although all three elements remained close enough to support one another ) . Crossing the frontier near Charleroi before dawn on 15 June , the French rapidly overran Coalition outposts , securing Napoleon 's " central position " between Wellington 's and Blücher 's armies . 
 Only very late on the night of 15 June was Wellington certain that the Charleroi attack was the main French thrust . In the early hours of 16 June , at the Duchess of Richmond 's ball in Brussels , he received a dispatch from the Prince of Orange and was shocked by the speed of Napoleon 's advance . He hastily ordered his army to concentrate on Quatre Bras , where the Prince of Orange , with the brigade of Prince Bernhard of Saxe @-@ Weimar , was holding a tenuous position against the soldiers of Ney 's left wing . Ney 's orders were to secure the crossroads of Quatre Bras , so that , if necessary , he could later swing east and reinforce Napoleon . 
 Napoleon moved against the concentrated Prussian army first . On 16 June , with a part of the reserve and the right wing of the army , he attacked and defeated Blücher 's Prussians at the Battle of Ligny . The Prussian centre gave way under more heavy French assaults but the flanks held their ground . Ney , meanwhile , found the crossroads of Quatre Bras lightly held by the Prince of Orange , who repelled Ney 's initial attacks but was gradually driven back by overwhelming numbers of French troops . First reinforcements and then Wellington arrived . He took command and drove Ney back , securing the crossroads by early evening , too late to send help to the Prussians , who were defeated at the Battle of Ligny on the same day . The Prussian defeat made Wellington 's position at Quatre Bras untenable , so the next day he withdrew northwards , to a defensive position he had reconnoitred the previous year — the low ridge of Mont @-@ Saint @-@ Jean , south of the village of Waterloo and the <unk> Forest . 
 The Prussian retreat from Ligny went uninterrupted and seemingly unnoticed by the French . The bulk of their rearguard units held their positions until about midnight and some elements did not move out until the following morning , ignored by the French . Crucially , the Prussians did not retreat to the east , along their own lines of communication . Instead , they too fell back northwards — parallel to Wellington 's line of march , still within supporting distance and in communication with him throughout . The Prussians rallied on Bülow 's IV Corps , which had not been engaged at Ligny and was in a strong position south of Wavre . 
 Once he had intelligence of the Prussian defeat , Wellington organised a retreat from Quatre Bras to Waterloo . Napoleon , with the reserves , made a late start on 17 June and joined Ney at Quatre Bras at 13 : 00 to attack Wellington 's army but found the position empty . The French pursued Wellington 's retreating army all the way to Waterloo , however due to weather and the head start that Napoleon 's tardy advance had allowed Wellington , apart from a cavalry action at Genappe there was no other substantial engagement . 
 Before leaving Ligny , Napoleon ordered Grouchy , commander of the right wing , to follow up the retreating Prussians with 33 @,@ 000 men . A late start , uncertainty about the direction the Prussians had taken and the vagueness of the orders given to him meant that Grouchy was too late to prevent the Prussian army reaching Wavre , from where it could march to support Wellington . By the end of 17 June , Wellington 's army had arrived at its position at Waterloo , with the main body of Napoleon 's army following . Blücher 's army was gathering in and around Wavre , around 8 miles ( 13 km ) to the east of the city . 
 = = Armies = = 
 Three armies were involved in the battle : Napoleon 's Armée du Nord ; a multinational army under Wellington ; and a Prussian army under Blücher . 
 The French army of around 69 @,@ 000 consisted of 48 @,@ 000 infantry , 14 @,@ 000 cavalry , and 7 @,@ 000 artillery with 250 guns . Napoleon had used conscription to fill the ranks of the French army throughout his rule , but he did not conscript men for the 1815 campaign . His troops were mainly veterans with considerable experience and a fierce devotion to their Emperor . The cavalry in particular was both numerous and formidable , and included fourteen regiments of armoured heavy cavalry and seven of highly versatile lancers . 
 Wellington claimed that he himself had " an infamous army , very weak and ill @-@ equipped , and a very inexperienced Staff " . His troops consisted of 67 @,@ 000 men : 50 @,@ 000 infantry , 11 @,@ 000 cavalry , and 6 @,@ 000 artillery with 150 guns . Of these , 25 @,@ 000 were British , with another 6 @,@ 000 from the King 's German Legion ( KGL ) . All of the British Army troops were regular soldiers but only 7 @,@ 000 of them were Peninsular War veterans . In addition , there were 17 @,@ 000 Dutch and Belgian troops , 11 @,@ 000 from Hanover , 6 @,@ 000 from Brunswick , and 3 @,@ 000 from Nassau . 
 Many of the troops in the Coalition armies were inexperienced . The Dutch army had been re @-@ established in 1815 , following the earlier defeat of Napoleon . With the exception of the British and some from Hanover and Brunswick who had fought with the British army in Spain , many of the professional soldiers in the Coalition armies had spent some of their time in the French army or in armies allied to the Napoleonic regime . The historian Barbero states that in this heterogeneous army the difference between British and foreign troops did not prove significant under fire . 
 Wellington was also acutely short of heavy cavalry , having only seven British and three Dutch regiments . The Duke of York imposed many of his staff officers on Wellington , including his second @-@ in @-@ command the Earl of Uxbridge . Uxbridge commanded the cavalry and had carte blanche from Wellington to commit these forces at his discretion . Wellington stationed a further 17 @,@ 000 troops at Halle , 8 miles ( 13 km ) away to the west . They were not recalled to participate in the battle but were to serve as a fallback position should the battle be lost . They were mostly composed of Dutch troops under Prince of Orange 's younger brother Prince Frederick of the Netherlands . They were placed as a guard against any possible wide flanking movement by the French forces , and also to act as a rearguard if Wellington was forced to retreat towards Antwerp and the coast . According to <unk> , the best Dutch troops were at Halle and he questions the reasons for their placement . 
 The Prussian army was in the throes of reorganisation . In 1815 , the former Reserve regiments , Legions , and Freikorps volunteer formations from the wars of 1813 – 1814 were in the process of being absorbed into the line , along with many Landwehr ( militia ) regiments . The Landwehr were mostly untrained and unequipped when they arrived in Belgium . The Prussian cavalry were in a similar state . Its artillery was also reorganising and did not give its best performance – guns and equipment continued to arrive during and after the battle . 
 Off @-@ setting these handicaps the Prussian Army had excellent and professional leadership in its General Staff organisation . These officers came from four schools developed for this purpose and thus worked to a common standard of training . This system was in marked contrast to the conflicting , vague orders issued by the French army . This staff system ensured that before Ligny , three @-@ quarters of the Prussian army concentrated for battle at 24 hours notice . 
 After Ligny , the Prussian army , although defeated , was able to realign its supply train , reorganise itself , and intervene decisively on the Waterloo battlefield within 48 hours . Two and a half Prussian army corps , or 48 @,@ 000 men , were engaged at Waterloo ; two brigades under Bülow , commander of IV Corps , attacked Lobau at 16 : 30 , while Zieten 's I Corps and parts of Pirch I 's II Corps engaged at about 18 : 00 . 
 = = Battlefield = = 
 The Waterloo position was a strong one . It consisted of a long ridge running east @-@ west , perpendicular to , and bisected by , the main road to Brussels . Along the crest of the ridge ran the Ohain road , a deep sunken lane . Near the crossroads with the Brussels road was a large elm tree that was roughly in the centre of Wellington 's position and served as his command post for much of the day . Wellington deployed his infantry in a line just behind the crest of the ridge following the Ohain road . 
 Using the reverse slope , as he had many times previously , Wellington concealed his strength from the French , with the exception of his skirmishers and artillery . The length of front of the battlefield was also relatively short at 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) . This allowed Wellington to draw up his forces in depth , which he did in the centre and on the right , all the way towards the village of Braine @-@ l 'Alleud , in the expectation that the Prussians would reinforce his left during the day . 
 In front of the ridge , there were three positions that could be fortified . On the extreme right were the château , garden , and orchard of Hougoumont . This was a large and well @-@ built country house , initially hidden in trees . The house faced north along a sunken , covered lane ( usually described by the British as " the hollow @-@ way " ) along which it could be supplied . On the extreme left was the hamlet of Papelotte . 
 Both Hougoumont and Papelotte were fortified and garrisoned , and thus anchored Wellington 's flanks securely . Papelotte also commanded the road to Wavre that the Prussians would use to send reinforcements to Wellington 's position . On the western side of the main road , and in front of the rest of Wellington 's line , was the farmhouse and orchard of La Haye Sainte , which was garrisoned with 400 light infantry of the King 's German Legion . 
 On the opposite side of the road was a disused sand quarry , where the 95th Rifles were posted as sharpshooters . This position presented a formidable challenge to any attacking force . Any attempt to turn Wellington 's right would entail taking the entrenched Hougoumont position . Any attack on his right centre would mean the attackers would have to march between enfilading fire from Hougoumont and La Haye Sainte . On the left , any attack would also be enfiladed by fire from La Haye Sainte and its adjoining sandpit , and any attempt at turning the left flank would entail fighting through the lanes and hedgerows surrounding Papelotte and the other garrisoned buildings on that flank , and some very wet ground in the Smohain defile . 
 The French army formed on the slopes of another ridge to the south . Napoleon could not see Wellington 's positions , so he drew his forces up symmetrically about the Brussels road . On the right was I Corps under d 'Erlon with 16 @,@ 000 infantry and 1 @,@ 500 cavalry , plus a cavalry reserve of 4 @,@ 700 . On the left was II Corps under Reille with 13 @,@ 000 infantry , and 1 @,@ 300 cavalry , and a cavalry reserve of 4 @,@ 600 . In the centre about the road south of the inn La Belle Alliance were a reserve including Lobau 's VI Corps with 6 @,@ 000 men , the 13 @,@ 000 infantry of the Imperial Guard , and a cavalry reserve of 2 @,@ 000 . 
 In the right rear of the French position was the substantial village of Plancenoit , and at the extreme right , the Bois de Paris wood . Napoleon initially commanded the battle from <unk> farm , where he could see the entire battlefield , but moved to a position near La Belle Alliance early in the afternoon . Command on the battlefield ( which was largely hidden from his view ) was delegated to Ney . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 Wellington rose at around 02 : 00 or 03 : 00 on 18 June , and wrote letters until dawn . He had earlier written to Blücher confirming that he would give battle at Mont @-@ Saint @-@ Jean if Blücher could provide him with at least one corps ; otherwise he would retreat towards Brussels . At a late @-@ night council , Blücher 's chief of staff , August Neidhardt von Gneisenau , had been distrustful of Wellington 's strategy , but Blücher persuaded him that they should march to join Wellington 's army . In the morning Wellington duly received a reply from Blücher , promising to support him with three corps . 
 From 06 : 00 Wellington was in the field supervising the deployment of his forces . At Wavre , the Prussian IV Corps under Bülow was designated to lead the march to Waterloo as it was in the best shape , not having been involved in the Battle of Ligny . Although they had not taken casualties , IV Corps had been marching for two days , covering the retreat of the three other corps of the Prussian army from the battlefield of Ligny . They had been posted farthest away from the battlefield , and progress was very slow . The roads were in poor condition after the night 's heavy rain , and Bülow 's men had to pass through the congested streets of Wavre and move 88 artillery pieces . Matters were not helped when a fire broke out in Wavre , blocking several streets along Bülow 's intended route . As a result , the last part of the corps left at 10 : 00 , six hours after the leading elements had moved out towards Waterloo . Bülow 's men were followed to Waterloo first by I Corps and then by II Corps . 
 Napoleon breakfasted off silver plate at Le Caillou , the house where he had spent the night . When Soult suggested that Grouchy should be recalled to join the main force , Napoleon said , " Just because you have all been beaten by Wellington , you think he 's a good general . I tell you Wellington is a bad general , the English are bad troops , and this affair is nothing more than eating breakfast " . 
 Napoleon 's surprisingly dismissive statements should not be taken at face value , given the Emperor 's maxim that " in war , morale is everything " and that praising the enemy is always wrong , as it reduces one 's morale . Indeed , he had been seen engaging in such pre @-@ battle , morale @-@ boosting harangues on a number of occasions in the past and on the morning of the battle of Waterloo he had to deal with his chief of staff 's pessimism and nervousness and had to respond to several persistent and almost defeatist objections from some of his senior generals . 
 Later on , being told by his brother , Jerome , of some gossip overheard by a waiter between British officers at lunch at the ' King of Spain ' inn in Genappe that the Prussians were to march over from Wavre , Napoleon declared that the Prussians would need at least two days to recover and would be dealt with by Grouchy . Surprisingly , Jerome 's overheard gossip aside , the French commanders present at the pre @-@ battle conference at Le Caillou had no information about the alarming proximity of the Prussians and did not suspect that Blücher 's men would start erupting onto the field of battle in great numbers just five hours later . 
 Napoleon had delayed the start of the battle owing to the sodden ground , which would have made manoeuvring cavalry and artillery difficult . In addition , many of his forces had bivouacked well to the south of La Belle Alliance . At 10 : 00 , in response to a dispatch he had received from Grouchy six hours earlier , he sent a reply telling Grouchy to " head for Wavre [ to Grouchy 's north ] in order to draw near to us [ to the west of Grouchy ] " and then " push before him " the Prussians to arrive at Waterloo " as soon as possible " . 
 At 11 : 00 , Napoleon drafted his general order : Reille 's Corps on the left and d 'Erlon 's Corps to the right were to attack the village of Mont @-@ Saint @-@ Jean and keep abreast of one another . This order assumed Wellington 's battle @-@ line was in the village , rather than at the more forward position on the ridge . To enable this , Jerome 's division would make an initial attack on Hougoumont , which Napoleon expected would draw in Wellington 's reserves , since its loss would threaten his communications with the sea . A grande batterie of the reserve artillery of I , II , and VI Corps was to then bombard the centre of Wellington 's position from about 13 : 00 . D 'Erlon 's corps would then attack Wellington 's left , break through , and roll up his line from east to west . In his memoirs , Napoleon wrote that his intention was to separate Wellington 's army from the Prussians and drive it back towards the sea . 
 = = = Hougoumont = = = 
 The historian Andrew Roberts notes that " It is a curious fact about the Battle of Waterloo that no one is absolutely certain when it actually began " . Wellington recorded in his dispatches that at " about ten o 'clock [ Napoleon ] commenced a furious attack upon our post at Hougoumont " . Other sources state that the attack began around 11 : 30 . The house and its immediate environs were defended by four light companies of Guards , and the wood and park by Hanoverian Jäger and the 1 / 2nd Nassau . 
 The initial attack by Bauduin 's brigade emptied the wood and park , but was driven back by heavy British artillery fire , and cost Bauduin his life . As the British guns were distracted by a duel with French artillery , a second attack by <unk> 's brigade and what had been Bauduin 's succeeded in reaching the north gate of the house . Sous @-@ Lieutenant Legros , a French officer , broke the gate open with an axe . Some French troops managed to enter the courtyard . The 2nd Coldstream Guards and 2 / 3rd Foot Guards arrived to help . There was a fierce melee , and the British managed to close the gate on the French troops streaming in . The Frenchmen trapped in the courtyard were all killed . Only a young drummer boy was spared . 
 Fighting continued around Hougoumont all afternoon . Its surroundings were heavily invested by French light infantry , and coordinated attacks were made against the troops behind Hougoumont . Wellington 's army defended the house and the hollow way running north from it . In the afternoon , Napoleon personally ordered the house to be shelled to set it on fire , resulting in the destruction of all but the chapel . Du Plat 's brigade of the King 's German Legion was brought forward to defend the hollow way , which they had to do without senior officers . Eventually they were relieved by the 71st Foot , a British infantry regiment . Adam 's brigade was further reinforced by Hugh Halkett 's 3rd Hanoverian Brigade , and successfully repulsed further infantry and cavalry attacks sent by Reille . Hougoumont held out until the end of the battle . 
 I had occupied that post with a detachment from General Byng 's brigade of Guards , which was in position in its rear ; and it was some time under the command of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel MacDonald , and afterwards of Colonel Home ; and I am happy to add that it was maintained , throughout the day , with the utmost gallantry by these brave troops , notwithstanding the repeated efforts of large bodies of the enemy to obtain possession of it . 
 When I reached Lloyd 's abandoned guns , I stood near them for about a minute to contemplate the scene : it was grand beyond description . Hougoumont and its wood sent up a broad flame through the dark masses of smoke that overhung the field ; beneath this cloud the French were indistinctly visible . Here a waving mass of long red feathers could be seen ; there , gleams as from a sheet of steel showed that the cuirassiers were moving ; 400 cannon were belching forth fire and death on every side ; the roaring and shouting were indistinguishably <unk> — together they gave me an idea of a labouring volcano . Bodies of infantry and cavalry were pouring down on us , and it was time to leave contemplation , so I moved towards our columns , which were standing up in square . 
 The fighting at Hougoumont has often been characterised as a diversionary attack to draw in Wellington 's reserves which escalated into an all @-@ day battle and drew in French reserves instead . In fact there is a good case to believe that both Napoleon and Wellington thought that holding Hougoumont was key to winning the battle . Hougoumont was a part of the battlefield that Napoleon could see clearly , and he continued to direct resources towards it and its surroundings all afternoon ( 33 battalions in all , 14 @,@ 000 troops ) . Similarly , though the house never contained a large number of troops , Wellington devoted 21 battalions ( 12 @,@ 000 troops ) over the course of the afternoon in keeping the hollow way open to allow fresh troops and ammunition to reach the buildings . He moved several artillery batteries from his hard @-@ pressed centre to support Hougoumont , and later stated that " the success of the battle turned upon closing the gates at Hougoumont " . 
 = = = First French infantry attack = = = 
 The 80 guns of Napoleon 's grande batterie drew up in the centre . These opened fire at 11 : 50 , according to Lord Hill ( commander of the Anglo @-@ allied II Corps ) , while other sources put the time between noon and 13 : 30 . The grande batterie was too far back to aim accurately , and the only other troops they could see were skirmishers of the regiments of Kempt and Pack , and <unk> 's 2nd Dutch division ( the others were employing Wellington 's characteristic " reverse slope defence " ) . Nevertheless , the bombardment caused a large number of casualties . Though some projectiles buried themselves in the soft soil , most found their marks on the reverse slope of the ridge . The bombardment forced the cavalry of the Union Brigade ( in third line ) to move to its left , as did the Scots Greys , to reduce their casualty rate . 
 At about 13 : 00 , Napoleon saw the first columns of Prussians around the village of <unk> @-@ Chapelle @-@ Saint @-@ Lambert , four or five miles ( three hours march for an army ) away from his right flank . Napoleon 's reaction was to have Marshal Soult send a message to Grouchy telling him to come towards the battlefield and attack the arriving Prussians . Grouchy , however , had been executing Napoleon 's previous orders to follow the Prussians " with your sword against his back " towards Wavre , and was by then too far away to reach Waterloo . Grouchy was advised by his subordinate , Gérard , to " march to the sound of the guns " , but stuck to his orders and engaged the Prussian III Corps rear guard under the command of Lieutenant @-@ General Baron Johann von Thielmann at the Battle of Wavre . Moreover , Soult 's letter ordering Grouchy to move quickly to join Napoleon and attack Bülow would not actually reach Grouchy until after 20 : 00 . 
 A little after 13 : 00 , I Corps ' attack began . D 'Erlon , like Ney , had encountered Wellington in Spain , and was aware of the British commander 's favoured tactic of using massed short @-@ range musketry to drive off infantry columns . Rather than use the usual nine @-@ deep French columns deployed abreast of one another , therefore , each division advanced in closely spaced battalion lines behind one another . This allowed them to concentrate their fire , but it did not leave room for them to change formation . 
 The formation was initially effective . Its leftmost division , under François @-@ Xavier Donzelot , advanced on La Haye Sainte . The farmhouse was defended by the King 's German Legion . While one French battalion engaged the defenders from the front , the following battalions fanned out to either side and , with the support of several squadrons of cuirassiers , succeeded in isolating the farmhouse . The King 's German Legion resolutely defended the farmhouse . Each time the French tried to scale the walls the outnumbered Germans somehow held them off . The Prince of Orange saw that La Haye Sainte had been cut off and tried to reinforce it by sending forward the Hanoverian <unk> Battalion in line . Cuirassiers concealed in a fold in the ground caught and destroyed it in minutes and then rode on past La Haye Sainte , almost to the crest of the ridge , where they covered d 'Erlon 's left flank as his attack developed . 
 At about 13 : 30 , d 'Erlon started to advance his three other divisions , some 14 @,@ 000 men over a front of about 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 100 yards ) , against Wellington 's left wing . At the point they aimed for they faced 6 @,@ 000 men : the first line consisted of the Dutch 1st " Brigade van Bylandt " of the 2nd Dutch division , flanked by the British brigades of Kempt and Pack on either side . The second line consisted of British and Hanoverian troops under Sir Thomas Picton , who were lying down in dead ground behind the ridge . All had suffered badly at Quatre Bras . In addition , the <unk> brigade had been ordered to deploy its skirmishers in the hollow road and on the forward slope . The rest of the brigade was lying down just behind the road . 
 At the moment these skirmishers were rejoining their parent battalions , the brigade was ordered to its feet and started to return fire . On the left of the brigade , where the 7th Dutch Militia stood , a " few files were shot down and an opening in the line thus occurred " . The battalion had no reserves and was unable to close the gap . D 'Erlon 's troops pushed through this gap in the line and the remaining battalions in the Bylandt brigade ( 8th Dutch Militia and Belgian 7th Line Battalion ) were forced to retreat to the square of the 5th Dutch Militia , which was in reserve between Picton 's troops , about 100 paces to the rear . There they regrouped under the command of Colonel Van Zuylen van <unk> . A moment later the Prince of Orange ordered a counterattack , which actually occurred around 10 minutes later . Bylandt was wounded and retired off the field , passing command of the brigade to Lt. Kol . De Jongh . 
 D 'Erlon 's men ascended the slope and advanced on the sunken road , Chemin d <unk> , that ran from behind La Haye Sainte and continued east . It was lined on both sides by thick hedges , with Bylandt 's brigade just across the road while the British brigades had been lying down some 100 yards back from the road , Pack 's to Bylandt 's left and Kempt 's to Bylandt 's right . Kempt 's 1 @,@ 900 men were engaged by Bourgeois ' brigade of 1 @,@ 900 men of <unk> 's division . In the centre , Donzelot 's division had pushed back Bylandt 's brigade . On the right of the French advance was <unk> 's division led by Grenier 's brigade consisting of the 45e Régiment de Ligne and followed by the 25e Régiment de Ligne , somewhat less than 2 @,@ 000 men , and behind them , <unk> 's brigade of the <unk> and 45e regiments . Opposing them on the other side of the road was Pack 's 9th Brigade consisting of three Scottish regiments : the Royal Scots , the 42nd Black Watch , the 92nd Gordons and the 44th Foot totaling something over 2 @,@ 000 men . A very even fight between British and French infantry was about to occur . 
 The French advance drove in the British skirmishers and reached the sunken road . As they did so , Pack 's men stood up , formed into a four deep line formation for fear of the French cavalry , advanced , and opened fire . However , a firefight had been anticipated and the French infantry had accordingly advanced in more linear formation . Now , fully deployed into line , they returned fire and successfully pressed the British troops ; although the attack faltered at the centre , the line in front of d 'Erlon 's right started to crumble . Picton was killed shortly after ordering the counter @-@ attack and the British and Hanoverian troops also began to give way under the pressure of numbers . Pack 's regiments , all four ranks deep , advanced to attack the French in the road but faltered and began to fire on the French instead of charging . The 42nd Black Watch halted at the hedge and the resulting fire @-@ fight drove back the British 92nd Foot while the leading French 45e Ligne burst through the hedge cheering . Along the sunken road , the French were forcing the Allies back , the British line was dispersing , and at two o 'clock in the afternoon Napoleon was winning the Battle of Waterloo . 
 = = = Charge of the British heavy cavalry = = = 
 Our officers of cavalry have acquired a trick of galloping at everything . They never consider the situation , never think of manoeuvring before an enemy , and never keep back or provide a reserve . 
 At this crucial juncture , Uxbridge ordered his two brigades of British heavy cavalry — formed unseen behind the ridge — to charge in support of the hard @-@ pressed infantry . The 1st Brigade , known as the Household Brigade , commanded by Major @-@ General Lord Edward Somerset , consisted of guards regiments : the 1st and 2nd Life Guards , the Royal Horse Guards ( the Blues ) , and the 1st ( King 's ) Dragoon Guards . The 2nd Brigade , also known as the Union Brigade , commanded by Major @-@ General Sir William Ponsonby , was so called as it consisted of an English , the 1st ( The Royals ) ; a Scottish , 2nd ( ' Scots Greys ' ) ; and an Irish , 6th ( Inniskilling ) ; regiment of heavy dragoons . 
 More than 20 years of warfare had eroded the numbers of suitable cavalry mounts available on the European continent ; this resulted in the British heavy cavalry entering the 1815 campaign with the finest horses of any contemporary cavalry arm . British cavalry troopers also received excellent mounted swordsmanship training . They were , however , inferior to the French in manoeuvring in large formations , cavalier in attitude , and unlike the infantry some units had scant experience of warfare . The Scots Greys , for example , had not been in action since 1795 . According to Wellington , though they were superior individual horsemen , they were inflexible and lacked tactical ability . " I considered one squadron a match for two French , I didn 't like to see four British opposed to four French : and as the numbers increased and order , of course , became more necessary I was the more unwilling to risk our men without having a superiority in numbers " . 
