 Regional differences in culture brought about different types of foods , while in certain areas the cooking traditions of regional cultures blended together ; such was the case of the Southern Song capital at Hangzhou . After the mass exodus from the north , people brought Henan @-@ style cooking and foods ( popular in the previous Northern Song capital at Kaifeng ) to Hangzhou , which was blended with the cooking traditions of Zhejiang . However , records indicate that already in the Northern Song period , the first capital at Kaifeng sported restaurants that served southern Chinese cuisine . This catered to capital officials whose native provinces were in the southeast , and would have found northern cuisine lacking in sufficient seasoning for their tastes . In fact , texts from the Song era provide the first use of the phrases <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> to refer specifically to northern , southern , and Sichuan cooking , respectively . Many restaurants were known for their specialties ; for example , there was one restaurant in Hangzhou that served only iced foods , while some restaurants catered to those who wanted either hot , warm , room temperature , or cold foods . Descendants of those from Kaifeng owned most of the restaurants found in Hangzhou , but many other regional varieties in foodstuffs and cooking were sponsored by restaurants . This included restaurants catering Sichuan cuisine that emphasized use of pepper , dishes and beverages from Hebei and Shandong , and coastal foods of shrimp and saltwater fish . The memory and patience of waiters had to be keen ; in the larger restaurants , serving dinner parties that required twenty or so dishes became a hassle if even a slight error occurred . If a guest reported the mistake of a waiter to the head of the restaurant , the waiter could be verbally reprimanded , have his salary docked , or in extreme cases , kicked out of the establishment for good . 
 In the early morning in Hangzhou , along the wide avenue of the Imperial Way , special breakfast items and delicacies were sold . This included fried tripe , pieces of mutton or goose , soups of various kinds , hot pancakes , steamed pancakes , and iced cakes . Noodle shops were also popular , and remained open all day and night along the Imperial Way . According to one Song source on Kaifeng , the night markets closed at the third night watch but reopened on the fifth , while they had also gained a reputation for staying open during winter storms and the darkest , rainiest days of winter . 
 There were also some exotic foreign foods imported to China from abroad , including raisins , dates , Persian jujubes , and grape wine ; rice wine was more common in China , a fact noted even by the 13th century Venetian traveler Marco Polo . Although grape @-@ based wine had been known in China since the ancient Han dynasty Chinese ventured into Hellenistic Central Asia , grape @-@ wine was often reserved for the elite . Besides wine , other beverages included pear juice , lychee fruit juice , honey and ginger drinks , tea , and pawpaw juice . Dairy products and farming were foreign concepts to the Chinese , which explains the absence of cheese and milk in their diet . Beef was also rarely eaten , since the bull was an important draft animal . The main diet of the lower classes remained rice , pork , and salted fish , while it is known from restaurant dinner menus that the upper classes did not eat dog meat . The rich are known to have consumed an array of different meats , such as chicken , shellfish , fallow deer , hares , partridge , pheasant , francolin , quail , fox , badger , clam , crab , and many others . Local freshwater fish from the nearby lake and river were also caught and brought to market , while the West Lake provided geese and duck as well . Common fruits that were consumed included melons , pomegranates , lychees , <unk> , golden oranges , jujubes , Chinese and Japanese quinces , apricots and pears ; in the region around Hangzhou alone , there were eleven kinds of apricots and eight different kinds of pears that were produced . Specialties and combination dishes in the Song period included scented shellfish cooked in rice @-@ wine , geese with apricots , lotus @-@ seed soup , spicy soup with mussels and fish cooked with plums , sweet soya soup , baked sesame buns stuffed with either sour bean filling or pork tenderloin , mixed vegetable buns , fragrant candied fruit , strips of ginger and fermented <unk> , jujube @-@ stuffed steamed dumplings , fried chestnuts , salted fermented bean soup , fruit cooked in scented honey , and ' honey crisps ' of kneaded and baked honey , flour , mutton fat and pork lard . Dessert molds of oiled flour and sugared honey were shaped into girls ' faces or statuettes of soldiers with full armor like door guards , and were called " likeness foods " ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 Song intellectuals sought answers to all philosophical and political questions in the Confucian Classics . This renewed interest in the Confucian ideals and society of ancient times coincided with the decline of Buddhism , which was then largely regarded as foreign , and as offering few solutions for practical problems . However , Buddhism in this period continued as a cultural underlay to the more accepted Confucianism and even Taoism , both seen as native and pure by conservative Neo @-@ Confucians . The continuing popularity of Buddhism can be seen with strong evidence by achievements in the arts , such as the 100 painting set of the Five Hundred <unk> , completed by Lin <unk> and Zhou <unk> in 1178 . 
 The conservative Confucian movement could be seen before the likes of Zhu Xi ( 1130 – 1200 ) , with staunch anti @-@ Buddhists such as Ouyang Xiu ( 1007 – 1072 ) . In his written work of the Ben @-@ lun , he wrote of his theory for how Buddhism had so easily penetrated Chinese culture during the earlier Southern and Northern Dynasties period . He argued that Buddhism became widely accepted when China 's traditional institutions were weakened at the time . This was due to many factors , such as foreign Xianbei ruling over the north , and China 's political schism that caused warfare and other ills . Although Emperor Wen of Sui ( r . 581 – 604 ) abolished the Nine Ranks in favor of a Confucian @-@ taught bureaucracy drafted through civil service examinations , he also heavily sponsored the popular ideology of Buddhism to legitimate his rule . Hence , it was given free rein and influence to flourish and dominate Chinese culture during the Sui and Tang periods ; historian Arthur F. Wright describes Confucianism in this period as being reverted to a state of " stale archaism " . Ouyang Xiu wrote : 
 " This curse [ Buddhism ] has overspread the empire for a thousand years , and what can one man in one day do about it ? The people are drunk with it , and it has entered the marrow of their bones ; it is surely not to be overcome by eloquent talk . What , then , is to be done ? 
 In conclusion on how to root out the ' evil ' that was Buddhism , Ouyang Xiu presented a historical example of how it could be uprooted from Chinese culture : 
 Of old , in the time of the Warring States , Yang Zhu and Mo Di were engaged in violent controversy . Mencius deplored this and devoted himself to teaching benevolence and righteousness . His exposition of benevolence and <unk> won the day , and the teachings of Mo Di and Yang Zhu were extirpated . In Han times the myriad schools of thought all flourished together . Tung Chung @-@ shu deplored this and revived Confucianism . Therefore the Way of Confucius shone forth , and the myriad schools expired . This is the effect of what I have called " correcting the root cause in order to overcome the evil " . 
 Although Confucianism was cast in stark contrast to the perceived alien and morally inept Buddhism by those such as Ouyang Xiu , Confucianism nonetheless borrowed ideals of Buddhism to provide for its own revival . From Mahayana Buddhism , the Bodhisattva ideal of ethical universalism with benevolent charity and relief to those in need inspired those such as Fan Zhongyan and Wang Anshi , along with the Song government . In contrast to the earlier heavily Buddhist Tang period , where wealthy and pious Buddhist families and Buddhist temples handled much of the charity and alms to the poor , the Song government took on this ideal role instead , through its various programs of welfare and charity ( refer to Society section ) . In addition , the historian Arthur F. Wright notes this situation during the Song period , with philosophical nativism taking from Buddhism its earlier benevolent role : 
 It is true that Buddhist monks were given official appointments as managers of many of these enterprises , but the initiative came from Neo @-@ Confucian officials . In a sense the Buddhist idea of compassion and many of the measures developed for its practical expression had been appropriated by the Chinese state . 
 Although Buddhism lost its prominence in the elite circles and government sponsorships of Chinese society , this did not mean the <unk> of Buddhism from Chinese culture . Zen Buddhism continued to flourish during the Song period , as Emperor Lizong of Song had the monk Wuzhun Shifan share the <unk> ( Zen ) doctrine with the imperial court . Much like the Eastern Roman Emperor Julian the Apostate promoting Roman paganism and <unk> amongst the leading members of Roman society while pushing Christianity 's influence into the lower classes , so too did Neo @-@ Confucians of the 13th century succeed in driving Buddhism out of the higher echelons of Chinese society . 
 In terms of Buddhist metaphysics , Zhou <unk> influenced the beliefs and teachings of Northern Song @-@ era Confucian scholars such as Cheng Hao and Cheng Yi ( who were brothers ) , and was a major influence for Zhu Xi , one of the leading architects of Neo @-@ Confucianism . They emphasized moral self @-@ cultivation over service to the ruler of the state ( healing society 's ills from the bottom @-@ up , not the top @-@ down ) , as opposed to statesmen like Fan Zhongyan or Su Shi , who pursued their agenda to advise the ruler to make the best decisions for the common good of all . The Cheng brothers also taught that the workings of nature and metaphysics could be taught through the principle ( li ) and the vital energy ( qi ) . The principle of nature could be moral or physical , such as the principle of marriage being moral , while the principle of trees is physical . Yet for principles to exist and function normally , there would have to be substance as well as vital energy . This allowed Song intellectuals to validate the teachings of Mencius on the innate goodness of human nature , while at the same time providing an explanation for human wrongdoing . In essence , the principle underlying a human being is good and benevolent , but vital energy has the potential to go astray and be corrupted , giving rise to selfish impulses and all other negative human traits . 
 The Song Neo @-@ Confucian philosophers , finding a certain purity in the originality of the ancient classical texts , wrote commentaries on them . The most influential of these philosophers was Zhu Xi , whose synthesis of Confucian thought and Buddhist , Taoist , and other ideas became the official imperial ideology from late Song times to the late 19th century . The basis of his teaching was influenced by the Cheng brothers , but he greatly extended their teachings , forming the core of Neo @-@ Confucianism . This included emphasis on the Four Books : the Analects , Mencius , Doctrine of the Mean , and the Great Learning ( the latter two being chapters in the ancient Book of Rites ) . His viewpoint was that improvement of the world began with improvement of the mind , as outlined in the Great Learning . His approach to Confucianism was shunned by his contemporaries , as his writings were forbidden to be cited by students taking the Imperial Examinations . However , Emperor Lizong of Song found his writing to be intriguing , reversing the policy against him , and making it a requirement for students to study his commentaries on the Four Books . 
 = Augustin Pyramus de Candolle = 
 Augustin Pyramus de Candolle also spelled Augustin Pyrame de Candolle ( 4 February 1778 – 9 September 1841 ) was a Swiss botanist . René Louiche Desfontaines launched de Candolle 's botanical career by recommending him at an herbarium . Within a couple of years de Candolle had established a new genus , and he went on to document hundreds of plant families and create a new natural plant classification system . Although de Candolle 's main focus was botany , he also contributed to related fields such as phytogeography , agronomy , paleontology , medical botany , and economic botany . 
 Candolle originated the idea of " Nature 's war " , which influenced Charles Darwin and the principle of natural <unk> de Candolle recognized that multiple species may develop similar characteristics that did not appear in a common evolutionary ancestor ; this was later termed analogy . During his work with plants , de Candolle noticed that plant leaf movements follow a near @-@ 24 @-@ hour cycle in constant light , suggesting that an internal biological clock exists . Though many scientists doubted de Candolle 's findings , experiments over a century later demonstrated that ″ the internal biological clock ″ indeed exists . 
 Candolle 's descendants continued his work on plant classification . Alphonse de Candolle and Casimir Pyrame de Candolle contributed to the Prodromus Systematis Naturalis Regni Vegetabilis , a catalog of plants begun by Augustin Pyramus de Candolle . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Augustin Pyramus de Candolle was born on 4 February 1778 in Geneva , Switzerland , to Augustin de Candolle , a former official , and his wife , Louise Eléonore Brière . His family descended from one of the ancient families of Provence in France , but relocated to Geneva at the end of the 16th century to escape religious persecution . 
 At age seven de Candolle contracted of a severe case of hydrocephalus , which significantly affected his childhood . Nevertheless , he is said to have had great aptitude for learning , distinguishing himself in school with his rapid acquisition of knowledge in classical and general literature and his ability to write fine poetry . In 1794 , he began his scientific studies at the Collège Calvin , where he studied under Jean Pierre Étienne Vaucher , who later inspired de Candolle to make botanical science the chief pursuit of his life . 
 = = Career in botany = = 
 Candolle 's initiation to botany happened in 1794 thanks to Pierre Etienne Vaucher in Geneva . He spent then four years at the Geneva Academy , studying science and law according to his father 's wishes . In 1798 , he moved to Paris after Geneva had been annexed to the French Republic . His botanical career began with the help of René Louiche Desfontaines , who recommended de Candolle for work in the herbarium of Charles Louis L 'Héritier de <unk> during the summer of 1798 . The position elevated de Candolle 's reputation and also led to valuable instruction from Desfontaines <unk> de Candolle established his first genus , <unk> , in 1799 . 
 de Candolle 's first books , Plantarum historia <unk> ( 4 vols . , 1799 ) and <unk> ( 1802 ) , brought him to the notice of Georges Cuvier and Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> de Candolle , with Cuvier 's approval , acted as deputy at the Collège de France in 1802 . Lamarck entrusted him with the publication of the third edition of the Flore française ( 1803 – 1815 ) , and in the introduction entitled Principes élémentaires de botanique , de Candolle proposed a natural method of plant classification as opposed to the artificial Linnaean method . The premise of de Candolle 's method is that taxa do not fall along a linear scale ; they are discrete , not continuous . 
 In 1804 , de Candolle published his Essai sur les propriétés <unk> des plantes and was granted a doctor of medicine degree by the medical faculty of Paris . Two years later , he published Synopsis plantarum in flora Gallica <unk> de Candolle then spent the next six summers making a botanical and agricultural survey of France at the request of the French government , which was published in 1813 . In 1807 he was appointed professor of botany in the medical faculty of the University of Montpellier , where he would later become the first chair of botany in 1810 . While in Montpellier , de Candolle published his Théorie <unk> de la botanique ( Elementary Theory of Botany , 1813 ) , which introduced a new classification system and the word taxonomy . Candolle moved back to Geneva in 1816 and in the following year was invited by the government of the Canton of Geneva to fill the newly created chair of natural history . 
 de Candolle spent the rest of his life in an attempt to elaborate and complete his natural system of botanical <unk> de Candolle published initial work in his Regni <unk> systema naturale , but after two volumes he realized he could not complete the project on such a large scale . Consequently , he began his less extensive Prodromus Systematis Naturalis Regni Vegetabilis in 1824 . However , he was able to finish only seven volumes , or two @-@ thirds of the whole . Even so , he was able to characterize over one hundred families of plants , helping to lay the empirical basis of general botany . Although de Candolle 's main focus was botany , throughout his career he also dabbled in fields related to botany , such as phytogeography , agronomy , paleontology , medical botany , and economic botany . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Augustin de Candolle was the first of four generations of botanists in the de Candolle dynasty . His son , Alphonse de Candolle , whom he fathered with his wife , Mademoiselle Torras , eventually succeeded to his father 's chair in botany and continued the Prodromus . Casimir Pyrame de Candolle , Augustin de Candolle 's grandson , also contributed to the Prodromus through his detailed , extensive research and characterization of the <unk> family of plants . Augustin de Candolle 's great @-@ grandson , Richard Émile Augustin de Candolle , was also a botanist . Augustin de Candolle died on 9 September 1841 in Geneva , after being sick for many years . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 He is remembered in the plant genera <unk> and <unk> , and the mushroom Psathyrella candolleana . <unk> , a scientific journal that publishes papers on systematic botany and <unk> , was named after de Candolle and his descendants in honor of their contribution to the field of botany . He was a mentor to the French @-@ Mexican botanist Jean @-@ Louis <unk> . 
 = = = Classification system = = = 
 de Candolle was the first to put forward the idea of " Nature 's war " , writing of plants being " at war one with another " with the meaning of different species fighting each other for space and resources . Charles Darwin studied de Candolle 's " natural system " of classification in 1826 when at the University of Edinburgh , and in the inception of Darwin 's theory in 1838 he considered " the warring of the species " , adding that it was even more strongly conveyed by Thomas Malthus , producing the pressures that Darwin later called natural selection . In 1839 de Candolle visited Britain and Darwin invited him to dinner , allowing the two scientists the opportunity to discuss the idea . 
 de Candolle was also among the first to recognize the difference between the morphological and physiological characteristics of organs . He ascribed plant morphology as being related to the number of organs and their positions relative to each other rather than to their various physiological properties . Consequently , this made him the first to attempt to attribute specific reasons for structural and numerical relationships amongst organs , and thus to distinguish between major and minor aspects of plant symmetry . To account for modifications of symmetry in parts of different plants , an occurrence that could hinder the discovery of an evolutionary relationship , de Candolle introduced the concept of homology . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 de Candolle also made contributions to the field of <unk> . Building upon earlier work on plant circadian leaf movements contributed by such scientists as Jean @-@ Jacques d <unk> de <unk> and Henri @-@ Louis Duhamel du Monceau , de Candolle observed in 1832 that the plant Mimosa pudica had a free @-@ running period of leaf opening and closing of approximately 22 – 23 hours in constant light , significantly less than the approximate 24 @-@ hour period of the Earth 's light @-@ dark cycles . Since the period was shorter than 24 hours , he hypothesized that a different clock had to be responsible for the rhythm ; the shortened period was not entrained — coordinated — by environmental cues , thus the clock appeared to be endogenous . Despite these findings , a number of scientists continued to search for " factor X " , an unknown exogenous factor associated with the earth 's rotation that was driving circadian oscillations in the absence of a light dark schedule , until the mid @-@ twentieth century . In the mid @-@ 1920s , Erwin Bunning repeated Candolle 's findings and came to similar conclusions , and studies that showed the persistence of circadian rhythm in the South Pole and in a space lab further confirmed the existence of oscillations in the absence of environmental cues . 
 = = Published works = = 
 <unk> rosea ( 1798 ) 
 Historia Plantarum <unk> ( 4 vols . , 1799 ) 
 <unk> ( 1802 ) 
 Flore française ( 1805 – 1815 ) editor , 3rd ed . ( Introduction : Principes élémentaires de botanique page 61 ) 
 vol . I 1815 
 vol . II 1805 
 vol . III 1815 
 vol . IV 1815 Latin Index page 931 
 vol . V 1815 Supplementary volume , volume index page 650 
 Les <unk> vols . 1 @-@ 4 , ( 1805 @-@ 1808 ) of 8 
 Essai sur les propriétés <unk> des plantes <unk> avec leurs formes extérieures et leur classification naturelle ( 1804 ) 
 Synopsis plantarum in flora Gallica <unk> ( 1806 ) 
 Mémoire sur la Géographie des Plantes de France , <unk> dans Ses Rapports avec la <unk> <unk> ( 1817 ) 
 Théorie <unk> de la botanique ( 1813 ) , 2nd ed . 1819 
 Flore du <unk> ( 1819 ) transcribed in Hervé M. <unk> , " Le <unk> par Augustin Pyramus de Candolle de l <unk> de la Flore du <unk> , dite aussi Flore des dames de Genève , " Anales del Jardín <unk> de Madrid , 54 ( 1996 ) 575 @-@ 88 . 
 Regni <unk> systema naturale ( 2 vol . , 1818 – 21 ) 
 Essai <unk> de Géographie Botanique ( 1820 ) 
 Prodromus Systematis Naturalis Regni Vegetabilis ( 17 vols . , 1824 @-@ 1873 ) 
 First seven volumes 1824 @-@ 1839 , continued by Alphonse de Candolle 
 = = = Collections of works = = = 
 View digitized titles by and a short biography of de Candolle in <unk> 
 de Candolle 's works in Gallica 
 de Candolle at Biodiversity Heritage Library 
 = Eisenhower National Historic Site = 
 Eisenhower National Historic Site preserves the home and farm of Dwight D. Eisenhower , the 34th President of the United States , and its surrounding property of 690 @.@ 5 acres ( 279 @.@ 4 ha ) . It is located in Cumberland Township , Adams County , Pennsylvania , just outside of Gettysburg . Purchased by then @-@ General Eisenhower and his wife Mamie in 1950 , the farm served as a weekend retreat for the President and a meeting place for world leaders , and became the Eisenhowers ' home after they left the White House in 1961 . 
 With its putting green , skeet range , and view of South Mountain and the Gettysburg Battlefield , it offered President Eisenhower a much @-@ needed respite from the pressures of Washington . It was also a successful cattle operation , with a show herd of black Angus cattle . Some of the more notable of Eisenhower 's guests were Premier Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union , President Charles de Gaulle of France , Prime Minister Winston Churchill of Britain , and Governor Ronald Reagan of California . 
 = = History = = 
 Dwight D. ( Ike ) Eisenhower had a long history with the Gettysburg area . His graduating class from West Point had visited the battlefield in 1915 . In 1918 , he was assigned to nearby Camp Colt in his first independent command as an army officer , commanding a tank training unit ; he and Mamie Eisenhower were newly married . 
 Throughout his long army career , Dwight Eisenhower and his wife never had a house to call their own , with the couple moving from army post to army post . After he became Columbia University 's president in 1948 , Mamie requested that they finally have a place to call their own . A married couple that were friends with the Eisenhowers , George and Mary Allen , had recently purchased a small farm around Gettysburg , and recommended the area . In 1950 , they found a " run @-@ down farm " on the outskirts of Gettysburg , and purchased the farm and its 189 acres ( 76 ha ) for $ 40 @,@ 000 ( equal to $ 393 @,@ 416 today ) from one Allen Redding , who had owned the farm since 1921 . Eisenhower stated that he could feel the " forgotten <unk> " that occurred on the grounds as the Battle of Gettysburg . 
 When purchased , the 189 acres ( 0 @.@ 76 km2 ) included 600 chickens , 25 cows , and many dilapidated buildings dating back to the 18th and 19th centuries . Renovation of the property was delayed when Eisenhower became supreme commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1951 . After he had attained the presidency of the United States in 1953 , Mamie had him rebuild the old house . Much of the original building had to be torn down , due to its deterioration . The total cost of renovation was $ 250 @,@ 000 ( equal to $ 2 @,@ 211 @,@ 132 today ) . This large expense was due partly to Mamie 's whims , but also to Eisenhower 's employment of union labor ; he spent $ 65 @,@ 000 ( equal to $ 574 @,@ 894 today ) for union workmen who came each day from Washington , D.C. ( 75 miles ( 121 km ) away ) to work on the farmhouse . On their 1955 wedding anniversary , the Eisenhowers held a party to celebrate completion of the work . The entire staff of the White House were invited , attending in two shifts , so that the White House would not be unstaffed . The staff were forever grateful to the Eisenhowers for including them in the festivities . 
 From its completion in 1955 to the end of Eisenhower 's second term on January 20 , 1961 , the President spent 365 days total on the Gettysburg farm . The longest of these stays was 38 days in late 1955 , while recovering from a heart attack he had suffered that September . After 1955 , the Eisenhowers spent most weekends and summer vacations at the Gettysburg farm . They sometimes went to both the Gettysburg farm and Camp David , prompting one person to call Camp David " an annex to Gettysburg " . 
 The Gettysburg farm provided a few headaches . Democrats chose the amount of time the Eisenhowers spent at the Gettysburg farm as another way to attack him . Paul M. Butler , head of the Democratic National Committee , called him a part @-@ time president due to his many stays in Gettysburg . When his World War II colleague Bernard Montgomery visited the farm , Eisenhower commented to Montgomery ( speaking as military commander to military commander ) that he would have fired a subordinate that would initiate Pickett 's Charge . Many Southerners saw this as disrespect toward Robert E. Lee , and protested . Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev visited the farm in September 1959 , and was " <unk> " to the Eisenhower grandchildren . David Eisenhower said that Khrushchev was such a nice guy , he ( David ) could become a Communist if he did not know better , causing much embarrassment to the Eisenhowers . 
 The Eisenhowers donated their home and farm ( 230 acres ( 93 ha ) total at the time ) to the National Park Service in 1967 , with lifetime living rights for the former president . Two years later , Eisenhower died at the age of 78 . Mamie Eisenhower rejected the idea of moving to Washington to be closer to family and friends and , with Federal permission , lived on the farm until her death in 1979 , although the living area for Mamie was reduced to 14 acres ( 5 @.@ 7 ha ) . The National Park Service opened the site in 1980 . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 The plans for decoration and construction of the house were dictated by Mamie Eisenhower . At one point , Eisenhower told the contractor " For God 's sakes , just give her what she wants and send me the bill . " His main concern was personally mixing the paint to <unk> the barn , which had a red coat he thought was hideous , so he painted it a light gray @-@ green . Mamie , meanwhile , was delighted in being able to use everything they always had in storage , and decorated more for sentimentality than for aesthetics . 
 Cattle were raised at the farm . Eisenhower would often poke the rump of a bull with his shotgun to show what quality of steak the animal would eventually produce , alarming the Secret Service agents that were protecting him . Once , while barbecuing ( something he loved to do on the farm ) , he made the mistake of announcing which cow he was cooking . As it had been the favorite cow of his granddaughter Susan Eisenhower , she was brought to tears . 
 A row of fifty Norway spruce trees lines the main driveway leading to the farm . These trees represent the fifty U.S. states , and were given to Eisenhower as birthday presents from each of the state Republican Party chairmen in 1955 . The furthest one from the house was the tree representing Texas , and it was seen as a mark of Eisenhower 's recovery that he was able to walk that far after his heart attack . 
 The Eisenhowers ( especially Dwight in the beginning ) spent most of their time in a glass @-@ covered porch overlooking Seminary Ridge . Reading and playing cards with friends were popular pastimes on the porch , it was said that he would sit for hours reflecting on his life and legacy . 
 In his book The Lost Continent : Travels in Small @-@ Town America , Bill Bryson said of the site that it was the most fun he could remember having in a Republican household , and described the decor of the house as " 1960s Republican " . Bryson did express dismay in discovering that the last book such an important man ever read was Zane Grey 's West of the Pecos . 
 = = Today = = 
 The Eisenhower National Historic Site is open daily from 9 : 00 am to 5 : 00 pm , except for Thanksgiving , Christmas and New Year 's Day . The home , grounds , barns and cattle operation are available for public tours . Visitors may reach the site via a shuttle bus which departs from the Gettysburg National Military Park Visitor Center . The total land area is 690 acres ( 280 ha ) . Two different films cover the grounds and President Eisenhower 's life . 
 Eisenhower National Historic Site 
 = Leopard catshark = 
 The leopard catshark ( Poroderma pantherinum ) is a species of catshark , and part of the family Scyliorhinidae , endemic to the coastal waters of South Africa . Abundant in inshore waters under 20 m ( 66 ft ) deep , this bottom @-@ dweller favors rocky reefs , kelp beds , and sandy flats . Growing to a length of 84 cm ( 33 in ) , the leopard catshark has a stout body with two dorsal fins placed well back , and a short head and tail . It is extremely variable in color and pattern , with individuals ranging from almost white to black and covered by diverse patterns of black spots , blotches , rosettes , and / or lines . The color pattern changes with age and some forms seem to be location @-@ specific , suggesting the presence of multiple distinct , local populations . In the past , some of the more distinct color forms have been described as different species . 
 Mainly nocturnal in habits , after dusk the leopard catshark hunts for small , benthic bony fishes and invertebrates in shallow water . In daytime , it generally rests inside caves and crevices , sometimes in groups . This species has been documented ambushing spawning chokka squid ( Loligo vulgaris reynaudi ) within their spawning grounds . Reproduction is oviparous and proceeds year @-@ round . Females produce rectangular , light @-@ colored egg capsules two at a time , attaching them to structures on the sea floor . Small and harmless , the leopard catshark adapts well to captivity and is often exhibited in public aquariums . It is caught by commercial and recreational fishers as bycatch , and often killed as a pest . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed this species as Data Deficient ; its numbers do not seem to be declining , but heavy human activity occurs within its native waters . The possibly fragmented nature of its distribution also merits caution for each local population . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Because of its highly variable color pattern , the leopard catshark has historically been known under a multitude of names . In an 1837 issue of Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London , Scottish physician and zoologist Andrew Smith listed without descriptions the new genus Poroderma , containing the species P. africanum ( the pyjama shark ) , P. pantherinum , P. <unk> , and P. variegatum . German biologists Johannes Peter Müller and Friedrich Gustav Jakob Henle assigned these sharks to the genus Scyllium , and in their 1838 – 1841 Systematische Beschreibung der Plagiostomen furnished descriptions for S. pantherinum and S. variegatum , and listed two more names without description , S. <unk> and S. <unk> . In 1934 , American zoologist Henry Weed Fowler described P. marleyi , characterized by large black spots . 
 Subsequent authors have recognized these names as based on pattern variants of the leopard catshark ; resolving the identity of P. marleyi proved especially problematic and it was not confirmed to be a synonym of this species until 2003 . The valid scientific name of the leopard catshark is considered to be Poroderma pantherinum , attributed to Müller and Henle as they were responsible for the description . The specific epithet pantherinum refers to the panther @-@ like patterning of the type specimen , a 65 cm ( 26 in ) long female collected off the Cape of Good Hope . Other common names for this shark include <unk> catshark and <unk> catshark . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The leopard catshark inhabits the temperate and subtropical inshore waters off South Africa , from Saldanha Bay in the west to the mouth of the Tugela River in the east . There are old and almost certainly erroneous records from Mauritius and Madagascar . Given the color pattern diversity within the species , its range is likely fragmented into a number of small local populations along the South African coast . Bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , the leopard catshark is most commonly encountered from the intertidal zone to a depth of 20 m ( 66 ft ) , though it has been reported from as deep as 256 m ( 840 ft ) on the uppermost portion of the continental slope . This species favors rocky reefs , kelp forests , and sandy flats off beaches . 
 = = Description = = 
 The leopard catshark is the smaller and slimmer of the two Poroderma species . The head and snout are short and slightly flattened , with a somewhat pointed snout tip . Each nostril is split into tiny incurrent and excurrent openings by a three @-@ lobed flap of skin in front , of which the central lobe forms a slender barbel that reaches past the mouth . The horizontally oval eyes are equipped with rudimentary nictitating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) and placed rather high on the head , with a thick ridge running under each . The mouth is wide and arched , with short furrows at the corners extending onto both jaws ; the upper teeth are exposed when the mouth is closed . There are 18 – 30 and 13 – 26 tooth rows on either side of the upper and lower jaws respectively . The teeth have a narrow central cusp with a pair of small lateral cusplets ; those of adult males are slightly more curved than those of females . 
 The body is rather laterally compressed and tapers towards the tail , with two dorsal fins set far back . The first dorsal fin originates over the rear of the pelvic fins and is much larger than the second , which originates over the midpoint of the anal fin base . The bases of the pectoral and pelvic fins are about equal ; the pectoral fins are large and broad while the pelvic fins are much lower . Adult males have stubby claspers with the inner margins of the pelvic fins partially fused over them to form an " apron " . The caudal fin is short and broad , with an indistinct lower lobe and a ventral notch near the tip of the upper lobe . The very thick skin is covered by well @-@ calcified dermal denticles . Each denticle has an arrowhead @-@ shaped crown with three posterior points , mounted on a short stalk . 
 The background color of the leopard catshark ranges from off @-@ white to glossy jet black above and white to almost black below , sometimes with an abrupt transition between the two . Overlaid is a striking pattern of black markings variously combining small to large spots , blotches , complete to incomplete rosettes , and / or short to long lines , that may extend almost to the midline of the belly . There are four named forms : ' typical ' , with leopard @-@ like rosettes and broken lines , ' marleyi ' , with large round spots , ' salt and pepper ' , with densely packed dots , and ' melanistic ' , with an almost completely black upper surface and irregular stripes and / or spots ; many sharks are intermediate between these forms . Color pattern is affected by development : all hatchling sharks have large black spots , that with age tend to break up into rosettes and smaller spots , that may eventually merge into lines . The ' marleyi ' form appears to be a type of paedomorphosis , in which in the hatchling pattern is carried into adulthood . Color pattern is also related to geographic location , with the ' marleyi ' and ' salt and pepper ' forms apparently restricted to the waters off the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu @-@ Natal . The leopard catshark reaches a maximum known length of 84 cm ( 33 in ) and a maximum known weight of 3 @.@ 2 kg ( 7 @.@ 1 lb ) ; males grow slightly larger than females . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The slow @-@ swimming leopard catshark generally spends the day resting inside caves or crevices , either alone or in groups . At night , it moves towards the shore to actively forage for small bony fishes , cephalopods , crustaceans , and polychaete worms . In False Bay , fishes are the most important prey type , followed by cephalopods and then the Cape rock lobster ( Jasus lalandii ) . This shark has been observed attacking octopus and cuttlefish by seizing and tearing off tentacles with a twisting motion . Like its close relative the pyjama shark , it will temporarily abandon its nocturnal habits to take advantage of the daytime mass spawnings of the chokka squid ( Loligo vulgaris reynaudi ) , which occur unpredictably year @-@ round with a peak from October to December . The sharks lie motionless amongst the squids ' egg masses with their heads hidden , and make sudden lunges at female squid that have descended to the sea floor to attach their eggs . 
 The leopard catshark is oviparous and apparently reproduces throughout the year . Females produce two eggs at a time , one within each oviduct . Each egg is protected by a rectangular capsule 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) long and 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) across , which is light brown to olive in color and thinner @-@ walled than those of the pyjama shark . The corners of the capsule bear long tendrils that enable the female to secure them to underwater structures . In the aquarium , the eggs hatch in approximately five and a half months . The hatchling shark measures 11 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) long ; males and females begin to mature sexually at 47 – 67 cm ( 19 – 26 in ) and 43 – 64 cm ( 17 – 25 in ) long respectively , corresponding to an age of around 10 years . One source reports the maximum lifespan as at least 15 years , while another source gives at least 19 years . 
 Predators of the leopard catshark include larger sharks and marine mammals ; it is one of the cartilaginous fish most often consumed by the broadnose sevengill shark ( Notorynchus cepedianus ) . When threatened , it curls into a ring with its tail covering its head , a behavior also performed by the shysharks ( Haploblepharus ) . Its eggs are also heavily preyed upon , by animals such as the whelks Burnupena papyracea and B. lagenaria , which can pierce the outer covering to extract the yolk . This species is known to be parasitized by the praniza larvae of the isopod Gnathia pantherina , which infest the nostrils , mouth , and gills . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Quite common within its range , the leopard catshark is harmless to humans . It is a popular subject of public aquariums because of its small size , attractive appearance , and hardiness . The aquarium trade supports a minor fishery that targets the two Poroderma species . This shark is regularly caught incidentally by commercial and recreational fishers , and almost invariably discarded despite being edible . Nevertheless , fishing mortality is likely to be high as many fishers using line gear make a point to kill hooked sharks , seeing them as pests that " steal " bait . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) presently lacks sufficient information to assess the leopard catshark beyond Data Deficient , though notes that its inshore habitat is heavily fished and otherwise impacted by human activity . The possible distribution of this shark across many small , distinct populations also warrants additional investigation and monitoring . 
 = Somerton = 
 Somerton / <unk> / is a small town and civil parish in the English county of Somerset . It gave its name to the county , and was briefly , around the start of the 14th century , the county town , and around 900 AD was possibly the capital of Wessex . It has held a weekly market since the Middle Ages , and the main square with its market cross is today an attractive location for visitors . Situated on the River Cary , approximately 8 @.@ 8 miles ( 14 @.@ 2 km ) north @-@ west of Yeovil , Somerton has its own town council serving a population of 4 @,@ 697 as of 2011 . Residents are often referred to locally as <unk> . The civil parish includes the hamlets of Etsome , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 The history of Somerton dates back to the Anglo @-@ Saxon era , when it was an important political and commercial centre . After the Norman conquest of England the importance of the town declined , despite being the county town of Somerset in the late thirteenth century and early fourteenth century . Having lost county town status , Somerton then became a market town in the Middle Ages , whose economy was supported by transport systems using the River Parrett , and later rail transport via the Great Western Railway , and by light industries including glove making and gypsum mining . 
 In the centre of Somerton the wide market square , with its octagonal roofed market cross , is surrounded by old houses , while close by is the 13th century Church of St Michael and All Angels . Somerton also had links with Muchelney Abbey in the Middle Ages . The BBC drama The <unk> <unk> was filmed in Somerton from 1985 to 1986 . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest reference to the town is in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , which records that in 733 the King of Wessex , Æthelheard lost control of Somerton to Æthelbald , King of Mercia . Somerton was the site of the 949 meeting of the witan , a form of Anglo @-@ Saxon parliament . The town returned to West Saxon royal control in the ninth century , and it was listed in the Domesday Book of 1086 as " <unk> " . The name may come from Old English for " sea @-@ lake enclosure " , " summer town " or " summer farmstead " . The Somerton name was extended to the people in the area it controlled , and this area became known as Somerset , although Somerton soon ceased to be the most important settlement and never grew into a large town . The parish was the largest in the Hundred of Somerton . It was , briefly , the county town of Somerset from the late thirteenth century into the early fourteenth century . A building referred to as " Somerset castle " is believed to have been built around 1280 as a county gaol , with a visitor in 1579 describing the remaining portion as " an old tower embattled about castle @-@ like " . It was owned by Sir Ralph Cromwell between 1423 and 1433 . Details are vague and visible remains have vanished , so its status as a castle and its very existence is in doubt , with one writer , <unk> King , feeling that people were confusing it with Somerton Castle in Lincolnshire . 
 The Abbots of Muchelney Abbey held the <unk> of the parish church of Somerton during the Middle Ages . They built a tithe barn , to house the tithes of crops and produce paid by the parish to the town 's Rector . The Abbey was dissolved in 1539 during the English Reformation , and the tithes and the tithe barn passed into the ownership of Bristol Cathedral . In the 20th century the barn was converted into private housing . 
 Glove making was a major industry in the town in the early nineteenth century , along with the production of rope and twine . The Somerton Brewery , owned by a local landowner named Thomas Templeman , was first recorded under the Tithe Apportionment Act of 1841 . The brewery became a large producer in Somerset until its final closure around 1935 . Before the National Insurance and the Health Service was introduced , Somerton Men 's Club acted as a local provident society within the area . Gypsum was extracted by hand at the <unk> open @-@ cast mine from the Victorian era up until it closed down in 1953 . In 1906 , a railway station opened on the Castle Cary Cut @-@ Off which was built by the Great Western Railway . Whilst the line still remains in use , the station was closed in 1962 . When the Marconi Company built the radio stations known as the Imperial Wireless Chain for the Post Office during 1925 – 26 , they also established their own transmitting station at Dorchester with a receiving station 30 miles ( 48 km ) away at Somerton . 
 Somerton was hit by four Luftwaffe bombs on the morning of 29 September 1942 during the Second World War . The bombs were aimed at the Cow and Gate milk factory and it was largely destroyed . Ten nearby houses were badly damaged . Nine people were killed and thirty seven injured . A memorial at the dairy site commemorates those killed . The factory later became a district council depot , and was recently bought by the town council for possible use as the site of a new town hall . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The town council has responsibility for local issues , including setting an annual precept ( local rate ) to cover the council 's operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny . The town council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police , district council officers , and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime , security , and traffic . The town council 's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities , as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance , repair , and improvement of highways , drainage , footpaths , public transport , and street cleaning . Conservation matters ( including trees and listed buildings ) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council . 
 In October 2009 , eleven of the local councillors resigned en masse , citing excessive criticism from local residents and in particular criticism from a hostile local weblog . In February 2012 the External Auditor appointed by the Audit Commission published a critical Report in the Public Interest regarding the activities of Somerton Town Council in the fiscal year 2008 to 2009 . 
 The town falls within the non @-@ metropolitan district of South Somerset , which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972 , having previously been part of Langport Rural District . The district council is responsible for planning permission and building control , local roads , council housing , environmental health , markets and fairs , refuse collection and recycling , cemeteries and crematoria , leisure services , parks , and tourism . Somerset County Council is responsible for major services such as the Local Education Authority , social services , libraries , main roads , public transport , policing and fire services , trading standards , waste disposal and strategic planning . 
 Somerton is in the electoral ward of Wessex and whilst it is by far the most populous area , the ward stretches north to Compton <unk> . The total population of the ward taken from the 2011 census was 5 @,@ 402 . 
 Somerton elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Somerton and Frome county constituency , represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom , and is part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Somerton is situated on a plateau , above and to the south of the deep valley of the River Cary . The river flows west and then north through the Somerton Moor and then into King 's Sedgemoor Drain on the Somerset Levels eventually joining the River Parrett near Bridgwater . The town is 116 miles ( 187 km ) from London , 28 miles ( 45 km ) south from Bristol and 9 miles ( 14 km ) north @-@ west from Yeovil , just off the Dorset border . Somerton 's hamlets include Etsome , <unk> , Lower Somerton , Littleton and <unk> . Great Breach Wood is a biological Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) and is situated just 1 @.@ 4 miles ( 2 @.@ 3 km ) north @-@ east from Somerton , near the hamlet of Littleton . 
 Somerton 's climate is typical of the climate of south @-@ west England which is usually cool winters with warmer summers and precipitation all year round , with more rain experienced in winter . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The Somerton parish had a population of 4 @,@ 706 as of 2002 . In the 1801 census the population of the town was 1 @,@ 145 and the first half of the 19th century saw strong growth ( reflecting that seen elsewhere in England during this period ) , with the population rising to 2 @,@ 140 in 1851 . It however then began to drop , starting with a significant drop to 1 @,@ 917 by the 1861 census . The population steadily fell until 1921 , before steadily rising thereafter . It was not until 1961 that the population of Somerton had risen above its former population of 1851 . The population has since continued to steadily increase . 
 = = Economy = = 
 A weekly market has been held in Somerton for much of its history . The cloth industry dominated the town 's market from the 17th century until the 20th century , when agriculture took over as the leading industry . Some light industries and services , such as garage repair , physiotherapy , water treatment , and builders and decorators , are located in the business park on <unk> Road . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The main square , Market Place , with its market cross is today an attractive location for visitors . Market crosses have stood in the square since before 1390 ; the present Butter Cross , a roofed market cross , was rebuilt in 1673 , and is Somerton 's most noted feature . The structure was the property of the Earls of Ilchester who sold it to the town in 1916 . It is a Scheduled Ancient Monument . Next to the Butter Cross stands the " Market Hall " , previously known as the " Town Hall " , although the building has never fulfilled either of these functions . Bordering the square are the church , and the Lady Smith Memorial Hall , also known as the " Parish Rooms " , which was built in 1902 , and the 17th century Market House , now a restaurant . The Red Lion was opened by the Earl of Ilchester in 1768 as a model coaching inn . It closed in 1995 ; after a period of neglect it has been redeveloped as town houses . 
 From the early 1980s onwards projects aiming to improve Somerton for film industry purposes have been undertaken . The market square was heavily revamped , creating a central parking area with easy access to the local amenities . The BBC drama The <unk> <unk> was filmed in Somerton from 1985 to 1986 . 
 = = Somerton Court = = 
 Somerton Court , originally known as " Somerton <unk> " . The house has had various owners including Edward IV 's brother , the Duke of Clarence , and Henry Percy , 6th Earl of Northumberland , who sold the estate in 1530 . It passed through a number of hands until 1597 when it was purchased by James Fisher , whose son later rebuilt it in 1641 . The court remained in the Fisher family 's possession until 1808 when it was sold . Its new owner renamed the house " Somerton Court " , and replaced the gabled dormers with Gothic battlements and turrets . The house was later enlarged by the Hall @-@ Stephenson family . During World War II it was occupied by Royal Navy <unk> . In the 1970s it was purchased by a local businessman Stuart <unk> . In 1987 Somerton Court and the estate of 55 acres and 4 cottages including The Dower House was purchased by Roger Byron @-@ Collins when it subject to extensive upgrading and extensions . It was resold in 2005 . The Dower House was built in the early 19th century . Somerton Court is now used for Wedding Receptions . The house now stands in 55 acres grounds . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The town 's former , and only , railway station was on the Castle Cary Cut @-@ Off , once part of the Great Western Railway . Although the line still remains in use the station closed to passengers in 1962 , and goods in 1964 . The nearest station is now at Castle Cary . On the outskirts of the town stands the impressive Somerton Viaduct . 
 Despite Somerton being situated in a rural area , the closest main road from Somerton is the A303 road that runs near the town and stretches all the way into northern Hampshire and finally ends at Basingstoke . The minor B3165 road runs through the town although the road is less commonly used and does not join to the A303 for another 4 miles ( 6 km ) . Two B roads , the <unk> and B3165 , run through Somerton ; the B3165 , mentioned earlier , starts in the town and runs southwards to the <unk> Langport road . The <unk> itself runs south @-@ east to the junction of the A303 and A37 roads at <unk> services . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 The Anglican Church , St Michael 's and All Angels , has origins which date from the 13th century , with a major reshaping in the mid 15th century , and further restoration in 1889 . It is built of local lias stone cut and squared , with Hamstone dressing . It has been designated by English Heritage as a grade I listed building . 
 It is notable for a carved roof , with lions and a small cider barrel purportedly carved by the monks of Muchelney Abbey . Sir John Betjeman was also inspired by an inscription on the candelabra . The church is quite plain on the outside but inside is one of the finest wooden carved roofs in the county . It is shallow pitched with massive , richly decorated tie beams and short king posts . The whole area of the roof is divided into square carved panels set in the framework of the structural timbers which are decorated with carved bosses where they intersect . There are 640 panels each carved with the same quatrefoil design . In the triangular spaces above each beam are dragon @-@ like beasts . It is said there are bullet holes in the timbers , caused by soldiers who camped in the church in 1646 before the Battle of Langport . The 17th century pulpit and altar table are Jacobean woodwork . There are five other churches in the town , including Catholic and Methodist groups . 
 = = Education = = 
 Somerton has two primary schools in the town , but no secondary schools . Children aged between 4 and 7 attend the County Infants ' school at Etsome Terrace . It has around 120 students in five classes that are named after flowers . Older children ( between 7 and 11 years ) attend the <unk> <unk> Junior School on Kirkham Street , which provides the second part of primary education in the area . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 <unk> Nardi , Tuscany , Italy 
 <unk> @-@ le @-@ Guillaume , Pays @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Loire , France 
 = R v Baillie = 
 R v Baillie , also known as the Greenwich Hospital Case , was a 1778 prosecution of Thomas Baillie for criminal libel . The case initiated the legal career of Thomas Erskine . Baillie , the Lieutenant @-@ Governor of the Greenwich Hospital for Seamen , a facility for injured or pensioned off seamen , had noted irregularities and corruption in the hospital , which was formally run by the Earl of Sandwich . After his official reporting of the problems failed to bring about reform in the hospital , Baillie published a pamphlet that was critical of the hospital 's officers , alleging that Sandwich had given appointments to pay off political debts ; Sandwich ignored the pamphlet but ensured that Baillie was indicted for criminal libel . Baillie hired five barristers , including Erskine , then newly called to the Bar , and appeared before Lord Mansfield in the Court of King 's Bench on 23 November 1778 . 
 After four of the barristers had spoken , Mansfield announced that the court session would resume the next morning rather than continue into the night , which gave Erskine the time he needed to present a full speech rather than a brief comment . In it he accused Sandwich of cowardice and of orchestrating the attack on Baillie , arguing that Baillie was merely doing his duty by attempting to bring the problems with the hospital into the public eye , and was therefore not acting in bad faith . If the issues with the hospital were not acknowledged , Erskine claimed , the Royal Navy would be " crippled by abuses " , with seamen no longer willing to risk their lives for a fleet that would fail to treat them well in their retirement . Erskine was successful in having Baillie found not guilty , and after leaving the court was met with a standing ovation ; Emory Speer writes that " It is probably true that never did a single speech so completely ensure professional success " . 
 = = Background = = 
 From 1705 to 1865 , the Greenwich Hospital for Seamen provided medical care to injured seamen and lodgings for those injured sailors who had been pensioned off or were unable to work on ships . Directed by an admiral , " it was more like a ship in port than a clinical facility ... its residents all wore navy uniforms ; food was identical to that served on vessels ( a weekly four pounds of meat and gallon of beer ) ; the seamen received a full ration of tobacco each week ; and time was told by the number of bells " . The facility was established by Royal Charter and led by a group of commissioners . Captain Thomas Baillie was a respected sailor who , after retirement , had been appointed Lieutenant @-@ Governor of the hospital . Here he found corruption , in breach of the Hospital 's Royal Charter , and endeavoured to bring it to the attention of the directors hospital , the hospital 's governors , and eventually the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty . 
 After failing to receive any satisfactory response from those in power over the hospital , Baillie published a pamphlet in 1778 detailing the problems and corruption , which had gone so far as to include denying food to the sailors . The publication of the pamphlet reflected badly on the Earl of Sandwich , who was at the time First Lord of the Admiralty . In his efforts to gain votes and pay off political debts Sandwich had given many of the positions in the hospital to his cronies , who had never served as sailors . Although he publicly ignored Baillie 's allegations , Sandwich ensured through back channels that he was suspended from his job , and had associates go to the Court of King 's Bench and secure a writ allowing them to sue him for criminal libel . 
 By chance , Baillie happened to have dinner with a friend of Thomas Erskine , a newly qualified barrister and former seaman with the Royal Navy . Erskine himself also attended the dinner , although Baillie and Erskine were then unacquainted . When Erskine , unaware of Baillie 's presence , " launched into an eloquent tirade against the corrupt and tyrannical practises of Sandwich " , Baillie resolved to have him as counsel in the case . The next morning , Erskine received the brief for R v Baillie and a retainer of one guinea . Initially thinking he was the only barrister Baillie had retained , he was disappointed to find out that he was but one of five , the other four being Bearcroft , Peckham , Murphy and Hargrave , and that he was scheduled to speak last . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The case of R v Baillie , a prosecution for criminal libel , opened on 23 November 1778 at 1 pm before Lord Mansfield , the Lord Chief Justice , in the Court of King 's Bench . Prior to this , Baillie and his counsel had been debating how to respond to the case ; Bearcroft , Peckham , Murphy and Hargrave advocated negotiating a settlement before it went to trial , while Erskine urged them to argue Baillie 's case before the court and eventually succeeded in convincing Baillie that this was the right thing to do . The case opened with an address by Sir John Scott , the Solicitor General for England and Wales , who was prosecuting Baillie , followed by " long , dreary " speeches by Bearcroft , Peckham , Murphy and Hargrave , defending him . An illness that befell Hargrave caused several interruptions to the proceedings , and as a result darkness had fallen by the time he finished speaking . Lord Mansfield announced that rather than dragging the proceedings out late into the night , the court session would end for the evening and resume the next morning , when Erskine would have his chance to speak . Erskine recognised this as a great opportunity , as it would present him with a refreshed court the following day , rather than an exhausted one ; he said later that he " always blessed God for the providential [ illness ] of Hargrave " . 
 Returning the next morning , the counsel found a packed court ; owing to the involvement of Lord Sandwich and other significant political figures , the case had received a substantial amount of publicity , and thus an audience . Erskine , who without the interruptions would merely have made a short statement and " remained in obscurity " , had taken the adjournment as an opportunity to write a full speech . In it Erskine argued that Baillie , unlike others charged with libel , had merely been doing his duty ; he " was not a disappointed malicious informer , prying into official abuses ... not <unk> inquisitive into other men 's departments , but conscientiously correcting his own at the risk of his office " . After Mansfield cautioned him for growing heated on the subject of Sandwich , who was not before the court , Erskine replied by stating that Sandwich had " placed [ the plaintiffs ] in the front of the battle , in hopes to escape under their shelter ... I will drag him to light , who is the dark mover behind this scene of iniquity " . 
 Erskine then argued that if Sandwich was not responsible for the actions of the hospital 's officers , he should respond by denying responsibility for them and restoring Baillie to his office ; if he did not , he would be " a shameless oppressor , a disgrace to his rank , and a traitor to his trust " . Were the situation in the hospital allowed to continue , the Royal Navy would be " crippled by abuses " , with seamen no longer willing to risk their lives for a fleet that would fail to reward them with good treatment in retirement . Baillie , who had merely tried to prevent this from happening , deserved " a palace , instead of a prison " ; Erskine then left Baillie in the hands of the judges , and the case was dismissed with costs . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The reaction to the trial and to Erskine 's speech was tremendous ; upon leaving the court he was given a standing ovation by the attorneys present , many of whom offered him briefs on the spot . Joseph Jekyll reported that the court was " in a trance of amazement " , and Emory Speer wrote that " It is probably true that never did a single speech so completely insure professional success " . Erskine claimed to have received 65 briefs immediately after the trial as a result of the case , which may be an exaggeration , although he undoubtedly did well out of his victory . He became Lord Chancellor in the Ministry of All the Talents and was renowned as an excellent , albeit unorthodox , advocate . Sandwich remained in office until the government fell in 1792 ; Baillie , on the other hand , was not reinstated at the Hospital despite an insistent effort to regain his former position . The events of the trial were replicated in an episode of Garrow 's Law , with William Garrow depicted as representing Baillie ( rather than Erskine ) and his main antagonist , Arthur Hill , replacing Lord Sandwich . 
 = Breathe ( Taylor Swift song ) = 
 " Breathe " is a country pop song written and performed by American singer @-@ songwriters Taylor Swift and Colbie Caillat . Produced by Nathan Chapman and Swift , it is the seventh track from Swift 's second studio album , Fearless ( 2008 ) . The song was written about the end of a friendship . Musically , the song is driven by acoustic guitar . 
 The song received favorable responses from contemporary music critics . " Breathe " was one of two songs featuring Caillat that was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals in 2010 , the other being Jason Mraz 's " Lucky " , the winner of the award . " Breathe " peaked at number eighty @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 . Its appearance tied Swift with Hannah Montana ( Miley Cyrus ) for two records on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Swift was very fond of Caillat 's 2007 debut album , Coco . Swift explained , " When it came out , I fell in love with the way that she makes music . " Swift later contacted her management and asked if she could write a song with Caillat . They confirmed Caillat would be available due to a then upcoming concert in Nashville , Tennessee and , coincidentally , on the same day , Swift had a vacation day . According to Swift , " Breathe " is about having to depart from a someone , however , not blaming anyone . Swift believed the scenario was one of the most difficult goodbyes , " when it 's nobody 's fault . It just has to end . " Swift explained , " It was total therapy because I came in and I was like look , ' One of my best friends , I 'm gonna have to not see anymore and it 's not gonna be part of what I do . It 's the hardest thing to go through . It 's crazy listening to the song because you would think it 's about a relationship and it 's really about losing a friend and having a fallout . " Caillat and Swift said one of the beauties of the song was that many people would be able to relate to it because it is never specific as why the departure is occurring or whose fault it was . 
 Swift desired for Caillat to sing background vocals but in a loud manner , enough for audiences to recognize who sang backup . Originally Swift and Caillat were only to harmonize in the chorus , but as Caillat recorded , Swift decided to include her voice more throughout the track because of how impressed she was . Swift first recorded the entire song , and Caillat then recorded background vocals separately . Swift was very pleased with the finished product : " I think she sounds beautiful on it . I 'm so excited to have her voice on my album . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Breathe " is a country pop song with a length of four minutes and twenty @-@ one seconds . The song has soft rock and adult contemporary elements in it . It was written in common time and has a ballad tempo of 72 beats per minute . It is written in the key of D ♭ major , and Swift and Caillat 's vocals span one octave , from G ♭ 3 to B ♭ 4 . " Breathe " follows the chord progression D ♭ 5 – A ♭ – G ♭ . The song 's instrumentation relies mainly on acoustic guitar , which are often plucked , while , on occasion , violins provide the accompaniment . 
 The lyrics for " Breathe " are about heartbreak and the loss of a person the narrator spent much time with . In the song 's verses , the narrator acknowledges that people change and grow apart , though she is upset because she knows the person " like the back of her hand . " In the song 's refrains , she realizes the need to remain strong and breathe in order to live without the person . Ken Tucker of Billboard believed " Breathe " was a " love @-@ gone @-@ wrong song . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The song received positive responses from contemporary music critics . Ken Tucker of Billboard said the song was suited for women of different age groups . James Read of The Boston Globe implied " Breathe " was not one of Fearless ' most interesting tracks . Gary Trust , also from Billboard wrote , " this ballad , perhaps along with fellow potential singles such as ' You 're Not Sorry ' and ' Forever & Always , ' could keep Swift 's string of smashes stretching into 2011 . " Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine thought Swift should have chosen another collaborator as he believed Caillat was inert . 
 " Breathe " was one of two songs featuring Caillat that was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals in 2010 , the other being Jason Mraz 's " Lucky " , the winner of the award . About " Breathe " not winning the award , Caillat said , " I love ' Breathe ' with Taylor , but I 've been performing ' Lucky ' with Jason all around the world the last year , so I 'm happy it won . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week ending November 29 , 2008 , " Breathe " debuted and peaked at number eighty @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 . Its appearance , along with six other songs , on the chart tied Swift with Hannah Montana ( Miley Cyrus ) for the female act to have the most songs charting on the Billboard Hot 100 in the same week , a record later surpassed by Swift herself when she charted eleven songs at once in 2010 . It was also one of six songs to debut that tied her with Cyrus , again , for the most debuts on the chart in the same week . The song spent one week on the chart . 
 = Long hair = 
 Long hair is a hairstyle where the hair is allowed to grow to considerable length . Exactly what constitutes long hair can change from culture to culture , or even within cultures . For example , a woman with chin @-@ length hair in some cultures may be said to have short hair , while a man with the same length of hair in some of the same cultures would be said to have long hair . 
 Males having short , cut hair is in many cultures viewed as being under society 's control , such as while in the military or prison or as punishment for a crime , while males having long hair signifies being outside of the mainstream . Long , thick hair has been a sign of wealth , power or prominence throughout time and history . 
 Long lustrous female hair is rated attractive by both men and women across cultures . The prevalence of <unk> ( hair <unk> or fetishism ) is 7 % in the population , and very long hair is a common subject of devotion in this group . 
 = = Biological significance = = 
 Humans , horses , and <unk> are among the few species that may grow their head hair very long . Humans are believed to have lost their fur 2 @.@ 5 – 3 million years ago when transitioning from a forest habitat to the open savanna , as an effect of natural selection , since this development made it possible to run fast and hunt animals close to the equator without getting overheated . An exception was however head hair , which was kept to provide thermal insulation of the scalp from the sun , to protect against ultra @-@ violet radiation exposure , and also to provide cooling ( when sweat evaporates from soaked hair ) . The ability to grow straight hair , has been observed among Homo sapiens sub @-@ groups in less sunny regions further away from the equator . Relative to kinky Afro @-@ textured hair , straight hair allows more UV light to pass to the scalp ( which is essential for the production of vitamin D , that is important for bone development ) . 
 Scientists also view the ability to grow very long hair as a result of sexual selection , since long and healthy hair is a sign of fertility and youth . An evolutionary biology explanation for this attraction is that hair length and quality can act as a cue to youth and health , signifying a woman 's reproductive potential . As hair grows slowly , long hair may reveal 2 – 3 years of a person 's health status , nutrition , age and reproductive fitness . Malnutrition and deficiencies in minerals and vitamins due to starvation causes loss of hair or changes in hair color ( e.g. dark hair turning reddish ) . 
 = = Psychological significance = = 
 Anthropologists speculate that the functional significance of long head hair may be adornment , a by @-@ product of secondary natural selection once other androgenic / somatic hair ( body hair ) had largely been lost . Another possibility is that long head hair is a result of Fisherian runaway sexual selection , where long lustrous hair is a visible marker for a healthy individual . For some groups or individuals , however , short hair is the selected trait . 
 By seven to nine months , infants can tell the sexes apart based on hair length , voice pitch and faces . 
 = = Cultural meaning = = 
 Ways of life often viewed as more rigid , such as soldiers and religious cultures , frequently have explicit rules regarding hair length . For example , Buddhist monks shave their heads as part of their order of worship . Similarly , religious men with long hair include the <unk> of the Hebrew Bible ( Samson being a famous example ) and the Sikhs . Subservient cultures may view male long hair negatively , and are sometimes detected by their rulers through hair length , as was the case with the Gaelic Irish under English rule and the Moors under Spanish rule in Medieval Spain . 
 East Asian cultures have traditionally seen long , unkempt hair in a woman as a sign of sexual intent or a recent sexual encounter , as usually their hair is tied up in styles such as the ponytail , plait , or any bun . 
 = = Transferred meaning = = 
 The traditional connotation of " long hair " in English meant , roughly , someone artistically knowledgeable or wise , an aesthete . As a descriptive term , it has been applied to Merovingians and classical music enthusiasts , as well as hippies and aesthetes . 
 = = Hair lengths = = 
 Hair length is most often measured ( in centimeters or inches ) from the line of the scalp on the forehead up over the highest point of the skull to its termination , and sometimes from the crown , the latter resulting in 10 centimeter lower values in average . In cosmetology , hair lengths are usually categorized according to the part of the body where the bulk of the longest hair terminates : chin level , shoulder length , lower shoulderblade / mid @-@ back level , waist length , hip @-@ length , classic length ( extends to almost buttock @-@ length , i.e. upper thigh @-@ length , where the legs meet the buttocks ) , thigh @-@ length , knee @-@ length and ankle / floor length hair . 
 Hair usually takes about two years to reach shoulder length , and about seven years to reach waist @-@ length / hip @-@ length , including occasional trims ( approximately 80 – 90 cm ( 32 – 36 inches ) from forehead for most people ) 
 = = = Maximum hair length = = = 
 The maximum hair length that is possible to reach is about 15 cm ( 6 in ) for infants ( below the age of 1 ) , about 60 cm ( 24 in ) for children , and generally 100 cm ( 40 in ) for adults . Documentation for decrease of the maximum length with age cannot be found in the literature . Some individuals can reach excessive lengths . Lengths greater than 150 cm ( 59 in ) are frequently observed in long hair contests . Xie <unk> had the longest documented hair in the world , measuring 5 @.@ 627 m ( 18 ft 5 @.@ 54 in ) in May 2004 . 
 The maximum terminal hair length depends on the length of the anagen ( period of hair growth ) for the individual . Waist @-@ length hair or longer is only possible to reach for people with long anagen . The anagen lasts between 2 and 7 years , for some individuals even longer , and follows by shorter <unk> ( transition ) and <unk> ( resting ) periods . Between 85 % and 90 % of the hair strands are in anagen at any given time . The <unk> growth factor 5 ( FGF5 ) gene affects the hair cycle in mammals including humans ; blocking FGF5 in the human scalp ( by applying a herbal extract that blocked FGF5 ) extends the hair cycle , resulting in less hair fall and increased hair growth . 
 = = Cultural history = = 
 = = = In Jewish and Christian scriptures = = = 
 In the Old Testament , the <unk> would go for long periods of time without cutting their hair to show devotion to God . Samson is one example ; his strength depended upon his refraining from cutting his hair , described as worn in " seven locks " . 
 In the New Testament , Saint Paul ( formerly Saul of Tarsus ) wrote , " Doth not even nature itself teach you , that , if a man have long hair , it is a shame unto him ? But if a woman have long hair , it is a glory to her : for her hair is given her for a covering . But if any seem contentious , we have no such custom , neither do the churches of God . " 
 = = = Western culture = = = 
 = = = = Ancient Greece and Rome = = = = 
 In ancient Greece , long male hair was a symbol of wealth and power , while a shaven head was appropriate for a slave . The ancient Greeks had several gods and heroes who wore their hair long , including Zeus , Achilles , Apollo , and Poseidon . Greek soldiers are said to have worn their hair long in battle . Such warriors considered it a sign of aristocracy and are said to have combed it openly in order to show off . Also , in order to keep enemies from getting a hold of it in battle , they were known to cut the front short , but leave it long in the back , where it was more out of reach . A widely held alternative interpretation of the conventional belief is that they kept it long , and simply tied it back in a style known as a ponytail in order to keep it out of their enemies ' reach . The ponytail method allowed warriors , who often traveled to battle with a minimal amount of equipment in order to avoid excessively heavy loads over long marches , to keep their hair manageable with a small piece of string to hold their pony tail in place and a knife to cut the back to length with one simple slice . Around the sixth century , however , the Greek men shifted to shorter hairstyles , with the exception of the Spartans . Women in the culture remained with the longer style , which for them showed freedom , health , and wealth , as well as good behavior . In men , it was considered a sign of false pride by this time . 
 Pliny the Elder in his Natural History and Varro related that the Romans did not begin to cut their hair short until barbers were introduced to Italy from Sicily by P. <unk> Mena in 299 BC . Women in Roman times valued long hair , usually with a center part . Apart from in the earliest times , men 's hair was usually shorter than women 's , although other cultures of the time , such as Greeks in the east , considered long hair to be typical of philosophers , who were thought to be too engrossed in learning to bother with hair . Strictly in the province of Rome , however , the shorter hairstyle was especially popular . When Julius Caesar conquered the Gauls , who favored long hair , he ordered it to be cut short . 
 = = = = Middle Ages = = = = 
 In the European middle ages , shorter hair often signified servitude and peasantry , while long hair was often attributed to freemen , as was the case with the Germanic Goths and Merovingians . 
 The Gaelic Irish ( both men and women ) took great pride in their long hair — for example , a person could be heavily fined for cutting a man 's hair short against his will . When the Anglo @-@ Normans and the English colonized Ireland , hair length came to signify one 's allegiance . Irishmen who cut their hair short were deemed to be forsaking their Irish heritage . Likewise , English colonists who wore their hair long in the back were deemed to be forsaking their role as English subjects and giving in to the Irish life . Thus , hair length was one of the most common ways of judging a true Englishman in this period . Muslims in Christian areas were ordered to keep their hair short and parted , as their longer style was considered rebellious and barbaric . 
 The long hair tradition was widespread among English and French men in the 11th and 12th centuries , though it was considered , mostly because of endorsement of the Roman Catholic Church , acceptable for men also to have shorter hair . The tradition was largely brought about by monarchs who rejected the shorter hairstyle , causing the people to follow . Wulfstan , a religious leader , worried that those with longer hair would fight like women , and be unable to protect England from foreign invasion . This idea can be found in later military leaders as well , such as those of the American Confederacy . Knights and rulers would also sometimes cut or pull out their hair in order to show penitence and mourning , and a squire 's hair was generally shorter than a knight 's . Married women who let their hair flow out in public were frowned upon , as this was normally reserved for the unwed , although they were allowed to let it out in mourning , to show their distressed state . Through these centuries it was expected of Eastern Christians to wear long hair as well as long beards , which was especially expected from clergy and monks . 
 In England , during the English Civil Wars of 1642 to 1651 , male hair length was emblematic of the disputes between Cavaliers and Roundheads ( Puritans ) . Cavaliers wore longer hair , and were less religious @-@ minded , thought of by the Roundheads as lecherous . The more devout Roundheads typically had somewhat shorter hair 
 Around this time , long hair in England also came to be associated with adventurers who traveled to America and were familiar with the native culture there , short hair with less adventurous types . 
 = = = = Recent trends among women = = = = 
 Growing and wearing long hair was common among women in the Western world until World War One . Long female hair never ceased in western culture , though it was rare during the 1920s and 1930s , and was frequent especially around 1970 and 1985 . 
 In most current cultures , it is more typical for women to wear long hair than for men to do so . An American study shows significant correlation between hair length and age , which indicates that younger women tend to have longer hair than older women . A significant correlation was also found between women 's hair length and hair quality . Moreover , hair quality was correlated with the women 's perceived physical health . Consistent with principles of evolutionary psychology , these results indicate that hair length and quality can act as a cue to a woman 's youth and health , signifying reproductive potential . The correlation between the woman 's hair length and marital status , or number of children , was however not more than to be expected from the correlation between hair length and age . 
 = = = = Recent trends among men = = = = 
 Before World War One men generally had longer hair and beards . However , short hair on men was introduced in World War One for soldiers . Slaves and defeated armies were often required to shave their heads . The trench warfare in 1914 to 1918 exposed men to flea and lice infestations , which prompted the order to cut short hair , establishing a military tradition , and it expanded among <unk> by imitation . 
 Beat poets during the 1950s wore longer hairstyles . By 1960 , a small " beatnik " community in Newquay , Cornwall , England ( including a young Wizz Jones ) had attracted the attention of their neighbors for growing their hair to a length past the shoulders , resulting in a television interview with Alan <unk> on BBC television 's Tonight series . The 1960s also introduced The Beatles , who started a more widespread longer hair trend . The social revolution of the 1960s led to a renaissance of unchecked hair growth , and long hair , especially on men , was worn as a political or countercultural symbol or protest and as a symbol of masculinity . This cultural symbol extended to several Western countries in the Americas , Western Europe , South Africa , and Australia . Specific long hairstyles such as dreadlocks have been part of counterculture movements seeking to define other alternative cultures and lifestyles since this time . Longer hair in general remained popular due to the youth rebellion throughout the liberal decade of the 1960s . The long hair trend grew with the spread of the hippie movement in the 1960s and , in the 1970s , longer hair styles would become the norm among men and women . 
 In the 1970s , the popularity of Jamaica 's reggae music and musician Bob Marley prompted interest in dreadlocks internationally . The anti @-@ establishment philosophy of Rastafari , echoed in much of the reggae of the time , resonated with leaning youth of all ethnicities – especially and primarily among African Americans and other Blacks , but among counterculture whites as well . Eastern Christians are encouraged to wear long hair with long beard . In the 1980s the view of long hair as a solitary signifier of political or counter @-@ cultural identity was countered and parodied in films such as Rambo and many other militaristic heroes of media which challenged then @-@ contemporary views of tradition . Today , longer hairstyles among men are still quite popular among neopagans and rock enthusiasts ; for example , musicians in heavy metal and power metal bands often wear long hair . Long hair may be grown for the purpose of being donated to an organization , such as Locks of Love , for <unk> to help those who could not have hair otherwise , such as those who are diagnosed with alopecia <unk> . 
 = = = = African Americans = = = = 
 When African slaves were freed in America , they struggled to reach the social status of whites . Many former slaves tried to conform their hairstyles as part of this struggle . Women , especially , felt pressure to make their hair long and oily , rather than keeping the shorter , tightly coiled style they had known . However , during the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s , African @-@ Americans such as Malcolm X advocated hairstyles such as afros and dreadlocks , in order to embrace their race , and to return to West African roots . 
 Social pressures at the time were heavily influencing these Americans ( women ) to have long , straight hair , like white people did . This resulted in the Black is beautiful movement , wherein African Americans wore long hair , that was however , untreated and unmodified . More recently , hair @-@ extensions have become widespread . Scholars have pointed out the continued pressure on black women to have long , smooth hair . Amelia Jones points out that dolls for children , such as <unk> , add to this pressure , citing as an example a new , black Barbie with long hair . Blacks , she believes , should be able to be themselves without feeling pressured to " tame " their hair . 
 = = = = Contemporary North America = = = = 
 1972 , it was estimated that 24 % of American women wore shoulder length hair or longer ( 44 % of women in ages 14 to 44 ) , meaning slightly more than 12 % of men and women altogether . Similar frequency was found in 2001 , when it was estimated that about 13 % of the US adult population , male as well as females , has hair shoulder @-@ length or longer , about 2 @.@ 4 % have hair reaching to the bottom of the shoulder blades or longer , about 0 @.@ 3 % have hair waist length or longer , and only about 0 @.@ 017 % have hair buttocks @-@ length or longer . By extrapolating the above data and the number of hair length records , the number of people with waist length hair in USA is estimated to 27 million , with buttocks @-@ length hair to 40 @,@ 000 , with knee length hair to 2 @,@ 000 and with ankle length hair to 70 . 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 = = = = Judaism = = = = 
 Strict orthodox Judaism forbids men from cutting their <unk> , but other hair may be kept as desired . Hair is not cut during a time of mourning . The Torah in Deuteronomy 14 : 1 prohibits removing hair in mourning for the dead . 
 = = = = Islam = = = = 
 In the Muslim world , it seems the trend of hair styles is now favouring short over long in men . In the past , Bedouin Muslims often wore their hair in long braids , but influences from the Western world have caused a change in attitudes . Bedouins are now less likely to have long hair . Islamic countries in North Africa such as Egypt view long hair in men as modernist and in one case the Egyptian police viewed it as Satanic and a sign of an infidel . Spanish rulers during the Medieval Period suspected long @-@ haired males to be Moors or <unk> , therefore long hair was forbidden since it was believed to be a Moorish custom . However , modern North African men have adopted Western short hair . 
 Muslims regard the Prophet Muhammad as the best example to live by , and try to emulate him whenever possible . The Islamic Prophet Muhammad reportedly in Sahih Muslim had hair that " hung over his shoulders and earlobes " . Sahih Bukhari , regarded the most authentic of hadith , also supports this using a prime example of the prophet Isa ( Jesus ) . The Prophet Muhammad has also described Jesus as " having long hair reaching his ear lobes . " Malik 's <unk> 51 @.@ 2 @.@ 6 reported , Yahya related to me from Malik from Yahya ibn Said that Abu Qatada al @-@ Ansari said to the Messenger of Allah , may Allah bless him and grant him peace , " I have a lot of hair which comes down to my shoulders , shall I comb it ? The Messenger of <unk> may Allah bless him and grant him peace , said , " Yes , and honour it . " Sometimes Abu Qatada oiled it twice in one day because the Messenger of Allah , may Allah bless him and grant him peace , said to him . " Honour it . " 
 With regards to women , neither Qur 'an nor Sunnah explicitly state that women cannot cut their hair . Hadith does mention that women should not imitate men , and vice versa , and hence many scholars on this assumption , decree that women should let their hair grow longer than the hair of the Prophet , reaching beyond their shoulders , as hadith mentions that the Prophet had his hair between his shoulder and his earlobes . ( He described Jesus 's hair , which hung to his earlobes , as long . ) 
 However , according to some hadiths regarding the rules of <unk> , women are required to grow hair long , long enough that it would cover the breasts or as much <unk> parts of the body when they 're being buried , because she lacks clothes and long hair would be used as a covering instead . 
 Some Muslims are also opposed to men having long hair as it is also important in Islam to have clear differences ( in appearance ) between sexes . And generally these cultures encourage women to have long hair and men to have short hair . The Taliban in Afghanistan viewed long hair for men as a western influence , and punished it by arrest and forced haircuts , although this would be a direct contradiction of the sunnah of the Prophet . Similar measures have been taken by Islamists in Iraq . In spite of this , several Taliban affiliated members of the Mehsud clan are recognisable by their long hair . The Saudi Islamist fighter Amir Khattab was also notable for his long hair . Dervishes of some Sufi orders , such as the <unk> , often have long hair and whirl it around during rituals . 
 = = = Native Americans = = = 
 Many Native American men wore long hair before the arrival of western influences on their culture . ( In Cherokee legends , for example , males said to be handsome were often described as having " long hair almost to the ground " or similar formulas . ) . Both men and women of these cultures have frequently struggled to maintain their tradition but have faced heavy opposition . Many consider it a sign of giving in to western influences to have their hair cut . Early American settlers saw long @-@ haired , native men as rebelling against their civilized society . Mountain men and trappers who adopted the customs were also considered amoral , and often identified by their long hair . Since the cultural movements of the Sixties and Seventies , however , Native Americans have felt less pressure to have short hair , as different movements have defended their cultural rights . For example , several states have loosened prison regulations , allowing Native Americans to wear long hair during incarceration , along with other cultural allowances . There has been resistance to these changes , however , as long hair is sometimes used to hide drugs , as well as to identify with a gang . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 Throughout much of Africa , afro @-@ textured hair is the most frequent hair form , except among the Afro @-@ Asiatic ( <unk> @-@ Semitic ) speaking populations in North Africa and the Horn of Africa . In the latter regions , naturally long hair is instead more common . 
 In West African cultures , women with long hair were highly valued . Long , thick hair was seen as a sign of health , strength , and capability to bear many children . In keeping with this general theme , women who were too young for marriage would shave a portion of their heads to signal so . This tradition , however , did not extend to every West African tribe , as several valued shorter hair . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 Historically , East Asian cultures viewed long hair as a sign of youth and aesthetic beauty . Long hair is associated with private life and sexuality . East Asian cultures see long , unkempt hair in a woman as a sign of sexual intent or a recent sexual encounter , as usually their hair is tied up . Lay Buddhists have long hair , while Buddhist monks have shaved heads . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 In ancient China and Korea , hair was regarded as a precious legacy from parents . Most people would never cut their hair after they became adults , and cutting off one 's hair was a penalty for minor crimes . Both men and women would coil up their hair and many hair @-@ coiling styles were developed . 
 Beginning in 1619 , the ethnic Manchu Qing dynasty forced all men in China to adopt the queue : a long braid down the back with the hair near the forehead completely shaved . Hair length and style became a life @-@ or @-@ death matter in 1645 as the Manchu told them either their hair or their head would be cut . By 1651 , the population of China had been reduced from 51 million to just 20 million , as a whole generation resisted the order for the sake of Confucian ideals against shaving or harming their hair . 
 Nearly every Han rebel group began by shearing this pigtail ( most especially in the case of the Taiping , who were known in Chinese as the " <unk> " ) , but the queue on penalty of death lasted until 1911 , when the Chinese people cut their queues in unison at a time of rebellion . Americans at first judged Chinese immigrant laborers to be poor workers because their long hair brought an association with women . 
 Islamic and Christian missionaries among the Chinese were strong advocates of shorter male hair for their converts . Around the Destruction of Four Olds period in 1964 , almost anything seen as part of Traditional Chinese culture would lead to problems with the Communist Red Guards . Items that attracted dangerous attention if caught in the public included jewelry and long male hair . These things were regarded as symbols of bourgeois lifestyle , that represented wealth . People had to avoid them or suffer serious consequences such as tortures and beatings by the guards . More recently , long hair was ridiculed in China from October 1983 to December 1983 , as part of the short and unsuccessful Anti @-@ Spiritual Pollution Campaign . 
 Also , in Chinese ancient and modern poetry , long hair is a common symbol used by poets , for example Li Bai and Li <unk> , to express their depression and sadness . Influenced by anime , comic and video game from Japan , youths translate a new word ( simplified Chinese : <unk> : <unk> ) from Japanese to illustrate a beauty with black , long and straight hair . 
 = = = = Southeast Asia = = = = 
 In Southeast Asia and Indonesia , male long hair was valued in until the seventeenth century , when the area adopted outside influences including Islam and Christianity . Invading cultures enforced shorter hairstyles on men as a sign of servitude , as well . They were also confused at the short hairstyles among women in certain areas , such as Thailand , and struggled to explain why women in the area had such short hair . They came up with several mythical stories , one of which involved a king who found a long hair in his rice and , in a rage , demanded that all women keep their hair short . 
 In rural areas in certain Asian countries , for example India , girls still usually let their hair grow long , and knee @-@ length hair is not unusual . 
 = = = = Japan = = = = 
 In the medieval Japan , <unk> gentleman were not very interested in a woman 's physical beauty and rarely had an opportunity to see it . The only physical attribute of interest was a woman 's hair , which had to be thick and longer than she was tall . The fascination with long hair was one reason why a woman 's becoming a nun was regarded with such seriousness — it could never again grow to its full length . This explains why Genji refuses to let Murasaki ( his de facto wife in the classical Japanese novel The Tale of Genji ) take the tonsure when she is ill . 
 = = = = Sikhism = = = = 
 For Sikhs , Kesh is the practice of allowing one 's hair to grow naturally as a symbol of devotion to God and lack of worldliness . 
 The Sikhs were commanded by Guru Gobind Singh at the Baisakhi Amrit Sanchar in 1699 to wear long uncut hair called Kesh at all times to signify the strength and vitality of the Sikh people . This was one of the ' five requisites of faith ' , collectively called <unk> that form the external visible identifiers to clearly affirm a Sikh 's commitment and dedication to the order ( <unk> ) of the tenth master and made one a member of the Khalsa . The Khalsa is the " Saint @-@ Soldier " of Guru Gobind Singh who stated the following : " He does not recognize anyone else except One Lord , not even the bestowal of charities , performance of merciful acts , austerities and restraint on pilgrim @-@ stations ; the perfect light of the Lord illuminates his heart , then consider him as the immaculate Khalsa . " ( Guru Gobind Singh in the <unk> Granth page 1350 ) 
 The Kesh or unshorn long hair is an indispensable part of the human body as created by <unk> that is the mainstay of the ' <unk> <unk> ' and the <unk> that was prescribed by Guru Gobind Singh Sahib by which a Sikh is clearly and quickly identified , Kesh . The <unk> , another requisite of faith is usually tucked behind the " Rishi Knot " and tied under the turban . The uncut long head hair and the beard in the case of men forms the main <unk> for the Sikhs . 
 <unk> , a term defining a Sikh as one who carries on his head the full growth of his <unk> ( hair ) which he never trims or cuts for any reason . Anyone , Sikh or non @-@ Sikh , may keep the hair unshorn , but for the Sikh <unk> , unshorn hair , is a requisite of faith and an inviolable vow . The Sikh <unk> Maryada published by the Shiromani Gurdwara <unk> Committee , statutory body for the control and management of Sikh shrines and by extension for laying down rules about Sikh beliefs and practices , issued in 1945 , after long and minute deliberations among Sikh scholars and theologians , defines a Sikh thus : Every Sikh who has been admitted to the rites of <unk> , i.e. who has been initiated as a Sikh , must allow his hair to grow to its full length . This also applies to those born of Sikh families but [ who ] have not yet received the rites of <unk> of the tenth master , Guru Gobind Singh . " . 
 = = Images = = 
 Female long hair in art ( Gallery at Wikimedia commons ) 
 Female long hair photos ( Gallery at Wikimedia commons ) 
 Male long hair in art ( Gallery at Wikimedia commons ) 
 Male long hair photos ( Gallery at Wikimedia commons ) 
 = PokerTracker = 
 PokerTracker Software , LLC is the name of a poker tool software company that produces the popular PokerTracker line of poker tracking and analysis software . PokerTracker 's software imports and parses the hand histories that poker sites create during online play and stores the resulting statistics / information about historical play into a local database library for self @-@ analysis , and for in @-@ game opponent analysis using a real @-@ time Head @-@ up display . 
 The software allows the user to monitor each poker session 's profit or loss , hands played , time played , and table style . It calculates and graphs statistics such as hands per hour , winnings per hand , winnings per hour , cumulative profit and loss , and individual game profit and loss across multiple currencies . 
 = = Products = = 
 PokerTracker Software , LLC produces poker analysis software . Examples include PokerTracker Holdem v2 , PokerTracker Omaha v2 , PokerTracker 3 Hold 'em ( PT3 ) for Texas Hold ' em , PokerTracker 3 Omaha ( PTO ) for Omaha Hold ' em , PokerTracker Stud for Stud poker , and TableTracker . The company previously developed the PokerAce Head @-@ Up Display , also known as PokerAce HUD or simply <unk> , which provides real @-@ time information for live online poker play ; the functionality from this formerly separate application was eventually incorporated within PokerTracker 3 . Collectively , the company 's software has been described as " among the most comprehensive software programs in the online poker industry " by <unk> The company subsequently developed PokerTracker 4 in 2012 and 2013 , which is its most recent software development . 
 = = = PokerTracker 3 = = = 
 In September 2009 , the company announced that as of March 31 , 2010 , PokerTracker Holdem v2 would no longer be supported . The decision was made because PokerTracker 3 had been released on May 15 , 2008 , nearly two years prior to the end @-@ of @-@ life date . The company felt that discontinuing support of v2 would avail resources which could be dedicated to improving PT3 and providing exceptional customer service . Similarly on December 31 , 2010 , PokerTracker Omaha v2 will also no longer be supported , as its features have been completely integrated into the PokerTracker 3 product line . 
 PokerTracker 3 supports online poker from the following poker networks and / or sites : 888 Poker Network , Bodog , Boss Media , Cake Network , Cereus Poker Network , <unk> Poker , Everest Poker , Full Tilt Poker , <unk> , <unk> , Merge Gaming Network , <unk> , <unk> , PokerStars and <unk> . PokerTracker is available natively for both Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X @-@ based computers . 
 PokerTracker 3 competes against several similar programs . According to Total Gambler , its most notable competitors are Hold ’ em Manager and <unk> , while <unk> considers only Hold ’ em Manager to be a serious competitor . 
 = = = PokerTracker 4 = = = 
 PokerTracker 4 is poker tracking software that designed for several types of online poker : No @-@ Limit , Limit , or Pot @-@ Limit cash games , Sit N ’ Go ’ s and Multi @-@ Table Tournaments for both Texas Holdem and Omaha players . It is compatible with almost all online poker websites ' software and interfaces . PokerTracker 4 began public beta testing in March 2012 . In August 2012 , the company commercially launched a Microsoft Windows version of PokerTracker 4 . In January 2013 as PokerTracker version 4 @.@ 05 @.@ 10 was rolled out , the company began alpha testing an Apple OS X version of the software . PokerTracker 4 was produced from scratch rather than by refining PokerTracker 3 and other earlier versions . 
 = = Software features = = 
 On most online poker sites , players can have the client software create a locally stored text file that records the hand history as shown in the ' Sample Hand History ' example . These hand histories summarize the details of the hand in a format that can be parsed by computer software . PokerTracker reads these files and extracts the relevant information , which it converts into a database for later review or statistical analysis . The software is capable of combining hand history details of multiple accounts from different online poker services , which allows a user to aggregate his or her data . Statistical summaries can be consolidated from different poker sites regardless of whether the user 's screen name is the same at each site . 
 PokerTracker is capable of analyzing cash ring games in which players play for cash during each hand , sit and go tournaments in which players compete for set prizes after the prescribed number of competitors join the tournament , and multi @-@ table tournaments in which players compete for tournament prizes based on the total number of entries at the scheduled start time . Statistics can be tracked by position , session , tournament , best & worst hands , and hand results . The helps the user analyze statistics based on starting hand or final hand . The software also enables the user to replay any specific hand . 
 The software 's database uses tournament summaries such as the ' Sample Tournament Summary ' example and hand histories to provide a three section summary ( see infobox screenshot ) . The top section of the general information tab provides tournament summaries of profit / loss as well as ordinal placement summary . The other sections summarize situational statistics based on the level of the blinds and the starting hand . Additional tabs in the software produce detailed information for various statistical interests . 
 PokerTracker 's probability graphs , as well as historical statistics of the hands a user and his or her opponents have played , enable the user to analyze conditional statistical possibilities and optimal betting amounts . The situations it analyzes are conditional on the opposition 's playing characteristics and the player 's position relative to the dealer . Graphs can be produced for a single session or for any part of one 's playing history . One of the biggest improvements in PokerTracker 3 over PT2 is that it is fully customizable so that all statistics and reports can be tailored to the individual user . The Guardian claims most serious players use PokerTracker during online play to constantly calculate situational <unk> . 
 PokerTracker 3 is also known for its integrated heads @-@ up display , a transparent video overlay data presentation that makes statistics and notes are readily available during play . The HUD allows an online poker player to focus his attention on the poker table he or she is playing at , rather than on the PokerTracker application . The HUD provides a vast array of realtime statistics for in @-@ game analysis , customizable to the user 's preference . In addition to the statistics available constantly during play on the poker window , detailed statistics are available in a pop @-@ up window , accessible via a single mouse click . Marbella Slim of the Daily Star used the vision of Arnold Schwarzenegger 's Terminator character in an analogy with the HUD : " In some scenes , you get to see what the robot Terminator is seeing and he has all these data streams in front of his vision - it 's a HUD or a head @-@ up display . " Unlike other poker tracking products , PokerTracker 3 includes a HUD as part of the basic program . The PT3 HUD , which automatically overlays a player 's opponents ' statistics next to their avatars , is essentially a built @-@ in version of the formerly available PokerAce HUD . 
 PokerTracker 3 also offers a monthly subscription @-@ based service called TableTracker . TableTracker is an integrated service that automatically identifies ring tables with competition suitable to the user 's playing style . PokerTracker 's servers constantly monitor which players are playing and what tables they are playing at on various major poker sites , which allows TableTracker to find the weakest players across multiple online poker websites . The user can search based on the software 's built in scoring system or any other statistics of his or her choosing . 
 = = Use and legality = = 
 Serious poker pros and casual amateurs alike can benefit from the poker tracking software , and poker magazines such as Card Player repeatedly remind poker players of the usefulness of tracking software . Total Gambler says that in addition to experience and skill the other necessity for a gambler to become a professional poker player is a good software package such as PokerTracker . 
 Several websites portray PokerTracker as either the world 's leading or the world 's most popular poker tracking software . For example , <unk> describes it as " the most popular poker tracking and analysis software available " and Party Poker describes PokerTracker as " the original and largest piece of poker tracking software " . <unk> says " Poker Tracker has been the industry standard ... for years " . Total Gambler says that for more than a two @-@ year period PokerTracker 2 was the " prominent force in online poker tracking " , but at the time of its December 2008 review it speaks of this leadership position in the past tense , noting that PT3 had not yet been " fully released " at the time of its testing . 
 Major online card rooms forbid the use of software that gives a player an " unfair advantage . " This typically includes software that allows players to share their hole cards with other players during live play and software that automates decision making . Since PokerTracker software doesn 't fit into either of these categories it is generally allowed on most sites , including industry leader <unk> Legality aside , some players feel the use of PokerTracker takes away from the game ; for example , Victoria Coren of The Guardian remarks " there is only one downside [ to using PokerTracker ] . Where 's the bloody fun in it ? " 
 = Hurricane Ramon = 
 Hurricane Ramon was a very intense Pacific hurricane that generated heavy rains in Southern California . The 19th named storm and final hurricane of the above @-@ average 1987 Pacific hurricane season , Ramon originated from a tropical disturbance formed in early October . On October 5 , a tropical storm had developed several hundred miles southwest of Manzanillo , bypassing the tropical depression stage . Tropical Storm Ramon turned to the west @-@ northwest after initially moving west . It intensified into a hurricane on October 7 . Two days later , Hurricane Ramon peaked in intensity with winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) . After peaking , Ramon turned to the northwest and rapidly weakened over cooler waters . It weakened into a tropical storm on October 11 and a depression on October 12 . Ramon dissipated shortly thereafter . While at sea , Ramon brought light rainfall to the Baja California Peninsula . The remnants of Hurricane Ramon produced heavy rainfall that caused flooding in California , indirectly contributing to five traffic @-@ related fatalities . Rainfall was reported as far inland as Utah . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Ramon originated from a tropical disturbance that was situated south of a large ridge over Central Mexico . The disturbance became better organized while traversing 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) waters and at 1800 UTC on October 5 , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) upgraded the disturbance into a tropical storm while centered about 575 mi ( 925 km ) southwest of Acapulco . Initially , the storm was expected to move west and not affect land ; however , this did not occur . After being named , Tropical Storm Ramon held onto marginal tropical storm intensity for 24 hours . Thereafter , Tropical Storm Ramon turned west @-@ northwestward and began to intensity . At 1200 UTC on October 7 , the EPHC reported that Ramon had intensified into a hurricane . About 24 hours later , the system was upgraded into a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) . Rapidly intensifying , Ramon reached major hurricane status on October 8 ( Category 3 or higher on the SSHWS ) . At 0600 UTC on October 9 , Ramon was upgraded into a Category 4 hurricane while reaching its peak intensity of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) , which it maintained for 24 hours . 
 After attaining peak intensity , Hurricane Ramon began to weaken . Late on October 10 , Ramon weakened slightly while turning northwest . The following morning , the storm reportedly weakened into a Category 2 . Hurricane Ramon began to rapidly deteriorate due to a combination of jetstream interactions and increasingly cold sea @-@ surface temperatures . At 0600 UTC on October 11 , the storm was downgraded into a Category 1 on the SSHWS after bypassing the Category 2 stage . It weakened into a tropical storm later that day and was further downgraded to a tropical depression on October 12 . Tropical Depression Ramon dissipated on 0600 UTC that day . The remnant moisture of this hurricane later moved into Southern California , resulting in record rains . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Although Hurricane Ramon was far from the state of California at that time , a flash flood watch was issued for southern Orange , San Diego , western San Bernardino and Riverside counties , citing uncertainty in the storm 's path . Additionally , " alerts " were also posted over a wide area that included the Santa Ana Mountains , the Laguna Mountains , Lake Arrowhead , and Joshua Tree National Monument . While still at sea , the storm produced high waves along the Pacific coast in the Baja California Peninsula ; Cabo San Lucas reported waves 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) high . The outer rainband 's of Hurricane Ramon brought scattered showers to the region . 
 The remnants of this storm caused extremely heavy rains across Southern California , peaking at 2 @.@ 14 in ( 54 mm ) in Camp <unk> . A total of 0 @.@ 5 in ( 13 mm ) of rain was reported in San Diego , resulting in street flooding . Torrential rainfall was recorded in San Diego County , where two people died in separate traffic accidents . Further north , in the city of Los Angeles , three more people perished in separate traffic incidents . Heavy rains extended west and was also reported in Hemet in Riverside County , where three people were also injured during a car accident . The rains caused a week @-@ long forest fire 16 @,@ 000 acre ( 65 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m ² ) on Mt . Palomar to dissolve . Several streets were closed in Orange County and San Diego County . One library 's roof <unk> , as such , books had to be covered for protection . Furthermore , the Spring Creek River overflowed its banks . Elsewhere , the moisture spread rains to Nevada , Arizona , Utah , and southwestern Colorado . The tropical moisture also helped end a 37 @-@ day dry spell in Salt Lake City , marking the longest time the city went without rain since 1964 . Nation @-@ wide , Ramon killed five people , all due to road @-@ related incidents . 
 = TowerFall = 
 TowerFall is a 2013 archery arena indie video game created by Matt Thorson where up to four players use arrows and head @-@ stomps to fight in a battle royale . It was released as an Ouya microconsole exclusive on June 25 , 2013 , and was later ported to PlayStation 4 , Microsoft Windows , Linux , Mac OS X in 2014 as TowerFall Ascension . TowerFall was Thorson 's first full commercial game , and it grew from a June 2012 game jam single @-@ player prototype . Thorson tested the game on his indie developer colleagues with whom he lived , and developed its capacity as a party game . Its mechanics were inspired by games of Thorson 's youth , such as Bushido Blade and Goldeneye 007 , and influenced by feedback received at the Evolution Championship Series fighting game tournament . The game was known as the standout title for the Ouya at the console 's launch , and sold well . 
 When the Ouya exclusivity expired , Thorson signed another exclusivity agreement for the PlayStation 4 , where Ascension received an expanded single @-@ player mode , and new levels , weapons , and gameplay variants . Ascension received generally favorable reviews . Reviewers praised the game 's balance , compared it favorably with Super Smash Bros. , and recommended it as a party game . Critics felt that the single @-@ player mode was a low point , and lamented for an online multiplayer mode . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 TowerFall is an archery combat arena game where players kill each other with arrows and head @-@ stomps until only one player remains . In multiplayer , up to four players fight in a battle royale using a limited supply of arrows . Players replenish their arrow supply from those shot about the arena . The players can also catch other players ' arrows . " Treasure " power @-@ ups give players shields , wings , and arrows with increased power . The game 's rules can be customized and saved for future use . Kotaku 's Chris Person described the gameplay as " [ Super ] Smash Bros. bred with games like Spelunky or Nidhogg " . 
 There are four game modes . In single @-@ player , the player must hit targets around the arena before a timer runs out . The developer compared this mode to " Break the Targets " in the Super Smash Bros. series . Ascension adds a remodeled version of the target levels as a Trials mode , which requires the players to use power @-@ ups to break all targets within several seconds . Ascension also adds a Quest mode , where one or two players attempt to survive against enemy waves of increasing difficulty . As a single @-@ player event , Quest functions as a score attack mode . The new Ascension improvements were also released for the Ouya version . 
 The Ouya release supports the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 controllers . Ascension uses the DualShock 4 controller 's built @-@ in speaker to play sound effects . The game does not have online multiplayer . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was developed and produced by Matt Thorson , who previously made Planet Punch and browser games . TowerFall was his first full commercial game . The idea came from a visit with Alec Holowka as they worked at a game jam , the 48 @-@ hour June 2012 Vancouver Full Indie Game Jam . The team iterated through a Legend of Zelda @-@ inspired multiplayer mode that became a single @-@ player platformer Flash game where the player was a " skilled archer out of an ancient legend " . They intended to add multiple weapons , but chose to keep their first one — the bow and arrow — due to its feel . The arrow was designed to fire without charging and to bias towards targets so as to give the player " more leeway " . Thorson also chose to limit the aim direction to the eight ordinal directions rather than affording complex 360 degree controls . They also added levels , items , a store , and a story based on ascending a tower . Along with progress , players would gaining new items and skills . Thorson originally intended to send the game to Adult Swim for " easy money " , but changed his mind upon developing a multiplayer version after the jam . 
 Holowka credits the multiplayer 's party game feel to the many hours of local multiplayer testing it received in Thorson 's homes in Vancouver . Thorson lived with a developer he met through Game Maker 's community and the two eventually moved in with Holowka in " Indie House " , a Vancouver house whose occupants are all indie developers . The close community of indie gamers and their interest in trying new game ideas was both a product and generator of their living arrangements . Though Holowka dropped back from the project shortly after the game jam , leaving the project to Thorson , he stepped in to demo the game at the 2013 Game Developers Conference at the last minute when Thorson 's passport was expired . With an increase in press attention following an exhibition at PAX East , Thorson entered an agreement with Ouya 's Kellee Santiago to release exclusively on the microconsole . Critics saw this as being the action the new console needed to compete with existing consoles , and Thorson felt the release for Ouya to be less " intimidating " than if for the PlayStation 3 . The game also fit Ouya 's emphasis on couch co @-@ op gaming . Thorson originally did the artwork himself but was not satisfied with the results and hired <unk> to finish the graphics . Holowka composed the music , and Thorson hired Power Up Audio to make the sound effects . 
 Thorson said that the game started to come together about six months into its development . He tested the game on close friends once every few weeks and they would ask him when they could play it again . Thorson brought the game to the 2013 Evolution Championship Series fighting games tournament , where he unexpectedly received more praise than criticism . The game mechanics were inspired by games from Thorson 's youth . Upon reflection , he felt that the game had the item @-@ catching mechanics of Super Smash Bros. , the one @-@ hit kills and tension of Bushido Blade , the playfulness of Goldeneye 007 , the shooting mechanics of Yoshi 's Island , and the positioning strategy of Team Fortress 2 . He described his development process as tweaking Super Smash Bros. Melee to his tastes . The limited arrow design was intended to slow the gameplay and encourage player strategy . He considered adding online multiplayer , a popular request , but lacked the programming skills himself . The game 's medieval scenery came from his contemporary interest in the Game of Thrones book series and his pairing of the arrow mechanic with " stone @-@ walled castles and lava @-@ filled dungeons " . The player @-@ characters also have individual personalities and backstories that Thorson intended to elaborate in a " lore " section of an instruction manual . 
 TowerFall was released June 25 , 2013 as an Ouya exclusive . The game sold well , minding the Ouya 's newness , which allowed Thorson to develop the game into a fuller package . Thorson stated his plans to extend the single @-@ player , and signed a new exclusivity agreement to release TowerFall Ascension on PlayStation 4 and Steam with new levels , weapons , and gameplay variants after the Ouya exclusivity agreement ended six months later . Sony actively pursued the game , and a majority of the porting work was handled by Dallas @-@ based <unk> Games by two people over the course of eight weeks using <unk> , " an open source rewrite " of Microsoft XNA . Thorson thought that the DualShock 4 's directional pad was " perfect for TowerFall " and that the PlayStation 4 was " the natural next step " for the game . He received a letter from George Broussard before Ascension 's launch with pre @-@ congratulations on Thorson 's becoming a millionaire . The main additions to Ascension were its single @-@ player and cooperative gameplay modes . A level editor is planned for a future update , and Thorson has expressed interest in six controller support for three @-@ on @-@ three matches . Ports for Linux and OS X platforms were released on May 29 , 2014 with updated game variants . TowerFall was selected for the July 2014 Evolution Championship Series fighting game tournament 's Indie Showcase , and as a free game with PlayStation Plus for the same month . 
 = = = Updates = = = 
 In February 2015 a " Blue Archer " was revealed as a new playable character for the expansion " Dark World " , developers stated her appearance was based on that of Anita <unk> . An expansion pack , Dark World , was released in North America on May 12 , 2015 , for the PlayStation 4 and PC ( Linux , OS X , and Windows ) via Steam , the Humble Store , and GOG.com. The European PlayStation released followed several days later . The pack includes a four @-@ player multiplayer campaign mode where players fight boss battles together and can resuscitate each other . It also adds a power @-@ up that makes arrows explode by remote @-@ detonation . The pack began as a set of new levels and became four sets , ten new characters , procedurally generated levels , and the aforementioned power @-@ up , co @-@ op , and boss battles . A PlayStation Vita version was released on December 15 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Multiple reviewers cited TowerFall as the standout game for the Ouya microconsole at the time of its launch . The Penny Arcade Report 's Ben Kuchera called the game " the Ouya 's killer app " , Polygon 's Russ Frushtick and Chris Plante said that TowerFall was the reason to purchase an Ouya . Destructoid 's Spencer Hayes said that he did not consider purchasing the Ouya until he played TowerFall . He added that the game had a " deceptive level of depth " . Eurogamer described its reputation as " the only thing worth playing on Ouya " . The added cost of additional controllers ( for four @-@ player local multiplayer ) exceeded the cost of the new console itself , and was cited as a negative for the game , though later offset by its support for Xbox 360 and PS3 controllers . Plante later described the original release as " critically beloved , humbly sold " , " punching way above its weight class " with recognition on the <unk> lists of Ars Technica and Polygon . 
 By April 2014 , Thorson told Eurogamer that the game had grossed a half of a million dollars , with the most sales from Ascension on the PlayStation 4 . At the time , a fifth of the games sales came from Ouya , a comparatively smaller platform with a smaller install base than PlayStation and Steam . The game was a nominee for the 2014 Independent Games Festival 's Excellence in Design award , but lost to Papers , Please . TowerFall Ascension received " generally favorable " reviews , according to game review aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers praised the game 's balance , compared it favorably with Super Smash Bros. , and recommended it as a party game . Critics felt that the single @-@ player mode was a nadir , and lamented for an online multiplayer mode , with Denton of Eurogamer calling the lack " painful " and " a crying shame " . 
 Griffin McElroy of Polygon found the game joyful and called it " a powerful distillery of childlike glee " . IGN 's Jose Otero thought highly of its visuals . He considered the single @-@ player mode a low point of the game , that it was only useful as practice . Eurogamer 's Denton called it " an afterthought " , and that Trials was " a tertiary mode at best " . Edge wrote that the boundaries of the game 's play area were confusing , and that it was difficult to watch both the area around the player @-@ character as well as the boundaries , which worked against what they deemed to be TowerFall 's " greatest strength " : close range combat . Denton praised the arrow catching mechanic , which he compared to the " hooks " of other " great multiplayer games " , like the Ultra counter in Street Fighter IV . He further compared the multiplayer to the battle modes of Bomberman , Mario , and Super Smash Bros. , the Trials mode to 10 Second Ninja , and the game 's " immediacy " to Nidhogg and Samurai Gunn . 
 = Hudson County Courthouse = 
 The Hudson County Courthouse or Justice William J. Brennan Jr . Courthouse is located in Jersey City , Hudson County , New Jersey , United States . The six @-@ story structure was originally built between 1906 and 1910 at a cost of $ 3 @,@ 328 @,@ 016 @.@ 56 . It is considered to be an outstanding example of the Beaux @-@ Arts architectural style in the United States . 
 The courthouse was used as the primary seat of government for Hudson County from its opening on September 20 , 1910 until the construction of the Hudson County Administration Building in 1966 . The courthouse was vacant for many years and was scheduled for demolition . The building was added to the National Register of Historic Places on August 25 , 1970 . Restoration began in the mid @-@ 1970s , and the building was reopened in 1985 . In 1984 , the Hudson County Board of Chosen Freeholders renamed the building in honor of Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan Jr . The restoration of the courthouse was acknowledged by a Victorian Society in America Preservation Award in 1988 . 
 As of 2013 the courthouse has seven working courtrooms and also houses the offices of the County Executive , the Hudson County Surrogate and the Hudson County Bar Association ; in the past it has been used in a number of television programs and movies , including scenes in the television series Law & Order , and for commercials . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Courthouse was designed by Jersey City native Hugh Roberts , twice a president of the New Jersey Chapter of the American Institute of Architects . Roberts , brother @-@ in @-@ law of future United States Senator and New Jersey Governor Edward I. Edwards , received a direct appointment as architect . No competition or bidding for designs was held , causing controversy among local architects . The property on which the courthouse stands was obtained from fourteen separate property owners between 1905 and 1914 . The groundbreaking took place on March 21 , 1906 and the cornerstone was laid on December 12 , 1906 . Construction of the building was done by Wells Brothers of New York City and construction of the interiors and finishes were by John Gill & Son of Cleveland , Ohio . 
 The courthouse is constructed of granite quarried in Hallowell , Maine . The front of the building is visually dominated by four Corinthian columns and a frieze above the main entrance bearing the inscription " Precedent Makes Law ; If You Stand Well , Stand Still . " 
 = = Interiors = = 
 Roberts delegated the assignment of artwork to the muralist Francis David Millet , noted for his work as decorations director for the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition in Chicago ; Millet assigned himself two lunettes on the third floor and a dozen small panels in the second floor corridors . Also on the third floor , Millet assigned two lunettes to Charles Yardley Turner , as well as eight more to Kenyon Cox . Cox also provided the groined ceilings . Edwin Blashfield painted the glass dome and the four pendentives between its supporting arches . The Tudor @-@ style legislative chamber of the Board of Freeholders on the second floor was adorned with murals by Howard Pyle depicting early life of the Dutch and English in New Jersey . This room has been called " one of the handsomest legislative chambers in the United States . " 
 David G. Lowe , writing in American Heritage magazine , described the interior of the building : 
 " The courthouse interior is a rush of color — pearl gray and green @-@ veined marbles , golden light fixtures , yellow , green , and blue paint . Standing in the great central court , one looks up the three stories of the magnificent rotunda to a dome whose outer rim is painted with the signs of the zodiac and whose center is an eye of stained glass worthy of Tiffany . One feels — as one does in the rotunda at the heart of the Capitol in Washington — the dignity of government and the permanence of law . " 
 = = Restoration = = 
 Plans for restoring the courthouse had been proposed even before it fell into disuse . In 1961 , the architectural <unk> Theodore Conrad proposed converting the building into a new city hall for Jersey City . The plan would have created a mall in front of the building and surrounded it with additional city buildings and a museum . Another proposal would house a branch of the New Jersey State Museum in the building . Conrad led a citizens group that lobbied for the preservation of the building , and got it listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The award @-@ winning restoration project resulted in the courthouse being reopened in 1985 for the use of the civil courts and other county offices . 
 = = Renaming = = 
 The Hudson County Board of Chosen Freeholders renamed the courthouse in 1984 in honor of Associate Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan , who had served in the building as Hudson County Assignment Judge from 1947 through 1951 . Following the 1989 Supreme Court decision in Texas v. Johnson , which Brennan authored , veterans groups petitioned unsuccessfully to have the name removed , but the Freeholders unanimously voted to retain the name . 
 = Wizards of the Coast = 
 Wizards of the Coast ( often referred to as WotC / <unk> / or simply Wizards ) is an American publisher of games , primarily based on fantasy and science fiction themes , and formerly an operator of retail stores for games . Originally a basement @-@ run role @-@ playing game publisher , the company popularized the collectible card game genre with Magic : The Gathering in the mid @-@ 1990s , acquired the popular Dungeons & Dragons role @-@ playing game by purchasing the failing company TSR , and experienced tremendous success by publishing the licensed Pokémon Trading Card Game . The company 's corporate headquarters are located in Renton , Washington in the United States of America . 
 Today , Wizards of the Coast publishes role @-@ playing games , board games , and collectible card games . They have received numerous awards , including several Origins Awards . The company has been a subsidiary of Hasbro since 1999 . All Wizards of the Coast stores were closed in 2004 . 
 = = History = = 
 Wizards of the Coast was founded by Peter Adkison in 1990 just outside Seattle , Washington , and its current headquarters are located in nearby Renton . Originally the company only published role @-@ playing games such as the third edition of <unk> and its own The Primal Order . The 1992 release of The Primal Order , a supplement designed for use with any game system , brought legal trouble with Palladium Books suing for references to Palladium 's game and system . The suit was settled in 1993 . 
 In 1991 , Richard Garfield approached Wizards of the Coast with the idea for a new board game called RoboRally , but was turned down because the game would have been too expensive for Wizards of the Coast to produce . Instead , Adkison asked Garfield if he could invent a game that was both portable and quick @-@ playing , to which Garfield agreed . 
 Adkison set up a new corporation , Garfield Games , to develop Richard Garfield 's collectible card game concept , originally called <unk> , into Magic : The Gathering . This kept the game sheltered from the legal battle with Palladium , and Garfield Games then licensed the production and sale rights to Wizards until the court case was settled , at which point the shell company was shut down . Wizards debuted Magic in July 1993 at the Origins Game Fair in Dallas . The game proved extremely popular at Gen Con in August 1993 , selling out of its supply of 2 @.@ 5 million cards , which had been scheduled to last until the end of the year . The success of Magic generated revenue that carried the company out from the handful of employees in 1993 working out of Peter 's original basement headquarters into 250 employees in its own offices in 1995 . In 1994 , Magic won both the Mensa Top Five mind games award and the Origins Awards for Best Fantasy or Science Fiction Board game of 1993 and Best Graphic Presentation of a Board game of 1993 . 
 In 1994 , Wizards began an association with The Beanstalk Group , a brand licensing agency and consultancy , to license the Magic brand . After the success of Magic , Wizards published RoboRally in 1994 , and it soon won the 1994 Origins Awards for Best Fantasy or Science Fiction Board Game and Best Graphic Presentation of a Board Game . Wizards also expanded its role @-@ playing game line by buying SLA Industries from Nightfall Games and Ars Magica from White Wolf , Inc. in 1994 . In 1995 , Wizards published another card game by Richard Garfield , The Great <unk> , which won the 1995 Best New Mind Game award from Mensa . In August 1995 , Wizards released <unk> and then four months later closed its roleplaying game product line . Peter Adkison explained that the company was doing a disservice to the games with lack of support and had lost money on all of Wizards ' roleplaying game products . Also in 1995 , Wizards ' annual sales passed US $ 65 million . 
 = = = Acquisition of TSR and Pokémon = = = 
 Wizards announced the purchase of TSR , the cash @-@ strapped makers of Dungeons & Dragons on April 10 , 1997 . Wizards acquired TSR and Five Rings Publishing Group for $ 25 million . Many of the creative and professional staff of TSR relocated from Wisconsin to the Renton area . Wizards used TSR as a brand name for a while , then retired it , allowing the TSR trademarks to expire . Between 1997 and 1999 , the company spun off several well @-@ loved but poorly selling campaign settings ( including Planescape , Dark Sun and Spelljammer ) to fan groups , focusing business primarily on the more profitable Greyhawk and Forgotten Realms lines . 
 In Summer 1997 , Wizards revisited the concept of a 3rd edition of Dungeons & Dragons , having first discussed it soon after the purchase of TSR . Looking back on the decision in 2004 , Adkison stated : " Obviously , [ Wizards ] had a strong economic incentive for publishing a new edition ; sales for any product line tend to spike when a new edition comes out , assuming the new edition is an improvement over the first . And given the change in ownership we thought this would be an excellent opportunity for WotC to ' put its stamp on D & D. ' " He later " Set [ the ] overall design direction " for the new edition of D & D. Wizards released the third edition of Dungeons & Dragons in 2000 , as well as the d20 System . With these releases came the Open Game License , which allowed other companies to make use of those systems . The new edition of the D & D game won the 2000 Origins Award for Best Roleplaying Game . In 2002 , Wizards sponsored a design contest which allowed designers to submit their campaign worlds to Wizards , to produce an entirely original campaign world ; Wizards selected " Eberron " , submitted by Keith Baker , and its first hardcover book was released in June 2004 . In 2003 Wizards released version 3 @.@ 5 of Dungeons & Dragons and the d20 system . Wizards helped to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the D & D game at Gen Con Indy 2004 . 
 On August 2 , 1997 , Wizards of the Coast was granted U.S. Patent 5 @,@ 662 @,@ 332 on collectible card games . In January 1999 , Wizards of the Coast began publishing the highly successful Pokémon Trading Card Game . The game proved to be very popular , selling nearly 400 @,@ 000 copies in less than six weeks , and selling 10 times better than Wizards ' initial projections . There was such a high demand for Pokémon cards that some sports card series were discontinued in 1999 because so many printers were producing Pokémon cards . The game won the 1999 National Parenting Center 's Seal of Approval . 
 Within a year , Wizards had sold millions of copies of the Pokémon game , and the company released a new set that included an instructional CD @-@ ROM . Wizards continued to publish the game until 2003 . One of Nintendo 's affiliates , Pokémon USA , had begun producing a new edition for the game before the last of its agreements with Wizards expired September 30 , and Wizards filed suit against Nintendo the following day , October 1 , 2003 . The two companies resolved their differences in December 2003 without going to court . 
 = = = Acquisition by Hasbro = = = 
 Seeing the continued success of Pokémon and Magic : The Gathering , the game and toy giant Hasbro bought Wizards of the Coast in September 1999 , for about US $ 325 million . Hasbro had expressed interest in purchasing Wizards of the Coast as early as 1994 , and had been further impressed after the success of its Pokémon game . Avalon Hill was made a division of Wizards of the Coast , in late 1999 ; the company had been purchased by Hasbro in the summer of 1998 . 
 Vince <unk> became President of Wizards of the Coast in November 1999 . As of January 1 , 2001 , Peter Adkison resigned from Wizards . Chuck Huebner became President and CEO of Wizards of the Coast in June 2002 , and Loren Greenwood succeeded Huebner in these positions in April 2004 . Greg Leeds succeeded Loren Greenwood as President and CEO of Wizards of the Coast in March 2008 . In 2016 Chris Cocks was announced as a replacement for Greg Leeds . As of 2008 , the company employs over 300 people . 
 In November 1999 , Wizards announced that Gen Con would leave Milwaukee after the 2002 convention . Hasbro sold Origins to GAMA , and in May 2002 sold Gen Con to Peter Adkison . Wizards also outsourced its magazines by licensing Dungeon , Dragon , <unk> , and Amazing Stories to Paizo Publishing . Wizards released the Dungeons & Dragons miniatures collectible pre @-@ painted plastic miniatures games in 2003 , and added a licensed Star Wars line in 2004 , and through its Avalon Hill brand an Axis & Allies World War II miniatures game in 2005 . Wizards of the Coast 's book publishing division has produced hundreds of titles that have sold millions of copies in over 16 languages . 
 After the company 's great success in 1999 with Pokémon , Wizards of the Coast acquired and expanded " The Game Keeper , " a US chain of retail gaming stores , eventually changing its name to " Wizards of the Coast " , including the company 's flagship gaming center on the Ave in Seattle for several years , and its retail stores , which were mostly in shopping malls in the US . The gaming center was closed by March 2001 and eventually Wizards announced in December 2003 that it would close all of its stores in order to concentrate on game design . The stores were closed in the spring of 2004 . 
 = = = The 2000s = = = 
 In early 2006 , Wizards of the Coast filed a lawsuit against Daron Rutter , then administrator of the <unk> website ( on which he is known as " <unk> Elf " ) . The charges stemmed from Rutter publicly posting confidential prototypes for upcoming Magic : The Gathering card sets to the <unk> forums , ten months before the cards were to be released . Mark Rosewater explained the outcome : " I can say that we [ Wizards of the Coast ] settled the lawsuit with <unk> Elf out of court to both parties ' satisfaction . " 
 Paizo Publishing 's license to produce Dragon and Dungeon magazines , which Paizo had been publishing since it spun off from Wizards of the Coast 's periodicals department in 2002 , expired in September 2007 . Wizards then moved the magazines to an online model . On June 6 , 2008 , Wizards released the 4th Edition of Dungeons & Dragons , with the retail availability of a new set of core rulebooks . Wizards began introducing 4th Edition online content in Dragon and Dungeon magazines . 4th Edition is designed to offer more streamlined game play , while the new rules framework intended to reduce the preparation time needed to run a game and make the game more accessible to new players . 
 On April 6 , 2009 , Wizards of the Coast suspended all sales of its products for the Dungeons & Dragons games in PDF format from places such as <unk> and its subsidiaries <unk> and <unk> This coincides with a lawsuit brought against eight people in an attempt to prevent future copyright infringement of their books , and includes the recent 4th edition Dungeons & Dragons products that were made available through these places as well as all older editions <unk> of the game . 
 A 5th edition of D & D was released during the second half of 2014 . 
 = = Games and products = = 
 In addition to Dungeons & Dragons , Magic : The Gathering , and Pokémon , Wizards has produced numerous other games , including board , card , miniature , and role @-@ playing games . They also publish novels based on games such as Dungeons & Dragons , Magic : The Gathering and Legend of the Five Rings . 
 = Dictator novel = 
 The dictator novel ( Spanish : novela del <unk> ) is a genre of Latin American literature that challenges the role of the dictator in Latin American society . The theme of caudillismo — the régime of a charismatic caudillo , a political strongman — is addressed by examining the relationships between power , dictatorship , and writing . Moreover , a dictator novel often is an allegory for the role of the writer in a Latin American society . Although mostly associated with the Latin American Boom of the 1960s and 1970s , the dictator @-@ novel genre has its roots in the nineteenth @-@ century novel Facundo ( 1845 ) , by Domingo Faustino Sarmiento . As an indirect critique of Juan Manuel de Rosas 's dictatorial régime in Argentina , Facundo is the forerunner of the dictator novel genre ; all subsequent dictator novels hearken back to it . As established by Sarmiento , the goal of the genre is not to analyze the rule of particular dictators , or to focus on historical accuracy , but to examine the abstract nature of authority figures and of authority in general . 
 To be considered a dictator novel , a story should have strong political themes drawn from history , a critical examination of the power held by the dictator , the caudillo , and some general reflection on the nature of authoritarianism . Although some dictator novels centre on one historical dictator ( albeit in fictional guise ) , they do not analyze the economics , politics , and rule of the régime as might a history book . The dictator novel genre includes I , the Supreme ( 1974 ) , by Augusto Roa Bastos , about Dr. Francia of Paraguay , and The Feast of the Goat ( 2000 ) , by Mario Vargas Llosa , about Rafael Leónidas Trujillo of the Dominican Republic . Alternatively , the novelist might create a fictional dictator to achieve the same narrative end , as in Reasons of State ( 1974 ) , by Alejo Carpentier , in which the dictator is a composite man assembled from historical dictators . The genre of the dictator novel has been very influential in the development of a Latin American literary tradition , because many of the novelists rejected traditional , linear story @-@ telling techniques , and developed narrative styles that blurred the distinctions between reader , narrator , plot , characters , and story . In examining the authority of leadership , the novelists also assessed their own social roles as paternalistic dispensers of wisdom , like that of the caudillo whose régime they challenged in their dictator novels . 
 = = Literary context = = 
 Literary critic Roberto González Echevarría argues that the dictator novel is “ the most clearly indigenous thematic tradition in Latin American literature ” , and traces the development of this theme from “ as far back as Bernal Díaz del Castillo ’ s and Francisco López de <unk> ’ s accounts of Cortés ’ s conquest of Mexico . ” The nineteenth century saw significant literary reflections on political power , though on the whole the dictator novel is associated with the Latin American Boom , a literary movement of the 1960s and 1970s . For critic Gerald Martin , the dictator novel marks the end of the Boom and even ( as he says of Roa Bastos 's I , the Supreme ) “ the end of an entire era in Latin American history , the era which had stretched from Sarmiento 's Facundo in 1845 . " In the 1970s , many dictator novels focused on the figure “ of the aging dictator , prey to the boredom of a limitless power he is on the verge of losing . ” 
 = = Definition = = 
 Miguel Ángel Asturias 's El Señor Presidente ( written in 1933 , but not published until 1946 ) is , in the opinion of critic Gerald Martin , " the first real dictator novel " . Other literary treatments of the dictator figure followed , such as Jorge Zalamea 's El Gran Burundún Burundá ha muerto , but the genre did not gain impetus until it was reinvented in the political climate of the cold war , through the Latin American Boom . 
 The dictator novel came back into fashion in the 1970s , towards the end of the Boom . As Sharon Keefe Ugalde remarks , " the 1970s mark a new stage in the evolution of the Latin American dictator novel , characterized by at least two developments : a change in the perspective from which the dictator is viewed and a new focus on the nature of language . " By this she means that the dictator novels of the 1970s , such as The Autumn of the Patriarch or I , the Supreme , offer the reader a more intimate view of their subject : " the dictator becomes protagonist " and the world is often seen from his point of view . With the new focus on language , Keefe Ugalde points to the realisation on the part of many authors that " the tyrant 's power is derived from and defeated by language . " For example , in Jorge Zalamea 's El Gran Burundún Burundá ha muerto the dictator bans all forms of language . 
 According to Raymond L. Williams , it was not until the 1970s , when enough Latin American writers had published novels dealing with military regimes , that " dictator novel " became common nomenclature . The most celebrated novels of this era were Alejo Carpentier 's Reasons of State ( 1974 ) , Augusto Roa Bastos 's I , the Supreme ( 1974 ) , and Gabriel García Marquez 's The Autumn of the Patriarch ( 1975 ) . He defines the dictator novel as a novel which draws upon the historical record to create fictionalized versions of dictators . In this way , the author is able to use the specific to explain the general , as many dictator novels are centred around the rule of a one particular dictator . Within this group he includes those novelists who took to task authoritarian figures such as Vargas Llosa 's Conversation in the Cathedral ( 1969 ) and Denzil Romero 's La tragedia del Generalísimo ( 1984 ) . He even includes Sergio Ramírez 's ¿ Te <unk> <unk> la sangre ? ( 1977 ) , a novel about Nicaraguan society under the Somoza dictatorship , which has been described as a " dictator novel without the dictator " . 
 = = Style and theme = = 
 The novelists of the dictator novel genre combined narrative strategies of both modern and postmodern writing . Postmodern techniques , constructed largely in the late 1960s and 1970s , included use of interior monologues , radically stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness narrative , fragmentation , varying narrative points of view , neologisms , innovative narrative strategies , and frequent lack of causality . Alejo Carpentier , a Boom writer and contributor to the dictator novel genre pioneered what came to be known as magical realism , although the use of this technique is not necessarily a prerequisite of the dictator novel , as there are many that do not utilize magical realism . 
 A predominant theme of the dictator novel is power , which according literary critic Michael Valdez Moses , in his 2002 review of Feast of the Goat , is linked to the theme of dictatorship : " The enduring power of the Latin American dictator novel had everything to do with the enduring power of Latin American dictators " . As novels such as El Señor Presidente became more well @-@ known , they were read as ambitious political statements , denouncing the authority of dictators in Latin America . As political statements , dictator novel authors challenged dictatorial power , creating a link between power and writing through the force wielded by their pen . For example , in Roa Bastos 's I , The Supreme , the novel revolves around a central theme of language and the power inherent in all of its forms , a power that is often only present in the deconstruction of communication . González Echevarría argues that : 
 Dr. Francia 's fear of the pasquinade , his abuse of Policarpo Patiño ... , [ and ] his constant worry about writing all stem from the fact that he has found and used the power implicit in language itself . The Supremo defines power as being able to do through others what we are unable to do ourselves : language , being separate from what it designates , is the very embodiment of power , for things act and mean through it without ceasing to be themselves . Dr. Francia has also realized that he cannot control language , particularly written language , that it has a life of its own that threatens him . 
 Another constant theme which runs throughout the Latin American dictator novel , which gained in importance and frequency during the Latin American Boom , is the interdependence of the Latin American tyrant and United States imperialism . In Mario Vargas Llosa 's The Feast of the Goat , for example , Trujillo faces serious opposition shortly after losing his material backing from the CIA , previously held for over 32 years in light of his anti @-@ communist leanings . 
 Gender is an additional overarching theme within dictator novels . National portraits in Latin America often insist on the importance of women ( and men ) that are healthy , happy , productive , and patriotic , yet many national literary treasures often reflect government rhetoric in the way they code active citizenship as male . Masculinity is an enduring motif in the dictator novel . There is a connection between the pen and the penis in Latin American fiction , but this pattern cannot be explained by machismo alone — it is far more complex . According to Rebecca E. Biron , " where we find violent , misogynistic fantasies of masculinity , we also [ find ] violent social relations between actual men and women . " Many Latin American works " include characters who act out violent fictions of masculinity , and yet their narrative structure provides readers with alternative responses to misogynistic fantasies of masculine identity formation " . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 = = = Dictators in Latin American history = = = 
 Since independence , Latin American countries have been subject to both right and left @-@ wing authoritarian regimes , stemming from a history of colonialism in which one group dominated another . Given this long history , it is unsurprising that there have been so many novels " about individual dictators , or about the problems of dictatorship caudillismo , <unk> , militarism and the like . " The legacy of colonialism is one of racial conflict sometimes pushing an absolute authority to rise up to contain it — thus the tyrant is born . Seeking unlimited power , dictators often amend constitutions , dismantling laws which prevent their reelection . <unk> Manuel Estrada Cabrera , for example , altered the Guatemalan Constitution in 1899 to permit his return to power . The dictators who have become the focus of the dictator novel ( Augusto Roa Bastos 's I , the Supreme , for instance , is based on Paraguay 's dictator of the early nineteenth century , the so @-@ called Dr Francia ) do not differ much from each other in terms of how they govern . As author González Echevarría states : " they are male , militaristic , and wield almost absolute personal power . " Their strong @-@ arm tactics include exiling or imprisoning their opposition , attacking the freedom of the press , creating a centralized government backed by a powerful military force , and assuming complete control over free thought . Despite intense criticisms leveled at these figures , dictators involved in nationalist movements developed three simple truths , " that everybody belonged , that the benefits of Progress should be shared , and that industrial development should be the priority " . <unk> Pessoa , who was elected President of Brazil in 1919 , wanted to make the country progress regardless of whether or not Congress passed the laws he proposed . In particular , during the Great Depression , Latin American activist governments of the 1930s saw the end of neocolonialism and the infusion of nationalist movements throughout Latin America , increasing the success of import substitution industrialization or ISI . The positive side @-@ effect of the collapse of international trade meant local Latin American manufacturers could fill the market niches left vacant by vanishing exports . 
 In the twentieth century , prominent Latin American dictators have included the Somoza dynasty in Nicaragua , Alfredo Stroessner in Paraguay , and Augusto Pinochet in Chile , among others . As an outside influence , United States interference in Latin American politics is controversial and has often been severely criticized . As García Calderon noted as far back as 1925 : " Does it want peace or is it controlled by certain interests ? " As a theme in the dictator novel , the link between U.S. imperialism and the power of the tyrant is very important . Dictators in Latin America have accepted military and financial support from the United States when it suited them , but have also turned against the United States , using anti @-@ American campaigning to gain favour with the people . In the case of Trujillo , " Nothing promises to reinvigorate his flagging popularity more than to face up to the Yankee aggressor in the name of la patria . " 
 = = = Los Padres de la Patria = = = 
 In 1967 during a meeting with Alejo Carpentier , Julio Cortázar , and Miguel Otero Silva , the Mexican author Carlos Fuentes launched a project consisting of a series of biographies depicting Latin American dictators , which was to be called Los Padres de la Patria ( The Fathers of the Fatherland ) . After reading Edmund Wilson 's portraits of the American Civil War in Patriotic Gore , Fuentes recounts , " Sitting in a pub in Hampstead , we thought it would be a good idea to have a comparable book on Latin America . An imaginary portrait gallery immediately stepped forward , demanding incarnation : the Latin American dictators . " Vargas Llosa was to write about Manuel A. Odría , Jorge Edwards about José Manuel Balmaceda , José Donoso about Mariano <unk> , and Julio Cortázar about Eva Perón . As M. Mar <unk> Pizarro observes , the project was never completed , but it helped inspire a series of novels written by important authors during the Latin American literary boom , such as Alejo Carpentier , Augusto Roa Bastos , Gabriel García Márquez , and Mario Vargas Llosa . 
 = = Development of the genre = = 
 = = = Forerunners = = = 
 Both Domingo Faustino Sarmiento 's Facundo and José <unk> 's Amalia , published in the nineteenth century , were precursors to the twentieth century dictator novel ; however , " all fictional depictions of the Latin American ' strong @-@ man ' , have an important antecedent in Domingo Faustino Sarmiento 's Facundo , a work written as a <unk> treatise " . Facundo is an indirect critique of Juan Manuel de Rosas 's dictatorship , directed against the actual historical figure , Juan Facundo Quiroga , but is also a broader investigation into Argentine history and culture . Sarmiento 's Facundo has remained a fundamental fixture because of the breadth of its literary exploration of the Latin American environment . In Facundo , Sarmiento criticizes the historical figure Facundo Quiroga , a provincial caudillo , who like Rosas ( dictator of Argentina from 1829 to 1853 ) was opposed to the enlightened ideas of progress . After returning from exile , Sarmiento worked to reinvent Argentina , eventually becoming president himself from 1868 to 1874 . Sarmiento 's analysis of Facundo Quiroga was the first time that an author questioned how figures like Facundo and Rosas could have maintained such absolute power , and in answering this question , Facundo established its place as an inspirational text to later authors . Sarmiento perceived his own power in writing Facundo as " within the text of the novel , it is the novelist , through the voice of omniscience , who has replaced God " , thereby creating the bridge between writing and power that is characteristic of the dictator novel . 
 Set in post @-@ colonial Buenos Aires , Amalia was written in two parts and is a semi @-@ autobiographical account of José Mármol that deals with living in Rosas 's police state . Mármol 's novel was important as it showed how the human consciousness , much like a city or even a country , could become a terrifying prison . Amalia also attempted to examine the problem of dictatorships as being one of structure , and therefore the problem of the state " manifested through the will of some monstrous personage violating the ordinary individual 's privacy , both of home and of consciousness . " In the early twentieth century , the Spaniard Ramón del Valle @-@ <unk> 's Tirano Banderas ( 1926 ) acted as a key influence on those authors whose goal was to critique power structures and the status quo . 
 = = = Classic dictator novels = = = 
 El Señor Presidente is a 1946 novel by Guatemalan Nobel Prize @-@ winning writer and diplomat Miguel Ángel Asturias . Although the novel does not explicitly identify its setting as early twentieth @-@ century Guatemala , Asturias was inspired by the 1898 – 1920 presidency of Manuel Estrada Cabrera for his title character . This novel explores the nature of political dictatorship and its effects on society , and is an overtly political novel in which Asturias denounces Latin American dictators . By keeping time and place ambiguous , Asturias 's novel represents a break from former narratives , which until this point had been judged on how adequately they reflected reality . Asturias 's distinctive use of dream imagery , onomatopoeia , simile , and repetition , combined with a discontinuous structure consisting of abrupt changes of style and viewpoint , sprang from surrealist and <unk> influences . Furthermore , it made early use of a literary technique that would come to be known as magic realism . The President went on to influence a generation of Latin American authors , becoming an early example of the " new novel " and a precursor to the Latin American literary boom . 
 Jorge Zalamea , El gran Burundún Burundá ha muerto ( " The Great Burundún Burundá is Dead " , 1951 ) . For Keefe Ugalde , " El gran Burundún Burundá ... occupies an important midway point in the evolution of the dictator novel " and Peter <unk> emphasizes " its cultural and political importance and subsequent influence on dictator narratives . " More broadly , Martin describes this " remarkable Colombian novelette " as seeming to contain " the seeds of García Márquez 's mature style . " The book describes the ( fictional ) dictator " Burundún 's rise to power , selected events during his regime , and a description of his funeral . " It is at this funeral that it is revealed that the body of the dictator is absent , and has somehow been replaced by or transformed into " a great big parrot , a voluminous parrot , an enormous parrot , all swollen , inflated and wrapped in documents , gazettes , mail from abroad , newspapers , reports , annals , broadsheets , almanacs , official bulletins . " 
 Enrique Lafourcade 's King Ahab 's Feast ( La Fiesta del <unk> Acab , 1959 ) portrays the fictional dictator César Alejandro Carrillo Acab , and opens with what Claude Hulet describes as an " amusingly ironic , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek note in preface " which declares that " This is a mere work of fiction . ... Indeed , no one is unaware that neither the United Nations , nor the Organization of American States , permits the continued existence of regimes like the one that serves as pretext to this novel . " As Hulet observes , Lafourcade 's " powerful and razor sharp satire " is directed " presumably against the Trujillo regime and others like it . " 
 Alejo Carpentier 's , Reasons of State ( El <unk> del método , 1974 ) , is a synthesis of several historical figures from Latin American , most prominently Gerardo Machado , dictator of Cuba . This fictional character , in his bid to be refined , spends half of his life in Europe , perhaps reminiscent of Sarmiento 's dichotomy of civilization and barbarism . This novel is tragicomic in nature , the only novel by Carpentier to combine elements of both tragedy and comedy . 
 Augusto Roa Bastos 's I , the Supreme ( Yo , el Supremo , 1974 ) is a fictionalized account of the nineteenth @-@ century Paraguayan dictator José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia . However , it is also a historical account , making use of real documents and accounts of people who knew Francia . Roa 's portrayal of a despot in Latin American fiction is distinguished " not only by the quantity of detail lavished on him , but by his remarkable capacity to seem at one moment a person , at another an embodiment of contradictory elements not usually associated with a single person , let alone a powerful tyrant " . Its title was derived from the fact that Francia referred to himself as " El Supremo " or " the Supreme " . Making use of non @-@ traditional writing techniques , the novel is composed of separate discourses with their own distinctive styles , and the demarcation between them is often blurred . Gerald Martin claims that Roa Bastos 's novel " was more immediately and unanimously acclaimed than any novel since One Hundred Years of Solitude , and critics seemed to suspect that its strictly historical importance might be even greater than that of García Márquez 's fabulously successful creation . " 
 Gabriel García Márquez 's The Autumn of the Patriarch ( El <unk> del <unk> , 1975 ) details the life of an eternal dictator , " el macho " , a fictional character who lives to be over 200 years old . The book is divided into six sections , each retelling the same story of the infinite power held by the archetypal Caribbean tyrant . Márquez based his fictional dictator on a variety of real @-@ life <unk> , including Gustavo Rojas Pinilla of his Colombian homeland , Generalissimo Francisco Franco of Spain ( the novel was written in Barcelona ) , and Venezuela 's Juan Vicente Gómez . One of the key characters of the novel is the Indian General <unk> Santos , who devotes himself to " inscrutable service to the patriarch . " In this novel , García Márquez proposes an interesting contradiction : " that Latin America 's patriarchs owe their most intimate support to their victims of longest standing ; and that America 's revolution is inconceivable without the Indian " . Illustrating the importance of the Indian in Latin America is all the more prudent given that García Márquez 's home country , Colombia , is distinguished as <unk> not recognizing the Indian populations which are very much alive today . 
 Luisa Valenzuela 's The Lizard 's Tail ( Cola de <unk> , 1983 ) is set in the period after Juan Perón 's return to Argentina in 1973 , when the Argentine president was heavily influenced by the sinister <unk> grise José López Rega . The novel deals specifically with themes surrounding the nature of male @-@ female relationships during this regime of military oppression . The novel 's title is a reference to an instrument of torture that was invented in the Southern Cone . 
 Tomás Eloy Martínez 's The Perón Novel ( La novela de Perón , 1985 ) uses a mixture of historical facts , fiction , and documents to retell the life story of Juan Domingo Perón , " dramatizing the rivalries within the ranks of Peronism " . This allowed the author to construct an intimate portrait of Perón rather than an historically accurate one . This method of analyzing Perón , that delves into his early history and family upbringing to theorize the motivation for his actions later in life , can be linked to Sarmiento 's similar analyses of Facundo , and through him , Rosas . 
 Gabriel García Márquez 's The General in His Labyrinth ( El general en su laberinto , 1989 ) is a fictionalized account of the last days in the life of Simón Bolívar . Bolívar , also known as the Great Liberator , freed from Spanish rule the territory that would subsequently become Venezuela , Bolivia , Colombia , Peru , and Ecuador . However the character of the General is not portrayed as the glorious hero that traditional history has presented ; instead García Márquez develops a pathetic protagonist , a prematurely aged man who is physically ill and mentally exhausted . 
 Mario Vargas Llosa 's The Feast of the Goat ( La fiesta del chivo , 2000 ) recounts with " gruesome detail and dramatic intensity " the last days of the tyrant and dictator Rafael Leónidas Trujillo of the Dominican Republic , as he becomes infuriated that , despite being a long @-@ standing ally of the United States because of his anti @-@ communist stance , he is no longer in favour with the U.S. administration who have withdrawn their backing on discovering his extensive human rights violations . Following several interwoven storylines — those of Trujillo , his assassins , and the daughter of a man who once served in Trujillo 's inner circle of advisers , Urania Cabral — this novel reveals both the political and social environment in the Dominican Republic , past and present . The story opens and closes with Urania 's story , effectively framing the narrative in terms of remembering and understanding the past and its legacy for the present . 
 = = = ' Not quite ' dictator novels = = = 
 Latin American novels that explore political themes , but that do not centre upon the rule of a particular dictator , are informally classified as “ not quite dictator novels ” . For example , Libro de Manuel ( A Manual for Manuel , 1973 ) , by Julio Cortázar , is a postmodern novel about urban guerrillas and their revolutionary struggle , which asks the reader to examine the broader societal matters of language , sexuality , and the modes of interpretation . In the Time of the Butterflies ( 1994 ) , by Julia Álvarez , tells the story of the Mirabal sisters , whom patriotism transformed from well @-@ behaved Catholic débutantes to political dissenters against the thirty @-@ year dictatorship of the Trujillo régime in the Dominican Republic . The novel sought to illuminate the officially @-@ obscured @-@ history of the deaths of the Mirabal sisters , not to determine what happened to them , but to determine how the Mirabal sisters happened to the national politics of the Dominican Republic . In the mock @-@ diary “ Intimate Diary of Solitude ” ( third part of El imperio de los <unk> 1988 ; Empire of Dreams , 1994 ) , by Giannina Braschi , the protagonist is Mariquita Samper , the diarist who shoots the narrator of the Latin American Boom in revolt against his dictatorial control of the fictional narration . Moreover , in Braschi ’ s most recent work “ United States of Banana ” ( 2011 ) , the Puerto Rican prisoner Segismundo overthrows his father , the King of the United States of Banana , who had imprisoned him for more than a hundred years in the dungeon of the Statue of Liberty , for the crime of having been born . The story of Distant Star ( 1996 ) , by Roberto Bolaño , begins on 11 September 1973 , with the coup d ’ état by General Augusto Pinochet against Salvador Allende , the President of Chile . The writer and professor of literature Raymond Leslie Williams describes the aforementioned novels as not @-@ quite @-@ dictator @-@ novels , which are reminiscent of the genre for being “ acutely and subtly political fiction ” that addresses themes different from those of the dictator novel , which cannot be divorced from the politics of the stories , and so each “ can be read as a meditation on the horror of absolute power ” . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although it is difficult to establish the exact origin of the dictator novel in the nineteenth century , its intellectual influence spans Latin American Literature . Most of the novels were written in the middle years of the twentieth century , and each has a unique literary style that employed techniques of the “ new novel ” , by which the writer rejected the formal structure of conventional literary realism , arguing that “ its simplistic assumption that reality is easily observable ” is a narrative flaw . As a genre , the dictator novel redefined the literary concept of “ the novel ” in order to compel the readers to examine the ways in which political and social mores affect their daily lives . Therefore , the regional politics and the social issues of the stories yielded to universal human concerns , thus the traditional novel ’ s “ ordered world view gives way to a fragmented , distorted or fantastic narrative ” in which the reader has an intellectually active role in grasping the thematic gist of the story . Additional to the narrative substance , the novelists redefined the formal literary categories of author , narrator , character , plot , story , and reader , in order to examine the etymological link between “ author ” and “ authority ” , wherein the figure of the novelist ( the author ) became very important to the telling of the tale . In the dictator novels , the writers questioned the traditional story @-@ teller role of the novelist as the “ privileged , paternal figure , as the authoritative ‘ father ’ , or divine creator , in whom meaning would be seen to originate ” , and so , the novelists fulfilled the role of the dictator . 
 = Mount St. Peter Church = 
 Mount Saint Peter Church is a Roman Catholic Church at 100 Freeport Road in New Kensington , Pennsylvania . The church is located along the Allegheny River and is approximately 25 mi ( 40 km ) north @-@ east of the city of Pittsburgh within the Diocese of Greensburg . 
 The congregation was founded by Italian immigrants in the early 1900s and the current building was constructed by hand by parish members during World War II . The church was dedicated on July 4 , 1944 . In 1998 , the building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 As of 2009 , the congregation had approximately 5 @,@ 000 members . The church is regionally known for its annual Festa Italiana , at which there is homemade Italian food , dancing , games for children , and gambling for adults . This festival is organized by volunteers from the church and takes place on the church grounds during the first weekend in August . The mission statement of the church emphasizes the congregation 's Italian heritage . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of the Mount St. Peter parish is woven with the history of Alcoa and the emergence of New Kensington as an industrial city in the early twentieth century . In 1890 , the Burrell Improvement Company considered the advantages of the level land south of its home in Lower Burrell . They named the area New Kensington , surveyed it , and laid out avenues , running parallel to the Allegheny River , and numbered streets running perpendicular to the river . Fourth and Fifth streets were the primary commercial streets . Once the land was surveyed and plotted , the company opened the land to bidding . The first large company to purchase land , the Pittsburgh Reduction Company , acquired a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ acre ( 14 @,@ 000 m2 ) property by the riverfront . Other companies also acquired sites for commercial and industrial development : Adams Drilling , Goldsmith and <unk> , New Kensington Milling , New Kensington Brewing , Logan Lumber , and Keystone Dairy , to name a few . 
 The presence of Pittsburgh Reduction Company ( later Alcoa ) provided a boon for development . On Thanksgiving Day 1888 , with the help of Alfred E. Hunt , Charles Martin Hall developed an experimental smelting plant on Smallman Street in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . In 1891 , the company established its production facility in New Kensington . 
 By 1910 , the city was also the home of a car manufacturing company , the New Kensington Automobile Company . In addition , the Pittsburg [ sic ] Motor Car Company had established a production plant for its Pittsburg Six model in New Kensington . By 1904 , the American Tin Plate Company ( capital stock owned by the United States Steel Corporation ) had established the six facilities of the Pittsburgh Mills and six of the Pennsylvania Mills in New Kensington . 
 = = = Diocese of Greensburg = = = 
 The Diocese of Greensburg , to which Mount Saint Peter now belongs , was established on March 10 , 1951 , by Pope Pius XII . Records show that the first Mass in the area was celebrated in the Allegheny Mountains in 1749 by a French priest serving as chaplain to French troops . Demetrius Augustine Gallitzin , the second priest ordained in territories that became the United States , arrived in Loretto , Pennsylvania in 1799 . Father Boniface Wimmer came to Latrobe from Germany and established the first Benedictine presence in the region of Saint Vincent in 1846 . 
 Prior to the United States ' Civil War , Catholicism grew slowly in America , but afterward , it became more widespread as Catholic immigrants from eastern Europe moved to the four counties , which include Armstrong , Fayette , Indiana , and Westmoreland , to mine coal and produce coke to fire steel mills in Pittsburgh . This influx of Catholic immigrants resulted in the creation of more than 80 parishes and missions in the counties between 1865 and 1917 . 
 = = = Founding and early days of St. Peter parish = = = 
 By 1900 , the burgeoning industrial town had 4 @,@ 600 residents and two years later Reverend Bonaventure Piscopo , a member of the Apostolic Band for the Roman Catholic Diocese of Pittsburgh , formed a new congregation in New Kensington to serve the immigrant work force , many of whom were Italian Catholics . The church was named after Saint Peter , the first pope . The parishioners of this new congregation were Italians living in and around New Kensington , Arnold , and Parnassus , which later became a part of the city of New Kensington . These immigrants needed a place to worship and in 1903 , the St. Peter congregation began holding Mass with a resident pastor , Reverend Vincenzo Maselli in a small building on the corner of Second Avenue and Tenth Street ( known as the downtown area ) in New Kensington . 
 Soon after , on September 28 , 1903 , the congregation relocated to the basement of St. Mary 's Polish Church , which was also located in New Kensington . Here , the first parish register was created . The first recorded event in the new parish was a marriage on December 27 , 1903 . Soon after , the Burrell Improvement Company donated land on the corner of Ridge Avenue and Constitution Boulevard . On July 4 , 1905 , the cornerstone of St. Peter Church was laid and on September 25 , 1905 , Bishop Regis <unk> dedicated the new church . 
 In 1908 , the number of attendees at St. Peter Church began to dwindle . Many of the priests who had served the congregation had been reassigned a few years earlier . In 1908 , a popular priest , Father Sacchi , was sent to Mother of Sorrows Church in <unk> Rocks , Pennsylvania . Parishioners formed a committee to go speak to the Bishop on Father Sacchi 's behalf . Although Father Sacchi was not allowed to return to St. Peter , Reverend James <unk> , who had also been at St. Peter prior to his reassignment , was brought back to the church . 
 At this time , the priests who were part of St. Peter were doing the best they could to keep the faith alive in their congregation . The priests were smart men who had attended school in Italy prior to their immigration , but most were unable to speak fluent English . At a time when immigrants were desperately trying to fit into the American life and be as American as possible , going to a church where the congregation was Italian was not the most desirable choice . Therefore , many Catholic Italians began going to churches and many others changed their religion altogether . Many of these Italians were becoming Protestant . The priests were poorly paid and most lived on about twenty @-@ five cents per day . They had no permanent housing : many slept in the church itself , and preferred the altar floor because it was the only place in the church that had carpeting . It was also common for the priests to say Mass several churches on the same day . These circuits trips were sometimes as much as twenty @-@ five miles away . 
 = = = Italian anarchist movement = = = 
 Around 1918 , the leaders of the Italian Communists and Anarchists in the United States settled themselves in New Kensington . The group was guided by the ideas of Carlo Tresca , a union organizer for Industrial Workers of the World , which were recorded first , in his newspaper La Plebe , or The Worker , and later in his anti @-@ fascist paper , Il Martello ( which translates to " the hammer " ) . The Italian Communists and Anarchists harassed members of the Catholic Church . Italians who did go the church were made to feel inferior and many became too intimidated to go to church at all . At St. Peter 's , one priest was shot through a window while he was sitting at his desk . Another priest was threatened that if he did not leave New Kensington he would be killed . In 1918 , there were only thirteen families who attended Mass at St. Peter on Sunday . This continued for several years until Carlo Tresca moved from New Kensington to New York in 1925 . 
 By 1929 , St. Peter was crowded for all three Masses on Sunday morning . There were so many people that the balcony , the sanctuary , and both sacristies were opened seating . Eventually the priests opened the doors of the church and hundreds of people stood outside on the steps to hear the Mass . Despite all of these accommodations , there were still many people who were turned away because there was not enough space to accommodate them . There were about a thousand families who belonged to St. Peter parish , but the church itself only had about two hundred seats in the pews . In 1933 , Bishop Hugh Boyle suggested the construction of a larger church and the congregation decided to construct a larger building . The new church building was constructed by the parishioners , who broke ground in May 1941 and three years later dedicated the new building . 
 = = = World War II affects the congregation = = = 
 By May 1944 , the parishioners had contributed to the war having given thousands of pints of blood to the Blood Banks ; given money to the war relief campaigns ; been active on the home front , and sent 808 men and women to the Armed Forces . There was a group that prepared and sent out a weekly special bulletin to the parishioners in the Armed Forces . These parishioners were happy to receive news from home on the progress of their new church and many of them sent home money to go towards the building fund . During the war , hundreds of dollars came in from these parishioners fighting in the war . Of the 808 parishioners who went off to war , seven died and their names were engraved on a piece of granite outside of the church : James <unk> , Arthur Capo , Nick <unk> , Justine <unk> , Neal <unk> , and Anthony <unk> . 
 = = Relocating and building a church by hand = = 
 The current location was found to be too small and the congregation was in need of a larger building . Parishioners from Arnold wanted the new church to be built in their town , arguing that most of the congregation lived there . Those from Parnassus wanted the church closer to them because there were a lot of Catholics but no Catholic church in Parnassus . The parishioners from New Kensington argued that St. Peter should remain close to its current location and one was found on the corner of Freeport Road and Seventh Street . This location was approximately 100 yd ( 91 m ) from the previous St. Peter Church and was located on the top of a hill . The land was 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) and had a large mansion and a few small buildings on the property . 
 The land had once belonged to Stephen M. Young , who had been a General in the United States Army during the American Civil War and was a friend of Abraham Lincoln . Young sold the property to Frank M. Curtis for $ 7 @,@ 000 in 1902 . It was sold to David A. Leslie for $ 17 @,@ 000 in 1914 . After Mr. Leslie 's death in August 1938 , attorneys spoke to Mrs. Leslie about selling the property and she agreed to sell for $ 20 @,@ 000 cash . On December 1 , 1938 , the congregation made a down payment of $ 500 cash and few days later , the Building Fund Campaign opened for the new church with a committee of one @-@ hundred volunteers . Each parishioner who was employed full @-@ time should sign a pledge to give $ 60 over a period of five years towards the building of the church . The committee was split up into groups , and the volunteers went door to door almost every day for five years until enough money was collected . 
 On April 1 , 1939 , St. Peter 's congregation took possession of the land and mansion . That day , it was decided the new church would be called " Mount St. Peter . " By May 1 , instead of having $ 20 @,@ 000 as anticipated , the building campaign had generated $ 23 @,@ 500 in cash and another $ 75 @,@ 200 in pledges . 
 = = = Acquiring materials from the Mellon Mansion = = = 
 Architect Enos Cooke of New Kensington developed the plan for the church building . In 1940 , a friend of the church , John Stanish , informed Mt . St. Peter 's congregation that the Mellon mansion , 6500 Fifth Avenue , in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , was to be demolished . Stanish had worked for the three Mellon brothers until the last of them died in 1938 . The Mellon family had spent years entertaining important people , including royalty , celebrities , well known financiers , and statesmen in the Mellon Mansion . It was built using Michigan sandstone and was four stories high on one side and three stories high on the other . The mansion had sixty @-@ five rooms , plus halls and vestibules . There were 11 bathrooms , one of which had cost over $ 10 @,@ 000 to complete because the walls and floor were covered in Italian marble and the fixtures were plated in gold . At one time , a hundred servants had maintained the house and surrounding grounds . The mansion had been completed in 1909 and had cost Mr. Mellon approximately three million dollars . The inside was filled with marble from all over the world , including China , Japan , and India . There were bronze doors cast in England , hand painted ceilings , and steel beams manufactured by the Carnegie Steel Company . In addition , one of the most expensive organs in the world was housed in this building . The items which the mansion contained were being sold for less than their actual values . For example , a half a million dollars worth of furniture had been sold for $ 3 @,@ 800 . The building contained many items that could easily be used in a church . There were mantles that could become altars and pieces of architecture , such as angel statues , that could be placed in Mount St. Peter Church . In 1940 , St. Peter 's congregation bought all of the stone , granite , marble , bronze doors , and railings from the mansion . In addition , the congregation purchased thirty tons of steel beams , sixty @-@ five oak doors , chandeliers , and some other items , and the members transported all of the marble 27 miles ( 43 km ) from Pittsburgh to New Kensington . The location of the mansion is now home to Mellon Park . 
 Many men of the congregation volunteered to transport the materials to New Kensington . The congregation found a contractor , Mr. Charles Camarata , to direct the free labor . Camarata had built hundreds of miles of road in the state of Pennsylvania and around the country . In addition , he had constructed homes , civic buildings , and churches . As soon as he agreed to take the job in December 1940 , he split the volunteers into three groups . Camarata personally supervised the first group , which removed the marble from Mellon Mansion . The second group transported the marble to New Kensington and the third placed the materials on the grounds of Mt . St. Peter . This project started on December 13 , 1940 , and continued until May 26 , 1941 . The process was difficult and time consuming , made more difficult by the harsh winter of 1940 – 1941 . 
 = = = Building Mt . St. Peter Church = = = 
 On Sunday , May 25 , 1941 , ground was broken for Mount St. Peter Church . The event was celebrated by the priests of St. Peter 's congregation and about two thousand people showed up to watch . The cornerstone was blessed on Sunday , September 7 , 1941 , by Reverend Alfred Koch , who was the Arch Abbot of St. Vincent in Latrobe , Pennsylvania . Many other priests from the area were also present . Father Paul Tomlinson of St. Peter 's Church in Pittsburgh delivered the sermon in English and <unk> Koch closed the ceremony with the Pontifical Benediction in Italian . The large red cornerstone was made of granite and was fitted with an iron box . The box contained the memorial reports of the congregation , newspapers , American and Papal coins , and medals of the church . The cornerstone was placed so that it can be seen from inside the church . It is located by the altar of the Sacred Heart . 
 = = = Fund raising = = = 
 At the time , only about $ 15 @,@ 000 from the building fund was still available since money had already been spent on buying the property and materials from the Mellon Mansion . Further fund raising generated 1 @,@ 200 pledges , 95 percent of which were fulfilled : 60 percent of the money came from 10 percent of the parishioners and approximately 10 percent of the people did not contribute at all . During this time , all of the books concerning the finances of the construction of the new church were kept by ladies of the St. Peter 's <unk> . The ladies not only recorded all of the pledges and collections , but they also recorded all notices and minutes from their meetings . While the church was being built , the Campaigners met almost every evening . 
 The <unk> was run under the supervision of Dom C. <unk> , the treasurer of the First National Bank in New Kensington and the cashier of the Building Fund Campaign . He was in charge of collecting all of the pledges made toward the Building Fund . This work kept him in the bank for one or two hours longer than the other employees every evening . This went on for almost five years . Mr. <unk> was also in charge of making sure there was enough money in the church 's bank account for the payroll that was taken out every other Friday . The needed funds were always collected in time and there was never a week when the account bounced . 
 By October 1941 , there was little money left , and the parish sold a house it possessed on Constitution Boulevard for $ 7 @,@ 000 , which was enough to pay off the $ 3 @,@ 000 of debt . The other $ 4 @,@ 000 covered some of the continuing costs of construction . 
 = = = Raising the roof = = = 
 Around this time , winter was threatening and in order for the walls of the new church to be protected from potential damage , the roof had to be laid before any snow began to fall . This meant that more workers were needed to get the job done faster . This was a problem because the church 's account did not contain enough money to employ more men . As soon as the committee of 100 became aware of this , they began asking for help . They found 30 parishioners who were each willing to lend another $ 500 each . These parishioners had already given high contributions to the new church but were still willing to help . As a result , the church had an extra $ 15 @,@ 000 to pay for the construction of the roof . Every day for about two months , over fifty parishioners worked on building the church roof . In December 1941 , the roof was completed . One of the men who helped complete the roof read about the attack on Pearl Harbor in the newspapers and decided to quit his work on the church and enlist in the United States Air Force . James <unk> was the congregation 's first casualty in the war . There is a plaque with his name and date of death on the pier . 
 The winter of 1941 – 1942 ended up being mild through all of December and most of January and workers were able to continue work on the church until January 27 , 1942 . On January 4 , 1941 a blizzard carried 30 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 48 km / h ) winds and left 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of snow . The blizzard forced workers inside the church . Camarata became the director of excavations , concrete , block , brick , stone and marble works , steel structures , road @-@ grading , electric and plumbing systems , carpentry , and landscaping . John Stanish was now his assistant . He built marble grinders , hoisting devices , marble cutters , and marble sanders . He worked with much machinery , including bulldozers , steam @-@ shovels , grading @-@ tractors , and steam @-@ rollers . Stanish collected marble , iron and bronze grilles , electric and plumbing equipment , lumber , panels , light fixtures , paint , chemicals , and ceiling and floor materials from Pennsylvania , Ohio , and New York . So much time and effort was put in by this one man . As a token of the parish 's gratitude to him , an inscription was placed in the main vestibule of Mt . St. Peter Church , on the right , going down into the Marble Hall ( downstairs of the church ) . The Latin inscription reads , Joannes Stanish Res <unk> ( John Stanish procured the material ) . 
 Much of the work inside the church was done by volunteers under the direction of paid plumbers , electricians , and craftsmen . In addition , all of the pattern @-@ makers and mechanics who worked on the building did so without pay . There was also a group of women who shined marble and granite until the pieces were full of luster . 
 = = Opening of Mt . St. Peter Church = = 
 By mid @-@ summer of 1942 , Mt . St. Peter Parish was once again without funds . By this time , the majority of the work on the new church had been completed and so the congregation agreed that it was time to sell the old St. Peter Church in order to fund the new church . The General Electric Company was willing to pay $ 16 @,@ 000 for St. Peter 's and on July 16 , 1942 , the church became the property of the General Electric Company . 
 Sunday , August 9 , 1942 , was a day of mixed emotions for the congregation . At twelve o 'clock noon , one final Mass was said in the old St. Peter Church , which had been the house of the congregation for the past thirty @-@ eight years . People cried as the Blessed Sacrament was carried out of the church by the pastor . The congregation followed the pastor up to the new church . 
 Mount Saint Peter Church was magnificent and rose up on the hill , but to many , it seemed as if it could not really belong to the congregation . It was much richer than Saint Peter Church and if it had not been labored upon by so many members of the congregation , none would have felt worthy to call it their parish . But since so much work , love , and faith had been spent on this place of worship , parishioners became proud to have the honor of attending Mass there every Sunday . As a construction site , it had held some dangers . On September 28 , 1941 , a group of teenage boys , just out of high school , were making concrete flooring for the church at the Burrell Construction Company . A large crane operating above them made an unusual movement , causing its bucket , which weighed several tons , to come down with a huge crash right in their midst . All the working tools were completely destroyed but none of the boys were hurt . The bronze door at the front entrance fell on a worker , and everyone believed he had been crushed to death . When ten men lifted the door , they found the worker unharmed underneath it . In another case , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old was assigned a job on the tower of the church before it was roofed . No one realized that he had poor eyesight and he fell from the tower while working . On his way down , he was able to grab onto a pulley that was suspended from the tower . 
 Although much time has passed since the completion of the church and although the majority of those who helped to build it have passed on , Mt . St. Peter Church still stands as a Roman Catholic church located at 100 Freeport Road in New Kensington , Pennsylvania . The church is located along the Allegheny River and is approximately 25 miles ( 40 km ) north @-@ east of the city of Pittsburgh . It is a member of the Diocese of Greensburg . The congregation was founded by Italian immigrants in the early 1900s and the building that now stands as Mt . St. Peter Church was built by its members . In 1998 , the building applied for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places as part of an Multiple Property listing that included several properties in New Kensington . 
 = = Additions to the church = = 
 = = = The Marble Hall = = = 
 The Marble Hall is the basement of Mt . St. Peter 's and is 125 by 55 feet ( 38 by 17 m ) . Before the church had been completed , this area had been filled with valuable material from the Mellon Mansion until the materials found their proper places in the upstairs of the church . By winter of 1944 , the basement was completely empty . During this time , there were men working on building the Rectory , but since there was much snow , they could not return to their work on the Rectory until spring . Nicholas Givens had donated a large quantity of marble for the basement , so they began work on the basement . The workers covered the ground with black asphalt tile and the walls and pillars with white Carrara marble . Two marble altars were constructed along with a large kitchen built to feed up to 400 people . They also built a furnace room and a large workshop to the side of the kitchen . 
 When work on the Marble Hall was being done , from 1944 – 1948 , the assistant pastor of Mount St. Peter 's was Father George <unk> , who executed an inscription around the central nave of the ceiling of the Marble Hall , Christ 's proclamation of Peter 's Primacy : " Blessed art thou Simon Son of Jona and I say to thee , thou art Peter and upon this Rock I will build my Church and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it , and I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven and whatever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven and whatever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven . " The basement was called the Marble Hall after completion and the name stuck . The Marble Hall is mostly used for special breakfasts and dinners , and for fish fry fundraisers during Lent . The hall also serves as the parish 's Italian Restaurant during the Festa Italiana each August . On special holidays when more parishioners than usual attend Mass , which usually include Christmas , Palm Sunday , and Easter , the Mass is said in both the upstairs of the church and downstairs in the Marble Hall . 
 = = = The rectory = = = 
 According to the Council of Trent , every Catholic church is required to have a residing pastor . Before the building of the rectory began in 1944 , the three priests and their housekeeper had lived in the Leslie Mansion ( the mansion on the property ) . The mansion was over a hundred years old , was a frame building , had very few rooms , provided poor living conditions , and had a water pump at the main entrance . 
 Therefore , the parish was in desperate need of a new rectory and the new project was begun in 1944 . An engineer , Frank H. <unk> , was the technical advisor of the project . Parishioners borrowed a bulldozer from the John F. Casey Company in Aspinwall , and a steam shovel from the Burrell Construction and Supply Company of New Kensington ; and they dug the foundation for a two @-@ level building . 
 Cinder blocks were purchased for eight cents each . <unk> slabs were made by young men of the parish on the grounds of the Burrell Construction Company and also at Mt . St. Peter 's . They were made under the direction of Charles Cammarata , who was assisted by the General Electric Co . The slabs , once completed , were used to make the floors and roof . John Stanish gathered free <unk> forms from Dayton , Ohio , free cement from the Burrell Construction Company , and free bricks from an abandoned brick @-@ yard in New Kensington . 
 The three story rectory took three years to complete . On the first floor , there is a dining room , a breakfast room , a kitchen , a pantry , space for archives , a laundry room , and a three car garage . There are four separate stairways that lead up to the second floor . The second floor has three offices , a community room , a large library , and a spacious veranda . In the hallway , there is a large stained glass window made in Germany , but repurposed from the Mellon Mansion . The third floor can be reached from either of two stairwells . The floor has ten rooms divided into four apartments and two guestrooms . This floor also has an open veranda . 
 In addition , the house has nine bathrooms and one elevator , which were taken from the Mellon Mansion . Also taken from the Mellon Mansion were two fireplaces . The one was carved in Italy from lava of Mt . Vesuvius and is located in the community room . The other , located in the dining room on the first floor , was carved out of red Michigan sandstone by an Italian @-@ American sculptor . 
 = = = The Mount Saint Peter Oval = = = 
 Once the church and rectory had been completed , the workers began to envision a plaza . The area that was to become the oval was still occupied by the mansion that was on the Mt . St. Peter grounds . With the permission of the Chancery Office of the Diocese of Pittsburgh , the mansion was demolished and only a few of the fixtures were removed by the church prior to the demolition . 
 A 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) wide road was built around the area that was to become the oval . John Stanish decided to have the oval paved with small pieces marble . He collected the marble remaining from the building of the church along with other pieces . The pieces were all different types , colors , and sizes . Mr. Stanish instructed John <unk> to lay them . 
 <unk> placed the pieces of marble in a way that looked artistic . In 1947 , a pedestal of granite taken from the Mellon Mansion was erected on the northern end of the oval . On top of it was placed a life @-@ size bronze statue of Christ with open arms . On Armistice Day , November 11 , 1951 , the monument was dedicated to the defenders of the United States . 
 A high flying flagpole was presented to the oval by Alcoa . The American flag was hoisted on it for the first time by Joseph <unk> , who was a disabled veteran of World War II . Nearly all of the fraternal organizations of the New Kensington community were represented at the dedication ceremony . The Reverend Monsignor <unk> <unk> , who was the Vicar @-@ General of the Diocese of Ferentino , Italy , blessed the statue of Christ and the American flag . 
 = = = Convent school = = = 
 The next thing built on the grounds was an eight foot arch that went from the rectory to the next future building . A statue of Saint Peter was placed in the niche over the keystone of the arch . From the arch , a large stairway descends to the lower level of the grounds . 
 For two years , from 1948 – 1950 , work was done on the new building connected to the rectory by the arch . The three @-@ story building was made of <unk> slab and the outside was made from a mixture of new and old bricks in the back and Michigan red sandstone in the front , so that the building was the same color as the buildings to which it was adjoined . The interior of the building was plastered by one of the best plasterers in the area , Dom Graziano , who was the son of a parishioner . He did all of the plastering for free . 
 When the building was finished , it had two classrooms , a kitchen , a laundry room , a pantry , and a main entrance on the first floor . On the second floor , there were three classrooms and a chapel with an adjoining sacristy . The third floor was a living area for the teaching sisters . It had eight cells , a kitchen , a refectory , and a community room . All in all , the building was a permanent convent and a temporary parochial school . 
 = = = Parochial school = = = 
 Since the convent school was small and only temporary , the next order of business was to build the actual school . The parochial school took ten years to build ( 1950 – 1960 ) . This building also consists of three floors and is covered with red sandstone in the front . The rear of the building is made of white Pennsylvania sandstone . There is a bell tower on the building . It has three heavy , bronze bells that were salvaged from three Protestant churches of Pittsburgh . 
 The walls of the building are faced with blue tiles from Kittanning . Mr. Clifford <unk> , who was the president of the Kittanning Tile and Brick Company at the time when Mt . St. Peter bought the tile , sold the tiles for a lot cheaper than normal price . He felt that it would not be fair to take advantage of a church by charging high prices . Another man who helped save the parish money in the constructing of the school was parishioner Luigi Valle . He advised the workers on how to set the tiles for many days while refusing to be paid for his services . Valle died in his early 40s , before the tile laying was completed . His place was taken by Bruno <unk> and two of his sons , Bruno , Jr. and John . ( John would later become a priest of Mt . St. Peter Parish . ) The three men faced the entire third floor with tile , a job that took them more than a month to complete . 
 Two huge granite lions , taken from the gardens of the Mellon Mansion , stand guard at the main entrance of the school and the door is surmounted with a terracotta Madonna by Della Robbia . In the school , there are nine classrooms , two auditoriums , a library , a cafeteria , and a utility kitchen . When the school was completed in 1960 , it opened for children in grades 1 – 8 . Later on , a kindergarten and preschool were added . 
 In September 2002 , Mount Saint Peter School no longer stood alone but rather became part of Mary Queen of Apostles School . The new school resulted from the consolidation of Mount Saint Peter , Saint Joseph , and Saint Margaret Mary Schools . Now , the school at Mt . St. Peter 's now educates children in preschool through third grade . 
 = = Pastors of Mt . St. Peter = = 
 The pastor of Mt . St. Peter Parish is appointed to the position by the Bishop and is the leader of the parish . When one steps down , is transferred to another church , passes away , or retires , another is appointed . He is in charge of making sure that everything goes smoothly with the priests and administration of the church . The pastor works in collaboration with the Parish Staff , the Parish Pastoral Council , and the Parish Finance Council . His mission is to proclaim and help facilitate the building of the Kingdom of God among the parishioners of Mt . St. Peter Church . 
 = = Congregation in the 21st century = = 
 As of 2009 , the congregation had approximately five thousand two hundred and nine parishioners . Mount Saint Peter Church serves as a symbol of faith and what can be accomplished when people work together for a common belief , hope , and dream . The church 's new motto , adopted in 2004 , reflected this balance : " to restore all things in Christ ... with the fire of love . " This motto serves as a constant reminder of the history of the parish . The beauty of the Mellon Mansion was restored by the congregation and turned into a House of God . This was done through a strong love of Christ , faith , and neighbor . The names of the volunteers who helped build the church are carved in the marble inside the main entrance of the church and serve as a token of the congregation 's appreciation . Many of today 's parishioners are descendants of those volunteers and are proud to tell the story of their forefathers who gave them this church in which to practice their faith . 
 = = = Church mission = = = 
 The parish mission reflects its ongoing commitment to both the Catholic and the Italian identity . " Mount Saint Peter Parish , a diverse Catholic parish strongly rooted in its rich Italian heritage , is called to spread the good news of Jesus Christ to all . With liturgy as the source and summit of pastoral life , we will work to promote faith formation as a life long process , to invite others into faithful stewardship in service to the Kingdom of God , and to promote our faith by word and deed to the wider community . " Mass is said at 8 : 30 am everyday from Monday to Friday and at 4 : 00 pm on Saturday evenings . Sunday Masses are said weekly at 8 : 30 and 10 : 30 am . 
 = = = Festa Italiana = = = 
 As part of its continuing mission , the congregation sponsors an annual Festa Italiana every August . The festival itself is full of activities , but one of the main attractions is the food . The menu usually includes lasagna with homemade noodles , spaghetti and meatballs , hot sausage sandwich with onions and peppers , pasta e <unk> , Italian rice balls , and other items such as pulled pork and baked chicken . Desserts include <unk> , frappe , <unk> , <unk> and gelato One parishioner explained , " I like seeing everyone from town , but the food is always an attraction . " 
 = = = Parish organizations = = = 
 Within the congregation , there are many organizations that specialize in various activities , all of which strive to better the church or community or both . These groups allow parishioners to work with each other in order to reach common goals and also allows them to become more involved in Mt . St. Peter Church . This way , the congregation can remain a close knit family , not just a church where parishioners spend an hour praying on Sunday mornings . The organizations listed are the ones that are currently active , there were in the past , many others , like the Committee of a hundred ( mentioned in the history section ) , which are no longer in existence . 
 = = = = Addolorata Society = = = = 
 The Addolorata Society was started by a group of women parishioners in 1903 and continues to be an all @-@ women society . The goal of the group is to find better ways to serve the church . The symbol of the Addolorata Society is the Blessed Mother because she symbolizes love . A member becomes a free life member when she turns eighty , as long as she has a member for at least fifteen years prior to her eightieth birthday . Some of their events include attending funeral Masses and collecting money to purchase altar linens , vestments , and altar lights . The presidents of the society since 1903 in chronological order are as follows : Mrs. Rose Spinelli , Mrs. <unk> <unk> , Mrs. Maria Greco , Mrs. Rose <unk> , Mrs. Santa <unk> , Mrs. Anna <unk> , Mrs. <unk> , Mrs. Carmina <unk> , Georgeanne Stearman , and Sandy Laney . 
 = = = = Saint Anthony Guild = = = = 
 In 1939 , Mrs. Angela Costanza Bongiovanni , along with the help of Monsignor Fuso , founded the Saint Anthony Guild . At that time , 32 women joined Mrs. Bongiovanni 's new guild . The mission of the guild was to serve the special needs of the parish and to help the poor and disadvantaged in the area . Also , the guild volunteered its time and effort at the St. Anthony Orphanage in Oakmont , hence the name " Saint Anthony Guild . " All the members of the Saint Anthony Guild are women and they strive to provide their group with fellowship and spiritual renewal through the help the bestow on the church and community . 
 As of 2010 , there are 47 active members of the organization and the president is Suzette Venturini . The group meets on the third Tuesday of February , April , May , August , September , October and November in the Marble Hall of Mt . St. Peter Church . The meetings consist of discussing projects and praying together . The St. Anthony Guild is known for their visits to the home @-@ bound of the parish at Christmas and Easter and also for their Tree of Angels Campaign . This campaign allows parishioners to purchase angels in memory of loved ones that are placed on the church 's Christmas tree . The money raised from these angel ornaments is donated to children in need . The guild also has many entertaining fundraisers to raise money for their charity projects . Some of these include a dance for parishioners in the fall , bingo nights , and selling coupons for special shopping days at Macy 's . 
 = = = = Altar servers = = = = 
 The honor of becoming an altar server , was , in the past , a privilege only available to boys but has since become coed . Altar servers wear long , white , plain robes and assist the priest in his duties during the Mass . At Mt . St. Peter Church , there are four altar servers at every Mass . One is the book bearer and is in charge of bringing the Bible to the priest at the times during which the priest reads from the Bible during the Mass . The cross bearer holds a large , wooded crucifix and commences the procession in which the priest enters the church . Also present in the procession are the acolytes , and the book bearer . He or she also leads the procession out of the church at the end of the Mass . The last two altar servers are acolytes and are in charge of lighting the candles in the church prior to the beginning of the Mass and extinguishing them after Mass . 
 Children , ages 11 – 17 , volunteer to become altar servers not only to serve the church but also because it has always been looked upon as an honor . It is a chance for children to serve their priest and become closer to Jesus by being on the altar . In addition , it is an opportunity for them to try to make themselves more holy and therefore more worthy of the position . 
 = = = = Confraternity of Christian Doctrine = = = = 
 The Confraternity of Christian Doctrine , also known as C.C.D. consists of men and women whose mission is to teach the principles of loving and serving God to the children of the parish who do not attend Catholic School . Members of the confraternity serve as teachers in the Sunday Schools of the parish ( there are seven different Sunday Schools belonging to Mt . St. Peter 's in total ) . These teachers send out the Catholic messages of faith and love through words , stories , examples , and prayers in order to help the children grow in their faith . The majority of children who attend one of the Sunday Schools are ages 6 – 12 . 
 = = = = Holy Name Society = = = = 
 For over fifty years , the Holy Name Society of Mt . St. Peter Church has been working to inspire love , honor , and reverence for the holy name of Jesus Christ . The society also works to promote respect for the Catholic Church , loyalty to Mt . St. Peter Parish , and a life filled with good spiritual values that can be carried throughout family , education , and work . The Holy Name Society is strictly for Catholic men and was begun by Monsignor Fusco , who started the group in hopes of uniting men of the parish through service to others . Members of the society host a Mass and breakfast on the Sunday prior to Palm Sunday every year and an annual Golf Outing during the summer . Money raised at this these two events is donated to the parish to help aid in the costs of parish projects . 
 = = = = Ushers ' Club = = = = 
 The Ushers ' Club consists of thirty or less men of the parish . They are chosen to join the club by the authority of the church . All members are required to do their job as " ushers " during Mass . This job entails showing people to available seats , telling parishioners when it is the right time to rise and get in line for communion , and collecting the monetary offerings of the parishioners during the presenting of the gifts to the altar . Members of the Ushers ' Club also serve the church by volunteering their time and labor at the social activities of the parish . 
 = = = = St. Vincent De Paul Society = = = = 
 Mt . St. Peter Parish has a branch of the Saint Vincent De Paul Society . The goal of this branch of the society , like all other branches , is to help the poor , the sick , and the suffering . Members of this group work to help people locally by collecting food and delivering it to food banks in and around New Kensington . Within the church , it is seen as a great honor to be part of this society and the members believe that the best help lies in the people they are more than in the caring acts they perform . They all work together to help others and they continually strive to become better Catholics . 
 = = = = Mount Saint Peter Parish Council = = = = 
 In March 1972 , the Mount Saint Peter Parish Council was first elected . The group consists of eighteen elected members and it advises and assists the pastor in important decisions concerning the affairs of the church . It prides itself on having the ability to guide the parish in its mission of following Christ . The main purpose of the council is to give the pastor an insight into what the parish community thinks and how it feels about different issues . All of the parish activities must go through the four standing committees , which are the Liturgy , Education , Apostolic Work , and <unk> . 
 = The Boat Race 1949 = 
 The 95th Boat Race took place on 26 March 1949 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames in London . The race , umpired by the former Oxford rower Guy Oliver Nickalls , was notable as the commentator for the BBC , John Snagge announced " I can 't see who 's in the lead , but it 's either Oxford or Cambridge . " Cambridge won by a quarter of a length , the narrowest margin of victory since the 1877 race which was officially recorded as a dead heat . The victory took the overall record in the event to 51 – 43 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1948 race by five lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 50 victories to Oxford 's 43 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by R. Beesly ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1927 , 1928 and 1929 races ) , W. L. S. Flemming , Mike Nicholson ( non @-@ rowing boat club president for the 1947 race ) , Harold Rickett ( who had rowed three times between 1930 and 1932 ) , and M. H. Warriner ( a three @-@ time Blue between 1928 and 1930 ) . Oxford 's coaches were Hugh " Jumbo " Edwards ( who had rowed for Oxford in 1926 and 1930 ) , F. E. Hellyer ( who had coached Cambridge on five previous occasions ) , A. McCulloch ( who had rowed in the 1908 race ) and J. MacNabb ( who had coached Cambridge between 1930 and 1932 ) . The race was umpired by Guy Oliver Nickalls who had rowed for Oxford in the 1921 , 1922 and 1923 races . 
 Writing in The Observer , G. I. F. Thomson noted that " neither crew contains an oarsman of any exceptional power , distinction or reputation " yet both crews had improved in form since their arrival at Putney . The rowing correspondent for The Manchester Guardian praised the quality of the final coaching on the Thames , and stated that " there has been no threat of influenza , and no last @-@ minute change in the constitution of either crew " . He went on to claim that " Oxford should win " . The Times ' rowing correspondent suggested that the crews were " extraordinarily evenly matched " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 10 @.@ 75 lb ( 80 @.@ 9 kg ) , 2 pounds ( 0 @.@ 9 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained five participants with prior Boat Race experience , including cox Alastair <unk> @-@ Brown . Cambridge saw one rower return to the crew in number five Paul Bircher . The Light Blue 's crew contained three Olympic medallists : Charles Lloyd , Bircher and Paul Massey won silver when they finished second in the men 's eights at the 1948 Summer Olympics in London . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . The umpire , Nickalls , started the race at 11 : 30 a.m. The Dark Blues took an early lead and were half a length ahead after the first minute of the race . They were clear of Cambridge by Craven Steps , and by the time the crews passed the Mile Post , were a length ahead . In the headwind along Chiswick Reach , and with the bend in the river in their favour , Cambridge slowly redressed the balance and by Chiswick Eyot they had begun to overlap Oxford 's boat . 
 By the bottom of Dukes Meadows , Oxford 's lead was down to half a length and as Cambridge out @-@ rated their opponents , they drew level and passed under Barnes Bridge side by side . Despite numerous spurts from Oxford 's stroke Davidge , Cambridge kept in touch and " were fighting every inch of the way " . <unk> for the BBC on a launch whose engine had failed , John Snagge announced " I can 't see who 's in the lead , but it 's either Oxford or Cambridge . " Both crews were rating over 33 strokes per minute as they approached the finishing post , with the Light Blues just edging ahead to win by a quarter of a length in a time of 18 minutes 57 seconds . The winning distance was the narrowest since the " dead heat " result of the 1877 Race . It was Cambridge 's third consecutive victory and took the overall record in the event to 51 – 43 in their favour . The rowing correspondent for The Manchester Guardian suggested that this was a race that " will never be forgotten " , while the correspondent for The Times claimed that " 1949 must go down in Boat Race history as having provided one of the epic struggles of all time . " G. I. F. Thomson , writing in The Observer , stated that " heroic determination on both sides ... produced perhaps the most exciting Boat Race of all time . " 
 = Music of Nier = 
 Nier is an action role @-@ playing video game developed by Cavia and published by Square Enix in 2010 . The music of Nier was composed by Keiichi Okabe with members of his studio , Monaca , Kakeru Ishihama and Keigo Hoashi , and Takafumi Nishimura of Cavia . The soundtrack has inspired the release of four official albums by Square Enix — an official soundtrack album and three albums of arrangements — along with two mini @-@ albums included as pre @-@ order bonuses for the Japanese versions of the game and two licensed EPs of jazz arrangements . 
 The original soundtrack was highly praised ; reviewers noted it as one of the best video game soundtracks of the year , praising the originality of the compositions and the beauty of Emi Evans ' vocal work . The first arranged album , while also warmly received , was perceived by critics to be weaker than the original and not long enough to stand up to the expectations created by the success of the original . The first three albums sold well enough to be recorded on the Japanese Oricon music charts , reaching number 24 for the original soundtrack , 59 for the first arranged album , and position number 77 for the second . 
 = = Development = = 
 The soundtrack to Nier was composed by a collaboration of the studio Monaca , consisting of Keiichi Okabe , Kakeru Ishihama , and Keigo Hoashi , along with Takafumi Nishimura from Cavia , the game 's developer . Okabe served as the lead composer and as the director for the project as a whole . Okabe was brought onto the project when the concept for the game was first being devised , and worked intermittently on the soundtrack for the next three years until its release . The music for the game was generally composed entirely separate from the development of the game . Often , elements of the game were modified to match the music , rather than the other way around . Some tracks were used in ways that the composers did not envision , such as " Grandma " , which was expected to be used in the prologue of the game but was instead chosen as a boss battle theme . The music was designed for different motifs to appear in various arrangements throughout the soundtrack , and also to convey a sense of sadness even during the " thrilling " tracks . Okabe was allowed a great deal of freedom regarding what the music was to sound like ; game director Taro Yoko 's main request was that he use a lot of vocal works . 
 The vocals and lyrics were provided by vocalist Emi Evans ( Emiko Rebecca Evans ) , a singer from England living in Tokyo . She is the singer for the band <unk> , and had previously worked on video game projects such as the Etrian Odyssey arrange albums . The Monaca team had met her when considering her for a prior project , and Okabe wanted to work with her on Nier . She was approached a few months after the initial meeting in Autumn 2008 to be the vocalist for the soundtrack . In addition to singing , Evans was asked to write her own lyrics in futuristic languages . The composers gave her preliminary version of songs and the style they wished the language to be in , such as Scottish Gaelic or French , and she invented the words . Evans wrote songs in versions of Scottish Gaelic , Portuguese , Spanish , Italian , French , English and Japanese , and wrote " Song of the Ancients " in an entirely fictional language . She wrote that song by listening to songs in as many languages as possible and jumbling them up together . For the other languages , she tried to imagine what they would sound like after 1000 years of drifting . 
 Okabe did not want to use traditional lyrics , as he felt they would clash with the design of the world in the game , and wanted to use a variety of languages to represent the open nature of the game 's world . He also did not want easily recognizable lyrics to be sung in the background while the characters were speaking , and for any noticeable words to instead evoke emotions in the player . Evans only knew English , Japanese , and French when she began the project ; she listened to the other languages on YouTube to learn the rhythms and sounds of the languages and then mixed and changed them . Okabe largely allowed Evans to decide how to integrate the lyrics with the early forms of the songs , and as he usually did not know where the songs would be used in the game gave her only light direction as to the emotional tone for the songs . The composers often would modify the songs in later revisions to follow how Evans had sung for that song . 
 = = Original soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack to Nier is largely composed of melancholy acoustic pieces which heavily feature vocals by Emi Evans . Of the 43 tracks included in the released soundtrack album , only 9 do not have any vocal component to them ; these are the four versions each of " <unk> " and " Yonah " , as well as " Dance of the Evanescent " . With the exception of " Ashes of Dreams " , the lyrics are not intended to mean anything ; for that song , Evans was given a list of Japanese words to use , which she then translated for the English , French , and Scottish Gaelic versions of the song . The song and its variants were the last to be recorded , and Evans convinced the composers that one song in the soundtrack should have recognizable lyrics rather than futuristic English as they originally planned . Evans found " Ashes " to be the most difficult song to write on the soundtrack , as she had difficulty writing lyrics that met the composers ' criteria of despair and lack of hope . 
 " Hills of Radiant Wind " is one of the few upbeat songs on the largely dark soundtrack ; for that piece Evans sang in a version of Portuguese in a style meant to sound like a spirit floating on the wind . For " Grandma " , she sang in a French style , trying to " put in as much anguish and melancholy " as possible ; she created the song in a single recording , and it is " one of the most memorable songs " that she has sung . " The Wretched Automatons " is sung in a variant of English and was recorded prior to the addition of the mechanical sounds that run throughout the track , while " Kainé " is in a version of Gaelic . 
 Square Enix released a soundtrack album of music from the game , titled NieR Gestalt & Replicant Original Soundtrack , on April 21 , 2010 . The two @-@ disc , 2 : 30 : 09 @-@ long album has the catalog numbers of SQEX @-@ <unk> / 90 . As preorder bonuses for Nier Gestalt and Nier Replicant , the two versions of the game released in Japan , two mini @-@ albums , Nier Gestalt Mini Album and Nier Replicant Mini Album , were included . Each one contains five tracks from the full soundtrack album ; Gestalt corresponds with tracks 1 and 4 from disc 1 , 8 and 13 from disc 2 , and an electronic version of " Kainé " titled " Kainé / Rain of Light " , while Replicant encompasses track 3 from disc 2 , tracks 2 and 7 from disc 1 , track 1 from disc 2 , and a medley of several tracks . Gestalt is 18 : 11 long , and Replicant 17 : 11 . A book of sheet music of piano arrangements of tracks from the game by Okabe was published by KMP on April 22 , 2011 . The book , NieR Gestalt & Replicant Official Score Book , contains 25 arrangements in 112 pages . Guitar arrangements of " Song of the Ancients / Devola " and " Yonah / Strings Ver . " by Yuji Sekiguchi were included in the Square Enix Official Best Collection guitar solo sheet music book , published by KMP in May 2011 . 
 The soundtrack album reached number 24 on the Japanese Oricon music charts , and remained on the charts for 11 weeks . It was well received by critics ; Patrick Gann of RPGFan called the album " an insanely good soundtrack " and noted it as his candidate for video game soundtrack of the year , as well as " one of the best game soundtracks ever " . He applauded that the music was both " meticulously @-@ crafted " and " accessible to the untrained ear " . Don Kotowski of Square Enix Music Online praised the " captivating vocal work " and " exquisite " composition . He also noted that each track retained a sense of individuality even when it reused themes from other tracks . He was less complimentary towards the mini albums , which he regarded as good introductions to the soundtrack as a whole but not worth purchasing on their own . Jayson Napolitano of Original Sound Version also praised the album , saying that it was " hands down one of the best soundtracks Square Enix has published over the years " . Calling it " captivating " and " otherworldly " , he applauded the album 's originality and Evans ' vocals . Original Sound Version later named the soundtrack as the best video game soundtrack of 2010 , and Square Enix Music Online awarded it the best Japanese video game soundtrack of the year . 
 Track list 
 = = Arrange tracks = = 
 An album of arranged music was published by Square Enix on December 8 , 2010 . The album , NieR Gestalt & Replicant 15 Nightmares & Arrange Tracks , contains 11 tracks across a length of 54 : 43 , and has a catalog number of SQEX @-@ <unk> . The arrangements were done by composers Okabe , Ishihama , and Hoashi , as well as by " <unk> " , Ryuichi Takada , and <unk> Tanaka . The first five arrangements , in a techno style , were included in the Nier DLC , while the remaining tracks are piano , instrumental , chiptune , and a cappella versions of tracks from the game . In the liner notes for the album , Okabe said that the DLC tracks were meant to be " more war @-@ like " versions of the originals , while the second half of the album was intended to " maintain the image and worldview of the original music " . 
 The arranged album reached number 59 on the Oricon music charts , a position it held for a week . It was warmly received by reviewers , if less so than the first album ; Patrick Gann critiqued the album as not being as good as the original , though he noted that " you can still be awesome and rank second to that album " . He concluded that the arrangements were all of good quality , but that listeners would not be " blown away by it " . Don Kotowski found it to be an " accomplished arrange album " , but inferior to the original as he felt that it was shorter than it should have been and that the final two tracks were weaker than the rest of the arrangements . Jayson Napolitano also felt that the album should have been longer ; he thought that most listeners would skip the DLC tracks in favor of the acoustic arrangements , and that six tracks was not enough to carry the album given the expectations created by the quality of the original soundtrack . 
 = = Echo = = 
 On September 14 , 2011 Square Enix published a third Nier album , titled NieR Tribute Album <unk> . Each of the 12 tracks on the album is a remix of a Nier piece , each by a different artist . The resulting eclectic mix of styles is primarily electronic , but also includes a multiple @-@ piano arrangement of " Grandma " and a klezmer rendition of " Shadowlord 's Castle " . The album has a duration of 1 : 00 : 46 , and has the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . 
 The album reached number 77 on the Oricon music charts , a position it held for a week . It was positively reviewed by Jayson Napolitano of Original Sound Version , who described himself as " impressed " with it . He preferred this album to the arranged album , though he felt that a few of the tracks had difficulty distinguishing themselves above the high quality of the original pieces . 
 = = Piano = = 
 On March 21 , 2012 Square Enix published a fourth Nier album , titled Piano Collections Nier Gestalt & Replicant . Each of the 11 tracks on the album is a piano arrangement of a Nier piece . The tracks were arranged and played by several different artists , namely Keigo Hoashi , Kumi Tanioka , Masato Kouda , Ryuichi Takada , and Yuri Misumi . Each arranger performed their own pieces , with the exception of Kouda , whose arrangement was played by Tanioka . The album has a duration of 45 : 42 , and has the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . 
 The album was positively reviewed by Jayson Napolitano of Original Sound Version , who said that while " nothing on this album came as particularly surprising " , that he enjoyed the arrangements and performances . He preferred the tracks on this album to the piano arrangements on the 15 Nightmares album . 
 = = Jazz = = 
 Music from Nier has been arranged into two jazz EPs . The albums , titled NieR Gestalt & Replicant : Jazz Arrange Version and Jazz Arrange Version Vol . 2 , contain six tracks each from the soundtrack licensed by Joypad Records . The tracks are arranged and performed by Sean <unk> , and were released digitally on August 8 , 2013 , and May 16 , 2014 . The EPs have durations of 26 : 48 and 25 : 33 . The music is split between instrumental and vocal pieces , and covers multiple different styles of jazz music . 
 The first EP was positively reviewed by Brad Hayes @-@ <unk> of RPGFan , who " greatly enjoyed the direction this album takes " , though he did note that some of the pieces did not quite meet his high expectations . He concluded that " the tracks give a fresh spin on some great pieces of video game music and keep the spirit of Nier alive and well . " 
 Track list 
 = = Music video = = 
 On July 15 , 2015 , an officially licensed arrangement of " Song of the Ancients " from Nier , along with a music video , were released by OverClocked Records . It was made available to stream or purchase . The song , a vocal performance with vibraphone and percussion , was the first officially licensed video game music single by the record label , an offshoot of the OverClocked ReMix video game music remix community . The single was sung by Jillian Aversa , who features in the accompanying music video , with percussion by Doug Perry . The song was performed by the duo prior to release at Video Games Live concerts , and was filmed at National Harbor , Maryland by the sculpture The Awakening in January 2015 during <unk> , an annual game music convention . 
 = Liberal Party of Australia leadership spill , 2009 = 
 A leadership spill of the federal parliamentary leader of the Liberal Party of Australia was held on 1 December 2009 . The incumbent , Malcolm Turnbull , was defeated by Tony Abbott in a three @-@ way vote of Liberal Party Members of Parliament ( MPs ) . Joe Hockey also stood as a candidate . Abbott thus became the Leader of the Opposition in the Parliament of Australia . 
 The spill was the culmination of a dispute within the Liberal Party over its response to the Rudd Government 's proposed emissions trading scheme ( ETS ) . Turnbull supported the introduction of an ETS and sought to negotiate amendments to government 's proposed legislation . Abbott came to represent many Liberal members of Parliament who were climate change sceptics or otherwise opposed the ETS . After Turnbull survived a spill motion ( a motion to declare the leadership vacant ) against his leadership in late November 2009 , Abbott declared his candidacy and a subsequent spill was moved on 1 December . Hockey — a moderate who had been a supporter of Turnbull 's position on the ETS — also stood . While Hockey had been expected to win , he was knocked out in the first round of voting . Abbott subsequently defeated Turnbull in the second round , 42 – 41 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Malcolm Turnbull was elected to the House of Representatives in the 2004 federal election . In January 2007 he was appointed Minister for the Environment and Water Resources by Prime Minister John Howard . After the Australian Labor Party defeated the Howard government in the 2007 election , Turnbull , Brendan Nelson and Tony Abbott announced they would each contest the Liberal Party leadership . Nelson defeated Turnbull in a ballot after Abbott withdrew his candidacy . Turnbull became the Shadow Treasurer on Nelson 's frontbench . 
 Nelson 's leadership of the Liberal Party was beset by poor opinion poll numbers . There was speculation that Turnbull would challenge Nelson for the leadership in late 2008 ; however , Nelson caught Turnbull by surprise by calling a snap spill of the party 's leadership positions while Turnbull was returning from an overseas holiday . The spill was moved on 16 September 2008 . Turnbull defeated Nelson by four votes , becoming the leader of the Liberal Party and of the Opposition Coalition between the Liberals and the National Party . Nelson later resigned from the House of Representatives . 
 = = Climate change policy dispute = = 
 Turnbull was regarded as a " believer " in global warming . As Environment Minister , he had overseen the introduction of an emissions trading scheme ( ETS ) as a policy of the Liberal Party shortly before the Howard government 's defeat . However , many of Turnbull 's fellow MPs in the Coalition were climate change sceptics . Tensions within the Coalition on climate change policy had contributed to the downfall of Nelson 's leadership . 
 As leader of the Liberal Party , Turnbull supported the introduction of an ETS . In June 2009 , he indicated in principle support for an ETS proposed by the Rudd Government despite the opposition of his Coalition partner , the National Party . Turnbull subsequently outlined the Coalition 's position that it would oppose the ETS introduced to Parliament by the government , but would be open to negotiating an amended version . 
 Turnbull 's willingness to negotiate with the government was met with opposition from some Coalition MPs . By September 2009 , The Australian was reporting that only 12 of the 59 Liberal backbenchers supported negotiations . On 18 October 2009 , Turnbull fronted a meeting of Coalition MPs with a proposal to negotiate amendments to the government 's ETS . This meeting supported his proposal , in what was seen as a test of Turnbull 's leadership . However , there was speculation that a number of Coalition Senators would defy Turnbull and cross the floor of the Senate to vote against any ETS legislation . The ETS opponents argued that it would be premature for Parliament to pass ETS legislation before the Copenhagen Summit on climate change . 
 The divisions within the Coalition were laid bare in an episode of Four Corners , aired by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation on 9 November 2009 . The program featured the Coalition 's leader in the Senate , Nick Minchin , suggesting that man @-@ made climate change was a conspiracy of the political left and disputing Turnbull 's authority to strike a deal with the government on the ETS . Later in the month , Minchin spoke against the ETS in the Senate . Abbott — who had publicly supported the ETS — was now arguing that the Coalition should abandon the policy . Turnbull attacked Abbott 's change of mind , stating : " Tony has expressed a number of views , each of which is at odds with the view he expressed before " . 
 On 23 November 2009 , the Coalition 's climate change spokesman Ian Macfarlane agreed to a deal with the government to amend the ETS legislation . The amendments provided industry with substantial compensation and exemptions from the ETS . Turnbull took the deal to Liberal MPs for formal approval , but a majority of backbenchers opposed it . Turnbull nonetheless claimed he had the Coalition 's support , by counting as supporters the 20 members of the Coalition Shadow Cabinet who he argued should be presumed to support the deal . This claim was met with rancour by his opponents in the Coalition . 
 Anger at Turnbull 's response to the 23 November 2009 meeting triggered a spill motion against his leadership three days later . The motion was moved by Kevin Andrews , a former Minister in the Howard government , but was defeated by a vote of 48 to 35 . Andrews was not seen as a genuine prospect for the leadership , so the close vote on the spill motion was considered a blow to Turnbull . While Abbott supported Turnbull at the time of Andrews ' spill , he subsequently resigned from the frontbench . Several others joined Abbott in resigning , including Nick Minchin , Eric <unk> , Sophie Mirabella and Tony Smith . 
 = = Abbott and Hockey challenges = = 
 Abbott announced on 27 November — one day after Turnbull survived Kevin Andrews ' spill motion — that he would challenge Turnbull for the leadership . Abbott committed to withdrawing his candidacy if Joe Hockey was to challenge . Abbott confirmed his opposition to the ETS legislation , questioning why Australia would legislate for a potentially detrimental economic measure before other countries had committed to do the same . A Newspoll released on 30 November placed Hockey at 33 % , Turnbull at 30 % and Abbott at 19 % , when voters were asked who would be the " best person to lead " the Liberal Party . Speculation flourished that Hockey would challenge Turnbull , and Hockey consulted senior party dignitaries such as Howard and Costello about whether he should run . 
 Hockey faced a dilemma . A moderate in the Liberal Party , Hockey had been a consistent supporter of the ETS . Running against Turnbull would mean taking the leadership with the support of the party 's right wing and climate change sceptics . Turnbull seized on the dilemma , claiming Hockey had given Turnbull his " complete support " and was still a firm supporter of the ETS legislation . 
 Hockey attempted to resolve his dilemma by declaring that as leader he would allow a conscience vote on the ETS legislation . Abbott rejected Hockey 's declaration , and reneged on his earlier indication that he would withdraw his candidacy for Hockey . Abbott stated : " It now seems pretty clear we could change the leader to Joe and these offensive bills could still go through the Parliament " . On Hockey 's candidacy , Turnbull claimed that Hockey had pledged his opposition to the spill motion . However , it was expected that if the spill motion succeeded , Hockey would stand for the leadership against Turnbull and Abbott . Hockey was generally expected to win the ballot and become leader . To the end , Turnbull refused to stand aside as leader , insisting he would defeat the spill motion . Hockey later alleged that Turnbull had promised he would not stand against Hockey if the spill motion was successful . Turnbull denied that he had given , and therefore broken , any such undertaking . 
 = = Results = = 
 On 1 December 2009 , Liberal MPs convened to consider the spill motion to vacate the leadership . The motion passed 48 – 34 , following which Turnbull , Hockey and Abbott contested a ballot . Hockey was seen as the favourite to win the ballot , but was knocked out in the first round of voting , receiving 23 votes to Turnbull 's 26 and Abbott 's 35 . A second round of voting ensued , in which Abbott defeated Turnbull by one vote ( 42 – 41 ) . Fran Bailey , a supporter of Turnbull , was absent for the vote , and there was one vote of " no " , which was recorded as informal . 
 Julie Bishop remained the deputy leader of the party , without being challenged for the position . Abbott thus became the third consecutive leader , after Nelson and Turnbull , for whom Bishop would serve as deputy . After the ballots , Bishop declared that she had voted for Turnbull , although Turnbull doubted her loyalty and Bishop resorted to proving it by retrieving her ballot papers . 
 = = = Ballots = = = 
 Spill motion to vacate leadership 
 Leadership ballot 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Abbott said he was " humbled and daunted " by his unexpected election , while Hockey expressed surprise at his defeat . Upon his election , Abbott acknowledged his propensity for making controversial public statements — which with his Catholicism and background as a trainee priest earnt him the moniker of " the Mad Monk " — and apologised for all his " errors of the past " . A week after the ballot , Abbott named his Shadow Cabinet . Hockey remained in the key position of Shadow Treasurer . Three Howard government veterans — Kevin Andrews , Philip Ruddock and Bronwyn Bishop — were recalled from the backbench , and outspoken National Party MP and climate change sceptic Barnaby Joyce was appointed to the shadow Finance portfolio . Turnbull voluntarily moved to the backbench . 
 Under Abbott 's leadership , the Liberal Party voted against the ETS legislation in the Senate on 3 December 2009 . Two Liberal Senators — Judith <unk> and Sue Boyce — crossed the floor to support the legislation . In February 2010 , Abbott outlined his alternative climate change policy , which would directly fund or subsidise emission reduction measures rather than cap emissions from industry . 
 Speaking in the House of Representatives in February 2010 , Turnbull attacked Abbott 's climate change policy and praised the government 's ETS legislation . He argued that Abbott 's subsidy @-@ based policy would be a " recipe for fiscal recklessness " . Turnbull later announced he would leave Parliament at the end of his term , before changing his mind within weeks . He claimed that his change of mind was the result of his anger at the government 's decision to delay its ETS legislation until 2013 . He denied being interested in regaining the leadership of the Liberal Party , saying " I don 't think there is any likelihood of that I assure you " . Turnbull subsequently gave qualified support to Abbott 's climate change policy , arguing that while it was inferior to an ETS in principle , it was preferable to the government 's approach of delaying action until 2013 . While it was the third leadership spill motion in three years , the Liberal Party did not attempt another spill motion for six years after , until the February 2015 leadership spill motion which was defeated 61 votes to 39 . In September 2015 , Malcolm Turnbull called for another spill , directly challenging Tony Abbott in a rematch between the two , and winning the vote 54 @-@ 44 to return to the position of leader of the Liberal Party , and as a result , displaced Abbott as Prime Minister of Australia . 
 For Hockey it is viewed that his failure to come up with a firm position on the ETS had blown what turned out to be his only chance to become Liberal leader in 2009 . When Prime Minister Tony Abbott 's leadership came under question in 2014 and 2015 , Hockey now Treasurer was not speculated as a potential successor to Abbott . 
 = Hurricane Josephine ( 1984 ) = 
 Hurricane Josephine was a long @-@ lived Atlantic hurricane that threatened the East Coast of the United States for several days in October 1984 . The fifteenth tropical cyclone , tenth named storm , and third hurricane of the season , Josephine developed from an area of disturbed weather near the Bahamas on October 7 , forming with subtropical characteristics . It quickly organized , and gained tropical characteristics as it strengthened into a tropical storm on October 8 . Gradual intensification occurred thereafter , reaching hurricane status on October 10 . The storm headed northward , remaining well offshore of the eastern United States . Josephine strengthened further and peaked as a moderately strong Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale on October 12 . On the following day , Josephine weakened back to a Category 1 hurricane before becoming nearly stationary . It later headed northeastward and paralleled the coast well offshore of Nova Scotia . By October 17 , Josephine weakened back to a tropical storm , shortly before beginning to execute a cyclonic loop to the south of Newfoundland . While executing the cyclonic loop , Josephine became extratropical on October 18 . 
 Although Josephine remained well offshore of the eastern United States , the effects from the storm and an area of high pressure produced strong winds and high seas along the coast . In North Carolina , high tides caused severe beach erosion and minor damage to ocean @-@ front houses . Minor coastal flooding occurred in New York and New Jersey . In addition , one fatality occurred when a man drowned after falling off his boat while sailing a river in Massachusetts . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A frontal trough moved eastward off the southeastern United States on September 30 , becoming stationary north of Haiti . The trough developed an area of disturbed weather that interacted with an upper @-@ level low pressure area , resulting in the development of a subtropical depression on October 7 . Upon formation , the system consisted of a very broad subtropical low , as well as a poorly defined surface circulation . As the subtropical depression drifted westward , it became further organized . By midday on October 8 , an Air Force reconnaissance aircraft flight indicated that the subtropical depression intensified and acquired enough tropical characteristics to be considered a tropical storm . The National Hurricane Center named the storm Josephine . 
 Further intensification was slow , as Josephine was very large and existed in a relatively cool environment . Shortly thereafter , Josephine curved northward to the northeast of the Bahamas . By October 10 , Josephine had strengthened into a hurricane . Josephine continued north @-@ northeastward , and became a Category 2 hurricane on October 11 . Winds increased slightly , and Josephine reached its maximum sustained winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) on October 12 . Josephine weakened back to a Category 1 hurricane on October 13 . That day , an area of high pressure moved off the northeastern United States , which caused Josephine to decelerate and abruptly curve northeastward , and eventually southeastward . By October 15 , Josephine began to accelerate east @-@ northeastward . Later that day , Josephine reached its minimum barometric pressure of 965 mbar ( 28 @.@ 5 inHg ) . 
 As Josephine continued east @-@ northeastward , it had weakened back into a tropical storm . Under the influence of an area of high pressure to the north and a nearby area of low pressure , Josephine began executing a cyclonic loop to the north while approaching Atlantic Canada . During the cyclonic loop , it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on October 18 . Shortly thereafter , the remnants of Josephine merged with a broad mid @-@ latitude trough . The remnants of Josephine tracked southward and completed the cyclonic loop on October 19 . The system eventually curved to the east @-@ northeastward and moved in that direction until it became unidentifiable on October 21 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Shortly after the system was declared a tropical storm , gale warnings were issued for the central Bahamas starting on October 8 . Slightly more than 24 hours later , a hurricane watch was issued on Eleuthera and the Abaco Islands . By early on October 11 , both of the alerts were discontinued . Later that day , gale warnings were issued from Cape Lookout , North Carolina to Virginia Beach , Virginia . The warning area was extended to as far north as Nantucket , Massachusetts on October 13 . The warning for the area from Cape Lookout , North Carolina to Virginia Beach , Virginia was discontinued late on October 14 . Simultaneously , gale warnings were issued from Nantucket to Cape Cod , Massachusetts . In addition , another gale warning was also issued from Cape Cod to Boston , Massachusetts . By October 15 , all gale warnings were discontinued . Early in the hurricane 's duration , NASA developed a contingency plan for delaying a landing of the space shuttle Challenger by a day in the event Josephine passed near Kennedy Space Center . The shuttle crew filmed the hurricane from orbit using an IMAX camera . This footage of the storm was featured in the 1985 IMAX documentary The Dream is Alive . 
 Although Josephine remained well offshore of the eastern United States , the storm produced strong winds and high seas in combination with an area of high pressure . On the Outer Banks of North Carolina , strong winds were reported from October 11 to October 14 . At Diamond Shoals , sustained winds were at 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) , with gusts as high as 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . However , most of the damage caused by Josephine was due to high tides along the East Coast of the United States . On Hatteras Island , tides were 5 @.@ 8 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) above the mean sea level . In addition , wave heights of 8 to 12 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 7 m ) were reported on the island . Due to the tides , over @-@ wash occurred on highways along the Outer Banks , which in turn caused those roads to close . Coastal erosion was also occurred in that area ; most notably , the tides washed away nearly all protective sand dunes built by the Civilian Conservation Corps during the Great Depression , especially in the Rodanthe area . In the absence of protective sand dunes , the Outer Banks became vulnerable to future storms that would also produce high tides . Minor damage to houses were reported due to high tides near Nags Head and Kill Devil Hills ; damage was mostly from the detachment of steps and porches . 
 Effects were somewhat lighter in Virginia . Gale force winds were also observed in the state , with winds of 46 – 52 mph ( 74 – 84 km / h ) being reporting at Cape Henry and Chesapeake Light , respectively . High tides also occurred in Virginia , with waves of 9 to 10 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) reported at Chesapeake Light . Tidal flooding was reported in Delaware . In response to the hurricane , the United States Coast Guard activated extra workers in the event of any storm emergencies . High winds in Sea Bright , New Jersey washed an abandoned cabin cruiser into the jetty along the coast . In the same town , officials closed a portion of New Jersey Route 36 . Helicopters evacuated three coast guardsmen from Ambrose Light in New York Harbor and two guardsmen from West Bank Light . Tides between 2 and 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 and 1 @.@ 22 m ) above normal resulted in minor coastal flooding on Long Island , New York and in parts of New Jersey . Officials closed 1 @.@ 5 mi ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) of a road in Southampton due to 3 @.@ 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) deep flooding . In Massachusetts , a man fell off his boat and drowned while sailing the North River amidst large swells produced by Josephine . The outer fringes of the storm produced wind and rainfall in Cape Cod . In Newfoundland , Josephine dropped light rainfall , peaking at slightly less than 1 in ( 25 mm ) . 
 Josephine also caused major effects to marine interests . High waves , estimated to have exceeded 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) , disabled a sailboat with a crew of six on it . They were quickly rescued after issuing a distress signal to a nearby tanker vessel . The storm caused the loss of 1 @,@ 799 bags of sorghum from water damage when a freighter encountered Josephine en route to Baltimore , Maryland . The major shipping lanes of North America were severely impacted , with more than 25 ships reporting winds of at least 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) over a period of nine days . Furthermore , at least five of those ships reported hurricane force winds during a period of six days . The highest wind speed reported from a ship was 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) , which was observed on October 16 . 
 = Adenosine triphosphate = 
 Adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) is a nucleoside triphosphate used in cells as a coenzyme often called the " molecular unit of currency " of intracellular energy transfer . 
 ATP transports chemical energy within cells for metabolism . It is one of the end products of photophosphorylation , aerobic respiration , and fermentation , and is used by enzymes and structural proteins in many cellular processes , including biosynthetic reactions , motility , and cell division . One molecule of ATP contains three phosphate groups , and it is produced by a wide variety of enzymes , including ATP synthase , from adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) or adenosine monophosphate ( AMP ) and various phosphate group donors . Substrate @-@ level phosphorylation , oxidative phosphorylation in cellular respiration , and photophosphorylation in photosynthesis are three major mechanisms of ATP biosynthesis . 
 Metabolic processes that use ATP as an energy source convert it back into its precursors . ATP is therefore continuously recycled in organisms : the human body , which on average contains only 250 grams ( 8 @.@ 8 oz ) of ATP , turns over its own body weight equivalent in ATP each day . 
 ATP is used as a substrate in signal transduction pathways by kinases that phosphorylate proteins and lipids . It is also used by adenylate cyclase , which uses ATP to produce the second messenger molecule cyclic AMP . The ratio between ATP and AMP is used as a way for a cell to sense how much energy is available and control the metabolic pathways that produce and consume ATP . Apart from its roles in signaling and energy metabolism , ATP is also incorporated into nucleic acids by polymerases in the process of transcription . ATP is the neurotransmitter believed to signal the sense of taste . 
 The structure of this molecule consists of a purine base ( adenine ) attached by the 9 ′ nitrogen atom to the 1 ′ carbon atom of a pentose sugar ( ribose ) . Three phosphate groups are attached at the 5 ′ carbon atom of the pentose sugar . It is the addition and removal of these phosphate groups that inter @-@ convert ATP , ADP and AMP . When ATP is used in DNA synthesis , the ribose sugar is first converted to deoxyribose by ribonucleotide reductase . 
 ATP was discovered in 1929 by Karl Lohmann , and independently by Cyrus Fiske and <unk> <unk> of Harvard Medical School , but its correct structure was not determined until some years later . It was proposed to be the intermediary molecule between energy @-@ yielding and energy @-@ requiring reactions in cells by Fritz Albert Lipmann in 1941 . It was first artificially synthesized by Alexander Todd in 1948 . 
 = = Physical and chemical properties = = 
 ATP consists of adenosine – composed of an adenine ring and a ribose sugar – and three phosphate groups ( triphosphate ) . The phosphoryl groups , starting with the group closest to the ribose , are referred to as the alpha ( α ) , beta ( β ) , and gamma ( γ ) phosphates . Consequently , it is closely related to the adenine nucleotide , a monomer of RNA . ATP is highly soluble in water and is quite stable in solutions between pH 6 @.@ 8 and 7 @.@ 4 , but is rapidly hydrolysed at extreme pH . Consequently , ATP is best stored as an anhydrous salt . 
 ATP is an unstable molecule in unbuffered water , in which it hydrolyses to ADP and phosphate . This is because the strength of the bonds between the phosphate groups in ATP is less than the strength of the hydrogen bonds ( hydration bonds ) , between its products ( ADP and phosphate ) , and water . Thus , if ATP and ADP are in chemical equilibrium in water , almost all of the ATP will eventually be converted to ADP . A system that is far from equilibrium contains Gibbs free energy , and is capable of doing work . Living cells maintain the ratio of ATP to ADP at a point ten orders of magnitude from equilibrium , with ATP concentrations fivefold higher than the concentration of ADP . This displacement from equilibrium means that the hydrolysis of ATP in the cell releases a large amount of free energy . 
 Two phosphoanhydride bonds ( those that connect adjacent phosphates ) in an ATP molecule are responsible for the high energy content of this molecule . In the context of biochemical reactions , these anhydride bonds are frequently – and sometimes controversially – referred to as high @-@ energy bonds ( despite the fact it takes energy to break bonds ) . Energy stored in ATP may be released upon hydrolysis of the anhydride bonds . The primary phosphate group on the ATP molecule that is hydrolyzed when energy is needed to drive anabolic reactions is the γ @-@ phosphate group . Located the farthest from the ribose sugar , it has a higher energy of hydrolysis than either the α- or β @-@ phosphate . The bonds formed after hydrolysis – or the phosphorylation of a residue by ATP – are lower in energy than the phosphoanhydride bonds of ATP . During enzyme @-@ catalyzed hydrolysis of ATP or phosphorylation by ATP , the available free energy can be harnessed by a living system to do work . 
 Any unstable system of potentially reactive molecules could potentially serve as a way of storing free energy , if the cell maintained their concentration far from the equilibrium point of the reaction . However , as is the case with most polymeric biomolecules , the breakdown of RNA , DNA , and ATP into simpler monomers is driven by both energy @-@ release and entropy @-@ increase considerations , in both standard concentrations , and also those concentrations encountered within the cell . 
 The standard amount of energy released from hydrolysis of ATP can be calculated from the changes in energy under non @-@ natural ( standard ) conditions , then correcting to biological concentrations . The net change in heat energy ( enthalpy ) at standard temperature and pressure of the decomposition of ATP into hydrated ADP and hydrated inorganic phosphate is − 30 @.@ 5 kJ / mol , with a change in free energy of 3 @.@ 4 kJ / mol . The energy released by cleaving either a phosphate ( Pi ) or pyrophosphate ( PPi ) unit from ATP at standard state of 1 M are : 
 ATP + H 
 2O → ADP + Pi ΔG ° 
 = − 30 @.@ 5 kJ / mol ( − 7 @.@ 3 kcal / mol ) 
 ATP + H 
 2O → AMP + PPi ΔG ° = 
 − 45 @.@ 6 kJ / mol ( − 10 @.@ 9 kcal / mol ) 
 These values can be used to calculate the change in energy under physiological conditions and the cellular ATP / ADP ratio . However , a more representative value ( which takes AMP into consideration ) called the Energy charge is increasingly being employed . The values given for the Gibbs free energy for this reaction are dependent on a number of factors , including overall ionic strength and the presence of alkaline earth metal ions such as Mg2 + and Ca2 + . Under typical cellular conditions , ΔG is approximately − 57 kJ / mol ( − 14 kcal / mol ) . 
 = = = Ionization in biological systems = = = 
 ATP ( adenosine triphosphate ) has multiple groups with different acid dissociation constants . In neutral solution , ionized ATP exists mostly as ATP4 − , with a small proportion of <unk> − . As ATP has several negatively charged groups in neutral solution , it can chelate metals with very high affinity . The binding constant for various metal ions are ( given as per mole ) as Mg2 + ( <unk> ) , Na + ( 13 ) , Ca2 + ( <unk> ) , K + ( 8 ) , Sr2 + ( 1381 ) and Li + ( 25 ) . Due to the strength of these interactions , ATP exists in the cell mostly in a complex with Mg2 + . 
 = = Biosynthesis = = 
 The ATP concentration inside the cell is typically 1 – 10 mM . ATP can be produced by redox reactions using simple and complex sugars ( carbohydrates ) or lipids as an energy source . For complex fuels to be synthesized into ATP , they first need to be broken down into smaller , more simple molecules . Carbohydrates are hydrolysed into simple sugars , such as glucose and fructose . Fats ( triglycerides ) are metabolised to give fatty acids and glycerol . 
 The overall process of oxidizing glucose to carbon dioxide is known as cellular respiration and can produce about 30 molecules of ATP from a single molecule of glucose . ATP can be produced by a number of distinct cellular processes ; the three main pathways used to generate energy in eukaryotic organisms are glycolysis and the citric acid cycle / oxidative phosphorylation , both components of cellular respiration ; and beta @-@ oxidation . The majority of this ATP production by a non @-@ photosynthetic aerobic eukaryote takes place in the mitochondria , which can make up nearly 25 % of the total volume of a typical cell . 
 = = = Glycolysis = = = 
 In glycolysis , glucose and glycerol are metabolized to pyruvate via the glycolytic pathway . In most organisms , this process occurs in the cytosol , but , in some protozoa such as the kinetoplastids , this is carried out in a specialized organelle called the <unk> . Glycolysis generates a net two molecules of ATP through substrate phosphorylation catalyzed by two enzymes : <unk> and pyruvate kinase . Two molecules of NADH are also produced , which can be oxidized via the electron transport chain and result in the generation of additional ATP by ATP synthase . The pyruvate generated as an end @-@ product of glycolysis is a substrate for the Krebs Cycle . 
 = = = Glucose = = = 
 In the mitochondrion , pyruvate is oxidized by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex to the acetyl group , which is fully oxidized to carbon dioxide by the citric acid cycle ( also known as the Krebs cycle ) . Every " turn " of the citric acid cycle produces two molecules of carbon dioxide , one molecule of the ATP equivalent guanosine triphosphate ( GTP ) through substrate @-@ level phosphorylation catalyzed by succinyl @-@ CoA synthetase , three molecules of the reduced coenzyme NADH , and one molecule of the reduced coenzyme FADH2 . Both of these latter molecules are recycled to their oxidized states ( NAD + and FAD , respectively ) via the electron transport chain , which generates additional ATP by oxidative phosphorylation . The oxidation of an NADH molecule results in the synthesis of 2 – 3 ATP molecules , and the oxidation of one FADH2 yields between 1 – 2 ATP molecules . The majority of cellular ATP is generated by this process . Although the citric acid cycle itself does not involve molecular oxygen , it is an obligately aerobic process because O2 is needed to recycle the reduced NADH and FADH2 to their oxidized states . In the absence of oxygen the citric acid cycle will cease to function due to the lack of available NAD + and FAD . 
 The generation of ATP by the mitochondrion from cytosolic NADH relies on the malate @-@ aspartate shuttle ( and to a lesser extent , the glycerol @-@ phosphate shuttle ) because the inner mitochondrial membrane is impermeable to NADH and NAD + . Instead of transferring the generated NADH , a malate dehydrogenase enzyme converts oxaloacetate to malate , which is translocated to the mitochondrial matrix . Another malate dehydrogenase @-@ catalyzed reaction occurs in the opposite direction , producing oxaloacetate and NADH from the newly transported malate and the mitochondrion 's interior store of NAD + . A transaminase converts the oxaloacetate to aspartate for transport back across the membrane and into the intermembrane space . 
 In oxidative phosphorylation , the passage of electrons from NADH and FADH2 through the electron transport chain powers the pumping of protons out of the mitochondrial matrix and into the intermembrane space . This creates a proton motive force that is the net effect of a pH gradient and an electric potential gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane . Flow of protons down this potential gradient – that is , from the intermembrane space to the matrix – provides the driving force for ATP synthesis by ATP synthase . This enzyme contains a rotor subunit that physically rotates relative to the static portions of the protein during ATP synthesis . 
 Most of the ATP synthesized in the mitochondria will be used for cellular processes in the cytosol ; thus it must be exported from its site of synthesis in the mitochondrial matrix . The inner membrane contains an antiporter , the ADP / ATP translocase , which is an integral membrane protein used to exchange newly synthesized ATP in the matrix for ADP in the intermembrane space . This translocase is driven by the membrane potential , as it results in the movement of about 4 negative charges out of the mitochondrial membrane in exchange for 3 negative charges moved inside . However , it is also necessary to transport phosphate into the mitochondrion ; the phosphate carrier moves a proton in with each phosphate , partially dissipating the proton gradient . 
 = = = Beta oxidation = = = 
 Fatty acids can also be broken down to acetyl @-@ CoA by beta @-@ oxidation . Each round of this cycle reduces the length of the acyl chain by two carbon atoms and produces one NADH and one FADH2 molecule , which are used to generate ATP by oxidative phosphorylation . Because NADH and FADH2 are energy @-@ rich molecules , dozens of ATP molecules can be generated by the beta @-@ oxidation of a single long acyl chain . The high energy yield of this process and the compact storage of fat explain why it is the most dense source of dietary calories . 
 = = = Fermentation = = = 
 Fermentation entails the generation of energy via the process of substrate @-@ level phosphorylation in the absence of a respiratory electron transport chain . In most eukaryotes , glucose is used as both an energy store and an electron donor . The equation for the oxidation of glucose to lactic acid is : 
 C 
 6H 
 12O 
 6 → 2 CH 
 <unk> ( OH ) COOH + 2 ATP 
 = = = Anaerobic respiration = = = 
 Anaerobic respiration is the process of respiration using an electron acceptor other than O 
 2 . In prokaryotes , multiple electron acceptors can be used in anaerobic respiration . These include nitrate , sulfate or carbon dioxide . These processes lead to the ecologically important processes of denitrification , sulfate reduction and acetogenesis , respectively . 
 = = = ATP replenishment by nucleoside diphosphate kinases = = = 
 ATP can also be synthesized through several so @-@ called " replenishment " reactions catalyzed by the enzyme families of nucleoside diphosphate kinases ( <unk> ) , which use other nucleoside triphosphates as a high @-@ energy phosphate donor , and the ATP : <unk> @-@ <unk> family . 
 = = = ATP production during photosynthesis = = = 
 In plants , ATP is synthesized in thylakoid membrane of the chloroplast during the light @-@ dependent reactions of photosynthesis in a process called photophosphorylation . Here , light energy is used to pump protons across the chloroplast membrane . This produces a proton @-@ motive force and this drives the ATP synthase , exactly as in oxidative phosphorylation . Some of the ATP produced in the chloroplasts is consumed in the Calvin cycle , which produces triose sugars . 
 = = = ATP recycling = = = 
 The total quantity of ATP in the human body is about 0 @.@ 2 moles . The majority of ATP is not usually synthesised de novo , but is generated from ADP by the aforementioned processes . Thus , at any given time , the total amount of ATP + ADP remains fairly constant . 
 The energy used by human cells requires the hydrolysis of 100 to 150 moles of ATP daily , which is around 50 to 75 kg . A human will typically use up his or her body weight of ATP over the course of the day . This means that each ATP molecule is recycled 500 to 750 times during a single day ( 100 / 0 @.@ 2 = 500 ) . ATP cannot be stored , hence its consumption closely follows its synthesis . However a total of around 5 g of ATP is used by cell processes at any time in the body . 
 = = Regulation of biosynthesis = = 
 ATP production in an aerobic eukaryotic cell is tightly regulated by allosteric mechanisms , by feedback effects , and by the substrate concentration dependence of individual enzymes within the glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation pathways . Key control points occur in enzymatic reactions that are so energetically favorable that they are effectively irreversible under physiological conditions . 
 In glycolysis , hexokinase is directly inhibited by its product , glucose @-@ 6 @-@ phosphate , and pyruvate kinase is inhibited by ATP itself . The main control point for the glycolytic pathway is phosphofructokinase ( PFK ) , which is allosterically inhibited by high concentrations of ATP and activated by high concentrations of AMP . The inhibition of PFK by ATP is unusual , since ATP is also a substrate in the reaction catalyzed by PFK ; the biologically active form of the enzyme is a tetramer that exists in two possible conformations , only one of which binds the second substrate fructose @-@ 6 @-@ phosphate ( F6P ) . The protein has two binding sites for ATP – the active site is accessible in either protein conformation , but ATP binding to the inhibitor site stabilizes the conformation that binds F6P poorly . A number of other small molecules can compensate for the ATP @-@ induced shift in equilibrium conformation and reactivate PFK , including cyclic AMP , ammonium ions , inorganic phosphate , and fructose @-@ <unk> and <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 The citric acid cycle is regulated mainly by the availability of key substrates , particularly the ratio of NAD + to NADH and the concentrations of calcium , inorganic phosphate , ATP , ADP , and AMP . <unk> – the molecule that gives its name to the cycle – is a feedback inhibitor of citrate synthase and also inhibits PFK , providing a direct link between the regulation of the citric acid cycle and glycolysis . 
 In oxidative phosphorylation , the key control point is the reaction catalyzed by cytochrome c oxidase , which is regulated by the availability of its substrate – the reduced form of cytochrome c . The amount of reduced cytochrome c available is directly related to the amounts of other substrates : 
 1 ⁄ 2 NADH + cyt cox + ADP + Pi ⇌ 1 ⁄ 2 NAD + + cyt cred + ATP 
 which directly implies this equation : 
 <formula> 
 Thus , a high ratio of [ NADH ] to [ NAD + ] or a high ratio of [ ADP ] [ Pi ] to [ ATP ] imply a high amount of reduced cytochrome c and a high level of cytochrome c oxidase activity . An additional level of regulation is introduced by the transport rates of ATP and NADH between the mitochondrial matrix and the cytoplasm . 
 = = Functions in cells = = 
 = = = Metabolism , synthesis , and active transport = = = 
 ATP is consumed in the cell by energy @-@ requiring ( endergonic ) processes and can be generated by energy @-@ releasing ( exergonic ) processes . In this way ATP transfers energy between spatially separate metabolic reactions . ATP is the main energy source for the majority of cellular functions . This includes the synthesis of macromolecules , including DNA and RNA ( see below ) , and proteins . ATP also plays a critical role in the transport of macromolecules across cell membranes , e.g. exocytosis and endocytosis . 
 = = = Roles in cell structure and locomotion = = = 
 ATP is critically involved in maintaining cell structure by facilitating assembly and disassembly of elements of the cytoskeleton . In a related process , ATP is required for the shortening of actin and myosin filament <unk> required for muscle contraction . This latter process is one of the main energy requirements of animals and is essential for locomotion and respiration . 
 = = = Cell signalling = = = 
 = = = = Extracellular signalling = = = = 
 ATP is also a signalling molecule . ATP , ADP , or adenosine are recognised by purinergic receptors . <unk> might be the most abundant receptors in mammalian tissues . 
 In humans , this signalling role is important in both the central and peripheral nervous system . Activity @-@ dependent release of ATP from synapses , axons and glia activates purinergic membrane receptors known as P2 . The P2Y receptors are metabotropic , i.e. G protein @-@ coupled and modulate mainly intracellular calcium and sometimes cyclic AMP levels . Though named between <unk> and <unk> , only nine members of the P2Y family have been cloned , and some are only related through weak homology and several ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) do not function as receptors that raise cytosolic calcium . The <unk> <unk> receptor subgroup comprises seven members ( <unk> – <unk> ) , which are ligand @-@ gated Ca2 + <unk> ion channels that open when bound to an extracellular purine nucleotide . In contrast to P2 receptors ( agonist order ATP > ADP > AMP > ADO ) , purinergic nucleoside triphosphates like ATP are not strong agonists of P1 receptors , which are strongly activated by adenosine and other nucleosides ( ADO > AMP > ADP > ATP ) . P1 receptors have A1 , A2a , A2b , and A3 subtypes ( " A " as a remnant of old nomenclature of adenosine receptor ) , all of which are G protein @-@ coupled receptors , A1 and A3 being coupled to Gi , and A2a and A2b being coupled to Gs . All adenosine receptors were shown to activate at least one subfamily of mitogen @-@ activated protein kinases . The actions of adenosine are often antagonistic or synergistic to the actions of ATP . In the CNS , adenosine has multiple functions , such as modulation of neural development , neuron and glial signalling and the control of innate and adaptive immune systems . 
 = = = = Intracellular signaling = = = = 
 ATP is critical in signal transduction processes . It is used by kinases as the source of phosphate groups in their phosphate transfer reactions . <unk> activity on substrates such as proteins or membrane lipids are a common form of signal transduction . Phosphorylation of a protein by a kinase can activate this cascade such as the mitogen @-@ activated protein kinase cascade . 
 ATP is also used by adenylate cyclase and is transformed to the second messenger molecule cyclic AMP , which is involved in triggering calcium signals by the release of calcium from intracellular stores . This form of signal transduction is particularly important in brain function , although it is involved in the regulation of a multitude of other cellular processes . 
 = = = DNA and RNA synthesis = = = 
 In all known organisms , the <unk> that make up DNA are synthesized by the action of ribonucleotide reductase ( RNR ) enzymes on their corresponding ribonucleotides . These enzymes reduce the sugar residue from ribose to deoxyribose by removing oxygen from the 2 ′ hydroxyl group ; the substrates are ribonucleoside diphosphates and the products <unk> diphosphates ( the latter are denoted <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> respectively . ) All ribonucleotide reductase enzymes use a common sulfhydryl radical mechanism reliant on reactive cysteine residues that oxidize to form disulfide bonds in the course of the reaction . RNR enzymes are recycled by reaction with thioredoxin or <unk> . 
 The regulation of RNR and related enzymes maintains a balance of dNTPs relative to each other and relative to <unk> in the cell . Very low dNTP concentration inhibits DNA synthesis and DNA repair and is lethal to the cell , while an abnormal ratio of dNTPs is mutagenic due to the increased likelihood of the DNA polymerase incorporating the wrong dNTP during DNA synthesis . Regulation of or differential specificity of RNR has been proposed as a mechanism for alterations in the relative sizes of intracellular dNTP pools under cellular stress such as hypoxia . 
