 = = Cover versions = = 
 Belgian jazz musician , Toots Thielemans , recorded a harmonica instrumental cover version of the song with a five @-@ piece combo at Nippon Columbia 's Grand Studio in Tokyo , Japan in 1979 . " Honesty " has been particularly popular in South Korea and Japan for decades and covered by East Asian musicians including Hajime Mizoguchi on his album yours ; tears ( 2007 ) , and K on his album The Timeless Collection Vol . 1 ( 2007 ) . In 1981 , Mexican singer David Haro recorded under the title " <unk> " from the album <unk> . " From Marcy to Hollywood " , a song by American rappers Jay @-@ Z , Memphis Bleek and Sauce Money from the soundtrack album The Players Club , ( 1998 ) featured a sample of " Honesty " . During his <unk> for Fox 's Glee , Canadian actor Cory Monteith sang " Honesty " . Fellow Glee actor Kevin McHale , as his character Artie Abrams , covered the song in the show 's 2013 tribute episode " Movin ' Out " . In 2010 , Swedish singer Helen Sjöholm covered the song for her 2010 album Euforia – Helen Sjöholm <unk> Billy Joel under the title " <unk> " . Actress Maggie Gyllenhaal sings a cover of the song in the 2005 film Happy Endings . 
 In March 2012 , eleventh season contestant of American Idol , Hollie Cavanagh , covered the song . Her performance received mixed reviews from the judges of the show , who said that she was " a little pitchy " and added that she seemed to be " overthinking " the song . Amy Reiter of Los Angeles Times noted that " her clear , crisp tone , crashed and burned on ' Honesty , ' missing notes and losing her way " . Laura Prudom of The Huffington Post was mixed about her performance writing , " She was occasionally pitchy on this song , and seemed to be overthinking it in parts and allowing the song to overwhelm her ... Unusually , she seemed both nasal and pitchy in the early parts of the performance ... her choice of a pantsuit was completely baffling , since it made her look nearer 40 than 20 . " Later , during an interview , Cavanagh revealed that she had difficulties singing the song because she had never heard it before . 
 = = Beyoncé Knowles version = = 
 In 2008 , American recording artist , Beyoncé Knowles re @-@ recorded Billy Joel 's version of the song produced by Scott Storch for a compilation album of her former group Destiny 's Child , titled Mathew Knowles & Music World Present Vol.1 : Love Destiny . The song was later included on the platinum edition of her third solo album , I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . Pip Ellwood of Entertainment Focus described Knowles ' version of the song as a " turgid " ballad that doesn 't " add too much to the record " . Serving as the sixteenth track to Knowles ' platinum edition re @-@ release of I Am ... Sasha Fierce , the song contrasts with previous tracks such as " Why Don 't You Love Me " . It showcases Knowles ' " soulful " voice and " outstanding " vocal range as stated by Hannah Spencer of the website <unk> . Ken Bielen in his book The Words and Music of Billy Joel wrote , " Backed primarily by an electronic keyboard and an urban rhythm and blues arrangement , she stays faithful to the original ballad with a bittersweet vocal performance . " " Honesty " was performed during Knowles ' concert at the Olympic Gymnastics Arena in Seoul on October 20 , 2009 as part of her worldwide I Am ... Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . The song became very popular on the South Korea Gaon International charts , peaking at number two . It became the 9th and 173rd best @-@ selling single in 2010 and 2011 in South Korea respectively selling over 800 @,@ 000 digital downloads . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = Niki Tsongas = 
 Nicola Dickson " Niki " Sauvage Tsongas ( / <unk> / ; born April 26 , 1946 ) is an American politician and the current U.S. Representative for Massachusetts 's 3rd congressional district . From 2007 to 2013 she represented Massachusetts 's 5th congressional district , the district her husband Paul Tsongas served prior to being elected to the United States Senate . She is a member of the Democratic Party . Following John Kerry 's appointment as Secretary of State , she was widely expected to run in the 2013 special election for the Senate seat once held by her husband ; she put such speculations to rest when she announced her endorsement of Representative Ed Markey instead . 
 = = Family , education , and career = = 
 Tsongas was born Nicola Dickson Sauvage on April 26 , 1946 , in Chico , California . Her mother Marian Susan ( née Wyman ) was an artist and copywriter , and her father Colonel Russell Elmer Sauvage was an engineer in the United States Army Air Forces who survived the attack on Pearl Harbor . Tsongas graduated in 1964 from <unk> American High School in Japan while her father was stationed at <unk> Air Force Base . Tsongas spent one year at Michigan State University , then transferred to Smith College in Northampton , Massachusetts , and graduated in 1968 with a Bachelor of Arts in religion . After college she moved to New York City , where she took a job as a social worker for the Department of Welfare . Tsongas earned her Juris Doctor from Boston University and started Lowell 's first all @-@ female law practice . 
 Tsongas interned in Arlington , Virginia , for presidential candidate Eugene McCarthy during summer 1967 ; at a party while there she met Paul Tsongas , then an aide to Republican Congressman Brad Morse . In 1969 , she married Paul ; they had three daughters : Ashley , Katina , and Molly . A politician , Paul served in the House from Massachusetts 's 5th congressional district from 1975 to 1979 , and the Senate from 1979 to 1985 . After being diagnosed with non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma , Paul resigned from Congress . Tsongas moved their family from Washington , D.C. , back to Massachusetts to care for Paul as he underwent treatments . After seemingly being cured of his disease , in 1992 Paul ran for the Democratic Party nomination for President ; he came in third behind former California Governor Jerry Brown and eventual winner Bill Clinton . Paul 's cancer later returned ; he died of pneumonia and liver failure on January 18 , 1997 . 
 Prior to her election to the House , Tsongas worked as the Dean of External Affairs at Middlesex Community College , as a Board Member of Fallon Community Health Plan and served on the Lowell Civic Stadium and Arena Commission , which oversees several sites including the Tsongas Arena . In 2001 , Representative Marty Meehan appointed Tsongas to head a foundation to provide education funding for children of the victims of the September 11 attacks . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 After Marty Meehan resigned in 2007 to serve as Chancellor of the University of Massachusetts Lowell , Tsongas ran in the special election . Tsongas defeated four other candidates to win the Democratic primary with 36 % of the vote . During her initial campaign Tsongas received endorsements from The Boston Globe , the Boston Herald , and the Lowell Sun . During the general election , former President Bill Clinton , who defeated her husband for the Democratic nomination in 1992 , campaigned for her . At an event in Lowell Clinton remarked : " Congress will be a better place because she is there . " Tsongas won the special election against Republican Jim Ogonowski with 51 % of the vote on October 17 ; she became the only female Representative from Massachusetts , and the first female representative from Massachusetts since the retirement of Margaret Heckler in 1983 , who became Secretary of Health and Human Services under Ronald Reagan . 
 After running unopposed in 2008 , in 2010 Tsongas faced Republican Jon Golnik , a small businessman and former Wall Street currency trader . During the campaign Tsongas attacked Golnik 's history as a Vice President of AIG , which Golnik called hypocritical , as she had stock in AIG and other large corporations . Tsongas defeated Golnik with 52 % of the vote . Following redistricting after the 2010 census , Tsongas ran for re @-@ election in the reconfigured Massachusetts 's 3rd congressional district in 2012 . In a rematch , she again defeated <unk> . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 A major issue in her initial election was whether the two candidates would vote to override President George W. Bush 's veto of an expansion of the State Children 's Health Insurance Program . Tsongas said she would vote to override , and it was reported Ogonowski would uphold the veto . Hours after being sworn into office on October 18 , Tsongas voted to override , but the vote failed to achieve the necessary two @-@ thirds majority . 
 As a candidate in 2007 , Tsongas promised to withdraw troops and end the Iraq War . The first bill she introduced aimed to do this by implementing a timetable for withdrawal from Iraq ; however , the bill died in committee . In 2010 , Tsongas along with other women in Congress , including House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , visited Afghanistan to oversee the war effort . Upon returning , Tsongas spoke of the need for the involvement of women in rebuilding of government . 
 Tsongas is an advocate for universal health care and supports a public health insurance option . In 2010 she voted for the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act . In 2012 Tsongas joined a Republican @-@ led effort to repeal a 2 @.@ 3 % sales tax on medical @-@ device manufacturers , which passed the House 270 – 146 ; 36 other Democrats voted for it . Tsongas is pro @-@ choice and received a 100 % approval rating from Planned Parenthood in 2008 . A supporter of LGBT rights , Tsongas cosponsored the Respect for Marriage Act to repeal the Defense of Marriage Act ; and voted for the Don 't Ask , Don 't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 , which allows homosexuals to serve openly in the armed forces . 
 Following Anthony Weiner 's sexting scandal , Tsongas was the only Representative from Massachusetts to call for his resignation , saying that " it would be appropriate for [ him ] to step down . " In the 2012 Massachusetts Senate election , Tsongas was the first major Democratic politician to endorse the winner , Elizabeth Warren , whom she called " a fighter for middle class families " . Following President Barack Obama 's designation of John Kerry as United States Secretary of State , there was much speculation that she would run for his seat , which her husband had previously held . Though Tsongas briefly considered a run , she responded she would best be able to serve the people of Massachusetts by continuing to serve in the House , and instead endorsed fellow Representative Ed Markey . 
 On January 23 , 2013 , Tsongas introduced the Nashua River Wild and Scenic River Study Act ( H.R. 412 ; 113th Congress ) , a bill that would amend the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act to designate certain segments concerning the Nashua River in Massachusetts for study for potential addition to the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System . Tsongas discussed the river 's history and past pollution problems in her testimony about the bill . She argued that the study would allow stakeholders to work together to " ensure that it remains a great place for canoeing , fishing , and enjoying the outdoors . " 
 = Johnstown Inclined Plane = 
 The Johnstown Inclined Plane is a 896 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 273 @.@ 3 m ) funicular in Johnstown , Cambria County in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . The incline and its two stations connect the city of Johnstown , situated in a valley at the confluence of the Stonycreek and the Little Conemaugh Rivers , to the borough of Westmont on Yoder Hill . The Johnstown Inclined Plane is billed as the " world 's steepest vehicular inclined plane " , as it is capable of carrying automobiles , in addition to passengers , up or down a slope with a grade of 70 @.@ 9 percent . The travel time from one station to the other is 90 seconds . 
 After a catastrophic flood in 1889 , the Johnstown Inclined Plane was completed in 1891 to serve as an escape route for future floods , as well as a convenient mode of transportation for the residents of the new communities situated above the valley . It was operated by Cambria Iron Company and its successor Bethlehem Steel until 1935 , when it was sold to the borough of Westmont . The incline was briefly shut down in 1962 when its supply of power from Bethlehem Steel was terminated . Twice in its history , the Johnstown Inclined Plane fulfilled its role as a means of evacuation from floods — once in 1936 and again in 1977 . The incline was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1973 and was designated a Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark in 1994 . It had major renovations in 1962 and from 1983 to 1984 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Johnstown Inclined Plane was designed by Hungarian engineer Samuel <unk> , who had also designed the Duquesne , Castle Shannon and Fort Pitt Inclines in Pittsburgh . The funicular consists of a parallel set of 8 ft ( 2 @,@ 440 mm ) broad gauge railroad tracks with a 70 @.@ 9 percent grade or an angle of 35 degrees and 28 minutes from the horizontal . The incline is 896 @.@ 5 feet ( 273 @.@ 3 m ) long and ascends 502 @.@ 2 feet ( 153 @.@ 1 m ) vertically to the top of Yoder Hill and the borough of Westmont , the station of which is at an elevation of 1 @,@ 693 @.@ 5 feet ( 516 @.@ 2 m ) above sea level . The rails are supported by 720 14 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 4 m ) railroad ties made from Southern Yellow Pine . The incline is lit at night by 114 high @-@ pressure sodium @-@ vapor lamps mounted along the sides of tracks . There used to be a stairway between the two tracks with 966 steps , but these were removed circa 1963 . 
 Two cars traverse the slope ; as one descends , the other ascends and acts as a counterweight . The cars are 15 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 7 m ) wide , 15 feet 2 inches ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) tall , and 34 feet ( 10 m ) long , and are large enough to carry either 65 people , 6 motorcycles , or an automobile . While the cars are open to the elements , an enclosed seating area containing a bench is situated along the outer side of the incline . The cables connecting the cars are 2 @-@ inch @-@ diameter ( 50 @.@ 8 mm ) , 6 × 36 right regular lay , steel wire rope . They are wound around a 3 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 2 @.@ 7 @-@ metric @-@ ton ; 2 @.@ 7 @-@ long @-@ ton ) , 16 @-@ foot @-@ diameter ( 5 m ) drum that connects the cars together . The cable on the north track is 1 @,@ 075 feet ( 328 m ) long , while the south cable is 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 13 m ) shorter . Each car weighs 22 short tons ( 20 @.@ 0 metric tons ; 19 @.@ 6 long tons ) , but they , and consequently the cables , can carry an additional load of 15 short tons ( 13 @.@ 6 metric tons ; 13 @.@ 4 long tons ) . A 400 @-@ horsepower ( 298 kW ) electric motor turns the drum , simultaneously winding and unwinding the cable , to power the incline . The Johnstown Inclined Plane is unusual in that the motor and winch are located at a 90 degree angle to the incline instead of directly underneath it . Operation of the incline is controlled via a foot pedal located in a booth in the upper station . 
 An emergency brake engages if the air pressure needed to control the incline is insufficient ; the brake also engages if a dead man 's switch is tripped in the operator 's booth . In addition to the hauling cables , a 972 @-@ foot ( 296 m ) safety cable capable of withstanding 165 short tons ( 149 @.@ 7 metric tons ; 147 @.@ 3 long tons ) is also connected to the cars . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background and construction = = = 
 Inclines are common in Europe , and immigrants , like the German , Slavic , and Welsh people who settled near Johnstown , remembered them from their native lands and brought the concept to the United States . The earliest inclines in the United States were a series of 10 that were built in the 1830s as part of the Allegheny Portage Railroad . The portage railroad carried canal boats over the Allegheny Mountains to connect the canals from Pittsburgh to the ones from Philadelphia . Pittsburgh at one time also had " at least 17 " inclines — some carried passengers , others freight , while another two inclines ( like the Nunnery Hill Incline ) were curved . 
 On May 31 , 1889 , the South Fork Dam collapsed upstream of Johnstown on the Little Conemaugh River . The resulting deluge devastated the city , killing 2 @,@ 209 people . As the city rebuilt , the Cambria Iron Company started work on a residential development atop Yoder Hill . To provide easy transportation up and down the steep slope for the residents of the new community of Westmont , the company decided to construct an inclined plane . In addition to being a convenient mode of transportation , the Johnstown Inclined Plane doubled as an escape route in case of another flood . <unk> was hired by Cambria Iron to design the incline . The rails used in the incline were all manufactured in Johnstown at Cambria Iron , with many of the tools needed in the construction also handcrafted there . The 232 @-@ foot ( 71 m ) Inclined Plane Bridge was built to span the <unk> River to provide access to the lower station of the incline . Originally named the Cambria Inclined Plane , the Johnstown Inclined Plane opened on June 1 , 1891 and cost $ 133 @,@ 296 to build . The convenience the incline provided stimulated a rapid growth of population in Westmont and made the borough one of the country 's first suburbs . Over 40 million trips were taken on the incline in its first 80 years of operation . 
 = = = Use = = = 
 The incline 's original steam engine was disconnected on January 6 , 1912 , and replaced with an electric motor . The cars used on the incline were originally double @-@ deckers , but were reconfigured into a single @-@ decker design in 1921 . The double @-@ decker cars had horses and wagons riding on the main , upper deck and passengers riding in a compartment below . Only one human fatality has occurred at the incline , though it was determined that the incident was not caused by the incline itself . There were two incidents in the 1920s when horses aboard the incline became spooked and leapt from the car onto the tracks below . Bethlehem Steel , the successor to Cambria Iron , sold the Johnstown Inclined Plane to the borough of Westmont in April 1935 . On March 17 , 1936 , nearly 4 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from Johnstown to higher ground via the incline as the <unk> and Conemaugh Rivers overflowed their banks . The floodwaters continued downstream and eventually reached Pittsburgh . From February 1938 to July 1953 , the Johnstown Traction Company operated transit buses from Johnstown to Westmont with the " fully loaded public buses " being carried by the incline . Bethlehem Steel stopped supplying electricity to the Johnstown Inclined Plane when the factory switched to " an incompatible power system " , forcing the incline to close on January 31 , 1962 . Because of public pressure to keep the incline operating , it was reopened in July 1962 after an extensive renovation , in which the electric motor was rewound , ties were replaced , and the cars were repainted . 
 The Johnstown Inclined Plane was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on June 18 , 1973 . On July 20 , 1977 , the incline was again used as an escape route , evacuating residents from the valley amid rising floodwaters . It also carried " boats , emergency personnel , and equipment down to the valley to aid in rescue operations " . The incline was again sold for $ 1 by Westmont borough on March 8 , 1983 , to the Cambria County Transit Authority , now CamTran . CamTran initiated a $ 4 @.@ 2 million renovation on September 7 , 1983 , replacing " the incline 's foundation piers , structural steel , and track . " The renovations were completed on August 22 , 1984 , and the incline was rededicated on September 6 . It was designated an Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ( ASME ) in September 1994 . A footbridge spanning Pennsylvania Route 56 between the incline and Vine Street was opened around the same time . On September 1 , 2000 , the incline was closed when the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation ( PennDOT ) undertook an $ 2 @.@ 3 million renovation of the bridge and the access road leading to the bridge . It was reopened in April 2001 , but again closed in September to allow PennDOT to finish repairs to the bridge deck . The repairs were completed on December 14 , 2001 . A strong thunderstorm disrupted power to the incline on April 16 , 2010 , stranding the cars and two passengers almost halfway down the slope ; the rescue took three hours and ended when firefighters rappelled down the tracks to reach the car . The Johnstown Inclined Plane was closed from September 9 to October 14 , 2010 , for the installation of a new 9 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 4 @,@ 100 kg ) " hoist brake shaft . " From October 29 to October 31 , 2012 , CamTran shut down the incline fearing power outages due to the passage of Hurricane Sandy . During the annual Thunder in the Valley motorcycle rally , two resistors failed and stopped the incline just outside the stations on June 28 , 2014 ; repairs took approximately a month after having experts brought in diagnose the failure . Sensor issues briefly disrupted service in August 2014 and , again , December 2014 forcing the incline to start its winter maintenance period early . 
 = = Current operations = = 
 With the growing popularity of the automobile and subsequent construction of new roads , ridership on the incline diminished and it was losing $ 25 @,@ 000 a year by 1961 . However , since the 1980s , the incline has become one of the main tourist attractions in Johnstown , with people visiting the incline to " ride for fun , nostalgia and novelty . " Though primarily used for tourism , the incline 's use by commuters , who bike or walk to work , has also increased . CamTran 's Route 18 transit bus offers connections between the incline and downtown Johnstown . As of 2015 , the cost for a ride on the incline is $ 2 @.@ 25 or $ 4 for a roundtrip ; fares for automobiles to be transported by the incline are $ 6 one way . The incline takes around 90 seconds to travel from one station to the other ; the same trip takes 10 minutes by automobile . In 2014 , the Johnstown Inclined Plane had an annual ridership of 70 @,@ 761 passengers , a decrease of 18 @.@ 7 percent from the previous year . 
 The upper station of the incline has a gift shop that sells souvenirs and snack foods ; a visitor center is also located adjacent to the station . The mechanical room housing the incline 's electric motor and hoisting mechanism can be viewed from windows in the gift shop and the lobby of the visitor center . An observation deck providing views of the incline , the city , and the valley is located on the opposite side of the station from the visitor center . Two hiking trails allow visitors to walk the slope . One is a sculpture trail , with works created in 1989 by local artist James Wolfe , who used remnants of the Bethlehem Steel factory in Johnstown . 
 = Halo ( series ) = 
 Halo is a military science fiction first @-@ person shooter video game franchise created by Bungie and now managed and developed by 343 Industries , a subsidiary of Microsoft Studios . The series centers on an interstellar war between humanity and a theocratic alliance of aliens known as the Covenant . The Covenant , led by their religious leaders called the Prophets , worship an ancient civilization known as the Forerunners , who perished in combat with the parasitic Flood . The central focus of the franchise builds off the experiences of Master Chief John @-@ 117 , one of a group of supersoldiers codenamed Spartans , and his artificial intelligence ( AI ) companion , Cortana . Other characters , such as Noble Six from Halo : Reach , are also introduced in the series . The term " Halo " refers to the Halo rings : large , habitable superweapons that were created to destroy the parasitic Flood . They are similar to the Orbitals in Iain M. Banks ' Culture novels , and to author Larry Niven 's Ringworld concept . 
 The games in the series have been praised as being among the best first @-@ person shooters on a video game console , and are considered the Xbox 's " killer app " . This led to the term " Halo killer " being used to describe console games that aspire , or are considered , to be better than Halo . Fueled by the success of Halo : Combat Evolved , and by immense marketing campaigns from publisher Microsoft , its sequels went on to record @-@ breaking sales . The games have sold over 65 million copies worldwide , with the games alone grossing almost $ 3 @.@ 4 billion . 
 Strong sales of the games led to the franchise 's expansion to other media ; there are multiple best @-@ selling novels , graphic novels , and other licensed products . Halo Wars took the franchise into new video game genre territory , as a real @-@ time strategy game , while the rest of the games in the series are first @-@ person shooters . Beyond the original trilogy , Bungie developed the expansion Halo 3 : ODST , and a prequel , Halo : Reach , their last project for the franchise . A high @-@ definition remake of the first game , entitled Halo : Combat Evolved Anniversary , was released on November 15 , 2011 , exactly ten years after the release of the original . A new installment in a second series of games , Halo 4 , was released on November 6 , 2012 . Halo : The Master Chief Collection , a remastered compilation of the four primary Halo titles , was released for the Xbox One on November 11 , 2014 . 
 The collective group of fans of the series is referred to as the " Halo Nation " . 
 = = Setting and plot = = 
 In the distant past , a powerful race called the Forerunners fought an alien parasite known as the Flood . The Flood , which spread through infestation of sentient life , overran much of the Milky Way Galaxy . One of the races affected was humanity , who came into conflict with the Forerunners as a result . Exhausted by their war and after having explored all other options , the Forerunners conceived a weapon of last resort to combat the Flood , called the Halo Array . Using an installation known as the Ark , they built large ring @-@ shaped megastructures known as Halos . The Halo Array , when activated , would destroy all sentient life in the galaxy – depriving the Flood of their food , after which samples of the lost lifeforms would be reseeded . Delaying as long as they could , the Forerunners activated the rings and disappeared . Tens of thousands of years later , in the 26th century , humanity – under the auspices of the United Nations Space Command , or UNSC – colonize many worlds thanks to the development of faster @-@ than @-@ light " slipspace " travel . Tensions escalate between the older and more stable " Inner Colonies " and the remote " Outer Colonies " , leading to civil war . The UNSC sponsors the Spartan @-@ II program to create an elite group of enhanced supersoldiers , whose purpose is to suppress the rebellion covertly . In the year 2525 , human worlds come under attack by a theocratic alliance of alien races known as the Covenant . The Covenant leadership declares humanity heretics and an affront to their gods – the Forerunners – and begins a holy war of genocide . The Covenant 's superior technology and numbers prove decisive advantages ; though effective , the Spartans are too few in number to turn the tide of battle in humanity 's favor . 
 In 2552 , the Covenant arrive at the UNSC 's last major stronghold beyond Earth – the planet Reach , in orbit of Epsilon Eridani – and launch an invasion of the planet . The last Spartans and UNSC military are unable to stop the Covenant from bombarding the planet . The UNSC Navy suffers devastating losses , and every Spartan but their leader , player character Master Chief John @-@ 117 , is believed lost in action . Following directives to avoid leading the Covenant to Earth , Cortana , the AI aboard the fleeing UNSC ship Pillar of Autumn , selects random coordinates that lead the ship to a Halo installation . These events form the backdrop to the first game in the series , Halo : Combat Evolved . 
 Over the course of the game , the Covenant pursue , damaging the Autumn and leading its crew to wage a guerrilla war on the ring 's surface . The Covenant accidentally release Flood imprisoned on the ring ; to nullify the threat , the ring 's AI caretaker , 343 Guilty Spark , enlists the help of the Master Chief in activating Halo . Cortana reveals that Halo 's activation would mean their own destruction . Master Chief and Cortana instead detonate Autumn 's engines , destroying Halo and preventing the escape of the Flood . 
 Between the events of the first game and Halo 2 , the Chief and a few other survivors return to Earth , warning of an impending Covenant attack ; this attack forms the first mission of the game . Meanwhile , the Covenant , unaware of the destructive nature of the rings , attempt to fire another ring , Installation 05 , to fulfill their religious prophecy and to do so launch an attack on Earth . Helping the Chief to defend the Earth are Sergeant Avery Johnson and Commander Miranda Keyes . One race in the Covenant , the Elites , learn the truth about the rings and are led by a former Elite commander named the Arbiter ( also a player character ) to join forces with humanity to stop the firing of the ring . Though they are successful , the unexpected shutdown of the installation triggers a fail @-@ safe protocol , priming all the rings for firing from the Ark . 
 Halo 3 picks up immediately after , with the Covenant 's leader , the High Prophet of Truth , and the remaining loyalist Covenant uncovering a portal to the Ark on Earth . A battle rages on Earth between human forces , the Covenant , and a Flood @-@ infected army . Eventually , the Covenant is repulsed and flees through a slipspace portal , and the Flood is purged from Earth , though much of Africa has been devastated in the battle . 
 Chief , Arbiter , Elites , Johnson , Keyes , and <unk> troops follow Truth through the portal , joined by 343 Guilty Spark , who aids the Chief as he has no function to fulfill after the destruction of his ringworld . During the ensuing battle between humans , Covenant , and the Flood on the Ark , Johnson is captured by Truth to activate the Halo rings . Keyes tries to intervene , but is killed . Master Chief and the Arbiter , aided by the Flood , kill the Covenant " prophet " of Truth and rescue Johnson . After finding out that the Ark is constructing a replacement for Guilty Spark 's Halo installation , Master Chief decides to fire the unstable Halo , destroying both the Flood and the Ark . After finding out about their plan , Guilty Spark kills Johnson and tries to kill Master Chief , but Master Chief destroys Guilty Spark and activates the Halo . Master Chief and the Arbiter escape on the UNSC frigate Forward Unto Dawn , but the slipspace portal closes with Master Chief 's half trapped in space . After a memorial service on Earth for the victims of the Human @-@ Covenant war , the Arbiter and his Elite brethren depart for their home planet . The rear half of Forward Unto Dawn floats in deep space . Cortana activates a distress beacon and the Chief goes into hibernation . 
 Four years later , the Chief and Cortana awake to find they are being attacked by a Covenant splinter group ( Halo 4 ) . Caught in an artificial gravity well , they are pulled into the artificial Forerunner planet of Requiem , along with the UNSC ship Infinity . Master Chief , fighting Covenant and AI soldiers called Prometheans , unwittingly releases a hostile Forerunner warrior called the Didact . While seeking a way to combat the Didact , Cortana reveals that she is becoming rampant , a state in AIs when their knowledge base becomes too large and they gradually go insane . Master Chief is eventually contacted by a Forerunner consciousness called the Librarian ( The Didact 's Wife ) , who tells him about the Didact : during the crisis with the Flood , the Didact tried to use a device called the Composer to transform humanity into creatures like the Prometheans . He did this because he needed extra soldiers in the war . His own race then imprisoned him along with Forerunner soldiers and humans he had already converted . The Composer was hidden . After the Didact leaves Requiem and retrieves the Composer , Master Chief pursues him to Earth , with Master Chief and Cortana working together to destroy the Composer . Master Chief succeeds , but Cortana sacrifices herself to save him from the resultant explosion . Master Chief is later found floating among the rubble , and taken back to Infinity . 
 Halo 5 : Guardians begins eight months later . Blue Team — consisting of four of the five remaining Spartans ( Master Chief , Fred @-@ 104 , Kelly @-@ 87 and Linda @-@ 58 ) , receives signals from Cortana indicating that she has survived her death by taking advantage of Forerunner AI technology . The Chief , disobeying direct orders , travels to the planet Genesis to reunite with her . A team of Spartans from a competing program , Fireteam Osiris , are dispatched to apprehend him . This journey takes them to several places around the galaxy , including the Elite homeworld of Sanghelios , where the Arbiter leads an offensive against the final remnants of the loyalist Covenant . As they travel , Osiris discover that Cortana is activating ancient Forerunner constructs — the eponymous Guardians — with which she plans to impose permanent galactic peace on pain of death . She holds the Master Chief 's team captive , and while Fireteam Osiris are able to rescue them , they are not able to stop Cortana from executing her plan , disabling most contemporary technology and bringing all remaining sentient species under her aegis . As the game ends , Blue Team , Fireteam Osiris and the Arbiter regroup to plan their resistance . 
 = = Game series = = 
 = = = Original trilogy = = = 
 The games of the main Halo trilogy were developed by Bungie , and are first @-@ person shooters in which the player experiences most action from the protagonist 's perspective . The first title in the series is the Xbox version of Halo : Combat Evolved , released on November 15 , 2001 . The game was initially intended to be released for Windows and Mac OS , until Microsoft 's purchase of Bungie in 2000 led to the game becoming an Xbox launch title and platform exclusive . Halo : Combat Evolved introduced many gameplay and plot themes common to the whole trilogy . Players battle various aliens on foot and in vehicles to complete objectives , while attempting to uncover the secrets of the eponymous Halo . One concept introduced in Halo : Combat Evolved , is limiting the number of weapons players could carry to two , forcing them to carefully select their preferred armament . Players fight with ranged and melee attacks , as well as a limited number of grenades . Bungie refers to the " weapons @-@ grenades @-@ melee " format as the " Golden Triangle of Halo " , which has remained fundamentally unchanged throughout the trilogy . In Halo : Combat Evolved , the player 's health is measured in both hit points and a continually recharging energy shield ; the sequels forgo the hit point system , although it returns in spin @-@ offs . A Windows and Mac OS X port was later developed by Gearbox Software , and released on September 30 and November 11 , 2003 , respectively . A stand @-@ alone expansion , entitled Halo : Custom Edition , was released as a Windows exclusive , and allowed players to create custom content for the game . 
 Its sequel , Halo 2 was released on the Xbox on November 9 , 2004 , and later for Windows Vista on May 17 , 2007 . For the first time , the game was released in two different editions : a standard edition with just the game disc and traditional Xbox packaging ; and the Collector 's Edition with a specially designed aluminum case , along with an additional bonus DVD , extra booklet , and slightly different user manual . Halo 2 introduced new gameplay elements , chief among them the ability to hold and fire two weapons simultaneously , known as " dual wielding " . Unlike its predecessor , Halo 2 fully supported online multiplayer via Xbox Live . The game uses " matchmaking " to facilitate joining online matches by grouping players looking for certain types of games . This was a change from the more traditional " server list " approach , which was used to find matches in online games at this time . Upon release , Halo 2 became the game played by the most people on the Xbox Live service that week ; it retained this title for over two years – the longest streak any game has held the spot . 
 Halo 3 is the final game in the main Halo trilogy , ending the story arc begun in Halo : Combat Evolved . The game was released on the Xbox 360 on September 25 , 2007 . It adds to the series new vehicles , new weapons , and a class of items called equipment . The game also includes a limited map @-@ editing tool , known as the Forge , which allows players to insert game objects , such as weapons and crates , into existing multiplayer map geometry . Players can also save a recording of their gameplay sessions , and view them as video , from any angle . 
 At E3 2014 , Microsoft and 343 Industries announced Halo : The Master Chief Collection , released on November 11 , 2014 , for the Xbox One . The game includes the full campaign and multiplayer modes of Halo : Combat Evolved , Halo 2 , Halo 3 , and Halo 4 . The campaign of Halo 3 : ODST was later released as DLC , and was free for those who bought The Master Chief Collection during late 2014 . 
 = = = Reclaimer saga = = = 
 Following Bungie 's split from Microsoft , 343 Industries – a studio established by Microsoft in 2009 – took the helm of the Halo franchise . 343 had already co @-@ developed the Halo Legends animated series and had overseen production of Halo : Reach and Halo : Combat Evolved Anniversary . The next game in the series , Halo 4 , was announced at E3 2011 as the first entry in what would be a new series of Halo games , also known as the " Reclaimer Trilogy " . The game included many staples of previous games , such as new or redesigned weapon types , an improved map @-@ editing tool and expanded multiplayer options and maps . Halo 4 was released worldwide on November 6 , 2012 , achieving record sales for the franchise . In a new addition to the series , a story @-@ driven multiplayer campaign entitled Spartan Ops was released over the weeks following Halo 4 's release , telling what happened after the end of the main game . 
 Halo 5 : Guardians , the sequel to Halo 4 , was released for the Xbox One on October 27 , 2015 . The game takes place on many different worlds , mainly the Covenant 's , and will revolve around Spartan Locke attempting to hunt down Master Chief . This will be the first game in the Halo series where players switch between two teams in Campaign at certain times : Master Chief 's team , consisting of the Spartans in the Blue team , and Spartan Locke 's team called Fireteam Osiris , consisting of fellow Spartans such as Buck from Halo 3 : ODST . 
 = = = Spin @-@ offs = = = 
 The success of the main Halo trilogy spurred the creation of spin @-@ off games . Halo Wars is a real @-@ time strategy game developed by Ensemble Studios for the Xbox 360 . Set in the year 2531 , the game takes place 21 years prior to the events of Halo : Combat Evolved . Much effort was spent on developing a control scheme that was simple and intuitive , unlike other console strategy games . The game was announced at X06 , and released in February and March 2009 . 
 In a July 2008 interview with MTV , Microsoft 's head of Xbox business , Don Mattrick , stated that Bungie was working on a new Halo game for Microsoft , independent of other Halo projects . An announcement of the new Halo project was expected at the 2008 E3 game exposition , which Bungie stated " has been building for several months " , but was delayed by their publisher Microsoft . The Halo announcement was to be part of Microsoft 's 150 @-@ minute E3 presentation , and was cut to trim the presentation down to 90 minutes ; Microsoft stated it wanted to give the game its own dedicated event . After the release of an ambiguous teaser trailer on September 25 , the project was revealed as Halo 3 : Recon , later changed to Halo 3 : ODST . Set between the events of Halo 2 and Halo 3 , players take control of elite human soldiers called Orbital Drop Shock Troopers ( ODST ) . The game was released on September 22 , 2009 . 
 Announced at E3 2009 , Halo : Reach is a prequel to the main trilogy and Bungie 's last Halo game . Players control Noble Six , a " Hyper Lethal Vector " who is one of the members of the Spartan squad " Noble Team " as they defend Reach against the Covenant . The ending of the game leads directly into the events of Combat Evolved . The game was released on September 14 , 2010 . 
 = = = Cancelled and related projects = = = 
 Alternate reality games were used to promote the release of the games in the main trilogy . The Cortana Letters , a series of cryptic email messages , were circulated by Bungie prior to Halo : Combat Evolved 's release . I Love Bees was used to promote the release of Halo 2 . The game revolved around a website created by 42 Entertainment , commissioned by Microsoft and endorsed by Bungie . Over the course of the game , audio clips were released that eventually formed a complete five @-@ hour story set on Earth between Halo and Halo 2 . Similarly , Iris was used as a viral marketing campaign for the release of Halo 3 . It featured five web servers containing various media files related to the Halo universe . 
 Spin @-@ off titles were planned for release on handheld systems , but did not progress far in development . Rumors of a handheld Halo title for the Game Boy Advance surfaced in 2004 . Bungie denied the rumors and commented that such a project between Microsoft and Nintendo would be " very unlikely " . At a Las Vegas consumer technology convention in January 2005 , rumors spread about a version of Halo for the handheld Gizmondo system . Bungie denied the rumors stating they were not making a game for the system . A former Gizmondo employee later revealed development only extended to basic story and game structure concepts to obtain funding from investors . In 2006 , a concept video for Microsoft 's portable Ultra @-@ Mobile PC featured footage of Halo and caused speculation for a handheld title . Microsoft later stated the footage was for demonstration purposes only ; Halo was included because it was a Microsoft @-@ owned property . In January 2007 , IGN editor @-@ in @-@ chief Matt Casamassina claimed he played a version of Halo for the Nintendo DS . He later demonstrated on @-@ camera , in @-@ game footage of an early @-@ development style version of Halo DS . The demonstrated work featured dual @-@ wielding and a version of the Halo 2 map Zanzibar . On October 5 , 2007 , Bungie employee Brian Jarrard explained the Halo DS demo was in fact an unsolicited pitch that was never taken on . 
 In 2006 , Microsoft announced an episodic video game to be developed by film director Peter Jackson 's Wingnut Interactive . The game , dubbed Halo : Chronicles , was confirmed to be in development in 2007 , and by 2008 was still hiring for positions on the development team . Jackson told game blog Joystiq in July 2009 that the project was no longer in development . Jackson 's manager Ken Kamins explained that the project was cancelled as part of budget cuts tied to job layoffs in January 2009 . 
 Before the company was shuttered after producing Halo Wars , Ensemble Studios had been working on a Halo @-@ themed massively multiplayer online game , often referred to as Titan Project , or just Titan . The project was cancelled internally in 2007 – 2008 , without a formal announcement from Microsoft . 
 Elements from the Halo universe have also appeared in other games . A Halo @-@ based character , SPARTAN Nicole @-@ 458 , appeared in Dead or Alive 4 , a product of the collaboration between Tecmo 's Team Ninja and Microsoft 's Bungie Studios . The Halo theme tune was also available as downloadable content for Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock . 
 An Arbiter appears as a playable character in Killer Instinct : Season Three . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 In December 2014 , 343 Industries general manager Bonnie Ross expressed Microsoft 's aim for the Halo series to last at least 30 more years . On March 25 , 2015 , 343 Industries announced Halo Online , a free @-@ to @-@ play Halo multiplayer game for Windows . A closed beta test limited to Russia is scheduled to launch in the second quarter of 2015 . The title is being developed with Saber Interactive and published by Innova Systems ; it is powered by a modified version of the Halo 3 engine . Furthermore , at Gamescom 2015 Microsoft announced a sequel to Ensemble 's Halo Wars , Halo Wars 2 , slated to launch in February 2017 . The game is being developed by 343 Industries and Creative Assembly . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Bungie = = = 
 Bungie ( formerly Bungie Software Products Corporation ) is a game development company started in 1991 by Alex Seropian . Seropian partnered with programmer Jason Jones to market and release Jones ' game Minotaur : The Labyrinths of Crete . Focusing on the Macintosh game market because it was smaller and easier to compete , Bungie became the biggest Mac developer with games including the shooters Pathways into Darkness and Marathon . What became Halo was originally code @-@ named Monkey Nuts and Blam ! , and took place on a hollowed @-@ out world called <unk> . The planet eventually became a ringworld , and an artist suggested the name " Halo " , which became the game 's title . 
 The first Halo game was announced on July 21 , 1999 , during the Macworld Conference & Expo . It was originally planned to be a real @-@ time strategy game for the Mac and Windows operating systems , but later changed into a third @-@ person action game . On June 19 , 2000 , Microsoft acquired Bungie Studios and Halo : Combat Evolved became a launch title for the Xbox video game console . After receiving Xbox development kits , Bungie Studios rewrote the game 's engine , heavily altered its presentation , and turned it into a first @-@ person shooter . Though the first Halo was meant to include an online multiplayer mode , it was excluded because Xbox Live was not yet available . 
 Halo was not intended to be the Xbox 's flagship game due to internal concerns and gaming press criticism , but Microsoft VP of game publishing Ed Fries did not act on these concerns . The Xbox 's marketing heavily featured Halo , whose green color palette meshed with the console 's design scheme . 
 The success of the game led to a sequel , Halo 2 , which was announced on August 8 , 2002 , at Microsoft 's New York <unk> press event . It featured improved graphics , new weapons , and a multiplayer mode on Xbox Live . Halo 3 was announced at the 2006 Electronic Entertainment Expo . The initial conception for the third game was done before Halo 2 was released in 2004 . It utilized a proprietary , in @-@ house graphics engine , and employed advanced graphics technologies . 
 They created two more Halo games before becoming independent as part of their deal with Microsoft : a side story Halo 3 : ODST and a prequel Halo : Reach in 2009 and 2010 respectively . 
 = = = 343 Industries = = = 
 Following the release of Halo 3 , Bungie announced it was splitting off from Microsoft and becoming an independent limited liability company . While Bungie remained involved in the Halo series by developing games such as ODST and Reach , the rights to Halo remain with Microsoft . To oversee everything Halo , Microsoft created an internal division , 343 Industries , serving as " stewards " for the franchise . Frank O 'Connor , formerly a Bungie employee , now serves as 343 's creative director . 
 In announcing the formation of 343 Industries , Microsoft also announced that Xbox Live would be home to a central hub for Halo content called Halo Waypoint . Waypoint is accessed from the Xbox 360 Dashboard and offers players access to multimedia content in addition to tracking their Halo game " career " . O 'Connor described Waypoint as intended to be the prime destination for Halo . 
 The company 's first new game , Halo 4 , was released on November 6 , 2012 , to generally positive reviews . 
 = = = Cultural influences = = = 
 In 2006 , in acknowledgment of the " wealth of influences adopted by the Bungie team " , a list of Bungie employees ' favorite science fiction material was published on the company 's website . The developers acknowledged that the Halo series ' use of ring @-@ shaped megastructures followed on from concepts featured in Larry Niven 's Ringworld and Iain M. Banks ' Culture series ( of which Consider <unk> and <unk> were said to be particularly influential ) . In a retrospective article in Edge , Bungie 's Jaime Griesemer commented , " The influence of something like Ringworld isn 't necessarily in the design – it 's in that feeling of being somewhere else . That sense of scale and an epic story going on out there . " Griesemer also explained , " One of the main sources of inspiration was Armor [ by John Steakley ] , in which a soldier has to constantly re @-@ live the same war over and over again . That sense of hopelessness , a relentless battle , was influential . " The Flood were influenced by the assimilating alien species in Christopher Rowley 's The Vang ; it has also been speculated that the Master Chief 's name " John 117 " may have been a reference to a character named Jon <unk> in Rowley 's <unk> , or to the John Spartan character of Demolition Man . An IGN article exploring the literary influences present in the Halo franchise commented on similarities between Halo and Orson Scott Card 's Ender 's Game : aspects of the SPARTAN Project and the design of the Covenant Drones are perceived as reminiscent of the super soldier program and <unk> found in the novel . Bungie has also acknowledged James Cameron 's film Aliens as a strong cinematic influence . 
 A report written by Roger Travis and published by The Escapist compares Halo with the Latin epic Aeneid , written by classical Roman poet Virgil . Travis posits similarities between the plots of both works and compares the characters present in them , with the Flood and Covenant taking the role performed by the Carthaginians , and the Master Chief 's role in the series to that of Aeneas . 
 = = Music = = 
 Seven Halo soundtracks have been released . The Halo Original Soundtrack contains most of Combat Evolved 's music . Due to the varying nature of gameplay , the music present was designed to use the game 's dynamic audio playback engine . The engine allows for the mood , theme , and duration of music played to change according to gameplay . To afford a more enjoyable listening experience , O 'Donnell rearranged portions of the music of Halo into standalone suites , which follow the narrative course of the game . The soundtrack also contains music not used in the game , including a variation on the Halo theme that was first played at Halo 's debut at Macworld 1999 . 
 For Halo 2 's soundtrack , producer Nile Rodgers and O 'Donnell decided to split the music into two separate volumes . The first , Volume One , was released on November 9 , 2004 and contained all the themes as well as the " inspired @-@ by " music present in the game ( featuring Steve Vai , Incubus , Hoobastank , and Breaking Benjamin ) . The second release , Volume 2 , contained the rest of the music , much of which was incomplete or not included in the first soundtrack , as the first soundtrack was shipped before the game was released . Halo 2 , unlike its predecessor , was mixed to take full advantage of Dolby 5 @.@ 1 Digital Surround Sound . 
 The soundtrack for Halo 3 was released on November 20 , 2007 . O 'Donnell noted he wanted to bring back the themes from the original game to help tie together the end of the trilogy . The tracks are presented , similarly to the previous soundtrack for Halo 2 , in a suite form . Unlike previous soundtracks , where much of the music had been synthesized on computer , the soundtrack for Halo 3 was recorded using a 60 @-@ piece orchestra , along with a 24 @-@ voice chorus . The final soundtrack was recorded by the Northwest Sinfonia at Studio X in Seattle , Washington . The soundtracks were bundled and released as a box set in December 2008 . A soundtrack for Halo 3 : ODST was released alongside the game and included many of the tracks from the game . 
 For Halo Wars , the task of creating the game 's music fell to Stephen Rippy . Rippy listened to O 'Donnell 's soundtracks for inspiration and incorporated the Halo theme into parts of his arrangements . In addition to synthesized and orchestral components , the composer focused on the choir and piano as essential elements , feeling these were important in creating the " Halo sound " . Rather than use the Northwest Sinfonia , Rippy traveled to Prague and recorded with the FILMharmonic Orchestra before returning to the United States to complete the music . A standalone compact disc and digital download retail version of the soundtrack was announced in January 2009 for release on February 17 . 
 The music of Halo 4 was composed by Neil Davidge . The Halo 4 Original Soundtrack was released on October 22 , 2012 , followed by a two @-@ disc Special Edition on November 6 . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The Halo franchise includes various types of merchandise and adaptations outside of the video games . This includes bestselling novels , graphic novels , and other licensed products , from action figures to a packaging tie @-@ in with Mountain Dew . Numerous action figures and vehicles based on Halo have been produced . Joyride Studios created Halo and Halo 2 action figures , while Halo 3 <unk> and collectible action figures , aimed at collectors , were produced by McFarlane Toys and became some of the top @-@ selling action figures of 2007 and 2008 . MEGA Blocks partnered with Microsoft to produce Halo Wars @-@ themed toys . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Numerous printed adaptations based on the Halo video games canon have been published . Larry Niven ( author of Ringworld ) was originally approached to write a Halo novelization , but declined due to unfamiliarity with the subject matter . The first novel was Halo : The Fall of Reach , a prequel to Halo : Combat Evolved . It was written by Eric Nylund in seven weeks , and published in October 2001 . William C. Dietz wrote an adaptation of Halo : Combat Evolved called Halo : The Flood , which was released in 2003 . Eric Nylund returned to write the third novel , Halo : First Strike , which takes place between Halo : Combat Evolved and Halo 2 , and was published in December 2003 . Nylund also wrote the fourth adaptation , Halo : Ghosts of Onyx , which was published on October 31 , 2006 . Bungie employee Joseph Staten wrote the fifth book , Halo : Contact Harvest , which was released on October 30 , 2007 , while Tobias S. Buckell produced the sixth , Halo : The Cole Protocol , published in November 2008 . Bungie considers the Halo novels as additions to the Halo canon . 
 A collection of Halo short stories , Halo : Evolutions , was simultaneously released in print and audiobook formats in November 2009 . Evolutions includes original material by Nylund , Buckell , Karen Traviss and contributions from Bungie . Tor re @-@ released the first three Halo novels with new content and cover art . Science fiction author Greg Bear wrote a trilogy of books focusing on the Forerunners , called The Forerunner Saga . The first book , entitled Halo : Cryptum , was released in January 2011 , followed by Primordium in January 2012 and Silentium on March 19 , 2013 . Karen Traviss wrote the Kilo @-@ Five trilogy , which takes place after the events of Halo 3 and Halo : Ghosts of Onyx . The first book , Halo : Glasslands , came out October 2011 , followed by Halo : The Thursday War on October 2 , 2012 , and Halo : Mortal <unk> on January 21 , 2014 . The fourteenth Halo book ( the thirteenth novel ) was released in November 2014 : Halo : Broken Circle by John Shirley , the author of novels based on BioShock , Borderlands , and other games . 
 = = = Comics = = = 
 The Halo universe was first adapted into the graphic novel format in 2006 , with the release of The Halo Graphic Novel , a collection of four short stories . It was written and illustrated by graphic novelists Lee Hammock , Jay Faerber , Tsutomu Nihei , Brett Lewis , Simon Bisley , Ed Lee and Jean Giraud . At the 2007 New York Comic Con , Marvel Comics announced they would be working on an ongoing Halo series with Brian Michael Bendis and Alex Maleev . The limited series , titled Halo : Uprising , bridges the gap between the events of Halo 2 and Halo 3 ; initially planned to conclude shortly before the release of Halo 3 , the constant delays led to the final issue being published April 2009 . 
 Marvel announced at the 2009 Comic Con that two new comics , a five @-@ part series written by Peter David and a second series written by Fred Van Lente , would appear the coming summer and winter . David 's series , Halo : Helljumper , is set prior to Halo : Combat Evolved and focuses on the elite Orbital Drop Shock Troopers . The five @-@ part series was published between July and November 2009 . Lente 's series , originally titled Spartan Black , revolves around a black ops team of Spartan supersoldiers assigned to the UNSC Office of Naval Intelligence . The rebranded comic , Halo : Blood Line , debuted in December 2009 . A comic @-@ retelling of the novel Halo : The Fall of Reach was the most recent comic series entitled : Halo : Fall of Reach . Fall of Reach was split into three mini @-@ stories : Boot Camp , Covenant , and Invasion . Two new series were announced in 2013 . A three @-@ part series , Halo : Initiation was released August 2013 with Brian Reed returning as writer . Also announced was Halo : Escalation , an ongoing comic series covering the period directly after Halo 4 . 
 = = = Live action = = = 
 = = = = Unproduced feature ( 2005 – 07 ) = = = = 
 In 2005 , Columbia Pictures president Peter Schlessel began working outside the studio system to produce a Halo film adaptation . Alex Garland wrote the first script , which was then pitched to studios by couriers dressed as Master Chief . Microsoft 's terms required $ 10 million against 15 percent of gross ; most studios passed , citing the lack of risk for Microsoft compared to their large share of potential profits . 20th Century Fox and Universal Studios decided to partner to produce the film , paying Microsoft $ 5 million to option the film and 10 percent of grosses . Peter Jackson was slated to be the executive producer , with Neill Blomkamp as director . Before Blomkamp signed on , Guillermo del Toro was in negotiations to direct . 
 D. B. Weiss and Josh Olson rewrote Garland 's script during 2006 . The crew stopped and resumed preproduction of the film several times . Later that year , 20th Century Fox threatened to pull out of the project , leading Universal to issue an ultimatum to Jackson and Schlessel : either cut their large " first @-@ dollar " deals , or the project was ended . Both refused , and the project stalled . 
 Blomkamp declared the project dead in late 2007 , but Jackson replied that the film would still be made . Blomkamp and Jackson collaborated on District 9 , but the director told / Film that he was no longer considering working on a Halo film if the opportunity arose , saying that after working on the film for five months before the project 's collapse it would be difficult to return . The rights for the film have since reverted to Microsoft . 
 = = = = Forward Unto Dawn ( 2012 ) = = = = 
 Halo 4 : Forward Unto Dawn is a live @-@ action film and miniseries set in the Halo universe . Although shot as a feature @-@ length film , Forward Unto Dawn was originally released as a webseries consisting of five roughly 15 @-@ minute episodes , the first of which was released on October 5 , 2012 , with the last episode released on November 2 , 2012 . The series ' plot , occurring in the early days of the Human @-@ Covenant War circa 2526 , revolves around Thomas Lasky , a young cadet at Corbulo Academy of Military Science , and how John @-@ 117 inspired him to eventually become a leader . Lasky is also a prominent character in Halo 4 as a commander on the UNSC Infinity . The name of the series , aside from being a reference to the UNSC frigate Forward Unto Dawn , is given new significance in the series as part a running motif based on a poem . The film cut was released on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on December 4 , 2012 . 
 = = = = Nightfall ( 2014 ) = = = = 
 On April 3 , 2014 , it was announced that Ridley Scott and his production company , Scott Free Productions , were working on a Halo digital feature alongside 343 Industries and Xbox Entertainment Studios ; Scott would be the executive producer , with David W. Zucker and Sergio Mimica @-@ Gezzan as the directors . The feature was expected to follow the same format as Machinima 's Halo 4 : Forward Unto Dawn . On June 9 , 2014 , it was announced at E3 2014 that the feature , titled Halo : Nightfall , would be included with Halo : The Master Chief Collection at its November 2014 launch . The feature introduces a new character to the franchise , Agent Jameson Locke , played by actor Mike Colter ; Nightfall is considered to be his origin story . Locke is one of the Spartans portrayed on the cover art of Halo 5 : Guardians , and is set to play a large role in the series . On July 24 , 2014 , 343 Industries released the first trailer for the feature . Halo : Nightfall is available to watch through Halo Channel , an application for the Xbox One , Windows 8 @.@ 1 and Windows Phone . On March 16 , 2015 , the series became available to stream , download , and buy on physical disc . 
 = = = = Untitled Showtime television series = = = = 
 On May 21 , 2013 , 343 Industries announced that a live @-@ action television series of Halo would be produced with Steven Spielberg serving as executive producer . Neill Blomkamp is rumored to direct the pilot for the series . The series will premiere on the American premium cable network Showtime . The project remains in active development as of July , 2016 . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Microsoft announced at Comic @-@ Con 2009 that it was overseeing production of a series of seven short anime films , together called Halo Legends . Financed by 343 Industries , the animation was created by five Japanese production houses : Bones , Casio Entertainment , Production I.G. , Studio 4 ° C , and Toei Animation . Shinji Aramaki , creator and director of Appleseed and Appleseed Ex Machina , served as the project 's creative director . Warner Bros. distributed Legends on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in February 2010 . Six of the stories are officially part of the Halo canon , with the seventh , made by Toei , intended to be a parody of the universe . In mid @-@ July 2015 , 343 Industries announced that a new animated series of Halo will be included in the Halo 5 : Guardians Limited Edition and Collector 's Edition called Halo : The Fall of Reach , and will be based on the book Halo : The Fall of Reach by Eric Nylund . 
 = = Reception and critical response = = 
 The Halo franchise has been highly successful commercially and critically . During the two months following Halo : Combat Evolved 's release , it sold alongside more than fifty percent of Xbox consoles and sold a million units by April 2002 . Halo 2 's sales generated US $ 125 million on its premiere day , making it the fastest selling United States media product in history up to that time . Combined with Halo 's sales , the two games sold 14 @.@ 8 million units before Halo 3 's release . 
 GameSpot reported 4 @.@ 2 million units of Halo 3 were in retail outlets on September 24 , 2007 , a day before official release – a world record volume . Halo 3 broke the previous record for the highest grossing opening day in entertainment history , making US $ 170 million in its first twenty @-@ four hours . Worldwide , sales exceeded US $ 300 million the first week , helping to more than double the sales of the Xbox 360 when compared with the weekly average before the Halo 3 launch . At the end of 2007 , Halo 2 and Halo : Combat Evolved were the number one and two best @-@ selling Xbox titles , respectively , and Halo 3 was the best @-@ selling Xbox 360 title . Halo Wars was the best @-@ selling RTS console game , selling more than one million units . The Halo series went on to sell more than 27 million copies by August 2009 , and more than 34 million copies by May 2010 . Tor Books reported that sales of all franchise materials are greater than $ 1 @.@ 7 billion , and Bungie 's games before Reach accounted for $ 1 @.@ 5 billion in sales . The soundtracks to Halo 2 , Halo 3 , ODST and Reach all appeared on the Billboard 200 charts for at least one week . By May 2011 , total gross of Halo merchandise was $ 2 billion , with 40 million copies of the games sold . The total amount climbed to $ 2 @.@ 3 billion in July 2011 , and $ 2 @.@ 8 billion in January 2012 . Total franchise grosses exceeded $ 4 @.@ 6 billion by October 2015 , with 25 % of the figure from non @-@ game @-@ related merchandise . 
 The Halo adaptations have been successful as well . Many of the novels have appeared on Publisher Weekly 's bestseller charts and the Halo Graphic Novel sold more than 100 @,@ 000 copies , a " rare hit " for the games @-@ to @-@ comics genre . Ghosts of Onyx , Contact Harvest , The Cole Protocol and the first volume of Cryptum appeared on The New York Times bestseller lists , and The Cole Protocol also opened 50th overall on USA Today 's bestsellers list . Tor 's first three novels sold more than one million copies by April 2009 . 
 Overall , the Halo series has been very well received by critics . Halo : Combat Evolved has received numerous Game of the Year awards . In March 2007 , IGN listed it as the top Xbox game of all time , while readers ranked it the fourteenth best game ever on " IGN Readers ' Choice 2006 – The Top 100 Games Ever " . Conversely , GameSpy ranked Halo : Combat Evolved tenth on its list of " Top 25 Most Overrated Games of All Time " , citing repetitive level design and the lack of an online multiplayer mode . Halo 2 also received numerous awards , with IGN listing it as the number two top Xbox game of all time in March 2007 . From its initial release on the Xbox in November 2004 until the launch of Gears of War on the Xbox 360 in November 2006 – two years later – Halo 2 was the most popular video game on Xbox Live . Halo 3 was nominated for and won multiple awards ; it won Time magazine 's " Game of the Year " and IGN chose it as the Best Xbox 360 Online Multiplayer Game and Innovative Design of 2007 . Most publications called the multiplayer aspect one of the best features ; IGN said the multiplayer map lineup was the strongest of the series , and GameSpy added that the multiplayer offering will greatly please " Halo veterans " . Complaints focused on the game 's plot . The New York Times said the game had a " throwaway " plot and Total Video Games judged the single @-@ player aspect ultimately disappointing . The series ' music and audio has received enthusiastic response from game reviewers . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The main trilogy , particularly its protagonist , has been declared iconic and a symbol of today 's videogames ; a wax replica of the Master Chief was made by Madame Tussauds in Las Vegas , where Pete Wentz compared the character to notable characters from previous generations like Spider @-@ Man , Frodo , and Luke Skywalker . The Escapist author Roger Travis compared Halo 's story to Virgil 's Aeneid , saying the religious and political struggle described in the games relates to the modern epic tradition . GamesTM stated Halo : Combat Evolved " changed videogame combat forever " , and Halo 2 showcased Xbox Live as a tool for communities . GameDaily noted Halo 2 's launch was " easily comparable to the biggest in other sectors of the entertainment industry " , marking the first time a video game launch has become a major cultural event in America . Time magazine included the franchise in the " 2005 Time 100 " , highlighting that in the first ten weeks after the release of Halo 2 , players spent 91 million combined hours playing the game online . A The New York Times report noted the success of Halo 3 was critical for Microsoft , persuading consumers to buy the Xbox 360 console which was experiencing waning sales compared with the Nintendo Wii , as well as helping restore the console 's image . On September 25 , 2007 , the release date for Halo 3 , Microsoft 's shares rose 1 @.@ 7 % based on sales expectations for the game . Halo has been described as a series that " has reinvented a genre that didn 't know it needed to be reinvented " , with aspects of the main trilogy being duplicated in other FPS games multiple times . 
 Variety called Halo " the equivalent of Star Wars " . 
 = = = Machinima = = = 
 As a highly popular video game series with a large and active fan base , the Halo trilogy has given rise to an array of video productions in an emerging entertainment medium , machinima . Virtually all machinima footage based around the Halo games is taken from the multiplayer modes of the main trilogy games . Most productions are set outside Halo canon , while others are based on fan fiction closely relating to the official story . Halo 3 includes a saved film function that allows camera angles not possible in previous games , and other features that simplify production . The game has become one of the most popular tools for generating machinima , and Microsoft updated its user license agreement to allow noncommercial distribution of such films . 
 A notable machinima production is the comedy series Red vs. Blue created by Rooster Teeth Productions . It has achieved an unparalleled level of success in Halo machinima in specific , and machinima in general ; it is credited with bringing attention to the genre . Red vs. Blue generated annual revenues of US $ 200 @,@ 000 , and special promotional episodes were commissioned by Bungie . The first series , The Blood Gulch Chronicles , ended on June 28 , 2007 , after 100 regular episodes and numerous promotional videos . Subsequent series include the The Recollection , the second series which contains more dramatic elements than its comedic predecessor , Project Freelancer , and The Chorus Trilogy , the most recent series . Other machinima series include Fire Team Charlie , The Codex , and the in @-@ game interview show This Spartan Life . 
 = = Sales history = = 
 = Sticky & Sweet Tour ( album ) = 
 Sticky & Sweet Tour is the third live album by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . It was released on March 26 , 2010 by Warner Bros. Records . The album was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray and CD formats . The tour was filmed at the River Plate Stadium in Buenos Aires , Argentina during the 2008 leg of Madonna 's Sticky & Sweet Tour . The album contains the performances from the tour , and thirteen songs in CD format , accompanied by photography of Guy Oseary . Before the official release , the show was broadcast on VH1 and was produced by Madonna 's production company Semtex Films . 
 Madonna commented that she had not been able to focus on the development of the DVD as she was involved with the development of her directorial venture , titled W.E. Upon its release , Sticky & Sweet Tour received mixed reviews from critics , with one group criticizing it for being lifeless , while others praised the album for the performances . It became Madonna 's 19th top @-@ ten album on the Billboard 200 , while reached the top of the charts in Greece , Hungary , Mexico and Portugal . The album also reached the top @-@ ten in the charts of Australia , Belgium , Canada , France , Japan , Sweden and Switzerland , but had failed to reach the top @-@ ten in Germany and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background = = 
 The album was originally announced as Sticky & Sweet by Madonna 's official website on January 12 , 2010 , with artwork depicting this title . This was later changed to Sticky & Sweet Tour and the packaging design was slightly altered with the additional wording , although the DVD and Blu @-@ ray menu screen retains the original title announced . The album included 30 minutes of exclusive footage , filmed behind the scenes during the course of the tour . The release included " Don 't Cry For Me Argentina " which was only performed at the River Plate Stadium concerts . The photography used on the front cover is by Guy Oseary and is included in his book Madonna : Sticky & Sweet . The imagery is from the video interlude section of " Die Another Day " and has been slightly altered , removing the dancers on stage in the mock @-@ boxing ring . The filmed tour footage was broadcast on VH1 on April 2 , 2010 , just a few days after the official release . 
 The DVD was released in the United States on April 6 , 2010 . Spin collaborated with Madonna 's official website and launched a promotional campaign for the release , giving away an autographed DVD of the album , a Sticky and Sweet tour t @-@ shirt , a tour photo book , an official tour program and a free one @-@ year subscription to their website . During an April 2010 interview with Interview magazine , Madonna noted how she was not able to focus on the development of the DVD as she was involved in her directorial venture , W.E. She said , 
 " I haven 't really been focused as much as I should be on the music part of my career because this movie has just consumed every inch of me . Between that and my four children , I don 't have the time or the energy for anything else . For example , I do appreciate that lots of people worked long and hard putting together things like the DVD of the Sticky & Sweet Tour that we just released , and I have seen the finished product , but I have got no idea how people are going to find out about it or how it 's going to be sold . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Mikael Wood from Entertainment Weekly gave the video a B + and commented , " This live CD @-@ DVD can 't replicate being there , Sticky & Sweet — taped in Buenos Aires in 2008 — does capture the show 's <unk> streak , as on the electro @-@ garage ' Hung Up ' . Props , too , for a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes doc that actually goes behind the scenes . " The Independent gave the release two out of five stars . The reviewer Andy Gill commented , " For all the multitude of crotches spread about the stage , this is as <unk> as pop gets , utterly lifeless despite the fervent activity . " Mayer Nissim from Digital Spy felt that " Despite its absurd charm , this CD won 't provoke the rediscovery of Hard Candy that it seems to nudge towards . That said , it 's still an entertaining blast from start to finish . And with the DVD record of her outstandingly outlandish tour bundled in , this is definitely worth the entry price for anyone who still has even half an interest in the Queen Mum of Pop . " Mark Beech from Bloomberg Television said that " It ’ s intriguing how note @-@ perfect Madonna is while running around and doing splits . " Rolling Stone gave the album three and a half out of five stars and wrote that it " featured stirring remixes , like a fresh mash @-@ up of " Vogue " with the brassy funk of Hard Candy 's " 4 Minutes " . " 
 Justin Kanter from Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer gave a positive review and commented on the performances : " Over the course of two full , uninterrupted hours comes an abundance of grandiose sets and effects ; a voluminous line @-@ up of dancers ; precisely engineered sound and sequence ; and sharply produced , celebrity @-@ studded video clips . [ ... ] Unquestionably , it ’ s Madonna and company ’ s actual show — the entire spectacle of song , dance , style , and attitude — that make the Sticky & Sweet Tour an invigorating and highly memorable happening . " However , he felt that the performances of " Borderline " ( 1984 ) and " Human Nature " were disappointing . Ben Kaplan from Canada.com said " Sticky & Sweet is a document of a woman in her fifties who actually started peaking after most people thought she was through . Madonna doesn 't speak with a British accent on her new record . But even if she did , it wouldn 't really have mattered : Most of the stage banter is drowned out by the crowd 's roar . " He listed the performance of " Into the Groove " ( 1985 ) as a highlight of the tour . Tony <unk> @-@ Lea from The Irish Times said " Madonna has the experience to know what works and what doesn ’ t . It is this that makes Sticky Sweet such an interesting proposition : a superbly shot movie of the ' four @-@ act ' show that blends muscle with music , depth with deftness . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic said " Since so much of the tour depended on overblown spectacle , Sticky & Sweet Tour is better experienced as a video instead of a CD – but even as a video this doesn ’ t rank among the best Madonna live albums , as there ’ s too much precision and not enough inspiration in the whole show . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , the album was released on April 4 , 2010 and entered the Billboard 200 chart at number ten , with first week sales of 28 @,@ 000 according to Nielsen Soundscan . Sticky & Sweet Tour became Madonna 's 19th top @-@ ten album on the Billboard 200 , thus tying her with Bob Dylan for sixth place among acts with the most top 10s in the chart 's 54 @-@ year history , trailing The Rolling Stones ( with 36 ) , Frank Sinatra ( 33 ) , The Beatles and Barbra Streisand ( 30 ) and Elvis Presley ( 27 ) . However , only the CD / DVD set and digital audio @-@ only counterparts were allowed to chart on the Billboard 200 . The Blu @-@ ray edition of the album charted on Billboard 's Top Music Videos chart , peaking it with sales of 5 @,@ 000 . It became Madonna 's ninth number @-@ one on that chart , extending her lead as the soloist with the most toppers in the 25 @-@ year history of the chart . Among all acts , only Bill and Gloria Gaither have more , with fifteen number @-@ ones . The next week , Sticky & Sweet Tour dropped to position fifty @-@ seven on the Billboard 200 , selling 8 @,@ 000 copies . It has sold 65 @,@ 000 copies there , with sales of the Blu @-@ ray version exceeding 17 @,@ 000 copies . In Canada , the album debuted at three on the Canadian Albums Chart with sales of 6 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In Japan , the album debuted and peaked at number ten on the Oricon Albums Chart , remaining on the chart for eight weeks . Sticky & Sweet Tour was her 20th top @-@ ten entries on the chart , making Madonna the international artist with most top @-@ ten albums in Japan , breaking the record previously held by The Beatles . She also became the oldest female artist to enter the top @-@ ten in Oricon albums chart history . In Australia , the album charted on the ARIA DVD Chart at number three while entered the New Zealand Albums Chart at number 20 . It was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , for shipment of 10 @,@ 000 copies there . In the United Kingdom , Sticky & Sweet Tour debuted outside the top ten at number 17 with sales of 17 @,@ 000 copies according to the Official Charts Company . The album was also commercially successful in other musical markets , topping the charts in Mexico , Greece , Croatia , Czech Rep , Norway , Hungary and Portugal , while attaining top @-@ ten positions in the charts of Austria , Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , Czech Republic , Finland , France , Ireland , Italy , Poland , Sweden and Switzerland . Sticky & Sweet Tour also reached number two on Billboard 's European Top 100 Albums chart . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " and " Like a Virgin " were only performed in Argentina . 
 There are two iTunes versions : one has the above track listing and a digital booklet , the other has only the 13 tracks from the CD version and does not include the digital booklet . 
 CD and DVD – Digipak case edition containing two discs : DVD of the concert and a CD containing 13 live tracks 
 CD and Blu @-@ ray – ( Europe and Latin America only ) Blu @-@ ray case edition containing : High Definition version of the concert on Blu @-@ ray and a CD containing 13 live tracks 
 Blu @-@ ray – Blu @-@ ray case edition containing : High Definition version of the concert on Blu @-@ ray 
 iTunes Digital version 1 – contains the 13 tracks from the CD release with four bonus tracks " Heartbeat " , " Borderline " , " 4 Minutes " , " Ray of Light " and a digital booklet 
 iTunes Digital version 2 – contains the 13 tracks from the CD release with three bonus tracks " Borderline " , " 4 Minutes " and " Ray of Light " ( this version does not have a digital booklet ) 
 Amazon Digital version – contains the 13 tracks from the CD release with four bonus tracks " Borderline " , " Miles Away " , " 4 Minutes " and " Ray of Light " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Directors – Nathan Rissman and Nick Wickham 
 Broadcast director – Jamie King 
 Production company – Semtex Films 
 Producer – Sara Martin 
 Executive producers – Madonna , Guy Oseary and Nicola <unk> 
 Photography – Darius Khondji 
 Film editing – Jamie King , Nathan Rissman , Danny Tull 
 Costume designer – Arianne Phillips 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Russian battleship Evstafi = 
 Evstafi ( Russian : <unk> ) was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the Imperial Russian Navy 's Black Sea Fleet . She was built before World War I and her completion was greatly delayed by changes made to reflect the lessons of the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1905 . She was the lead ship of her class . 
 She and her sister ship Ioann Zlatoust were the most modern ships in the Black Sea Fleet when World War I began and formed the core of the fleet for the first year of the war , before the dreadnoughts entered service . They forced the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben to disengage during the Battle of Cape Sarych shortly after Russia declared war on the Ottoman Empire in late 1914 . She covered several bombardments of the Bosphorus fortifications in early 1915 , including one where she was attacked by Goeben , but Evstafi , together with the other Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts , managed to drive her off . Evstafi was relegated to secondary roles after the first dreadnought entered service in late 1915 and reduced to reserve in 1918 in Sevastopol . 
 Evstafi was captured when the Germans took the city in May 1918 and was turned over to the Allies after the Armistice in November 1918 . Her engines were destroyed in 1919 by the British when they withdrew from Sevastopol to prevent the advancing Bolsheviks from using them against the White Russians . She was abandoned when the Whites evacuated the Crimea in 1920 and was scrapped by the Soviets in 1922 – 23 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Evstafi was 379 feet ( 115 @.@ 5 m ) long at the waterline and 385 feet 9 inches ( 117 @.@ 6 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 74 feet ( 22 @.@ 6 m ) and a maximum draft of 28 ft ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) . Her displacement was 12 @,@ 738 long tons ( 12 @,@ 942 t ) as designed . 
 She had two 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines driving two propellers . 22 Belleville water @-@ tube boilers provided steam to the engines . The engines had a total designed output of 10 @,@ 600 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 904 kW ) and gave a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . At full load she carried 1 @,@ 100 long tons ( 1 @,@ 118 t ) of coal that provided her a range of 2 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 900 km ; 2 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Evstafi 's Obukhovskii 12 @-@ inch Pattern 1895 40 @-@ calibre guns were mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft . Each turret had a firing arc of 260 ° . All four 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) 50 @-@ calibre Pattern 1905 guns were mounted in the corners of the superstructure in armoured casemates . These guns had a firing arc of 120 ° and could fire straight ahead or astern . The dozen 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Canet Pattern 1892 45 @-@ calibre guns were mounted in the lower casemates . The anti @-@ torpedo boat armament consisted of 14 75 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) Canet Pattern 1892 50 @-@ calibre guns mounted in sponsons on the upper deck , protected by gun shields . She carried two 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes on the broadside aft . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 Evstafi was fitted with anti @-@ aircraft guns on top of each of her turrets during 1915 and screens were added on top of her funnels to keep out light bombs . She first received three 75 mm guns , but these were later replaced by two 63 @.@ 5 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) guns and a pair of 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) guns . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Construction of Evstafi began on 13 July 1904 , well before the formal keel @-@ laying ceremony on 23 November 1904 . Progress was relatively quick , despite the disruptions caused by the 1905 Revolution , and she was launched on 3 November 1906 . Fitting @-@ out , however , was considerably delayed by a number of changes made as the navy digested the lessons of the Russo @-@ Japanese War and she was not completed until 28 May 1911 . Shortly after completion she ran aground off the Romanian port of Constanţa in October 1911 , but was only slightly damaged . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Evstafi , as the newest ship in the Black Sea Fleet , was the flagship of Vice Admiral Andrei Eberhardt , commanding the fleet , for the first year or so of World War I. Two weeks after the Russian declaration of war on the Ottoman Empire on 2 November 1914 , the Black Sea Fleet , comprising the pre @-@ dreadnoughts Evstafi , Ioann Zlatoust , Pantelimon , Rostislav , Tri Sviatitelia , and three cruisers were escorted by three destroyers and 11 torpedo boats set out on 15 November to bombard Trebizond . They did this successfully on the morning of 17 November and they turned west to hunt for Turkish shipping along the Anatolian coast before setting course for Sevastopol later that afternoon . They were intercepted by the German battlecruiser Goeben and the light cruiser SMS Breslau the following day in what came to be known as the Battle of Cape Sarych . Despite the noon hour the conditions were foggy and the capital ships initially did not spot each other . The Black Sea Fleet had experimented on concentrating fire from several ships under the control of a " master ship " before the war and Evstafi held her fire until Ioann Zlatoust , the master ship , could see Goeben . When the gunnery commands were finally received they showed a range over 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) in excess of Evstafi 's own estimate of 7 @,@ 700 yards ( 7 @,@ 000 m ) , so Evstafi opened fire using her own data before Goeben turned to unmask its broadside . She scored a hit with her first salvo as a 12 @-@ inch shell partially penetrated the armor casemate protecting one of Goeben 's 15 @-@ centimetre ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) secondary guns . It detonated some of the ready @-@ use ammunition , starting a fire that burnt out the casemate and killed its crew . 
 Goeben returned fire shortly afterwards and hit Evstafi in the middle funnel ; the shell detonated after it passed through the funnel and destroyed the antenna for the fire @-@ control radio , which meant that Evstafi could not correct Ioann Zlatoust 's inaccurate range data . Goeben hit Evstafi four more <unk> although one shell failed to detonate , before Rear Admiral Wilhelm Souchon decided to turn away and break contact after fourteen minutes of combat . Evstafi suffered 34 killed and 24 wounded from those hits . Evstafi only fired between 12 and 16 12 @-@ inch shells as well as 14 eight @-@ inch and 19 six @-@ inch shells . 
 Several armour plates on Evstafi required replacement after the battle and they were taken from the old pre @-@ dreadnought Dvenadsat Apostolov so that the repairs were completed by 29 November . On 9 January 1915 Breslau and the Ottoman cruiser Hamidiye encountered the Russian fleet while returning from a mission in the eastern part of the Black Sea . Breslau hit Evstafi 's forward turret with a 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) shell , temporarily putting it out of action , and the two cruisers escaped using their superior speed . 
 Evstafi and Ioann Zlatoust served as the covering force for several bombardment missions of the Bosphorus between 18 March and 9 May 1915 . The two earlier bombardments were uneventful , but the 9 May bombardment provoked a reaction as Goeben intercepted the Russian battleships after they 'd been spotted by the Ottoman destroyer Numune @-@ i Hamiyet . Both forces turned on parallel courses and opened fire at the range of 17 @,@ 400 yards ( 15 @,@ 900 m ) . Neither side scored a hit although Goeben had multiple near @-@ misses on Evstafi . Admiral Eberhardt ordered his ships to make only 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) while Goeben was making 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . Goeben was unable to cross the T of the Russian ships , despite its superior speed , as they were continually turning . This manoeuvre bought enough time that Tri Sviatitelia and Pantelimon were able to rejoin the other two ships before they could start shelling the Ottoman forts . Pantelimon hit Goeben twice before the German ship broke contact after 22 minutes of firing . With the fleet assembled Admiral Eberhardt attempted to pursue the enemy battlecruiser , but was unsuccessful . 
 On 1 August 1915 she , and all the other pre @-@ dreadnoughts , were transferred to the 2nd Battleship Brigade , after the dreadnought Imperatritsa Mariya had entered service . On 1 October the new dreadnought provided cover while Ioann Zlatoust and Pantelimon bombarded Zonguldak and Evstafi shelled the nearby town of Kozlu . Both Evstafi @-@ class ships participated in the second bombardment of Varna in May 1916 . 
 Evstafi and Ioann Zlatoust were reduced to reserve in March 1918 in Sevastopol . Immobile , they were captured there by the Germans in May 1918 and Evstafi was subsequently used by them as an accommodation hulk . Both ships were handed over to the Allies the following December . The British wrecked both ships ' engines on 22 – 24 April 1919 when they left the Crimea to prevent the advancing Bolsheviks from using them against the White Russians . They were captured by both sides during the Russian Civil War , but were abandoned by the White Russians when they evacuated the Crimea in November 1920 . Evstafi was renamed <unk> ( Revolution ) on 6 July 1921 . The ships were scrapped in 1922 – 23 , although they were not removed from the Navy List until 21 November 1925 . 
 = Lynde Point Light = 
 The Lynde Point Light or Lynde Point Lighthouse , also known as Saybrook Inner Lighthouse , is a lighthouse in Connecticut , United States , on the west side of the mouth of the Connecticut River on the Long Island Sound , Old Saybrook , Connecticut . The first light was a 35 feet ( 11 m ) wooden tower constructed by Abisha Woodward for $ 2 @,@ 200 and it was completed in 1803 . A new lighthouse was eventually needed and a total of $ 7 @,@ 500 was appropriated on July 7 , 1838 . Jonathan Scranton , Volney Pierce , and John Wilcox were contracted to build the new 65 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) octagonal brownstone tower . It was constructed in 1838 and lit in 1839 . The lighthouse was renovated in 1867 and had its keeper 's house from 1833 replaced in 1858 with a Gothic Revival gambrel @-@ roofed wood @-@ frame house . In 1966 , the house was torn down and replaced by a duplex house . The original ten lamps were replaced in 1852 with a fourth @-@ order Fresnel lens , and with a fifth @-@ order Fresnel lens in 1890 . Lynde Point Lighthouse used whale oil until 1879 when it switched to kerosene . It was electrified in 1955 and fully automated by the United States Coast Guard in 1978 . In 1990 , it was added to the National Register of Historic Places and is significant for its " superior stone work in the tapering brownstone walls " . 
 = = First light = = 
 Out of a need for a lighthouse to mark the Old Saybrook harbor , the government paid $ 225 for William Lynde 's land at its entrance to erect a light . Abisha Woodward was contracted to build a 35 feet ( 11 m ) wooden tower for $ 2 @,@ 200 and it was completed in 1803 . Due to erosion threatening the foundation of the lighthouse , a seawall was constructed in 1829 , and it was reinforced and widened in 1831 . Also constructed was a six @-@ room frame structure to serve as the keeper 's quarters . The keeper 's building was replaced in 1933 . The light was criticized by many sailors for being too short to be seen at an effective distance , a problem exacerbated by a local fog from the marshland that obscured the light . A petition was made to have the tower raised 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) , but it was deemed a replacement would be better . 
 = = Current light = = 
 The United States Congress appropriated funds for the tower 's replacement by 1832 . On July 7 , 1838 , Congress appropriated an additional $ 2 @,@ 500 @.@ 00 to add to the other $ 5 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 appropriated for the new lighthouse . The contract for the lighthouse was awarded to Jonathan Scranton , Volney Pierce , and John Wilcox of Madison , Connecticut , on August 18 , 1838 . A new 65 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) octagonal brownstone tower was constructed in 1838 and lit in 1839 . The walls of the base of the light are 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) thick , tapering to 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) at the top . The lighthouse is painted white and has six windows , all facing the water . The lighthouse has been described as being " similar to the masonry towers built earlier , ( New London Harbor Light , New Haven Harbor ( Five Mile Point ) Light , and Faulkner 's Island Light ) , but Lynde Point is considered to represent the finest work of the three " . The wooden staircase was likely replaced in an 1868 renovation of the light . In 1886 , the Saybrook Breakwater Light was built . Lynde Point then became commonly known as the " Saybrook Inner Light " and Saybrook Breakwater became known as the " Saybrook Outer Light " . 
 The keeper 's house from 1833 had a frame kitchen addition that connected to the lighthouse , but it was replaced in 1858 with a Gothic Revival gambrel @-@ roofed wood @-@ frame house . In 1966 , the house was torn down and replaced by a duplex house . In 1852 , a fourth @-@ order Fresnel lens from <unk> and <unk> replaced the original ten lamps and 9 @-@ inch ( 230 mm ) reflectors . In 1890 , a fifth @-@ order Fresnel lens , which is still in the tower today , was installed . An appropriation of $ 800 was made for a fog bell in 1850 , and it was installed in 1854 at a cost of $ 1000 . Two years later the machinery to automatically strike the fog bell was completed . The 1867 renovation saw the addition of a fog siren , but it was removed and replaced with the fog bell in 1874 and a new fog bell was later installed in 1883 . Lynde Point Lighthouse used whale oil until 1879 when it switched to kerosene , it was electrified in 1955 and fully automated by the United States Coast Guard in 1978 . 
 = = Importance = = 
 In 1990 , it was added to the National Register of Historic Places . Templeton writes , " Lynde Point exhibits superior stone work in the tapering brownstone walls . Of the three early masonry <unk> in the nominated group , Lynde Point is the latest and its construction is the best documented : two advertisements for construction proposals survive , containing the government 's specifications , and the construction contract as well . Lynde Point also is significant as part of the federal government 's early efforts to improve aids to navigation in Long Island Sound , when the mouths of important harbors and rivers were among the first sites chosen for lighthouse appropriations . " Lynde Point is an active aid to navigation and is not open to the public . The Lynde Point Light was used in the 2005 horror movie Predator Island . 
 = = List of keepers = = 
 This list includes known keepers , but excludes assistants and non @-@ officers of the Coast Guard . 
 = Liudhard medalet = 
 The Liudhard medalet is a gold Anglo @-@ Saxon coin or small medal found some time before 1844 near St Martin 's Church in Canterbury , England . It was part of the Canterbury @-@ St Martin 's hoard of six items . The coin , along with other items found with it , now resides in the World Museum Liverpool . Although some scholarly debate exists on whether or not all the items in the hoard were from the same grave , most historians who have studied the object conclude that they were buried together as a necklace in a 6th @-@ century woman 's grave . The coin is set in a mount so that it could be worn as jewellery , and has an inscription on the obverse or front surrounding a robed figure . The inscription refers to Liudhard , a bishop who accompanied Bertha to England when she married Æthelberht the king of Kent . The reverse side of the coin has a double @-@ barred cross , or patriarchal cross , with more lettering . 
 The coin was probably struck at Canterbury in the late 6th century , most likely between 578 and 589 . Although it could have been used as a coin , it was more likely made as a medallion to proclaim the wearer 's conversion to Christianity . The coin is the oldest surviving example of Anglo @-@ Saxon coinage . The design of the figured side has some affinities with Merovingian and Visigothic coins , but the side with the cross has few known predecessors in coinage , and is the first northern European depiction of a patriarchal cross in any medium . 
 = = Discovery and ownership = = 
 The medalet was first revealed to the public on 25 April 1844 by Charles Roach Smith , who presented it along with other coins found with it , to a meeting of the Numismatic Society . The medalet , along with two other similar items , had been acquired by W. H. Rolfe , who later acquired five other items from the same hoard , and all eight items were published in the Society 's Numismatic Chronicle in 1845 . About the origins and circumstances of the finding of the hoard , Smith only knew that they had been found " a few years since " , and that all of the items had been found together . There may have been further items that were found but not preserved . All of the items were found in the churchyard of St Martin 's in the east of Canterbury according to Rolfe , although the first published account stated that it was found next door at St Augustine 's Abbey instead of St Martin 's . 
 The whole collection , including the medalet , passed from Rolfe 's collection to the collection of Joseph Mayer , and then passed to the Rolfe @-@ Mayer collection in the City of Liverpool Public Museums . This now forms part of the World Museum Liverpool . 
 S. C. Hawkes argues that the eight items in the hoard were found in different graves , basing this on x @-@ ray and fluorescent analysis of the coins . However , the historian Philip Grierson thought that the possibility of two graves from different time periods both containing coins of the same period was so small as to make the likelihood of the hoard coming from two graves slim . 
 The medalet is part of the only late @-@ 6th or early @-@ 7th century find of gold jewellery in a grave in a churchyard . All of the coins in the hoard were probably part of a necklace that was buried in a woman 's grave . The medalet itself is the earliest surviving Anglo @-@ Saxon coin . 
 = = Description = = 
 The medalet itself is a gold coin , set in a loop mount so that it could be worn as jewellery . On the obverse side is a bust of a man wearing a diadem and a robe , with a border of dots around the edge . Written on this side is the legend " <unk> · <unk> · DV ~ · EPS " . The inscription runs backwards from right to left . The letters are also inscribed backwards . Both the initial " L " and terminal " S " of " <unk> " ( Latin for the name " Liudhard " ) are to some degree shifted sideways on their axes , perhaps to conveniently demarcate between words . The second grouping , " EPS " ( also with identical sideways terminal " S " ) is a standard abbreviation for the ecclesiastical Latin word , " <unk> , " which means " bishop . " 
 On the reverse side of the coin appears a patriarchal cross set on a base with two pendants descending from the upper arm of the cross . A circle and two half @-@ circles intersect the cross . Above the cross , upside down , are the letters " AA " . The cross is flanked by two inscriptions , each one reading " <unk> " . Under the cross are the letters " <unk> " . The whole medalet weighs 1 @.@ 57 grams ( 0 @.@ 055 oz ) . 
 Smith felt that the legend on the obverse named a 6th @-@ century bishop of Autun , but D. B. Haigh as well as C. H. V. Sutherland , Arthur Evans , and G. C. Brooke all felt that it referred to Liudhard , a Frankish bishop who accompanied the Frankish princess Bertha to Kent in the late 6th century when the Christian Bertha married the then pagan King Æthelberht of Kent . Liudhard died probably in the late 590s . 
 = = Origins and similarities to other coins = = 
 The coin that formed the base of the medalet was most likely minted in England , probably at Canterbury . Evans felt that it was produced by a Frankish member of Liudhard 's household , but Grierson was less sure of it being produced by a Frank . Both , however , concluded that it was not really meant to be used as money , but was rather struck for use as a medallion showing conversion to Christianity . The historian Margaret Deanesly argued that it was made at Canterbury , by a native Jutish artisan . Given the dates of Æthelberht 's reign , it appears likely that the coin was struck between 578 and 589 . The loop for suspension is a feature of bracteates , pagan Germanic quasi @-@ coins apparently made as amulets or jewellery , and often featuring a king . However bracteates are only stamped on one side . 
 The obverse is similar to coins from Merovingian France , especially from the southern parts , as well as showing influences from Visigothic Spain . The reverse side , however , has no known predecessors in Merovingian or Visigothic coinage . Although by the late 6th century , Merovingian and Visigothic kings were putting their names on their coins , no surviving coins from either kingdom name a bishop . The design of the figure is derived from Byzantine imperial coins , and the cross itself is large and closely resembles an altar cross . 
 The patriarchal , or double @-@ barred cross had become a common symbol for the True Cross by the time of the striking of the medalet . The historian Martin Werner argues that the form of the cross on the reverse , with the pendants , is set to resemble the crux gemmata , or jeweled cross , set up in the 4th or 5th century at what was believed to be the site of Golgotha inside the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem . Werner further speculates that the base of the cross on the medalet is meant to symbolize the hill at Golgotha . The circle crossing over the cross on the reverse is an early form of a cross that later appears in conjunction with the <unk> or " empty throne " motif in Byzantine art . 
 The medalet is the first northern European artistic work to display a patriarchal cross , and it is also the first securely datable item to use the circle crossing a cross . 
 = Hurricane Karen ( 2001 ) = 
 Hurricane Karen was a hurricane of non @-@ tropical origin that formed in October of the 2001 Atlantic hurricane season . It developed out of the interaction between a cold front and an upper level trough on October 10 located to the south of Bermuda , and quickly strengthened as an extratropical storm . The storm passed near Bermuda on October 12 , producing hurricane @-@ force winds on the island . It then organized , becoming a subtropical cyclone on the 12th and a tropical cyclone on the 13th . Karen strengthened to reach 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) winds as a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , and after weakening over cooler waters , it made landfall on Nova Scotia as a tropical storm . It quickly became extratropical . 
 On Bermuda , winds from the precursor extratropical storm produced moderate damage , primarily to power lines and marine interests . Over 2 / 3 of the island 's power subscribers were left without power during the worst of the storm , and several boats sank or ran aground from the high winds . Damage on Bermuda totaled to over $ 1 @.@ 4 million ( 2001 USD ; $ 1 @.@ 7 million 2008 USD ) . In Atlantic Canada , Tropical Storm Karen produced light winds and rain , but caused minimal damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A cold front stalled a couple hundred miles southeast of Bermuda on October 10 . During that day , a strong upper @-@ level trough moved southeastward off the southeast coast of the United States . Due to several factors , including upward motion and strong diffluence — the rate at which a fluid moves — the area became baroclinically unstable . This caused the interaction between the trough and the front to develop into an extratropical low about 345 miles ( 555 km ) southeast of Bermuda on October 11 . The low moved quickly northward , then northwestward , strengthening quickly due to the instability of the atmosphere . Late on October 11 , the system slowed , and the upper @-@ level circulation became aligned with the low @-@ level circulation . The extratropical storm began to develop tropical characteristics late on October 11 , including surface temperatures warmer than the surrounding environment , and vertical wind characteristics of a tropical cyclone . Based on its organization , the system developed into Subtropical Storm One early on October 12 while located about 35 miles ( 55 km ) south of Bermuda . 
 While passing to the south of Bermuda , the subtropical storm maintained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , with wind gusts on the island surpassing 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . After becoming dissociated from the Westerlies , the system turned northward , and began to develop convection over the center . In addition , the frontal characteristics of the subtropical storm continually weakened . On October 13 , based on an Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit observation that stated that a warm core was present throughout the system , the National Hurricane Center designated the system as a tropical storm , and gave it the name Karen . At this point , Karen was located 200 miles ( 320 km ) north of Bermuda . Karen slowly strengthened over the warm waters of the Gulf Stream , and the storm intensified to a hurricane later on October 13 . Convection continued to develop , and organized into a ring around the eye as Karen reached its peak intensity of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) on October 14 while located about 400 miles ( 640 km ) south of Halifax , Nova Scotia . 
 Karen quickly weakened as it moved over cooler waters , and late on October 14 it degenerated back into a tropical storm as it accelerated northward . Convection gradually decreased , and Karen made landfall on southwestern Nova Scotia with winds of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) on October 15 . Karen retained its tropical characteristics during and after making landfall , based on a research flight out of Halifax intended to study the early stages of extratropical transition . The flight reported arced bands and a warm @-@ core system transitioning into a more typical mid @-@ latitude system . Under the influence of a mid @-@ latitude system , the storm turned sharply to the northeast , and after losing the remaining of its convection it became extratropical shortly after landfall . Continuing northward , the remnant low quickly weakened , and dissipated as it was absorbed by a larger extratropical storm over the Gulf of Saint Lawrence . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On October 10 , as the precursor extratropical storm was forming , the Bermuda Weather Service issued a gale and later a storm warning for the island , expecting winds of 50 to 60 mph ( 60 to 95 km / h ) . Several radio interviews and television stations issued information on the expected storm . Many residents believed they were insufficiently warned , though it is acknowledged that emergency managers and citizens pay less attention to gale warnings then they do for tropical cyclone warnings . On October 12 , as the storm was passing to the south of the island , officials closed all schools and government offices . Many private businesses closed as well . 
 At the time of Karen 's landfall , gale warnings were issued for coastal waters , while inland wind warnings were in effect for Cape Breton . In addition , heavy rainfall warnings were issued for large portions of Nova Scotia including Halifax , southeastern New Brunswick , Fundy National Park , and Prince Edward Island . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Bermuda = = = 
 While passing to the south of the island , the tight pressure gradient between the precursor extratropical storm and high pressures resulted in strong winds on the island , including sustained winds of hurricane status at Fort George . Gusts on the island officially peaked at 100 mph ( 161 km / h ) at Devonshire . A cruise ship anchored at harbor reported a wind gust of 118 mph ( 190 km / h ) , though it could have been caused by a downdraft . The storm also dropped moderate rainfall of just over 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , resulting in minor flooding of streets . Because the storm developed quickly , wave @-@ induced beach erosion was minor . 
 The strong winds left considerable tree and powerline damage . At the worst of the storm , 23 @,@ 000 of the island 's 30 @,@ 000 power subscribers were without electricity . Damage to power lines totaled to $ 385 @,@ 000 ( 2001 USD , $ 468 @,@ 700 2008 USD ) . The strong winds also caused considerable damage to vegetation . Three cruise ships weathered the storm at Saint George Harbour , where the powerful winds ripped out a post and snapped a mooring line , leaving a ship drifting in the harbor . One crew member was minorly injured . Over a dozen boats broke free from their moorings , resulting in them running aground or sinking . In all , 87 boats were affected to some degree , with marine damage totaling to about $ 665 @,@ 000 ( 2001 USD , $ 809 @,@ 600 2008 USD ) . The winds also caused minor damage to 175 properties on the island , primarily to houses . Damage to houses amounted to about $ 425 @,@ 000 ( 2001 USD , $ 517 @,@ 400 2008 USD ) . Overall damage was moderate , totaling to about $ 1 @.@ 4 million ( 2001 USD , $ 1 @.@ 7 million 2008 USD ) . No fatalities were reported , though a few storm @-@ related injuries occurred . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 Tropical Storm Karen produced light to moderate winds across Atlantic Canada , peaking at 47 mph ( 76 km / h ) with a gust of 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) in Cape George in Antigonish County , Nova Scotia , along with a 26 mph ( 42 km / h ) report in Charlottetown , Prince Edward Island . Rainbands in the storm dropped light rainfall of up to 1 @.@ 8 inches ( 46 mm ) in Yarmouth , Nova Scotia and 1 @.@ 4 inches ( 35 mm ) in Saint John , New Brunswick , most of which fell in a short amount of time . <unk> to the left side of the transitioning storm , the rainfall was beneficial for the drought @-@ stricken areas of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick . Due to the fast @-@ moving nature of the storm , though , most areas reported only around half an inch of rain . A buoy in Halifax Harbour reported wave heights of up to 16 @.@ 7 feet ( 5 @.@ 1 m ) , causing breaking waves at docks white caps along the ocean . Damage in Canada was minor due to the storm , limited to an uprooted tree in New Glasgow , Nova Scotia and several other trees with damaged branches . There were no injuries or fatalities in Canada . 
 = German submarine U @-@ 38 ( 1938 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 38 was a Type IXA U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine that operated during World War II . 
 Her keel was laid down on 15 April 1937 , by DeSchiMAG AG Weser of Bremen as yard number 943 . She was launched on 9 August 1938 and commissioned on 24 October with Kapitänleutnant Heinrich Liebe in command . 
 U @-@ 38 conducted eleven patrols , as part of several flotillas . During her career , she sank over 30 enemy vessels and damaged a further one . U @-@ 38 ranks as one of the most successful U @-@ boats in World War II . She was scuttled west of Wesermünde ( modern Bremerhaven ) on 5 May 1945 . Throughout the war , the U @-@ Boat suffered no losses among her crew . 
 = = Design = = 
 As one of the eight original German Type IX submarines , later designated IXA , U @-@ 38 had a displacement of 1 @,@ 032 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 016 long tons ) when at the surface and 1 @,@ 153 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 135 long tons ) while submerged . The U @-@ boat had a total length of 76 @.@ 50 m ( 251 ft ) , a pressure hull length of 58 @.@ 75 m ( 192 ft 9 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 51 m ( 21 ft 4 in ) , a height of 9 @.@ 40 m ( 30 ft 10 in ) , and a draught of 4 @.@ 70 m ( 15 ft 5 in ) . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40 / 46 supercharged four @-@ stroke , nine @-@ cylinder diesel engines producing a total of 4 @,@ 400 metric horsepower ( 3 @,@ 240 kW ; 4 @,@ 340 shp ) for use while surfaced , two Siemens @-@ Schuckert 2 GU 345 / 34 double @-@ acting electric motors producing a total of 1 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 740 kW ; 990 shp ) for use while submerged . She had two shafts and two 1 @.@ 92 m ( 6 ft ) propellers . The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . 
 The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 18 @.@ 2 knots ( 33 @.@ 7 km / h ; 20 @.@ 9 mph ) and a maximum submerged speed of 7 @.@ 7 knots ( 14 @.@ 3 km / h ; 8 @.@ 9 mph ) . When submerged , the boat could operate for 65 – 78 nautical miles ( 120 – 144 km ; 75 – 90 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) ; when surfaced , she could travel 10 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 400 km ; 12 @,@ 100 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . U @-@ 38 was fitted with six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four fitted at the bow and two at the stern ) , 22 torpedoes , one 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) SK C / 32 naval gun , 180 rounds , and a 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) as well as a 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . The boat had a complement of forty @-@ eight . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = 1st Patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 38 left the port of Wilhelmshaven on 19 August 1939 . The boat operated off the coast of Lisbon , returning to port on 18 September . During this four @-@ week period , she sank two ships . 
 On 5 September 1939 U @-@ 38 stopped the French ship <unk> , examined her papers and released her . <unk> broadcast the event , warning others of the U @-@ boat . For this , Liebe was reprimanded . 
 The British steam freighter SS Manaar was sunk on 6 September 1939 . U @-@ 38 opened fire on the freighter and she returned fire . This was the first time that a merchantman fired at a U @-@ boat . U @-@ 38 sank Manaar with torpedoes . As Manaar had fired at him , Liebe did not assist the survivors . Radio Officer James Turner remained at his post until the last moment . As he was leaving he found two <unk> , one badly injured . Turner rescued both men while under continuous fire from U @-@ 38 , for this he was awarded the Empire Gallantry Medal . 
 On 11 September 1939 , while flying the Irish tricolour , Inverliffey was shelled and sunk . In spite of Captain William Trowsdale 's protestation that they were Irish , Liebe said that they " were sorry " but they would sink Inverliffey as she was carrying contraband petrol to England . The crew took to the lifeboats . Inverliffey burned fiercely , endangering the lifeboats . At risk to herself , the German submarine approached , threw lines to the lifeboats and towed them to safety . As Captain Trowsdale 's lifeboat was damaged , the occupants were allowed to board the U @-@ boat . The captain did not have a lifebelt , so he was given one . U @-@ 38 stopped the American tanker R.G. Stewart and put Inverliffey 's crew on board . Just two days earlier , Inver tankers transferred its ships from the Irish to the British registry . 
 = = = 2nd Patrol = = = 
 After nearly two months in port , U @-@ 38 left Wilhelmshaven , again with Heinrich Liebe in command , on 12 November 1939 . This second patrol was to see the boat operate in the waters northwest of Norway . 
 On 17 November 1939 , Naval High Command ( SKL ) issued orders for U @-@ 38 and U @-@ 36 to scout the location for Basis Nord , a secret German naval base to be used for raids on allied shipping which was located off the Kola Peninsula and provided by the Soviet Union . The mission required coded messages to be flashed to Soviet naval vessels patrolling the area preceding a Soviet escort to the prospective base location . 
 U @-@ 36 never left the Norwegian Sea and was sunk by the British submarine HMS Salmon . U @-@ 38 rounded the North Cape uneventfully and arrived in <unk> Bay by mid @-@ afternoon on 26 November . Running silently into the bay , U @-@ 38 had to avoid being spotted by merchant vessels in order to help maintain the Soviet Union 's attempted appearance of neutrality at that time . U @-@ 38 's captain commented that , while in the area of the North Cape and the Kola Peninsula , he had observed thirty to forty targets and regrettably had been " harmless to [ all ] of them . " 
 After completing the clandestine reconnaissance mission , U @-@ 38 returned to raiding duties and sank three ships , two British and one Greek . The British steam freighter SS Thomas Walton was sunk on 7 December . The Greek steam freighter SS <unk> was destroyed on 11 December , as was the British steam freighter Deptford on 13 December . After an operational period of four and a half weeks , U @-@ 38 returned to Wilhelmshaven on 16 December . 
 = = = 3rd Patrol = = = 
 Once again , U @-@ 38 would spend considerable time in port , prior to sailing on 26 February 1940 , for operations in the Western Approaches . 
 U @-@ 38 sank six ships . First sent to the bottom was the neutral Irish steam trawler ST Leukos on 9 March , with a single shell at point @-@ blank range off Tory Island , all 11 crew were lost . The Leukos was fishing in the company of British trawlers ; it has been speculated that she positioned herself between the surfacing U @-@ boat and the fleeing British in the belief that her neutral markings would protect her . This event was followed by the sinking of the Danish motor freighters SS Argentina on 17 March and SS <unk> and SS Christiansborg on 21 March . The Norwegian motor freighter MV <unk> was sunk on 26 March . The sixth and final ship sunk during this third patrol was the Finnish steam freighter SS Signe on 2 April . After nearly six weeks on the high seas , U @-@ 38 returned to Wilhelmshaven on 5 April 1940 . 
 = = = 4th Patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 38 left her home port of Wilhelmshaven with Heinrich Liebe in command on 8 April 1940 . She would sweep the waters off Norway , supporting the occupation of that country by Nazi troops . During this patrol , U @-@ 38 reported problems with her torpedoes , after HMS Effingham was fired upon with no result . U @-@ 38 would return to port on 27 April . 
 There were two naval battles of Narvik on 10 and 13 April 1940 . U @-@ 38 and U @-@ 65 were positioned at the entrance to the fjord . When the Royal Navy arrived , U @-@ 38 fired at HMS Valiant and at HMS Southampton missing both . In the second battle , U @-@ 38 fired at Effingham , but the torpedoes malfunctioned , ( exploding prematurely ) . 
 = = = 5th Patrol = = = 
 For her fifth patrol , U @-@ 38 would again depart from Wilhelmshaven with Heinrich Liebe in command on 6 June 1940 . She was to patrol the waters off southern Ireland . During this operation , Liebe would hit six ships , two of which were sailing in convoy at the time . On 14 June , U @-@ 38 sank the Greek steam freighter SS Mount <unk> . The next day , U @-@ 38 sank two ships , both sailing as part of Convoy HX @-@ 47 , sailing from Halifax to England . First sunk was the Canadian steam freighter SS Erik Boye , followed by the Norwegian motor tanker MV Italia . Five days later , on 20 June , the Swedish steam freighter SS Tilia <unk> was torpedoed and sunk . The Belgian steam freighter SS Luxembourg was destroyed on 21 June , followed by the Greek steam freighter SS <unk> the following day . After three weeks at sea , U @-@ 38 returned to Wilhelmshaven on 2 July . 
 During this patrol , U @-@ 38 was able to land Walter Simon , a Nazi agent , at Dingle Bay in Ireland on 12 June . Not realising that the passenger services of the Tralee and Dingle Light Railway had been closed fourteen months earlier , he asked when the next train to Dublin was . He was arrested and interned in the Curragh Camp for the duration of the war . 
 = = = 6th Patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 38 would depart Wilhelmshaven for the last time on 1 August 1940 , again with Heinrich Liebe in command . On this month @-@ long patrol off the western coast of Ireland , U @-@ 38 would hit and sink three ships , all of which were in convoy at the time of attack . On 7 August the Egyptian liner SS Mohamed Ali El @-@ Kebir was sunk while traveling with HX @-@ 61 , from Halifax to Gibraltar , 320 died . The British steam freighter SS Llanfair was hit and sunk , travelling as part of SL @-@ 41 from Sierra Leone to England . The third and final ship hit on the sixth patrol of U @-@ 38 was the British steam freighter SS Har Zion , while travelling with the Convoy OB @-@ 225 , from Liverpool to the United States . After four weeks at sea Liebe returned U @-@ 38 to her new home port of Lorient in France on 3 September 1940 . 
 = = = 7th Patrol = = = 
 For her first patrol from Lorient and her seventh overall , U @-@ 38 would again be under the command of Heinrich Liebe . She departed on 25 September , for the Northwest Approaches . She would attack five ships on this patrol , sinking four of them . On 1 October , the British motor freighter MV Highland Patriot was torpedoed . After two weeks of no victories , U @-@ 38 was successful against the Greek steam freighter SS <unk> on 17 October , sailing as part of Convoy SC 7 , from Sydney , Nova Scotia to England . The following day , the British steam freighter SS <unk> was damaged , but not sunk , while traveling with the SC @-@ 7 convoy from Sydney to Grimsby , England . On 19 October , two ships were hit , both sailing as part of the HX 79 convoy : the Dutch SS <unk> and the British steam freighter SS Matheran . Following these victories , U @-@ 38 returned to Lorient on 24 October 1940 . 
 = = = 8th Patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 38 would depart Lorient with Liebe in command once again on 18 December 1940 . The eighth war patrol of her career would involve operations again in the Northwest Approaches . During this patrol , the submarine would hit and sink two ships . On 27 December , U @-@ 38 destroyed the British ship SS <unk> , and on 31 December , she sank the Swedish motor freighter SS Valparaiso , sailing as part of the HX @-@ 97 convoy from Halifax to Glasgow . U @-@ 38 returned to port on 22 January 1941 . 
 = = = 9th Patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 38 would spend two and a half months in port , before leaving for operations off the west coast of Africa on 9 April 1941 . This would prove to be her most successful patrol , with the sinking of eight ships . On 4 May , the Swedish steam freighter SS Japan was torpedoed while traveling with Convoy OB @-@ 310 from England to the United States . The following day , the British motor freighter MV Queen Maud was hit and sunk . On 23 May , the Dutch motor freighter SS Berhala was sunk while traveling with the Convoy OB 318 , from England to America . The British steam freighter SS Vulcain was torpedoed and sunk on 24 May . Six days later , on 29 May , the British steam freighter SS Tabaristan was another victim . The following day the destruction continued , the British steam freighter SS Empire Protector was sent to the bottom , as was the Norwegian steam freighter SS <unk> on the 31st . The eighth and final ship sunk during U @-@ 38 's eighth patrol was the British cargo steamship SS Kingston Hill on 8 June . The boat then returned to Lorient on 29 June 1941 , after spending eleven and a half weeks at sea . 
 = = = 10th Patrol = = = 
 For the first time in her career , U @-@ 38 would head to sea with a new commander , Korvettenkapitän Heinrich Schuch . She left on 6 August , for a five @-@ week patrol in the North Atlantic . During this time one ship was hit , the Panamanian steam freighter SS <unk> on 18 August . U @-@ 38 returned to Lorient on 14 September 1941 . 
 = = = 11th and 12th Patrols = = = 
 U @-@ 38 would depart from Lorient for the last time on 15 October , again with Heinrich Schuch in command . Her eleventh patrol was to take place in the North Atlantic . However , during a period of five weeks , not a single ship was hit . U @-@ 38 traveled to the U @-@ boat base in Bergen , Norway on 21 November . She would later depart Bergen on the 23rd and arrive in Stettin on 29 November . 
 = = = Life after active duty = = = 
 From December 1941 until November 1943 , U @-@ 38 was used as a training boat in the 24th and 21st U @-@ boat Flotillas . She was then used as a testing boat , until she was scuttled by her crew on 5 May 1945 . 
 = = = Wolfpacks = = = 
 U @-@ 38 took part in five wolfpacks , namely . 
 Prien ( 12 – 17 June 1940 ) 
 Grönland ( 10 – 27 August 1941 ) 
 Markgraf ( 27 August – 3 September 1941 ) 
 <unk> ( 20 October – 1 November 1941 ) 
 <unk> ( 1 – 11 November 1941 ) 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 During her service in the Kriegsmarine , U @-@ 38 sank 35 commercial ships for 188 @,@ 967 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and damaged another of 3 @,@ 670 GRT . 
 = Give Up = 
 Give Up is the first and only studio album by indie pop band The Postal Service , released on February 19 , 2003 through Sub Pop Records . 
 The band began as a side project between electronic music artist Jimmy Tamborello and Death Cab for Cutie 's vocalist Ben Gibbard . The two had previously worked together for a track on <unk> 's album Life Is Full of Possibilities . 
 The Postal Service 's only full @-@ length release , Give Up was the second Sub Pop Records release to receive platinum certification , their best selling album since Nirvana 's Bleach . The album peaked at # 114 on the U.S. Billboard 200 album chart in its initial release ; the 2013 tenth @-@ anniversary reissue of the album peaked at # 45 in April 2013 . As of January 2013 , Give Up had sold 1 @.@ 07 million copies . The album was generally well received , and critics commented on its throwbacks to the eighties new wave genre . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 The Postal Service 's two members – Ben Gibbard of Death Cab for Cutie and electronic music artist Jimmy Tamborello – had previously collaborated on " ( This Is ) The Dream of Evan and Chan " before deciding to record a full @-@ length album together . The two worked on the album separately ; in December 2001 , Tamborello sent a CD @-@ R of electronic music to Gibbard , who added melodies and wrote lyrics . He then added drums , guitar and keyboards at Death Cab for Cutie guitarist Chris Walla 's recording studio and sent the CD back to Tamborello . This process of mailing each other their work on the album continued ; after ten months and two trips by Gibbard to Los Angeles to record vocals , the album was completed . The group called themselves " The Postal Service " because of this method of trading ideas . Rilo Kiley 's Jenny Lewis provided backup vocals after being cold called by Gibbard , who knew her when Rilo Kiley was on the same label as Death Cab for Cutie . 
 Give Up primarily deals with themes of love , as well as fame , history , and friendship . " Clark Gable " is about Gibbard making home movies with an ex and " Nothing Better " is a duet between a couple about to break up . Allmusic 's Heather Phares compared " Nothing Better " to The Human League 's " Don 't You Want Me ? " and Gibbard later confirmed that " Don 't You Want Me ? " was the inspiration for the song . Gibbard said that " The District Sleeps Alone Tonight " , " Brand New Colony " and " This Place Is a Prison " were the only songs that bordered on autobiographical . He went on to say that " Such Great Heights " was the only song he had ever written that was positive about love . 
 Critics compared it to the eighties synthpop and new wave genres . Pitchfork Media 's Matt LeMay and Phares both commented on the contrasts between the " cool , clean synths " and Gibbard 's vocal melodies . Phares went on to liken " This Place Is a Prison " to Björk 's recent works . Death Cab for Cutie had previously covered Björk 's " All Is Full of Love " on their The Stability EP . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Give Up was released February 19 , 2003 on Sub Pop in the U.S. It was later released in the UK on April 23 , 2003 . As of December 2007 , it had sold over 900 @,@ 000 copies . It was awarded a platinum certification on October 4 , 2012 , the second Sub Pop record to do so . The album led to three singles ; " The District Sleeps Alone Tonight " , " Such Great Heights " and " We Will Become Silhouettes " , of which only " We Will Become Silhouettes " charted , reaching 82 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 The band toured the U.S. from April to August 2003 , including Jenny Lewis in the line @-@ up for all but one of the performances . Lewis provided vocals as well as guitar and keyboards . In the sole performance that Lewis missed , a festival in Spain , friend Joan Hiller sang and Chris Walla played her guitar and keyboard parts . Death Cab for Cutie bassist Nick Harmer was in charge of the tour 's visuals . Tamborello later said in an interview that Gibbard had been nervous about touring , as the audience may have been bored by what they saw as " a guy with a computer onstage " . This was partly the motivation for using visual effects such as videos and lights , which included small films for each song . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 In January 2006 , Apple released an advertisement for the iMac that was said to be very similar to The Postal Service 's video for " Such Great Heights " . Some created videos that played the advertisement and the music video side by side to make the resemblance clear . It was later revealed that the advertisement had been created by the filmmakers who had made the music video . Ben Gibbard said on the band 's website : 
 It has recently come to our attention that Apple Computers ' new television commercial for the Intel chip features a shot @-@ for @-@ shot recreation of our video for ' Such Great Heights ' made by the same filmmakers responsible for the original . We did not approve this commercialization and are extremely disappointed with both parties that this was executed without our consultation or consent . 
 The band did not take legal action , but Tamborello later stated in an interview that they " got a little bit of compensation from them for it " in the form of " attention from iTunes and stuff like that " . 
 The United States Postal Service served the band with a cease and desist letter citing tarnishing and dilution of their trademark . The band initially considered renaming themselves , but eventually came to a settlement that involved the band playing at a conference and the sale of the album in the USPS online store . Tamborello later said of their conference performance : 
 It was really weird . When we found out we had to do it , it was really depressing , and it kind of freaked me out . I already don 't like flying , and flying to play a show for people who probably aren 't going to care – we only played two songs – it just seemed like a crazy trip . But then when we did it , and it ended up being kind of fun . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Give Up was generally well @-@ received by music critics . It holds a score of 79 out of 100 on review aggregate site Metacritic , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Matt LeMay of Pitchfork Media called the album " a pretty damned strong record , and one with enough transcendent moments to forgive it its few substandard tracks and ungodly lyrical blunders " . Will Hermes of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " Ben Gibbard radiates claustrophobia , so the shut @-@ in synth @-@ pop of this side project fits him like a leotard " , calling Give Up " the near @-@ perfect pop record that 's eluded his main group . " The Village Voice 's Robert Christgau praised its " staying power " and felt that " Gibbard 's delicate voice matches the subtle electro arrangements far more precisely than it does the folky guitars of his real group " . 
 Heather Phares of AllMusic felt that while Give Up did not measure up to either Gibbard or Tamborello 's main projects , it was nonetheless " far more consistent and enjoyable than might be expected . " Michaelangelo Matos of Rolling Stone described the album as " a cuddly little new wave reverie " and wrote that " Tamborello 's delightful pings and whistles fit Gibbard 's whimsy perfectly . " Devon Powers of PopMatters remarked that " like any worthy match , the coming together gives each aspect assets that they 'd be wont to find otherwise " , concluding that the album " integrates the human and the humanoid to give soundtrack to the disconnected , yet earnest escapades of contemporary emotional life . " 
 Online music magazine Pitchfork Media placed Give Up at number 104 on their list of top 200 albums of the 2000s . Rolling Stone ranked the album at number 86 on their list of the 100 Best Albums of the Decade . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by The Postal Service . 
 The vinyl version of Give Up was released on November 9 , 2004 and featured a bonus 12 " of B @-@ sides , covers and remixes , all of which can also be found on the Such Great Heights and The District Sleeps Alone Tonight EPs : 
 In February 2013 , Sub Pop announced that a Tenth Anniversary edition of Give Up would be released , featuring fifteen bonus tracks , including two newly recorded songs . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Benjamin Gibbard – lead vocals , lyrics , guitars ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 9 ) , additional keyboards ( 2 , 7 ) , electric piano ( 8 ) , drums ( 6 , 8 , 9 ) 
 Jimmy Tamborello – programming , accordion ( 8 ) , additional keyboards ( 8 ) , electric drums , production , glitching 
 Chris Walla – piano ( 4 ) , production 
 Jenny Lewis – backing vocals ( 1 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 9 ) 
 Jen Wood – backing vocals ( 2 ) , vocals ( 4 ) 
 = Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology = 
 Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology ( ISMB ) is an annual academic conference on the subjects of bioinformatics and computational biology organised by the International Society for Computational Biology ( ISCB ) . The principal focus of the conference is on the development and application of advanced computational methods for biological problems . The conference has been held every year since 1993 and has grown to become one of the largest and most prestigious meetings in these fields , hosting over 2 @,@ 000 delegates in 2004 . From the first meeting , ISMB has been held in locations worldwide ; since 2007 , meetings have been located in Europe and North America in alternating years . Since 2004 , European meetings have been held jointly with the European Conference on Computational Biology ( ECCB ) . 
 The main ISMB conference is usually held over three days and consists of presentations , poster sessions and keynote talks . Most presentations are given in multiple parallel tracks ; however , keynote talks are presented in a single track and are chosen to reflect outstanding research in bioinformatics . Notable ISMB keynote speakers have included eight Nobel laureates . The recipients of the ISCB Overton Prize and ISCB Accomplishment by a Senior Scientist Award are invited to give keynote talks as part of the programme . The proceedings of the conference are currently published by the journal Bioinformatics . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early meetings = = = 
 The origins of the ISMB conference lie in a workshop for artificial intelligence researchers with an interest in molecular biology held in November 1991 . The workshop was organised by American researcher Lawrence Hunter , then director of the Machine Learning Project at the United States National Institutes of Health 's National Library of Medicine ( NLM ) in Bethesda , Maryland . A subsequent workshop on the same topic held in 1992 , hosted by the NLM and the National Science Foundation , made it clear that a regular international conference for the field was required . Such a conference would be dedicated to molecular biology as a rapidly emerging application of artificial intelligence . Having successfully applied for grants from <unk> , NIH and the Department of Energy Office of Health and Environmental Research , the first ISMB conference was held in July 1993 , at the NLM . The conference was chaired by Hunter , David Searls ( research associate professor at University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine ) and Jude <unk> ( assistant professor of computer science at University of Wisconsin – Madison ) and attracted over 200 attendees from 13 countries , submitting 69 scientific papers . 
 The success of the first conference prompted the announcement of a second ISMB conference at the end of the meeting . ISMB 1994 was initially planned to be held in Seattle . However , a competing meeting forced ISMB to change venues at short notice . The conference was held at Stanford University in August 1994 and was organised by Russ Altman , a research scientist at Stanford University School of Medicine . To emphasise the international aspect of the conference , ISMB 1995 was held at Robinson College , Cambridge . ISMB 1995 also marked a shift in the focus of the conference . ISCB Board member and Director of the Spanish National Bioinformatics Institute Alfonso Valencia has stated that , in 1995 , " the conference changed from a computer science @-@ based conference to a point where everyone realized that , if you want to make progress , there has to be more focus in biology . " 
 = = = Formation of ISCB and expansion = = = 
 ISMB 1997 was held in <unk> , Greece and marked the foundation of the International Society for Computational Biology ( ISCB ) . ISCB was formed with a focus on managing all scientific , organizational and financial aspects of the ISMB conference and to provide a forum for scientists to address the emerging role of computers in the biological sciences . ISCB has assisted in organising the ISMB conference series since 1998 . The period following the formation of ISCB also marked an expansion in the number of ISMB attendees : ISMB 2000 ( held at the University of California , San Diego ) was attended by over 1 @,@ 000 delegates , submitting 141 scientific papers . This meeting was also the last time ISMB would be held at a university , due to size limitations . 
 = = = Partnership with ECCB = = = 
 In 2004 , ISMB was jointly held with the European Conference on Computational Biology for the first time . The conference was also co @-@ located with the Genes , Proteins and Computers conference . This meeting , held in Glasgow , UK , was the largest bioinformatics conference ever held , attended by 2 @,@ 136 delegates , submitting 496 scientific papers . Alfonso Valencia considers ISMB / ECCB 2004 to be an important milestone in the history of ISMB : " it was the first one where the balance between Europe and the States became an important part of the conference . It was here that we established the rules and the ways and the spirit of collaboration between the Americans and the Europeans . " The success of the joint conference paved the way for future European ISMB meetings to be held jointly with ECCB . 
 = = = Recent meetings = = = 
 By the end of 2006 , ISCB was in financial difficulty . Two conferences ( ISMB 2003 , in Brisbane and ISMB 2006 , in Fortaleza ) had drastically reduced numbers of participants due to their location , with a corresponding reduction in income . To allow more delegates to attend , it was decided to limit conference locations to North America and Europe . In January 2007 , ISMB and ECCB agreed to hold joint conferences in Europe every other year , beginning with ISMB / ECCB 2007 . ISMB would be held in North America in the years between joint meetings . As of 2016 , this pattern has been confirmed to continue until at least 2019 . ISMB / ECCB 2007 ( held in Vienna , Austria ) marked the first conference for which ISCB took full responsibility for organising . Vienna became the first city to host ISMB twice with ISMB / ECCB 2011 . This ' return visit ' was an experiment intended to reduce the increasing effort required to find suitable conference venues . Although the return to Vienna was only deemed partially successful due to price increases , Boston ( which hosted ISMB 2010 and 2014 ) is predicted to become a ' safe ' site which ISMB can periodically return to . 
 ISMB celebrated its 20th meeting with ISMB 2012 , held in Long Beach , California . This event attracted around 1 @,@ 600 delegates , submitting 268 scientific papers . Richard H. Lathrop and Lawrence Hunter presented a special keynote presentation , looking back at previous ISMB meetings and attempting to predict where the field of bioinformatics may head in the future . ISMB / ECCB 2013 was held in Berlin , Germany and was attended by around 2 @,@ 000 delegates , submitting 233 scientific papers . 
 = = Format = = 
 = = = Main conference = = = 
 The main ISMB conference is usually held over three days and consists of presentations , poster sessions and keynote talks . 
 Academic papers at ISMB were traditionally presented in a single track . Presentations at ISMB 1994 were split further into three themed days , focusing on protein secondary structure prediction , sequence analysis and AI techniques and biochemical applications , respectively . As attendance at ISMB increased , the single track approach became increasingly unsustainable and two parallel tracks were introduced at ISMB / ECCB 2004 . Further expansion meant that , by ISMB 2012 , over 200 talks were presented in nine parallel tracks including multiple proceedings tracks , a highlights track and a technology track . The introduction of parallel tracks to ISMB was controversial . Christopher Rawlings ( head of Computational and Systems Biology at Rothamsted Research and organiser of ISMB 1995 ) has said : " There were a lot of people who wanted to keep it more strongly in the AI intelligent systems model and have a meeting where everybody would go to everything . But it just grew too big . We just couldn ’ t . " As the number of submitted proceedings papers has increased , the acceptance rate has decreased dramatically , from 75 % in 1994 to 13 % in 2012 . ISMB proceedings from 1993 @-@ 2000 were published by <unk> Press . Since ISMB 2001 , proceedings have been published in the journal Bioinformatics . The number of posters presented at ISMB has also increased dramatically . 25 posters were presented at ISMB 1994 ; at recent ISMB meetings , 500 @-@ 1 @,@ 000 posters have been presented in multiple poster sessions . 
 Keynote talks are presented in a single track and generally attract the largest audience . These presentations are chosen to highlight outstanding research in the field of bioinformatics . Notable ISMB keynote speakers have included eight Nobel laureates : Richard J. Roberts ( keynote speaker in 1994 , 2006 ) , John <unk> ( 1995 ) , Manfred Eigen ( 1999 ) , Gerald Edelman ( 2000 ) , Sydney Brenner ( 2003 ) , Kurt Wüthrich ( 2006 ) , Robert Huber ( 2006 ) and Michael Levitt ( 2015 ) . 
 As of 2012 , ISMB runs on a budget in excess of $ 1.5M and , in terms of proceeds , brings in four times that of the other ISCB conferences ( ISCB @-@ Latin America , ISCB @-@ Africa , ISCB @-@ Asia , Rocky Mountain Bioinformatics Conference , <unk> and the Great Lakes Bioinformatics Conference ) combined . Standard registration fees ( as of 2013 ) are around $ 1 @,@ 000 for academics who are ISCB members ( $ 1 @,@ 350 for non @-@ members ) , with lower rates for students and higher rates for corporate delegates respectively . Discounts are provided for early registration . 
 = = = Satellite events = = = 
 Pre @-@ conference tutorials have played an important role in ISMB since the first conference . Tutorials at ISMB 1994 included introductions to genetic algorithms , neural networks , AI for molecular biologists and molecular biology for computer scientists . Tutorials on computational mass spectrometry @-@ based proteomics and <unk> data access were presented at ISMB / ECCB 2013 . 
 As attendance at ISMB grew in the late 1990s , several satellite meetings and special interest group ( SIG ) meetings formed alongside the main conference . SIG meetings are held over one or two days before the main conference and focus on a specific topic , allowing more detailed discussion than there would be time for in the main conference . Notable SIG meetings include the Bioinformatics Open Source Conference ( <unk> ) , which has been held annually since 2000 and Bio @-@ <unk> , which has been held annually since 1998 . Satellite meetings are usually two days long and are held in conjunction with ISMB . The 12th <unk> conference and the 9th <unk> meeting were held as satellite meetings of ISMB / ECCB 2013 . 
 = = List of conferences = = 
 = Anthony Eden hat = 
 An " Anthony Eden " hat , or simply an " Anthony Eden " , was a silk @-@ brimmed , black felt Homburg of the kind favoured in the 1930s by Anthony Eden , later 1st Earl of Avon ( 1897 – 1977 ) . Eden was a Cabinet Minister in the British National Government , holding the offices of Lord Privy Seal from 1934 – 1935 and Foreign Secretary 1935 to 1938 . He was later Dominions Secretary from 1939 – 1940 , War Secretary in 1940 , Foreign Secretary from 1940 – 1945 and 1951 – 1955 , and Prime Minister 1955 to 1957 . 
 The " Anthony Eden " ( rarely the " Eden " , except in London 's Savile Row ) was not marketed as such and the name was purely informal , but the use of the term was widespread , entering dictionaries and phrase books : for example , it was still listed in the 17th edition of Brewer in 2005 and as recently as 2010 the fashion " guru " Trinny Woodall cited the hat as an example of Eden 's reputation for being well dressed . It came into particular vogue among civil servants and diplomats in Whitehall and , to that extent , rather belied the stereotypical view , that lasted until well after the Second World War , of civil servants as a " bowler hat " brigade . 
 = = The Trilby and the Homburg = = 
 The Homburg had initially been popularised in Britain by King Edward VII who often visited Bad Homburg in Germany . It was essentially a more rigid variant of the trilby which had been fashionable since George du Maurier 's novel of that name was published in 1894 . The writer and broadcaster Rene <unk> recalled in the 1970s that 
 one of things that strikes me most about the Thirties scene when I think about it now is the trilby hat , the universal headgear of the middle classes ... [ s ] <unk> early in the century , it must have been a wild gesture of freedom and informality ... By the thirties it had certainly become degenerate ... It was a hat which had lost all aspiration : it had become a <unk> hat ... " . 
 In such circumstances Eden 's adherence to the Homburg seemed fresh and dashing . He is one of only two British Prime Ministers to have had an item of clothing named after him , the other being the Duke of Wellington ( his boot ) . 
 = = Eden 's style = = 
 Eden became , at 38 , the youngest Foreign Secretary since Pitt the Younger in the late 18th century . As a relatively youthful politician among mostly much older men , he appeared fashionably dressed , even flamboyant . In 1936 the American magazine Time referred to his " pin @-@ stripe trousers , modish short jacket and swank black felt hat " , worn during a diplomatic mission to the League of Nations in Geneva . Many remarked too on Eden 's " film star " appeal , even as late as the 1950s when , as Prime Minister , he retained his youthful good looks . His biographer D. R. Thorpe , who likened the young Eden to a mixture of Sir Galahad ( Eden won the Military Cross in the First World War ) and Beau Brummel ( the Regency dandy in whose London house Eden lived for a time ) , commented on a photograph of him , arriving in Russia by train in hat and fur @-@ lined coat in 1935 , that " it seemed to some as if Tolstoy 's Count Vronsky [ a glamorous character in the novel Anna Karenina ] were alighting at the platform " . 
 In addition to the Homburg , Eden was associated with the mid @-@ 1930s fashion for wearing a white linen waistcoat with a lounge suit , while the poet and novelist Robert Graves likened Eden 's moustache to those of film stars Ronald Colman , William Powell and Clark Gable : " the new moustache was small , short and carefully cut , sometimes slightly curved over the lip at either end , sometimes making a thin straight line " . When Eden visited New York in 1938 he was " deluged with fan mail from teenage college girls to elderly matrons " , while women reporters and society editors " gushed about his classic features , his long dark eyelashes , his limpid eyes , his clear skin , his wavy hair , his charm and magnetism " . In another American city , a display of <unk> in a shop window was adorned with the sign " Welcome to Anthony Eden " . In Amsterdam the hat became known as the " Lord Eden " . 
 = = = " Heads like his " = = = 
 The journalist Malcolm Muggeridge , who was not an admirer of Eden , recalled that , among other qualities , " an elegant appearance and an earnest disposition ... equipped him for dazzling advancement ... An <unk> collar became him . What came to be known as an Anthony Eden hat grew on heads like his " . In June 1938 , four months after Eden 's resignation from Neville Chamberlain 's Cabinet , the Member of Parliament and diarist " Chips " Channon noted that he had " doffed his bowler " to Chamberlain in St. James 's Park and that " everyone wears a bowler now ... [ S ] nce the Eden debacle black <unk> are " out " " . However , in August of that year , the British Minister in Prague , Basil Newton , wore " a black <unk> of the kind made fashionable by Anthony Eden " to greet Lord Runciman on his arrival by train at Wilson station for talks with the Czechoslovak government . In 1939 , writing to a former classmate during a European tour , the future United States President John F. Kennedy remarked that he had not been doing much work , " but have been sporting around in my morning coat , my ' Anthony Eden ' black Homburg and white gardenia " . 
 = = = The " glamour boys " = = = 
 There were those who believed , like Muggeridge , that Eden 's rapid rise through the political hierarchy owed as much to image as to substance . In the period between his resignation and his return to the government on the outbreak of war in 1939 , Eden and his acolytes , who , broadly speaking , favoured a tougher stance against Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini , were often referred to as " the glamour boys " . Harold Nicolson , a member of this group who found Eden 's approach ineffectual , observed that Eden was missing " every boat with exquisite elegance " . 
 Some contemporary observers thought they detected a " prima donna " streak in Eden 's attitude and appearance . For example , the aging Earl of Crawford and Balcarres ( 1871 – 1940 ) , a snob , thought him " vain as a peacock and all the mannerisms of a petit maître [ in the sense of a dandy or fop ] " . One of Eden 's permanent secretaries , P. J. Grigg , who rarely had a good word to say of anyone , dismissed him as " a poor feeble little pansy " . Less prosaically , W. F. Deedes , a Minister in Eden 's Government who , as a journalist , had once commented unfavourably on the colour of Eden 's socks , remarked half a century later that , in the modern vernacular , Eden would have been called a " smoothie " . The philosopher Bertrand Russell thought Eden " not a gentleman " because he dressed " too well " , while a Ministerial <unk> R. A. Butler , alluding to Eden 's parentage and highly strung nature , is said to have remarked , " that 's Anthony – half mad baronet , half beautiful woman " . 
 The writer and critic A. N. Wilson , who observed in 2008 that Eden was " easily the best @-@ looking individual , of either sex , to occupy [ the ] office [ of Prime Minister ] in the twentieth century " , noted also that he was " the only male Prime Minister known to have varnished his fingernails " . However , there is little objective evidence that Eden was unduly vain about his clothes ; he merely dressed well . As for his Homburg , which Deedes noted that he wore at an angle , his official biographer Sir Robert Rhodes James , wrote that " to him it was just a hat " . 
 = = The hat as a trademark = = 
 Even so , the image stuck . The hat became a " trademark " in the public mind , assisting instant recognition , and was one of the most recognisable features of contemporaneous political cartoons . During the general election campaign in 1955 , when Eden was Prime Minister , he was presented with " an Eden hat " when he and Lady Eden ( he became a Knight of the Garter in 1954 ) visited the Lancashire hat @-@ making town of Atherton . At various points of the Suez Crisis the following year , cartoons depicted him in the same hat for which he had become known twenty years earlier . In one by Vicky for the New Statesman , a <unk> but otherwise barely clothed Eden was shown in the biblical Garden of Eden being tempted with an apple by a young Frenchwoman , presumably Marianne , in the guise of Eve . ( The allusion was to French pressure for joint action to reverse the unilateral nationalisation of the Suez Canal by Egyptian President Nasser . ) 
 = = = " Hush ! here comes Anthony " = = = 
 In 1951 , two days after Eden 's re @-@ appointment as Foreign Secretary , Vicky had , in similar vein , employed the imagery of Antony and Cleopatra to represent Eden approaching the Egyptian throne in suit and hat . King Farouk ( overthrown in 1952 ) and the ancient Queen Cleopatra , as the embodiment of the Egyptian state , were shown to have torn up the treaty of 1936 which provided for Britain 's military presence in the Suez Canal zone . The caption , " Hush ! here comes Anthony " , was taken from Shakespeare . ( This cartoon was a reference to Egypt 's denunciation of the treaty on 9 October 1951 , thus posing an early problem for Winston Churchill 's incoming government . ) 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Journalist and social historian Anne de Courcy has written of Chamberlain that " he did not smoke a pipe , nor , as Anthony Eden did , always wear the same distinctive hat , though cartoonists made the most of his ever @-@ present umbrella " . ( On Guy Fawkes Night 1938 the future Prime Minister Harold Macmillan , then a rebellious Conservative MP , burned an image of Chamberlain with rolled umbrella , which he topped with his own Homburg . ) In fact , as photographs from the late 1930s onwards show , Eden frequently wore no hat at all . This was a habit that he shared with few other public men at the time . It was one of several aspects of modernity noted by John Betjeman in his poem on the death in 1936 of King George V , who , like Edward VII before him , had worn a Homburg for shooting : 
 At the new suburb stretched beyond the runway 
 ... a young man [ King Edward VIII ] lands hatless from the air " . 
 = = The Anthony Eden in popular culture = = 
 The Anthony Eden hat was essentially an accessory of the 1930s and 1940s , although , in the mid @-@ 1950s , the Homburg came to be associated with the melancholic image of comedian Tony Hancock . In 1949 a character ( Mr. <unk> ) in John Dighton 's play The Happiest Days of Your Life had been described as " soberly dressed . He wears an " Anthony Eden " hat and carries gloves " . The Suez débâcle , followed by Eden 's departure from public life in 1957 due to ill health , tended to hasten the drawing of a line that might have seemed inevitable before long in the era of " Angry Young Men " , rock ' n ' roll and Vespa motor scooters which , according to his wife Clarissa , kept Eden awake at night . As the communist historian Eric Hobsbawm put it , " Suez and the coming of rock @-@ and @-@ roll divide twentieth century British history " . 
 = = = " Who wears an Anthony Eden hat today ? " = = = 
 In the 1960s , when hats for men were becoming unfashionable , former diplomat Geoffrey McDermott asked , with evident disdain , " who wears an Anthony Eden hat today ? Only Mr Steptoe [ a character in a BBC television sitcom ] , Mr Enoch Powell and , rather curiously , [ Russian leader ] Mr Kosygin . And , of course , all those Carleton @-@ Browne characters at the F [ <unk> ] O [ <unk> ] " . Memories did linger , however . In 2006 , the son of a Wolverhampton ironmonger recalled a very wet evening on which Enoch Powell , the local Member of Parliament throughout the 1950s and 60s , required a new washer for a tap : " his moustache quivered with urgency and water streamed from the broad rim of his black Homburg hat . " 
 Another well @-@ known wearer of an " Anthony Eden " was Sergeant Arthur Wilson ( played by John Le Mesurier ) in Dad 's Army ( 1968 – 77 ) , the BBC TV comedy series about the wartime Home Guard , which Eden established in 1940 . In one episode , Captain Mainwaring ( Arthur Lowe ) , who , as manager of a bank , wore a bowler , told Wilson that his hair was too long . Wilson replied that " Mrs Pike [ his lover ] says it makes me look like Eden " . 
 In 1969 the Kinks recorded for their album Arthur ( Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire ) a song called " She 's Bought a Hat Like Princess Marina " . This was written by Ray Davies ( b . 1944 ) , who was only twelve when Eden resigned as Prime Minister , and contained the lines : 
 He 's bought a hat like Anthony Eden 's 
 Because it makes him feel like a Lord . 
 = 10 Songs for the New Depression = 
 10 Songs for the New Depression is the twenty @-@ first studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter Loudon Wainwright III , released in July 2010 through Proper Records . Released forty years following his first studio album , 10 Songs is Wainwright 's first album since his Grammy Award @-@ winning tribute project High Wide & Handsome : The Charlie Poole Project ( 2009 ) . The concept album was inspired by the late @-@ 2000s global financial crisis and recession , and features Wainwright backed by his own banjo , guitar and ukulele performances . 
 Wainwright began writing songs for the album following the inauguration of Barack Obama in January 2009 . The album features ten original songs and two cover versions of songs originally written and recorded during the Great Depression . Lyrical references throughout 10 Songs include economists Alan Greenspan , John Maynard Keynes and Paul Krugman , President Barack Obama , and the government program Car Allowance Rebate System ( more commonly known as " cash for clunkers " ) . Overall , critical reception of the album was positive . 10 Songs reached peak positions of number thirty @-@ eight on the United Kingdom 's Top Independent Albums chart and number twelve on the Top 40 Independent Albums Breakers chart . 
 = = Development and promotion = = 
 Wainwright began writing songs for the album following the January 2009 inauguration of Barack Obama . In January 2010 , Wainwright said the following of the album : 
 As of this writing some folks are saying things are looking up recession wise and this particular hard time might be ending . Other experts are saying we 're in for a " double @-@ dip " and there 's more feces heading toward the national and global fans . If that 's the case I 'd like to cash in . So buddy if you can spare a few bucks , please enjoy 10 Songs for the New Depression ! 
 On February 22 , The New Yorker featured a video of Wainwright performing " The Krugman Blues " and complimenting the publication 's March 2010 article which profiled economist Paul Krugman . Part of " Cash for Clunkers " was featured in a segment of NPR 's program Car Talk . Wainwright was able to promote the album by touring both before and after the album 's release . The Loud and Rich Tour , which co @-@ headlined Wainwright and long @-@ time friend Richard Thompson , began in the fall of 2009 and continued into 2011 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 10 Songs for the New Depression is a simple vocal and acoustic performance album composed of original songs as well as two cover versions of songs from the Great Depression . The album is approximately thirty minutes in length and contains lyrical references to economist Alan Greenspan , Nobel Prize @-@ winning economist and The New York Times columnist Paul Krugman , and President Barack Obama . While Wainwright 's previous studio album High Wide & Handsome : The Charlie Poole Project ( 2009 ) contains more than twenty musicians and singers , The Guardian contributor Robin Denselow described 10 Songs as featuring a " pared @-@ down , DIY set , in keeping with the mood of the new songs " . 
 The opening track , " Times Is Hard " , features " bleak " lyrics about " nihilism [ being ] used as a tool to remedy social ills " sung to upbeat melodies . Wainwright wrote the song following the inauguration of Barack Obama . " House " is about economics and relationships , and tells the story of a couple wanting to divorce but staying together because they cannot sell their house . In the liner notes , Wainwright admitted that at the time the album was released he " remained relatively unscathed by the New Depression " but owned a house in Southern California that he was unable to sell . " On to Victory , Mr. Roosevelt " and " The Panic Is On " were both originally written during the Great Depression . Circa 1933 , Texas politician W. Lee O 'Daniel wrote and recorded the former . Medicine show performer Hezekiah Jenkins originally wrote and recorded " The Panic Is On " . 
 " Fear Itself " is about being fired " from the job you always professed to hate " and contains a reference to John Maynard Keynes . " The Krugman Blues " references the " gloomy mien of one 's favourite economic pundit " , Paul Krugman , whom Wainwright met on a train to Boston . Wainwright believed Krugman 's sense of melancholy made for a " compelling and challenging character " . " Spooky " sound effects , suggested by Dick <unk> , were added to the track " Halloween 2009 " . Wainwright wrote " Middle of the Night " a few years prior to the album 's release in an attempt to " cheer [ himself ] up and also to purvey an optimistic point of view for a change " . " Cash for Clunkers " refers to the Car Allowance Rebate System , a United States federal scrappage program active during summer 2009 . " Got a Ukulele " features Wainwright performing the titular instrument , which he believes was popular during the 1920s – 1930s due to its ability to improve " one 's mood and general outlook " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of the album was positive overall . Robin Denselow of The Guardian awarded the album four of five stars and wrote that Wainwright 's performance sounded as " easy @-@ going and spontaneous " and it does at his live concerts . Denselow considered " House " to be the album 's best track . The Daily Telegraph 's Colin Irwin described the album as " oddly uplifting " despite its " variants on the theme that we 're all doomed " from the economic crisis . The Observer contributor Neil Spencer wrote that " while [ Wainwright 's ] tone becomes shrill at times , his mix of nihilism and <unk> ( with ukulele ) are finally uplifting . " Music journalist Andy Gill of The Independent recommended the tracks " House " , " Fear Itself " and " The Panic Is On " . Simmy Richman 's review for The Independent complimented Wainwright 's ability to address current issues " simply and effectively " , claiming " Wainwright can make you laugh , nod in agreement , shake your fist in despair and want to sing along " . Richman appreciated Wainwright 's honesty and humor and wrote that he displayed " better lyrical form than he has been in for some time " . The Independent included 10 Songs on their " Indy Choice : Best of the New Music " list for the week of July 16 , 2010 . PopMatters ' Alex Ramon preferred Wainwright 's album Social Studies ( 1999 ) , but considered 10 Songs to be " an enjoyable effort nonetheless " , complimenting it for its simple approach . Furthermore , Ramon wrote that the album " succeeds in getting you smiling rather than despairing at the mess we 're in , and that 's always been one of Wainwright 's great gifts " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks written by Loudon Wainwright III , unless noted otherwise . 
 " Times Is Hard " – 2 : 55 
 " House " – 4 : 19 
 " On to Victory , Mr. Roosevelt " ( W. Lee O 'Daniel ) – 2 : 35 
 " Fear Itself " – 2 : 34 
 " The Panic Is On " ( Hezekiah Jenkins ) – 2 : 56 
 " The Krugman Blues " – 3 : 11 
 " Halloween 2009 " – 2 : 40 
 " Middle of the Night " – 3 : 09 
 " Cash for Clunkers " – 3 : 02 
 " Got a Ukulele " – 2 : 39 
 = = Chart history = = 
 10 Songs for the New Depression debuted and reached its peak position at number thirty @-@ eight on the United Kingdom 's Top Independent Albums chart the week of July 31 , 2010 . That same week the album debuted at number twelve on the Top 40 Independent Albums Breakers chart . 10 Songs fell to number eighteen on the Top 40 Independent Albums Breakers chart the week of August 7 , 2010 . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hurricane Chantal ( 1989 ) = 
 Hurricane Chantal was one of three tropical cyclones to make landfall in Texas during the 1989 Atlantic hurricane season . The third named storm and the first hurricane of the season , Chantal slowly developed on July 30 in the southern Gulf of Mexico from a tropical disturbance that was previously within Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) while near Trinidad and Tobago . While heading north @-@ northwestward , the depression steadily intensified and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Chantal on the following day . Thereafter , Chantal quickly strengthen and became a hurricane on August 1 . After intensifying slightly further , Chantal made landfall near High Island , Texas later that day . The storm quickly weakened upon moving inland and fell to tropical storm intensity a few hours after landfall . Early on August 2 , Chantal weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated over Oklahoma by August 4 . 
 While making landfall in Texas , the storm produced relatively small tides , with most locations reporting waves less than 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in height . However , some locations experienced extensive beach erosion . In addition , there were numerous rescues made by the U.S. Coast Guard . Due to both rainfall and high winds at least 3 @,@ 000 homes were damaged , and numerous trees and sign were knocked down . Two tornadoes were reported , with one causing the destruction of a shed in Crystal Beach , Texas , and the other knocking over several trees and mobile homes in Iota , Louisiana . Elsewhere , Chantal and its remnants brought light to moderate rainfall to several other states , although affects were minor in other states . Overall , 13 fatalities occurred , all of which due to drowning , and at least $ 100 million ( 1989 USD ) in damage was reported . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Chantal can be tracked back to a tropical disturbance within the Intertropical Convergence Zone near Trinidad and Tobago on July 24 . The system crossed westward over the Caribbean Sea , and there were no signs of organization until July 27 near the coast of Honduras . Despite the predictions for slow development from the tropical weather outlooks , it was possible that the system developed a surface low center near Belize City , Belize late on July 28 . After the system moved inland over the Yucatán Peninsula , it became disorganized , although the National Hurricane Center indicated in the tropical weather outlook that once it moved into the Gulf of Mexico there was potential for development . Although the outflow of the system had appeared impressive on satellite images , the potential for development seemed uncertain , mostly due to the close proximity to land . The storm quickly became better organized based on satellite data and ship reports . 
 Almost immediately after emerging into the Gulf of Mexico on July 30 , the cloud pattern of system quickly became better organized . Later after emerging into the Gulf of Mexico , ships and satellite images confirmed that Tropical Depression Four had formed offshore of the north coast of the Yucatán Peninsula ; although it was likely that the depression formed 80 miles ( 129 km ) north of the Yucatán Peninsula several hours earlier than confirmed . The following morning after development occurred , the depression had intensified into a tropical storm 575 miles ( 920 km ) southeast of Texas ; the National Hurricane Center assigned it to the name Chantal . Although it became a tropical storm early that morning , the system was not upgraded to a tropical storm until a reconnaissance flight confirmed tropical storm force winds about six hours later , when sustained winds were already 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Tropical Storm Chantal rapidly strengthened thereafter , with weather satellites indicating t – numbers increasing from 2 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 5 within twelve hours using the Dvorak technique . Chantal continued to intensify , and headed northwestward at 11 mph ( 18 km / h ) due to weak ridging over Florida . 
 Later on July 31 , satellite imagery revealed better organization , and another reconnaissance flight found winds at 91 mph ( 151 km / h ) while flying at 1500 feet ( 457 m ) . Based on these observations , it was estimated that Chantal had intensified into a hurricane early on August 1 . Hurricane Chantal continued to intensify , slightly , and attained its peak intensity on August 1 at 1000 UTC , reaching maximum sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 986 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) . Only three hours thereafter , Hurricane Chantal made landfall near High Island , Texas with winds still at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Chantal rapidly weakened to a tropical storm at 1800 UTC on August 2 , just five hours after landfall , and quickly degenerated to a tropical depression early on August 2 . Tropical Depression continued its course and eventually dissipated over western Oklahoma on August 3 . The remnants of Chantal then moved northward over the Great Plains and was tracked northward over New York , eventually reaching New England and Newfoundland just before Hurricane Dean approached . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 At 0000 UTC on July 31 , a tropical storm watch – indicating tropical storm force winds were possible within 48 hours – was issued from Port O 'Connor , Texas to the mouth of the Mississippi River . Three hours thereafter , a hurricane warning – signifying that hurricane @-@ force winds were likely in 24 hours or less – was issued from Freeport , Texas to Morgan City , Louisiana . A tropical storm warning was simultaneously put into effect from Port O 'Connor , Texas to Mobile , Alabama , significantly overlapping the existing hurricane warning . The tropical storm warning was discontinued at 1000 UTC on August 1 . Six hours later , the hurricane warning issued at 0300 UTC on July 31 was downgraded to a tropical storm warning , before the portion from Port Arthur , Texas to Morgan City , Louisiana was canceled . The remaining portion from Freeport to Port O 'Connor , Texas was discontinued at 0100 UTC on August 2 . 
 In addition to the tropical cyclone watches and warnings , several other actions were taken as Chantal approached . More than 600 oil workers were moved inland , though a man drowned while attempting to evacuate a rig south of New Orleans , Louisiana . Mayor of Port Arthur Malcolm Grant asked 800 residents to evacuate Sabine Pass , due to potential coastal flooding isolating the area . Shelters were opened at various schools in Port Arthur and Beaumont . In nearby Orange , crews at emergency centers distributed sand bags . About 8 @,@ 500 residents of Cameron Parish , Louisiana evacuated , with at least 67 people taking shelter at a school in Lake Charles . An additional 2 @,@ 500 people fled Grand Isle , as the threat of the only road to the island flooding loomed . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Texas bore the brunt of the storm , where strong winds and heavy rainfall damaged about 3 @,@ 000 homes and knocked downed numerous trees and signs . Chantal also spawned two tornadoes , one in Crystal Beach , Texas and the other in Acadia Parish , Louisiana ; both of which caused minor damage . Additionally , 13 fatalities occurred , all of them due to drowning ; 11 deaths occurred offshore in the Gulf of Mexico , while the remaining two were reported in east @-@ central Texas . Overall , the storm resulted in at least $ 100 million ( 1989 USD ) in damage . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 Prior to becoming a tropical cyclone , the precursor tropical disturbance dropped rainfall on the Yucatán Peninsula of Mexico . The precipitation put out fires burning in the region , which had destroyed up to 370 @,@ 000 acres ( 150 @,@ 000 ha ) of jungle in the two months prior to the tropical disturbance , according to the Agriculture Department of Mexico . 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 = = = = Galveston County = = = = 
 The worst effects from the storm occurred in Galveston County . Waves of 7 feet ( 2 m ) in height were reported on High Island during Chantal , while Kemah measured tides of 3 @.@ 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) , and the Galveston Flagship pier reported 3 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 m ) seas . The high tides eroded more than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of Texas State Highway 87 , while at least another 15 miles ( 24 km ) of that highway was covered in sand and debris . As a result , the highway was expected to be closed for at least five weeks , though in October 1989 , storm surge from Hurricane Jerry caused more erosion , and no repairs have been made since . In the northern portions of Galveston County , rainfall was generally at least 12 inches ( 300 mm ) , which a peak of 20 inches ( 510 mm ) in Friendswood . Numerous streets in League City , Dickinson , and Friendswood were flooded for more than 24 hours . At least 100 homes in Friendswood were flooded , while water entered 70 % of houses in Dickinson . Severe street flooding and ponding occurred in Galveston , especially in the low @-@ lying areas ; some homes and businesses were damaged , as a result . Overall , 500 homes in the county were flooded . 
 Strong winds also effected the county , with the highest recorded sustained wind speed being 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) in Galveston ; the highest gust of 83 mph ( 134 km / h ) was reported at the same location . At the National Weather Service Office in Downtown Galveston , sustained winds were 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) and gusts reached 69 mph ( 111 km / h ) . Although winds were strong , associated losses was confined to roof damage at beach homes in Gilchrist and High Island . In addition to strong winds , heavy rainfall , and high tides , the storm also produced one tornado in the county . Rated as an F0 on the Fujita scale , the tornado was spawned in Crystal Beach , where it destroyed a boat shed ; elsewhere , no damage occurred from this twister . 
 = = = = Harris County = = = = 
 Rainfall produced by Chantal in the city of Houston alone varied extensively , with 7 @.@ 14 inches ( 181 mm ) at William P. Hobby Airport after twenty @-@ four hours , and only 1 @.@ 21 inches ( 31 mm ) at George Bush Intercontinental Airport ( then known as Houston Intercontinental Airport ) in the same time lapse . In the southern portions of Harris County , rainfall totaled ranged from 8 to 12 inches ( 200 to 300 mm ) . Significant amounts of precipitation resulted in flooding , which in turn , caused several hundred emergency crew rescues and damage to at least 500 homes . Strong winds also caused significant effects in the county . In La Porte , where winds gusted to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , 40 trees were toppled at a golf course , while a plane was flipped over at the La Porte Municipal Airport . The roof of a mobile home was torn off and a fence and a portable building was destroyed in Highlands . Winds damaged a red cross shelter in Pasadena and blew out several windows at a hospital in Baytown . Throughout the county , high winds destroyed 2 mobile homes and damaged 49 apartments and 24 businesses . 
 = = = = Elsewhere in Texas = = = = 
 Heavy rainfall effected Brazoria County , where precipitation amounts up to 12 inches ( 300 mm ) were reported ; this caused significant flooding , especially in <unk> and Manvel . During the height of the storm , the entire town of Manvel was inundated with water , causing flood damage to at least 100 homes . Additionally , high winds in combination with floods damaged about 500 homes throughout the county . In Chambers County high winds caused two injuries and tore roofing material off of homes and mobile homes ; about 100 homes were effected in the area . 6 inches ( 150 mm ) of rain fell in the southern portions of the county , causing minor flooding . Between 8 and 12 inches ( 200 and 300 mm ) of precipitation was recorded in eastern Fort Bend County . In the city of Fresno , at least 60 homes were flooded and several families were evacuated . After 9 @.@ 7 inches ( 250 mm ) of rain fell in Richmond , local flooding occurred . Several mobile homes in the county also suffered wind damage . 
 In Brazos County , heavy rainfall caused street flooding in College Station . Precipitation in Collin County reached as high as 16 inches ( 410 mm ) in Clear Lake , though no flood damage was reported . Additionally , two fatalities occurred when two teenage boys were riding a rubber raft , swept into a drainpipe , and subsequently drowned . The highest sustained wind speed recorded in Jefferson County was 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) at Sea Rim State Park , while the strongest gust was 49 mph ( 79 km / h ) at the Jack Brooks Regional Airport . Winds downed trees and limbs , while also causing minor roof damage . Tides at Sabine Pass were about 3 @.@ 9 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) about mean sea level ; some beach erosion was reported near that location . In Liberty County , winds felled tree limbs , which damaged vehicles and portable buildings . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 One fatality was reported during an oil rig evacuation in the Gulf of Mexico . Ten other people perished when a lifeboat capsized south of Morgan City , Louisiana . Four others on the boat were rescued by the United States Coast Guard . In Louisiana , high tides were only reported at one location , with seas reaching about 4 @.@ 2 feet ( 1 @.@ 3 m ) in Cameron . Winds in the state were also light , with the highest sustained wind speed being 29 mph ( 47 km / h ) along the Lake Pontchartrain Causeway , while the strongest gust was approximately 42 mph ( 68 km / h ) in New Orleans . Rainfall was mostly minimal throughout the state and mainly less than 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , while the highest total recorded as 3 @.@ 84 inches ( 98 mm ) in Amite City . A tornado touched down in Acadia Parish , where it downed trees and removed a mobile home from its foundation . The only known impact in Mississippi was tides of 2 @.@ 6 feet ( 0 @.@ 79 m ) above mean sea level . 
 Further north in the Midwestern United States , impact was generally minor . Chantal and its remnants dropped mostly light rainfall in the states of Oklahoma , Missouri , Kansas , Iowa , Wisconsin , Illinois , Indiana , and Michigan . Only two of those states – Illinois and Michigan – recorded more than 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of precipitation . In Illinois , rainfall in Chicago flooded numerous streets and basements ; Lake Shore Drive and Edens Expressway were briefly closed , as a result . Outside Chicago , minor flooding also occurred along a few creeks and low @-@ lying areas . The rainfall rate of 2 inches ( 51 mm ) per hour in Grand Rapids , Michigan caused the release of about 40 million gallons of untreated sewage into the Grand River . Despite crossing through Ontario and New York , it is unknown if any impact occurred in those two locations . In Vermont , the remnants of Chantal dropped rainfall in excess of 6 inches ( 150 mm ) along the Caledonia , Orange , and Washington county lines . Bridges were knocked down , cars and homes were swept away , and crops were destroyed in the resultant flash floods . 
 = 2015 La Flèche Wallonne = 
 The 2015 La Flèche Wallonne was the 79th edition of the La Flèche Wallonne one @-@ day cycling classic . It took place on 22 April and was the twelfth race of the 2015 UCI World Tour . La Flèche Wallonne is the second of the three Ardennes classics ; it comes three days after the Amstel Gold Race ( won in 2015 by Michał Kwiatkowski ) and four days before the Liège – Bastogne – Liège . The defending champion in the race was Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) . 
 The race took place on a 205 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 127 @.@ 7 mi ) route that started in <unk> and ends in Huy . The key aspect of La Flèche Wallonne is the climb of the Mur de Huy , which is crossed three times during the race ; the finishing line is at the top of the final climb of the Mur . The race typically suits both puncheurs and climbers . La Flèche Wallonne had added importance in 2015 because the second stage of the 2015 Tour de France was also scheduled to finish on the Mur , so several riders rode the race as preparation . 
 Despite the addition of an additional climb late in the race , a group formed at the base of the Mur . Valverde won his third victory on the climb , with Julian Alaphilippe ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) second and Michael Albasini ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) third ; Valverde went on to win Liège – Bastogne – Liège as well . La Flèche Wallonne was affected by many crashes , which caused the withdrawal of several of the favourites for race victory , including Philippe Gilbert ( BMC Racing Team ) , Dan Martin ( Cannondale – Garmin ) and Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) . 
 = = Teams = = 
 La Flèche Wallonne is part of the UCI World Tour , which meant that the 17 UCI WorldTeams were automatically invited and obliged to send a team . The race organisers ( ASO , which also organises the Tour de France ) made eight wildcard invitations to UCI Professional Continental teams . The peloton was therefore made up of 25 teams . Each team was required to enter between five and eight , so the maximum size of the peloton was 200 riders . MTN – Qhubeka and Team Roompot , however , only entered seven riders each , so 198 riders were entered into the race . 
 = = Route = = 
 The 205 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 127 @.@ 7 mi ) route of the 2015 La Flèche Wallonne began in <unk> in the province of Liège on the Rue de Huy with a 2 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) neutralised zone . The first part of the route went south @-@ east through <unk> and Saint @-@ Georges @-@ sur @-@ Meuse before reaching the day 's first climb , the Côte des 36 Tournants , after 22 kilometres ( 14 mi ) . After the climb , the riders continued south @-@ east to <unk> ; here the route turned south . It passed through <unk> , then reached <unk> after 55 kilometres ( 34 mi ) . The route then turned west to pass through Havelange before reaching Ohey after 84 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 52 @.@ 5 mi ) . The roads between the Côte des 36 Tournants and Ohey were not entirely flat , but there were no categorised climbs . 
 After reaching Ohey , the route entered a series of loops . The riders first travelled north , south @-@ west and then north again to reach the day 's second climb , the Côte de Bellaire , after 92 kilometres ( 57 mi ) of racing . The route continued north to <unk> , then east to the third climb , the Côte de <unk> , 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) into the race . The riders then rode north @-@ east to reach the first ascent of the Mur de Huy . The first climb of the Mur came with 118 kilometres ( 73 mi ) raced and 87 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 54 @.@ 4 mi ) to the finish line ; it was followed by the day 's only feed zone . The peloton continued riding east as far as <unk> , where the course turned to the south @-@ west . The Côte d 'Ereffe was climbed after 131 kilometres ( 81 mi ) as the riders returned to Ohey . The race then used the same roads as before between Ohey and Huy , repeating the ascents of the Côte de Bellaire , the Côte de <unk> and the Mur de Huy . The second and penultimate ascent of the Mur came after 176 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 109 @.@ 7 mi ) ; there were 29 kilometres ( 18 mi ) remaining . 
 The final loop of the race followed the same roads as before , east out of Huy and then south @-@ west to the Côte d 'Ereffe , climbed with 16 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 3 mi ) remaining . After this climb , however , the route turned north to take a more direct route to Huy , though some of the same roads were used . Within the town , the riders were faced with a slightly different route and a climb new to the 2015 edition of the race , the Côte de Cherave . The roads before the climb were narrow and twisting , with a level crossing at the foot of the climb . The hill itself was 1 @,@ 300 metres ( 4 @,@ 300 ft ) in length with an average gradient of 8 @.@ 1 % ; the steepest section came in the first part . The top of the Côte de Cherave came with 5 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) to the finish line and was followed by a sharp right @-@ hand turn and a fast descent back into Huy . 
 The crucial part of the race was the final 1 @,@ 300 @-@ metre ( 4 @,@ 300 ft ) climb of the Mur de Huy , which has an average gradient of 9 @.@ 6 % . The first 400 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) section of the climb has a gradient less than 7 % ; after this it increases to about 10 % . The steepest section comes after 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) with an S @-@ bend . The steepest part of the climb has a gradient of about 24 % ; many past races have been won with attacks at this point . The finish line came at the very top of the climb . 
 = = Pre @-@ race favourites = = 
 Recent editions of the race have been decided with attacks on the Mur de Huy . The addition of the Côte de Cherave , however , added an unknown factor into the race : it was considered much more likely than in previous years that a group of riders could break away from the peloton on the penultimate climb and hold an advantage to the finish line . No breakaway had won La Flèche Wallonne since 2003 . 
 The strongest favourite for the race victory was Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) , who was the defending champion and who had also won the race in 2006 . Valverde had shown good form by coming second in the Amstel Gold Race behind Michał Kwiatkowski ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) ; Valverde was expected to have an advantage on the steep climb of the Mur , though Kwiatkowski was still among the favourites for victory . 
 Three other former winners entered the 2015 race . These were Philippe Gilbert ( BMC Racing Team ) , who had won the race in 2011 ; Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) , who had won in 2012 ; and Daniel Moreno ( Team Katusha ) , who had won in 2013 . All of there were well suited to the steep final climb . Other riders considered to have a chance of victory included Dan Martin ( Cannondale – Garmin ) , Sergio Henao ( Team Sky ) and several other climbers and puncheurs . 
 Because the third stage of the 2015 Tour de France was scheduled to finish on exactly the same roads , several riders who were aiming at success there rode La Flèche Wallonne as preparation . These included Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) , Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) and Nairo Quintana ( Movistar Team ) . 
 = = Race report = = 
 = = = Early stages = = = 
 A breakaway formed within the first 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) of racing . There were seven riders in the break : Thomas De Gendt ( Lotto – Soudal ) , Mike Teunissen ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) , Brice Feillu ( Bretagne – Séché Environnement ) , Jérôme Baugnies ( Wanty – Groupe Gobert ) , <unk> Honig ( Team Roompot ) , Daniele <unk> ( UnitedHealthcare ) , and Pieter <unk> ( Topsport Vlaanderen – Baloise ) . The breakaway initially built an eight @-@ minute lead , with De Gendt leading the group over the climbs . The main peloton was led principally by Movistar and Team Katusha . 
 The first major action of the race occurred as the riders approached the first ascent of the Mur de Huy . Dan Martin , one of the favourites for the race , touched wheels with Tiago Machado ( Katusha ) and both riders crashed . Martin returned to his bike and chased back to the peloton with the help of several teammates , but later withdrew . He had hit his head in the crash and wished to recover ahead of the Liège – Bastogne – Liège the following weekend . Several other riders were caught up or delayed , including Chris Froome . At the top of the first ascent of the Mur , the breakaway 's lead had been cut to under six minutes . 
 After the riders left Huy , Team Sky came to the front of the peloton with Peter Kennaugh ; his riding at the front of the bunch reduced the gap to under five minutes . Honig and Teunissen were dropped from the leading group on the second climb of the Côte de Bellaire . Katusha and Movistar were joined at the front of the peloton by Etixx @-@ Quick Step as the race returned towards Huy . 
 = = = Final loops around Huy = = = 
 Another crash followed before the climb ; this crash was caused by riders ' bunching together on a road made narrower by parked cars on either side . The most significant rider caught in this crash was Philippe Gilbert ; others were Julián Arredondo and Bob <unk> ( both Trek Factory Racing ) . Gilbert got up slowly , with his shorts and jersey ripped . He abandoned shortly afterwards . The next significant crash came with 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) remaining . This took out Lars Petter Nordhaug and Wouter Poels ( Team Sky ) , Ben King ( Garmin @-@ Cannondale ) , <unk> <unk> ( BMC ) and Anthony Roux ( FDJ ) . Poels ended up stuck in a ditch for some time with Roux injured on top of him . Another crash happened shortly afterwards , involving Jelle Vanendert ( Lotto @-@ Soudal ) , Alexey Tsatevich ( Katusha ) and Kévin Reza ( FDJ ) . 
 On the penultimate climb of the Mur , the breakaway split ; only De Gendt and Baugnies remained in the lead , 50 seconds ahead of the peloton . Giovanni Visconti ( Movistar ) and Luis León Sánchez ( Astana ) attacked the peloton on the climb and joined De Gendt and Baugnies soon afterwards , while Etixx @-@ Quick Step and Katusha led the chase in the peloton . Tejay van Garderen ( BMC ) attacked on the Col d 'Ereffe , while Visconti and Sánchez soon dropped De Gendt and Baugnies . De Gendt helped his teammate Louis Vervaeke bridge up to Van Garderen . Vervaeke , Van Garderen and Baugnies combined briefly , but were unable to catch the leading pair and were themselves caught by the peloton with 13 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 3 mi ) remaining . 
 = = = Race finale = = = 
 Visconti and Sánchez continued in the lead ; they had 20 seconds lead with 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) left . At this point , another crash occurred in the peloton . This included several IAM Cycling riders , Samuel Sánchez ( BMC ) , Bryan Coquard ( Team Europcar ) and Chris Froome . Froome suffered cuts on his left side , with blood visible through rips on his shorts . He continued to the end of the race , however , and reached the finish line in 123rd place , over 12 minutes behind the leaders . 
 As the peloton headed towards the penultimate climb , the Côte de Cherave , Huub Duyn ( Team Roompot ) attacked but was unable to build a lead , with Tony Martin leading the peloton on behalf of Kwiatkowski . On the climb , Vincenzo Nibali attacked ; he could not build a gap to the group , but did bring them closer to Visconti and Sánchez . Soon afterwards , Tim Wellens ( Lotto @-@ Soudal ) attacked , catching and passing the leading pair . Giampaolo Caruso ( Katusha ) attempted to follow ; he was unable to join Wellens and was recaptured by the pack soon afterwards . 
 Wellens had a 14 @-@ second lead at the foot of the final climb of the Mur de Huy . The peloton was led by Lampre @-@ Merida for the first part of the ascent . The peloton stayed together for most of the climb , with no rider escaping on the steep sections . In the final few hundred metres , however , Valverde came to the front of the group . He wound the pace up gradually before sprinting within sight of the line . He took the race victory with a significant gap to the riders behind . Julian Alaphilippe ( Etixx @-@ Quick Step ) finished in second place , with Michael Albasini ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) third . 
 = = Result = = 
 = = After the race = = 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 The race was described afterwards as " an incredibly boring race " by Cycling Weekly . Valverde , however , said that it was " dangerous " , with all the crashes happening at the front of the peloton , and that it was " the most nervous race I can remember doing " . The 2015 race was his third victory in La Flèche Wallonne , bringing him level with Eddy Merckx ; Valverde described this as a " great honour " . His aim after the race was to win a third victory at the Liège – Bastogne – Liège , which he succeeded in doing . 
 Alaphilippe said after the race that he had not been intending to go for the sprint at the end of the race ; the team 's plan was to set up Kwiatkowski . He started sprinting only after his directeur sportif shouted " go , go " at him over the radio . Alaphilippe said that he had briefly thought that he was going to win the sprint ; his second @-@ place finish was , however , the most important result of his career so far . He said , " For my first time performance here , I can 't help but be pleased . " Albasini 's third place was better than his team had expected : before the race , Orica – GreenEDGE 's directeur sportif Matt White had not expected him to be as strong because of the addition of the extra climb . Albasini himself also described the race as " a lot tenser " ; he also said that Valverde was " one of the strongest guys in those kinds of finishes " . 
 One of the consequences of the high number of crashes in the race was a number of injuries to several prominent riders . These included Dan Martin , who was left with " contusions , abrasions and soreness in his neck " ; Martin himself described himself as suffering from whiplash and as feeling " crappy " , though he still intended to start Liège – Bastogne – Liège . Philippe Gilbert likewise described his crash as " not the best preparation " and planned a trip to an osteopath to help his recovery . Chris Froome did not suffer any significant injuries but did not plan to start in Liège ; he went instead to do reconnaissance of the cobbled stage of the Tour de France and his next scheduled race was the following week at the Tour de Romandie . 
 = = = UCI World Tour rankings = = = 
 Riders who finished in the top ten in La Flèche Wallonne were awarded points in the UCI World Tour rankings . Valverde , as the race winner , won 80 points ; Kelderman won 2 points for his tenth @-@ place finish . Valverde moved from eighth to second place in the rankings ; his 238 points left him 65 points behind Richie Porte , the leader of the ranking . Joaquim Rodríguez also moved up in the rankings from sixteenth to ninth place . Spain remained in second place in the nations ' rankings , one point behind Australia , with Colombia moving ahead of the Netherlands into third place and France returning to the top 10 . Etixx @-@ Quick Step retained their lead in the teams ' rankings . 
 = H.D. = 
 Hilda " H.D. " Doolittle ( September 10 , 1886 – September 27 , 1961 ) was an American poet , novelist , and memoirist known for her association with the early 20th century avant @-@ garde Imagist group of poets such as Ezra Pound and Richard Aldington . She published under the pen name of H.D. 
 H.D. was born in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania , in 1886 and moved to London in 1911 , where her publications earned her a central role within the then emerging Imagist movement . A charismatic figure , she was championed by the modernist poet Ezra Pound , who was instrumental in building and furthering her career . From 1916 – 17 , she acted as the literary editor of the Egoist journal , while her poetry appeared in the English Review and the Transatlantic Review . During the First World War , H.D. suffered the death of her brother and the breakup of her marriage to the poet Richard Aldington , and these events weighed heavily on her later poetry . Glenn Hughes , an authority on Imagism , wrote that ' her loneliness cries out from her poems ' . She had a deep interest in Ancient Greek literature , and her poetry often borrowed from Greek mythology and classical poets . Her work is noted for its incorporation of natural scenes and objects , which are often used to emote a particular feeling or mood . 
 She befriended Sigmund Freud during the 1930s , and became his patient in order to understand and express her bisexuality . H.D. married once , and undertook a number of relationships with both men and women . She was unapologetic about her sexuality , and thus became an icon for both the LGBT rights and feminist movements when her poems , plays , letters and essays were rediscovered during the 1970s and 1980s . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 H.D. was born into the Moravian community in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania . Her father , Charles Doolittle , was professor of astronomy at Lehigh University and her mother , Helen ( <unk> ) , was a Moravian with a strong interest in music . In 1896 , Charles Doolittle was appointed Flower Professor of Astronomy at the University of Pennsylvania , and the family moved to a house in Upper Darby . She attended Philadelphia 's Friends ' Central High School , at Fifteenth and Race streets , graduating in 1905 . In 1901 , she met and befriended Ezra Pound , who was to play a major role both in her private life and her emergence as a writer . In 1905 , Pound presented her with a sheaf of love poems under the collective title Hilda 's Book . 
 That year , H.D. attended Bryn Mawr College to study Greek literature , but left after only three terms due to poor grades and the excuse of poor health . While at the college , she met poets Marianne Moore and William Carlos Williams . Her first published writings , stories for children , were published in The Comrade , a Philadelphia Presbyterian Church paper , between 1909 and 1913 , mostly under the name Edith Gray . In 1907 , she became engaged to Pound . Her father disapproved of Pound , and by the time Pound left for Europe in 1908 , the engagement had been called off . Around this time , H.D. started a relationship with a young female art student at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts , Frances Josepha Gregg . After spending part of 1910 living in Greenwich Village , she sailed to Europe with Gregg and Gregg 's mother in 1911 . In Europe , H.D. began a more serious career as a writer . Her relationship with Gregg cooled , and she met a writing enthusiast named Brigit Patmore with whom she became involved in an affair . Patmore introduced H.D. to another poet , Richard Aldington . 
 = = = H.D. Imagiste = = = 
 Soon after arriving in England , H.D. showed Pound some poems she had written . Pound had already begun to meet with other poets at the Eiffel Tower restaurant in Soho . He was impressed by the closeness of H.D. ' s poems to the ideas and principles he had been discussing with Aldington , with whom he had shared plans to reform contemporary poetry through free verse , the tanka and the tightness and conciseness of the haiku , and the removal of all unnecessary verbiage . In summer 1912 , the three poets declared themselves the " three original Imagists " , and set out their principles as : 
 Direct treatment of the ' thing ' whether subjective or objective . 
 To use absolutely no word that does not contribute to the presentation . 
 As regarding rhythm : to compose in the sequence of the musical phrase , not in the sequence of a metronome . 
 During a meeting with H.D. in a tea room near the British Museum that year , Pound appended the signature H.D. Imagiste to her poetry , creating a label that was to stick to the poet for most of her writing life . However H.D. told different versions of this story at various times , and during her career published under a variety of pseudonyms . That same year , Harriet Monroe started her Poetry magazine and asked Pound to act as foreign editor . In October , he submitted three poems each by H.D. and Aldington under the rubric Imagiste . Aldington 's poems were in the November issue of Poetry and H.D. ' s poems " Hermes of the Ways , " " Orchard , " and " Epigram , " in the January 1913 issue . Imagism as a movement was launched with H.D. as its prime exponent . 
 The early models for the Imagist group were from Japan , and H.D. often visited the exclusive Print Room at the British Museum in the company of Richard Aldington and the curator and poet Laurence Binyon in order to examine <unk> @-@ e prints that incorporated traditional Japanese verse . However , she also derived her way of making poems from her reading of Classical Greek literature and especially of Sappho , an interest she shared with Aldington and Pound , each of whom produced versions of the Greek poet 's work . In 1915 , H.D. and Aldington launched the Poets ' Translation Series , pamphlets of translations from Greek and Latin classics . H.D. worked on the plays by Euripides , publishing in 1916 a translation of choruses from <unk> at Aulis , in 1919 a translation of choruses from <unk> at Aulis and Hippolytus , an adaptation of Hippolytus called Hippolytus <unk> ( 1927 ) , a translation of choruses from The Bacchae and Hecuba ( 1931 ) , and Euripides ' Ion ( 1937 ) a loose translation of Ion . 
 She continued her association with the group until the final issue of the Some Imagist Poets anthology in 1917 . She and Aldington did most of the editorial work on the 1915 anthology . Her work also appeared in Aldington 's Imagist Anthology 1930 . All of her poetry up to the end of the 1930s was written in an Imagist mode , utilising spare use of language , and a classical , austere purity . This style of writing was not without its critics . In a special Imagist issue of The Egoist magazine in May 1915 , the poet and critic Harold Monro called H.D. ' s early work " petty poetry " , denoting " either poverty of imagination or needlessly excessive restraint " . 
 <unk> , one of her earliest and best @-@ known poems , which was first published in the 1915 anthology , illustrates this early style : 
 = = = World War I and after = = = 
 Before World War I , H.D. married Aldington in 1913 ; however , their first and only child , a daughter , was stillborn in 1915 . Aldington enlisted in the army . The couple became estranged , and Aldington reportedly took a mistress in 1917 . H.D. became involved in a close but platonic relationship with D. H. Lawrence . In 1916 , her first book , Sea Garden , was published , and she was appointed assistant editor of The Egoist , replacing her husband . In 1918 , her brother Gilbert was killed in action , and that March she moved into a cottage in Cornwall with the composer Cecil Gray , a friend of Lawrence . She became pregnant with Gray 's child , however , by the time she realised she was expecting , the relationship had cooled and Gray had returned to live in London . When Aldington returned from active service he was noticeably traumatised , and he and H.D. later separated . 
 Close to the end of the war , H.D. met the wealthy English novelist Bryher ( Annie Winifred Ellerman ) . They lived together until 1946 , and although both took numerous other partners , Bryher remained her lover for the rest of H.D. ' s life . In 1919 , H.D. came close to death when she gave birth to her daughter Frances Perdita Aldington — although the father was not Aldington , but Gray — while suffering from war influenza . During this time , her father , who had never recovered from Gilbert 's death , died . In 1919 , H.D. wrote one of her few known statements on poetics , Notes on Thought and Vision , which was unpublished until 1982 . In this , she speaks of poets ( herself included ) as belonging to a kind of elite group of visionaries with the power to ' turn the whole tide of human thought ' . 
 H.D. and Aldington attempted to salvage their relationship during this time , but he was suffering from the effects of his participation in the war , possibly post @-@ traumatic stress disorder , and they became estranged , living completely separate lives , but not divorcing until 1938 . They remained friends , however , for the rest of their lives . From 1920 , her relationship with Bryher became closer , and the pair travelled in Egypt , Greece and the United States before eventually settling in Switzerland . Bryher entered a marriage of convenience in 1921 with Robert McAlmon , which allowed him to fund his publishing ventures in Paris by utilising some of her personal wealth for his Contact Press . Both Bryher and H.D. slept with McAlmon during this time . Bryher and McAlmon divorced in 1927 . 
 = = = Novels , films and psychoanalysis = = = 
 In the early 1920s , H.D. started to write three projected cycles of novels . The first of these , Magna Graeca , consists of Palimpsest ( 1921 ) and <unk> ( 1928 ) . The Magna Graeca novels use their classical settings to explore the poetic vocation , particularly as it applies to women in a patriarchal literary culture . The Madrigal cycle consists of <unk> , Bid Me to Live , Paint It Today and Asphodel , and is largely autobiographical , dealing with the development of the female artist and the conflict between heterosexual and lesbian desire . Kora and Ka and The Usual Star , two novellas from the Borderline cycle , were published in 1933 . In this period , she also wrote Pilate 's Wife , Mira @-@ Mare , and Nights . 
 During this period her mother had died , and Bryher had divorced her husband , only to marry H.D. ' s new male lover , Kenneth Macpherson . H.D. , Bryher , and Macpherson lived together and traveled through Europe as what the poet and critic Barbara Guest termed in her biography of H.D. as a ' menagerie of three . ' Bryher and Macpherson adopted H.D. ' s daughter , Perdita . In 1928 , H.D. became pregnant but chose to abort the pregnancy in November . Bryher and Macpherson set up the magazine Close Up ( to which H.D. regularly contributed ) as a medium for intellectual discussion of cinema . In 1927 , the small independent film cinema group <unk> or Pool Group was established ( largely funded with Bryher 's inheritance ) and was managed by all three . Only one <unk> film survives in its entirety , Borderline ( 1930 ) , which featured H.D. and Paul Robeson in the lead roles . In common with the Borderline novellas , the film explores extreme psychic states and their relationship to surface reality . As well as acting in this film , H.D. wrote an explanatory pamphlet to accompany it , a piece later published in Close Up . 
 In 1933 , H.D. traveled to Vienna to undergo analysis with Sigmund Freud . She had an interest in Freud 's theories as far back as 1909 , when she read some of his works in the original German . H.D. was referred by Bryher 's psychoanalyst due to her apparent paranoia about the rise of Adolf Hitler which indicated another world war , an idea that H.D. found intolerable . The Great War ( World War I ) had left her feeling shattered . She had lost her brother in action , while her husband suffered effects of combat experiences , and she believed that the onslaught of the war indirectly caused the death of her child with Aldington : she believed it was her shock at hearing the news about the RMS Lusitania that directly caused her child to be stillborn . Writing on the Wall , her memoir about this psychoanalysis , was written concurrently with Trilogy and published in 1944 ; in 1956 it was republished with Advent , a journal of the analysis , under the title Tribute to Freud . 
 = = = World War II and after = = = 
 H.D. and Bryher spent the duration of World War II in London . During this time , H.D. wrote The Gift , a memoir of her childhood and family life in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania , which reflects on people and events in her background that helped shape her as a writer . The Gift was eventually published in 1960 and 1982 . She also wrote Trilogy , published as The Walls do not Fall ( 1944 ) , Tribute to the Angels ( 1945 ) and The Flowering of the Rod ( 1946 ) . The opening lines of The Walls do not Fall clearly and immediately signal H.D. ' s break with her earlier work : 
 After the war , H.D. and Bryher no longer lived together , but remained in contact . H.D. moved to Switzerland where , in the spring of 1946 , she suffered a severe mental breakdown , which resulted in her staying in a clinic until the autumn of that year . Apart from a number of trips to the States , H.D. spent the rest of her life in Switzerland . In the late 1950s , she underwent more treatment , this time with the psychoanalyst Erich Heydt . At Heydt 's prompting , she wrote End to Torment , a memoir of her relationship with Pound , who allowed the poems of Hilda 's Book to be included when the book was published . Doolittle was one of the leading figures in the bohemian culture of London in the early decades of the century . Her later poetry explores traditional epic themes , such as violence and war , from a feminist perspective . H.D. was the first woman to be granted the American Academy of Arts and Letters medal . 
 = = = Later life and death = = = 
 During the 1950s , H.D. wrote a considerable amount of poetry , most notably Helen in Egypt ( written between 1952 – 54 ) , an examination from a feminist point of view of a male @-@ centred epic poetry . H.D. used Euripides 's play Helen as a starting point for a reinterpretation of the basis of the Trojan War and , by extension , of war itself . This work has been seen by some critics , including Jeffrey Twitchell @-@ <unk> , as H.D. ' s response to Pound 's Cantos , a work she greatly admired . Other poems from this period include <unk> , Winter Love and Hermetic Definition . These three were published posthumously with the collective title Hermetic Definition ( 1972 ) . The poem Hermetic Definition takes as its starting points her love for a man 30 years her junior and the line ' so slow is the rose to open ' from Pound 's Canto 106 . <unk> , written in bed after H.D. had broken her hip in a fall , serves as a kind of coda to <unk> being partly written in the voice of a young female Blitz survivor who finds herself living in fear of the atom bomb . Winter Love was written together with End to Torment and uses as narrator the Homeric figure of Penelope to restate the material of the memoir in poetic form . At one time , H.D. considered appending this poem as a coda to Helen in Egypt . 
 H.D. visited the United States in 1960 to collect an American Academy of Arts and Letters medal . Returning to Switzerland , she suffered a stroke in July 1961 and died a couple of months later in the <unk> <unk> in Zürich . Her ashes were returned to Bethlehem , and were buried in the family plot in the <unk> Hill Cemetery on October 28 , 1961 . Her epitaph consists of the following lines from her early poem " Let Zeus Record " : 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The rediscovery of H.D. began in the 1970s , and coincided with the emergence of a feminist criticism that found much to admire in the questioning of gender roles typical of her writings . Specifically , those critics who were challenging the standard view of English @-@ language literary modernism based on the work of such male writers as Pound , Eliot and James Joyce , were able to restore H.D. to a more significant position in the history of that movement . Her writings have served as a model for a number of more recent women poets working in the modernist tradition ; including the New York School poet Barbara Guest , the Anglo @-@ American poet Denise <unk> , the Black Mountain poet Hilda Morley and the Language poet Susan Howe . Her influence is not limited to female poets , and many male writers , including Robert Duncan and Robert <unk> , have acknowledged their debt . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 = = = Poetry collections = = = 
 Sea Garden ( 1916 ) 
 The God ( 1917 ) 
 Translations ( 1920 ) 
 Hymen ( 1921 ) 
 <unk> and Other Poems ( 1924 ) 
 Hippolytus <unk> ( 1927 ) 
 Red Roses for Bronze ( 1932 ) 
 The Walls Do Not Fall ( 1944 ) 
 Tribute to the Angels ( 1945 ) 
 Trilogy ( 1946 ) 
 The Flowering of the Rod ( 1946 ) 
 By Avon River ( 1949 ) 
 Helen in Egypt , New Directions ( 1961 ) 
 Hermetic Definition , New Directions ( 1972 ) 
 = = = Prose = = = 
 Notes on Thought and Vision ( 1919 ) 
 Paint it Today ( written 1921 , published 1992 ) 
 Asphodel ( written 1921 – 22 , published 1992 ) 
 Palimpsest ( 1926 ) 
 Kora and Ka ( 1930 ) 
 Nights ( 1935 ) 
 The Hedgehog ( 1936 ) 
 Tribute to Freud ( 1956 ) 
 Bid Me to Live ( 1960 ) 
 End to Torment : A Memoir of Ezra Pound , New Directions ( 1979 ) 
 <unk> , New Directions ( 1981 ) 
 The Gift , New Directions ( 1982 ) 
 <unk> Ring ( written 1943 – 44 , published 2009 ) 
 The Sword Went Out to Sea ( written 1946 – 47 , published 2007 ) 
 White Rose and the Red ( written 1948 , published 2009 ) 
 The Mystery ( written 1948 – 51 , published 2009 ) 
 = = = Archival sources = = = 
 H. D. Papers , 1887 – 1977 ( 26 @.@ 25 linear feet ) are housed at the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale University 
 Numerous archival resources are listed on <unk> . 
 = <unk> = 
 In political philosophy , a throffer is a proposal ( also called an intervention ) that mixes an offer with a threat which will be carried out if the offer is not accepted . The term was first used in print by political philosopher Hillel Steiner ; while other writers followed , it has not been universally adopted and it is sometimes considered synonymous with carrot and stick . Though the threatening aspect of a throffer need not be obvious , or even articulated at all , an overt example is 
 Kill this man and receive £ 100 ; fail to kill him and I 'll kill you . 
 Steiner differentiated offers , threats and throffers based on the <unk> of compliance and noncompliance for the subject when compared to the normal course of events that would have come about were no intervention made . Steiner 's account was criticised by philosopher Robert Stevens , who instead suggested that what was important in differentiating the kinds of intervention was whether performing or not performing the requested action was more or less preferable than it would have been were no intervention made . Throffers form part of the wider moral and political considerations of coercion , and form part of the question of the possibility of coercive offers . Contrary to received wisdom that only threats can be coercive , throffers lacking explicit threats have been cited as an example of coercive offers , while some writers argue that offers , threats and throffers may all be coercive if certain conditions are met . For others , by contrast , if a throffer is coercive , it is explicitly the threat aspect that makes it so , and not all throffers can be considered coercive . 
 The theoretical concerns surrounding throffers have been practically applied concerning workfare programmes . In such systems , individuals receiving social welfare have their aid decreased if they refuse the offer of work or education . Robert Goodin criticised workfare programmes which presented throffers to individuals receiving welfare , and was responded to by Daniel Shapiro , who found his objections unconvincing . Several writers have also observed that throffers presented to people convicted of crimes , particularly sex offenders , can result in more lenient sentences if they accept medical treatment . Other examples are offered by psychiatrist Julio <unk> @-@ Flórez , who presents concerns about throffers in community psychiatry , and management expert John J. Clancey , who talks about throffers in employment . 
 = = Origin and usage = = 
 The term throffer is a portmanteau of threat and offer . It was first used by Canadian philosopher Hillel Steiner in a 1974 – 75 Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society article . Steiner had considered a quote from the 1972 film The Godfather : " I 'm gonna make him an offer he can 't refuse " . While the line seemed to be amusingly ironic ( because a threat is being made , not an offer ) , Steiner was unsatisfied that the difference between an offer and a threat was merely that one promises to confer a benefit and the other a penalty . He thus coined throffer to describe the " offer " in The Godfather . One prominent thinker who adopted the term was political scientist Michael Taylor , and his work on throffers has been frequently cited . 
 <unk> has not , however , been universally adopted ; Michael R. Rhodes notes that there has been some controversy in the literature on whether to use throffer , citing a number of writers , including Lawrence A. Alexander , David Zimmerman and Daniel Lyons , who do not use the term . Some , including political scientists Deiniol Jones and Andrew Rigby , consider throffer to be synonymous with carrot and stick , an idiom which refers to the way a donkey is offered a carrot to encourage compliance , while noncompliance is punished with a stick . Other writers , while electing to use the word , consider it a poor one . For instance , literary scholar Daniel Shore calls it " a somewhat unfortunate term " , while using it in his analysis of John Milton 's Paradise Regained . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 In addition to Steiner 's original account of throffers , other authors have suggested definitions and ideas on how to differentiate throffers from threats and offers . 
 = = = Steiner 's account = = = 
 In the article that introduces the term throffer , Steiner considers the difference between interventions in the form of a threat and those in the form of an offer . He concludes that the distinction is based on how the consequences of compliance or noncompliance differ for the subject of the intervention when compared with " the norm " . Steiner observes that a concept of " normalcy " is presupposed in literature on coercion , as changes in well @-@ being for the subject of an intervention are not merely relative , but absolute ; any possibility of an absolute change requires a standard , and this standard is " the description of the normal and <unk> course of events , that is , the course of events which would confront the recipient of the intervention were the intervention not to occur " . 
 For an offer , such as " you may use my car whenever you like " , the consequence of compliance " represents a situation which is preferred to the norm " . <unk> , that is , not taking up the offer of the use of the car , is identical to the norm , and so neither more nor less preferable . Threats , on the other hand , are characterised by compliance that leads to an outcome less preferable to the norm , with noncompliance leading to an outcome less desirable still . For instance , if someone is threatened with " your money or your life " , compliance would lead to them losing their money , while noncompliance would lead to them losing their life . Both are less desirable than the norm ( that is , not being threatened at all ) , but , for the subject of the threat , losing money is more desirable than being killed . A throffer is a third kind of intervention . It differs from both a threat and an offer , as compliance is preferable to the norm , while noncompliance is less preferable than the norm . 
 For Steiner , all of offers , threats and throffers affect the practical deliberations of their recipient in the same way . What is significant for the subject of the intervention is not the extent to which the consequences of compliance or noncompliance differ in desirability from the norm , but the extent to which they differ in desirability from each other . Thus , an offer does not necessarily exert less influence on its recipient than a threat . The strength of the force exerted by an intervention depends upon the difference in desirability between compliance and noncompliance alone , regardless of the manner of the intervention . 
 = = = Stevens 's account = = = 
 Responding to Steiner , Robert Stevens provides examples of what he categorises variously as offers , threats and throffers that fail to meet Steiner 's definitions . He gives an example of an intervention he considers a throffer , as opposed to a threat , but in which both compliance and noncompliance are less preferable to the norm . The example is that of someone who makes the demand " either you accept my offer of a handful of beans for your cow , or I kill you " . For the subject , keeping the cow is preferred to both compliance and noncompliance with the throffer . Using this and other examples , Stevens argued that Steiner 's account of differentiating the three kinds of interventions is incorrect . 
 In its place , Stevens suggests that determining whether an intervention is a throffer depends not on the desirability of compliance and noncompliance when compared to the norm , but on the desirability of the actions entailed in compliance or noncompliance when compared with what their desirability would have been were no intervention made . He proposes that a throffer is made if P attempts to encourage Q to do A by increasing " the desirability to Q of Q doing A relative to what it would have been if P made no proposal and decrease the desirability to Q of Q doing not @-@ A relative to what it would have been if P made no proposal " . An offer , by contrast , increases the desirability to Q of Q doing A compared to how it would have been without P 's intervention , leaving the desirability to Q of Q doing not @-@ A as it would have been . A threat decreases the desirability to Q of Q doing not @-@ A compared to what it would have been without P 's intervention , while leaving the desirability to Q of Q doing A as it would have been . 
 = = = Kristjánsson 's account = = = 
 Political philosopher <unk> Kristjánsson differentiates threats and offers by explaining that the former is a proposal that creates an obstacle , while the latter is one kind of proposal ( another example being a request ) that does not . He also draws a distinction between tentative proposals and final proposals , which he feels earlier authors ignored . A tentative proposal does not logically create any kind of obstacle for its subject , and , as such , is an offer . For instance , " if you fetch the paper for me , you 'll get candy " is a tentative proposal , as it does not logically entail that a failure to fetch the paper will result in no candy ; it is possible that candy can be acquired by another route . In other words , if the subject fetches the paper , then they get candy . By contrast , if the proposal was a final proposal , it would take the form of " if and only if you fetch the paper for me , you 'll get candy " . This entails that candy can only be acquired if the subject fetches the paper , and no other way . For Kristjánsson , this kind of final proposal constitutes a throffer . There is an offer to fetch the paper ( " if " ) , and a threat that candy can only be acquired through this route ( " only if " ) . As such , an obstacle has been placed on the route of acquiring candy . 
 Previous authors ( Kristjánsson cites Joel Feinberg , Alan Wertheimer and Robert Nozick ) provided moral and statistical analyses of various thought experiments to determine whether the proposals they involve are threats or offers . On Kristjánsson 's account , by contrast , all of the thought experiments considered are throffers . Instead , he argues , the previous thinkers ' analyses attempted to differentiate offers that limit freedom from those that do not . They conflate two tasks , that of differentiating threats and offers and that of differentiating freedom @-@ restricting threats from non @-@ freedom @-@ restricting threats . He concludes that the thinkers ' methods are also inadequate for determining the difference between freedom @-@ restricting and non @-@ freedom @-@ restricting threats , for which a test of moral responsibility would be required . 
 = = = Rhodes 's account = = = 
 Political philosopher and legal theorist Michael R. Rhodes offers an account of threats , offers and throffers based upon the perception of the subject of the proposal ( and , in the case of proposals from agents as opposed to nature , the perception of the agent making the proposal . ) Rhodes presents seven different motivational @-@ want @-@ structures , that is , seven reasons why P may want to do what leads to B : 
 W1 ( intrinsic @-@ attainment @-@ want ) : " B is wanted in and of itself ; B is perceived by P with immediate approbation ; B is valued in and of itself by P. " 
 W2 ( extrinsic @-@ attainment @-@ want ) : " B is perceived by P as a means to E where E is an intrinsic @-@ attainment @-@ want . " 
 W3 ( compound @-@ attainment @-@ want ) : " B is both an intrinsic @-@ attainment @-@ want and an extrinsic @-@ attainment @-@ want ; B is both W1 and W2 . " 
 W4 ( extrinsic @-@ avoidance @-@ want ) : " B is perceived by P as a means of avoiding F where F is perceived by P with immediate disapprobation ( F is feared by , or F is threatening to , P ) . " 
 W5 ( complex @-@ want @-@ type @-@ A ) : " B is both W1 and W4 . " 
 W6 ( complex @-@ want @-@ type @-@ B ) : " B is both W2 and W4 . " 
 W7 ( complex @-@ want @-@ type @-@ C ) : " B is both W3 and W4 . " 
 Proposals that motivate P to act because of W1 , W2 or W3 represent offers . Those that do so because of W4 represent threats . Rhodes notes that offers and threats are asymmetrical : while an offer requires only a slight approbation , a high degree of disapprobation is required before a proposal can be called a threat . The disapprobation must be high enough to provoke the " perception of a threat and correlative sense of fear " . Rhodes labels as throffers those proposals that motivate P to act because of W5 , W6 or W7 , but notes that the name is not universally used . 
 For Rhodes , throffers can not merely be biconditional proposals . If Q proposes that P pay $ 10 @,@ 000 so that Q withholds information that would lead to P 's arrest , then despite the fact that the proposal is biconditional ( that is , P may choose to pay or not pay , which would lead to different outcomes ) it is not a throffer . This is because choosing to pay cannot be considered attractive for P independent of Q 's proposal . P 's paying of Q does not lead to the satisfaction of an attainment @-@ want , which is a necessary condition for a proposal 's being an offer under Rhodes 's account . The exception to this is when an agent offers to help another overcome a background threat ( a threat that was not introduced by the proposal ) . <unk> , in addition to either threats or offers , may contain neutral proposals , and so not be throffers . The possibility of another agent 's not acting is necessarily neutral . Throffers are those biconditional proposals that contain both a threat and an offer , as opposed to biconditional proposals containing a threat and neutral proposal , or an offer and a neutral proposal . In the case of throffers , it is always going to be difficult or even impossible to determine whether an agent acts on the threatening aspect of the proposal or the offer . 
 = = Throffers and coercion = = 
 Consideration of throffers forms part of the wider question of coercion and , specifically , the possibility of a coercive offer . Determining whether throffers are coercive , and , if so , to what extent , is difficult . The traditional assumption is that offers cannot be coercive , only threats can , but throffers can challenge this . The threatening aspect of a throffer need not be explicit , as it was in Steiner 's examples . Instead , a throffer may take the form of an offer , but carry an implied threat . Philosopher John <unk> sees a throffer as an example of an occasion when an offer alone may be considered coercive . Another example of a coercive offer may be when the situation in which the offer is made is already unacceptable ; for instance , if a factory owner takes advantage of a poor economic environment to offer workers an unfair wage . For Jonathan Riley , a liberal society has a duty to protect its citizens from coercion , whether that coercion comes from a threat , offer , throffer or some other source . " If other persons ... attempt to frustrate the right @-@ holder 's wants , then a liberal society must take steps to prevent this , by law if necessary . All exercises of power by others to frustrate the relevant individual or group preferences constitute unwarranted ' interference ' with liberty in purely private matters . " 
 Ian Hunt concurs that offers may be considered coercive , and claims that , whatever form the interventions take , they may be considered coercive " when they are socially <unk> in <unk> <unk> over action that diminish an agent 's freedom overall " . He accepts that a possible objection to his claim is that at least some coercive offers do seemingly increase the freedom of their recipients . For instance , in the thought experiment of the lecherous millionaire , a millionaire offers a mother money for treatment for her son 's life @-@ threatening illness in exchange for her becoming the millionaire 's mistress . Joel Feinberg considers the offer coercive , but in offering a possibility of treatment , the millionaire has increased the options available to the mother , and thus her freedom . For Hunt , Feinberg " overlooks the fact that the millionaire 's offer opens the option of [ the mother ] saving her child on condition that the option of not being [ the millionaire 's ] mistress is closed " . Hunt does not see the mother as more free ; " while it is clear that she has a greater capacity to pursue her interests as a parent once the offer has been made , and to that extent can be regarded as freer , it is clear also that her capacity to pursue her sexual interests may have been diminished . " Every coercive proposal , whether threat , offer or throffer , according to Hunt , contains a simultaneous loss and gain of freedom . Kristjánsson , by contrast , argues that Feinberg 's account of " coercive offers " is flawed because these are not offers at all , but throffers . 
 Peter Westen and H. L. A. Hart argue that throffers are not always coercive , and , when they are , it is specifically the threat that makes them so . For a throffer to be coercive , they claim , the threat must meet three further conditions ; firstly , the person making the throffer " must be intentionally bringing the threat to bear on X in order that X do something , Z1 " , secondly , the person making the throffer must know that " X would not otherwise do or wish to be constrained to do " Z1 , and , thirdly , the threat part of the throffer must render " X 's option of doing Z1 more eligible in X 's eyes than it would otherwise be " . As such , for the authors , there is the possibility of non @-@ coercive throffers . The pair present three possible examples . Firstly , when the threat aspect of the throffer is a joke ; secondly , when the offer aspect is already so desirable to the subject that the threat does not affect their decision @-@ making ; or , thirdly , when the subject mistakenly believes the threat immaterial because of the attractiveness of the offer . Rhodes similarly concludes that if a throffer is coercive , it is because of the threatening aspect . For him , the question is " whether one regards the threat component of a throffer as both a necessary and sufficient condition of the performance of a behaviour " . He argues that if the offer without the threat would have been enough for the agent subject to the proposal to act , then the proposal is not coercive . However , if both offer and threat aspects of the throffer are motivating factors , then it is tricky to determine whether the agent subject to the proposal was coerced . He suggests that differentiating between " pure coercion " and " partial coercion " may help solve this problem , and that the question of coercion in these cases is one of degree . 
 = = Practical examples = = 
 The conceptual issues around throffers are practically applied in studies in a number of areas , but the term is also used outside of academia . For instance , it has seen use in British policing and in British courts . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Conceptual thinking about throffers is practically applied in considerations of conditional aid , such as is used in workfare systems . For philosopher and political theorist Gertrude <unk> , the denial of welfare when subjects refuse work is the epitome of a throffer . Conditional welfare is also labelled a throffer by political philosopher Robert Goodin . In the words of Daniel Shapiro , also a political philosopher , the offer aspect of workfare is seen in the " benefits one receives if one learns new skills , gets a job , alters destructive behaviors and the like " , while the threat aspect is executed with " the elimination or reduction of aid , if the person does not , after a certain period of time , accept the offer " . For Goodin , the moral <unk> of the threat aspect of a throffer is generally mitigated by the attractiveness of the offer aspect . In this way , workfare can represent a " genuine " throffer , but only when a person receiving welfare payments does not need the payments to survive , and so possesses a genuine choice as to whether to accept the throffer . When , however , an individual would be unable to survive if he or she stopped receiving welfare payments , there is no genuine choice ; the individual is , for Goodin , unable to refuse the throffer . This cancels out the morally mitigating factor usually possessed by a throffer . This is presented as an argument against workfare , and Goodin anticipates that advocates would respond <unk> by claiming that , regardless of issues of freedom , the individual in question would benefit from taking part in the work or education offered . 
 Shapiro responds to Goodin 's argument by challenging his factual assumption that individuals would starve if they refused the workfare throffer . In state @-@ sponsored ( see welfare state ) workfare systems , he claims , only monetary assistance is eliminated by a refusal to accept the throffer , while in private systems ( that is , non @-@ state charities or organisations offering conditional aid ) , other groups than the one operating a workfare system exist . In either system , recipients of welfare may also turn to family and friends for help . For these reasons , he does not consider the throffer to be <unk> in the cases in which Goodin believes it is . A second ( and , Shapiro claims , more important ) objection is also presented . State welfare without sanctions fails to mirror the way that working individuals who do not rely on welfare payments take responsibility for their lives . If a person who works stops working , Shapiro observes , then they will typically find their economic situation worsened . Unconditional state welfare does not reflect this , and instead reflects the unusual position of the person who would be no worse off if they refused to work . As unconditional welfare does not mirror the situation of ordinary workers , it is unable to determine whether or not people are willing to take responsibility for their lives . 
 For Ivar <unk> and Heather Trickey , editors of ' An Offer You Can 't Refuse ' : <unk> in International Perspective , workfare programmes ' reliance on compulsion makes them throffers . Citing the Danish model as a particular example , the pair argue that workfare involves the use of compulsory offers ; while the work or education is presented as an offer , because recipients of welfare are dependent upon the help they would lose if they refuse the offer , they effectively have no choice . The compulsive aspect reveals that at least some recipients of welfare , in the eyes of policy makers , require coercion before they will accept offers of work . Neither the chance of paid work nor participation in labour schemes are , alone , enough to encourage some to freely accept the offers they receive . Such compulsion serves to reintegrate people into the labour market , and serves as a kind of " new paternalism " . The authors are concerned about this compulsion , and present several arguments against it which are possible or have been utilised in the literature : Firstly , it impacts the rights of those against whom it is used . This may make it objectionable in and of itself , or it may result in undesirable outcomes . Secondly , it can be argued that benefits must be unconditional in order to act as a genuine safety net . Thirdly , compulsion undermines consumer feedback , and so no differentiation can be made between good and poor programmes presented to those receiving welfare . Fourthly , such coercion may contribute to a culture of resistance among those receiving welfare . 
 = = = Prisoners and mental health = = = 
 Forensic psychologist Eric Cullen and prison governor Tim Newell claim that prisoners face a throffer once they are told that they must acknowledge their guilt before they are offered parole or moved to an open prison . Cullen and Newell cite the example of a prisoner who falsely admitted guilt to move to an open prison ; once there , however , he felt he could no longer lie about his guilt , and confessed to the prison 's governor . He was subsequently transferred back to a maximum security prison . In the case of sex offenders , a throffer is presented when they are offered release if they take up treatment , but are threatened with extended sentences if they do not . Cullen and Newell are concerned about the predicament that these throffers present to prisoners , including those found innocent on appeal . Concerns surrounding throffers proposed to convicted sex offenders have also been discussed in print by Alex <unk> , himself wrongly imprisoned , and criminologist David Wilson . The latter observed the difficulties for those innocent people wrongly imprisoned who are faced with the throffer of having their sentence shortened if they " acknowledge their guilt " , but noted that , as perspectives of prisoners were rarely considered , the problem is usually not visible . 
 Likewise , therapeutic treatment of non @-@ criminals with mental health problems can be considered in terms of throffers . In community psychiatry , patients with mental health problems will sometimes be presented with the provision of social services , such as financial or housing aid , in exchange for changing their lifestyle and reporting for the administration of medicines . Psychiatrist Julio <unk> @-@ Flórez considers these throffers a form of social engineering , and worries that they 
 have multiple implications in regard to coercive mechanisms from implicit <unk> of freedom to ascription of vulnerability . The former would include threats to personal autonomy , instilling fear in regard to a potential loss of freedom , an increase of dependency with mistrust of one 's own capabilities to manage the business of living and , hence , an increase of feelings and attitudes of helplessness . The ascription of vulnerability overrides the principle of equality between the partners , constitutes and invasion of privacy and impacts on the positive rights of individuals . 
 = = = Business = = = 
 According to management researcher John J. Clancey , scientific management can involve the use of throffers . While piecework had been utilised since the Middle Ages , Frederick Winslow Taylor blended rationalised management with piecework , to create a new system . Productivity processes were standardised , after which point managers were able to present a throffer to workers : higher pay was offered if they were able to exceed the standard , while lower pay was threatened for any who did not meet expectations . 
 = Freedom from Want ( painting ) = 
 Freedom from Want , also known as The Thanksgiving Picture or I 'll Be Home for Christmas , is the third of the Four Freedoms series of four oil paintings by American artist Norman Rockwell . The works were inspired by United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's 1941 State of the Union Address , known as Four Freedoms . 
 The painting was created in November 1942 and published in the March 6 , 1943 issue of The Saturday Evening Post . All of the people in the picture were friends and family of Rockwell in Arlington , Vermont , who were photographed individually and painted into the scene . The work depicts a group of people gathered around a dinner table for a holiday meal . Having been partially created on Thanksgiving Day to depict the celebration , it has become an iconic representation of the Thanksgiving holiday and family holiday gatherings in general . The Post published Freedom from Want with a corresponding essay by Carlos Bulosan as part of the Four Freedoms series . Despite many who endured sociopolitical hardships abroad , Bulosan 's essay spoke on behalf of those enduring the socioeconomic hardships domestically , and it thrust him into prominence . 
 The painting has had a wide array of adaptations , parodies , and other uses , such as for the cover for the 1946 book Norman Rockwell , Illustrator . Although the image was popular at the time in the United States and remains so , it caused resentment in Europe where the masses were enduring wartime hardship . Artistically , the work is highly regarded as an example of mastery of the challenges of white @-@ on @-@ white painting and as one of Rockwell 's most famous works . 
 = = Background = = 
 Freedom from Want is the third in a series of four oil paintings entitled Four Freedoms by Norman Rockwell . They were inspired by Franklin D. Roosevelt 's State of the Union Address , known as Four Freedoms , delivered to the 77th United States Congress on January 6 , 1941 . In the early 1940s , Roosevelt 's Four Freedoms themes were still vague and abstract to many , but the government used them to help boost patriotism . The Four Freedoms ' theme was eventually incorporated into the Atlantic Charter , and it became part of the charter of the United Nations . The series of paintings ran in The Saturday Evening Post accompanied by essays from noted writers on four consecutive weeks : Freedom of Speech ( February 20 ) , Freedom of Worship ( February 27 ) , Freedom from Want ( March 6 ) , and Freedom from Fear ( March 13 ) . Eventually , the series was widely distributed in poster form and became instrumental in the U.S. Government War Bond Drive . 
 = = Description = = 
 The illustration is an oil painting on canvas , measuring 45 @.@ 75 by 35 @.@ 5 inches ( 116 @.@ 2 cm × 90 @.@ 2 cm ) . The Norman Rockwell Museum describes it as a story illustration for The Saturday Evening Post , complementary to the theme , but the image is also an autonomous visual expression . 
 The painting shows an <unk> matriarch presenting a roasted turkey to a family of several generations , in Rockwell 's idealistic presentation of family values . The patriarch looks on with fondness and approval from the head of the table , which is the central element of the painting . Its creased tablecloth shows that this is a special occasion for " sharing what we have with those we love " , according to Lennie Bennett . The table has a bowl of fruit , celery , pickles , and what appears to be cranberry sauce . There is a covered silver serving dish that would traditionally hold potatoes , according to Richard Halpern , but Bennett describes this as a covered casserole dish . The servings are less prominent than the presentation of white linen , white plates and water @-@ filled glasses . The people in the painting are not yet eating , and the painting contrasts the empty plates and vacant space in their midst with images of overabundance . 
 = = Production = = 
 In mid @-@ June Rockwell sketched in charcoal the Four Freedoms and sought commission from the Office of War Information ( OWI ) . He was rebuffed by an official who said , " The last war , you illustrators did the posters . This war , we 're going to use fine arts men , real artists . " However , Saturday Evening Post editor , Ben Hibbs , recognized the potential of the set and encouraged Rockwell to produce them right away . By early fall , the authors for the Four Freedoms had submitted their essays . Rockwell was concerned that Freedom from Want did not match Bulosan 's text . In mid @-@ November , Hibbs wrote Rockwell pleading that he not scrap his third work to start over . Hibbs alleviated Rockwell 's thematic concern ; he explained that the illustrations only needed to address the same topic rather than be in unison . Hibbs pressured Rockwell into completing his work by warning him that the magazine was on the verge of being compelled by the government to place restrictions on four @-@ color printing , so Rockwell had better get the work published before relegation to halftone printing . 
 In 1942 , Rockwell decided to use neighbors as models for the series . In Freedom from Want , he used his living room for the setting and relied on neighbors for advice , critical commentary , and their service as his models . For Freedom from Want , Rockwell photographed his cook as she presented the turkey on Thanksgiving Day 1942 . He said that he painted the turkey on that day and that , unlike Freedom of Speech and Freedom of Worship , this painting was not difficult to execute . Rockwell 's wife Mary is in this painting , and the family cook , Mrs. Thaddeus Wheaton , is serving the turkey , which the Rockwell family ate that day . The nine adults and two children depicted were photographed in Rockwell 's studio and painted into the scene later . The models are ( clockwise from Wheaton ) Lester Brush , Florence Lindsey , Rockwell 's mother Nancy , Jim Martin , Mr. Wheaton , Mary Rockwell , Charles Lindsey , and the Hoisington children . Jim Martin appears in all four paintings in the series . Shirley Hoisington , the girl at the end of the table , was six at the time . 
 After the Four Freedoms series ran in The Saturday Evening Post , the magazine made sets of reproductions available to the public and received 25 @,@ 000 orders . Additionally the OWI , which six months earlier had declined to employ Rockwell to promote the Four Freedoms , requested 2 @.@ 5 million sets of posters featuring the Four Freedoms for its war @-@ bond drive in early 1943 . 
 Rockwell bequeathed this painting to a custodianship that became the Norman Rockwell Museum in Stockbridge , Massachusetts , and it is now part of the museum 's permanent collection . Rockwell lived in Stockbridge from 1953 until his death in 1978 . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 Freedom from Want is considered one of Rockwell 's finest works . Of the four paintings in the Four Freedoms , it is the one most often seen in art books with critical review and commentary . Although all were intended to promote patriotism in a time of war , Freedom from Want became a symbol of " family togetherness , peace , and plenty " , according to Linda Rosenkrantz , who compares it to " a ' Hallmark ' Christmas " . Embodying nostalgia for an enduring American theme of holiday celebration , the painting is not exclusively associated with Thanksgiving , and is sometimes known as I 'll Be Home for Christmas . The abundance and unity it shows were the idyllic hope of a post @-@ war world , and the image has been reproduced in various formats . 
 During the Cold War , Rockwell 's images affirmed traditional American values , depicting Americans as prosperous and free . Rockwell 's work came to be categorized within art movements and styles such as Regionalism and American scene painting . Rockwell 's work sometimes displays an idealized vision of America 's rural and agricultural past . Rockwell summed up his own idealism : " I paint life as I would like it to be . " 
 Despite Rockwell 's general optimism , he had misgivings about having depicted such a large turkey when much of Europe was " starving , overrun [ and ] displaced " as World War II raged . Rockwell noted that this painting was not popular in Europe : " The Europeans sort of resented it because it wasn 't freedom from want , it was overabundance , the table was so loaded down with food . " Outside the United States , this overabundance was the common perception . However , Richard Halpern says the painting not only displays overabundance of food , but also of " family , conviviality , and security " , and opines that " overabundance rather than mere sufficiency is the true answer to want . " He parallels the emotional nourishment provided by the image to that of the food nourishment that it depicts , remarking that the picture is noticeably inviting . However , by depicting the table with nothing but empty plates and white dishes on white linen , Rockwell may have been invoking the Puritan origins of the Thanksgiving holiday . 
 To art critic Robert Hughes , the painting represents the theme of family continuity , virtue , <unk> , and abundance without extravagance in a Puritan tone , as confirmed by the modest beverage choice of water . Historian Lizabeth Cohen says that by depicting this freedom as a celebration in the private family home rather than a worker with a job or a government protecting the hungry and homeless , Rockwell suggests that ensuring this freedom was not as much a government responsibility as something born from participation in the mass consumer economy . 
 One of the notable and artistically challenging elements of the image is Rockwell 's use of white @-@ on @-@ white : white plates sitting on a white tablecloth . Art critic Deborah Solomon describes this as " one of the most ambitious plays of white @-@ against @-@ white since Whistler 's Symphony in White , No. 1 " . Solomon further describes the work as " a new level of descriptive realism . Yet , the painting doesn 't feel congested or fussy ; it is open and airy in the center . Extensive passages of white paint nicely frame the individual faces . " 
 Jim Martin , positioned in the lower right , gives a coy and perhaps mischievous glance back at the viewer . He is a microcosm of the entire scene in which no one appears to be giving thanks in a traditional manner of a Thanksgiving dinner . Solomon finds it a departure from previous depictions of Thanksgiving in that the participants do not lower their heads or raise their hands in the traditional poses of prayer . She sees it as an example of treating American traditions in both sanctified and casual ways . Theologian David Brown sees gratitude as implicit in the painting , while Kenneth <unk> writes that Rockwell was mindful of the Last Supper and that the painting 's perspective echoes its rendition by Tintoretto . 
 = = Essay = = 
 Freedom from Want was published with an essay by Carlos Bulosan as part of the Four Freedoms series . Bulosan 's essay spoke on behalf of those enduring domestic socioeconomic hardships rather than sociopolitical hardships abroad , and it thrust him into prominence . As he neared his thirtieth birthday , the Philippine immigrant and labor organizer Bulosan was experiencing a life that was not consistent with the theme Rockwell depicted in his version of Freedom From Want . Unknown as a writer , he was subsisting as a migrant laborer working intermittent jobs . Post editors tracked down the impoverished immigrant to request an essay contribution . Bulosan rose to prominence during World War II when the Commonwealth of the Philippines , a United States territory , was occupied by Japan . To many Americans , Bulosan 's essay marked his introduction , and his name was thereafter well recognized . The essay was lost by The Post , and Bulosan , who had no carbon copy , had to track down the only draft of the essay at a bar in Tacoma . 
 Freedom From Want had previously been less entwined in the standard liberalism philosophies of the western world than the other three freedoms ( speech , fear , and religion ) ; this freedom added economic liberty as a societal aspiration . In his essay , Bulosan treats negative liberties as positive liberties by suggesting that Americans be " given equal opportunity to serve themselves and each other according to their needs and abilities " , an echo of Karl Marx 's " from each according to his abilities , to each according to his needs " . In the final paragraph of the essay , the phrase " The America we hope to see is not merely a physical but also a spiritual and intellectual world " describes an egalitarian America . In a voice likened to Steinbeck 's in works such as The Grapes of Wrath , Bulosan 's essay spoke up for those who struggled to survive in the capitalist democracy and was regarded as " haunting and sharp " against the backdrop of Rockwell 's feast of plenty . It proposed that while citizens had obligations to the state , the state had an obligation to provide a basic level of subsistence . Unlike Roosevelt , Bulosan presented the case that the New Deal had not already granted freedom from want as it did not guarantee Americans the essentials of life . 
 = = Pop culture = = 
 The painting was used as the 1946 book cover for Norman Rockwell , Illustrator , written during the prime of Rockwell 's career when he was regarded as America 's most popular illustrator . This image 's iconic status has led to parody and satire . New York painter Frank Moore re @-@ created Rockwell 's all @-@ white Americans with an ethnically diverse family , as Freedom to Share ( 1994 ) , in which the turkey platter brims over with health care supplies . Among the better known reproductions is Mickey and Minnie Mouse entertaining their cartoon family with a festive turkey . Several political cartoons and even frozen vegetable advertisements have invoked this image . 
 A snapshot at the end of the 2002 Walt Disney Feature Animation film Lilo & Stitch shows the movie 's characters , including some clearly alien life forms , seated at a Thanksgiving table that echoes the painting . The painting was also featured in the May 16 , 2012 , season 3 " Tableau Vivant " episode of the comedy series , Modern Family . Another well @-@ known imitation of the work is the cover art to Tony Bennett 's 2008 Christmas album , A Swingin ' Christmas ( Featuring The Count Basie Big Band ) . The parody includes all 13 members of Count Basie 's band . 
 = Mesopropithecus = 
 Mesopropithecus is an extinct genus of small to medium @-@ sized lemur , or strepsirrhine primate , from Madagascar that includes three species , M. dolichobrachion , M. globiceps , and M. pithecoides . Together with Palaeopropithecus , Archaeoindris , and Babakotia , it is part of the sloth lemur family ( Palaeopropithecidae ) . Once thought to be an indriid because its skull is similar to that of living sifakas , a recently discovered postcranial skeleton shows Mesopropithecus had longer forelimbs than hindlimbs — a distinctive trait shared by sloth lemurs but not by indriids . However , as it had the shortest forelimbs of all sloth lemurs , it is thought that Mesopropithecus was more quadrupedal and did not use suspension as much as the other sloth lemurs . 
 All three species ate leaves , fruits , and seeds , but the proportions were different . M. pithecoides was primarily a leaf @-@ eater ( folivores ) , but also ate fruit and occasionally seeds . M. globiceps ate a mix of fruits and leaves , as well as a larger quantity of seeds than M. pithecoides . M. dolichobrachion also consumed a mixed diet of fruits and leaves , but analysis of its teeth suggests that it was more of a seed predator than the other two species . 
 Although rare , the three species were widely distributed across the island yet allopatric to each other , with M. dolichobrachion in the north , M. pithecoides in the south and west , and M. globiceps in the center of the island . M. dolichobrachion was the most distinct of the three species due to its longer arms . Mesopropithecus was one of the smallest of the extinct subfossil lemurs , but was still slightly larger than the largest living lemurs . Known only from subfossil remains , it died out after the arrival of humans on the island , probably due to hunting pressure and habitat destruction . 
 = = Classification and phylogeny = = 
 Mesopropithecus is a genus within the sloth lemur family ( Palaeopropithecidae ) , which includes three other genera : Palaeopropithecus , Archaeoindris , and Babakotia . This family in turn belongs to the infraorder Lemuriformes , which includes all the Malagasy lemurs . 
 Mesopropithecus was named in 1905 by Herbert F. Standing using four skulls found at Ampasambazimba . He noted that the animal had characteristics of both Palaeopropithecus and the living sifakas ( Propithecus ) . In 1936 , Charles Lamberton defined Neopropithecus globiceps ( based on one skull from Tsirave ) and N. <unk> ( based on two skulls from Anavoha ) . He thought that Neopropithecus was a separate , intermediate genus between Mesopropithecus and Propithecus . In 1971 , paleoanthropologist Ian Tattersall merged N. <unk> into N. globiceps and Neopropithecus into Mesopropithecus . 
 Until 1986 , Mesopropithecus was only known from cranial ( skull ) remains from central and southern Madagascar , and because these are similar to teeth and skulls of living indriids , particularly those of Verreaux 's sifaka ( Propithecus verreauxi ) , Mesopropithecus was often assigned to the family Indriidae . For example , in 1974 , Tattersall and Schwartz labeled Mesopropithecus as a sister group to sifakas . With the discovery of an associated skeleton of M. dolichobrachion near Ankarana in 1986 , it became clear that Mesopropithecus shared distinct traits with sloth lemurs . Unlike the indriids , but like the sloth lemurs , they had elongated forelimbs and other adaptations for arboreal suspension ( hanging in trees ) , linking them most closely to family <unk> . A comparison of these morphological traits between the sloth lemurs and indriids suggest that Mesopropithecus was the first genus to diverge within the sloth lemur family . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 Three species are recognized within Mesopropithecus : 
 M. pithecoides , described in 1905 , was the first species to be formally named . Its specific name , pithecoides , derives from the Greek word <unk> , meaning " monkey " or " ape " , and the Greek suffix <unk> , meaning " like " or " form " , and reflects Standing 's impression that the animal resembled monkeys in form . It was a small to medium @-@ sized lemur , weighing approximately 10 kg ( 22 lb ) and having an intermembral index ( ratio of limb proportions ) of 99 . Its skull was similar to that of M. globiceps , but had a broader snout and was more robust , particularly in its sagittal and nuchal crests ( ridges on the skull for muscle attachments ) and massive zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) . Its skull length averaged 98 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) , ranging from 94 @.@ 0 to 103 @.@ 1 mm ( 3 @.@ 70 to 4 @.@ 06 in ) . It was predominantly folivorous ( leaf @-@ eating ) , but also consumed some fruit and ( rarely ) seeds . It was moderately abundant on the high , central plateau of Madagascar . It shared its range with the larger sloth lemurs , Palaeopropithecus maximus and Archaeoindris fontoynontii . One sample of its subfossil remains has been radiocarbon dated , yielding a date of 570 – 679 CE . 
 M. globiceps was discovered in 1936 and originally classified in its own genus , Neopropithecus . The name globiceps comes from its prominent forehead and derives from the Latin word globus , meaning " ball " , and the New Latin suffix -ceps , meaning " head " . Like M. pithecoides , it was a small to medium @-@ sized lemur , weighing approximately 11 kg ( 24 lb ) and having an intermembral index of 97 . It had the most narrow snout and gracile skeleton of the Mesopropithecus species , similar to but smaller than M. pithecoides , making it more like the living sifakas . Its teeth were similar to but larger than those of living sifakas , except for its lower premolars , which were shorter , and the M3 ( third upper molar ) , which was moderately constricted by the cheek and tongue . Its skull length averaged 94 mm ( 3 @.@ 7 in ) , ranging from 93 @.@ 4 to 94 @.@ 8 mm ( 3 @.@ 68 to 3 @.@ 73 in ) . It was a mixed feeder , eating fruit , leaves , and a moderate amount of seeds , having a diet similar to that of the living indri ( Indri indri ) . Although its forelimbs were more like those of living indriids , its hindlimbs and axial skeleton ( skull , spine , and ribs ) were more specialized for suspension , as in Palaeopropithecus and Babakotia . It was found in the south and west of Madagascar . Three samples of its subfossil remains have been radiocarbon dated , yielding dates of 354 – 60 BCE , 58 – 247 CE , and 245 – 429 CE . 
 M. dolichobrachion was discovered in 1986 and formally described in 1995 . It was found in the caves of Ankarana , northern Madagascar , around the same time that the first remains of Babakotia were unearthed . The species name dolichobrachion is Greek , coming from <unk> ( " long " ) and <unk> ( " arm " ) , and means " long @-@ armed " . It was a medium @-@ sized lemur , slightly larger than the other two members of its genus , weighing approximately 14 kg ( 31 lb ) . It differed significantly from the other two in its limb proportions and its postcranial morphology . Most notably , it was the only species in the genus to have forelimbs that were longer than the hindlimbs , due to a substantially longer and more robust humerus ( yielding an intermembral index of 113 ) , as well as more curved phalanges ( finger and toe bones ) . For these reasons , it is thought to have been more sloth @-@ like in its use of suspension . This was further supported by a study of a single lumbar vertebra . This vertebra was similar to that of Babakotia in having a moderately reduced , dorsally oriented spinous process and a transverse processes ( plates of bone that protrude from the vertebrae ) that points to the side ( laterally ) . The vertebra was intermediate in length when compared with other sloth lemurs , and its laminae ( two plates of bone that connect to the spinous process ) were not as broad as seen in Palaeopropithecus . In M. dolichobrachion , skull length averaged 102 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 in ) , ranging from 97 @.@ 8 to 105 @.@ 5 mm ( 3 @.@ 85 to 4 @.@ 15 in ) . The only notable difference from the two other species in its teeth was that the third upper molar had a relatively wider trigon and smaller talon ( groups of cusps on the molar teeth ) . It was a mixed feeder , eating leaves , fruits , and seeds . This species was more of a seed predator than the other two species , but was not as specialized as closely related Babakotia radofilai . M. dolichobrachion was rare and shared its range with two other sloth lemurs , Babakotia radofilai and Palaeopropithecus maximus . It was the most distinct member of its genus and was geographically restricted to the extreme north of the island . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 The genus Mesopropithecus includes some of the smallest of the recently extinct subfossil lemurs , but all species were still noticeably larger than all living ( extant ) lemurs . They ranged in weight from 10 to 14 kg ( 22 to 31 lb ) . They were also the least specialized of the sloth lemurs , more closely resembling living indriids in both skull and postcranial characteristics . Skull length ranged from 93 @.@ 4 to 105 @.@ 5 mm ( 3 @.@ 68 to 4 @.@ 15 in ) . The dentition and cranial proportions , however , more closely resembled those of the sifakas . The dental formula of Mesopropithecus was the same as in the other sloth lemur and indriids : either 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 31 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 3 or 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 32 @.@ 0 @.@ 2 @.@ 3 × 2 = 30 . Mesopropithecus had a four @-@ toothed toothcomb , like all indriids and most other sloth lemurs . It is unclear whether one of the permanent teeth in the toothcomb is an incisor or canine , resulting in the two conflicting dental formulae . Like other sloth lemurs and indriids , Mesopropithecus had rapid tooth development . 
 Despite the similarities , there are several features that distinguish Mesopropithecus skulls from those of living indriids . The skull , including the zygomatic arch , is more robustly built . The temporal lines join together anteriorly into a sagittal crest and there is a distinct nuchal ridge that joins the rear of the zygomatic arch . The skull has a more rounded braincase , slightly smaller and more convergent orbits , more pronounced postorbital constriction ( narrowing of the skull behind the eye sockets ) , more robust postorbital bar ( bone that encircles the eye socket ) , a steeper facial angle , more robust and <unk> convex zygomatic bone , and a broader , squared snout . The upper incisors and canines are larger . The more robust mandible ( lower jaw ) and mandibular symphysis ( point where the two halves of the lower jaw meet ) suggest a more folivorous diet , which requires extra grinding . The orbits are as large ( in absolute size ) as those in smaller living indriids , which suggests low visual acuity . Mesopropithecus and its closest sloth lemur relative , Babakotia , did share a few ancestral traits with indriids , unlike the largest sloth lemurs , Palaeopropithecus and Archaeoindris . These include the aforementioned four @-@ toothed toothcomb , an inflated auditory bulla ( bony structure that encloses part of the middle and inner ear ) , and an <unk> ectotympanic ring ( bony ring that holds the eardrum ) . 
 While the skull of Mesopropithecus most closely resembles that of modern sifakas , the postcranial skeleton is quite different . Rather than having elongated hindlimbs for leaping , Mesopropithecus had elongated forelimbs , suggesting they predominantly used quadrupedal locomotion , slow climbing , with some forelimb and hindlimb suspension . In fact , they were the most quadrupedal of the sloth lemurs , having an intermembral index between 97 and 113 , compared to the lower value for indriids and higher values for the other sloth lemurs . ( In arboreal primates , an intermembral index of 100 predicts quadrupedalism , higher values predict suspensory behavior , and lower values predict leaping behavior . ) Wrist bones found in 1999 further demonstrate that Mesopropithecus was a vertical climber and the most loris @-@ like of the sloth lemurs . Analysis of a lumbar vertebra of M. dolichobrachion further supported this conclusion . 
 Our understanding of the morphology of Mesopropithecus has not always been so complete . Until recently , important pieces of the skeleton had not been discovered , including the radius , ulna , vertebrae , hand and foot bones , and the pelvis . In 1936 , Alice Carleton mistakenly associated postcranial remains of the diademed sifaka ( Propithecus diadema ) from Ampasambazimba with Mesopropithecus pithecoides and came to the false conclusion that its morphology was like that of a monkey . This mistaken attribution was corrected in 1948 by Charles Lamberton . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Mesopropithecus species appear to have been generally rare within their wide range . Collectively , the three species have been found in the north , south , west , and center of Madagascar , although they appear to have been geographically separated ( allopatric ) from each other . Subfossil discoveries indicate that they lived in the same region ( sympatric ) with other sloth lemurs in the north and center of Madagascar . The subfossil remains of M. globiceps have been found at seven subfossil sites on Madagascar : Anavoha , Ankazoabo @-@ Grotte , Belo sur Mer , Manombo @-@ Toliara , Taolambiby , <unk> , Tsirave . The subfossil remains of both M. pithecoides and M. dolichobrachion have only been found at one site each , Ampasambazimba and Ankarana respectively . 
 M. pithecoides from the central plateau was a specialized leaf @-@ eater ( folivore ) , but the other two species had a more mixed diet , eating fruits and seeds in addition to leaves . The level of seed predation varies between the three species , with tooth wear indicating that M. dolichobrachion exhibited the greatest level of seed predation within the genus . 
